AN APOLOGY FOR THE MINISTRY, and its Maintenance:

Wherein is set forth the Necessity, Dignity, and Efficacy of a
Gospel Ministry; against the Socinians, Swenckfieldians, Weigelians,
Anabaptists, Enthusiasts, Familists, Seekers, Quakers, Levellers, Libertines,
and the rest of that Rout.

Here you have many Texts of Scripture explained, all the Cavils of the
Adversaries (of any weight) refelled, the Equity of Tithes by many Arguments
evinced, and the Iniquity of such as seek sacrilegiously to remove them is
demonstrated, and the most material Cavils against them are succinctly, yet
fully answered.

By Tho. Hall, B. D. and Pastor of Kingsnorton.

Jer. 3. 15. I will bring you to Sion, and I will give you Pastors according to
my heart, which shall feed you with Knowledge and Understanding. 1 Cor. 9. 7.
Who goes a Warfare at any time at his own Charges? Who planteth a Vineyard,
and eats not of the fruit of it? Or who feeds a flock and eats not of the
milk of the flock? LONDON: Printed by A. W. for Joseph Cranford at the Castle
and Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

To the Right Worshipful, and his much honored Cousin, the Lady LUCY GRANTHAM
of Ratcliffe upon Soar, in the County of Nottingham, Grace and Peace.
Madame:
BEnefits (we say) are binders, and every Favor received makes the Receiver a
Debtor: If this be so, I must needs acknowledge my self deeply indebted to You
for those many real Favors which from time to time You have showed to me, and
to my Sonns that have been Your Chaplains. And, that I may not wholly dye
ungratefully, I have sent you a Scho^ars Gift, a Paperpresent, as a Testimony
of my best Respects unto Your Ladyship, who have been so eminent a Friend and
Patroness to us of the Ministry; and that in a time when so many hate us, rob
us, revile us, without a cause. You have been more like a Nursing mother than a
Friend to many of your neighbou^ing Ministers, especially where their means is
low: Your Ladyships readiness to contribute to the augmenting of the
Maintenance of Ministers, and setting up of Preaching, where there is none;
Your respectfull Entertainment of the Min^sters of Christ weekly at Your house;
Your bounty in parting with considerable Sums toward the breeding of
ingenuous and hopeful Children for the work of the Ministry; Your tender
respect especially to the Orphans of Ministers; Your late disbursing of a
considerable Sum at a bare motion of mine toward the breeding of a very
hopeful child, the son of a pious and painful Minister, whose father is now
with God; your great care for their family in Spirituals as well as Temporals;
your constant Morning and Evening Sacrifice there; and your care to see that
your Family l^ve Prayers, and live their Sermons, and live up to their D^ties:
and if any be found to be Drunkards, Fornicatours, Lascivious,
Sabbath-prophaners, etc. You quickly make them know, that those who will not be
servants to God, shall be no servants to you; your Religious care in a timely
providing of a p^ous and ingenuous Instructor for the fatherless and motherless
Little On^, Samuel Marrow Esquire.
which now lies solely upon your hands; as he is a Samuel by name, so you
endeavor to make him a Samuel indeed, by instructing him betimes in the ways
of God, that so he may have a heart to improve that great Estate which
providence has cast upon him, to the glory of that God that gave it; your
careful Observation of the Lord's Day, not only in the public, but in the
Intervalls of Divine Worship, to keep your Family from straying; you have not
only Repetitions, but also Reading of some practical Divinity constantly on
the Lords day to your Family. These things justly praise you in the gates, and
though no tongue should praise you, yet your works themselves will do it:
Virtuous actions are the best Orators, and they speak best, who do best; And
though your Ladyship had rather do good, than hear of it; yet that others (in
these last and worst times, when the love of so many waxes cold) may be
incited to follow your Ladyships Pious and Charitable Example, I could not but
publish those things to Gods glory, and your further encouragement in the work
of the Lord.

'Twas the Commendation of Dorcas, that she made c^ates for the poor whilst
she lived (Acts 9. 39.) she did not as most do, put it off till death, and then
make good wills, after all their evil deeds: but your Ladyship in your
lifetime has expressed your bounty long since to the Town of Nottingham, in
giving them Two Hundred Pounds, as a Stock to be carefully improved for the
best advantage of their poor: besides the daily occasional gifts to such as are
real Objects of pity and compassion. You have been Eyes to the Blind, Feet
to the Lame; a Father to the Fatherless; a Mother to the Motherlesse; These
you take into your Family, and when you have hatched them up, you part with
considerable Sums to set them forth Apprentises; And, which is worthy
observing, your Ladyship has been a great gainer by all this, God has blessed
your Substance, and your Store, he has made your latter end better then your
beginning, and has cast riches on you in abundance, which you never looked
for; and, above all, he has given you a heart to improve what he has given
you to his praise; and to order your affairs with that discretion, and good
Huswifery, that those who have far greater means, yet do not the Tithe of that
good which you do; and all because they spend that in riotous feasting,
superfluous building, keeping a kennel of Hounds, or some other sinful and
exorbitant course, which disables them, and dispirits them from Works of Piety
and Mercy, Now the good Lord remember you in mercy for all that you have done
for his House, for his Ministers, and for his people* He recompense all your
labor of Love sevenfold into your bosom; and when You have served your
Generation here, he receive you unto himself in glory. This is, and shall be
the Prayer, of

Kings-Norton: November. 3. 1659. Your much obliged Kinsman Tho. Hall.

To the Worshipful, and his honored Friend RICHARD GREVIS of MOSELEY HALL, in
the County of WORCESTER, Esquire. the TRANSLATOR humbly wishes the Multiplication
of Grace, and the Continuation of Peace.
Worthy SIR:
I have emboldened my self to offer that unto the World, under Your Patronage,
which, I believe, Your singular Modesty will almost decline, and fear, Your
excellent Ingenuity will be ready to disown, when you find it so unworthy of
the benign influences of your Eyes, much more of the Effluences of your Name,
Virtue, and Authority, by which You are able to Patronize any thing that makes
You its Sanctuary of Refuge. Neither Sir, have Principles of Policy only
persuaded me to inscribe Your famous Name, and entitle Your Worthy Self to this
my imperfection: but indeed, a desire to Express and Testify the Esteem I have
of the One, and the Love and Honor which I deservedly have for the Other. If
any man, in this nice Age, may be judged worthy to be the Object of a
Dedication, it must be a Theophilus; and, if any other, I do verily believe,
you are a Theophilus; if a sober, moderate, Contemplative, serious life,
adorned with many public and private Exercises of Religion, Expressions of a
Gracious Soul; if constant and vigorous Endeavors to reconcile Differences
amicably, and suppress Sin Authoritatively; if an engaging, edifying, aweing
presence, to Wife, Children, servants; if a sweet, friendly, charitable owning
of Gods People; or a cordial, gladsome Entertainment of his faithful
Ministers; if any of these, if all these will denominate a man a Lover of God,
Accept, I pray you, Sir, ths poor Oblation; and although I do not, cannot judge
this little Impolite Treatise worthy your Countenance or Patronage, yet I
beseech you, for the love of God, to stir up all your whole Soul (...) improve
your utmost interest to maintain and defend the Cause which therein I study to
Patronize, which is not yet so much my Cause, as the Cause of all the Faithful
Ministers of Christ, and not so much theirs neither, as Christ's. Go on ^
beseech You, and, whatever Troubles shall be upon the earth, whatever
Divisions, Distractions, Dissettlements, Apostasies are, or may be in England,
yet study to approve Your Self to be a Friend to God's Cause, whom you love;
and Faithful to the Interest of Jesus Christ, in whom you believe. And so
doing, that You may be blessed with days as prosperous as many, with a Crown
as Glorious as Eternal, is, and shall be the hearty Prayer of

Sir, Your Friend and Servant in Christ Jesus, Sam. Shaw.
Long-Whatton. July 2. 1659.
TO THE Impartial READER.
Reader;
IT is not long since, that a faithful Minister of Christ, my very loving
Friend, presented the World with a Latin Treatise, vindicating and asserting
the Necessity, dignity and duty of a Gosp^l-Ministry; which when I had perused,
and discovered (not only by the testimony of the Epistles Commendatory, but by
my own Judgment) in it a great Acuteness of Wit, a sweet Savor of a pious
Disposition, pertinent and cogent Arguments, full and satisfacto^y Answers to
all Objections militating against the Truth; holding Discourse with him
concerning it, I was bold to intimate to him, how convenien^ly and usefully it
might have been offered in a Tongue more known amongst us, for the Conviction
and satisfaction of English Cavillers; Adding, That I thought, they, who had so
much knowledge as to understand Latin, had also more Judgment than to need to
be satisfied in that thing: Whereupon, the Reverend Author concurring with my
Judgment (but giving me a good Account of his Style) was pleased, at first, to
desire, and upon reluctance to press me to do that, which I only wished had
been done: withal, trusting me with the liberty of Paraphrasing and Enlarging,
by his Letters, of June 11. and June 25. 1658. Which Task I have accordingly
undertaken, being Influenced (I hope) by a desire to glorify God, and have
performed, being assisted by the strength of that God, whom I desire to
glorify. Besides what I have already expressed and intimated, I need give no
further Account of my Enterprise, but the Apprehensions which I then had. I see
daily more and more justified of the proneness of our Apostatizing times to
grow Antiministeriall. Pardon me, I pray thee, if, through my weakness, any of
the Author's Ingenuity, elegancy or strength be lost, or the Truth suffer
through my Inability to vindicate it. And I humbly beseech Almighty God, that
these poor Endeavors may contribute some little toward thy satisfaction or
Confirmation; toward the Edification and Provocation unto Duty, the
maintaining the Maintenance and Honor, the encouraging the Faintings and Fears
of the Faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE MINISTRY And it is maintenance, etc.
CHAP. 1.
Matt. 5. 13. Ye are the salt of the earth.
HE that will speak more for the commendation of any thing, than to say it is
good, must say it is seasonable: For he that sought out acceptable words, has
as fitly told us, that A word fitly spoken, is like apples of gold in pictures
of silver. Here Is a golden sentence adorned with a silver season, by so much
the more useful, by how much the more suitable, having this addition to it is
commodiousness, that it may be so fitly accommodated to our present times. And
if we consider what have the furious ^renzyes of our age do make, intending the
contempt, and (if it might be) the very extirpation of our Gospell-Ministers,
we may well compare it to the seasonable address of wise Abigail to resolute
David. Or if you will, let it be called, as before, a golden apple, and so
there is hopes it may retard the ^eadlong have of these cruel Atala^ta's, that
design the ruin of Christ's Ambassadors. What better language do the devils
drudges and emissaryes now adays afford the Ministers of the Gospel, than,
dec^ivers of the people, Baal' s priests the Locusts of the b^ttomlesse pit,
l^mbs of Anti Christ, Thieves, Lya^s, Seducers, Generation of vipers, ravenous
wolves, whited walls* Hirelings, Babylonish Merchants, Hypocrites, Dumb d^gs,
Simon Magul's, unclean spirits, and whatever the malice of hell, or the
madness of men can devise. And what better confutation of such calumnyes can
we des^re, than thi^ one sentence of our Saviors, ye are (not the Di^turbers
of Kingdoms, the Betrayer^ of Kings, the Bu^dens of the Earth, the Disease of
the Land, the Sweepings of the House, the Scumme of the Country, the Refuse of
the Nation, the Dreggs of the World, the off ^couring of all things, as the
devi^s g^sse (...) ^arry i^) but ye ar^ the (...) of the earth. A short
sentence, but enough to con^^^e those voluminous aspersions that are cast upon
them; A compe^d^ous encouragement. What though the Devil be the accu^er of the
Brethren, what though our Brethren be our accusers for him; Yet who shall lay
any thing to the charge, or what can the charge be that any can lay upon those
whom Christ justisyeth? Lo, here the sentence may lose i'ts order, and yet
retain it is truth, wisdoms Children are justified of her, ye are the salt of
the earth.

Let us a little search the context, that we may find the meaning of the text.
When our Savior had in the very threshold of his Sermon, discoursed of the
blessed ones of the world, in this second step that he makes, he ^^tly
subjoyneth a discourse concerning the Ministers of the Gospel, whose
qualifications he teaches by three metaphorical resemblances of salt, ^ght,
and a C^y upon an hill: S^eming to make this the one summary of his
similitudes, that the Ministers of the Gospel must not only be Sayers but
Doers, Preachers but Practicers, Talkers but Walkers, and must have not only
the salt of doctrine, but the light of conversation also. But more
particularly, by this similitude of salt, he s^rs out in lively colors, the
necessity and efficacy of the Gospell-Ministry. For as men season sle^h with
sal^, so must the souls of men be seasoned by the Ministry of the word, that
neither the one, nor the other may be corrupted.

The text is a Categoricall proposition, consisting of a subject ^ predicate,
and a Copulative. The subject is ye ( i. e.) ye my disciples and all the
preachers of the Gospel that shall succeed you. The Copulative is are, not
shall be for the time to come, but at present ye are chosen and called so to
be. The predicate is, the salt of the earth* (i. e.) It is your office to
season men, who are altogether unsavory until they be seasoned with the salt
of heavenly doctrines. As salt is the seasoner of mea^s, so the Ministers of
the Gospel are called salt from their office, by way of resemblance, because
they should by their edi^ying language and exemplary life season men, that they
may be kept from the corruption of vices, and have the ^avoury relish of
graces. And they are not only Metaphorically called salt, or the most
excellent salt, because they season as salt does, but emphatically called the
salt, or the most excellent salt, because they season so as no other salt can
do. Nay they are not only salt, and the salt, but the salt of the earth, not
the salt of one Town, or City, or Island only, but the salt of the earth, that
is of the inhabitants of the earth, ye are the salt of the earth. And yet they
are not properly salt neither, they are but the salters, or seasoners. But our
Savior does here ascribe that which is proper to the doctrine of the Gospel
to them that preach it. Observe by the way, that our Savior in calling them
the salt of the earth, implicitly prefers them before the prophets, who were
only the salt of Judea: But the Apostles and their successors are the salt of
the earth, of the whole earth. Mat. 28. 19. Observe also that in calling them
salt, he does as it were make a secret promise of the power and efficacy of the
Gospell-Ministry to season the world, and to keep men from putrefying in sin.
The sense of the whole is plainly this, ye my Apostles and all the Ministers of
my ordinances, and pastors of my Church, in respect of the doctrine of the law
and the Gospel which you shall preach, shall deliver men from the corruption,
and filthiness of sin, and shall render them acceptable and savory to God,
whom by nature they cannot please. Lo here the usefullnesse and necessity of a
Gospell-Ministry? When our Savior compares; it to sait, he commends it almost
as highly, as if he had said it were incomparable; For their is nothing
(according to the proverb) more useful and needful, than the sun, and salt.

Take this doctrinall conclusion for a foundation of the following discourse,
that

The Ministers of the Gospel are the salt of the world. Doctr.


This may easily be proved, F^^st from the nature, propertyes, and manifold
virtues of salt. Secondly from the titles that the spirit of God gives them in
Scripture. Thirdly by arguments.

1. The First property of salt is to season tastlesse and unsavory things. It
is a sovereign condiment and singularly useful and necessary. And it may be
called the condiment of condiments, not only because it excells them, but also
because it helps them, and contributes to their goodness. And it has that to
commend it which few of our spices have, even it is necessity. Spices are the
superfluous ornament of meats, but salt their necessary condiment. It is so
necessarily subservient to the seasoning of meats, and rendering them savoury,
and grateful to the palate, that it has deserved and found the name of
Natures balsome, and the Soul of bodies; wherefore nature has wisely mixed salt
with all well compounded bodies, to season, and preserve them from corruption;
as may be exemplifyed in the salt urine of beasts, and the saltness of roots:
and is so commonly received, that every Smatterer^in Chemistry will tell you
that Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury are ingredients in all mixed bodies.

Thus the Ministry of the Gospel is the salt of the world, without which our
condition is desperate and deplorable. Neither could I tell what answer to
make, if one should ask me. How it comes to pass that men abound with errors
in their heads, wickedness in their lives, and corruptions in their hear^s, but
this, They are not seasoned with this salt. Our whole nature without this is
unsavory, nauseous and indeed odious to God, as the Psalmist describes a pure
(that is, an impure) nature, Ps. 14. 1, 2, 3. without this salt, what is the
wisdom of the would but a world of folly; what are moral virtues, but corrall
vices, which ^ub the gums indeed, to make men appear well as to the teeth
outward, but not changing or cleansing the inward heart and mind? Nay how can
any oblation indeed please God That wants salt, Lev. 2. 13. Or any thing please
a judicious palate that is unseasoned? Can that which is unsavory be eaten
without salt. ^eb. 6. 6. As if he had said, can any one be delighted with meat
that has not been seasoned with salt? So, take away the Ministry of the word,
and all wordly things are presently unsavory, gladness is converted into
sadness, or the best joys are but toye sat best, the purest gold is but
dross, and they deserve no better Character than Job's friends, Physicians of
no value, Job. 13. 4. Miserable and troublesome comfort^^s. Job. 16. 2. It is
necessary therefore that men be seasoned with this heavenly salt, that they be
not corrupted. For there is nothing better to preserve our hearts from
corruption than the savory Ministry of the Gospel.

2. Another property of salt is Acrimony. Salt by it is acrimony, bites, eats,
pierces, pricketh. Flatnesse, faintness and want of sharpness is a defect in
salt.

Thus the preaching of the law pierces and pricketh the consciences of
sinners, that they seek of the Gospel for a salve, Act. 2. 39. This makes men
sound in the faith, therefore Paul commands Titus to corn the Cretians with
this salt. Tit. 1. 13. Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the
faith. As Elisha by casting salt into the spring of the naughty waters, healed
them, so our naughty and ba^^en hearts being leasoned with the salt of Gods
word and spirit, becomes pleasing and acceptable to God. Moreover as salt by
its sharp heat, penetrates, attenuates, and works the whole lump, so there is
nothing more piercing than the word of God, hewing like an axe, and slaying
like a sword. Ho^ 5. 6. He that would understand this property of Gods word,
let him consult and examine the Apostles six Epithets. Heb. 4. 12. It is quick,
powerful, sharp, pie^cing, dividing, discerning. It is of such a subtle and
sharp nature, that it can divide, where the subtle wi^s of Metaphysicians can
scarce make a mental or notionall distinction, even between soul and spirit,
and where the sharpest instruments of Chirurgions can hardly divide, even
between the joints and the marrow. And can discern that, which the most acute
and quicksighted judge* with the contributed discoveryes of never so many
faithful witnesses cannot discern, even the thoughts and intents of the heart.

3. Salt resists corruption, and by its acrimony consumes whatever is
vicious in the body; sucks out all putrid and excrementitious humors, with
which the flesh is in^ected; consolidates the substantial parts by uniting the
native virtue, shutting up the pores and passages, and shutting out the
injurious assaults of the extraneous air.

Thus the Ministers of Christ do the work of salt by plucking up sin by the
roots, which is that corrupt and noxious humor, which has diffused its self
through the whole soul. This the salt of the Word expells by reproving Errors,
by wasting the sinful desires of the old man, and by hardening the new man
against all injuryes, and by fortifying it against all assaults.

This salt of the Word therefore with a constant, and careful hand is to be
sprinkled, by declaring the nature and aggravations of sin, to prick the heart,
not to tickle the ears, and which may be enterteined with the beating of the
breasts, not the clapping of the hands. For I had rather that men gnasht their
teeth, and beat their heads, than nod with their heads under our Ministry. The
tears of the congregation ought to be most in our eye. And their inarticulate
groans do least speak forth our commendations. Hence the Holy Ghost every where
in Scripture puts such a price upon salt because it signifyes that
mortification, which so restraines the soft effeminacyes and delicacyes of the
flesh, and all sweet carnal delights and tickling pleasures, and hinders the
inordinate affections of the flesh from showing themselves in the flesh. This
grace does that to the spirit which salt does to flesh, which will not suffer
it to putrifye, and dissolve into corruption and filthiness, as it would do,
were it not consolidated and hardened therewith.

4. Salt begets an appetite to meat or drink, and is so useful in meats that
we scarce know how to live without it. Bread requires a mixture of this to
season it, and it also begets an appetite to drink.

Thus the preaching of Gods word does beget an exceeding thirst after heavenly
things It may most truly be said of these waters of the Sanctuary. Quo plus
sunt potae, plus sitiuntur, The more a man drinks of them, the more he shall
thirst after them.

It cannot be said of this water, as our Savior says of the grace of God.
Ioh. 4. 14. He that drinks of it shall never thirst more, but rather, he
shall thirst the more: when Peter's hearers had tasted some of this salt, see
how they thirst after the water of life, after salvation. Act. 2. 39. For so
says the test, when they heard this, they said, Men and Brethen, what shall we
do?

5. Salt is the Symbol or Hieroglyphick of wisdom. (...)
Hence wise men, and fools have names given them in Latin from salt: as also
all kind of jests, and wittinesses in speech, and festivity do derive their
name from hence. In so much as to reach a man salt is interpreted by some
people as an indignity, as much in effect as to call him a fool.

Thus the Ministers of the Gospel do correct the foolish manners of the world,
and render them savory. Take away this condiment, and you take away all real
and true wisdom out of the world; If men re^ect the world of the Lord, what
wisdom can there be expected in them Ier, 8. 9. The word of our Savior, who
is the wisdom of the father, is enough to make us also wise unto Salvation.

6. Salt is an emblem of duration, perpetuity and incorruption. It is good
Physic for natures consumptions, preserving fluid and wasting matter, and
makes pe^^shing and pu^ri^ying ^odyes long-lived. Hence an everlasting covenant
is called a Covenant of salt, Numb, 8. 19. 2. Chr. 13. 5. And Lot's wife was
converted into a pillar of salt, not only that the might be instead of a
condiment to us, but a perpetual Monument also of Gods judgments: so the
Covenant preached by the Apostles was truly a Covenant of salt, more durable
than the pilla^s of the earth, or the poles of heaven, and happily hinting to
us that every one of the ^aithfull is so confirmed in the Covenant of God by
faith, that by the salt of afflictions they shall be preserved (...) against
all kind of temptations and alsaults.

But this heavenly (...) ^arre excells that earthly salt, as eternity exceeds
diuturnity. That may preserve a long time, but this will preserve longer than
time. Again that salt does but preserve things from (...) but this redeems
(...) from their corruption.

7. Salt is a symbol and significant of friendship. It p^eserves the amity of
the members one amongst, another, and deserds the harmony of the body from
corruption; and is therefore called the soul of the body* (...) as the soul
does not suffer^ the structure to be dissolved, and fall in pieces, so salt
does keep inanimate bodies from corruption and putrefaction, and suffers them
not to perish, but playing the soul* as it were, resists death. Hence
Antiquity above all things required salt at the table, because it signified the
perfection and perseverance of friendship. And therefore many of the Heathens
(and even some of us who inherit their superstition) counted it ominous and
unlucky, if at any time it happened that the salt were spilt upon the table, as
though by this some breach of friendship were portended.

Thus the Ministry of the Gospel, although by chance and indirectly it
occasion divisions and wars (as our Savior brought not peace but a sword)
yet directly, intentionally and of it self, it both creates and conserveth the
amity, peace, and union of the faithful, both with their God and amongst
themselves. The Gospel is properly and deservedly styled, the Gospel of peace.

8. Salt is medicinal to the body. It is a medicament as well as a condiment.
Therefore Physicians say that newborn infants should be sprinkled with salt or
salted water, not only to scour off all uncleanness, but also to consolidate
the members of the body, and to bind up and heal the wound of the navell. To
which God himself alludes, Ezekiel. 16. 4. For salt does certainly confer a
solidity and fatness to natural bodies.

Thus the heavenly salt is necessary for the spiritual newborn babes, 1 Pet.
2. 2. Without which we can neither be cleansed, nor cured, nor strengthened, as
will appear hereafter.

9. Salt was an ingredient into every sacrifice, as appears, Lev. 2. 13. Ez^.
6. 9. 22. Ezekiel. 42. 24. Mar. 4. 49. Every sacrifice (that is every spiritual
and acceptable sacrifice) shall be salted with fire and with salt ( i. e.) with
the fire of affliction, and the salt of wisdom, mortification and integrity o^
life and doctrine. For as meats seasoned with salt are most acceptable to the
palate, so the spiritual sacrifi^es which are seasoned with this kind of salt,
are most pleasing to God, God will have no honey, ( i. e.) no carnal delights,
wordly pleasures, or wordly men in his sacrifices. For in sacri^^ces a contrite
spirit is required, and therefore honey is forbidden, Lev. 2. 11. But co^roding
and biting salt was there required and used in sacrifices by the very Heathens,
Salsa mola, and sals^ fruges.
the devil staming a piece of worship like that of Gods.

10. Salt is a communicative thing, and therefore is called good, Mar. 9. 50.
Now as every good thing is communicative and diffu^^ve of it self, so salt, not
only es^apes corruption it sel^, whilst it retains it is natural strength, but
also preserves all other things uncorrupted, to which it communicates it self.

It keeps flesh from stinking, wine from sow^ing, renders meat savory, and many
other ways is excellently advantageous. So that it seems to be but adequately
spoken by the proverb, S^le and sale nih^l utilius.

Thus every disciple, and much more minister of Christ ought to be salt, not
only themselves good, but commun^cating to others of their goodness. David
will teach transgressors Gods ways, Ps. 51. 13. And Abraham was a good man, of
whom God was persuaded, that he would command his Children and his household
after him to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. And as God is persuaded of
Abraham that he would command his children, so Christ commands Peter to
strengthen his b^ ^thren, Luke 22. 32. Our Savior himself sets a Copy of
this, Io^ 5. 39. Come and see. And Philip imitates him in this
commu^ica^ivenes^e, crying out to Natha^iel as soon as he met him, with the
Philosophers (...) we have found him. etc v. 45. and will have him, also to
come and see. v. 46. The Apostle would have his C^lossians to know how they
ought to answer every man, to this purpose he commends to them gracious speech,
and he knows not how to phrase that better, than by speech seasoned with salt,
Coll. 4. 6. (i. e.) with grace and wisdom, communicating saving knowledge to
the foolish, administ^ing consolation to the afflicted, and giving wise and
wholesome answers to all.

11. Salt makes green wounds smart.

Thus the Ministry of the word, requiring self-denial, reproving sin, and
applying the terrors of the Law to galled consciences, brings grief and
bitterness to the flesh, and renders the preachers of it hateful and
terrible. Chryso^tom^ speaks gravely and appositely* Christ (says he) calls
not the Apostles teachers of Palestine, but of the whole earth, neither does he
barely call them teachers, but terrible ones: And this is to be wondered at,
that they that did not flatter and daw be, but wound and pierce and burn the
consciences, like salt, were yet therein desirable, and thereby beloved* in
spite of the proverb, Truth brings fo^th hatred.

12. Salt is very frui^full. Witness the fruitfullnesse of the salt sea,
wherein (witness the Psalmist. Ps. 10. 25.) are innumerable creeping things,
and both small and great beasts. Plutarch reports that mice breed more
abundantly in Ships that carry salt. Leachery has its name in Latin from
salt, and Iustfull Venus derives her pedigree from the salt sea. And certainly
no land-creature is so ^ruitfull as all those are that inhabit the Sea.

Thus nothing is more fruitful than the sound and substantial Ministry of the
word of God, one Peter by one Sermon caught three thousand souls for Christ,
Act. 2. 4^. The multitude of believers is prophesyed to the Gospel Times. Ps. 1
10. 3. From the womb of the morning thou have the dew of thy youth. As much as
if he had said, Children shall be born to Christ by the preaching of the
Gospel, in as great a number, as the dow drops fall and disperse themselves
far^e and near, being as it were conceived in the womb of the early morning. Oh
would to God that the thirsty vineyards of the Church were watered, and
refreshed also with the evening dew of conv^r^^^, in these last and worst
times; or that three thousand P^ters* might with three thousand Sermons but
beget three thousand sons or daughters to Jesus Christ.

13. Salt is of a nature both fiery and waterie. For it is sharp like fire, and
fr^ts and sharpens the fire into which it is cast* And if it be cast into
water; it self if presently resolved into water.

Thus the Ministers of the Gospel are the salf of the earth. For by their
fiery ver^ue they inflame the hearts of men, with love to, and z^al for God.
And as salt melts and dissolves that it may the better preserve flesh from
putrefaction, so is it the part of a good pastor, as it were, to wear and wast
himself by l^bours and watchings, that so the people committed to his charge
may be saved from the corruption of sin, such salt was the Apostle Paul, who
denied himself, kept himself under* cut himself short, spared not himself, but
spent himself that he might gain souls to Christ. 2. Cor. 12. 15. I will very
gladly spend all mine) and (my self) to be spent for your souls.

14. Salt is a thing very common. It is not only to be found upon the tables of
the rich, but even with the poorest, where there is scarce a table to be found.
Thus ought the Ministers of the Gospel to be so easy and common, that he that
seeks them may easily find them, and so facile and amiable in their carriage,
that no one may fly their presence, that desires to learn of them. And it is
the Apostles mind that they be apt to teach. 2. Tim. 2. 24. and that in season
and out of season, not being rendered idle, by regard had to private profit,
pleasure or ease. Nay it ought to be reputed their greatest gain to gain souls
to Christ; their greatest pleasure to see many take pleasure in godliness, and
by their Ministry be made pleasant and acceptable to God; and their greatest
ease to take pains in the vineyard of Christ, to bring them to a sight of their
sins that are settled upon their lees and are at ease in Sion. Let us pray the
Lord of the harvest therefore that his word may not creep but go, nay run, and
be glori^yed in the hearts, words and works of men. 2. These. 3. 1. For a good
thing, the more common it is, the better it is.

15. Salt is a sign of desolation and a curse to those things which it does not
season, as we may see. Zeph. 2. 9. And that which the Hebrew calls saltness,
that we translate barrenness. Ps. 1^9. 34. It is the Spaniards ^^stome to
sprinkle the house of those that are convi^^ed of high (...) with salt; and the
jews manner to sow a place with salt, when they intended to make it desolate
and lay it waste, as Abimelech did. Judge. 9. 45. For althought salt be very
necessary for the seasoning of meats, and other uses, yet by reason of its
fiery nature it destroys, and exhales the ^^dicall moisture that is in roots
and herbs, and in hot Countrey^ occasions barr^nnesse; For in cold Countieys it
is inste^d of (...).

Thus the Gospel hardens the hearts that will not be seasoned by it, Is. 6, 9,
10. and is the savor of death unto death. 2. Cor. 2. 16. as to the godly it is
a savor of life unto life. And no wonder* for it is very usual in humane
things that the sa^e thing being in it self good and profitable, proves good to
some and hurtful to others, and upon many has an operation besides its nature.
The Sun it self by its beams helps some to see, and blinds the sight of others.
And as salt, so the word of God, according to the diversity of the subject,
becomes either useful or hurtful.

16. Salt is a Symbol of discretion and prudence. If it be moderately mixed
with meats, it presents the palate with a pleasant relish, but to much of it
renders it unsavory.

Thus let the Ministers of the Gospel do all things with discretion and
judgment lest by too much and indiscreet affectation of bitter and harsh
expressions and applications, and representing the graces like furyes, they
disaffect the auditors against the truth of the doctrine, and render it
nauseous, and odious to them. Let them use such a moderate and convenient
mixture of Law and Gospel, whereby the sharpness of the one may be lenifyed,
and the l^nity o^ the other may be sharpened, and both together may be edifying,
and useful; that the Gospel may not let men altogether sit still, nor the Law
make them run out of their vits. For it is our design to season men, not to
destroy them to salt them not to subvert them. The proverb is well known, we
must buy salt and oil. Oil signi^yes leni^y* salt acrimony. Therefore the
sons of the Physicians mix oil with salt, that it may not be too corrosive.

It may well become the Sons of the prophets to imitate these men, and to pour
the oil of gladness into the wounds which smart with the salt terrors of the
Law. Let them so divide the word of truth, that weak consciences be not
swallowed up of sadness by the immoderate austerity of the law, nor licentious
hearts encouraged by the over-wide and unlimited charter of the Gospel.

Thus we have seen the propertyes of salt, and a proof of the doctrine by
those propertyes. Let us now look into the titles which the sacred Scripture
has given to the Ministers of Christ, that in them also their Necessity,
Dignity, Vtility, and E^^icacy may further appear.

CHAP. II. The titles of Dignity, Vtility, Necessity, and Efficacy* which are
gi^^n to the Mi^^sters of Christ.
THe Holy Ghost has set upon the heads of the Ministers of Christ many
glorious inscriptions, and given them the attributes of many worthy names, and
has thought good to call them, The salt of the earth, the sun and light of the
world, Men of God, prophets of God etc. as may appear in the following
discovery.

1. They are called the salt of the earth; which expression we have already
insisted upon.

2. They are called the light of the world, Mat. 5. 14. Now what is either more
profitable or more pleasant than light? Without it we cannot discern between
things that dif^er, go about our employments, or decline pits and precipices.

This calls for clearness of doctrine, and cleanness of life, and exactly
expresses the sovereign excellency of the Gospel Ministry, and this light of
the world far excells the light of this world. For the sun only profits them
that see, but this light of the Gospel Ministry enlightens them that see not,
2. The sun is often obscured and curtain'd under clouds; But in the very midst of
night, and amidst the thickest clouds and afflictions, there is clear daylight
in the Church. 3. The sun of this world often sets and leaves us in the dark, but
this light of a Gospell-Minist^y shall never cease, till that sun shall cease
to be light, and that world cease to be. It is such a light, that if it were
taken away, the whole world would be wholly overspread with the grossnesse of
darkness, the darkness of sin, and sinful errors. Hence it is that God
himself opposes darkness to divination. Mic. 3. 6. It Is true, Christ Jesus the
light of the world, and the sun of righteousness, properly, essentially,
originally, perfectly, intensively, and extensively: But his Ministers are
imperfect lights, as they partake and communicate of him and depend upon him.
They are the lights enlightened, and enlightening the world with the light of the
Gospel, Ioh. 5. 35. Act. 26. 18. Romans 2. 19. Although indeed all Christians
are also lights in their measure, and ought to shine as lights in the world, as
Children of the light, Phil, 2. 15. Yet this title is by way of Eminence due to
the Ministers of Christ, because they ought in an especial manner to shine in
life and doctrine; and also because God does by their Ministry kindle the (...)
d^light, and illuminate the soul. How great then is the (...) of and how great
a contradiction is it in the libertines of our age, who labor to ex^^inguish
the Ministry of the word, and in the mean time p^e^end and a^^ow a new light.

3. They are called, Men of God, (i. e.) Men of God's own, and especial
sending, This title is frequently given to the prophets, as to Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.
1. to Samuel 1. Sam 9. 6. as also to others. 1. Sam. 2. 27. 1. King. 13 1. and
indeed to all others, 2. Pet. 1. 21. Afterward to the Ministers of the
Gospel. 1. Tim. 6. 11. 2. Tim. 3. 17. Neither does Paul call Ti^othy only a
man of God, but also every Minister of Christ, by way of Eminence. For it is an
Hebraisme, and signifyes holy men, or men familiar with God* And it is an
emphaticall paraphrase. For as a man of Belial signifyes a very wicked man, and
a man of blood, a very cruel and bloody man, So a man of God signifyes a
Godly, and a godlike man.

4. They are called Prophets of God. which title is not only attributed to them
that can ^oretell things to come, but also to any that are any way interpreters
of the will of God. Mat. 10. 41. Where to receive a prophet, is to receive a
Minister or preacher of the Gospel. For these discharge that sacred
employment, which the prophets under the old Testament discharged, and do also
interpret the writings of those prophets, 1. Cor. 14. 3. 1. These. 5. 20.

5. They are called priests of God, Which name although it properly belong to
the Levites* yet is improperly applied to spiritual priests, offering up
spi^ituall sacrifices to God. In which sense all the faithful are said to be
pre^sts to God. Rev. 1. 6. and a royal priesthood 1. Pet. 2. 9. And the
Ministers of the Gospel are priests, in that by the preaching of the word they
subject men to God. Paul was such a priest offering up the Gentiles. Romans 15.
16. and such are all other preachers of the Gospel, in praying for the people,
and consecrating themselves to God in a more peculiar manner.

6. They are called bearers of the vessels of the Lord, Is. 52. 11. in whose
presence they stand Deuteronomy. 10. 8. and whose substitutes they are* being
appointed to preach, administer Sacraments, and to other sacred employments.
Let these bearers of the uessels of the Lord, have their own vessels holy to
the Lord, and handle holy things in a holy manner. For if the Ministers of the
tabernacle must be clean in heart and hands, how much more cleanness is
required at our hands both toward God and men, who carry not the vessels, but
the word of the Lord.

7. They are called Stewards, or Dispensers of the Mysteries of God. 1. Cor. 4.
1. 2. Tit. 1. 7. that is, of Grace, Justification, Sanctification, and
Salvation. Neither are they the stewards of Emperors, or Kings* but of the
heavenly householder. Now the great commendation of a steward is his
faithfulness. Luke 12. 42. And the best expression of faithfulness is to
design his Masters profit and credit, and not his own; and also to serve his
Masters will, and not his own, in administering the affairs of the family. He
accomodates his distributions to the capacity of the subject; gives milk to
the babes, and strong meat to strong men; and also purges the family of all
corrupt members. Hence it is that they have received the Keys from God, with
which they open the gates of heaven to believers, and lock them against the
unbelievers. Mat. 16. 19. Now the Lord who has in effect called us stewards,
effectually call us to be faithful.

8. They are called Workmen, or Reapers in the Lords harvest, and Vine
dressers, whom he sends into his vineyard Mat, 9. 37. 20. 1. 1. These. 3. 2. 2.
Tim. 2. 15. This phrase denotes not only the necessity of a Gospell-Ministry,
but the diligent laboriousnesse of the Ministers. Those that assert the
easiness of a Ministers employment, will not (I believe) speak so much in
favor of a Reapers work, and yet their employments run parallel in the
Scripture dialect. Ministers are called Reapers; Now Reapers you know, are
exposed to the heat of the Sun, the violence of winds, showrs and storms,
which hardships do require a strong and hardy nature, not a man accustomed to
idleness and pleasure. Ministers break themselves with labors, wear and wast
themselves with watchings, and are therefore called laborers 1. Tim. 5. 17.
such laborers as husbandmen, reapers, Souldyers, who weary themselves with
working. For such is the force of the Greek phrase.

The employment of the Ministers of Christ is so laborious, that it attenuates
and consumes the body, impaires the strength, hastens old hairs to young heads
to the grave. Our Savior Christ at three and thirty years of age by his great
pains in preaching the Gospel, Cura facit canos.
incessant watchings and prayings, had brought upon himself the suspicion of
fifty years of age, as many rationally conclude from the Jews words, Ioh. 8.
57. Thou art not yet fifty y^ares old. And the Prophet Isaiah mourning under
the treachery and perfidiousnesse of his Countrymen, being zealous for his
Gods glory and their souls good, cries out as a man consumptive with cares and
sorrows, My le^nnesse, My leanness, If. 24. 16.

9. They are laborers together, (not with Paul or with Peter but) with God, 1
Cor. 3. 9. So called, because God uses them for the begetting of faith, their
pains and the promulgation of the Gospel tending to one and the same end,
even the Salvation of souls: An honorable Character. And great is the dignity
that God has con^er^ed on them, to adopt and adapt them to be helpers, without
whose help he could as easily do his own work, if he pleased. God calls us to
those pains, which he does not need, and then honors us with those honors,
and honorable titles which we do not de^erve. This is a great Angelic^ll, nay
divine dignity, in which we may find a consolation almost as great as the
dignity, inferring, that if we miscarry not in our duty, God will be also our
fellow laborer, and help us by his labor. For what man will forsake, the
plowmen, the Shepherds, the Stewards, which himself sets a work? And what good
commander is there is, but will encourage, vindicate, embolden, and reward his
faithful Soldiers in and for their faithful service? And although Christ
primarily and by way of Eminence be called Gods fellow, Zach. 13. 7. Yet se^un
darily the Ministers of the Gospel upon this account are so too.

10. They are called Gods. Moses that faithful servant of God, and steward of
his house, is called a God, even by God himself, Exodus 4. 16. Thou shall be to
Aaron instead of God, and again, Exodus 7. 1. See I have ^ade thee a God to
Pharoab. He was indeed a man still by nature, but a God by office, and
delegation from God, and also by the communication of divine power and wisdom
to him. And if they be called Gods unto whom the word of God came, Ioh. 10. 35
Surely then the title is as due to the prophets of God, as any other,
concerning whom it is so often recorded, that the word of the Lord came unto
them. All the Ministers of the Gospel are as much Gods, as it is possible for
one to be that stands only in Gods stead, for of them it is that God says, He
that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you despises me, Luk, 20.
16.

11. They are called Watchmen. If. 62. 6. Ier. 6. 17. Ezech. 3. 17. and 33. 7.
Hos. 9. 8. Heb. 13. 17. So called, because they foresee the future dangers, and
warn the people of them; as a watchman sees the enemy coming afarr off,) and
by the giving of a sign warns the inhabitants. The Ministers of the Gospel
watch over the souls of the people, that they be not led aside by errors, nor
perish in their sins. And this they do by preaching, praying, reproving, and
other exercises of their calling.

12. They are called Pastors, or Shepherds. If. 63. 11. Ier. 3. 15. Ioh. 10.
2, 12. Now in a Shepherd there is required 1. Diligence and industry, to feed
the flock, to reduce the straying, to heal the sick, to preserve the whole. 2.
Courage to defend the sheep, and resist the wolve^. 3. Faithfullnes^e, to
restore the sheep to their Master, confessing himself a servant, and not the
Master of the flock. 4. Wi^dome and discretion to know whether to use his voice
or his sta^^e. 5. Patience and ha^dinesse, to endure the winds, the storms, and
tempests which he is exposed to, as Jacob complains of himself. Genesis 31. 38,
39, 40. Thus the Ministers of Christ, do feed the Church, that flock of Christ,
with the food of heavenly doctrine, keep them from the poisonous and rotting
pastures of heretics, and the wolves from them, and do also govern the sheep
committed to them with the rod of discipline.

13. They are called builders of the Church. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 1. Cor. 3. 10. For
by their doctrine the people of God are built up and do grow in faith and
mutual charity. The Church of God is a building, the Master builder or
Architect is God, the inferior workmen are his Ministers, whereof some ^ay the
foundation, others build upon it, that so we may become as a temple fit for God
to dwell in. The prophets of old were Gods masons, Hos. 6. 5. I have hewed them
by the prophets. For as the Mason cutts, hews, and squares the stones, so by
the means of the law do the Ministers of Christ, hew us, square, and prepare
us, that we may be fit materials for the building up of a spiritual house.
Thus ought the Ministers of Christ like wise builders prepare every particular
house committed to their charge to be some part in this building, wherein let
them use discretion according to the nature of their materials, breaking some
stones in pieces before they can make good work of them, squaring and smooting
others by gentler instruments, cu^tting and hewing all by the law, and plaining
and placing and compacting and building up by the Gospel, all that are so cut.

14. They are called Christ's witnesses. Ioh. 15. 27. Act. 1. 8. Rev. 2. 13. 11.
3. 22. 16. Now they witness to Christ, both by their preaching, as by a
verbal, and their conversations, as by a practical and real testimony. For
it every ordinary judge will look for faithfulness and veracity, exact and
personal knowledge of the thing, and honesty and integrity of conversation, in
every one of his current witnesses, much more does Christ require at the hands
of his Ministers those extraordinary witnesses, that by life as well as
language they do truly, freely, explicitly, ingenuously and constantly, own
and witness to him and his truth; And that those qualifications of every
su^^icient witness, be by no means wanting in his witnesses to make them
sufficient.

15. They are called Servants of Jesus Christ, Romans 1. 1. Phil. 1. 1. sam. 1.
1. Not servants of men, of princes, but of that God, who is above all men, of
that Monarch, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Neither are they of
Gods ordinary sort of servants, as all creatures are his servants by the right
of creation. Ps. 119. 91. Or as all the Elect are his servants by the right of
redemption, but his servants by virtue of their mission, commission and
embassage, after a more peculiar manner. They are the servants of Christ by way
of Eminence, in that they do him more Eminent service then others, and in so
serving him do govern his, which title yet does enforce pains, as well as
conferr honor, for a servant is all his Masters. For him he works, for him he
wins, to him he lives and dies: He does all things for his Masters profit, and
according to his Masters pleasure. So they owe to Christ what ever they have,
or are, and therefore ought to lay out and expend whatever they have, or are,
life, liberty, wit, wealth for this honor and glory, and esteem themselves
great gainers, in being profitable ^o him:

16. They are called fathers. 2. Kin. 2^: 12* 1: Cor 4^ 15. 1. These. 2^ 11. and
frequently elsewhere, because they are serviceable in the hand of God by means
of the word of God, to beget spiritual Children unto God. For although God be
our father principally and properly, yet this hinders not, but that his
Ministers may be out spiritual fathers, organically and analogically, which
title bespeaks love and ^everence; which tributes God is pleased to allow
parents. Ex^d: 20. 12. And if they have been fruitful in this relation, it
will be their joy and Crown of rejoicing at the coming of Jesus Christ. 1.
These. 2. 19. Let us pray therefore, and let all that are already begotten by
any of us to Christ Jesus pray, that since God has honored us with the title
of fathers, he would also honor us with the relation of sons, that so we may
not be fathers, without Children, And let us all desire to increase the family
of Christ with Rachels importunity, (leaving out her impatience) Lord give us
Children before we dye?

17. They are called Seers and the eyes of the body: 1. Sam. 9^ 9. I^* 30, 10,
Cor, 12. 17. They used to say in Israel, Come let us go the seer, for men
prophesyed by visions and revelations. Ezechiel saw visions of God. Ezech. 1.
1. being enlightened by the spirit of God they saw things at a distance. Hab, 1,
2. 1, And hence they are called seers, for the prophets and pastors are that to
the Church which the eyes are to the body: Let us pray therefore that God would
enlighten our minds which the Psalmist, Ps. 119. 18. Open thou our eyes that we
may behold the wondrous things out of thy Law, that so we may not be blind
guides, and seers that see nothing.

18. They are called Christ's Souldyers. 2, Tim, 2, 3. 4. Now a soldier has
much to do, and more to suffer; their action is fighting, 1. Tim, 1. 18. Their
suffering is, not only the violence of their adversaries, which they must
sustain, but they are exposed to hunger, and thirst, the heat of the day and
the cold of the night, and many wearisome watchings. Hence the Apostle calls
his fellow-Ministers, Fellow Soldiers. Phil 2. 25. Philem* 1. 2^ For although
every believer be a Soldier. Ephesians, 6, 12* 13* Yet amongst those, the Ministers
obtain the first place, as they that lead the troops, and receive the first
impressions of the enemies fury. There are Soldiers that are no Ministers (and
could happily with there were none) and there are Ministers that do not act
like souldyers, But let them all know that they are called to a warfare, that
there is a combat prepared for them, and that therefore they must either fight
for Gods cause, or dye for the cause of not fighting.

19. They are called Guides of the Church. Act. 8. 31. Romans 2. 19. Heb. 13. 7,
17, 24. because they lead others in the ways of Salvation. They are the
examples of believers, whom all behold for imitation, and do conform themselves
to, as to a living law. 1. Tim. 4. 12. Some sone has alluded to the Apostles
words in verse, Past^rs are the glass, the school, the book,
Where peoples eyes do learn, do read, do look.


It is with an Emphasis, that the Apostle calls them so often the guides or the
leaders, in that 13. Chap. to the Hebrews: Because they either lead or ought to
lead the people of God in the ways of God. For although it be proper to God
only to lead men, yet because he leads them by his word, he is pleased to
communicate this honorable title to the preachers of this word.

20. They are called the Chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof, as it is
in an express aknowledgment, 2. Kin. 2. 12. and 13. 14. and by a fair
consequence from 1. Sam. 7, 13. ^4. As long as Samuel lived, the Philistines
were subdued before Israel. And if Moses let God alone, the people will be
consumed with his wrath, Exodus 32. 10* Gods Ministers are not only Soldiers
and Captains, but they are all the army, they are the horsemen and the
Charriots of the Church, they are for defense unto it. And if one Elijah
carried and protected the people, and defended them more by his zeal, and
prayers, then thousands of Charriots and horsemen; what strength and might
shall there be found in many Elijahs? These are the Churches walls, the
bullwarks of the land, and the best fortifications for any City, They kill the
enemies of God with the sword of Gods word, whereby they sharply wound in
reproving; and kill in threatening death: If furious Iehu should chance to let
any escape, the sword of Elisha shall be sure to slay him. 1. Kin* 19. 17. And
you may see Elija sitting upon a hill, and s^aying an hundred of Ahaziahs
Souldyers to death, and burning them up with the words of his mouth 2. Kin. 1,
The same is the power of Gods witnesses, out of whose mouths fire does proceed
and devour their enemies. Rev. 11. 5. Let England then take heed of pulling
down, nay so much as loosening these pillars, lest the whole structure of
Church and state fall together with them.

21. They are called Bishops, A general title, and given to all the Ministers
of the Gospel, all whose it is to oversee the flock committed to their trust,
and to have a diligent care of it. Act. 20. 28. And therefore, whom the Apostle
calls Elders. Tit, 1. 5, these he calls also Bishops V. 7. Neither does this
title confer dignity only, it inferrs duty also. The office of a Bishop has
employment as well as preferment in it. It is a work in the Apostles judgment.
1. Tim. 3. 1. He that desires the office of a Bishop, desires a good work.

22. They are called Teachers* this being the great business of Ministers to
preach and teach the word of God. This title primarily belongs to Christ, who
is the teacher of his people, But it is applied secundarily to his Ministers,
who are ush^rs to him the Head ^ master. Ephesians. 4. 11. 1. Tim. 2. 17.

23. They are called Clouds, spiritual Clouds, watering, refreshing,
fructifying the vineyard of the Lord with the former and the latter rain of
ordinances. I^. 5. 6. Hence they are said to drop their doctrine upon men by a
word fetched from the Clouds. Deuteronomy. 32. 2. Ezech. 21. 2. Am 7. 16. But
Heretics and deceivers, are emp^y bottles, waterlesse Clouds, ^ossed to and
fro with the winds, Jude. 12. They make an ostentation and specious pretense of
knowledge, when as indeed their sounds are but the sounds of empty bottles, and
they are specious white Clouds, that seem to promise the earth a belly full of
water, but when they should come to distill it, they are gone with a blast of
wind, and so gull the thirsty expectation* of the silly spectators.

24. They are called Nurses 1. Th^s. 2. 7. For as a Nurse, dandles and husheth,
and suckleth, and ^lattereth the little infant, so the Ministers of the Gospel
should even hugg in their bosoms, speak pleasantly unto and feed with the
sincere milk of the word, Christ's new born-babes, accommodating their language,
behavior, and way of feeding to their infant state. And as a nurse with
admirable patience does digest the wranglings, endure the frowardnesses of her
nu^seling, not grudging it her own blood to feed upon; So a faithful Minister
should be patient in his pains, indefatigable in his diligence, and not count
his life dear unto him, if by it the Church of Christ may be advantaged, nor
think much at his own destruction, if by it his people may be edisyed.

25. They are called the Ministers of Christ. 1. Cor. 4. 1. Which word in the
Greek bespeaks sorrow, (...)
and calls for ^ains, as the office of a rower does require. They sit at the
oars, where if the wind of Gods spirit do not exceedingly help, they will find
intolerable pains, and if it do help, yet they must use an indefatigable
diligence. And if they be the Ministers of God (administering faithfully the
word and ^^^^ments) they must be approved in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessi^yes, in distresses, etc. 2. Cor 6 4. They are not prese^'d to (...) and
imperial dignity, but an Ecclesiastical Ministry, in which they may promise
themselves whatever pains, the meanest of servants, in rowing, running or what
else, do find, and more.

26. They are called Stars, and that not wandering, but fixed. For Christ, who
sits at the right hand of God holds them in his right hand, Rev. 1. 20 (1.)
Stars shine; so ought they by clearness of doctrine, and integrity of life to
shine before others. (2) Stars shine in the night; so let a Minister of the
Gospel shine more glorio^sly, and illustriously when the Church of Christ is
be^louded with heresies, and benighted in persecutions. (3.) Stars shine with
a borrowed light; so the Ministers of Christ, receive their calling, gifts and
doctrine from him the Sun of righteousness. Nay they excel either fun or
stars, for these shall be turned into darkness, the sun shall be totally
eclipsed, the stars sink down into their sockets, and be put out at the
dissolution of the world, but they shall shine for ever and ever. Dan. 12. 3.
Oh that they were also as the stars of heaven for number, the Lord of the
harvest sending out plenty of laborers to reap his yet plentiful ha^vest; and
more fixed in the firmament of our Church, then the stars in heaven, that
sometimes tumble headlong?

27. They are called Angels of the Church. Rev. 1. 20. 14. 6. For 1. like
Angels they are messengers sent by God to declare his will to men. 2. They
ought to imitate an Angelical, purity, chastity, zeal and celerity, that they
may be as Angels amongst men, Masters amongst boys, and shepherds amongst
sheep. So that this name also brings duty with it, as well as dignity. Many
would be content to be Angels to dwell in heaven, but loath to be Angels to
do Gods errands upon earth; but he that would enjoy the honor, must first be
employed in the office, and execute that office too with carefullnesse,
cherefullnesse and speediness, as the Angels do. Now if Timothy as being a
man of God, must flee covetousness; how much rather ought he to do it as
being an Angel of God. And if the Angels of God by pride fell from the
presence and glory of God, it concerns these Angels that yet they be humble as
men. What matters now though the world call us blind guides; God counts us
stars, and will set us in heaven, when the stars themselves shall be
misplaced. What though they call us devils; it is honor enough that God
counts us Angels. Let us do the work of Angels, and God will not stick to own
us and honor us as such, before all men and Angels.

28. They are called Presbiters and Elders, a name implying, not their age, but
office and dignity, common to all the Ministers of Christ, so that it is no
solescime to say, the youngest of Christ's faithful Ministers is an Elder. For
the name is indifferently given to them all. Act. 14. 23. 20. 17. 1. Tim. 5.
17. Tit. 1. 5. 1. Pet. 5. 1. So called, because they ought to excel others in
an elderly wisdom and discretion, shunning all youthful vanities and
levityes, and behaving themselves with such a gravity and piety, as may beget a
reverence for them amongst the people.

29. They are called Paranymphs or friends of the bridegroom. Ioh. 3. 29. 2.
Cor. 11. 2. Because they bring the bride and espouse her to Christ: They invite
men to the marriage of the Kings son. Mat. 22. 3. and to the great feast, Luke
14. 17. Oh singular dignity, and sweet employments. As the bridegroom makes
use of his most faithful and approved friends for Paranymphs, to make up the
match between him, and his beloved: So Christ Jesus makes use of the pains of
his Ministers, to persuade poor sinners into a marriage with their maker. Now
the work of these friends of the bridegroom is manifold. For first they make up
the match, secondly, after marriage they instruct them in their conjugall
du^yes, and teach them faithfulness, love, and loy (...) in that relation?
And (...), in case they b^^k^lide and forsake their Lord and Husband, they
cause them to return again, and re^ew, their conjugall vows. And they that do
these things are su^e the confidents and approved friends of the bridegroom.
Let us take heed therefore, that we play not the part of those unfaithful
^^ustees, who having been put into this office, and employed for the
bridegroom, in the consummation of marriages, speak one word for him, and two
for themselves; Let us woo for Christ and not for our selves; his profit and
credit, and not our own, for we are but the paranymphs, he is the bridegroom,
we are but the ambassadors, he the King.

30. They are called Legates, messengers, ambassadors for Christ, Hag. 1. 13.
2. Cor. 5. 20. Ephesians. 6. 20. to be Ambassador from any prince is an honor, from
a renowned Monarch is more, but to be employed an Ambassador for Christ Jesus
is of all other honors most honorable. And such ambassadors are Christ's
Ministers. And therefore *1. as an Ambassador keeps himself within the limits
of his commission, and observes how he is bounded by his Princes commands, so
let the Ministers of Christ deliver their Masters mind freely, and yet truly,
without detracting from, or adding any thing ^o the same. 2. As no Ambassador
assumes that province to himself, nor puts himself into commission. So let them
expect their Masters mission before they fall a running: and 3. As Ambassadors
are safe from any violence; so let these promise themselves the protection of
their Master, and well they may, for they serve the best Master in the world,
who not only sends them of his embassage, but goes along with them also. And
let England take heed of doing violence or offering abuse to these Ambassadors,
for if David did revenge upon Hanun the base usage of his servants, and the
Romans sacked Carthage, for offering violence to their Ambassadors, surely
Christ, that interprets despites done to his Ministers, to be done to himself,
will sharply and surely revenge the quarrel of his Ambassadors, and the
dishonor done unto them.

31. They are called fishers of men. Mat. 4. 19. Mar. 1. 17. Luke 5. 10.
Because they do, as it were by the preaching of the word catch men, that wander
up and down the wide world, as it were in a deep and vast Ocean. And under this
Metaphor, a diligent and unwearyed care and endeavor to gain many souls is
enjoined to them. For fishers many times catch at what they catch not, it may
be, toil all the night and catch nothing, therefore they had need of patience
and constancy: they are exposed to tempests and ill weather, nay, have their
lives always in jeopardy by reason of the raging waves and unmercifull deeps,
therefore had need of a great share of courage and hardiness, to adventure
upon the one, and endure the other. Oh that we had Peter's success to catch
many fishes, or at least Peter's indefatigablenesse, patiently to endure
toyling all the night.

32. They are called Husbandmen. 1 Cor. 3. 9. and therefore are called planters
and waterers of God vineyard. 1. Cor. 3. 6. The primary and chief Husbandman is
God, Ioh. 15. 1. The secundary or subordinate Husbandman is the Minister of
God. God tills inw^rdly by his spirit, the Minister outwardly by his word and
doctrine. And as the field is plowed and sowed to bring forth fruit to its
owner, so is the Church plowed and sowed to bring forth fruit to God, whose it
is, and whose they are that till it. See here the necessity of a Ministry,
without bread no life, without corn no bread, without Husbandry no corn,
without Husbandmen no Husbandry, why so without faith no Salvation, without
hearing no faith, without preaching no hearing, and how can there be preaching
without preachers?

33. They are compared to Oxen, 1, Cor. 9. 9. 1. Tim. 5. 18. under the name of
an Ox, the indefatigable labor of a Minister is typically and allegorically
set forth. For the Ox is a very laborious Creature, and very profitable by its
labor, (Prove. 14. 4. Much increase is by the strength of the Ox) and that not
to it self but to its Master. So let the Ministers of Christ be laborious and
industrious, and that for Christ, not for themselves. The Ox is slow in work
but sure: If a Minister be cast upon hard ground, amongst a dull and slow
people of understanding, it matters not for much have or acuteness, Let him
accommodate himself to their capacityes, rather study to do his work firmly
then finely; Let him not think much to explain, press and inculcate the same
things again and again. And as the Ox content with grass, hay or straw is an
Hieroglyphick of frugality, So let a Minister of Christ be sober and frugall,
minding more his work then his meat. As an Ox is a harmless and innocuous
creature, by the verdict of the poet, What does the Ox deserve that has
(...) guile,
But harmless born alone to suffer ^oyl^?


So let a preacher be a single and ^i^ere^man, without fraud or malice, plain
and upright, like ^acob, helpful to all, hurtful to none. As the Ox is hardy
and strong to work (...) 144, 14. So let a pr^acher of Gods word be valiant,
learing the face of no man, nor the ^rowns of no face. Does any one curse him?
Let him contemn the curse. For he cannot answer reproaches and raylings
better, then by not answering them at all. And as the Ox labors hardest in
hardest weather, more in Winter then in Summer. So let Ministers approve
themselves in a^f^ictions, in necessityes, in distresses. 2. Cor 6. 4. and
stir up themselves to the greatest diligence, when there is the worst weather
in the Church. As the Ox is profitable both in his life and death, so let
every faithful and able Minister of Christ, be serviceable to the Church of
Christ, not only by his preachings but also writings. Again as the ground which
the Ox plows not, brings forth briers and thorns, but that which is by him
broken up and prepared, presents the Husbandman with a welcome harvest: So the
souls to whom the sound of the Gospel preached does not come, that have no
teaching priest, no ministerial Ox to break up the fallow ground, are
overgrown with the weeds and rubbish of vices, but those over whose souls the
plow of Gods word, held by the Ministers of Christ, does pass, are fruitful
in graces and virtues. And lastly, as it is sit that the Ox should feed of the
harvest which he gets in, and eat of the corn which he treads forth; So is it
fit that he that serves at the Altar should live of the Altar, that he that
preaches spiritual things should receive of their temporalls to whom he
preaches; which piece of equity the Apostle proves by many arguments. 1. Cor. 9.

34. They are called God's Trumpetters. Hos. 5. 8 and 8. 1. Because they must
cry with a loud, shrill, and trumpet-like voice to awaken the sleepy sinners.
(1.) They blow the trumpet of the law against sinners, Zeph. 1. 14, 15, 16.
Then the trumpet of the Gospel to the penitent ones, Is. 27. 13. (2.) As the
trumpets of the Lovites were of solid and massy silver, Num^. 10, 2. So the
Ministers of Christ ought to preach the substantial and simple word of God
without any mixture of their own inventions* without dross or corruption (3.)
They are Gods Trumpetters, in as much as they ought to proclaim an everlasting
and irreconcilable combat against sin, and call out men to fight the devil and
their own corruptions, therefore VVisdom's maidens do not whisper, the
Ministers of Gods word do not speak coldly, but boldly. Prove. 9. 3. For a
preacher is not made for a pipe to invite men to wantonness and feasting, but
for a trumpet to call forth to wars and fightings, to call men into the field
against the black band of devils, and their own outrageous lusts. And whilst
one of these enemye^ abide the field, the Minister must call on to fight, as
the trumpe^ ^ounds, so long as the enemies are in fight.

35. They are called the mouth of the Lord. Ier. 15. 19. I^. 2. 3. Luke 10. 16.
Act. 10. 35. 1. These. 2. 13. Those that ^eparate the precious from the vile,
discern between the good and the bad, and reprove sin freely, are as the Lords
mouth, and those that preach the Gospel faithfully are as the lips of Christ,
for he speaks in them. 2. Cor. 13. 3. These God ownes for his mouth, that is
for his true and faithful messengers, whilst they speak his words and not
their own, in so much that he that hears them, is interpreted as hearing God
himself. And if they be the mouth of God, let their adversaryes desist their
designs to silence them, for how is it possible that the mouth of God should
be stopped?

36. They are called the Ministers of the New Covenant or T^stament. 2. Co^. 3.
6. Ministers, not of the law as Moses was, but of the Gospel, not of the old,
but of the new Covenant, not of the letter* but of the spirit, not of death,
but of life, not of ^amnation, but of mercy, not in weakness, but power, and
^ffica^ye; because by them Christ enlightens the mind, puri^yes the heart, and
regenerates the whole man.

37. They are called a sweet savor. 2. Cor. 2. 15. By which Metaphor, the
Apostle commends and glori^yes their sacred Ministry. For they are a sweet
savor, in as much as they bring a sweet smell from Christ, and with it perfume
the corrupt manners of the dunghill world. And this must needs be so, because
on the contrary, false prophets are a noisome stink; but these preaching a holy
doctrine, and proving it by an holy life, do become a sweet smelling savor,
and being so, their Mi^^stry does become an acceptable sacrifice to God, yea,
even (...) them that perish. For although Israel be not gathered, yet (...)
they that desire to gather them, be glorious in the ey^ o^ God. I^. 49. 5.

38. They are called the Churches Crown. Rev. 12. 1. The Church of Christ is to
be seen there clothed with the su^ that (...) with Christ the sun of
righteousness, having the (...) her feet, that is, she tramples upon all
worldly things as vain and worthless; For the moon signifyes things
sublunarie. She has upon her head a Crown of twelve stars, that is, she does
not tread under her feet the Apostolical doctors, and doctrine, (as the manner
of unmannerly England is at this day) but carries them as her Crown and royal
ornament upon her head. She is adorned with the doctrine of the twelve
Apostles, upon which she is founded. Chap. 21. 14. with excellent Ministers, as
with a diadem, Chap. 1. 20. For her glory is not a wordly Crown, but her Crown
is the integrity of her ^eachers.

39. They are called the glory of Christ, 2. Cor. 8. 23, that is by a Metonymye
of the effect, such as promote and illustrate the glory of Christ. A title that
comprehends all dignity in it. For how can a man be more glorious, then by
being made the glory of Christ? Thus the grace and doctrine of the Gospel is
called the glory of the Lord, Is. 60. 1. Thy light is come, and the glory of
the Lord is risen upon thee. So let us therefore preach, so le^u^live, that we
may be a glory to Christ our Lord and Master, and not a shame, for ornament not
for ignominye.

40. They are called Saviors, Romans 11. 14. Obad. 21. v. 1. Tim 4. 16. For so
it seems good to the spirit of God, to honor them whose Ministry it makes
use of, by ascribing its own work to their hands. And this lays a strong charge
upon us, that we through ignorance or idleness suffer not those souls to
perish, whose Salvation God has as it were entrusted into our hands. Neither
is that cavil worth any thing, that it is God alone that converts and
regenerates: For we do not deny it. God saves, and so do we. He saves
absolutely and principally, we only subserviently and instrumentally, we
endeavor the salvation of souls, Gods gives efficacy and success to our
endeavors. God and man go together, to bring God and man together. That which
God could do without us, he is yet pleased to do by us; and we working in his
hand, are said to do that work which the hand does that acts us: we save men;
and yet it is God that saves both them and us: And this now argues the g^eatest
necessity of a Gospel Ministry, that by it souls may be saved, and God
glorified in their Salvation; which Argument might be of sufficient strength to
establish such a Ministry, if those thousands, that might be called out for
help, were all silenced.

Now to what end are all these Titles and Elogies, but to teach Ministers their
Duty toward their people, and how to look upon themselves (as men created and
devoted to labor and service) and to teach the people their debt of love,
honor, and reverence to, and how to look (with an eye of esteem) upon their
Ministers.

CHAP. III. Arguments and Reasons evincing the Necessity, and efficacy of a
Gospell^ Ministry.
1. THe Necessity of the Sacred Ministry does appear by God's command given,
Mark. 16. 15. Preach the Gospel to every creature; that is, to all men: Man
being the Masterpiece of the Creation is exalted; the Creature, by way of
Eminence, as by our Savior here, so by the Apostle Paul. Col. 1. 23. The like
not only Commission, but command ye may find, Matthew. 28. 19. Act 10. 42.
where you have Christ expressly commanding to preach to the people. And the
Apostle Paul, about to die, and so to leave his Office, gives this as his last
Charge to Timothy) to the observance of which he strongly ad^ures him) that he
preach the Word in every opportuni^y, and with all importunity, 2. Tim 4. 12.
This task Christ imposed, or rather, this honor Christ con^err'd upon Peter,
and in him upon all his Ministers, that they should feed, and feed, and again
feed his sheep, John 21. 15. 16. It is not a humane Invention, but a Divine
Institution, and therefore not arbi^ra^y, but Necessary.

2. A Ministry is not only necessary by a necessity of the Precept, but also
by a necessity of the means; not only as being ordained by God, but as being
ordained for man, and his s^lvation: and it is so necessary in this regard, as
that, it is called in ordinary Speech, the means or the means of grace. This is
the ordinary way, the King's highway to heaven, Romans 10. 14. 15. 1 Cor. 1. ^1.
Act. 11. 14. 1 Timothy 4* 16. By this the Spirit is received, Gal. 3. 2. Act^ 10.
44. This is the arm of the Lord, and the power of God to salvation, Romans 1. 16.
This was the employment which our blessed Savior was diligent in, Matthew. 4.
17. and 11. 1. Luke 4. 18* 19. and therefore God sent Cornelius, not to an
Angel, but to Peter, who should tell him what he ought to do* Act. 10. 5. 6.
and Paul, although extraordinarily called, yet for the honor of the Ministry,
was sent to school to Ananias, Act. 9. 6* 10. and the Eunuch must have Philip
to preach to him, Act. 8. 19. For so it seemed good to God, by men to reveal
his will to men: This treasure God has committed to earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be o^ God, 2 Cor. 4. 7. God has ordained it to be
the primary mean^ of our Regeneration and Conversion unto God. Mal. 4. 5, 6.
James 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 23. 1 Cor. 4. 15. And as the Word of God preached is the
seed whereof the Christian man is borne, so it is the food whereby the new born
Christian is nourished. Hence it is compared to meat, Ierem. 3. 15. to shewers,
and dew, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. Isa* 55. 10. to light, Act. 26. 18. Psalm. 119. 105, to
the face of God, Psalm. 27. 4. and 105. 4. Now without meat no li^e, without
shewers no increase, without light no comfort, without the face of God no joy:
It is this Word of God that enlightens the eyes, Psalm. 19. 8. cheareth the
heart, Mic. 2. 7. raises up the drooping, Isa. 57. 19. comforts the sad, Isa.
40. 1, 2. enlivens the dead, John. 5. 25. heateth the cold like fire, breaks
the obstinate, like a hammer, I^rem. 23. 29. and confers the spirit of
Adoption, whereby we are sealed unto the day of Redemption. This is a sign of
God's blessing, Exodus 20. 24. In whatsoever place the name of God is recorded,
there he blesses the people, in hearing prayers, directing in doubts, and
enriching them with all internal and external goods: Micah, although upon a
false ground, had great confidence of this blessing, upon this account* Judge.
17 13. Now know I that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my
Priest. But truer, and diviner is that of the divine Musician, Psalm. 65. 4.
Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that
he may dwell in thy courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
house, even of thy holy temple: to which truth our Savior also gives his
testimony, Luke 10. 23. Blessed are the eyes which see the things which ye see,
and this seeing compre^ends hearing* and so consequently, hearing has the
blessing also, verse. ^4.

They must necessarily, and most deservedly perish then, that neglect and
reject this spiritual Food and Physic. Cursed be also those damnable Apostates
that bring in Damnable Errors, whereby they drive the sheep of Christ from his
Folds, and drive them into the mouths of the Wolves, bewitching them with
their Fancies and Dr^ams, and so at last dreaming them into hell: and cursed be
the Presumption of those inspired Spirits, who despising the sacred Ministry of
the more sacred word of God, pretend and profess Revelations, and Enthusiasms,
as false as new, and as dangerous as either. These God ^uffers to fall into the
temptations of pride, and into the snares of Satan; having reserved the
blacknes^ of everlasting darkness to be the Conclusion of their new Lights, 2
Pet. 2. 17. Jude 13.

3. The Nec^ssity and Efficacy of the Ministry appears by the ends for which
it was ordained; which being many, the Apostle comprises in few, but full
phrases, Ephesians ^ 4 11. etc. 1. Christ ordained a Ministry for the Restoration
of the Saints, for the setting of them as of disjointed members in their proper
places: There was a disjuncture made by the fall of our first parents, and
hence it is that all of us have variously erred and gone astray: Therefore God
to restore us, has given variety of gifts to his Ministers, to knit us to
Christ our head* and us all together, as fellow members. And as for the
Restoration of the Saints, so 2. For their Edification. He has given us
Teachers, that we may be built up* in knowledge; Preachers of the Word, that by
them we may be built up in our most holy Faith, which comes by hearing. 3. For
the settling and establishing us in the Truth, that we may arrive at a staid
manhood in Christianity, and not like children be tossed too and fro with every
wind of Doctrine, no^ be drawn aside by the fle^ght and cunning craftiness of
men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive* 4. For the conservation of the Unity
and Harmony of the Church, in the Worship of God, that we may speak the truth
in love.

4. Our Infimities and Miseries do sufficiently speak a Necessity of a
Minist^y. We are all by nature sick of an Here ^^^tary Disease, and do
therefore need a savo^y and ^^ving Ministry, to keep us that we die not of this
Sickness, and to restore us again to pe^fect (...). Nay, we are all by nature
distanced from the mercy of God, are destitute of all i^^ate strength, whe^by
to help our se^ves: Nay, we are not only sick, and unable to restore our
selves to health, but even dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. 1. and therefore b^ sure unable
to restore our selve to life; and so we are obnox^^us to the hea^^^st wrath of
tl^ M^migh^y God. And does not this sad condition call for A^istry of
Reconciliation?

5. ^he Necessity of a Ministry appears: by the sad condition of them that are
destitute of the preaching of the Word, as may be exemplified in the I^ws
sometime wanting it, and the Heathens at this day, without a teaching Priest,
and without the true God, are put together, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. And the Heathens
that want this Ministry are without God in the world, without Christ, without
hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. When Moses the Jews Minister was a way but five or six weeks,
the people presently become idolatrous, Exodus 32. 1. After Paul's departure,
grievous Woolves are seen entering in amongst the people, Act. 20. 29. where
there is no vision the people perish, says Solomon, prove. 29* 18. Where there
is no Ministry of the Word, we may exspect whatever evi^l is expressed or
signified by the Hebrew word ((...)) which we translate ( perish) 1.
Denudation, or stripping off the true and saving knowledge of God, faith, love,
with the whole Armor of God, as also of Divine safeguard, and protection. 2.
Rebellion, viz. against God, and against men. 3. Cessation from the study of
good learning, performance of good duties, and practice of good works. 4.
Separation, not only from God by Apostasy, but one from another, by cruel
enmities, and carnal Errors, as sheep having no Shepherd, and (as when there
was no King in Israel, so) if there should be no Preacher in Israel, every one
would do what seemed good in his own eyes, Nay, I doubt not to say, if Israel
were nothing else but Kings, yet, if there were no Preacher, they would all do
so*

We see some good fruits which God is pleased to hand over to us by the
Ministry, some sad fruits of the want of it, and some Arguments* evincing the
necessity and efficacy thereof: What remains, but that we maintain and stick to
this Ministry; love, and reverence the Ministers, at least for their work sake.

CHAP. IV. The Doctrine is applied in an Use of Information.
THe Corrolaryes issuing out of the bowels of this Doctrine, thus explicated
and demonstrated, will serve for Information, Instruction, Consolation,
Reprehen^ion, Exhortation.

1. For Information. There is then a Ministry in the Church. To what purpose
are all these Names, and honorable Titles, if there be no such Order, as
Ministers, in the Church? Which Order is not of a months, a years, or an Ages
standing, but must be contemporary with the world, even in its last Ages* There
is, and shall be a Ministry in the world, so long as there shall be a world for
it to be in; which we shall prove by Arguments; 1. Confirming the truth. 2.
Infirming and confuting the Cavills of the Anabaptists.

1. It is plain, by those Evangelicall Prophesies and Promises, by which God
has made himself a debtor to his Church. He stands engaged to his people, in
all ages, as well as to those of the Primitive times, to give them Pastors
according to his own heart, who shall feed them with knowledge and
understanding, Isa. 30. 20. Ierem. 3. 15. and 23. 4. Ezech. 44. 23.

2. It is plain by the Promise of Christ's presence, and help with the Ministry
of his Word, to the end of the world; the enrollment of which Promise we may
see Matthew. 28* 20. Lo, I am with you (not a day, nor a year, but) always, even
unto the end of the world. Although it may be shaken sore in this world, yet it
shall not be plucked up by the roots; although many may, and do gnash their
teeth against it, yet shall they not be able to devour it; for Christ will
build his Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, or its
Ministry. Neither did our Savior make this Promise only (though chiefly) to
his Apostles, but to all his Ministers also in general, that either in times
past have been, to us who now are, and to them that shall be after us* even to
the end of the world.

3. The Offices of Ministers, and the works of the Ministry, shall be
perpetual, Therefore shall the Ministry it self last also. The Preaching of
the Word, and the Administration of the Sacraments are Offices of Ministers,
and works of the Ministry; but these have a long-liv^d Char^^r, a promise of
perpetuity, and an injunction that they be perpetuated. A Ministry was given,
not for one age, but for all ages; ^ot for the Edification of one man, but of
the whole body of Christ, the Church, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. The Administration of
Sacraments must extend it self to the utmost times, and last age of the Church,
Matthew. 28. 19* 20. 1 Cor. 11. 2^. Now whilst the Office continues, they must
needs continue that execute it. Where there is any Religion, there must be some
set apart to maintain it. Baal himself, if he be a God, must have his Priests.
The same may be found in Scripture concerning the fictitious crew of all those
devilish De^^ies, which the Phili^^ines, Egyp^^ans, M^abites; and Ammonites
worshipped.

4. It is plain from the necessity of this Calling: VV^^hout faith no
Salvation, John 13. 1^. Without the preaching of the word no faith, Romans 10.
17. VVrithout Preachers no preaching* and without a Ministry there can be no
Preachers; For, How shall they preach except they be sent* So then, without the
ministry and Ministers no Salvation. So long as there shall be any to be saved,
God will provide some, by whose hands he will save them*

5. Whilst there shall be a Church, there must be a ministry of the Church;
But God will have a Church militant upon earth whilst ^un and moon endure,
(...). 31. 36. Matthew* 16. 18. Ephesians. 3. 21. It is necessary therefore, that as
there ever has been a ministry, because there ever has been some ^^^ct, so
there should be a ministry for ever, because there shall ever be some Elect,
who^e Salvation shall be carried on thereby; that it should be commensu^able
with the Churches necessi^ies, Whilst God shall have upon earth a Church to be
built, a Vineyard to be planted, a field to be tilled, a Flock to be ^ed, an
harvest to be reaped, and souls to be saved; so long will he have builders,
planters, tillers, shepherds, reapers, Saviors, and a Ministry for the
accomplishing of these things; see Act. 1^. 10, 11.

6. It appears* in that it is said to be the privilege, and is rep^esented as
the Property of the New Jerusalem, to have no Temple in it, Rev. 21. 22. The
Church Triumphant is the Church, and the only Church, that needs no ministry,
ministers, or ordinances; For God is all this to them; Instead of the word of
God, they read in the God of that Word; instead of the representation of Christ
in Sacraments, they have the enjoyment of him without the help of shadows or
types. The immediate enjoyment of God in this life, without the means, is sure
then a fancy only beseeming the heady brains, or rather brainless heads of
Anabaptists. It is the proper Privilege of the Church Triumphant to serve God
immediately, without Temple or Ordinances; Amongst them it is, that Prophes^^s
shall fail, 1 Cor. 13* 8. But in the Church militant they are to be highly
esteemed, 1 These. 5. 20^

7. It appears by the care of the Apostles for the continuation of their
Successors, and the perpetuation of a Ministry in the Church. Paul commands
Titus to ordain Elders and Bishops in (...) city, describes the persons to be
ordained, and prescribes rules for the ordaining of them, Tit 1. 5, 6, 7, 8,
etc. He command^, and cautions Timothy also about the same thing; and ^^ds him
keep the commands relating to this Ministry till the appearing of the Lord
Jesus Christ; which Injunction is not only laid upon Timothy in his own
person, but upon all the Ministers of Christ that shall be in succession to the
end of the world.

8. It appears by that honor, reverence, and submission, which, by virtue of
the command, is due to the Successors of the Apostles, 1 These. 5. 12, 13.
Phil. 2. 29. Heb. 13. 17. Which things, so long as they are due, must needs
have, and prove Ministers of the Gospel to whom they shall be given. And if you
take a way them that are over you in the Lord, your Messengers, them that have
the rule over you, and that watch for your souls, I pray you tell me, where
will you bestow the high estimation and love, the reputation, obedience, and
submission which the great Apostle commands to be given, in the fore-quoted
Texts.

9. It appears by that constant provision that God has made for his Ministers,
ordering them honorable stipends for their work, Gal. 6. 6. 1 Cor. 9. 13* 14.
1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. which provision is laid up in the storehouse of the Gospel,
not only for the Apostles sake, but all theirs that are Ministers of Christ in
succession. Now to what purpose should these commands of God remain in the
B^ble, if there should not be a remainder of Ministers still in the Church. God
needed not to have provided meat for his Ministers, if he had been minded that
men should have sewed up their m^uthes.

Away with the doting crew of Anabaptists then, that despising the Word of God,
and Ministry of that Word* and Ministers of that Ministry, gape for the
downfall of Revelations into their mouths, and stare after New Lights. Away
with them to the Law and the Prophets. Why stand ye gazing up into heaven for
new discoveries? to the Law, and to the Testimony; If they be not according to
this Word, it is because your new Lights have no light in them* Isa. 8. 20. God
has ordained and established a public Ministry, and forbids the consulting of
Diviners, Observers of times, Enchanters, Charmers, Witches, Wizards,
Necromancers, Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11, 12. No, nor must men's own Fancies lead them,
their own inventions be set up to give Oracles; But in all doubtful matters,
consult the Ministers of God, verse. 15. Is there no light in the Word of God?
or, whether are your eyes out that ye cannot receive it? Is that nothing but a
dead letter now, which in S. Paul's days was so quick and spiritual, Heb. 4.
12. Is there no God, but in the still voice of your spiritual conceivements
and Revelations now adays? Well, let us hear what your spirit has to say
against our Christ, who has bidden ^o* and teach and baptize.

CHAP. V. The Cavills and Fallacies of the Anabaptists, Socinians,
Swend^eldians, and Enthusiasts are blown away.
Obj. 1. THe first harbor of these Libertines Opinion in this thing is
pretended to be in Ierem. 1. 34. They shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all
know me, from ^he l^ast of them, even to the greatest of them, says the Lord;
Therefore such a thing as the Ministry of the Word is needless under the New
Testament.

Answ. 1. Words are not properly Scripture,, but the sense; neither does the
Scripture properly consist in the leaves of words, but in the root of reason;
the Word of God is not to be taken formally, as it is described by words and
syllables, but materially, as it declares to us the mind and counsel of God;
we must not stick in the bark, for that has involved the ^apist^ and
Anabaptists in many Errors.

2. If we must needs have so much regard to the letter of the Text, it rather
takes away Private Instruction, then Public Preaching; for God does not say,
there shall be no public Preachers, but They shall no more t^ach every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother. But neither can we dis^ard private
Instructions under the Gospel, if S^ Paul be a Gospell-man, who presses this
duty, Coloss. 3. 16. 1 These. 5. 11.

3. The Text is a Promise: Now Promises must not shoulder out, nor overthrow
Precepts; neither must the means be taken away, because the primary cause is
laid down and asserted. God feeds all, it does not follow, therefore that
tillag^ is unnecessary, or bread needless, ^or by these means God ^eeds us. No
more does it follow, that because God teaches, therefore the ministry of his
word is unnecessary, for God teaches by the ministry of his Word.

4. The genuine scope of the Text is to show us, that God teaches his Elect*
not only externally by the ministry of his Word, but internally* by the
ministry of his Holy Spirit. Neither does the Prophet speak absolutely, simply*
and inclusively; but comparatively, as the Holy Ghost frequently speaks. Things
spoken negatively in Scripture, are often times to be understood comparatively,
and are not to be expounded so much by (not) as by (not so much,) which is
plain in Hos. 6. 6. Psalm. 50. 8. Psalm. 51. 16. John 6. 38. John 7. 16. and many
other places: So that the sum of the Prophets words will easi^y be, There shall
be a ^uller and clearer knowledge of God in the times of the New Testament, then
there was in the times of the Old. 1. Because under the Old Testament Christ
was obscurely shadowed out in Types; but under the New he is plainly preached,
and shown openly; insomuch, that a very boy, w^ll ca^echised and instructed
does understand the Gospel concerning Christ, beter then many of the Priests
of the Law did; which is the accomplishment of that Promise. Isa. 11. 9. The
earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord. 2. Because there are
far more that are blessed with the saving knowledge of God in the times of the
New Testament, than were in the times of the Old, the Preaching of the Word not
being restrained to one Nation now, as it was then, but common to all. 3. By
reason of the more plentiful Effusions of the grace of God, there shall not
need so much pains and trouble to instruct the Elect now, as formerly there
needed. This is plain from verse. 33. where it is said, I will write my Law in
their hearts, not in their lips, not in tables of stones, not on the fringes of
their garments (as it was sometimes among the Jews) but in their hearts, by
giving them pious affections, and inclinations for the Law of God. That of
Calvin upon the place gives the substance of the Interpretation; God, who had
more darkly represented himself under the Law, promises a more glorious
discovery under the Gospel; in so much, that the knowledge of God shall be
then, as it were, familiar, and common: But it is by an Hyperbole that he
commends this grace, when he says, that no one shall need any Master or
Teacher, but every one shall be sufficiently instructed: Neither yet does he
say exactly, that they shall not teach every one his neighbor, but they shall
not teach every one his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord; i. e. there shall be
such a measure of knowledge, that men shall be no longer Abecedarians: For this
phrase (know the Lord) seems to point at the first beginning, and rudiments of
Religion. The mind of the Prephet in this place (which we willingly yield) can
be nothing but this, that God will send out a greater light, and greater
measures of knowledge in the times of the Go^pell, and will deal more freely
and familiarly with his people then, than formerly.

5. If having given the natural sense, and genuine scope of the text, we may
use an answer ad hominem, I would fain know why the Anabaptists and Quakers,
that stand up for this litterall meaning, and apply the promise to our days,
can make themselves these new lights, and the heirs of this promise, and yet
go about saying know the Lord. Certainly if this be the meaning of the
promise, these be the times of the accomplishment of it, and they the persons
to whom it belongs, they contradict their interpretation, and even break the
neck of the promise, in going from town to town, from street to street, from
house to house, teaching men to repent, to turn to the Lord, to know the Lord,
and a great deal more of this, and so take Gods work out of his hands, for they
should be all taught of the Lord. And if they say, true men shall be taught of
the Lord, but it shall be by the means of men, then why are not we as fit to
teach as they? This now brings to my mind their

2. Obj. Which they build upon, Is. 54. 13. where God promises that all the
faithful shall be taught of the Lord. Therefore the Ministry of the word is
needless.

Ans. 1. This rather raises up then razeth out the Ministry of the word, of
which there shall be need in the New Testament, no less then in the old. All
know that Scripture is the best interpreter of Scripture. Now Christ reaches
us what it is to be taught of God. Ioh. 6. 45. God teaches us two ways, by the
outward preaching of his word and by the inward revelations of his spirits. God
here promises that his elect shall be taught, not only by the teachers of the
Church from without, but by the Holy Spirit from within. Christians in this
text of the Prophet seem to be put in opposition to the lews, whose teachings
under the old Testament were more external then internal. And it is here
promised that the spirit of God shall be mightily efficacious by the Ministry
of the word, and that it shall be more free and liberal in distributing its
gifts and graces under the New Testament. So that these two kinds of teachings
are rather united in this text than divided. To be taught of God is not to be
taught of him immediately, but mediately by the preaching of the word, as
appears from Luk 10. 16. Act 10. 33. But further if this text of the prophet be
interpreted for the overthrow of the Ministry of the word, how will it agree
with Ier. 3. 15. Mat. 28. 20. Romans 10. ^4.? And agree it must, unless you will
have the spirit of truth to give himself the lie. Cal^^ speaks appositely. It
is evident how miserably they dote, who abuse this text, for the overthrow of
the ministry of the Word, so much used by, and useful ^o the Church. They
cannot be owned for the Children of the Church, that reject her education. And
it is in vain to boast the revelations of the spirit; for the spirit teaches
none, save those who submit themselves to the ministry of the Word. Account we
them therefore the brats of the Devil, not the genuine begotten of God, who
reject this holy ordinance of his own institution. For we see these two, (the
Children of the Church) and (the taught of God) are so much the same, that they
cannot be the taught of God, who will not be taught in the Church.

2. If we may make an answer ad hominem, It little becomes the Anabaptists to
decrye a Ministry, and forbid prophesying who otherwise bid all to do it, plead
the cause of the gifted brethren so stiffly, and give them a license for
prophesying at their pleasure. No wonder if they would set Scripture together
by the ears, and make contradictions in them, who themselves do contradict
themselves, and whose latter opinions do fall out and quarrel with their
former.

3. Obj. Is grounded upon 1. Ioh. 2. 20, 27. Ye have an unction from the holy
one, and ye know all things; And ye need not that any man teach you. The
Objection framed for the purpose of our Libertines and New lights, will be of
this form, who ever has the spirit of God, understands the Scriptures
without a teacher, But we have this spirit of God. Therefore we understand them
without any teacher.

Ans. 1. The Major proposition is false. For whom the spirit of God teaches,
it teaches by teachers, Ephesians* 4. 11. and not immediately, as was made to appear
before. This anointing teaches you all things, that is, The spirit of God is
efficacious and powerful by the preaching of the word, to enlighten the minds
of the faithful in all things necessary to Salvation. These elect persons knew
all things, and so St. Paul could do all things he says, and yet I dare say
there were many things* that they did not know, nor he could not do: what
shall we say then? Why not that these elect persons were so many Gods, which
they must be, if they know all things. Ioh. 21. 17* Not that Paul was
Omnipotent, not that these were Omniscient; But Paul's Omnipotence, and their
Omniscience must be limited. The one could do all things belonging to his
calling, the other knew all things necessary to Salvation, at least in some
good measure* they knew all things which might serve for the discovering of
Antichrist, and the avoiding of his snares, which is there the subject of the
Apostles discourse. Concerning these things, or concerning the fundamentalls of
religion, ye need not that any man teach you; which words else are spoken
comparatively not absolutely, and come to this meaning. The spirit of God
teaches you so plainly and powerfully, that no one needs to bestow much pains
to persuade you concerning heavenly truths. The Major proposition being pulled
down, the Minor, staggars, and the conclusion appears to be a mere delusion.

2. If they that have the spirit of God and the Holy anointing, know all
things, and need not that any one teach them any thing, in the sense which our
Enthusiasts would interpret it, I wonder that the Apostle John could so far
forget himself, as to write an Epistle for the instruction, and edification of
such Omniscient persons as these were. This sense of the text, which our
libertines will stitch to it, will not only render the Apostle contradictory to
Christ Jesus his Master, Mat. 9. 38. to the Apostle Paul 1. Tim. 3. 1. and Ephesians.
4. 11, 12, 13. but to himself also. As though a man should go and teach
another, tha^ he need not be taught. So that surely, ye know all things, must
n^^ds be meant but of some things, and ye need not that any one teach you, must
be limited to some things only, wherein they were so well verst.

4. Obj. God can save the Elect without any Ministry, therefore he will.

Ans. This ^oth not follow: An argument from Gods power to his will is not
concluding. God could have saved Noah without an Arc, but he would not. He
could have instructed the Jews without Levites, have propagated the Gospel
without Apostles, but he would not. He could save us indeed without means, but
it has pleased him to make use of means for the regenerating of us, and to
prescribe those means to us. Romans 10. 14. Where the Apostle in an elegant
gradation shows us by what means, and in what order to faith and Salvation,
We are fitted for glory.

5. Obj. Although the Ministry be useful for regeneration, yet it is useless
to the regenerate.

Ans. Why do ye not say also that meat is necessary for Children, but
superfluous, and hurtful to men of age; for we are ^ure that the word of God
is meat. The Apostle Paul appears ^o be of another mind, Ephesians. 4. 11. The
Ministry of the word ^ust continue (not for a year or an age, not till we be
regenerate, not till we have got a little strength, but) till we all come in
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ. Not only till
we be united to Christ by faith, but ^ill all the elect come to a perfect
knowledge in the beatificall vision, and to the full statute of Christ. These
remain many scales yet to be stricken off from the most enlightened eyes in the
world, and some cubits which may still be added to the highest stature in this
world by the word of God. The word of God is not only the seed, of which the
Christian babe is born* but the food also, by which the Christian man is sed,
1. Pet. 2. ^. and is not only the instrument of regeneration, but of
edification also* Act. 20. 32. 1. Tim. 3. 16, 17. Therefore the Apostle would
not have believers to forsake the assembling of themselves together, by way of
Christian congregations to handle, and hear Gods word. Heb. 10. 25. The word of
God preached, that principle of regeneration, is also the principle of
nutrition. Jeremiah was regenerate, yet he eat the word of the Lord, and it
was to him the joy and rejoicing of his heart. Ier. 15. 16. David was
regenerate, yet the word of God, was more sweet to his taste then the most
clarifyed honey, more desirable to his eyes, then the most refined gold, Ps.
19. 11. Job was regenerate, yet he hid, or rather hoarded up the Commandments
of God, as the best treasure, in his heart, as the best treasury; Nay, he
esteemed the words of Gods mouth more then his necessary food. Job. 23. 12.

Nay, since the best saints upon earth are by nature slow, s^cure, apt to
loosen themselves from God, and obnoxious to many wanderings both in head,
heart, and hand, (as is sadly exemplifyed in Sampson the strongest of men,
David the most humbled of sinners, Solomon the wisest of Kings, Peter the
bolbest of believers) since blindness in part happens even to the dest of
Israel, and no man even was or will be upon earth, either so complete in
knowledge or grace, but that something will remain to be added to him, Phill. 3.
12. 2. Pet. 3. u^t. we have daily and hourly need for, and use of the word of
God, whereby our ignorance may be instructed, our faintings refreshed our
weakness strengthened, our dullness quickened, our wanderings reduced, our
waverings resolved, and we built up in grace* and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VI. Many uses of instruction arising from the doctrine.
1. HEnce we may see the absolute necessity of a Gospel Ministry. Take away
this salt, and you have the world stinking in sin presently. The whole world
not only falls into, but lies in wickedness, 1. Ioh. 5. 19. and there would
lie and ^ot, to all eternity, were it not for this ^alt. Take away this
Ministry, and ye take the sun out of the firmament. For what is the world
without the Ministry of Gods word, but the picture of hell, nay very hell upon
earth, wherein will b^ no order, and eternal horror. That of the
Constantinopolitans is all most more common then that it needs to be repeated,
It were better that the sun did not shine, than that Chrysostom should not
teach. Take away this Ministry, and you take away all the true knowledge of the
true God, the heat of piety is extinguished, ba^barisme enters, and you shall
presently reap a large harvest (...) the weeds of all error and profaneness.
There will be neither sovereign nor subject, Mistress nor maid, but all
things will presently be in a confusion, which very miseryes our ancesto^^ did
sadly experience in the dark night of popery, to their great ^ffl^ction. And
not only they in their Papisticall, but also we in part see in our Atheistical
days, wherein the Ministry and Ministers of the Gospel being set at naught, he
has broke loose, and a numberless crew of Locusts have sprung out of the
bottomless pit, assuming to themselves the names of Arrians, Arminians,
Socinians, Antinomians, Anabaptists, Familists, Antiscripturists,
Antisabbatarians, Antitrinitarians, Libertines, Erastians, Levellers,
Mortalists, Millenaryes, Enthusiasts, Separatists, Semiseparatists, Reggus
Comment. de statu Angliae.
Quakers and many more of the same brood, upon all which and the present
erroneous state of our English Church, a stranger has set a black mark*
England (says he) in four years, is become a Lerna and sink of all errors, and
sectaries. No Country from the foundation of the world has brought forth, and
brought up, so many monstrous births as it has done. Nay, in a word, take away
the Ministry, and you take away faith in in God, prayer to God, and Salvation
given by him. Romans 10. 15. 1 Timothy 4. 16. By this men are turned from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan to God. Ier. 23. 22. Luk 1. 16, 17. By
this Christ has propagated his Church, overthrown the Kingdom of Satan, and
the powers of darkness, viz. paganism, idolatry, superstition, and ignorance,
Luk 10. 18, 19. This stops the blasphemous mouths, and cuts out the very
tongues of that pestilent generation of Jesuits, and Romish agents: Therefore
when God will hasten the downfall of Antichrist, he will not do it by a
secular power, but by the spirit of his mouth, 2. These. 2. 8. that is, By the
power of the Gospel preached, by Ministers not Magistrates, by whom also he
has founded true religion, kept it upon its Legs, when it was founded, and
restored it when it was fallen. To these he has given (that which he has
denied to the greatest Monarchs of the world) the Keys of the Kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 16. 19. Ioh. 20. 23. So that what they bind on earth, is said to
be bound in heaven, and what they loose, to be loosed also. Hence some one not
amiss inferrs that a Minister rightly discharging his office, has not only
pre-eminence above all other private persons, but even Kings and Princes; to
which Chrysostom gives his suffrage; That the very Angels of God in heaven in
this may give place to the Angels of God, which are upon earth, who although
they be themselves in heaven, yet have no Keys to open to others. Take away
this Palladium i. e. come who will, and take away our place, and nation. Behold
the disasters and disorders, and the omnifarious calamitousnesse of those
times, wherein Israel was without the knowledge of the true God, without a
teaching priest, and without law, 2. Chron. 15. 3. 5. Take away this light, ye
have nothing but stumbling. Ioh. 11. 10. Take away Pastors, and ye have men,
like sheep wandering; Take away these guides, and ye have all ditches every
where filled, with the carcasses of the blind, that are fallen there. Take away
this light, and let us see what solid comfort, innumerable gold, uninterrupted
prosperity, and friendly society will afford. Take away this Arc, and then
show me the glory of Israel. Ignorance and impiety go together in the Gospel
texture, Ephesians. 4. 18, and there is but a letter between Ignorants, and
Covenant-breakers, Romans 1. 31. If ye would find cruelty, (...)
search the dark places of the earth, for they are full of it. Ps. 74. 20. Come
see and hear the wise man's whoremonger bewayling himself at last, Prove. 5.
13, 14. I have not obeyed the voice of my teachers. Behold the root of
bitterness, the fountain of his sin, Nor inclined mine ear to them that
instructed me. Hin^ illae lacl^ymae, here is the ground of the complaint.
Wherefore the Lord promises faithful pastors as a great blessing, and
singular kindness, I^. 30. 20, 21. The Lord will give you the bread of
adversity, and the water of affliction. Behold the ^ore? But thy teachers shall
not be removed into Corners any more, thine eyes shall see thy teachers. Behold
the salve? Although we suffer hunger, and thirst, and adversity, for trial and
purgation, yet if God will be present with us in our teachers, who may
strengthen the weak, cheer the sad, refresh the faint, and teach us the ways
of the Lord, our hunger will be as good as plenty, our adversity will ou^-shine
prosperity, and our thirst as waged by the waters of the Sanctuary. And on the
other hand, as hunger and thirst are blessings with the word, so is a famine of
the word the greatest curse on this side hell, though in the midst of plenty
and prosperity, so is it represented, Am. 8. 11. Is. 29. 9. 10. what is the
body to the soul; no more comparable in value, then the clothes are to the
body. And so consequently what is the sust^ntation, and nourishment of the
body, to that of the soul? Wheat is but chafe to the bread of life; Wine is
but water to the droppings of the Sanctuary. Honey is but Wax, nay, very
bitterness to the word of God; Ps. 19. 10. And so consequently what is a
famine of bread, or of water, to a famine of the word of God, which is the most
exce^lent food of the most excellent substance in this world, even our precious
souls.

2. This acquaints us with our miserable condition, by nature. It gives us to
understand, that we are altogether destitute of the salt of Mortification and
Repentance. If we were sound, and could so preserve our selves, what needed we
this salt: what unsavory, filthy, stinking, corrupt carcases are men, till they
be seasoned with this heavenly salt! Let us therefore bless God for this
Seasoner, and that he has caused us to be brought forth, and brought within
the sound of the glorious Gospel: and pray with all earnestness, that, as God
has out of his mere goodness ordained a Ministry for us, that he would
preserve it amongst us; as he has set, it up, so that he would keep it
standing, whilst the world it self shall stand.

3. This acquaints us with the dignity and efficacy of the sacred Ministry; of
all that serve and minister to Christ, his Ambassadors are his chiefest
servants, and choicest ministers. Their ministry is most excellent, because
they minister to God, Heb. 5. 1. and that, not in the things pertaining to this
life, but in the things that respect the Kingdom of God, and the everlasting
Salvation of men: this ministry is called a thing not small, Numb. 16. 19. ^ay,
it is called an honor, Heb. 5. 4. nay the Prophet puts a beauty with an
admiration upon the very feet of the Gospell-ministers, Isa. 52. 7. How
beautiful are the feet of them that bring good tidings of good, that publish
salvation! how could the beauty of them be expressed more fully, than by such an
elegant particle of admiration? and yet, if the beauty of their feet must have
an admiration borrowed to express them, by what shall we express the beauty of
their faces? Learn hence, what a glorious treasure the Gospel is, what a
glorious Office the Preaching of it is, what glorious and honorable servants
the preachers of it; they have been a delight to the very Kings of the earth,
who in token of honor and reverence, have called them fathers, 2 Kings 6. 21.
nay, they have not only spoken reve^^ntly of them, but also comfortably to
them, 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. and 35. 2. wicked Saul himself could not but reverence
holy Samuel, 1 Samuel 15. and graceless Herod could not but respect the gracious
Baptist* Marl 6. 20. the Apostle Paul was of so much worth to the Galattan*
that they received him as an Angel of God, even as Christ jesus ((...) his
Ambassador he was) Gal. 4. 14. Behold Corn^lius the Ce^turion falling down
before Peter the Apostle, and worshipping him, Act. 10. 25. Oh stupendous
humanity, and humility! a Roman Captain, a Gentleman Soldier stooping to a
poor Apostle, and offering him honor, not only more than could be exspected,
but than durst be accepted: Lo Alexander the grand Tenant of the Universe
(whose ranging soul knew no confines, whose stately spirit scorned to own any
Monarch) stooping before, and doing reverence unto Iaddus the Jewish
High Priest, Josephus, Antiquit. l. 11. c. 8. It is not much that Aqutla and
Priscilla should expose their lives to danger for Paul's sake. Romans 16. 3, 4.
but yet it spoke their great affection to, and estimation of him. Observe the
reverend carriage of the noble Obadiah* Governor of the Kings household,
toward Elijah a poor persecuted Prophet, 1 Kings 18. 7. He fell on this face,
and said, Art thou that my Lord Elisah? and not only him did he reverence, but
manifested his great affections toward an hundred of the Lords Prophets, even
with the danger of his life, ver. 13. such was the honor sometimes thought due
to the men of God. Ministers are gifts, not carnal and temporal, but
spiritual: they are part of Christ's purchase, and a singular fruit of his
ascension, who went up into heaven, that they might come down upon the earth,
Ephesians. 4. 10. 11. Surely the gift of the Sun and salt, are a mere nothing, if
compared with this heavenly Largess. By this Ministry the glory of God is
manifested, faith is begotten and nourished, charity kindled and enflamed: by
this the Ignorant are instructed, the idle are provoked, the unconstant are
fastened to the truth, as it were nails, Eccles 12. 11. the wicked are
convinced, the weak are confirmed, the root of wickedness cast up, and the
branches cut off. This Gospell-ministry, in the Apostles mind, far ou^-goes
the Ministry of the Law, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9. and John Baptist (who himself was
scarce a Gospell-preacher, had yet, because of his more then ordinary nearness
thereunto, his pre-eminence, not only of the silken Courtiers in our Saviors
account, but of all the Prophets his p^edecessors, Matthew. 11. 7, 8, 9, 10. And
yet the meanest of the faithful Ministers of Christ (in regard of the
clearness of the Doctrine taught by him) is greater then he. The great
excellency and dignity of the Sacred Ministry will easily appear, if we
consider,

1. The Author of it, not man, but God. The commendation of the Scriptures is,
that they are (...), 2 Timothy 3. 16. The commendation of Believers is, that they
are (...), Isa. 54* 13. The same authority commends the Ministry of the Word*
Ephesians. 4. 11. (...), Christ gave some Apostles, etc. He put^ his Ministers into
Commission, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. And Jesus came and spoke unto them saying, All
power is given to me in heaven and in earth; Go ye therefore, and teach all
Nations, baptizing them. And S. Paul magnifies his Ministry by this authority,
1 Cor. 1. 1. 2 Cor. 1. 1. and Gal 1. 1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, nor by
man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the father, It is not man's appointment, but
an Ordinance of God; not a humane fiction, but a Divine Institution.

2. The Antiquity of it, which also commends the goodness of a good thing. The
Ministry of the Church is no new Invention, but an ancient Ordination: for it
had been even from the beginning, which the Churches of God have not wanted in
any age, neither before, nor under, nor since the Law; Before the Law were the
Patriarchs, who instructed their Families in the Worship of God, and propagated
Religion to their Posterity: Under the Law God had his Priests, and Levites,
and Prophets, who had their unctions, missions, and Commissions from him: And
since the Law (...), Christ has given Apostles, Pastors, Evangelists, Teachers.

3. The Ministers of it: the Patriarchs, the Prophets, Christ himself, and his
Apostles. Isaiah was of the blood: oyal, and yet a Minister of this ministry:
King Solomon commends himself to the Church of God under the name of Koheleth:
and amongst other his Titles, seems to glory first, and most in that of The
Preacher, Eccles. 1. 1 The words of the Preacher, and then it follows, the son
of David, King in Ierusal^m. Noah the Monarch of the whole world was a Preacher
of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5. Nay, Christ Jesus himself, God blessed for
evermore, came to minister, Mark. 10. 45. and to be the Masterpreacher of the
Gospel, Heb. 1. 2. The Apostles and Teachers that have succeeded him, being set
up by him (1 Cor. 12. 28.) are also honorable: For what greater honor can
there be in Court, then to succeed in that place and employment, in which the
King's son himself deigned sometime to be.

4. The Object about which it is conversant: not the body* but the soul; not
humane Laws, secular concernments, but spiritual things relating to the
worship, service, and glory of God, and the salvation of souls. Physicians
bind up bruised bodies, Lawyers patch up broken Estates, whilst Christ
Ministers bind up broken hearts, and salve wounded consciences. If therefore
the body he unworthier then the soul, the earth be content to be below the
heavens, externalls give place to eternalls; parity of reason will prefer this
sacred function before, and set it above all others.

5. The Supernatural Effects thereof, such as the Conversion, Sanctification,
and Salvation of man; In all which the dignity of the sacred Ministry does
admirably appear, and in the dignity of the ministry does also appear the
dignity of the Ministers. Neither let any one say, they are servants, they are
but Ministers, and therefore not to be honored; for that derogates not awhit
from their honor: If they be servants, they are the servants of the Church of
God; If they be Ministers, they are Ministers of Christ, the Lord of heaven,
earth, and hell, They are not the servants of Kings, but of the King of Kings,
to whom the glorious Angels do gladly Minister; neither are they of the
meanest of Christ's servants, put in some low place of service, but they serve
him in the distribution of the most precious treasure, even Gospell-grace, 2
Cor. 4. 7. now to be the Treasurer of the Lord, is a greater honor then to be
Lord-Treasurer. And if there be honor in the meanest Office performed for God,
as he wing wood, and drawing water for the Sanctuary, and keeping the door of
the house of God, Psalm. 84. 10. surely the highest Offices cannot be
dishonorable. All the things that render any service honorable, do concur
to make this great employment truly honorable. 1. We serve an honorable
Master, the Lord Iehorah, the Monarch of heaven and earth. 2. Our service is in
it self excellent and honorable. 3. Our wages and reward is the highest of all
others, viz. a Crown of glory; God does not only honor his faithful
ministers that honor him, in this life; but he has reserved a more exceeding
weight of glory for them against the time to come. Oh what admirable honor
will be given of God at the last day to his faithful Ministers! Then shall
stand forth before God, and his Angels, and all men, Andrew bringing with him
his Achaians, whom by his ministry he gained to Christ; John with his Asians.
Thomas with his Indians; Peter with his Jews; Paul with his Gentiles; and all
the pious and painful Ministers of Christ, with the children that God has
given them in their respective Ages and Generations, and these shall be their
crown of glorying, in the presence of Jesus Christ at his coming, 1 These. 2. 19.

What remains therefore, but that we give such honor to our Teachers, as is
due to the Ambassadors and Ministers of the most high God, For although they
be servants, yet are they his servants, whom to serve is to reign; Look not
upon them as slaves, but as such servants, to whom honor, reverence, and
obedience is due, even by the command of God 1 Timothy 5. 57. Tit. 2. 15. Heb. 13.
17. 1 Cor. 16. 15, 16. The Apostle Paul desires the Thessalonians, 1 These. 5.
12, 13. not only to know, but to acknowledge their Teachers, nay, to love them
with a high strain of affection, even to an Hyperbole, to esteem them highly in
love, which Translation yet comes short of the expression, (...). Let us
imitate the Galatians, whose very eyes were not so dear in their heads, as the
Apostle Paul was in their eyes, Gal 4. 15.

But here a double Caution is needful. 1. Let us take heed lest these
Encomiums and commendations of the Ministry lay in us the grounds of pride,
lest we be puffed up with the dignity of our Office. And to this purpose 'twill
not be amiss to consider, that the operation and efficacy of our Ministry is
not from our selves, but from God, Act. 3. 12, 13. 3 Cor. 3. 5, 6, 7. We are
only Ministers, not Lords of men's faith, but Ministers by whom they believe;
Our planting and watering avail nothing unless God give* increase. The Preacher
beats the ears, but God alone breaks the heart; The Preacher teaches, but God
gives knowledge; the Preacher persuades, but God inclines; John baptiseth with
water, but Christ only with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, Matthew. 3. 11. 2.
Let us take need of dishonouring this honorable calling by unsuiteable lives,
lives led in drunkenness, idleness, ignorance, profaneness, heresy, pride,
covetousness, uncleanness, sports and pastimes; let us take need of being
unsavory salt, of speaking silken words, and things to please men's fancies; and
so proving rather honey then salt to the sinners, as they were Ezech. 13. 10,
11. They that are such, teach others the things which themselves contemn; They
that reprove others, had themselves need to be irreprovable; For, Who can
abide the traitrous Gracchi, when
They make complaints against seditious men?
Shall Clodius condemn Adultery;
Or Catiline Cethegus, worse then he?


Certainly he must needs strike faintly upon the Consciences of sinners, who
has his own Conscience polluted with gross sins; and how shall he inveigh
against the vices of others, who fears shame for his own? How shall be teach
well that lives ill; or season others, who is himself altogether unsavory? How
can the covetous Minister press his people to heavenly mindedness; or, with
what face can the drunken Doctor commend to another a sober course of life? Or,
if he do, it is seldom with good success; A wicked man may indeed preach
against wickedness, but will hardly preach it down, except he preach in deed;
He that attempts to take a mote out of his brothers eyes, must either cast the
beam out of his own first, or else he will certainly be entertained with the
Proverb, Physician heal thy self. He is a Pharisaicall Teacher that says, and
does nothing, Mat. 23. 3. such take away all authority from their Preachings,
plucking down with their life what they build with their language; For, who
will obey, when the Preachers teach disobedience? Of all creatures upon earth
degenerate men are the worst; of all men, wicked Christians; and of all
Christians, wicked Ministers; They are the shame of the Clergy, the worst of
Varlets, not Pastors but impostors, not Doctors but Seducers, not Dispensers
but Dispersers, the increment and Instruments of Satan, and the very picture
of that wicked one; they are like the Statue of Mercury, that show others the
way, which themselves walk not; like bells that call men to hear the word and
will of God, but themselves want ears; like spunges, that cleanse other things,
but remain unclean themselves; like a musical Instrument, that creates delight
to others, but it self is senseless of any; or like the Shipwrights that made an
Ark to save Noah and his Family in, but themselves were drowned. No wonder
(says a learned Author) if that polity be made a prey, and brought to naught,
whose Watchmen are blind, Nicol. de Cleman. giis, Epist. 75. p. 223.
whose Preachers dumb, whose Champions lame, whose Physicians sick, whose
Teachers untaught, and whose Guides are ignorant of the way. Hence springs the
ruin of the Church, the corruption of manners, a sink of sin, a deluge of
Profaneness, the sterving of Charity, the hazarding of Faith, the debasement
of Religion, the poison of pestilent Schisms, the contempt of the Ministry* and
all Ecclesiastical Orders, and Ordinances. Hence it is that the people are so
wicked, for how should there choose but be whoredom in Ephraim, and defilement
in Israel, when the Priests commit lewdness, Hos. 6. 9, 10. The actions of
public persons are influentiall; and this gave occasion to that witty
conjecture of Charles the fifth, who guest at the state of a City, or
Commonwealth, by three things, by considering their Pastor, their Pedagogue,
their Praetor: The Church depends upon the Pastor, the School upon the Master,
the Court upon the Praetor, who are the salt of their respective places; Such
therefore as is the Preacher, is the Church; as is the Pedagogue, so are the
children; as is the Praetor, so are the citizens. Good reason therefore why God
requires holiness in those especially, that come thus nigh unto him, Lev. 10.
2, 3.

Neither does it mitigate to say, that these Ministers are learned, but rather
aggravate. Learning dwells ill in an evil man: it is like wine in a poisoned
cup, or a sword in a mad man's hand. Dexterity of wit, the liberal Arts, the
knowledge of the Tongues, and humane Learning are indeed excellent gifts from
God; but they are all miserably profaned in such a man. A Religious dunce is
better then he: And it comes to pass by the just Judgment of God, that the
devil works more powerfully in none, then in wicked and Apostate Ministers;
insomuch that they are called Devils, John 6. 70, 71. the worst name in the
world: Such do not only invite, but even compel, by their example: The
examples of Minnisters are cogent, Gal. 2. 14. Christ therefore threatens these
unsavory salts with sad Judgment, Luke 14. 34. 35. which judgment that we may
the better understand, let us consider it in these following particulars.

1. Unsavory salt has this inconvenience, that its lost nature cannot be
repaired. There is no further salt wherewith this unsavory salt can be
seasoned. The unhappiness of it is therefore very unhappy. The best things in
their corruption become the worst. The best nourishment becomes the worst
excrement, the best wine is corrupted into the sharpest vinegar. Degenerate
Ministers are hardly cured; for what remains with which they may be restored
and seasoned? If the people be unsavory, God has given Ministers to ^eason
them. But if themselves be corrupt and unsavory, what cure shall we find for
them. These vines if they be fruitful, are the best trees in Gods garden, and
the worst, if barren. Ezech. 15.

2. Unsavory salt is unprofitable. It is not fit for the earth, for it will
not suffer it to be fruitful, not for the dunghill, for it will not suffer it
to ^ructify. So unprofitable are unsavory Ministers, who are therefore deposed
from their Ministry, and discarded by the Churches censure: other things in
their corrupt state are good for something, as degenerate wine generates
vinegar, and the excrement of nourishment, nourishes land. But infatuated salt
is so unprofitable, as that it is also hurtful; so hurtful as that it makes
the very dunghills themselves unprofitable. Such vile, unprofitable hurtful
creatures are Apostate Ministers and corrupt; to whom God therefore threatens,
rejection, deposition, and contempt. Hos. 4. 6. Mall 2. 8, 9 Ezr. 2. 62.

3. Unsavory salt is trodden under foot of men, which is the height of ignominy
and shame. So Ecebolius the apostate cried out, tread upon me unsavory salt.
The just judgment of God causes their Ministry to be contemned, whose lives are
contaminated. Thus the sacrifices of the Lord were abhorred, because of the
vilenes^e of the sacrificers. 1. Sam. 2. 17. Nay, as though the treadings under
feet of men were not enough miserable, the proverb has laid profaned
Ministers lawer then the earth, which says, that Hell is paved with the
helmets of princes, and the shavings of priests. Woe be to that Pastor, that is
not true, but treacherous, not lively and diligent, but dull and sloathfull,
who is rather the counterfe^t of a Pastor than indeed such, who seeds not his
people, but his purse, and his paunch: woe to these idol shepherds, the sword
shall be upon their arm, and upon their right eye, their arm shall be clean
dried up, and their right eye utterly darkened. Zach. 11. 17. God will weaken
their strength, and infatuate their judgments. Such are the punishments of
these wicked, unsavou^y, unprofitable Ministers.

2. Another sort of unsavory salt, and gifted Brethren (as they call
themselves) though how barren of (...) good gift, all may see. These like the
Pa^^rioges Chickens, run with the shells upon their heads. T^us the little
ducklings fall a swimming as soon as they are well hatched, and the Lions whelps
tear their own passage into the world: But such hasty burths are lightly
blind. There is an incurable itch of teaching, which possesses many wild heads
in these days, who think they know that which indeed they are ignorant of, nay,
are ignorant of their ignorance. In all other arts and sciences, men use first
to learn and after to teach. But in divinity we have many that teach what they
never learned, and become the Masters of fools, before they have been the
Scholars of wise men. And hence it is that this waxen divinity of theirs
receives any impression, and they themselves are metamorphosed into many
shapes. These do not season souls, but poison them, not edifye, but destroy
them, not communicate instruction, but convey infection. These are plants
without sap, wells without water, stars without light, bubbles broken with a
blast, and waves of the sea, soming out their own shame, quorum prophetia non
est (...) sed (...) these prophets are fools, these spiritual men are mad.
This liberty of prophesying, this root of mani^old heresies is to be rooted
out, as that which has eaten as a Gangrene, and infected many. Oh that some
Hercules will oppose himself to this many headed Monster? many complain of this
evil, but few put to their hand for the reforming of it: So that it may justly
be feared, that whilst the infectors are spared, more will be infected. The
true shepherds are an abomination to these Egyptians. Egyptians? Nay they are
worse then Egyptians: For the Egyptians tempered their clay with straw to make
brick of, But these have neither straw nor stubble, neither wit nor learning,
nor any other materials to build with, but dawbe with untempered mortar. These
like Iereboam, one of the worst men in the world, make priests of the meanest
of the people. Nay, as Caligula made his horse Consul, so these make their
asses preachers, who if they can do nothing else, yet like Balaams ass, can
reprove the madness of the prophets. These are the men that give moldy bread
instead of Ambrosia, vinegar instead of Nectar, and poisons instead of
preservatives they mix tares with their wheat, and dregs with their wine,
preach without pains, and are heard without profit. They dream dreams, and then
tell them, they cause the people to err by their lies and by their lightness,
when God sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they do not profit the
people at all. Ier. 23. 32. Away ye unsavory crew of senseless, saplesse,
saltlesse dunees, Anabaptists, Collyers, Saltmarshes, Haggards. etc.

In all this tribe, this crew, what will you called;
There is not to be found one corn of salt.
This brood of vipers have come forth in a numerous multitude, in this decrepit
old age of the world, doting upon opinions, and under the pretext of piety,
going about to overthrow, Scriptures, Sacraments, universityes, all order and
ordinances, to confound heaven and hell, with more than a Gigantick confidence,
and whorish impudence. Let the heavens tremble, and the earth be amazed, and
both be ashamed, that this our Britain should bring forth, and bring up such
monsters. Are these the returns of so many incomes from above? Are these the
fruits of so much patience and love? Do we thus require the Lord, a people
foolish and unwise? There has been a famous Church, and a renowned Ministry in
these parts of the world. Nay, and there is still a Church and a Ministry,
although it appear to be clouded, or rather can not appear, because it is
clouded. But let us lift up our hearts, and eyes to Christ Jesus, whose
Ministry it is, for although it be clouded, yet he will at length cause those
clouds to vanish* although it lie in the dust for the present, yet he will not
let it be choakt there. But to the purpose. They that are sensible of the
weightinesse of the ministerial calling, will not run upon their own heads,
nay they will abide thrusting, Mat. 9. 37. Moses undertook the charge of Gods
people with reluctance, and Jeremiah after many excuses, and so do they that
know they are about a work of continual pains, inevitable danger, and
implacable hatred. And therefore we have Moses sent by God, Exodus 3, 10. Aaron
s^parated that he should sanctify the most holy things. 1. Chr. 23. 13. The
prophets called, the Apostles chosen. Ioh. 6. 70. In a word, all Ministers are
sent. Romans 10. 15. How shall they preach except they be sent? That is, they can
not lawfully preach. For although it be evident that many do preach that are
not sent, yet by what right, by what authority, with what good conscience can
they preach, except they be sent? No one can undertake and exercise the public
employment of the Ministry, except he can say with the Apostle, that he is made
a Minister of the Gospel* Ephesians. 3. 7. he must stay for a call, lest that be
charged upon us. Ier. 23. 21. I have not sent them, yet they ran. Which is
yet further plain from the practice of all in old, and New Testament times, who
diligently expected and observed a mission or call to this sacred employment.
No man of them took this honor to himself (that is, rightly, and safely) Heb.
5. 4. That of Luther therefore deserves golden letters, Sit still till God
call; Nay, although thou were wiser than Solomon or Daniel, yet if thou be not
called, fly the office, as hell it self; and speak not a word. If God need
thee* he will call thee; if he call thee not, thy knowledge will not burst thee
etc. For God does never prosper the labors of them, whom he never called to
labor; For although they may preach things in themselves wholesome; yet they do
not heal, things in themselves profitable, yet they do not profit the people.
But on the contrary, great has been the success of those that have gone at
God's sending, and preached at Gods bidding.

Away with the unfixed Anabaptists then, who determine any self-ordeiner of
what condition and calling soever, to the pulpit promiscuously without any
proof of a lawful call; and by this means have brought in a kind of barbarous
disorder, and babylonish confusion into the Church of Christ: which confusion
God abhorrs, as appears by his reiterated complaints. Ier. 14. 14. and 23. 21,
32. and 27. 15. Christ reproves the Angel of Thyatira for suffering Iezabel,
who called her self a proph^^esse, (but was none) to teach and to seduce many,
Rev. 2. 20. God has also punished such usurpers with exemplary judgments,
witness, Uzzah. 1 Samuel 6. 6, 7: Uzziah the King. 2 Chro. 26. 16, 17. Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, who, for offering to arrogate to themselves the priesthood,
were swallowed up alive, into a grave made without hands. Numb. 16. 10, 32.

4. Inference follows. If there be a Ministry, then there must be Schools of
learning, and Universityes. If the end be allowed, the means conducing to that
end must not be denied. It is now necessary, that they, that are intended for
the sacred Ministry, be instructed and principled in the Schools, those
Nurseries for the Church: As an Orchard, though it be excellently pruned,
manured, and managed, and set with the choicest and fruitfullest trees in the
world, will decay, and at length come to nothing, except there be a Nursery of
young plants, which may be placed and succeed, in the room of the barren and
dead trees: So the sacred Ministry cannot long endure sale and firm, except
there be some formed, educated, instructed in the Schools; and fitted to
succeed in the employment; For Ministerial gifts are not now adays inspired
into men immediately and miraculously, but mediately gotten by reading,
meditation, study, and diligent pains, as appears 1 Timothy 4. 13, 15. Hence it
has been the care of pious Princes, to found, endow, and maintain Schools and
Universities, in which young Students might be seasoned with, and educated in
piety and good Learning, who might afterward be Champions to defend the truth,
and put to flight Errors and Heresies. And therefore let it be the care of all
who have power in their hands, strongly to defend, and diligently to preserve
the Revenues, and Privileges of Schools and Universities, that the glory of
our Church may not fade, but be still more and more glorious,: unless you will
be worse than the uncircumcised Philistines, who are observed to have spared
the College of the Prophets, Isa. 10. 5.

Away then with Familists* Anabaptists, VVeigelians, etc. who rail against
Learning, and Learned men at this rate. They are unsit for the Ministry who are
trained in Schools, and taught of men; There is no knowledge of Christ in
Universities, They are the Nurseries of wickedness, the Plagues of the
Commonwealth. Oh the Egyptian darkness that has overspread the minds of
men! Oh Impudence, like that of Pope Paul the second! who condemned them all
for Heretics, not only that were Students, but (whose hatred of Learning was
so deadly) tha^ he pronounced all them Heretics* that either in earnest or in
jest should name an University; who therefore commanded the Romans not to
suffer their children to converse in Books, or to study for Learning, saying,
it were enough, if they could write and read. These men are not more like this
Paul the Pope, than he was unlike to Paul the Apostle, who himself was brought
up at the feet of learned Gamaliel, and commends Reading, Study, and Meditation
to his Son Timothy, as you saw before.

But if there be found the seeds of sin in these Seminaries, let them be
purged, and not spoiled; refined, and not consumed; made better, and not
unmade. Let corruption be drained; abuses be taken away, and the use of them
remain.

5. It appears hence, that that is a sound and savoury Ministry which bites and
pie^ceth the consciences of the hearers. The Mass indeed is toothlesse, and
cannot bite, but Salt is of a b^ing and sharp nature. Nothing torments a sinner
like the free and ^incere Preaching of the Word, Hence it comes to pass, that
the sincere and savoury Preachers do purchase to themselves all contempt,
reproach and hatred; which gave occasion to Luther (who knew well enough what
salt preaching was) to define preaching thus, It is a deriving of the hatred of
the whole world upon ones self. Hence it was, that the world hated and
persecuted Christ and his Disciples, because they testified of it, that the
works, thereof were evil, John 7. 7. and 15. 19. The Gospel, because of its
sharpness, has always been the scorn and derision of the stinking world,
requiring the Mortification of the flesh, self-denial, and other things
unpleasant to corrupt nature. And although these sharp Corrosives, these bitter
Pills do heal and purge, yet such is the tenderness and softness of the most,
that they had rather rot in their sins, than to be sharply reproved, although
that be for salvation. But this is an infallible Argument of a wicked man, and
a heart full of putrefying fores, not to be able to abide the salt of sound
Reproof, witness Ahab, 1 Kings 18. ^4. Amaziah Amos 7. 10. and Faelix, Acts 24.
25. No wonder then if they have filthy hearts, and stinking lives, who
studiously put away from them this salt, withdraw themselves from this Ministry.

As for us, Brethren in the ministry, let us not faint, but go on with cheer
and courage, thanking God that we are worthy to be hated of the world, for it
is a good proof of our sincerity to be so entreated. And if this be to be vile,
to season the corrupt world with the savoury Word of God, Oh that we might be
yet more vile! let us love study, preach sound doctrine, which although it be
sharp, yet its savoury, although it wound the conscience, yet it will heal,
although it be bitter in the mouth yet in the Conclusion will prove sweeter
than the honey and the honeycomb. Although the Ploughshare of the Gospel
touch upon our very souls, yet let it be welcome, if by this means our
spiritual weeds and thistles may be rooted out. Christ's Spouse is a Dove,
Cant. 5. 2. Now Doves love salt exceedingly. Oh then ye Christians, fly to the
Congregations, where this Salt is to be had, as doves to the windows.

CHAP. VII. More Corrolaries issuing from the Doctrine.
THe Third Use is for Consolation. It is clear, that Satan does persecute the
sound and sincere Ministers of the Gospel with all might and main, knowing
them to be the main enemies of his kingdom, that seek by all means to destroy
it, according to what was prophesied of them, Luke 10. 18. them therefore he
assails with reproaches, persecution, perdition, fire, sword, banishment,
hunger, thirst, and death it self. He encourages his Agents against them, as
the King of Syria did his Captains, 1 Kings 22. 31. Fight neither against great
nor small, save only against the King of Israel. For the King being conquered,
the soldiers fly: the Shepherd being smitten, the sheep are scattered. Let
not us dream of better usage from him and his than Christ and his disciples
found from them. The Apostles were counted by the world, as the filth of the
world, the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4. 12. men unworthy of the
society of men, worthy to be exterminated the world, and to be trodden under
foot. Paul is counted a babbler Acts 17. 18. a pestilent fellow, nay, if we
translate the word properly, the Plague it self, Act. 24. 5. a man unfit to
live, Act. 22. 22. Christ himself was every where entertained with scoffs,
beaten with whips, assaulted with stones, and at last put to an ignominious
death. But let us quietly endure all these Afflictions, and patiently undergo
all that men or devils can load with, in hope of the glory that is to be
revealed. Let wanto^^ mock, let malice insult (...) world when it is teeth at
us, the devil smite his hands at us, Christ Jesus holds the stars in his
right hand, and will certainly maintain and preserve them. For he is not only
the author, but also the Protector of the Ministry, and he has promised safety
to the persons, and success to the pains of his Ministers. Ier. 15. 20. Luke
21. 15. This is shadowed out by Christ'^ right ^and. For the right hand denotes
love, Hence Jacob call^ his youngest son Benjamin or the son of his right
hand. Genesis 35, ^8. Because he was as dear to him as a man's right hand uses to
be to him. It also denotes and promises protection and the greatest care. Ps.
17. 7. The Ministers of Christ are his e^bassadors. Now ambassadors are
inviolable by the law of all Nations, and injuryes and indignityes done to them
use to find a sharp revenge. If David so severely revenged the injury offered
to his Ambassadors by the Ammonites, who shaved their beards, and cut their
garments by the halfes, with how much sorer vengeance shall Christ repay the
greater reproaches and indignityes with which wicked men entreat his Ministers?
Who ever curses Father or Mother shall dye the death. Lev. 20. 9. Christ's
Ministers are spiritual fathers to regenerate men, as has been already proved,
and spiritual Mothers, travailing in birth till Christ be formed in their
people. Gal. 4. 19. Nay it is evident by palpable demonstrations, that God has
revenged the quarrel of his violated ambassadors. He has broken prelaticall
powers, and heretical Counsels proclaiming war against his Ministers. He
has reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Do my prophets no harm. Ps. 105.
14, 15. He will smite thorough the loins of all that rise up against them, and
hate them, that they rise not again. Dent. 33. 11. Witness Gods dealing with
Pa^hur, who persecuted the prophet Jeremiah. Ier. 20, 3, 4. the Children that
mocked the prophet Elisha, 2, Kin. 2. 23, 24. King Saul who had slain many of
the Lord's prophets, himself was miserably slain at Mount Gilboa, Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram paid dearly for their conspiracy against Moses and Aaron,
Numb. 16. Ieroboam's hand which he stretched out against the man of God, dried
up. 1 Kin. 13. 4. Asa imprisoned Hanani the Lord's seer, and he dies of the
gowte, notwithstanding all his Physicians. 2. Chro. 16. 10, 12. Ioa^h commanded
his servants to stone Zechariah the son of Ieho^ada the priest, and for the
blood of the same Zechariah. did his servants kill him upon his bed. 2. Chro.
24. Elymas withstood Paul, and he is struck blind upon it. Act 13. We know the
sad desolation of Jerusalem that had killed the prophets, and stoned God' s
Ministers; and what befell the whole b^dy of the Jewish people who killed the
Lord of life, and evil entreated his Apostles, any body can tell. It is done
unto them according to the sentence which themselves past upon such offenders.
Mat. 21. 41. Now if God spared not Jerusalem because of the injury done to his
Ministers (2. Chron. 36. 15, 16. 17.) How shall he spare the haters and
despisers both of his Ministers and Ministry? Shall not the like causes produce
the like effect? Is not God always like himself? And if the man that refused
to hearken unto the priest standing to minister before the Lord, was sentenced
to dye by God's law; (Deuteronomy. 17. 12.) what more heavy doom shall they undergo,
that scorn, contemn, reproach the Ministers of Christ? When God would express
a people given up to all wickedness, he says of them that they are like to
them that strive with the priest. Hos. 4. 4. you may read the greatness of the
sin, and the proportionablenesse of the judgment. Ier. 20. 11. 1 These, 2. 16.
whosoever shall neglect or despise the sacred ministry, or the faithful
Ministers thereof, let him know that he despises Christ himself, who gives both
the gift of the Ministry, and gifts to the Ministers, The contempt that is cast
upon Christ's Ambassadors lights upon Christ himself. Luk 10. 16. Is. 7. 13.
Let no plots, devices, injuryes, conspiracyes, then weaken our courages, or
dant our hearts: For Christ Jesus shall be with us, not a few days, but to the
end of the world by his power and spirit. Mat. 28. 29. He whose name is
Immanuel, will not, cannot be far from us. The world shall sooner cease to
be, than Christ cease to be with us. He will protect us in dangers, comfort us
in temptations, help us in undertakings, direct us in doubts, and upon all
occasions stand by us. Let us therefore be of good courage, discharg our
calling, going on it cheerfully. What though we may tremble at the sense of our
own infirmities; yet we may be bold and adventurous in the strength of Christ.
He will not desert us in the work that is his own, but will either give fredome
from suffering, or patience, courage, and constancy wherewithal to suffer.
Through the wonderful providence of God, all things shall work together for
good unto us. He can make to his messengers medicines out of this poison, cause
roses to spring up to them from amidst these prickles, and make figs to be the
fruit of these thistles Let heretical men g^^sh their teeth sharpen their
swords, spit their venom at us; their end shall be to be destroyed. Let them
associate themselves, they shall be broken in pieces; Let them gird themselves
they shall be broken in pieces. Let them take Counsel, it shall be in vain.
Let them speak the word, it shall not stand, because God is with us: Is. 8. 9,
10. Let our adversaryes write whole volumes of satyrs against us, and fill
every page and line with some new scandal or reproachful title; we will bind
them as Crowns upon our heads. They do the best to me. (quoth Luther) who speak
the worst of me: Luther feeds upon opprobries, The Ministers of Christ are in
this, like Philip King of Macedon, who used to thank the Athenian Orators for
railing him into the better; for he was resolved that his upright conversation
should confute, and give the lie to all their soul-mouthed declamations. They
think with Seneca that no name is better, than an ill name well got.

In a word let us comfort our selves against the ingratitude of the shameless
world, by the serious review of Gods gracious promises. Do wretched and
godless men deprive and defraud us of temporal rewards? It is God who has
promised eternal ones. For the best wages of Christ's, Ministers are reserved
in heaven for them, where they shall inherit an eminency (if not a singularity)
of eternal glory and brightness. Dan. 12. 3. Mat. 5. 12. Mat. 24. 45, 46, 47.
I Cor. 3. 8, 9. 1. P^t. 5. 4. This Crown the Apostle Paul still had in his eye*
1. Tim. 4* 8. Romans 8. 18. Suffering for a time, triumphing to eternity: The
work shall have an end, but so shall not the wages. The people shall-receive
each man a reward for his good works, but the pasto^ shall receive a reward for
the good works of them all; For his own he shall receive a Crown, for each of
theirs a coronet, as Chrysostom acutely notes.

Nay even in this life they shall be sure of some reward, as

1. Increase of their gifts. This augmentation is sure; they have God' s own
express order for it, Mat. 13. 12. To him that has shall more be given.

2. The feast of a good conscience, which in the saddest and ebbest condition
of life accompanies a sincere fai^hful Minister of Christ, who eyes only the
glory of God, and the Salvation of his hearers. Act. 23. 1. and Chap. 24. 16.
2. Cor. 1. 12. and Chap. 6. 10. when he shall be as a man sorrowing yet here in
he shall rejoice; In a time of famine he shall have this table spread for him.

3. The concurrence of divine assistance. Qui jubet e^am juvat.
Whom God calls to this employment, them he will also protect and assist, and
give in fresh supplies of new strength for the discharge of the same. Is. 42.
6. I have called thee, I will hold thee by the hand, and keep thee. Thus will
God show himself a father, and a Protector to them. Nay, he will not only save
them, but clothe them with Salvation. Ps 132. 16.

A fourth corollary may be this. Let us then study to preserve mutual peace
and concord amongst our selves. God has joined salt and peace together, Mark
9. 50. Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another. Now what
things God has joined let no one part asunder. Because salt by its acrimony
biteth, therefore our Savior presently advises so wisely to temper it, that
peace may be preserved inviolable. The love of our brother must correct the
salt of correction, and the salt of justice must season the love of our
brother. And so shall we be insuperable, by being inseparable, and shall gain
many to Christ: As lighted torches, if they be separated cause a smoke, but if
they be united do increase the flame. All wisdom is folly and madness except
it be seasoned with peace and charity. As sacrifices must be without honey, so
neither does any service or sacrifice please God that issues from an heart
stuffed with anger, envy, animosity, and bitterness. Let us not forget that
there are many Canaanites and Perizzites in the land that are offended at our
differences, and from them seek occasion to oppress and devour us. Let us by
mutual and universal concord therefore grow into one body, into one soul,
thinking with our selves what an incongruous thing it is, that the messengers
of peace should fall into mutual jarrs; and how unseasonable it is at this
time, when (the adversary is laying snares for us) our strength had more need
be united by peace, than broken and enfeebled by divisions. There is a fitter
object of our anger than one another throats. And he seems to be mad but too
much, who promises himself a standing, in the downfall of the Church. It is an
excellent* commendation which is given to Myconius by a worthy Author. He lived
with his colleagues two and twenty years together in an uninterrupted peace and
concord. M^l. Adam.
We have run, (says Myconius himself) We have wrestled, we have wrought, we
have ^ought, we have conquered most unanimously and undividedly. Oh that some
such blessed fire of love, and peace were kindled in our frozen breasts. That
the Character sometimes proper to the primitive Church might be common to us
all, See how they love one another and are ready to dye one for another. In
those days says the Historian, Act. 4. 32. Believers, nay the whole multitude
of believers were of one heart and of one soul, there was a moral oneness
though not a physical one, for they did so agree in minds and manners, as if
they had indeed had but one heart and the same soul amongst them all. Oh happy
age of the Church comparatively to ours wherein men and minds are of all equal
number! Oh memorable wish of that famous preacher Dr. Stoughton! So that
brotherly unity may be preserved, quoth he, Let me below even in the dust,
rather than exalted in a tryumphant Chariot by a Cadmean conquest. Let others
affect the great title of Ptolomaeus. I am more pleased with the pleasant name
of Irenaeus. This peaceable frame concerns all, but more especially the
Ministers of Christ, who are sent to preach to, and to pray, for, not to prey
upon others, to build up the Church of Christ, not to demolish it, to work and
not to wrangle. The harmony and joint consent of the builders promotes the
building, Neh. 4. 76. Solomon's, temple was built without noise, 1 King, 6, 7.
which by a profitable type does shadow out the peaceableness of the builders
and quietness of Christ's Church, in which the noise of contentions and
schisms ought not to be heard. The builders of the Church of Christ should not
be divided as Nehemiah's servants were, half to the work and half to the
war, neither must these spiritual builders have swords girded upon their
sides when they build as his builders had, Neh. 4. 18. If we will revenge our
selves upon the bitterness and malice of base spirits, the best way of
revenging is by forgetting, and the only way to vex them is to be more zealous
and servent in the study, practice and pursuit of opposed Godliness: If we
will contend with their murmurings and malice, let it be by faith and patience
and meekness of spirit, as knowing it better to neglect them than to stand to
confute them, to pass them by in silence than to take notice of them.

Neither do we want motives to this peaceableness. (1) Our God is the God of
peace, Romans 15. 33. 2 Cor. 13. 11. (2) Christ Ie^us is the Prince of Peace,
Isa. 9. 6. (3.) The sons of God are the sons of Peace, Luke 10. 6. (4.) The
Gospel which we preach is the Gospel of peace, Ephesians: 6. 15. In a word, we are
called unto peace, 1 Cor. 7. 15. Therefore follow peace, pursue it with the
greatest vehemence, nay, although it fly from you, and men will not suffer
themselves to be reconciled, yet pursue it with indefatigable pains, Psalm. 34.
15. H^b. 12. 14. love Truth and Peace. Zach. 8. 19. for otherwise, Truth is
better with Discord, than a sinful Concord: But if it be possible as much as
in us lies, let us follow peace with all men, Romans 12. 18. For we are one body,
we are governed by one Spirit, we have one hope, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Moreover, this is just, honest, good, pleasant,
as Sibelius out of Ps. 1 33. 1. Tom. 1. page 576. proves by many strong and
savory Arguments.

CHAP. VIII. Asserts and vindicates the Maintenance of Ministers.
Fifth use is for the reprehension and correction of Anabaptists, Levellers,
etc. who deny those stipends to the Ministers of Christ, which are due by a
right both divine and humane, by the Law both of heaven and earth, for, grant a
Ministry, and you must needs grant stipends, by which it may be maintained.
This is almost as clear as a Demonstration can make it. For, Who goes to
war at his own charges? even the Law of Nature dictates this, that the
workman is worthy of his wages. Hence Moses gave unto the Levites by divine
appointment the Ten^^, the First Fruits, the best of the Sacrifices, the yearly
pension of a ^hekel, the money for the redemption of the firstborn, the money
for vows, as appears Exodus 34. 26. Lev. 27. 3^ etc. Numb. 18. In that universal
famine in Egypt, when Joseph the Kings Steward bought all the Land for
Pharaoh, he bought not the Priests land, but allowed them Corn out of the Kings
Granaries, Genesis 47. 22. Even Pharaoh himself, although an Idolater, had yet a
singular care of the worship of his Gods, and maintined their Priests at his
own proper cost and charges; And, if Pharaoh was so careful for his Priests as
to mantain them for the ruin and destruction of himself and his people, that
he might not be thought to be wicked and ungrateful to his ^eigned Deities:
What an ingratitude, what a sacrilege is it, that the true Ministers of the
true God should be neglected by Princes and Powers that call themselves
Christians, whose pains they know to be of Gods approbation, and for their
salva^ion. Hezekiah that Father of the Priests, did not only give a good part
of his own substance to them, but commanded the people to maintain the Priests
and Levites; that being freed from secular cares, they might wholly give
themselves to the Law of the Lord, and lay out themselves in their sacred
function, in the service of the Temple, 2 Chronicles 31, 4, 12. etc.

It was not the least (was it not the greatest) of Alexander's Commendations,
that he loved and honored Learning and larned men; which made his times be so
fruitful of great wits, and witty Inventions. He so well know how to esteem
Learning, and to treat the learned, that it afterward, became a Proverb, If
thou had lived in Alexander's times* he would have given thee a Cyprus or a
Phoenice for every Verse. For as a good refined disposition of the air begets
plenty of fruits, so the benign and ingenious disposition and constitution of
Kings and Powers produces a great increase of Arts and Ingenuities. But on the
contrary, the envy, ignorance and baseness of Princes blasts the fruit, and
makes the birth of the brain abortive. Therefore, we have Nehemiah contending
even with the Rulers, because they had denied the Levites their tithes and
salaries, Neh 13. 10, 11, 12. and he accounts this contention a subject fit for
divine Remembrance; ver. 14.

1. Then let all Christian Magistrates take care that the Ministers of the
Church (who are ignorant of manual employments) be not driven to wrestle with
want and hunger, and by this means be turned aside from the diligent execution
of their weighty calling, to the care of providing inecessities for nature, All
know that the Ministry is a very weighty Calling, great enough for the
shoulders of Angels, and such as may justly take up and challenge the whole man
neither can the Preachers of the Gospel (nor ought they) to ex^^cise any
manual Art, whereby to provide sufficient supplies or maintenance for
themselves and theirs, who must either therefore live upon their people, or dye
amongst them for want of a livelihood.

2. Let them take heed they do not diminish, or suffer to be diminisht, or
withheld the gifts given to God by pious Ancestors. For God is the revenger of
all such, who will send upon the unthankful world a famine of his Word, for
the famishing of his Messengers, but rather let them imitate Constantine the
Great, who took care that the Clergy should receive liberal and honorable
stipends, and confirmed it by a Law, Eusebius, de vita Constant, lib. 2. cap. 21.
36, 39. Sozomen, Hist, Eccl. l. 2. cap. 8. l. 2. cap. 4.

3. Let them take heed lest the Levellers do also level the weal public, and
convert it into private-wealth; for after the contempt of Moses, follows the
insurrection of the people, Numb. 26. Nay for this, amongst other causes, do
these men decry Ministers, because they are the pillars of the Magistracy.

But that I may handle these things the more exactly, I will discuss this
position.

There are certain and fixed stipends due to the Ministers of Gods Word, by a
divine right, from their people, that they may be freed from the secular cares
and wordly encumbrances, and give up their whole selves to the work of the
Ministry.

All the Churches of God are Patrons of this Truth, the Opponents and
Adversaries are the Anabaptistical party, and other sectaries.

But that the thing may be the rather clear and evident, I will 1. Confirm the
position by the Testimony of the sacred Scripture. 2. I vince the same by
Arguments. 3. Briefly answer the wranglings, and break the Forces of the Truths
Adversaries.

1. The Truth is confirmed by the mouth of Truth it self, even Christ Jesus,
whose words are express for it, Mat. 10. 10 (...) 10. 11. The Labourer
(speaking unto them that were to labor in the word) is worthy of his hire.
Christ's Ministers shall not want maintenance, for the promise leans upon the
justice of God, which will not deceive them. A true paraphrase of the word is
this, that the people ought by right to maintain those that preach the Gospel
to them. They ought by right to do it, (...) which springs from poverty as its
object, without obliging the person upon whom it is bestowed to any work or
duty: (save only that by the law of nature, the Alms-receiver is bound to be
thankful to, and pray for the Alms-giver.) But what is given to the Ministers
of Christ, is not properly given upon the account of their poverty, or is there
be some respect had to their poverty, yet not purely and only upon that
account, but for their works-sake; No one will say that he has received an
Alms, when he has received it with an obligation to a piece of service,
especially to a service that deserves much more, to which Austin gives his
suffrage: saying, It is his Power, not his poverty, when a Minister of the
Gospel receives from his people: for, if we judge watchmen that watch by night
for us and our estates worthy of wages; what do the watchmen of our souls then
deserve? from what has been said, I thus argue;

Whatsoever things (...) due, may be honestly demanded, and ought to be
honestly paid, But maintenance and wages are due to the Ministers of the
Gospel. Therefore they are lawfully demanded by the Ministers, and ought by
right to be paid by the people.

2. That which is due to laborers by the Law of nature, is to be paid. But a
ju^^ recompense is due to laborers by the Law of nature, therefore it is to be
paid.

(...)* But Ministers of the Gospel are not laborers, but (...) and
slow-bellies.

Answ. So say idle and ignorant Anabaptists But I will con^idently aver, that
the labor of the mind far exceeds the work of the hands. For, although the
Ministers of the word do not work with their hand; yet if they diligently and
faithfully discharge their office, give diligence in reading, watching over,
praying for, preaching to, admonishing, reproving and comforting of their
people, etc. it will be but an idle and unreasonable part to accuse any of them
of idleness, Either let their adversaries confess them to be Laborers, or at
once, accuse all Soldiers, Shepherds, Husbandmen of idleness; for such are
they, as was before made to appear.

2. A second proof is easily fetch from Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in
the word communicate unto him that (...) (...) in all good things. That is,
(1.) freely and liberally, not covetously and repiningly. (2.) Not in some
only, but in all temporal good things. For as the Teachers communicates to
the Learners their spiritual good things, the knowledge of Christ, and all
heavenly Treasure; so it is fit that the Learners communicate unto their
Teachers temporal good things, all things ordained for the relief of the
necessities of an animal life, which things carry no proportion in them to
spiritual good things, although the blind world put a great price upon them,
and stick not to prefer them before spiritual things. It is a sad complaint
that Musculus takes up. Now that there are no Tithes, no Revenues, no stipends
constituted by our Ancestors, the people contribute to their Teachers so
freely, that, whilst themselves either by covetousness contract all things
unto, or by luxury consume all things upon themselves, the Minister of Christ
has source dry bread, with which to satisfy the hunger of himself or his.

But here men begin to flinch. one pretends that he has a Family to maintain,
another that he has nothing to spare: Others declaim against the Ministers:
They are covetous, greedy, insatiable men; if they were right Gospel Ministers,
they should have nothing of their own, but should nakedly follow a naked Christ.

To all which the Apostle given a sharp answer, Gal. 6. 7. Be not deceived, God
is not m^cked, etc. Many men be deceived (but in this you have to deal with
God) who cannot be, will not be, is not deceived.

3. The Apostle judges them worthy of double honor, who rule well, especially
they who labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1. Tim. 5. 17. He would have a
liberal, honest and honorable allowance given to the Ministers of Christ* not
only for nourishment but ornament, not only for necessity but for honor
also. For the manner of the Scripture is by Double to mean manifold. Elisha in
2 King* 29. ask a double portion of the spirit of Eliah; that is, a very great
and ^ealous spi^^t. So Rev 18. 6. double unto her double according unto her
works; That is, Let Babylon be punished after a fuller measure. Thus give unto
them double honor, that is, honor them fully and freely? maintain them
cheerfully, pay them stipends readily, and as it is meet, speak reverently and
honorably of them; Hence it appears that the maintenance of Ministers ought to
be sufficient, honorable, certain.

1. It ought to be sufficient to relieve their necessityes. This is a sacrifice
well pleasing to God, an odor of a sweet smell, Phil. 4. 18. I have received
all things, and abound, I am full. That is, ye have not only supplied my
necessi^yes, but have also made me to abound, not unto lust and luxury, but for
necessity and use. Therefore the Holy Ghost expresses a stipend or a
livelihood, by salt, because it is as nec^ssary as salt. To have maintenance
from the Kings Palace, in the Chaldee is expressed, by being salted with the
salt of the palace, Ezra 4. 14. Even Christ himself received subsistence of
the woman that followed him, Luke 8. 8. and had a common bag and moderate
expence^, John 4. 8. Ier. 13. 6.

2. It ought to be an honorable stipend. Public work ought to be fruitful
and gainful to the workmen. Great rewards are great encouragements to a
diligence as great as either. Nay, it is just and fit that every man should not
only live upon, but profit by his pains. Hence God commands that the best
should be given for ^ythes, Numb. 18. 29, 30. this ought to be the rather,

1. That by hospitality, and bounty, and good works they may adorn their
Office, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Tit. 1. 8. for if you take away a liberal stipend,
liberality must needs fall; take away the (...), you extinguish the fire, Prove.
26. 20. where no wood is there the fire goes out. Stipends decaying, charity
must needs grow cold; What advantage can be gotten by money that is already
^lipt, or what shavings can be expected of an Egg?

2. That they may live like the Embassadour^ of the great King* not like
Nea^-heards and Swine^heards, that they may be more ready to give than to
receive; For it is more blessed, and consequently more honorable to give than
to receive; Act. ^0. 35. And yet alas) in many places the Ministers of Christ
have not the wages of a Gentleman's Hors-rider*

3. That they may furnish themselves with books, Philosophical, Historical,
Theological, Polemicall, Practical, Critical, etc. We must give diligence to
reading, De justit. and jure. li. 2. cap. 1.
but how shall we read without books? Some have therefore determined 500 l.
some 600 l. requisite for the purchase of a Library. Lessius speaks well and to
the purpose. They(meaning Ministers) had need of a great deal of Learning, the
procuring of which requires great charges; and as for other ways of
advantages, as Merchandise* and m^chanicall* Arts they are ignorant of them,
neither does it become them to deal therein.

4. That they may cheerfully go through with the Lord's work, being freed from
worldly cares and encumbrances. Not that they may be idle and luxurious, but
that they may cheerfully, faithfully, and solely give up themselves to the Law
of God, 2 Timothy 2. 4.

5. If the Leviticall Priests had an honorable stipend, then such ought the
Ministers of the Go^pel to have (for they are obnoxious to greater labors, and
expenses than the Tribe of Levi was). But the Antecedent is true, as shall be
made to appear hereafter. Therefore ought Christian Magistrat^s to take care
that there be a liberal and honorable allowance for the Ministers of Christ.

3. It ought to be a settled maintenance, a certain stipend; not the benevolence
of the people, not a spontaneous arbitrary gift, not an alms; for honor and
alms do not well agree to the same person. But let it be fixed, certain,
established, ratifyed and settled by the Laws of the Land; lest the Labans of
this world change good Jacob's wages ten times or oftener. Our Brethren of
London, commonly called (dissenting), did therefore take care that their
stipends should be settled to them to the value of 100 200, 300. per annum.
Experience witnesses that the men of the world are hardly drawn or driven to
pay the stipends and salaryes due to Gods laborers; nay even those allowances,
which by the bounty of pious Princes and Ancestors have been given to the
Ministers of Christ, are hardly writing out of the hand of the^e Harpyes,
notwithstanding the favor and assistance of the law. How much more deceitfully
and unjustly should we be dealt with, if the Law did not befriend us then. This
stipend, w^ confess, is not the ultimate end which a Minister ought to propound
to himself, yet it is a reward allowed by God to laboure^s, not to drones: and
although these temporal things are not our chiefest good, yet they are
concomitants thereof, they are encouragements and ornaments of Virtue* adding
something to its ^plendor and glory, Eccl 7. 11. Wisdom is good with an
Inheritance. And hence it is that God promises these things as a reward of
Piety, Deuteronomy. 28. ^, 2, 3, etc.

Deservedly then are the Anabaptists condemned, who deny settled stipends to the
Ministers of the Gospel. This is a delusion and suggestion of the Devils, to
defraud faithful Ministers of their livelihood, to the intent that the Church
may be made destitute of such, and himself might delude, dec^ive, devour
without control. And such is the ingratitude, inhumanity and sordid
covetousness of the world, that it is not very thought^ull how to maintain the
Ministers of the Gospel and the Devil uses this stratagem to rob the Church of
the Doctrine of the Gospel, by want and the fear of poverty to afright the most
from undertaking such a task, as you may see, Neh. 13. 10,

11. The tithes are injuriously detained, and the house of God is presently
forsaken. This wretched covetousness of the ingrat^full world does put a stop
to many forward spirits: for we are men, and so are affected, encouraged or
discouraged by the consideration of temporal things, as appears by the
examples of zealous Elijah, and good Jeremiah, 1 King. 19. 4. Ier. 20. 9. Men
know what a heavy affliction poverty is, Prove. 30. 8. Lam. 4. 9. We must
therefore a little consider humane weakness, and encourage great and gracious
ingenuities with generous rewards; For who will follow virtuous studyes, when
Condign rewards shall cease from virtuous men?


Do not the more noble and generous wits decline the ^unction of the Ministry,
seeing Ministers and their Windows and children (to the great shame of
Christian Religion) frequently exposed to poverty and want? Has not the
poverty of Clergymen begotten ignorance, and ignorance brought forth contempt?
Do not poor means make poor Ministers? This Julian the Apostate knew well
enough, therefore he enterpri^'d the extirpation of Christian Religion, not by
violence, but by spoiling the Clergy of all their Privileges, stipends, (...),
and allowances, which they had from the public: imitating the Stratagem or
Soldiers, who, when they cannot prevail against a City or Garrison by
downright opposition, and violent storming, weary it out with long and strait
^iege* and weaken it by extreme hunger, even unto Resignation: Take away all
allowances and maintenance, and you cut the very throat of Religion; For, who
will learn Arts and Languages at his own cost? Who will teach them for naught?
Who will betake himself to a naked and beggarly Ministry.

4. We argue from 1 Cor. 9. 6. to the 15. Lo a Text big with irrefragable
invincible Arguments; For the Apostle foresaw, that the wicked world would be
very sordid and niggardly in maintaining the Ministers of the Gospel* although
pro^u^e and prodigal in vain and idle expenses. It is a just judgment of God,
that they who will not give a bit of bread to the Ministers of Christ* the
Messengers of Salvation, should be given up to throw away whole Kingdoms, and
Provinces upon the Ministers of Sat^an, and the Messengers of death; as Luther
speaks truly and roundly.

The Apostle proves, that he had right, and power to receive maint^nance of the
Church; to lead about a wife, who should also be maintained at a public
Charge, that posterity might know this to be lawful, ver. 4, 5, 6. and, to
show what a clear right of his own he denied for the Corinthians sake, that by
this means he might win them to Christ, and promote their Salvation; He
confirms this,

1. By an Argument drawn from three Similitudes, to wit, From the right of
Soldiers, of Husbandmen, and of Shepherds. Who goes a warfare at his own
charges? etc, that is, as it is right and fit that Soldiers should live upon
their pay, the Planter of a vineyard feed upon the fruit of his vines, and a
Shepherd upon the milk of his flock; so is it fit, that the Ministers of the
Gospel should live of the Gospel, of their own vine, that is, the Church; of
the milk of their own flock, that is, of the goods of their own people. Let
those Soldiers that decry Tithes, and the settled stipends of Ministers,
consider their own case, and answer the great Apostles Argument, if they can,
Who will go to war at his own charges? The Interrogation is a vehement
Negation, No one will soldier it upon such terms. For indeed, it is an unjust,
and unreasonable thing, that a Soldier should stand in jeopardy daily, fight
for the common safety against the common enemy* and offer his very life as a
sacrifice for the lives of the commonalty* and not be maintained at a common
charge. He receives therefore wages from his General by a natural and civil
right. And is it reasonable, or just, that the Ministers of Gods word should
undergo the care of the Churches, the great burden of the Ministry, and yet
live of their own? For their pains, and labors, and sufferings, and dangers
exceed those of the Soldiery. These fight against flesh and blood, but they
against the world, the flesh, and the devil, 2 Cor. 10. 4. 1 Timothy 1. 18. 2 Timothy
2, 3. This then is the Apostles Argument, Soldiers do not war at their own
charges, The Ministers of the Gospel are Soldiers, Therefore ought not they to
war at their own charges.

2. The Apostle having put to flight the soldiers that declame and rail
against the settled and honorable maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel,
he comes to stop the murmuring mouths of Husbandmen, sowers, plowers,
threshers, shepherds and men of that mold. Against these he argues thus: They
that plant and dress a Vine, it is fit that they should taste of the grapes
thereof, (as it is said) that Noah planted a Vineyard and drank of the wine of
it; and Prove. 27. 18. Whose keeps the fig tree shall eat of the fruit
thereof.) But the Ministers of Christ plant, and dress Christ's Vineyard,
therefore it is fit that they should live of the fruit thereof. So also it may
be argued from Shepherds, feeding upon the milk of their flocks. As much as if
the Apostle had said, look but unto humane equity and common customs of men, in
things of far lesser and lighter moment, and conclude how just it is that the
Ministers of the Gospel should live of the Gospel.

3. The Apostle sets upon these sacrilegious persons with stronger Arguments,
Arguments fetched from Divine Authority. For, although the cause which he
pleads be a most just cause, yet he knew how subtle and crafty worldly wit is
to reply, especially in a money-matter; therefore, by a Prolepsis, he meets an
Objection, ver. 8. where he proves, that he does not only confirm his Position
by humane Arguments and Examples, but by the Law of God also; Say I these as a
man? Do I fortify my cause with humane reason and examples only? Or, says
not the ^aw the same also? Yes; Deuteronomy. 25. 4. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of
the ox, when he treads out the corn. He uses an Argument from the less to
the greater. If it were not lawful to deny maintenance to an unreasonable
creature, much less to a man; if not to an Ox treading, then not to a Minister
^oyling. For Gods chief care in this Law was not for oxen; he looked at a
further end, even at us, who are typical oxen, toyling in the Lords field,
treading in his barnes: Therefore convenient maintenance must not be denied us,
lest we faint in the work.

4. He argues from the less to the greater again; From the example of Plowmen,
and Threshers, ver. 10. If the Plower ploweth, and the Thresher thresheth in
hope, to wit, of his wages, and that he shall partake of his crop, and of his
threshing, then a Minister of the Gospel may exspect a Salary, fruit of his
labors, of which he and his may live comfortably. But the Antecedent is true
(says the Apostle) therefore the Consequent is true also.

5. The Apostle argues verse. 11. from natural right, and commutative Justice,
which commands to give like for like, much more then, small things for great.
Now, who doubts, but that spiritual things do much excel carnal, heavenly
things excel earthly. eternal things excel fading, flitting, perishing,
transitory vani^ies? For, by how much the soul excells the body, by so much
does the Word, the food of this soul, outgoe corporal maintenance, Oh
ungrateful wret^h then, whoever grudges to administer to him carnal things,
who preaches unto him the eternal Gospel, and is an instrument to convey unto
him the fruits of the same Gospel preached, to wit, Faith, Regeneration. and
Life Eternal! Now these things (says the Apostle) we have sowed, therefore it
is meet we should reap, For,

Whosoever do sow unto us spiritual good things, to them we ought cheerfully to
administer of our temporalls, Romans 15 27.

But the Ministers of the Gospel sow spiritual things;

Therefore ought we cheerfully to administer unto them of our temporalls.

6. The Apostle argues from Example, ver. 12. If the true Apostles receive
maintenance of you, why should not I and Barnabas, who have preached the
Gospel to you as well as they. 2. If the false Apostles and Seducers, who
devour you, receive things necessary, then, why may not we who propagate the
Gospel of Christ? If stipends be given to the bad, why not much rather to the
good?

7. He argues verse. 13. from the Testimony of the Law, from the Example of the
Levites under the Old Testament; and from the Ordination of God under the New.
These things are not Antichristian devices (as the do^ing Anabaptists dream)
but Divine Decrees and Ordinations, as will appear, if we frame an Argument
thus.

If the Ministers of God under the Old Testament were maintained of the
public, then are they so to be maintained under the New; But Ministers under
the Old Testament were maintained of the public. Therefore ought the Ministers
under the New to be so maintained.

The* Antecedent appears, Numb. 18. 8. to 13. Deuteronomy. 12. 6. 14. 22. 18. 1. Lev.
2. 3, 10. 5. 13. 7. 7, 8, 9, 10, 14, 32. 10. 13. 27. 30, 31. Numb. 3. 48. 5. 9,
10. 35. 2. Exodus 29. 26. 22. 29. Josh. 13. 14. 21. 2. 2 Chronicles. 31. 4. Neh. 10.
32, to the end. 12. 44. 13. 5. etc. Ezekiel. 44. 30. 45. 4. Heb. 7. 5, 9. By all
which places it evidently appears, that God did appoint* not a loose, and
uncertain, and arbitrary, but a settled, standing, full, and honorable
maintenance for his Ministers out of Tithes, Scrifices, Oblations,
First Fruits, oil, wine, honey, fleeces of sheep, and such like. G^d also
commanded to give unto the Levites 48 Cities, with their Suburbs, for them and
their cattle. Therefore God is called their Inheritance, because he gave them
his part, to wit, the Tithes, First Fruits, etc. Numb. 18. 24. In a word, a
special care was to be had of them; For, God commanded that they should not
forsake a Levite all his days, Deuteronomy. 12. 19. and 14. 27. They must not be
forsaken, as to maintenance, protection, or encouragement; because they were
the Lords servants, and Ambassadors. All these things were assigned and
established by God to the Priests and Levites. Woe then to those wretched
^ellowes, who envy the least conveniences, or accommodations to faithful
Ministers, that would not give them a farthing (did not the Law constrain them)
but rather defraud them of what is given them.

The Consequent appears by the Apostles own words. Even so has the Lord
ordained, that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. This
then is his Argument,

That which Christ has ordained is to be observed:

But Christ has ordained that the Churches should give a full and honorable
maintenance to their Ministers:

Therefore ought the Churches, etc.

Lest any should object, that these are Mosaical rites, and nothing to the
purpose, the Apostle brings Christ's own Authori^y for this* That they that
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, Luke 10. 7. The labourer is worthy
of his hire. In which words our Savior does both authorize his Ministers to
take, and oblige the Church to give Salaries. This thing is an universal right,
belonging not to the Apostles only, but to all the Ministers of the Gospel, in
all places, at all times. They who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel:
They that wait at the Altar* are partakers with the Altar. The Proposition is
indefinite, and that is as large as an universal one, should live, but how?

1. As men, not wanting any thing that is for necessity or honest delight. 2.
As Believers, having a care of their Wives, children, and Families; for, h^
that provideth not for his own, has denied the faith, and is worse than an
infidel, 1. Tim. 5. 8. ^. Cor. 12. 14. And 3. Let them live as the Ambassadors
of Christ, that they may by works of piety and charity adorn their calling.

Objection, Then they must have the First Fruits, Oblations, etc.

Answ. 1. That does not follow. For, although those Ceremonies be taken away by
Christ, yet a way of maintaining the Worship of God in general is not taken
away; the way of maintaining it being one and the same generically, though not
specifically, and both in quantity, proportion, sufficiency, and certainty:
Otherwise the Apostles Argument could not hold water, who says with an
Emphasis (...), even so, since the Ministers, of the Gospel do succeed the
Levtical Priests and Ministers, let them be maintained by some such like way;
let them that preach the Gospel, live of the Gospel, even so, that is, so
liberally, so plentifully, so certainly as the Leviticall Clergy lived under
the Law. For so has God, not man, nay* God-man ordained, Even so has the Lord
ordained. The due maintenance then of the Ministry is not man's device, but
Gods Decree; not a h^mane order, but a Divine Ordination, which whosoever
denies, resists the Ordinance of God, and procures condemnation to himself.

2. Those Laws concerning First Fruits, Tithes and Offerings may be
considered, either as to their substance, or as to their circumstances; as to
their Substance, they belong also unto us; for the end of those Laws was, that
the people by those Offerings should testify their thankfulness to God, to the
advantage of the Church, the Ministry* the poor; to which things even the Law
of nature does bind. And if our Magistrates shall at this day enact Laws for
the maintenance of Ministers, we ought to obey them carefully and cheerfully,
especially in those things which neither contradict the Moral Law, nor the Law
of Nature. It follows therefore that as the Israelites were to communicate of
their goods to the Levites, as unto them that administered their holy things, so
ought Christians at this day freely to communicate of their substance to their
Ministers: And the rather, because the Ministry of the Gospel is more
glorious, laborious, costly, than the Ministry of the Law was. To say nothing
(says Bellarmine) of the dignity of the Gospell-Ministry, which is far
greater than that of Aaron' s Ministry, the Christian Clergy is exposed to
greater pains and cost than the Tribe of Levi was. It concerns now that
Ministers be learned* and consequently, that they spend much of their estates
upon their studies; who therefore ought, according to their condition, to be
maintained honestly and ^reely by the goods of the Church.

5. We argue, ab (...), from the Profit of it. That which will certainly bring
a blessing upon the doers of i^, is to be done, But an honest and lib^ral
maintaining of Ministers brings with it a Blessing, as you may read Deuteronomy. 14.
22, 23, 28, 29. 26. 12, 13, 14, 15. 2. Ch^on. 31, 10. Prove. ^. 9 10. Mal. 3.
10, 11, 12. Temporal good things bestowed upon Gods Ministers are not cast
away, but are as ^eed cast into the ground, which brings forth a plentiful
c^op: Ti^hes (say the R^bbines) are the wall of riches, because the payment of
the Tenth part defended the other nine: Hence it was their familiar Prove^b,
Pay Tithes and be rich: Austine observes, that our Ancestors were rich, and
abounded with temporal blessings, because they gave tenth so faithfully to God.
Be liberal to God and his Ministers, and you shall find God more liberal to
you; for he will not suffer his creatures to out-doe him in liberality.

Again, That which takes away many occasions of sin is very profitable and
necessary; But a convenient, settled, and and ratified Salary, cuts off many
occasions of sin; Therefore a certain and settled Salary is necessary. The
Major is an undeniable truth; The Minor may be proved in many particulars. 1. A
certain and set^led Salary takes away temptations to flattery; were a stated
maintenance taken away from Ministers, a sad temptation to make merchandise of
souls would follow upon it. Men will be inclinable to comply with those that
they hope to get any thing by. The Itinerary Levite, in Judge. 17. who was fain
to accept of what Mi^ah would give him (which was but 25 s. a year) complied
with him in his Idolatry* as you may read, verse. 11. And so consequently the
Gospel would be preached with more boldness and freedom of speech. For, who
almost would be so bold, as to tax the vices, or reprove the corrupt manners of
those, from whom they received daily gratuities? But where there is a settled
and stated maintenance, there all sorts of men are freely and indifferently
dealt withal. 2. By this means Ministers shall not need to be condemned for
taking or having more than they will confess: which although no good men will
deserve to be condemned of, yet malignant and corrupt men are apt to load them
with such slanders. 3. Otherwise* what contribution might ministers exspect
from the wicked world, who being reproved, would rather suffer them to sterve
with hunger, then relieve them. They would be bad at works of arbitrary
charity, who are so base at works of necessary justice; and they who will not
suffer Ministers to enjoy their own maintenance quietly, will not easily give
of their own to maintain them. 4. By this means pride and arrogance is
prevented, a sin very familiar to free Contributions; pride, not conscience,
would soon principle men to Liberality. 5. By this means Ministers shall be
freed from secular cares, and wordly encumbrances, and shall not be put to
study for meat and drink, when they should be studying the Law of God.

6. We argue a damno, from the loss and danger which follows upon the
contrary. That which is cursed by God, is to be avoided; But the defrauding of
his Ministers is accursed of God, Therefore it is to be avoided. The major
needs not to be proved, the minor is proved sufficiently by the Testimony of
the Spirit of God, Mal. 3. 8, 9. Will a man rob God? But ye have robbed me in
tithes and offerings. Therefore ye are cursed with a curse. A man robs God,
when he withholds from Gods Ministers Tithes, and other things necessary for
their maintenance; whereby it comes to pass, that they studying to avoid
poverty, are forced to desert Gods service in public Administrations.
Therefore ye are cursed with a curse; that is, with Famine, poverty, and
barrenness of the earth; For, It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which
is holy, Prove. 20. 25. that is, it is a dangerous thing; for, a snare catches
soon, holds sure, and destroys suddenly. Austine, Sermon. 219 de decimis
speaks sharply, Thou have lost nine parts, because thou would not give the
tenth; For this is the just proceeding of God that thou, who would not give a
tenth part, should thy self be reduced to a tenth part.

7. Crying sins are to be avoided; But the Scripture reckons the defrauding
of God's Ministers amongst crying sins, Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. Ierem. 22. 13.
James 5. 4. This cry is the foulness and grievousness of the sin, which can
neither be concealed nor excused, but beats Gods ears continually, and provokes
him to vengeance. Schoolmen observe four Crying sins in Scripture, which
they comprehend in a Distich, thus, The voyee of Bloodshed, and of Sodomy,
Oppression, and Fraud, aloud do cry.


Now if the defrauding the Reaper that reaps down our corn, be so abominable a
sin to God; how much more abominable is the de^rauding of his Ministers, who
reap a crop of souls for God himself?

8. If we ought to maintain the Fathers of our flesh, from whom (organically)
we have our natural being, and that both by the Law of God, and of Nature;
then much rather our Spiritual Fathers, from whom (instrumentally) we have our
well-being. 1. Maintenance is due to the Fathers of our flesh from us, Genesis 45.
9, 10, 11. 2. Love, and that not only whilst they live, but to be expressed to
them even when they are dead, Genesis 25. 9. Genesis 50. 2. 3. Reverence, expressed by
mouth, heart, and hand, Exodus 20. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 4. 4. Obedience, Ierem. 35. 18.
Col. 3. 20. The consequence is clear from 1 Cor. 4. 15. Gal. 4. 19. Philem.
ver. 19. 1 These. 5. 12, 13.

9. They that give diligence to Reading, Exhortation, and Doctrine, that mind
these things, and give up themselves wholly to them, and ought not to engage
their heads or hands in the ca^es of this world, must necessarily receive a
stated Maintenance of the Church; but such is the duty of Gospell-ministers,
Act. 6. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 13, 15, 16. 2 Timothy 2. 4. Therefore had their types the
Levites no part in the division of Canaan, that they should not be engaged in
Secul^r affairs, and worldly business, but might be wholly for the Lord, and
for the Temple; but the Lord was their inheritance, that is, the Tithes and
offerings due to God, of which the Levites did live, and were not sollicitous
concerning any other way of maintenance, which otherwise they would necessarily
have been.

10 If Idolaters and Heathens have been even prodigal toward Baals Priests and
seducers, then it does not become Christians to be illiberal and covetous to
the faithful Ministers of Christ. But so prodigal have they been, witness
Iezabel, who maintaind above 800. Priests of Baal at her own costs and
charges, 1. Kings 18. 19. whilst an hundred of the Lords Prophets were hid in
caves and only relieved with bread and water v. 13. so prodigal were the
Idolaters in the Prophet Isaiahs time, who lavished silver out of the bags for
their Idols, Isaiah 46. 6. It grieved not Pharaoh to maintain all the Egyptian
Priests with his own bread. In a general famine he was so far from making
money of the Priests lands in the first place, that he continued to them their
inheritances, and gave them their diet several years besides. The Heathens
thought not much to offer the tenth of their spoils to their Gods. And if the
Papists with a prodigal liberality be willng to spend almost all upon their
silly Priestlings, and greedy Jesuits, notorious deceivers; sure then the
faithful Ministers of Christ may justly expect an honest maintenance from
their people. Ahab the King of Judah, who sought to reduce the Priests of the
Lord unto want, is therefore branded with this mark, This is the King Ahaz, 2.
Chron. 28. 21, 22.

11. All Sacriledg is to be avoided, but to defraud the Ministers of Christ of
their stipends is Sacriledg* Therefore etc. The major is plain of it self. The
minor God himself proves, Mal. 3. 8. Y^ have robbed m in Tithes and Offerings.
God complains here that this injury and fraud was not so much done to men as to
himself. Sacrilege is not a simple theft, but a stealing of sacred things,
which is the highest degree of Theft: Now that is sacred which is given to holy
uses, either by the express command of ^od* or by the voluntary devotion of
men: whether it be given (says learned Mr: Cartwright upon P^^v. 20. 25.) for
the and sake of Gods worship, for the (...) of Schools Universities, or for
the relief of (...) and if it be a wickedness and a snare after vows (...)
again, that is to call back, or withhold any thing given or vowed to Gods use,
Prove. 20. 25. then what notorious impiety shall they be guilty of, who having
not given any thing themselves, shall yet go about to diminish and de^raud us
of the gifts of others: when as a man's last will or Testament is not changed or
disposed of otherwise, than as the Testator did ordain, Gal. 3. 15.

Let the Governors of the Commonwealth then take special heed, that they do
not engross any Church-revenues to themselves, convert those things, or any of
those things unto private uses, which are dedicated to sacred uses, and so
devolve upon their heads the heavy doom of sacrilegious persons robbers of
God, For who can think that God will let such escape,
That do on sacred things commit a rape.


The Eagle burning her nest and her young ones by a coal fetched with a piece
of flesh from the Altar does well prophecy and prefigure the ruin of those
Harpyes and Vultures, and their posterity, who make so bold with the Churches
revenues* Or if such a doom be not prefigured by the Eagle, I am sure it is
prayed for by the Psalmist, Ps. 83* 11, 12. make their Nobles like Oreb and
like Zeb, yea all their Princes as Zebah and Zalmunna, who said, Let us take to
our selves the houses of God in possession, etc. Nay and certainly the time
will come when they shall not only disgorge like dogs, what they have drunk
down like Oxen, but when it shall repent them that they have so much as
touched the inheritance of the Lord. Tollant (...), and ^iunt (...), See A.
Gellius Noc. Attic. lib. 3 cap. 9.
Such Levellers that sow Sacrilege shall reap a snare, Prove. 20. 25. They take
away that which is devoted to God, and God himself will devote them to
destruction. Such revenues will certainly prove as unhappy to their unjust
detainers, as Cn. Seius his horse proved to him, afterward to Dolabella to
Cassius, to Antonius, and to as many as had him, and will create sooner or
later as many vexations, as the gold which Q, Caepio found in Tholossane, a
town in France, in the Churches thereof, did create to all that did lay but a
thievish hand upon it: Witness Belshazzar, Antiochus, Po^^peius Iulianus,
Claudius, Fulvius, Pyrrb^^, etc. whose doom any one may read in Lactant. lib.
2. cap. 4. 7 And no wonder, for Sacrilege is worse than Idolatry, for it
argues a contempt of all Deity. Romans 2. 22. Thou that abhorrest Idols,
committest thou Sacrilege? Thou that abhorrest false Gods, do thou rob the
true one, which is worse? In a word, such must needs pay dearly for their
injustice, who detain that which is another; to which injustice there is yet
added a sacrilegious king of malignity, because Tithes are due to God, not
openly as an expression of thankfullness, but as a means to preserve, and to
maintain his sacred worship.

CHAP. IX. The Anabaptists Objections are answered and their Arguments refelled.
Obj. THey object and say, true, Tithes were commanded often in the old
Testament, but his does not bind us under the new, because there is no express
command.

Ans. The same Argument will hold against the Lords day, against the Baptism
of Infants, against all Taxes and dues, because they are not expressly and by
name commanded in the new Testament.

2 Those Tithes which were commanded under the old Testament, are continued
still under the new, as to their spiritual and moral use; and that upon a
threefold account. 1. Upon the the account of piety* because they are given to
God and his Service. 2. Upon the account of thankfullness* For Tithes are a
Sacrifice of praise to God for his mercies toward us, and for the good things
which he bestows on us, Genesis 28. 22. 3. Upon the account of commutative
justice, for if we have sowed unto them our spiritual things, it is no great
matter if we reap their carnal things. Now then although Tithes be not expressly
and explicitly enjoined in the new Testament, yet we are as expressly engaged to
piety, thankfulness, and justice now as ever.

3. Neither does Christ in the new Testament expressly abolish the payment of
Tithes, when the Pha^isees boasted of their care in paying even their smallest
Tithes, he is so far from reproving them for it, that he commends and does
countenance it, Luke 11. 42. Mat. 23. 25. These ought ye to have done, and not
to leave the other undone. He gives no commission to neglect the payment of
Tithes. Ye ought not to leave that undone.

Tithes therefore or fixed stipends are due to the Ministers of the Gospel by a
trebble right. First by a divine moral right, not ceremonial or judicial: For
it is ^it and just that a Minister, who feeds the peoples souls, should be fed
by the people, that he that preaches the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.
The old Law concerning the Sabbath and concerning Tithes, at least shows thus
much (says Grotius de jure belli lib. 1. cap. 1.) that Christians are bound to
set apart no less than the seventh part of time, and to give no less than the
tenth part of their increase to Gods Ministers. It shows at least thus much,
that however they be maintained, whether out of Lands, Houses, Moneys, Tithes,
etc. yet that they ought to be maintained honestly and liberally, not sordidly
and sparingly. Estius speaks clearly and learnedly. That which the Law of God
and Nature command in the general, that does the ecclesiastical Law determine
specifically, whilst it app^inteth some certain stipend to be given by the
people to their Ministers* as Tithes or the like. Tithes therefore are not
precisely commanded in or absolutely necessary under the new Testament, neither
are they unjust, where they are established by the Magistracy, whose duty it is
to take the most convenient way for maintaining the Ministry, as may best
consist with the edification of the Church, and dignity of the sacred function.
Secondly, They are due by a natural right. Even the very Heathens gave the
tenth part to their Gods, as the Grecians, the Carthaginians, the Romans, etc.
who gave the Tithe of the spoil to Jupiter. And if the Tithe of such things,
how much rather the Tithes of more certain revenues. Thirdly, By the Law of
nations* and by the positive Law of our nation, Tithes were given by Off^ the
Saxon king in the year 793. afterward increased and confirmed by Ethelwolf in
the year 855. who gave the tenth part of his own revenues and of the kingdom
to God: binding them with this prayer, Whoever shall add to this our gift,
let allmighty God add to his life many prosperous days, and if any one shall
presume to change or diminish them, let him know that he must give an account
before the tribunal of Christ. After him King Athelstone confirmed them in the
year 930. In a word they have been confirmed, together with magna charta,
thirty times by Parliament.

By all which it is plain, that the Preachers of the Gospel have a better title
to their tithes than any Nobleman, Knight, or Gentleman to their proper
Inheritances. For. 1. They were given by our Ancestors to God and his service,
and therefore cannot be taken away without sacrilege; but the Estates of
Noblemen may be taken from them without sacrilege. 2. God has commanded that
a sufficient* honorable, and fixed maintenance be given to his Ministers, as
has been already proved. But such a special command has he not given
concerning any other men. Therefore tithes and things which are so God's, are
twice God's. 1. By a divine right primarily. 2. By a humane right secundarily,
as being dedicated to him and his worship.

Obj. 2. But the people cry out and rayl, saying, Tythe^ are burdensome, they
are Antichristian, Jewish etc.

Answ. 1. So do the people cry out of taxes, excize, customs etc. that they are
burdens: therefore shall we say, Away with taxes, customs, excise. All things
are common amongst friends?

2. It little matters what the many headed multitude say, Seneca could say*
argumentum pe^simum esse turbam, that the common people were the worst argument
in the world: Neither matters it how many they are, but how rational, how good.
The multitude of sinners does not patronize a sin

3. This is not the cry of the wisest, soundest and best of the people, they do
not declame against Tithes.

4. Neither are Tithes Jewish: For first, before the Law given by Moses,
Abraham gave Tithes to Melchisedech of all that he had, Genesis 14. 20. Heb. 7. 2.
Jacob also vowed to God the Tithe of all that he had, Gen, 28. 22. And
secondly, they are not paid to the Ministers of Christ by a ceremonial right,
but a moral right, and by a positive Law of the Nation, as was proved before.
See Repper. de. lege Mosis l. (...) c. 10.

5. Neither are they Antichristian as many vain men object, who whilst they are
hearers, decry Tithes to save their money, but turning preachers take Tithes,
dispute for them and contend for additions to be made to them. Tithes are not
Antichristian, that are by the Law of nature, by the moral Law, by the positive
Law of the nation, and not by any canonical or pontifical Law. How can they be
popish, which were paid thousands of years before any such beast as a Pope did
spring up?

6. If Tithes be unjust, burdensome, wicked things, then is God the author of
injustice, oppression, wickedness (which were blasphemy to conceive) for he
gave the Tithes to his Levites under the Law by a special command for their
subsistence. Neither does the Gospel, as I said before, abrogate or abolish
Tithes in general, but rather establish and confirm them specifically, as may
appear, Mat. 23. 23. Luk 11. 42. Gal. 6. 6. 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Heb. 7. 1. 5, 6,
8. And if the wise God thought this way the best to maintain his Ministers, who
shall reprove him?

7. They are not burdensome impositions, because they were freely given to the
Church by pious and well affected Princes, They are not the peoples burden, for
they are none of theirs; Neither they nor their pro parents ever purchased
them, and why should they repine to part with that which is none of theirs.

8. Let there be found out a more sufficient and certain and honorable
maintenance, and who will contend for Tithes? But since it appear^ to all wise
men, that a more just and stated maintenance cannot be found out, why should
the impor^unity of wild and unreasonable men prevail? that this epidemicall
disease may be cured, there seems to remain this and this only remedy. Let
Tithes be got out of the hands of those that have eng^ost them to private uses:
I mean those Tithes which the Lawyers call impropriate, more truly improper*
and indeed to many unprosperous, as the holy coal to the Engls nest. Of such
Harpyes Luther sadly complains, In these and many other Countries there are a
company of Harpyes, ^o wit Prefects and Questors, who have devoured the
liberalities of Princes given for the maintenance of the Ministers of the
Church, and such is their envy and malignity* that it can hardly ^e wrung out
of their clutches* And indeed this is a hard task, but it is a Princely, a
Parliamentary undertaking: And I doubt not but all godly men will do all they
can to bring to pass so gracious an enterprise. It commended the excellent and
worthy spirits of some Londoners, that bought impropriate Tithes, and restored
them to the Churches. Many know by whose fault this good work was hindered, and
what became of them that hindered it.

Obj. 3. They argue from Mic 3. 11. the Priests teach for hire, and the
Prophets divine for money.

Ans It is one thing to receive hire, and another to be an hireling; one thing
to be hired to teach, another to teach for hire. The true Prophets received a
reward of their pains, and that by Christ's allowance, Mat. 10. 10. but the
false Prophets whom God here reproves, prophesied false things, and that for
hire only, and preached pleasing things only, that they might have a more
liberal reward. The Ministers of the Gospel do receive Salaries, not as a
reward of their Ministry, but that they may provide the necessaries of life,
and may persist in their sacred function.

4. Obj. Their great argument is fathered upon (for I cannot say gathered from)
Mat. 10. 8, 9, 10. Freely ye have received, freely give* Provide neither Gold
nor Silver, nor brass in in your purses etc*

Ans. The Anabaptists are deceived in this late figment of theirs. For Christ
himself unties the knot, v. 10. The workman is worthy of his meat, and appr^ved
it by his owny example, taking something of the substance of his rich followers
Luke 8. 3. John 12. 6. and 13. 29. Neither did the Apostles ordinarily refuse
Salaries from the Churches, 1. Cor. 9 4, 5, 6. Phil. 4. 18.

2. Christ here speaks concerning working of miracles, as appears v. 8. and
he forbids his Apostles to sell their miraculous cures for money, because that
gift was freely given them by God, and they ought therefore to use it freely.
As Elisha refused the reward offered him by Naaman the Syrians 2 King 5. 15.
16. These words ( ye have freely received) does not so much respect the work of
preaching, as the working of miracles, which is not so laborious as the other.

3. This command of Christ to his Apostles was only temp^rary, a precept for
the present time, not a moral commandment; neither can it or ought to be made a
perpetual Law. It only related to that first Embassy of theirs to the Jews,
which, was to be dispatched with all speed, and they were to avoid whatever
would retard them in their journey. This is plain from our Saviors own words,
Luke 22. 35. where speaking of this first mission of theirs, and the charge he
gave them then: He says; Before I sent you without purse, etc. but now he that
has a purse, let him take it etc. As much as to say, the former precept that I
gave you is valid, Now I give you a new charge.

4. It is plain that the Apostles afterward lived of the Gospel Acts 4. 5.
chapt. The primitive Believers offered them all their goods, they sold lands
and goods for the Apostels use, Heu quantum distamus ab illis, but now we had
rather take the Apostles lands and goods for our own use, or at least are so
far from selling all for them, that we grudge miserably to give unto them a
tenth part.

5. This precept, as to the substance of it does still bind. It engages us to
have hearts free from covetousness, to be a pattern of holiness, of the
contempt of riches, and of noble and heavenly minds.

6. The Apostles were sent to heal all manner of diseases.

Now our Savior foreseeing that men would be ready to give any thing for
Health, forbids them to make a private gain of the gift of healing, as Simon
Magus thought to have made of the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 5. The haters of the Ministry urge the unsuitable Example of Paul, Act.
18. 3. 20. 34. 2 These. 3. 8. Paul got his living by his own Hand-labour;
Therefore ought all the Ministers of the Gospel also.

Ans. 1. It does not follow. A particular and singular Action does no^ make an
universal rule. Neither does the Apostle here go about to take away from
Christ's Ministers that which elsewhere he does allow them. Now he allows them
a right to be maintained of the Public, in many places, 1 Cor. 9. 14. Gal. 6.
6. 1 Ti^. 5. 17. He approves of them that lived of the Gospel, 1 Corinthians. 9. 5,
6. Nay himself received maintenance of other Churches* Phil. 4. 18. 2 Cor. 11.
8.

2. Suppose the Case be now as it was then, caeteris paribus, and we will also
allow the Apostle Paul's example to be binding* 1. If the Preacher be furnished
with Extraordinary Gifts, that he can perform his work without study and
medita^ion; so could the Apostle. 2. If Ministers can live otherwise, and it be
necessary by reason of the Churches poverty; in such a cafe of necessity the
Minister ought to deny his right, that he prejudice not the Gospel, and be a
burden to the Church, 1 These 2. 9. 2 These. 3. 8, 9, But the case is not so now,
neither respective to the Ministers of the Church, nor respective to the
Church. For 1. Ministers have not that extraordinary and supernatural Gil^. 2.
The Church enjoys, through the bounty of pious Princes, and Progenitors,
Chruch-Revenues, dedicated to the maintenance of its Ministry, that they need
not be burdensome to the Church. Moreover in the Apostles time there was a
community of Goods* which did abundantly make up the want of ^ythes. We must
therefore distinguish of a Church. 1. The^e is a Church to be constituted, or
in constituting which; for the most part, is made up of poo^ and inferior
members, not headed by powerful Princes, or rich Magistrates, in whose ^and it
might be ^o appoint settled stipends. Such was the estate of the Church in the
Apostles time: and here we must decline our own right. Moreover, the Apostles
preached to Heathens* who knew not the worth of the Gospel, nor the necessity
of a Ministry. 2. There is a Church constituted, adorned with Magistrates, and
Laws, and endued with certain Revenues and Immunities appointed by those
Magistrates for the Ministers: these Revenues are by Divine Right due to these
Ministers: therefore Paul acknowledged, that he did receive things necessary of
some Church, as form the Church at Philippi* Phil. 4. 16. and others, 2. Cor.
11. 8. though he did not of the Church of Corinth, nor Thessalonica. In a word,
Stipends are different according to time and place; doubtless the richer
Congregations both may and ought to maintain their Pastors more liberally than
the poorer; neither is it equal, that the Stipends of all Ministers should be
equal* because of their different Gifts, different Labors, different Families,
and different quality of their people.

Object. 6. Many Ministers are rich, and are single men, therefore they ought
to preach freely, and live of their own.

Ans. 1. That does not follow; For our Saviors Proposition is universal, Luke
10. 14. The Labourer is worthy of his hire, that is, Every Labourer, be he rich
or poor, single or double, or what else. Melchizedeck was a rich king* and yet
Abraham pays him tithes, Genesis 14. 20. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the
ox that treads out the corn, be he fat, or be he lean. Moreover, if a rich
Minister receive nothing of his people, he will expose his poorer brethren to
the envy and malice of their people: and not only so, but be a means to starve
his Successor; wherefore let him receive his due Stipend, and let him give to
the poor, and convert much to public uses. Our Savior Christ could easily
have maintained himself, and the family of his Apostles, after a miraculous
way; his Godhead could easily have provided for his manhood, yet he received of
those things which were brought him, Luk 8. 3. to instruct us by his example.
The Lord has not ordained, that they that preach the Gospel should live of
their own private Estates, that I know of; but he has ordained, that they
should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor 9 14.

2. Would this be a good Argument* Many Soldiers are rich, therefore let them
fight freely, spend and be spent, without expectation or acceptance of pay,
and live of their own: The richer men grow, the less commonly they care for
fighting, (lest they should loss their rich lives) much less would they fight
for nothing; For Who goes, says the Apostle, to war, at his own charges.

CHAP. X. A sixth Corollary from the Doctrine.
IN the last place then, let all Christ's Ministers take heed they be not
Unsavou^y Salt. Christ has put upon us the Name, oh that Christ would put into
us the Nature of Salt. Now the right and conscienscious manner of salting and
feeding is tenfold* Exemplarily, Ministerially, Diligently, Boldly, Lovingly*
Zealously* Purely Plainly Fully, and Sincerely.

1. Let ^ Minister ^each by example and life, let him learn to do before he
teach others to learn; for the life of a Preacher has in it the greatest
Argument to Holiness of life, and will instruct better, and pr^va^^ more than a
thousand elegant Sermons. Men are more dr^wn by Example than by Precepts;
Wherefore let us show our selves examples of piety, and good works, and as
patterns which ^hey may follow. Timothy must be an example of believers in word
and conversation, in Charity, in spirit, in faith, and purity, 1 Timothy 4. 12.
and so must Titus, Tit. 2. 7. and so must all the Ministers of the Gospel* 1
Pet. 5. 3. The tongue indeed teaches, but the life commends; for the voice
of the hand is more powerful then that of the tongue, and gives efficacy to
it; whilst we speak Oracles, let us live like Deities. The best way of moving
the affections is one's self first to be moved. He that is first himself
persuaded, shall better persuade others; and no one can prescribe so good
Remedies, as he that by experience knows what is hurtful* It is the part of a
faithful Pastor to weep with himself, before he call for the tears of others,
and to grieve more inwardly, than in an expression. He that would have my
tears,
Must weep himself, or else i will think he jeers,
That voice pierces the heart of the Hearers most effectually, which the life
of the Preacher commands; For, that Preacher loses his Authority, whose words
are not interpreted by his works; Nay, as Austine well observes, A life
unsuitable to the Doctrine is of a soul-killing, ^urtherous nature. What a
monstrous prodigious sight (says Bernard to Eugenius) lib. 2. de Consider.) is
a high degree, and a low spirit; a sacred Profession and an execrable practice;
a laborious tongue, and a lazy hand; much leaves and no fruit, a grave
countenance and a light carriage, great authority and no stability, to look
like a man and speak like a child? against such the Apostle thunders, Romans 2.
1, 21. Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self, etc. Such
derogate from the weight of their Doctrine, they de^troy with their works what
they build with their words, they dedicate their tongues to God, and devote
their souls to the Devil. What is profound Science good for (says Dr.
Staughton in Foelicit. ult. saeculi, p. 91, 92, 93.) without a pure conscience;
an Orators tongue without an Angels life; but to make up a Statue like unto
Nebuchadnezzar' s, whose golden head ended in earthen feet; as though it were
for the present to be crowned, and shortly to be broken in pieces; or a toad
with a jewel, perhaps in the head, but certainly poisonous all over the body;
which is more hateful for the o^e, than precious for the other? let Eloquence
therefore sit in the lips, but let grace also give strength to Eloquence.

Let us therefore imitate our Master, who was mighty in deed and word, Luke 24.
19. who began first to do, and then to teach, Act. 1. 1. Himself was first
meek, and pure, and peaceable, and then he began to teach, Blessed are the poor
in heart, the pure in heart, the peaceable, Matthew. 5. As John the Baptist was
all voice, so the all of a Minister ought to preach; his eating, drinking,
travailing, entertaining, clothing, life and language should all breathe out
holiness; whatever he does or says should instruct his flock. Ezra the servant
of the Lord was indeed a Scribe instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, for he
first prepared his heart to seek the Law of the Lord, and to do it, and then to
teach in Israel statutes and judgments, Ezra 7. 10. Lo* the right way to
attain to an excellent faculty of teaching. 1. Prepare not the head only, but
the heart also. 2. Seek with all care and diligence, viz. by hearing, reading,
learning, meditating, praying. 3. What must be sought; not Civil Laws, not
humane Statutes, not scholastical niceties, but s^ek the Law of the Lord,
converse in this, meditate of it, peruse it day and night. He that will be a
good Preacher must labor to be a good Textuist; for Scripture is the best
Interpreter of Scripture. 4. For what end? first, that we may do it, then that
we may teach it. Let us labor to be as Glasses, in which the representations
of all verture and grace may appear; yea, if we do and teach, we shall be
called (that is, we shall be) great in the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5. 19. Such
an one was holy Basil, whose words were thunder, and his works lightening. He
preaches (says Nazianzen) with a lively voyc^, who preaches with life and
voice, making good his Doctrine and his Life, the one by the other. One, and
the same Apostle tells us, that Ministers should not only (...), divide, and
rightly distribute the word of truth, 2. Tim. 2. 15. but also (...), walk
uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2. 14. All our Nazarites
should be purer than snow, whiter than milk, Lam. 4. 7. like unto Absalom, in a
more spiritual beauty, in whom, from the crown of the head to the sole of his
foot was no blemish, 1 S^m. 14. 25. For if those that had any blemish upon them
were forbidden the Priests Office, under the Law, Lev. 21. 17. etc. how shall
they, whose mouths, hearts, hands, are full of sin and filthiness, be
admitted, or accepted under the Gospel? Wherefore let every Preacher teach by
words, and works, by life and Language. It is an easy thing to speak, but a
hard to perform; easy to teach in words, but preaching with the life, is the
life of Preaching; for, words make not such an impression upon the soul, as
works do; A fighting Captain encourages his soldiers more then a prating
coward. The Apostle therefore will that Bishops be blameless, Tit. 1. 7.
unreproveable, without scandal, not without sin, As were Samuel, Jeremiah,
Daniel, Paul, Zachary, 1 Samuel 12. 3. ^erem. 15. 10. Da^. 6. 5. Act. 20. 23.
Luke 1. 6. such were Bucer, Bradford, Latimer, Hooper, etc. such ought we to
be, that evil men may be able to speak no evil of us without lying, Tit. 2. 8.
For he may truly be said to be unblameable, not who is never blamed, but who is
not blameworthy. Neither does the Apostle call for men devoid of all fa^lings,
such are not men but Angels, such are members of the Church Triumphant, not the
Militant. Many men (as Austine well observes) live without complaint or
scandal, but none without sin

2. Let a Pastor feed his people ministerialy, by voice and sound Doctrine. The
bare Reading of the Scriptures seldom conduces much to Conversion, the word
preached by an Applicatory Voice has some kind of secret energy in it, and
being sent from the Minister, as from the mouth of God himself, into the ears
of the Audito^s, it carries a great authority with it, and fastens better upon
their souls. It is requisite, that a Minister of the Gospel carry upon hi^
breast both the Urim and the Thu^min, have both the light of Doctrine, and
Integrity of life. The servant of the Lord should be apt to teach, 2 Timothy 2.
24. which aptitude denotes both a proneness and a fitness: he should have both
a will to communicate, and a faculty of communicateing that which he knows:
This (says even the Council of Trent) is the p^imary office of a Bishop;
therefore Paul, being now at the door of death, adjures Timothy to preach the
Gospel in every opportunity, with all impor^unity, 2. Tim. 4. 1, 2. to instruct
first himself, and then others, 1 Timothy 4. 13, etc. Take heed to the self, that
thou compose thy behavior according to the holy rule, and to thy Doctrine,
that thou teach others. Blind Watchmen, and dumb dogs are the worst of
creatures, Isa. 56. 10. If a dog, whose office it is to watch, to bark, to
affright thieves, be dumb, either by nature, or by some disease, or through a
birbe, ^e is altogether useless, A covetous, proud, idle, luxurious Minister,
has his mouth stopped by the guilt of that very sin which he ought to reprove
in others; for, how shall he bark against covetousness, who is himself
worldly-minded? The sound of Aarons bells must be heard, when he went into the
holy Place to minister* upon pain of death, Exodus 28. 3^, 34, 35. A sadder
complaint could not be made, than what a pious and learned man of this Nation
makes, That this Church has lain under these 2 sore plagues, formerly many
Ministers that were not Preachers, and now, many Preachers that are not
Ministers.

3. Let a Pastor feed his Flock diligently and industriously: From us, my
Brethren, from us, does our mother the Church exspect relief; let us endeavor
to the utmost of our power to administer the help she exspects, to remove
scandals, to heal divisions, to confute Heresies, to beat down wickedness, and
to demolish the strong holds of Satan. Let us be instant (...) in season, when
any fair opportunity offers it ^elf, and (...), out of season, when
inconveniences and dangers do seem to flesh and blood to block up the way:
Diligence* as it is very conducible to many other ends, (for it makes rich,
Prove. 10. 4. it inbrings to Preferment, Prove. 22. 29.) so, more especially, is
it necessary the Ministry, in the Government and management of souls, which is
an Art beyond all other Arts, and requires the greatest accomplishments,
exercitation, unction, discretion, etc. For some are brutish and unteachable,
some weak, some dull, some perverse, and many ungrateful.

Let us therefore watch and be hardy: let him that undertakes this Ministerial
task, at once furnish himself with an Hero^ck and invincible spirit, for he
shall be sure not to want exercises enough of his valor; For, there are none
whom Satan oftener tempts, sharplyer assaulteth; there are none that suffer
more of forer shocks and tempests, than the holy and faith^ull Captains of the
Church, whom God has designed to prisons, not Palaces, to hatred and reproach
in the world, not to the pleasures and delights of the world; according to
that, Romans 8. 36. For thy sake we are killed all the day long; And (which may
the rather quicken us unto diligence) behold the indefatigable industry of
Satan, and his agents. In this decrepit age of the world* in these last and
perilous times, they are hurried on with a desperate rage, the Devils seem
possessed with some worse spirit than themselves, they turn every stone,
improve the very dregs of their malice, and the height of their might, if by
any means, by secret persuasions, or hostile invasions. they may drag any soul
to hell with themselves: What weeds of Heresy do they plant? what seeds of
discord do they sow? what stones of stumbling do they lay? They compass sea
and land to gain one Proselyte. Let us learn diligence of that great
Peripatetick, the Devil, who compasses the earth to ensnare souls. Therefore
says Latimer, exhorting the Bishops to diligence, if they will not follow the
example of the Saints, the Prophets, the Apostles, of Christ Jesus himself, yet
let them be provoked by the diligence of the Devil, who spares no pains, but
carefully visits, inst^ucts, and inciteth his servants and disciples. Nay, the
Sea it self is restles, the Heavens are turned about with an uninterrupted
motion, and the Sun returns with its unwearied light, from the same to the same
goals continually: And do senseless bodies perfect so many motions so
constantly, and shall the great lights of the Church lurk within their sockets,
rust with idleness and dullness? Idleness is hateful to God in every Calling,
but especially in the Ministry. Cursed be he that does this work of the Lord
negligently.

If thou be a Minister of Christ, hoc age, mind this thing only, be intent
upon it, diligent in it. The life of a Minister is not an idle life, a delicate
easy life; we are appointed to work in the Lords Vineyard, Numb. 8. 24. and
not to play. It unbecomes the Ministers of Christ then to be Carders, dicers,
hunters, Merchants, Soldier, H^^bandmen* etc. For, if i^ be unfit that they
should l^ave the preaching of the Word to s^rve tables, Act. 6. 2. much more
unfit is it for them to neglect that work, to employ th^mselves in things quite
of a different nature. There is (...), but it is to the Laborers; there are
some worthy of double honor, but it is they that labor still: This office
which we have, is not an easy, but a laborious Task, which always has been
accompanied with more care than credi^, whose sweat is greater than its crop.
Know (says Austine) that the name of a Bishop is not a name of worth so much
as work* of dig^ity so much as duty; and that those are Bishops* who had rath^r
convert then people then command them. And therefore our Ministry (...) work,
not an honor, an employment not enjoyment a labor not a ^oytering, 1 Timothy 3.
1. 2 Timothy 4. 5. Act. 15. 38. 1 Cor 3. 13. Ephesians. 4. 12. Phil. 1. 22. 1 These. 5.
13. 2. Neither is it an easy, bu^ a laborious painful work, not (...), an
ordinary labor, but (...), a working even unto weariness, John 4. 38. 1 Cor.
3. 8. 2 Cor. 10. 15. Gal. 4. 11. 1 These. 3. 5. and 5. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 3. It is
called (...), that is, such as labor a has much difficulty in it, Cor 11. 27.
1 These. 2. 9. 2 These. 3. 8. 4. It is called (...), a care, and vehement study,
2 Cor. 7. 12. 5. (...), a dist^acting ca^e, 2 Cor. 11. 28. Phil. 2. 20. 1 Timothy
3. 5. 6. It is such a work as requires the whole man; therefore we are
commanded to give up our selves wholly to these things, and to continue in
them, 1 Timothy 4. 15, 16. that is, Let these things be thy study, thy care, thy
employment thy practice, thy whole business. Therefore we are commanded to wait
on our Ministry, Romans 12. 7. and to give our selves continually to it, Act. 6.
4. and to fulfill it, Col. 4. 17. And hence we are called Shepherds, Soulders,
Laborers, as I said before.

Neither are we without examples of this diligence. Moses was faithful in all
Gods House, Heb. 3. 2. He was ^aithfull in delivering to the people the
Commands of God, and governing them according to the mind and will of God.
Samuel ceased not to exho^t the people, and to pray for them, 1 Samuel 12. 23.
Christ himself was not sometime, but daily in the Synagog^e, teaching, and in
the Temple, Mat. 26. 55. Luke 19. 47. It was his custom so to do, Luke 4. 16.
He spent the day in preaching* and the night in prayer, Luke 21. 37. See the
indefa^igable diligence of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 23. to the 30. He was
unwearied in his doing, and invincible in his su^fering: How many Cities and
Countries did he enlighten with the Go^pel? Jerusalem, Illyricum, Damascus,
Antioch, Arabia, Se^^ucia, Cyprus, Pamphylia, P^sidia, Lycaonia, Syria,
Cilicia, Phrygia, Galatia, Mysia, ^roas, Achaia, Epyrus, and many others. It is
reported of Farellus, that, being hindered by no difficulties, threatenings,
reproaches, frighted with no persecutions, he gained to Christ the
Mompeigardenses, the Aquilenses, the Lonsannenses, the Genevites, the
No^ocomenses. That which is reported of Calvin is diligence almost to a
miracle; that he preached yearly Two hundred Eighty and six Sermons, read an
hundred eighty and six Lectures, besides a multitude of Epistles which he wrote
concerning sundry points in Divinity. How often do we meet with (...),
yesterday and to day in Chrysostom: although yesterday I spoke to you of this
thing, yet I will not fo^get it to day (said he) nor will I fail to preach the
same to morrow* and he^ceforth. The Ancient Fathers gave themselves wholly to
their study; the least part of their life was spent in sleep, little in eating
and drinking, and none at all in idleness, Origin lost no time in his life from
his studies. Let us therefore bring under our bodies by watching, fasting,
praying, pains-taking, mortification of the flesh, sustaining all persecutions,
abstaining from all carnal pleasures, incentives to sin. There is eminent
danger in indulging the flesh, 1 Cor. 9. 29. The time is short, the work great,
the reward greatest of all. Contemplate of the Crown. And that we may be the
better enabled to carry on the work, let us love; for nothing is impossible to
love, it runns, it flies, it overcomes all difficulties, Cant. 8. 6, 7. 2 Cor.
5. 14. Genesis 29. 20. The Peter that loves Christ will ^eed, feed, feed, John 21.
15* 16. feed by preaching, feed by practicing, feed by printing Zachary, when
he could not speak, wrote: the voice of the pen is louder than the voice of the
tongue: By this we can speak to them that are at a distance; nay, by this,
being dead we yet spe^k.

4. Let a Pa^tor feed his people bol^^y, and freely. Let us undertake,
undergo, and a^complish our Minist^y, with a confidence full of courage, with
a courage devoid of ^ear. Let us commit our ship to the winds; It is ^ecessa^y
to ^wod^, not so to live, as Caesar said heroically. They that fear the hatred,
or reproaches of the world, will ^oon faint, and flagge? There is therefore
requisite a boldness, and confidence of Spirit to contemn^ the contempt of the
world. It is a prime virtue in a Min^ster to contemn, and to be able to be
contemned. As it becomes a Commander to dye standing, so it behooves a Minister
of Christ to die suffering and doing, sustaining, and abstaining, preaching and
praying, and chea^fully to undergo all that c^n be laid upon him for the love
of Christ. This is indeed to endure hardship, 2 Timothy 2. 3. to sustain crosses,
to entertain injuries, and ^o retain a heart hardened against all the affronts
of an enraged world; Like Christ, who set his face as a flint, because the Lord
was his helper, Isa. 50. 7. And therefore he stood unmoved in the greatest
storms, unco^quered by the greatest rage; like a rock, against which the
roaring waves do dash themselves, and go into foam; or like an Adamant, which
breaks in pieces the stones and hammers which would break it. Let others fear
and fly, let us contend and continue even unto death. Take Bias for an example,
who being circumvented by Iphicrates the A^henian Captain, answered his
Soldiers that asked him what they should do, What should ye do, but consult
your own safety, and for my part I will dye fighting. Christ Jesus seems to
bespeak us as ^lexander bespoke Alexander* either fig^t or change thy name:
Either carry on thy Ministry courageously, and fulfill it constantly, or cease
to be a Minister. It is the chief business of a Minister, by spiri^ual weapons
to demolish the strong holds of Satan; but this will not be done by
flatterie^, and pleasant ditties; but by this boldness, and freeness of speech,
with which we reprehend sharply, all errors, heresies, reigning ^innes,
especially conscience wasting sins in all men, high and low, great and small,
without any respect of persons: we must be like clear and spotless glasses,
which flatter no one, but represents all persons and things faith^ully* as they
are. No difference must be put 'twixt man and man;
Whether a Trojane, or a Tyri^n.
Nathan reproved King David, Elijah King Ahab, Elisha King Iehoram, Hosea the
King's house, Amos King Ierobo^m* John Baptist King Herod, Paul the Governou^
Foelix, Chrysostom Eudoxus, ^mbrose Theodosius the Emperor, whom he also
excommunicated for violence done to the Thessalonians. Let us therefore boldly
and freely tax, princely, popular, plausible sins, and so shall we be the
children of the Prophets. Let us not be overcome with fear, nor fear to be
overcome, either by might, or malice; but with an honest kind of impudence
speak out the turth, knowing that we are the messengers of God, who will act,
direct, protect us, Isa. 42. 6. 50. 7. Ier. 1. 8. 18, 19. Ier. 28. throughout,
especially v. 11. Ezekiel. 3. 8, 9. God will not forsake his, in these last and
worst times, whom he knows unable to subsist or persist without him; Therefore
he bids them not to be afraid though briars and thorns be with them; nay,
though they dwell amongst scorpions, yet not to be afraid, Ezekiel 2. 6. Every
coward in Gods cause is a murderer, according to that, (...), and of all
cowards they are the most notorious that have God for their Captain; For, what
need they be afraid of briars or thorns, who have the good will of him that
dwelt in the bush?

5. Let a Pastor feed his people lovingly. Let all things be sweetened with
love, 1 Cor. 16. 14. Let prayers, Sermons, reproofs, exhortations, all flow
from this Fountain, Let all things be done with charity. Let the fire of zeal
be kept burning with no other fuel than the oil of compassion, Ier. 13. 17.
Luke 19. 41. Gal. 4. 19. Thus the good Samaritane pours wine and oil into the
wounds, wine to ^earch, and oil to supple. If there be need of severity, let us
play the good Chirurgions, who when they apply Corrosives to prevent death by
the wound, administer Cordialls to prevent fainting by the Corrosives; and
cheer up the patient, telling him it is only in a tendency to his health. No
one is fit indeed to reprove, but he that loves the party to be reproved, that
so the reproof may be in compassion, not in passion, for his restoration, and
not his ruin. The Apostle Paul therefore will have our sharpness tempered with
mildeness, and lenity, 2 Timothy 4. 2. reprove rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering* not being enraged at the dullness and undutifulness of our
Auditors; Let us not offend any by a proud severity, or a supercilious gravity
but by mildeness, and a sweet composure of manners and b^haviours strive to win
them, engage them to us, and make them our own, so shall we be able to have an
Influence upon them, prevail with them, and live profitably and comfortably
amongst them. Love me (said ^ustine) and say what you will, and do what you
will. As an Orator should not only be qualif^^d with prudence, but with
benevolence also* so a Preacher: For) as the Philosopher observes) it
con^^ibutes much to the creditableness of the Orator, if the Auditors be
persuaded that he stands well affected to them* The gravity of a Minister
should not be such as may affright men from coming before him, but such as
compose them to reverence, that do come. Let us feed the Flock of Christ, not
imperiously, as Lords, much less, rigidly, as Tyrants; but gravely, and
mildely, as Fathers, with a fatherly benevolence and affection* desiring rather
to be loved then feared. To this purpose speaks La^renti^^, upon 1* Pet. 5. 3.
Let every Pastor govern the Church providently, and prudently, not straining
his power to its utmost rigor, but exercising a spirit of Lenity; not always,
in all things, toward all, using his utmost power and au^hority, but sometimes
denying something of his own right, as Paul often did, 1 Cor. 9. 12. 2 Cor. 3.
2. 2 These. 3. 9. In a word, let us imitate Basil; who, for patience and
constancy was an Adamant, for meekness a Loadstone.

6. Let a Pastor feed his flock zealously* not carelessly and coldly. Let us
cry aloud, and lift up our voice like a Trumpet, because we speak to dead men
and stones* Let us pray the father of Light to touch our tongues with a coal
from the Altar, that our lips may breath out nothing but what is pure and
heavenly; that we may be Lamps, burning in zeal, faith, and Love, and shining
in words and works; that we may be coals to our selves* and lamps to our
people; such was John, Ioh. 5. 35. Wherefore Christ gave not fleshly* but fiery
tongues to the Primitive Preachers, that they might preach zealously with them,
and inflame the hearts of their hearers, Act. 2. 3. Excellent is that
commendation of Luther, Whatever Luther speaks or writes pi^^ces into the
^earts, and leaves a wonderful sting in the cons^^ences of the hearers. Let us
look unto our Saviou^, whom Zeal for Gods glory eat up. Let us imitate Elijah,
qui zelando zelavit, who was very zealous for the Lord, all ^i^e for God, whom
God therefore sent for in a Fiery Chariot. Let us imita^^ Elisha Isaiah,
Ier^miah, ( Ier. 20. 9. John Baptist, Paul, Gal* 2. 11. Who all being enflamed
with the fire of Love did burn the cold hearts of their hearers with zealous
Discourses. Let our hearts, our tongues our hands be all of a fire, that we may
bring men from sin unto God. Even immoderate z^al is better than coldness in
Gods cause, for it is an error of love* and not a love of error. Let us neglect
nothing through idleness, or cowardi^^, which may conduce to the Salvation of
the souls of our people. In a word, let us imitate the holy Seraphims (who
have their name from fire) who burning in zeal, are always in readiness to
execute every command of God; having with them six wings, with which we may
speedily move upward, downward, forward, backward, on this hand, on that hand,
as God calls. So zealous was the Angel who had the everlasting Gospel to
preach, who did not creep, nor walk, nor run, but fly with a swift wing through
the midst of Heaven, Rev. 14. 16. See VVard's Coal from the Altar: p. 390.

7. The word of God is to be dispensed purely, without any sophistical or
superstitious comments. Let nothing be said of God, without Gods authority. In
all doubts we must have recourse to the Law, and the Testimony, Isa. 8. 20.
Moses returning from the Mount brought commands, not his own, but Gods, Exodus
19. 7, 8. The Apostles Commission runns not for them to teach humane
Traditions, private Fancies, but to teach all things that Christ Jesus had
commanded them, Mat. 28. 20. that is, either by himself, or by his Prophets.
Therefore the Apostles themselves father their Doctrines upon Christ, 1 Cor.
11. 23. I have received of the Lord that which also I have delivered unto you:
so 1 These. 4. 2. Ye know what Commandments we gave you by the Lord Iesus^; As
much as if he had said* The Commandments which I gave you are not mine but
Christ's, he is the Lawgiver, I am only his Messenger. So also 1 Pet. 4 11. if
any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; Let him be a Teacher well
instructed in the Word of God, and produce Oracles, as it were, out of Gods
mouth. God cannot abide unlawful Mix^ures* that men should play the huxters
with his Word, or plow with the ox of his Word, and the Ass of humane
traditions together. God will not have men set their thresholds by his, and
their posts by his posts, Ezekiel. 43. 8. What is the cha^^e to the wheat? What
are false Prophecies to the truth of God? Ier. 23. 28. Men's inventions are like
light and empty cha^^e, that has no substance in it, nor give any spiritual
nourishment, but Gods Word is nu^ritive, like the purest wheat. We are called
to be dispencers of the Ministries of God, not broachers of out own groundless
conceptions; prop^gators of the old way and Doctrine, not coiners of a new. If
an Angel from heaven should preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed, Gal.
1. 8. Reject therefore all new and feigned worships, and worship God after a way
that is Gods.

8. The word of God is to be dispensed plainly. He is the best Preacher, not
who s^^atcheth the ears, but who pricketh and pierces the heart. Therefore
does Paul profess, that he had rather speak (...) words in a known and
intelligible Language, than five thousand in a strange and unknown tongue, 1
Cor 14* 19. Let us preach a crucified Christ in a crucified style; not with the
persuasive words of man's wisdom, but in the demo^station of the spirit and
power: not Rhetorically; but Apostolic^lly, not so much fi^ely, as soundly, not
so curiously as carefully, not so ^dmirably as intelligibly. Let our speech be
simple without figures, plain without mysteries, pure without mixtu^e; not
curious, painted, affected, unnecessarily adorned: and so shall they be as
fiery darts piercing the inmost conscience, and strong hammers bre^king the
hardest rock.

9. The Word of God is to be dispensed fully. For, so runns the Dispensers
Commission, Mat. 28. 20. all things whatsoever, etc. The least particle of Gods
Word is not fraudulently to be detained, but the whole counsel of God, without
addition or diminution is to be declared, Act. 20. 27. And then, if any soul
dye, it shall fall by its own hand, and not by ours, and its blood charged upon
its won head, not ours, when we shall faithfully have discharged our duty
without fraud or fallacy, in preaching, exhorting, warning* threatening, and
explaining all things needful to ^alvation. Let us imitate the noble spirited
Micajah. who professed freely ^ King 22. 14. that he would not speak what the
flattering Courtiers would dictate to him, but what the Lord should command him.

10. Let a Pastor feed his flock, and dispense Gods Word sincerely. not
designing his won profit or credit, but Gods glory, Phil 4 17. so that Christ's
authority, renown, and honor may be exalted; let us rejoice, though our own be
eclipsed, nay extinguished, Ioh. 3. 30. Ambition was the first mother of
Heresy; Let us therefore turly and sincerely preach the way of the Lord, and
study to promote his glory. For them that honor him he will honor.

Above all, thou man of God, flee covetousness. The love of money distracts the
mind, makes it unfit for its sacred employment, and shoulders out Hospitality
and Charity. We are Gods Soldiers, now no Soldier entangleth himself with the
affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2. 4. They are unworthy the name of Christ's
Ministers, who gape after the private goods, more than they desire the public
good of the Church, that make a trade of their ^acred function, undertaking it
not to bring souls to eternal life, but to bring themselves a temporal
livelihood. Covetousness is abominable in all men, but especially in Ministers,
such therefore are called greedy dogs, Isa 56. 11. that prepare war against
every one that puts not into their mouths, Mic. 3. 5. that pollute the name
of God amongst the people, for handfulls of barley, and pieces of bread, for
any light gain, Ezekiel. 13. 19. This in Bishops is called (...), filthy gain,
because it is gotten filthily, unworthily, flatteringly, not without staining
and ^ullying the Ministerial dignity. This the Apostle condemns again and
again, 1 Timothy 3. 3. Tit. 1. 7, 11. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Who can but condemn the
preposterous ca^e of a Livelihood, which some Ministers stand guilty of, who
bestow more thoughts about breeding and feeding their cattle, managing their
land, and such heterogeneous business, than in their studies, or the Promotion
of Salvation of the peoples souls: whom you may fitlyer call Feeders of
cattle, than Feeders of Christians, whilst they converse more in their stables
than in their studies, as though they still looked for Christ in a manger. Not
that it is absolutely unlawful for a Minister of the Gospel (so it may be
without prejudice to his employment and study to have some moderate care of his
temporal concernments, (as about his cattle, and land, (...) like*) but
chiefly let him take heed to himself, and to (...) Doctrine, and not be anxious
or solicitous inordinately concerning a temporal subsistence; For the Lord is
our inheritance, if we be faithful Vine-d^es^ers, and reapers for him* he will
be vineyards, fields, and harvests unto us; Christ will suffer his sent-ones to
want nothing, Luke 22. 35*

Woe to those drones then, that do not feed, but feed upon the flock; These the
Prophet strikes through with a sharp dart, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3. For it is our duty
to seek the peace more than the (...) of our Flocks, 2 Cor. 12. 14. I seek not
yours but you: We were ordained fishers of men, not of moneys. It ought
therefore to be our care (as Aquinas ha^h taught us) to p^omote, and e^crease
spiritual good in our people, rather tha^ to procu^e and gather temporal goods
for our selves. Mr. Rollock, tha^ fam^us Scottish light, professed, that of all
his Stipends he had not hoarded one penny; for that these worldly things were
never a care to him. Calvin, that choice man (not to be named without an
honorable Preface) never studied to enrich himself; for all his goods
(together with his Library, sold at the best rate) were hardly worth Three
hundred Crowns.

Lastly, See Motives to a faithful discharge of the Ministerial calling in
Bowls past. Evangel. lib. 3. c. 9.
To all these things we must add Prayer, for our selves and for our Flocks;
For, besides diligent Reading, Prayer and Temptations are requisite (says
Luther) to make a good Divine. Whilst the hand turns over the Book, let the
eye turn toward God; and never forget to importune his directing, assisting,
emboldening, enlarging spirit, from whom all thy sufficiencies are: And thou will find, that to have Prayed well, is to have Studied well.

THE END.

