

Select Thoughts: OR, CHOICE HELPS FOR A Pious Spirit. A Century of Divine
Breathings for a Ravished Soul, beholding the Excellencies of her Lord Jesus.

By J: HALL, B. N.

N B



London, Printed for Nath: Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1654.

TO THE Christian Reader Grace and Peace.
IT pleased the Alwise and holy GOD, who orders all events to his own glory, to
make use of my late Secession for the producing of diverse, not, I hope
unprofitable Tractates; wherein I much rejoice that my declined Age, even in
that retiredness, might be in any measure serviceable to his Church: Now, I
send these Select Notions after their Fellows; of which, I wish you may find
cause to say with the Wedding-guests at Cana, Thou have reserved the best wine
till now.

The intent of this Labor is to put some good Thoughts (Reader) into thy mind,
which would not otherwise, perhaps have tendered themselves to thee; such, as I
hope may not a little further thee on thy journey to Heaven. And if in my
Laboring thitherward, I shall, through Gods mercy, be a means of forwarding any
soul, but some steps up that steep way, how happy am I?

To which purpose, I know no means more effectual, then those Meditations which
conduce to the animation and vigor of Christian practice: Such I have
propounded to my Self, as most behooveful and necessary; especially for this
Age, into which we are fallen; an Age of more brain then heart; and that has
almost lost Piety in the chase of some litigious Truths. And surely had I known
how better to have placed my hours, I should gladly have changed my task: But,
I must needs say, I have found this employment so useful, and proper, as that I
have looked upon those Polemical Discourses which have been forced from me, as
no better then mere Excursions. I wis, it will be long enough, ere we shall
wrangle our selves into Heaven: It must be true contrition, pure consciences,
holy affections, heavenly dispositions, hearty devotions, sound Regeneration,
Faith working by Love, an humble walking with GOD that shall help us thither;
and whatsoever may tend to the advancing of any of these gracious Works in us,
is worthy to be dear and precious.

Such passages, Reader, if thou shall, according to my hopes, meet with here,
bless GOD with me, and improve them to the best advantage of thy Soul: Thus
shall our gain be mutual, and our account happy in the day of the Lord Jesus:
In whom farewell.

From Higham, near Norwich. Febr. 7. 1647.
Select Thoughts, One Century.
I.
IF miracles be ceased, yet marvails will never cease. There is no creature in
the world, wherein we may not see enough to wonder at; for there is no worm of
the earth, no spire of grass, no leaf, no twig, wherein we may not see the
footsteps of a Deity: The best visible Creature is man; now, what man is he
that can make but an hair, or a straw, much less any sensitive creature; so as
no less then an infinite power is seen in every object that presents it self to
our eyes; if therefore we look only upon the outsides of these bodily
substances, and do not see God in every thing, we are no better then brutish;
making use merely of our sense without the least improvement of our faith, or
our reason: Contrary then to the opinion of those men, who hold that a wise man
should admire nothing, I say, that a man truly wise and good should admire
every thing, or rather that infiniteness of wisdom and omnipotence which shows
it self in every visible object: Lord what a beast am I that I have suffered
mine eyes to be taken up with shapes, and colors and quantities, and have not
looked deeper at thee (with awful adoration, and wonder) in every parcel of thy
great Creation: Henceforth let me see nothing but thee, and look at all visible
things, but as the mere shadows of a glorious omnipotence.

II.
Our affections are then only safe and right, when they are deduced from God,
and have their rise from Heaven; then only can I take comfort of my love, when
I can love my wife, my child, my friend, my self, my pleasures, and whatsoever
contentments in God; thus I may be sure not to offend either in the object, or
measure; no man can in God love whom he should not, nor immoderately love whom
he should: this holy respect does both direct and limit him; and shuts up his
delights in the conscience of a lawful fruition: the like must be said of our
joy, and fear, and grief, and what ever other affection; for we cannot derive
our joy from God, if we place it upon any sinful thing, or if we exceed in the
measure of things allowed; we cannot fetch our fear from Heaven, if it be
cowardly, and desperate, nor our grief, if it be merely worldly and heartless.
And if our affections do begin from above, they will surely end there, closing
up in that God, who is the Author and orderer of them; and such as our
affections are, such will be the whole disposition of the soul, and the whole
carriage of our actions: These are the feet of the soul, and which way the feet
walk, the whole man goes; happy is the man that can be so far the master of
himself, as to entertain no affections but such as he takes upon the rebound
from Heaven.

III.
Whence is this delicate scent in this Rose, and Violet? It is not from the
root, that smells of nothing; not from the stalk, that is as senceless as the
root; not from the earth whence it grows, which contributes no more to these
flowers, then to the grass that grows by them; not from the leaf, not from the
bud before it be disclosed, which yields no more fragrance then the leaf, or
stalk, or root; yet here I now find it; neither is it here by any miraculous
way, but in an ordinary course of nature; for all Violets and Roses of this
kind yield the same redolence; it cannot be, but that it was potentially in
that root, and stem from which the flowers proceed, and there placed, and
thence drawn by that Almighty power which has given these admirable virtues to
several plants, and educes them in his due seasons to these excellent
perfections. It is the same hand that works spiritually in his elect; out of
the soil of the renewed heart, watered with the dew of Heaven, and warmed with
the beams of his Spirit, God can, and in his own season, does bring forth those
sweet odors of Grace, and holy dispositions, which are most pleasing to
himself; and if those excellencies be so closely lodged in their bosoms, that
they do not discover themselves at all times, it should be no more strange to
us, then that this Rose and Violet are not to be found, but in their own
months; it is enough that the same virtue is still in the root, though the
flower be vanished.

IIII.
A man that looks at all things through the consideration of eternity, makes no
more of a man, then of a flower; that lasts some days, he lasts some years; at
their period, both fade: Now, what difference is there to be made betwixt days
and years in the thoughts of an eternal duration? Herein therefore I have a
great advantage of a carnal heart; such a one bounding his narrow conceits with
the present condition, is ready to admire himself, and others, for what they
have or are, and is therefore dejected upon every miscarriage: whereas I behold
my self, or that man, in all his glory, as vanishing; only measuring every
man's felicity by the hopes and interress which he has in a blessed eternity.

V.
When I am dead and forgotten, the world will be as it is, the same successions
and varieties of seasons, the same revolutions of Heaven, the same changes of
Earth and Sea, the like occurrents of natural events, and humane affairs. It is
not in my power to alter the course of things, or to prevent what must be: What
should I do, but quietly take my part of the present, and humbly leave the care
of the future to that all-wise providence, which orders all things (even the
most cross events) according to his most holy and just purposes?

VI.
The Scripture is the Sun, the Church is the Clock, whose hand points us to,
and whose sound tells us the hours of the day; the Sun we know to be sure, and
regularly constant in his motion; the Clock as it may fall out, may go too
fast, or too slow; we are wont to look at, and listen to the Clock to know the
time of the day, but where we find the variation sensible, to believe the Sun
against the Clock, not the Clock against the Sun. As then we would condemn him
of much folly, that should profess to trust the Clock rather then the Sun; so
we cannot but justly tax the miscredulity of those who will rather trust to the
Church then to the Scripture.

VII.
What marvailous high respects has God given to man above all his other
visible Creatures! what an house has he put him into! how gloriously arched,
how richly pavemented! Wherefore serves all the furniture of Heaven and Earth,
but for his use? What delicate provision has that bountiful hand made for his
palate, both of meats and liquors, by Land and Sea? What rich ornaments has he
laid up for him in his wardrobe of earth and waters? and wherefore serves the
various music of Birds, but to please his ear? For, as for the brute
Creatures, all harmony to them is but as silence. Wherefore serves the
excellent variety of Flowers, surpassing Solomon in all his glory, but to
please his eye? mere grass is more acceptable to Beasts. Yea, what Creature but
he is capable to survey Gods wonders in the deep? to contemplate the great
fabric of the Heavens? to observe the glorious bodies, and regular motions of
the Sun, Moon, Stars; and (which exceeds all conceiveable mercies,) who but he
is capable of that celestial Glory, which is within that beautiful
contignation? to be a companion of the blessed Angels, yea to be a limb of the
mystical Body of the eternal Son of God, and to partake with him of his
everlasting and incomprehensible glory? Lord, what is man that thou art thus
mindful of him? and how utterly unworthy are we even of common mercies, if we
return not to our God, more advantage of glory, then those poor creatures that
were made for us, and which cannot in nature be sensible of his favors?

VIII.
How plain is it that all sensitive things are ordered by an instinct from
their Maker? He that gives them being, puts into them their several
dispositions, inclinations, faculties, operations. If we look to Birds; the
Mavis, the Blackbird, the Red-brest have throats tuneable to any note, as we
daily see they may be taught strains utterly varying from their natural tones,
yet they all naturally have the same songs and accents different from each
other, and fully according to their own kind; so as every Mavis has the same
ditty with his fellows: If we mark the building of their nests, each kind
observes its own fashion and materials, some clay, others moss, hair, sticks;
yea if their very motions and restings, they are conform to their own feather,
different from others. If to Beasts, they all untaught observe the fashions of
their several kinds. Galen observes that when he was dissecting a She-goat big
with young, a Kid then ready to be yeaned starts out, and walks up and down the
room, and there being in the same place, set several vessels of oil, honey,
water, milk, the new fallen Kid smells at them all, and refusing the rest falls
to lapping of the milk; whereupon he justly infers, that nature stays not for a
Teacher. Neither is it other in Flies, and all sorts of the meanest vermin,
all Bees build alike, and order the Commonwealth of their hive in one manner;
all Ants keep their own way in their housing, journeys, provisions; all Spiders
do as perfectly and uniformly weave their web, as if they had been Apprentises
to the trade, the same instincts are seen also in the rational Creatures,
although in most cases overruled by their higher faculties.

What an infinite providence then is this we live under, that has distributed
to every creature, as a several form, so several inclinations, qualities,
motions, proper to to their own kind, and different from other; and keeps them
in this constant uniformity, and variety, for the delight and contentment of
man! O God, that I could be capable of enough wondering at thy great works! that
I could be enough humbled under the sense of my own incapacity, that I could
give thee so much more glory, as I find more vileness in my self.

IX.
When I saw my precious watch (now through an unhappy fall grown irregular)
taken asunder, and lying scattered upon the workmans shop-board; so as here lay
a wheel, there the balance, here one gimmer, there another, straight my
ignorance was ready to think, when and how will all these ever piece together
again in their former order? But when the skilful Artisan had taken it a while
in hand, and curiously pined the joints, it now began to return to its wonted
shape, and constant motion, as if it had never been disordered: How could I
choose but see in this, the just emblem of a distempered Church and State?
wherein if all seem disjoynted, and every wheel laid aside by it self, so as an
unknowing beholder would despair of a redress, yet if it shall please the great
Artist of Heaven to put his hand unto it, how soon might it return to an happy
resetlement? Even so, blessed Lord, for thy great mercies sake make up the
breaches of thy Sion, and repair the ruins of thy Jerusalem

X
We are, and we are not, all one man's children: Our bodies once met in one
root, but our minds and dispositions do so differ, as if we had never been of
kin: one man is so gentle and plausible that he would fain please all; another
is so churlish and dogged that he cares not whom he displeases, and hardly can
be well pleased with himself: One so sparing and pinching that he grudges
himself necessaries, another so vainly lavish, that he cares not how he
squanders his estate: one is tenderly pitiful, another mercilesly cruel; one
religiously devout, another wildly profane; one cowardly fearful, another
desperately courageous: one jovially cheerful and lightsome, another sad and
dumpish, even to stupidity: one petulant and wanton, another austerely
continent; one humble and low-conceited of rich indowments, another swollen big
with a little. He did never read men to purpose that is too much troubled with
the harsh and unpleasing contrariety of humors, which he meets with in the
world; and he shall be too unthankful to God, that finding himself better
composed then others, knows not whither to ascribe it; and too neglective of
himself, that finding his own distempered, labors not to rectify it.

XI.
Nature, Law, and Grace divide all the Ages of the world; now as it is in man
(who is a lesser world) that in every day there is a resemblance of his whole
life; the morning is his childehood, the midday his youth, the evening his old
age; so is it in this greater World; the dim break of day was the state of
nature, and this was the nonage of the world, wherein the light of knowledge,
both of humane and divine things was but weak and obscure. The Sun was risen
higher in the state of the Law, but yet not without thick mists and shadows,
till the high-noon of that true Sun of Righteousness, who personally shone
forth to the world; upon whose vertical point began the age of Grace, that
still continues, which is the clear afternoon, and full vigor of the World,
though now in its sensible declination: after this, there shall be no time, but
eternity. These then are they, which both the Prophets and Apostles have styled
the last days; not only in respect of the times that went before them, but in
regard that no time shall follow them: neither have we reason to bogle at the
large latitude of sixteen hundred years; there was neither of the two other
periods of age, but were longer then this: Besides, how ever, childehood and
youth have their fixed terms which they ordinarily pass not, yet the duration
of old age is indefinite: We have in our youth known some gray-heads that have
continued vigorous, till we have lived to match them in the color of their
livery.

And if this be (as it is) the Evening of the World, do we not see much
difference of time in the shutting in of the Light? A Summers Evening, is a
Winters day; but if these were to the Apostles the last days, how can they be
other then in the last hour, yea, the last minute unto us?

Why do we not put our selves into a constant expectation of the end of all
things, and set our selves in a meet posture for the receipt of our returning
Savior?

XII.
It is a feeling and experimental expression that the Apostle gives of a
Christian, 2 Cor. 4. 18.
That he looks not on the things which are seen; not that his eyes are so dim
as old Isaacs, that he cannot discern them, or that his inward senses are so
stupefied, that he cannot judge of their true value: but that, taking an exact
view of these earthly things, he discries so much vanity in them, as that he
finds them not worthy to be looked at with the full bent of his desires; like
as it is not the mere sight of a strange beauty that is forbidden (for a man
may as well look upon a fair face, as upon a good picture) but a settled and
fixed aspect, that feeds the eye, and draws the heart to a sinful
concupiscence: Thus does not the Christian look upon the things that are seen,
as making them the full scope, and aim of his desires and affections: So far he
takes notice of them, as to make his best (that is, lawful and moderate) use of
them; not so, as to make them the chief object of his contemplation, the main
drift of his cares. It is well observed by S. Basil, that as there are two
contrary ways, the broad, and the narrow; so there are two guides, as contrary,
Sense and Faith: Sense presents to us the pleasing delights of this world, on
the one side; on the other, the present afflictions and persecutions that
attend a good profession: Faith lays before us the glorious things of a future
life, and the endless miseries and torments abiding for sinful souls in the
world to come: Now, it is not for every one to deny al credit to his sense,
alluring him with all present, and visible pleasures, and discouraging him with
the terror and pain of present and visible afflictions, and to yield himself
hood-winkt, to be led by Faith, forepromising only better things afar off, and
foreadmonishing him of dangers, future and invisible. Faith only is that
heroical virtue, which makes a man with an holy contempt to overlook all the
pleasing baits of the world, and with a brave courage and fortitude to despise
all the menaces, and painful inflictions of his present fury: This works our
eyes, not to look upon the things which we cannot but see, the present shows of
the world, whether alluring, or terrifying: Had Lot but looked back on Sodom;
the pleasant plain of Sodom, that lay like the Garden of God behind his back,
he had never escaped into the mountain: Had the glorious Protomartyr fixed his
eyes only upon his persecutors, his heart could not but have failed, to see
the fire in their faces, the sparkling of their eyes, the grinding of their
teeth, the bending of their brows, the stopping of their ears, their furious
running upon him, their violent halings and draggings; and lastly, a whole volly
of stones discharged mortally upon him; he had been utterly daunted with such
an impetuosity of death: But he, as not seeing any of this pomp, and
ostentation of horror, looks up steadfastly to Heaven, and there sees (that
which might well make him blind to all other visible objects) the Heavens
open, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God; and upon this sight, he shut
up his eyes, and slept. The true Christian then, has with holy Job, made a
covenant with his eyes, not to look upon, either the cruel insolences of the
raging world with fear and dejectedness, or on the tempting vanities of the
world with amorous glances; but with a sober and constant resolution entertains
the objects of both kinds. Very justly did Tertullian jeer that Heathen
Philosopher, who pulled out his eyes to avoid concupiscence; and can tell him,
that a Christian can hold his eyes, and yet behold Beauty unbewitched; and can
be at once open-eyed to nature, and blind to lust: and what the Apostle said
of the Use, he can practice of the sight of the world, and earthly objects; he
can so behold them, as if he beheld them not. How often have we, in a deep study
fixed our eyes upon that, which we, the while thought not upon, neither
perceived that we saw? So does the Christian to these worldly glories,
pleasures, profits, whiles his mind and affections are on the things above,
Colos. 3. 1, 2.
where Christ sits on the right hand of God. There, Lord, let me behold
those things which cannot yet be seen, but shall, once, in the sight of them
make me blessed: And let me not look on the things that are seen; for the
things that are seen are temporary, but the things which are not seen, are
eternal.

XIII.
There is not more strangeness then significance in that charge of the Apostle,
That we should put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 13. 14.
The soul is (as it were) a body; Gal. 3. 27.
not really and properly so, according to the gross error of Tertullian; but by
way of allusion: This body of the soul, then, may not be naked, but must be
clad; as our first parents were ashamed of their bodily nakedness, (and so
still are all their (not savage) posterity,) so may we of our spiritual. Every
sinner is naked; those rags that he has, are so far from hiding his nakedness,
that they are part of it; his fairest moralities are but glittering sins, and
his sins are his nakedness: Exodus 32. 25.
Aaron had made Israel naked to their shame; not so much in that they were
stripped of their earings, as that they were enwrapped in the sin of idolatry.
No marvel if we run away, and hide us from the presence of God, as our first
parents did, whiles we are guilty to our selves of our Spiritual deformity: As
then we are bodily naked, when we come into the world, so we are spiritually
naked whiles we are of the world; neither can it be either safe, or comely for
us, till we be covered: There is no clothing can fit the soul but the Lord
Jesus Christ; all other robes in the wardrobe of Earth, or Heaven, are too
short, too straight; like those which the scorn of Hanun put upon David's
messengers, reaching but to the hams; for though the soul of man be finite, the
sin of the soul is scarce so; and that sin must be covered, else there can be
no safety for the soul, according to that of the Psalmist: Psalm. 32. 1.
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered: None
therefore but the robes of an infinite Righteousness, can cover the soul so
woefully dressed; none therefore but the Lord Jesus Christ, who is God blessed
for ever, can cover the soul, that it may not appear unrighteous; or can
cleanse the soul that it may not be unrighteous; and cleansed it must be, ere
the Lord Jesus can be put on: We shall wrong his perfect holiness, if we think
we can slip him on, as a case, over our beastly rags: It is with us, as with
Joshua the high Priest; Zech. 3. 4.
The filthy garments must first be taken off, and then the Lord shall say unto
us: Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe
thee with change of raiment.

We put on a garment when we apply it all over to our body; so as that part
which is clothed, appears not, but is defended from the air, and from the eye:
if we have truly put on the Lord Jesus, nothing of ours is seen, but Christ is
all in all, to us; although this application goes yet deeper; for we so put him
on, that we not only put our selves into him, but also put him into our
selves, by a mutual kind of Spiritual incorporation.

We put him on then, upon our Intellectual parts, by knowing him, by believing
on him. ( This is eternal life to know thee, and whom thou have sent, says our
Savior;) and for Faith, no grace does so sensibly apprehend him, and make him
so feelingly ours.

We put him on upon our wills, and affections, when we take pleasure in him,
when we love him, delight in him, and prefer him to our chiefest joy.

Thus do we put him on; as our Lord, in our humble and dutiful subjection; as
our Jesus, in our faithful affiance; as Christ, the anointed of God, to be our
King, in all holy obedience; our Priest, in our willing consecration to him;
our Prophet, in our cheerful readiness to be instructed by him: How happy are
we, if we be thus decked; we prank up these poor carcasses of ours gaily, with
no small expense; and when we have done, the stuff, or the fashion, or both,
wears out to nothing: But, here is a garment that will never be out of fashion;
Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever; yea, the same to us:
here, we put him on in Grace, there, in eternal Glory.

The Israelites were forty years in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 16.
yet their shoes not worn, their apparel not impaired; but this attire shall
not only hold good in the time of our wandering in this desert, but after we
are come into the Canaan of glory, and is best at last. Wherefore do we put on
our choicest attire on some high days, but to testify the cheerfulness of our
hearts: Eccles. 9. 7, 8.
Let thy garment be white, says the Preacher, for now God accepts thy works:
Mephibosheth changed not his raiment since David went out, as one that would
have the sorrow of his heart seen in the neglect of his clothes; although many
a one under a gay coat has an heavy heart, but this attire does not only
testify, but make cheerfulness in the soul; Thou have given me more joy of
heart, Psalm. 4. 7.
then they had in the time that their corn and their wine increased; and, In
thy presence is the fullness of joy; what can this apparel of ours do but keep
us from a blast, or a shower? it is so far from safeguarding the soul, that it
many times wounds it, and that to the death. It was one of the main quarrels
against the rich glutton, that he was every day clothed in purple, and byss:
How many souls shall once wish that their bodies had been ever either naked,
Luke 16. 19.
or clad with haircloth? But this array, as it is infinitely rich and beautiful,
so it is as surely defensative of the soul; and is no less then armor of proof
against all assaults, Ephesians. 6.
all miseries.

What a deal of cost and pains do we bestow upon these wretched bodies of ours,
only to make them pleasing and lovely to the eye of some beholders, as
miserable, perhaps, as our selves; and yet when we have all done, we are (it
may be) no better then hard-favord, and unhandsome creatures, and contemptible
in those eyes from whom we desired most approbation; Jezebel, for all her
licking, is cast out of the window, and trodden to dirt in the streets: But this
robe we can not wear, and not be amiable in the eyes of the holiest: Cant. 1.
15.
Behold thou art fair, my beloved; behold thou art fair, and there is no spot
in thee: Lo, in this case, the apparel makes the man; neither is it in the
power of any spiritual deformity, to make us other then lovely, in the sight of
our God, whiles we have Christ put on upon us. What ever therefore become of
the outward man, let it be my care that my soul be vested with my Lord Jesus;
so shall I be sure, to be safe, rich, amiable here, and hereafter glorious.

It was part of our Saviors charge upon the mount, Take no care what to put
on; but it must be the main care of our lives, how to put on Christ upon our
souls: This is the prime stole wherewith the father of the Prodigal, graceth
his returned son; the heaven of heavens is not worth such another; when I have
once got this on my back, I shall say, though in a contrary sense, with the
Spouse in the Canticles: Cant. 5. 3.
I have put on my coat, how shall I put it off? I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them?

XIIII.
With how devout passion does the Psalmist call to all the works of the
Almighty to praise him; as well supposing, that every creature (even those that
have no tongues to speak for themselves) yet have a tongue to praise their
Maker; Psalm. 19. 1.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work; Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge:
There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard; neither is the
very earth defective in this duty: Every plant says, look on me, and
acknowledge, the life, color, form, smell, fruit, force that I have from the
power of my Creator: every worm and fly says, look on me, and give God the
praise of my living, sense, and motion: every bird says; hear me, and praise
that God who has given me these various feathers, and taught me these several
notes: every beast, whiles he bellows, bleats, brays, barks, roars, says, It
is God that has given me this shape, this sound; yea the very mute fishes, are
in their very silence, vocal, in magnifying the infinite wisdom and power of
him that made them, and placed them in those watery habitations; Let every
thing that has breath says the Psalmist, Psa. ult. ult.
praise the Lord. Yea the very winds whistle, and the sea roars out the praise
of the Almighty, who both raises, and allays them at pleasure; what a shame
were it for man, to whom alone God has given an understanding heart, a nimble
tongue, and articulate language, wherein he can express his rational thoughts,
to be wanting to this so universal devotion? and to be as insensible of the
great works of God, as the ground that he treads upon? If others shall be thus
unthankfully dumb, Yet praise thou the Lord, Psalm. 103. 1. 2.
O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name; Psa. 146. 1, 2.
whiles I live will I praise the Lord; I will sing praises to my God whilst I
have any being. But alas Lord thou know, I cannot so much as will to praise
thee, without thee; do thou fill my heart with holy desires, and my mouth with
songs of thanksgiving.

XV.
It may seem a strange errand upon which our Savior tells us he came into the
world; Luke 12. 49.
I am come to send fire on the earth: When the two fervent Disciples would have
had fire sent down from Heaven upon but a Samaritan Village, our Savior
rebuked them, and told them they knew not of what spirit they were; yet here,
he makes it his own business, to send fire on the earth: Alas (may we think) we
have fire too much already; how happy were it rather, if the fire which is
kindled in the world, were well quenched; and what is the main drift of the
Prince of darkness but fire? If not to send fire down from Heaven, upon the
inhabitants of the earth; yet, to send the inhabitants of the earth down to the
fire of hell? As then we find diverse kinds of material fire, Celestial,
Elementary, Domestique, Artificial, Natural; so there is no less variety of
spiritual fires: It was in fiery, cloven, tongues, wherein the Holy Ghost
descended upon the Apostles, Acts 2.
in their Pentecost; Joh. 16. 7.
and even this fire did our Savior come to send down on the earth: Thy word
was in me as fire, Jer. 5. 14.
says the Prophet; and did not our hearts burn within us (said the two
Disciples, Luke 23. 32.
in their walk to Emaus) whiles he talked with us; This fire he also came to
send: Heavenly Love, and holy Zeal are fire; Cant. 8 7.
Many waters cannot quench love. My zeal has consumed me, Psalm. 119. 139.
says the Psalmist: and these fires our Savior came to send into the hearts
of men; holy thoughts are no other then the beams of celestial fire, Psalm. 39 4.
My heart was hot within me; whiles I was musing, the fire burned, and these,
we know he sends: Psalm. 104. 4.
He makes his Angels spirits, Heb. 1. 7.
and his ministers a flame of fire: These he sends forth to the earth to
minister for them that shall be heirs of of salvation: Heb. 1. 14.
Besides these, afflictions and persecutions are fire: We have passed through
fire and water: 1 Pet. 4. 12.
Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you,
as if some strange thing had happened to you: and even these are of his
sending; Lament. 4. 11.
The Lord has kindled a fire in Zion, and it has devoured the foundations
thereof. There is no evil in the city, but the Lord has done it: The Lord has
done that which he had devised, Lam. 2. 17.
he has thrown down, and not pitied.

But this expression of our Savior goes yet deeper, and alludes to the effect
of Separation, which follows upon the fire of our trial: When the lump of Oar
is put into the furnace, the fire tryes the pure metal from the dross, and
makes an actual division of the one from the other; so does Christ by his Word,
and Spirit; even he that is the Prince and God of Peace, comes to set division
in the world. Surely, there are holy quarrels worthy of his engagement; for, as
the flesh lusts and warreth against the spirit, so the spirit fights
against the flesh; and this duel may well beseem God for the Author, and the
Son of God for the setter of it: these second blows make an happy fray.

Nothing is more properly compared then discord to fire; this, Judges 9. 20.
Christ (the first thing he does) sets in every heart: there is all quietness,
secure ease, and self-contentment in the soul, till Christ come there: How
should it be other, when Satan sways all without resistance? but when once
Christ offers to enter, there are straight civil wars in the soul betwixt the
old man, and the new; and it fares with the heart, as with an house divided in
it self, wherein the husband and the wife are at variance; nothing is to be
heard, but unquiet janglings, open brawlings, secret opposition; the household
takes part, and professes a mutual vexation: This Spiritual self-division,
where ever it is, though it be troublesome, yet it is cordial; it puts the soul
into the state of Rebecca^s womb; which barren, yielded no pain; but when an
Esau and Jacob were conceived, and struggling within, yielded for the time, no
ease; yet this was that which caused her just joy, That she had not so much
children, as nations in her womb; even so the trouble of this inward conflict
is abundantly requited with the joy of this assurance, That now Christ is come
into our soul, and is working his own desired ends, in, and upon us. Let vain
and sensual hearts please themselves in their inward peace and calmness; there
cannot be a greater sign of gracelesness and disfavor of God; When they shall
say Peace, Peace, then shall come upon them sudden destruction: The old word
was, No safety in War; here it is contrary, It is this intestine war of the
heart, with fire and sword to our corruptions, that must bring us true rest for
the present, and hereafter eternal peace and happiness. Now, Lord, since it is
thy desire that this fire should be kindled, kindle thou and inflame my heart
with a fervent desire, and endeavor that this thy desire may be accomplished in
me: Set me at war with my self, that I may be at peace with thee.

XVI.
In all that we have to do with God, he justly requires and expects from us, an
awful disposition of heart toward his infiniteness; hereupon it was that he
delivered his Law in thunder, fire, smoke, and all dreadful magnificence; And
when upon the same day, he would send down his Spirit, for the propagation of
the Gospel, it was done with an astonishing Majesty; with a sound from Heaven,
as of a rushing mighty wind, and with the apparition of cloven and fiery
tongues: Acts 2. 2, 12.
And as it was thus in the descent of the Holy Ghost in the miraculous gifts;
so it is in the sanctifying Graces: Seldom ever does God by them seize upon the
heart, but with a vehement concussion going before: That of St Paul's
conversion, was extraordinary and miraculous, but in some degree it is thus, in
every soul; We are struck down first, and are made sensible of our spiritual
blindness, ere our full call be accomplished; as it was with Elijah in the
Mount of Horeb, There came first a strong wind, that tore the Rocks, and
Mountains, and after that, an earthquake, then a fire, before the still small
voice; so it is usually in our breasts, ere the comfortable voice of Gods Spirit
speak to our hearts, there must be some blustrings, and flashes of the Law: It
is our honor, and his favor, that we are allowed to love God; it is our duty to
fear him: We may be too familiar in our love, we cannot be too awful in our
fear.

XVII.
All valuations of these outward things are arbitrary, according to the opinion
of their pleasure, or their rarity, or the necessity of their use: Did not men's
minds set a price upon metals, what were they better then some other entrails
of the earth, or one better then other? If by public law the mint were
ordained to be only supplied by our stanneries, how currantly would they pass
for more precious then silver mines? To an Indian, a bracelet of worthless
Beads is estimated above his Gold; an hungry Esau values a mess of pottage
above his birthright: In the siege of Samaria an Asses head was sold for
fourscore pieces of silver; and a Kab of Doves dung for five pieces: 2 Kings 6.
25.
We have heard that those of Angola have valued a Dog at the price of many
slaves. In all these earthly commodities, the market rises, and falls according
to conceit, and occasion; neither is there any intrinsecal, and settled worth in
any of them; only Spiritual things, as Virtue and Grace are good in
themselves; and so carry their infinite value in them, that they make their
owner absolutely rich, and happy: When therefore I see a rich man hugging his
bags, and admiring his wealth, I look upon that man with pity, as knowing the
poorness of that pelf wherein he places his felicity; neither can I behold him
with other eyes, then those, wherewith, a discreet European sees a savage
Indian priding himself in those trifles, which our children have learned to
contemn: On the other side when I see a man rich in the endowments of mind,
well-fraught with knowledge, eminent in goodness, and truly gracious, I shall
rise up to that man (how homely so ever his outside be) as the most precious
and excellent piece which this world can afford.

XVIII.
Should I but see an Angel, I should look (with Manoah) to dye no other death
then the sight of that glory; and yet even that Angel is fain to hide his face,
as not able to behold the infinite Majesty of God his Creator: When Moses did
but talk with God in the Mount, for forty days, his face did so shine, that
the Israelites could not look upon the luster of his countenance, even the very
presence of the Divine Majesty not only has, but communicates glory: Lord,
that I could see but some glimpse of the reflection of those glorious beams of
thine upon my soul; how happy should I be in this vision, whose next degree is
perfectly beatifical.

XIX.
As good, so evil is apt to be communicative of it self; and this so much more,
as it meets with subjects more capable of evil then good; the breath of a
plague-sick man taints the air round about him; yea, the very sight of blear
eyes infects the sound; and one yawning mouth stretches many jaws: How many
have we known, that have been innocent in their retiredness, miserably debaucht
with lewd conversation? Next to being good, is, to consort with the virtuous;
It is the most merciful improvement of an holy power to separate the precious
from the vile; it is the highest praise of a constant goodness, for a Lot to be
righteous in the midst of Sodom.

XX.
We are all apt to put off the blame of our miscarriages from our selves: Even
in paradise we did so: It was the woman, says Adam, it was the Serpent, says
the woman: How have we heard fond gamesters cast the blame of their ill luck
upon the standers by, which intermedled nothing but by a silent eyesight: So
the idolatrous Pagans of old, though flagitiously wicked, yet could impute
their public judgments to none but the Christians, whose only innocence was
their protection from utter ruin; So foolishly partial does our self-love
render us to our own demerits, that all are guilty save our selves: Yea, rather
then we will want shifts, our very stars shall be blamed; which are no more
accessory to our harms, then our eyes are to the Eclipses of their most eminent
Lights. As on the contrary, we are ready to arrogate unto our selves those
blessings, which the mere bounty of Divine Providence has cast upon us;
whereto we could not contribute so much as an hand to receive them, but by the
mercy of the giver: It cannot be well with me, till I have learned to correct
this palpable injustice in both; challenging to my self all my errors, and
guilt of sufferings, and yielding to God the praise his own free and gracious
beneficence.

XXI.
How profitable and beneficial a thing is affliction; especially to some
dispositions more then other: I see some trees that will not thrive, unless
their roots be laid bare; unless (besides pruning) their bodies be gashed and
sliced; others, that are too luxuriant, except diverse of their blossoms be
seasonably pulld off, yield nothing: I see too rank corn, if it be not timely
eaten down, may yield something to the barn, but little to the granary: I see
some full bodies, that can enjoy no health without strong evacuations,
blood-lettings, fontinels; such is the condition of our spiritual part: It is a
rare soul that can be kept in any constant order without these smarting
remedies; I confess mine cannot: How wild had I run, if the rod had not been
over me? Every man can say he thanks God for ease; for me, I bless God for my
troubles.

XXII.
When I consider what an insensible Atome man is, in comparison of the whole
body of the Earth; and what a mere Center-point the Earth is, in comparison of
the vast circumference of Heaven; and what an almost-infinite distance there is
betwixt this point of Earth, and that large circle of the Firmament; and
therewithal think of the innumerable number, and immense greatness of those
heavenly Luminaries: I cannot but apprehend how improbable it is, that those
Stars should, at such a distance, distinguish betwixt one man, and another;
betwixt one limb of the same body, and another; betwixt one spot of Earth, and
another; and in so great a mixture, and confusion of influences, should give
any distinct intimation of particular events in nature; and much more of mere
contingencies of arbitrary affairs. As for the Moon, by reason of her vicinity
to the Earth, and sensible predominance over moisture; and for the Sun, the
great magazin of Light and Heat, I acknowledge their powerful (but unpartial)
operations upon this whole globe of Earth and Waters, and every part of it, not
without just wonder and astonishment; the other Stars may have their several
virtues and effects, but their marvelous remoteness, and my undiscernable
nothingness, may seem to forbid any certain intelligence of their distinct
workings upon me: But whether these glorious Lights give, or take any notice of
such an imperceptible mite as I; sure I am, there is great reason I should take
notice of them; of their beauteous luster, of their wonderful magnitude, of
their regular motion; and be transported with admiration of that omnipotent
power, wisdom, providence, which created this goodly and mighty host of Heaven,
and guides them in their constant march, without the least deviation from their
first setting out, to the last moment of their final conflagration. O the
narrowness of my wretched heart, that affords not room enough for wonder at
that which I cannot but see!

XXIII.
It becomes not us to be niggardly where our Savior intends bounty: How glad
should we be rather to ampliate the benefit of the great Work of our Redeemer?
but surely, I cannot see upon what warrant that favor is grounded, that
enlarges the fruit of Christ's redemption, to the Angels: the good needed it
not, the evil were not capable of it; only mankind was captived, and
redeemable by that invaluable ransom.

Doubtless those blessed Spirits have their part in the joy and gratulation of
the infinite mercy of our deliverance; for if they rejoice at the conversion of
one sinner, what triumph do we think there is in Heaven at the Universal
Redemption of all believers? The propriety of this favor has reason to engage
us so much the more: Lord, thy mercy is free, and boundless; thou would pass
by the lapsed Angels, and leave them in their sin, and their chains; and only
rescue miserable man out of their Hell. O for an heart that might be in some
measure answerable to so infinite mercy; and that might be no less captived to
thy love, then it is freed by thy Redemption.

XXIIII.
Men do commonly wrong themselves with a groundless expectation of good;
forepromising to themselves all fair terms in their proceedings, and all happy
success in the issue; boding nothing to themselves but what they wish; even the
man after Gods own heart could say, In my prosperity I said, Psalm. 30. 6.
tush, I shall never be removed; wherein their misreckoning makes their
disappointment so much the more grievous: Had not David made such account of
the strength and stability of his Mountain, it could not have so much troubled
him to have it levelled with the Plain; on the contrary, the evils which we
look for, fall so much the less heavily, by how much we are fore-prepared for
their entertainment; what ever by-accidents I may meet withal besides, I have
two fixed matches that I must inevitably encounter with, Age, and Death; the
one is attended with many inconveniences, the other with much horror: let me
not flatter my self with hopes of jollity, and ease. My comforts for Heaven
shall (I trust) never fail me; but for the present world, it shall be well for
me, if I can without too much difficulty scramble out of the necessary miseries
of life; and without too much sorrow crawl to my grave.

XXV.
Heaven has many tongues that talk of it, more eyes to behold it, but few
hearts that rightly affect it: Ask any Christian (especially) whom ye shall
meet with; he will tell you, thither he shapes his course; there he has pitched
his hopes, and would think himself highly wronged by that man, who should make
doubt of either his interest or speed: But, if we shall cast our eyes upon the
lives of men, or they reflect their eyes upon their own bosoms, the hypocrisy
will too palpably discover it self: for surely, which way so ever the faces
look, the hands and feet of the most men move hell-ward: If malice, fraud,
cruelty, oppression, injustice, excess, uncleanness, pride, contention,
covetousness, lies, heresies, blasphemies, disobedience be the way thither, woe
is me, how many walk in that wide and open road to destruction? but even there
where the heart pretends to innocence, let a man strictly examine his own
affections, he shall find them so deeply earthed, that he shall be forced to
confess his claim to Heaven is but fashionable: Ask thy self but this one
question, O man, whatsoever thou art, ask it seriously; Might I this very hour
go to Heaven, am I willing and desirous to make a present change of this life
for a better? and tell me sincerely, what answer thou receivest from thine own
heart. Thy judgment cannot but tell thee that the place is a thousand times
better; that the condition would be infinitely advantageous, to exchange
baseness for glory, misery for blessedness, time for eternity, a living death,
for a life immortal: If thou do now fumble, and shuffle, and demur upon the
resolution, be convinced of thine own worldliness, and infidelity; and know,
that if thy heart had as much of Heaven as thy tongue, thou could not but say
with the chosen vessel, Phil. 1. 23.
I desire to depart hence, and to be with Christ, which is far better.

XXVI.
There is no earthly pleasure whereof we shall not soon grow weary; and be as
willing to intermit, as ever we were to entertain it; and if the use of it
continue, the very frequency makes it disregarded; so as that which at first we
esteemed rare and precious, is now looked upon as common and despicable; and if
it be such, as that our impetuous affection is too much transported with a
present fruition, we are so much the more distempered in the loss: on the
contrary, those painful yokes, which at the first imposing seemed
insupportable, grow tolerable by custom and long acquaintance; so as I know not
how it comes to pass, that time has a contrary power, both to aggravate, and
lighten evils: those pleasures are only worthy to carry our hearts, which are
measured by no less then eternity; and those pains most justly formidable which
know neither end, nor remission.

XXVII.
The nearer our Savior drew to his glory, the more humility he expressed: His
followers, Joh. 13. 16.
were first his servants, Joh. 15. 8.
and he their Master; Joh. 15. 14.
then his disciples and he their Teacher; soon after they were his friends, and
he theirs; straightways after his resurrection, and entrance into an immortal
condition, they were his brethren; Joh. 20. 17.
Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father.
Lastly, they are incorporated into him, and made partakers of his glory, Joh.
17. 21, 22, 23.
That they also may be one with us, says he, I in them, and thou in me: that
they may be made perfect in one; and the glory which thou gave me, I have
given them. O Savior, was this done for the depressing of thy self, or for the
exaltation of us; or rather for both? how could thou more depress thy self,
then thus to match thy self with us poor wretched creatures? how could thou
more exalt us, then to raise us unto this entireness with thee the
All-glorious, and eternal Son of God? how should we learn of thee to improve
our highest advancement to our deepest humility, and so to regard each other,
that when we are greatest, we should be least?

XXVIII.
How apt we are to misconstrue the Spirit of God, to our own disadvantage?
whiles the blessed Apostle bids us to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling; he does not bid us to work it out with doubt and distrust: It is the
Psalmists charge, Psalm. 2.
that we should serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice in him with trembling; so
as there is a fear without diffidence, and a trembling that may consist with
joy; trembling is an effect of fear, but this fear which we must affect is
reverential, not slavish, not distrustful: Indeed, when we look upon our
selves, and consider our own frailties and corruptions, and Gods infinite
justice, we have too just cause of doubt and dejection, yea (were it not for
better helps) of utter despair; but when we cast up our eyes to the power of
him that has undertaken for us, and the faithfulness of him that has
promised; and the sure mercies of him that has begun his good work in us, we
can fear with confidence, and rejoice in our trembling: For what are our sins
to his mercies, our unworthiness to his infinite merits, our weaknesses to his
omnipotence! I will therefore so distrust my self, that I will be steadfastly
confident in the God of my salvation; I will so tremble before the glorious
Majesty of my God, that I may not abate of the joy of his never-failing mercy.

XXIX.
What a large and open hand has our God? how infinitely does his bounty
transcend not the practice only, but the admiration of man? We think it well
if upon often asking we can receive small favors: if after long delay, we can
be gratified with a condescent; and if we have received one courtesy, that is a
bar to a second; whereas our munificent God gives us not only what we ask, but
what we ask not; and therefore before we ask: yea, it is he that gives us to
ask, neither could we so much as crave good things, if he did not put into us
those holy desires; yea, he not only gives us blessings, before we ask; but he
gives us the best things, a right to eternal glory, before we are at all, yea,
before the world was; and as he prevents us in time, so he exceeds our thoughts
in measure, giving us more then we ask: Rachel would have a Son; God gives her
two: Abraham sues that Ishmael may live; God gives him to prosper and to be the
father of many Princes: Yet more, he gives us what we cannot ask. The dumb
Demoniack could not sue for himself; his very silence was vocal, and receives
what he would, and could not request: yea lastly, which is the great
improvement of his mercy, he gives us against our asking; our ignorance sues
against our selves, requiring hurtful things, he will not suffer our hearts and
tongues to wrong us; but withholds what we unfitly crave, and gives us what we
should, and do not crave; as the fond child cries to his father for a knife;
he reaches him a spoon that may feed, and not hurt him. O the Ocean of divine
bounty, boundless, bottomless; O our wretched unworthiness, if we be either
niggardly to our selves in not asking blessings, or unthankful to our God in
not acknowledging them!

XXX.
Infidelity and faith look both through the same perspective glass, but at
contrary ends: Infidelity looks through the wrong end of the glass, and
therefore sees those objects which are near, a far off; and makes great things
little; diminishing the greatest spiritual blessings; and removing far from us,
threatened evils: Faith looks at the right end, and brings the blessings that
are far off in time, close to our eye; and multiplies Gods mercies which in a
distance lost their greatness: Thus the Father of the faithful saw his seed
possessed of the promised land, when as yet he had no seed, nor was likely to
have any; when the seed which he should have, should not enjoy it till after
four hundred years; thus that good Patriark saw Christ's day, and rejoiced: Thus
our first parent comforted himself after his ejection out of paradise, with the
foresight of that blessed seed of the woman, which should be exhibited almost
four thousand years after: still, and ever faith is like it self; what use were
there of that grace, if it did not fetch home to my eye things future, and
invisible?

That this dissolved body shall be raised out of the dust, and enlived with
this very soul wherewith it is now animated; and both of them put into a
condition eternally glorious, is as clearly represented to my soul in this
glass, as if it were already done. Faithful is he that has promised, which
will also do it.

XXXI.
Who can think other then with scorn of that base and unworthy conceit which
has been entertained by some, that our Savior lived here on earth upon alms?
He that vouchsafed to take upon him the shape of a servant, would have hated to
take upon him the trade of a beggar: Service is a lawful calling; beggary not
so: he that gave life to all creatures, could take a maintenance from them
without asking: he that did command the fish to bring the tribute money for
himself and his disciples, and could multiply a few loaves and fishes for the
relief of thousands; could rather raise a sustenance to himself, and his, then
beg it: But here was neither need, nor cause; even ordinary means failed not;
many wealthy followers, who had received cures and miraculous deliverances
(besides heavenly doctrine) from him, Luke 8. 2.
ministered to him of their substance: neither was this out of charity, but out
of duty; in the charge which he gave to his disciples (when he sent them by
payrs to preach abroad) he tells them the laborer is worthy of his wages; and
can we think this rule does not much more hold concerning himself? had not
himself and his family been furnished with a meet stock raised from hence; what
purse was it which Judas bore? and how could he be a theif in his office, if
his bags were empty? He therefore that could say, It is a more blessed thing to
give, then to receive; certainly would not choose (when it was in his power)
rather to receive then give: The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof;
and he distributes it as he pleases, amongst the children of men: For me, I
hope I shall have the grace to be content with whatsoever share shall fall to
my lot; but my prayer shall be that I may beg of none but God.

XXXII.
What a madness it is in us to presume, on our interest in Gods favor, for the
securing of our sinfulness from judgment? The Angels were deeper in it then we
mortals can ever hope to be, in these houses of clay; yet long since are ugly
Devils; and they which enjoyed the liberty of the glorious Heavens, are now
reserved in everlasting chains of darkness; And if we look down upon earth,
what darling had God in the world but Israel? This was his first born, his lot,
his inheritance; of whom he said, Here I have a delight to dwell. And now,
where is it? O the woeful desolations of that select people! What is it to tell
of the suffossion of her vineyards? Psa. 80. 13.
vastation of her tents? Jer. 4. 20.
the devouring of her land? Esa. 1. 7.
demolition of walls? Psa. 89. 40.
breaking down Altars? Esa. 27. 11.
burning of Cities? Esa. 13. 16.
spoiling of houses? dashing in pieces their children, ravishing their wives,
Psa. 78. 84.
killing of their Priests, eating of their own children of but a span long,
Lam. 2. 26.
and a thousand such woeful symptoms of war: the Psalmist has said a word for
all (in a just, but contrary sense) Destructions are come to a perpetual end;
what destruction can be more, when there is no Israel? How is that wretched
nation vanished no man knows whither! so as it was Jezebels curse that nothing
was left, whereof it could be said, this was Jezebel, So there is not one piece
of a man left in all the world, of whom we can say; This was of one of the
tribes of Israel: as for those famous Churches, which were, (since that)
honored with the preaching, and pens of the blessed Apostles, where are they
now to be looked for, but amongst the rubbish of cursed Mahumetism? O that we
could not be high-minded, but fear.

XXXIII.
What a woeful conversion is here? The sting of death is sin; and the sting of
sin is death; both meet in man, to make him perfectly miserable; Death could
not have stung us; no, could not have been at all, if it had not been for sin:
And sin, though in it self extremely heinous yet were not so dreadful, and
horrible, if it were not attended with death: How do we owe our selves to the
mercy of a Savior, that has freed us from the evil of both; having pulled out
the sting of death which is sin, that it cannot hurt us; and having taken such
order with the sting of sin, which is death, that in stead of hurting, it shall
turn beneficial to us: Lord, into what a safe condition have thou put us? If
neither sin, nor death can hurt us, what should we fear?

XXXIV.
How unjustly has the presumption of blasphemous cavillers been wont to cast
the envy of their condemnation merely upon the absolute will of an unrespective
power, as if the damnation of the creature were only of a supreme will, not
of a just merit; the very name of Justice convinces them; a punitive Justice
cannot but suppose an offense: It is not for us to rack the brains, and strain
the heart strings of plain honest Christians with the subtilties of
distinctions, of a negative, and positive reprobation, of causes and
consequences; truths meet for the Schools: It is enough that all Christian
Divines; the Synods both of Dort and Trent agree in this truth; that never man
is, was, can be miserable but for sin, yea, for his own sin; The Prophet tells
us so in terms, Lam. 3. 39.
Why is the living man sorrowful, man suffers for his sin: Nothing can be
more true then that of Bildad the Shuhite, Job. 8. 20.
Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man: thy perdition is of thy self, O
Israel. It is no less then rank blasphemy to make God the author of sin: Psa.
5. 4.
Thou art the God that have no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any evil
dwell with thee, says the Psalmist; our sin is our own, and the wages of sin is
death; he that does the work earns the wages; so then the righteous God is
cleared both of our sin, and our death; only his justice pays us what we will
needs deserve; Ezekiel. 18. 23.
Have I any pleasure at all (says he) that the wicked should die, and not that
he should return from his ways and live? wherefore return yea and live. What a
wretched thing is a willful sinner that will needs be guilty of his own death?
Nothing is more odious amongst men, then for a man to be a felon of himself;
besides the forfeiture of his estate, Christian burial is denied him, and he is
cast forth into the highway, with a stake pitched through his body, so as every
passenger that sees that woeful monument is ready to say: There lies the
carcass, but where is the soul?

But so much more heinous is the self-felony of a wilful sinner, because it is
immediately acted upon the soul; and carries him with pleasure in the ways of an
eternal death. Psalm. 19. 12, 13.
O Lord, cleanse thou me from my secret faults; keep thy servant also from
presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion over me.

XXXV.
We are wont to say, That we ought to give even the Devil his due; and surely,
it is possible for us to wrong that malignant spirit, in casting upon him those
evils which are not properly his: It is true, that he is the tempter; and both
injects evil motions, and draws them forth into act: but yet, all ill is not
immediately his; we have enough besides, of our own: Jam. 1. 14, 15.
Every man, says St. James, is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust,
and enticed; then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin when
it is finished brings forth death; Lo, both the lust, and the seducement are
our own; the sin is ours, the death ours: There are indeed diabolical
suggestions which are immediately cast into us by that wicked one; but there are
carnal tentations that are raised out of our own corrupt nature; these need not
his immediate hand; he was the maine agent in our depravation; but being once
depraved we can act evil of our selves: And if Satan be the father of sin, our
will is the mother; and sin is the cursed issue of both: He could not make our
sin without our selves; we concur to our own undoing: It was the charge of the
Apostle, That we should not give place to the Devil; Lo, he could not take it,
unless we gave it; our will betrays us to his tyranny; in vain shall we cry out
of the malice and fraud of wicked spirits, whiles we nourish their accomplices in
our bosoms.

XXXVI.
I cannot but think with what unspeakable joy old Simeon dyed, when, after long
waiting for the consolation of Israel, he had now seen, the Lords Christ; when
I hear him say, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according
to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation; Methinks I should see his
soul ready to fly out of his mouth in an heavenly ravishment; and even then
upon its wing toward its glory; for now his eyes saw, and his arms embraced,
in Gods salvation, his own; in Isreal's glory, his own: How gladly does he now
see death, when he has the Lord of life in his bosom? or how can he wish to
close up his eyes with any other object? yet when I have seriously considered
it, I cannot see wherein our condition comes short of his: He saw the child
Jesus but in his swathing-bands, when he was but now entering upon the great
work of our redemption; we see him, after the full accomplishment of it,
gloriously triumphing in Heaven: He saw him but buckling on his armor, and
entering into the lists; we see him victorious. Who is this that comes from
Edom with dyed garments from Bozra; Esa. 63. 1.
this that is glorious in his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his
strength, mighty to save? He could only say: Esa. 9. 6.
To us a child is born, to us a son is given: We can say, Thou have ascended
on high, thou have led captivity captive, Psa. 68. 18.
thou have received gifts for men: It is true, the difference is, he saw his
Savior with bodily eyes, we with mental; but the eyes of our Faith are no less
sure and unfailing, then those of Sense: Lord, why should not I, whose eyes
have no less seen thy salvation, say, Now let thy servant depart, not in peace
only, but in a joyful sense of my instant glory.

XXXVII.
When I think on my Savior in his agony, and on his cross, my soul is so
clouded with sorrow, as if it would never be clear again: those bloody drops,
and those dreadful ejulations (methinks) should be past all reach of comfort:
but when I see his happy eluctation out of these pangs, and hear him cheerfully
rendering his spirit into the hands of his Father; when I find him trampling
upon his grave, attended with glorious Angels, and ascending in the chariot of
a cloud to his Heaven; I am so elevated with joy, as that I seem to have
forgotten there was ever any cause of grief in those sufferings. I could be
passionate to think, O Savior, of thy bitter and and ignominious death, and
most of all, of thy vehement struglings with thy fathers wrath for my sake, but
thy conquest and glory takes me off, and calls me to Hallelujahs of joy and
triumph; Blessing, Revel. 5. 13.
honor, glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the
Lamb for ever and ever.

XXXVIII.
It is not hard to observe that the more holy any person is, the more he is
afflicted with others sin: Lot vexed his righteous soul with the unclean
conversation of the Sodomites; David's eyes gush't out rivers of water because
men kept not the Law; Those that can look with dry and undispleased eyes upon
another sin, never truly mourned for their own: Had they abhorred sin, as sin,
the offense of a God would have been grievous to them in whomsoever: It is a
godless heart that does not find it self concerned in Gods quarrel; and that
can laugh at that, which the God of Heaven frowns at; my soul is nearest to me,
my sorrow therefore for my sin must begin at home, but it may not rest there;
from thence it shall diffuse it self all the world over: 2 Cor. 11. 19.
Who is offended, and I burn not? who offends, and I weep not?

XXXIX.
The world little considers the good advantage that is made of sins: surely the
whole Church of God has reason to bless God for Thomas his unbelief, not in
the act, which was odious (after so good assurances) but in the issue his doubt
proves our evidence; and his confession (after his touch had convinced him) was
more noble, then his incredulity was shameful. All his attendance upon Christ
had not taught him so much divinity, as this one touch: Often had he said, my
Lord, but never my God, till now: Even Peter's confession (though rewarded with
the change of his name) came short of this: The flame that is beaten down by
the blast of the bellows, rises higher then otherwise it would; and the spring
water that runs level in the Plain, yet if it fall low, it will therefore rise,
high; the shaken tree roots the deeper: Not that we should sin that grace may
abound, God forbid; he can never hope to be good that will be therefore ill,
that he may be the better: but that our holy zeal should labor to improve our
miscarriages to our spiritual gain, and the greater glory of that Majesty whom
we have offended: To be bettered by grace it is no mastery; but to raise more
holiness out of sin, is a noble imitation of that holy God, who brings light
out of darkness, life out of death.

XL.
Every man best knows his own complaints, we look upon the outsides of many,
whom we think happy; who in the mean time are secretly wrung with the inward
sense of their own concealed sorrows, and under a smooth and calm countenance
smother many a tempest in their bosom. There are those, whose faces smile,
whiles their conscience gripes them closely within; There are those that can
dissemble their poverty, and domestic vexations, reserving their sighs till
their back be turned; that can pick their teeth abroad, when they are fasting,
and hungry at home: and many a one forces a song when his heart is heavy: No
doubt Naomi made many a short meal after her return to Bethlehem, yet did not
whine to her great kindred in a bemoaning of her want: And good Hannah bit in
many a grief, which her insulting rival might not see: On the contrary, there
are many whom we pity as miserable, that laugh in their sleeve, and applaud
themselves in their secret felicity; and would be very loath to exchange
conditions with those that commiserate them. A ragged Cynick likes himself at
least as well as a great Alexander: The mortifyed Christian that knows both
worlds, looks with a kind of contented scorn upon the proud gallant, that
contemns him; as feeling that heaven within him, which the other is not capable
to believe.

It is no judging of men's real estate by their semblance; nor valuing others
worth by our own rate: And for our selves, if we have once laid sure grounds of
our own inward contentment and happiness, it matters not greatly if we be
mis-known of the world.

XLI.
For one man to give titles to another is ordinary; but for the great God to
give titles to a poor wretched man is no less then wonderful: Thus does the
Lord to Job; There is none like him in the earth, a perfect and upright man: O
what must he needs be, in whom his maker glories! Lo; who would have looked for
a Saint in so obscure a corner of the east, and in so dark a time, before ever
the Law gave light to the world? yet even then the land of UZ yields a Job; no
time, no place can be any bar to an infinite mercy: Even this while, for ought
I see, the Sun shined more bright in Midian then in Goshen: Gods election will
be sure to find out his own any where out of hell; and if they could be there,
even there also: Amongst all those idolatrous heathen, Job is perfect and
upright; his religion and integrity is so much the more glorious, because it is
so ill neighbored; as some rich Diamond is set off by a dark foyl. O the
infinite goodness of the Almighty that picks out some few grains out of the
large chaff-heap of the world, which he reserves for the granary of a blessed
immortality: It is not of him that wills, nor in him that runs, but of God
that has mercy.

We might well imagine that such a sprig must sprout out of the stock of
faithful Abraham; what other loins were likely to yield so holy an issue? And
if his Sarah must be the mother of the promised seed, yet why might he not also
raise a blessed seed from Keturah? The birth does not always follow the belly:
even this second brood yields an heir of his fathers faith; Genesis 25. 6.
it is said, That to the sons of the Concubines Abraham gave gifts, and sent
them away to the East: Surely this son of the Concubine carries away as rich a
legacy of his fathers grace as ever was enjoyed by the Son of the promise at
home.

The gifts that Abraham gave to Midian were nothing to those gifts which the
God of Abraham gives to this son of Midian; who was perfect and upright, one
that feared God and eschued evil. I perceive the holy and wise God meant to
make this man a pattern as of patience, so of all heavenly virtues; he could not
be fit for that use if he were not exquisite; and what can be wanting to that
man, of whom God holily boasts that he is Perfect?

And now what metal is so fit to challenge the fire of affliction as this pure
gold? and who is so fit a match for the great Adversary as this Champion of
God? Never had he been put upon so hard a combat, if God had not well known
both the strength that he had given him, and the happy success of his conflict:
little does that good man know what wager is laid on his head, but strongly
incounters all his trials: The Sabeans have bereft him of his Oxen; the
Chaldees of his Camels; the fire from Heaven of his sheep; the tempest of his
children; Satan of his health; and had not his wife been left to him for his
greatest cross, and his friends for his further tormentors, I doubt whether
they had escaped.

Lo there sits the great Potentate of the East, naked and forlorn in the ashes;
as destitute of all comforts, as full of painful boyls and botches; scraping
his loathsome hide with a potsheard; yet even in that woeful posture possessing
his soul in patience, maintaining his innocence, justifying his Maker, cheering
himself in his Redeemer, and happily triumphing over all his miseries, and at
last made the great miroir of divine bounty to all generations: Now must Job
pray for his freindly persecutors, and is so high in favor with God, that it is
made an argument of extreme wrath against Israel; that though Noah, Ezekiel 14.
14, 20.
Daniel, and Job were in the land they should deliver none but their own souls:
O God, this Saint could not have had this strength of invincible patience
without thee: thou that rewardest it in him, did bestow it upon him: it is
thy great mercy to crown thine own works in us: thy gifts are free, thou can
fortify even my weak soul with the same powers, strengthen me with the same
grace, and impose what thou will.

XLII.
As it shall be once in glory, so it is in grace, there are degrees of it: The
Apostle that said of his auditors, they have received the holy Ghost as well as
we, did not say; they have received the holy Ghost as much as we: We know the
Apostles had so much as to give it to others; none besides them could do so: It
is an happy thing to have any quantity of true sanctifiying grace at all; every
drop of water is water, and every grain of gold is gold, every measure of grace
is precious: But who is there that when he is dry would take up with one drop
of liquor when he might have more? or if covetously minded, would sit down
content with one dram of gold? in such cases a little does but draw on a desire
of more: it is strange to see that in all other commodities we desire a
fullness: If God give us fruit of our bodies, it contents us not to have an
imperfect child, but we wish it may have the full shape and proportion: and,
when God has answered us in that, we do not rest in the integrity of parts,
but desire that it may attain to a fullness of understanding, and of stature;
and then lastly to a fullness of age: We would have full dishes, full cups, full
cofers, full barns; a fullness of all things, save the best of all, which is,
the holy Ghost. Any measure of spiritual grace contents us; so as we are ready
to say with Esau: I have enough my brother. There is a sinful kind of
contentation, wherewith many fashionable Christians suffer themselves to be
beguiled, to the utter undoing of their souls: for hereupon they grow utterly
careless to get, what they think they have already: who cares to eat that is
full cramed? and by this means they live and die graceless: for had they ever
tasted how sweet the Lord is in the Graces of his holy Spirit, they could never
think they had enough; and whiles they do think so, they are utterly incapable
of either having, or desiring more: As there is a sinful; so there is an holy
covetousness, which the more it has, the more it affects: Lord make me thus
covetous, and I cannot choose but be rich*

XLIII.
What a marvelous familiarity was this which Moses had with God: Exodus 33. 11.
That the Lord spoke unto Moses, face to face, as a man speaks to his friend!
and yet more, that Moses so spoke to God! what a bold and high request was that
which Moses made to God: I beseech thee show me thy glory, that is (as it is
there interpreted) thy face! that face which no man might see and live: Lo; God
had immediately before spoken to Moses even to his face, out of the cloudy
pillar: that does not satisfy his holily-ambitious soul: but, as he heard the
voice, so he must see the face of the Almighty: That cloudy pillar did
sufficiently represent unto him the presence of the great God of Israel; yet
still he sues for a sight of his glory: This is no pattern for flesh and blood;
far be it from our thoughts to aspire so high: Thy face, O God, will we seek:
but in thy blessed ordinances, not in thy glorious and incomprehensible
essence: It is not for me as yet to presume so far as to desire to see that
infinite light which thou art, or that light wherewith thou art clothed, or
that light inaccessible wherein thou dwelest: Only, now show me the light of
thy countenance in grace, and prepare my soul for that light of glory; when I
shall see as I am seen.

XLIV.
In the waters of life, the divine Scriptures, there are shallows, and there
are deeps; shallows where the lamb may wade, and deeps where the Elephant may
swim: If we be not wise to distinguish, we may easily mis-carry: he that can
wade over the foord, cannot swim through the deep; and if he mistake the
passage he drowns: What infinite mischief has arisen to the Church of God from
the presumption of ignorant and unlettered men, that have taken upon them to
interpret the most obscure Scriptures, and pertinaciously defended their own
sense? How contrary is this to all practice in whatsoever vocation? In the
Tailors trade, every man can stitch a seam, but every man cannot cut out a
garment: In the Sailors art, every one may be able to pull at a cable, but
every one cannot guide the helm: In the Physicians profession, every gossip can
give some ordinary receipts upon common experience; but to find the nature of
the disease, and to prescribe proper remedies from the just grounds of art, is
proper to the professors of that science; and we think it absurd and dangerous
to allow every ignorant Mountebank to practice: In matter of law, every plain
countryman knows what belongs to distraining, impounding, replevying: but to
give sound counsel to a clyent in a point of difficulty, to draw firm
conveyances; to plead effectually, and to give sound judgment in the hardest
cases, is for none but Barristers, and Benchers: And shall we think it safe
that in Divinity, which is the mistress of all Sciences, and in matters which
may concern the eternal safety of the soul, every man should take upon him to
shape his own coat, to steer his own way, to give his own dose, to put and
adjudg his own case? The old word was, that Artists are worthy to be trusted in
their own trade: Wherefore has God given to men skill in arts and tongues?
Wherefore do the aptest wits spend their times and studies from their infancy
upon these sacred employments, if men altogether inexpert in all the grounds,
both of art and language, can be able to pass as sound a judgment in the depths
of Theological truths, as they? How happy were it if we could all learn
(according to that word of the Apostle) to keep our selves within our own line:
As Christians, the Scriptures are ours; but to use, to enjoy; to read, to hear,
to learn, to meditate, to practice; not to interpret according to our private
conceit; for this faculty we must look higher: Mal. 2. 7.
The Priests lips are to preserve knowledge: and they shall seek the Law at his
mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.

XLV.
When we see the year in his prime and pride, decked with beautiful blossoms,
and all goodly varieties of flowers, cheered with the Music of birds, and
stated in a sweet and moderate temper of heat and cold; how glad we are that we
have made so good an exchange for an hard and chilling winter; and how ready we
could be to wish that this pleasant and happy season might last all the year
long: But herein (were our desires satisfied) we should wish to our own great
disadvantage: for if the spring were not followed with an intension of Summers
heat, those fruits whose hopes we see in the bud and flower, could never come
to any perfection: and even that succeeding fervor, if it should continue long,
would be no less prejudicial to the health and life of all creatures; and if
there were not a relaxation of that vigorous heat in Autumn, so as the sap
returns back into the root, we could never look to see but one years fruit. And
thus also it is spiritually: if our prosperity were not intermixed with
vicissitudes of crosses; and if the lively beams of grace were not sometimes
interchanged with cold desertions, we should never know what belongs to
spiritual life: What should we do then, but be both patient of, and thankful
for our changes; and make no account of any constancy, till we attain to the
Region of rest and blessedness?

XLVI.
What fools does the devil make of those men which would fain otherwise be
accounted wise? who would think that men could be so far forsaken of their
reason, as to fall down before those stocks and stones which their own hands
had carved; to guide their enterprises by the fond auguries of the flying, or
posture, or noise of fowls; or the inspection of the entrails of beasts; to tie
the confidence of their success to certain scrawls, and characters, which
themselves have devised: to read their own or others fortunes in their hands or
stars: to suffer themselves mocked with deceitful visions? neither are his
spiritual delusions less gross and palpable; wise Solomon speaks of the
wickedness of folly; Eccles. 7. 25.
and we may no less truly invert it; the folly of wickedness, Matthew. 7. 26.
the fool, says our Savior, builds his house upon the sand, 1 Timothy 6. 17.
so as it may be washed away with the next waves; what other does the foolish
worldling, that builds all his hopes upon uncertain riches, Heb 11. 25.
momentany pleasures, Prove. 31. 30.
deceitful favors? Eccles. 2. 14.
The fool (says Solomon) walks in darkness; Eccles. 10. 15.
the sinner walks in the darkness of ignorance, through the works of darkness,
to the pit of darkness: The fool, says the Preacher, knows not the way into
the city: The worldling may perhaps hit the way through the golden gates of
honor; or down to the mines of wealth; or to the flowery garden of pleasure; but
the way of true peace he knows not: he no more knows the way to Heaven, then if
there were none: The fool (says the Psalmist) has said in his heart, there is
no God; Did not the wicked man say so, he durst not wilfully sin in the face of
so mighty and dreadful an avenger. Lastly, the fool is apt to part with his
patrimony for some gay toys: and how ready is the carnal heart to cast away the
Favor of God, the inheritance of Heaven, the salvation of his soul, for these
vain earthly trifles? Holy men are wont to pass with the world for Gods fools;
(alas! how little do these censurers know to pass a true judgment of wisdom and
folly? he that was rapt into the third Heaven, tells us, That the foolishness
of God is wiser then men, 1 Cor. 1. 25.
and the weakness of God stronger then men; but this we are sure of, that
wicked men are the devils fools; Pro. 19. 29:
and that judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of
fools.

XLVII.
There are some things which are laudable in man, but cannot be incident into
God; as a bashful shamefastness, and holy fear: And there are some dispositions
blameworthy in men, which are yet, in a right sense, holily ascribed unto God,
as unchangeableness, and irrepentance: Attributes and qualities receive their
limitations according to the meet subjects to which they belong; with this sure
rule, That whatsoever may import an infinite purity and perfection, we have
reason to ascribe to our Maker; whatever may argue infirmity, misery,
corruption, we have reason to take to our selves: Neither is it otherwise in
the condition of men: One man's virtue is another vice; so boldness in a woman,
bashfulness in an old man, bounty in a poor man, parsimony in the great, are as
foully unbeseeming, as boldness in a Soldier, bashfulness in a child, bounty
in the rich, parsimony in the poor, are justly commendable. It is not enough
for us to know what is good in it self, but what is proper for us: else, we may
be blemished with that which is another honor.

XLVIII.
It is easy to observe that there are five degrees of the digestion of our
spiritual food: First it is received into the cell of the ear, and there
digested by a careful attention; then it is conveyed into the brain, and there
concocted by due meditation, from thence it is sent down into the heart, and
there digested by the affections; and from thence it is conveyed to the tongue,
in conference, and holy confession; and lastly, it is thence transmitted to the
hand, and there receives perfect digestion, in our action and performance: And
as the life and health of the body cannot be maintained, except the material
food pass through all the degrees of bodily concoction, no more can the soul
live and prosper in the want of any of these spiritual degrees of digestion;
And as where the food is perfectly concocted, the body grows fat and vigorous;
so is it with the soul, where the spiritual repast is thus kindly digested:
Were there not failings in all these degrees, the souls of men would not be so
meager and unthriving as they are. Some there are that will not give so much as
ear-room to the word of truth; such are willing recusants: others will admit it
perhaps, so far, but there let it rest; these are fashionable auditors: some
others can be content to let it enter into the brain, and take up some place in
their thoughts and memories; these are speculative professors; some (but fewer)
others let it down into their hearts, and there entertain it with secret
liking, but hide it in their bosoms, not daring to make profession of it to
the world; these are close Nicodemians: Others take it into their mouths, and
busy their tongues in holy chat, yet do nothing; these are formal discoursers:
But alas, how few are there whose hands speak louder then their tongues; that
conscionably hear, meditate, affect, speak, do the word of their Maker, and
Redeemer?

XLIX.
Men that are in the same condition speed not always alike: Barabbas was a
theif, murderer, seditionary, and deserved hanging no less then the two thieves
that were crucified with our Savior, yet he is dismissed, and they executed;
And even of these two (as our Savior said of the two women grinding at the
mill) one was taken, the other refused; one went before Peter to paradise, the
other went before Judas into hell: The providence and election of a God may
make a difference; we have no reason in the same crime, to presume upon a
contrary issue: If that gracious hand shall exempt us from the common judgment
of our consorts in evil, we have cause (...) less his mercy; but if his just
hand shall sweep us away in the company of our wicked consociates, we have
reason to thank none but our selves for our sufferings.

L.
How sweet a thing is revenge to us naturally? even the very infant rejoices to
see him beaten that has angerd him; and is ready with his little hand to give
that sroke to the by-stander, which he would have with more force returned to
the offender; and how many have we known in mortal quarrels cheerfully bleeding
out their last drop, when they have seen their enemy gasping, and dying before
them: This alone shows how much there is remaining in our bosom of the sting
of that old Serpent, who was a murderer from the beginning, delighting in
death, and enjoying our torment; whereas, on the contrary, true grace is
merciful, ready to forgive, apt to return good for evil, Col. 3. 13.
to pray for our persecutors; Nothing does more clearly evince what spirit we
are of, then our disposition in wrongs received: The carnal heart breathes
nothing but revenge, and is straight wringing the sword out of the hands of him
that has said, Romans 12. 19.
Vengeance is mine: The regenerate soul, Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
contrarily, gives place to wrath, and puts on the bowels of mercies, Col. 3.
12. 13.
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing,
forgiving: Romans 12. 21.
and will not be overcome with evil, but overcomes evil with good. We have so
much of God, as we can remit injuries; so much of Satan, as we would revenge
them.

LI.
It is worth observing how nature has taught all living creatures to be their
own physicians; The same power that gave them a being has led them to the
means of their own preservation: No Indian is so savage, but that he knows the
use of his Tobacco and Contra-yerva; yea even the brute creatures are bred with
this skill: The Dog when he is stomack-sick can go right to his proper Grass;
the Cat to her Nep; the Goat to his Hemlock; the Weasel to Rue; the Heart to
Dittany; the sick Lion can cure himself with an Ape; the Monkey with a Spider;
the Bear with an Ant-heap; the Panther with man's dung; and the Stork is said to
have taught man the use of the glyster; to what purpose should we instance when
the case is universal? The Toad has recourse to his Plantainleaf; the Tortois
to his Peniroyal; and in short, there is none but knows his own medicine: As
for the reasonable creature, in all the civilized regions of the world, we may
well say now of every nation as it was of old said of Egypt, That it is a
country of Physicians: There is not an huswife, but has an Apothecaries shop
in her Garden; which affords her those receipts, whereby she heals the ayls of
her complaining family. Only mankind is mortally soul-sick, and naturally
neither knows, nor seeks, nor cares for remedy. O thou that art the great
Physician in Heaven, first cure our insensibleness; make thou us as sick of our
sins, as we have made our selves sick by sin, and then speak the word, and we
shall be whole.

LII.
When I consider the precious ornaments of the high Priest, the rich Fabric
and furniture of the Tabernacle, the bountiful gifts which the Princes of the
Tribes offered at the dedication of the Altar; Number. 8.
I cannot but think what a mass of wealth Israel brought with them out of
Egypt; these treasures grew not in the wilderness; neither did Jacob and his
sons bring them out of Canaan; they were gathered in their Goshen: It was an
hard bondage under which Israel was held by the latter Pharaohs; yet, as if
then, in stead of the furnaces of bricks, they had been laboring in the Silver
mines, to their own advantage, they come out laden with precious metals: What
should I say to this? God said, Israel is my first born, and the first born was
to have a double portion: What was Israel but a type of Gods Church? now the
Church of God may be held down with cruel tyranny; but in spite of all
opposition it will thrive; Psalm. 68. 13.
And though they have lain among the pots, yet shall they be as the wings of a
Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold; And if the Spouse
of Christ shall be stripped of her outward ornaments; yet the kings daughter is
allglorious within; rich in those heavenly endowments of Grace and holiness,
which shall make her dear and lovely in the eyes of her celestial Bridegroom;
shortly, the Church may be impaired in her external estate; but if, the while,
she gathers so much the more of those better treasures* what has she lost?
Godliness is great gain with contentment; If she have less of the world and
more of God, what cause can she have of complaint, or her enemies of
insultation?

LIII.
He that is a God of Order loves both to set, and keep it; For the service of
his Sanctuary he appointed several offices, and in those offices several
degrees; none of those might enterfer with others: The Levites might not meddle
with the Priests charge; nor one degree of Levites with another: The Porters
might not thrust in amongst the Singers, though perhaps some of their voices
might be more tuneable; neither might the Singers change places with the
Porters: The sons of Merari, that were to carry the boards, Number. 4. 29. 23.
bars, and pillars of the Tabernacle, and the Court, might not change with the
sons of Gershon for the lighter burden of the curtains, and hangings; nor
those of Gershon, Number. 4. 15.
for the more holy load of the vessels of the Sanctuary, committed to the sons
of Kohath: Neither might the sons of Kohath so much as go in to see the
covering of those sacred utensils by Aaron, Number. 4. 20.
and his sons; upon no less pain then death: So punctual was God in seting
every man his proper station; and holding him to it, without either neglect, or
change: And why should we think God less curious in his Evangelical Church? It
was the charge of him, who next under the Almighty, had the marshalling of the
Church of the Gentiles; Let every man abide in the same calling, 1 Cor. 7. 20.
wherein he was called: perhaps there may be a better head for policy upon
Plebeian shoulders then the Governors: shall that man leave his rank, and
thrust into the chair of government? Neither is it other in spiritual offices;
It is no thinking that the wise and holy God will be pleased with a wel-meant
confusion: For all our employments in the service of the Almighty, we must
consult, not with our abilities, but with our vocation.

LIIII.
I see too many men willing to live to no purpose; caring only to be rid of
time on what terms soever, making it the only scope of their life to live; A
disposition that may well befit brute creatures, which are not capable of any
other aim save merely their own preservation: but for men that enjoy the
privilege of reason, for Christians that pretend a title to Religion, too base
and unworthy; where God has bestowed these higher faculties, he looks for
other improvements; For what a poor thing is it only to live? a thing common
to us, with the most despised vermin, that breeds on our own corruption: but to
live for some more excellent ends, is that which Reason suggests, and Religion
perfits: Here then are diverse subordinations of ends, whereof one makes way for
another, and all for the supreme. We labor and exercise that we may eat, we eat
that we may live, and maintain health and strength; we desire health and
strength that we may do good to our selves and many; that we may be able to do
service to God, King, and Country; and therein, we drive at the testimony of a
good conscience, approving to God our holy desires, and endeavors; and in all
these, at the glory and salvation of our souls; and lastly, in that, as the
highest of all ends, at the glory of our blessed Creator and Redeemer: This is
indeed to live: otherwise, we may have a being for a time upon earth, but a
life I cannot call it; and when we must cease to be, we are necessarily
swallowed up with the horror of either not being at all, or of being eternally
miserable.

LV.
All our love is moved from some good which we apprehend in the party loved;
carnal love from beauty; worldly from gain; spiritual from grace; divine, from
infinite goodness: It must needs be therefore, that when the ground and motive
of our love fails, the affection it self must cease; those that are enamoured
of a beautiful face, find their passion cooled with a loathsome deformity;
those that are led by the hopes of profit, like wasps, leave buzzing about the
gally-pot, when all the honey is gone; those that could carry the rod familiarly
in their hand, run from it when they see it turned to a Serpent: Contrarily,
when that which attracts our love is constant to it self, and everlasting, the
affection set upon it is permanent, and eternal: If then I love God for riches,
for preferment, for my own indemnity; when intervening crosses strip me of the
hopes of all these, I shall be ready to say, with that distempered King of
Israel: 2 Kings. 6. 33.
Behold, this evil is of the Lord, What should I wait on the Lord any longer?
If my respects to my Savior be for the loaves, and fishes; my heart is carried
away with those baskets of fragments: but if I can love God for his goodness
sake, Cant. 8. 6.
this love shall out-last time; and over-match death.

LVI.
What a wretched narrowness of heart is this which I find in my self; that
when I may have all things, I take up with nothing; and when I may be possessed
of an infinite good, I please my self in grasping a little thick clay? It was a
large word that the Apostle said to his Corinthians; 1 Cor. 3. 22.
Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours. What, shall we think they were
richer then their neighbors? or is not this the condition of all those, of whom
he can say in the next words, ye are Christ's? There, there comes in all our
right to this infinite wealth; of our selves we are beggars; in him, who is
Lord of all, we are feoffed in all things; for whiles he says, All are yours,
and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods; he does in effect say, Christ is yours,
and in him, God is yours; for this right is mutual: How else should all things
be ours, if God were not ours; without whom all is nothing? and how should God
the Father be ours, without that Son of his love, who has said, Joh. 16. 15.
All things that the Father has, Joh. 17. 21.
are mine; Joh. 14. 6.
Thou O Father art in me, and I in thee: No man comes to the Father, but by
me? If then Christ be mine, all is mine: and if I have so often received him, and
so often renewed my union with him, how is he but mine? O Savior, let me feel
my self thoroughly possessed of thee, whether the world slide, or sink, I am happy.

LVII.
God will not vouchsafe to allow so much honor to wicked instruments, as to
make them the means of removing public evils: The Magicians of Egypt could
have power to bring some plagues upon the Land, but had not the power to take
them away; Certainly, there needed a greater power to give a being to the
frogs, then to call them off; yet this latter they cannot do who prevailed in
the first: Moses and Aaron must be called to fetch off that judgment, which the
Sorcerers have brought upon themselves; neither is it otherwise still: Wicked
men can draw down those plagues upon a nation, which only the faithful must
remove: The sins of the one make work for the others intercession: Do we
therefore smart, and groan under heavy calamities? we know to whom we are
beholden: Jer. 14. 10, 12.
Thus says the Lord to this people, thus have they loved to wander; they have
not refrained their feet, therefore he will now remember their iniquity, and
visit their sins; When they fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they
offer burnt offerings and an oblation, I will not accept them; but I will
consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence. Do we
desire to be freed from the present evils and to escape an utter desolation?
They are Moses and Aaron that must do it; He said that he would destroy them:
Psalm. 106. 23.
had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach to turn away his
wrath, lest he should destroy them: When our quarrel is with Heaven, it is not
our force, or our policy that can save us: Every faithful man is a favorite of
the King of glory, and can do more then command Legions: Then is a people in
some good way toward safety, when they have learned to know their friends.
Whiles we have good men's prayers to grapple with wicked men's sins, there may be
hopes of recovery.

LVIII.
The aiming at a good end can be no just excuse for an unlawful act, or
disposition; but if contentment did consist in having much, it were a sore
temptation to a man to be covetous; since that contentation is the thing
wherein the heart of man is wont to place it is chief felicity: neither indeed
can there be any possible happiness without it; but the truth is, abundance is
no whit guilty so much as of ease, much less of a full joy: how many have we
known that have spent, more pleased and happy hours, under an house of sticks,
and walls of mud, and roof of straw, then great Potentates have done under
marbles, and cedar? And how many, both wise Heathen, and mortified Christians
have rid their hands of their cumbersome store, that they might be capable of
being happy? Other creatures do naturally neglect that which abused reason bids
us dote upon: If we had no better powers then beast, or fowls, we should not at
all care for this either white, or red earth; and if our graces were as great
as the least of Saints, we should look carelessly upon the preciousest and
largest treasures that the earth can afford; now our debauched reason, in stead
of stiring us up to emulate the best creatures, draws us down below the basest
of them; moving us to place our happiness in those things which have neither
life, nor true worth; much less can give that which they have not; It is not
for the generous souls of Christians to look so low, as to place their
contentment in any thing, whether within the bowels, or upon the face of this
earth; but to raise their thoughts up to the glorious region of their original,
and rest: looking not at the things which are seen, 2 Cor. 4. 18.
but at the things which are not seen: for the things that are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.

LIX.
The holy Psalmist knew well what he said when he called the thunder in the
clouds, Psalm. 29. 4.
The voice of the Lord: a voice powerful and full of Majesty: The very Heathens
made this the most awful act of their Jupiter; which the Spirit of God
expresses in a more divine language: The God of glory thundreth; upon this
dreadful sound it is, that the Psalmist calls to the mighty ones, Psalm. 29. 3.
to give unto the Lord glory and strength, Psalm, 29. 1. 2.
to give unto the Lord the glory due to his name: as it were advising the great
Commanders of the world, when they hear it thunder, to fall down on their
knees, and to lift up their hands, and eyes, to that great God that speaks to
them from Heaven: No man needs to bid the stoutest heart to fear, when this
terrible sound strikes through his ear; which is able to drive even Neroes and
Caligulaes into bench-holes: But this mighty voice calls for an improvement of
our fear, to the glory of that Almighty power whence it proceeds: Perhaps, the
presumption of man will be finding out the natural causes of this fearful
uproar in the clouds; but the working by means derogates nothing from the God
of nature; neither yet are all thunders natural: That whirlwind and thunder,
wherein God spoke to Job; Job. 40. 9. 38. 1.
that thunder and lightning wherein God spoke to Moses and Israel in mount
Sinai; Exodus 19.
that thunder and rain wherewith God answered the prayer of Samuel in
wheat-harvest, 1 Samuel 12. 17, 8.
for Isreal's conviction in the unseasonable suit for their King; that
thundering voice from Heaven that answered the prayer of the Son of God, Joh.
12. 28, 29.
for the glorifying of his Name; the seven thunders that uttered their voices
to the beloved Disciple in Pathmos, Revel. 10. 3. 4.
had nothing of ordinary nature in them: And how many have we heard, and read
of, That for sleighting of this great work of God, have at once heard his
voice, and felt his stroke. Shortly, if any heart can be unmoved at this mighty
voice of God, it is stiffer then the rocks in the wilderness; Ps. 29. 8.
for, The voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness, the Lord shakes the
wilderness of Kadesh: For me, I tremble at the power, whiles I adore the mercy
of that great God, that speaks so loud to me: It is my comfort that he is my
Father, who approves himself thus omnipotent; his love is no less infinite then
his power; let the terror be to them that know him angry; let my confidence
overcome my fear: It is the Lord, let him do what he will: All is not right
with me till I have attained to tremble at him while he shines, and to rejoice
in him whiles he thundreth.

LX.
We talk of mighty warriors that have done great exploits in conquering
kingdoms; but the Spirit of God tells us of a greater conquest then all theirs;
Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world; 1 John 5. 4.
and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith; Alas, the
conquest of those great Commanders was but poor and partial, of some small
spots of the earth; the conquest of a regenerate Christian is universal, of the
whole world: Those other conquerors, whiles they prevailed abroad, were yet
overcome at home: and whiles they were the Lords of nations, were no other then
vassals to their own lusts: These begin their victories at home, and enlarge
their Triumphs over all their spiritual enemies: The glory of those other
victors was laid down with their bodies in the dust; the glory that attends
these, is eternal; What pity it is that the true Christian should not know his
own greatness; that he may raise his thoughts accordingly; and bear himself as
one that tramples the world under his feet? For all that is in the world, 1 John 2. 16.
is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life; these
he has truly subdued in himself; not so as to bereave them of life, but of
rule; if he have left them some kind of being still in him, yet he has left
them no dominion; and therefore may well style himself the Lord of the world:
Far, far therefore be it from him, that he should so abject, and debase
himself, as to be a slave to his vassals: none but holy and high thoughts, and
demeanors, may now beseem him; and in these spiritual regards of his inward
greatness, and self-conquests, his word must be; either Caesar, or nothing.

LXI.
I see so many kinds of phrensies in the world, and so many seemingly wise
brains taken with them, that I much doubt whom I may be sure to account free
from either the touch, or (at least) the danger of this indisposition; How many
opinions do I see raised every day, that argue no less then a mere spiritual
madness? such as if they should have been but mentioned seven years ago, would
have been questioned out of what Bedlam they had broken loose. And for
dispositions; how do we see one so ragingly furious, as if he had newly torn
off his chains, and escaped; another so stupidly senseless, that you may
thrust pins into him, up to the head, and he startles not at it: One so
dumpishly sad, as if he would freez to death in melancholy, and hated any
contentment but in sorrow; another so apishly jocund, as if he cared for no
other pastime then to play with feathers: One so superstitiously devout, that
he is ready to cringe, and crouch to every stock; another so wildly profane,
that he is ready to spit God in the face: shortly, one so censorious of others,
as if he thought all men mad but himself; another so mad, as that he thinks
himself and all mad men sober, and well-witted.

In this store and variety of distempers (were I not sure of my own principles)
I could easily misdoubt my self; now, settled on firm grounds, I can pity and
bewail the woeful distraction of many; and can but send them for recovery to
that divine wisdom, who calls to them in the openings of the gates, and
utters her words, saying; Prove. 1. 22.
How long ye silly ones will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in
their scorning, and fools hate knowledge; turn you at my reproof: Prove. 8. 5.
O ye simple understand wisdom, and ye fools be ye of an understanding heart:
Prove. 8. 34, 36.
Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my ga^es: But he that
sins against me, wrongeth his own soul: all they that hate me, love death.

LXII.
Man, as he confists of a double nature, flesh and spirit, so is he placed in a
middle rank betwixt an angel, which is spirit, and a beast, which is flesh;
partaking of the qualities, and performing the acts of both: he is angelical in
his understanding, in his sensual affections, beastial: and to whether of these
he most enclineth, and conformeth himself, that part wins more of the other,
and gives a denomination to him; so as, he that was before half angel, half
beast, if he be drowned in sensuality, has lost the angel, and is become a
beast; if he be wholly taken up with heavenly Meditations, he has quit the
beast, and is improved angelical: It is hard to hold an equal temper; either he
must degenerate into a beast, or be advanced to an angel; mere reason
sufficiently apprehends the difference of the condition: Could a beast be
capable of that faculty, he would wish to be a man, rather then a brute, as he
is: There is not more difference betwixt a man, and beast, then between an
angel and a brutish man; How must I needs therefore be worse then beast, if,
when I may be preferred to that happy honor, I shall rather affect to be a
beast, then an angel? Away then with the bestial delights of the sensual
appetite; let not my soul sink in this mud; let me be wholly for those
intellectual pleasures which are pure and spiritual: and let my ambition be, to
come as near to the Angel as this clog of my flesh will permit.

LXIII.
There is great difference in men's dispositions under affliction: Some there
are, deadhearted patients, that grow mopish and stupid, with too deep a sense
of their sufferings; others out of a careless jollity are insensible even of
sharp and heavy crosses: We are wont to speak of some, whose enchanted flesh is
invulnerable; this is the state of those hearts, which are so bewitched with
worldly pleasur^s, that they are not to be peirced with any calamity, that may
befall them in their estates, children, husbands, wives, friends; so as they can
say with Solomon's drunkard, Prove. 23. 35.
They have stricken me and I was not sick, they have beaten me but I felt it
not; These are dead flesh, which do no more feel the knife, then if it did not
at all enter; for whom some corrosives are necessary to make them capable of
smart: This disposition, though it seem to carry a face of Fortitude, and
Patience, yet is justly offensive; and not a little injurious both to God, and
the soul: To God; whom it endeavors to frustrate of those holy ends which he
proposes to himself in our sufferings; for wherefore does he afflict us, if he
would not have us afflicted? wherefore does the father whip the child, but
that he would have him smart; and by smarting bettered? he looks for cries and
tears; and the child that weeps not under the rod is held graceless: To the
soul, whom it robs of the benefit of our suffering; for what use can there be
of patience where there is no sense of evil? and how can patience have its
perfect work, where it is not?

Betwixt both these extremes, if we would have our souls prosper, a
mid-disposition must be attained; we must be so sensible of evils, that we be
not stupefied with them; and so re^olute under our crosses, that we may be
truly sensible of them: not so brawned under the rod, that we should not feel
it; nor yet so tender that we should over-feel it: not more patient under the
stripe, then willing to kiss the hand that inflicts it.

LXIV.
God as he is one, so he loves singleness and simplicity in the inward parts:
as therefore he has been pleased to give us those senses double, whereby we
might let in for our selves, as our eyes, and ears; and those limbs double,
whereby we might act for our selves, as our hands and feet; so those which he
would appropriate to himself, as our hearts for belief, and our tongue for
confession, he has given us single; neither did he ever ordain, or can abide
two hearts in a bosom, two tongues in one mouth: It is then the hateful style,
which the Spirit of God gives to an hypocrite; Jam. 4. 8.
that he is doubleminded; In the language of Gods Spirit, a fool has no heart,
and a dissembler has an heart, and an heart; and surely, as a man that has
two heads is a monster in nature, so he that has two hearts is no less a
spiritual monster to God: For the holy and wise God has made one for one; One
mind, or soul, for one body: And if the regenerate man have two men in one;
the old man, and the new; yet it is so, as that one is flesh, the other spirit;
the mind then is not double; but the law of the mind is opposed to the law of
the flesh; Romans 7. 23.
so as here are strivings, in one heart, not the sidings of two: for surely,
the God of unity can neither endure multiplication, nor division of hearts, in
one breast: If then we have one heart for God, another for Mammon, we may be
sure God will not own this latter; how should he, for he made it not? Yea, most
justly will he disclaim both, since that which he made was but one, this
double. And as the wise man has told us, That God hates nothing which he has
made; so may we truly say, God hates whatsoever he made not; since what he
made not, is only evil: When I have done my best, I shall have but a weak and
a faulty heart; but, Lord, let it be but a single one: Psalm. 134. 23, 24.
Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me, and know my thoughts: and see if
there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.

LXV.
There is a kind of not-being in sin; for sin is not an existence of somewhat
that is, but a deficiency of that rectitude which should be: it is a privation,
but not without a real mischief; as blindness is but a privation of sight, but
a true misery: Now, a privation cannot stand alone; it must have some subject
to lean upon; there is no blindness but where there is an eye, no death but
where there has been a life: sin therefore supposes a soul, wherein it is, and
an act whereto it cleaves: and those acts of sin are they which the Apostle
calls the works of darkness* Ephesians. 5. 12.
So as there is a kind of operosity in sin, in regard whereof sinners are
styled, Luke 13. 27.
The workers of iniquity: And surely there are sins, wherein there is more toil
and labor, then in the holiest actions: What pains and care does the thief take
in setting his match, in watching for his prey? How does he spend the darkest
and coldest nights in the execution of his plot? What fears, what flights, what
hazards, what shifts are here to avoid notice and punishment?

The adulterer says, That stolen waters are sweet; but that sweet is sauced to
him with many careful thoughts, with many deadly dangers: The superstitious
bygot, who is himself besotted with error, how does he traverse Sea and land to
make a Proselyte? What adventures does he make, what perils does he run, what
deaths does he challenge, to mar a soul?

So as some men take more pains to go to Hell, then some others do, to go to
Heaven: O the sottishness of sinners, that with a temporary misery will needs
purchase an eternal! How should we think no pains sufficient for the attaining
of Heaven, when we see wretched men toil so much for damnation?

LXVI.
With what elegance and force does the holy Ghost express our Saviors leaving
of the world; which he calls his taking home again; Luke 9. 51.
or his receiving up? In the former, implying, That the Son of God was, for the
time, sent out of his Fathers house, to these lower regions of his exile, or
pilgrimage, and was now readmitted into those his glorious mansions; In the
latter, so intimating his triumphant ascension, that he passes over his bitter
passion: Surely, he was to take death in his way; so he told his Disciples, in
the walk to Emaus: Luke 24. 26.
Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and to enter into his glory? He must
be lifted up to the Cross, ere his Ascension to Heaven; but, as if the thought
of death were swallowed up in the blessed issue of his death, here is no
mention of ought but his assumption: Lo, death truly swallowed up in victory:
Neither is it otherwise proportionally with us: wholly so it cannot be; for, as
for him, Death did but taste of him, could not devour him, much less put him
over; It could not but yield him whole and entire the third day, without any
impairing of his nature; yea, with an happy addition to it, of a glorious
immortality: and in that glorified humanity he ascended by his own Power into
his Heaven: For us, we must be content that one part of us lie rotting for the
time, in the dust, whiles our spiritual part shall by the ministry of Angels
be received up to those everlasting habitations: Here is an Assumption
therefore, true and happy, though not, as yet, total: And why should I not
therefore have my heart taken up with the assured expectation of this receiving
up into my glory? Why do I not look beyond death, at the eternally-blessed
condition of this soul of mine; which in my dissolution is thus crowned with
immortality? So does the Seabeaten Mariner cheer up himself with the sight of
that Heaven, which he makes for; So does the Travailer comfort himself, when
after a tempestuous storm he sees the Sun breaking forth in his brightness.

I am dying; but, O Savior, Joh. 11. 23.
thou art the resurrection and the life; he that believes in thee, though he be
dead yet shall he live: Esa. 26. 19.
Awake, and sing ye that dwell in the dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs,
and the earth shall cast out the dead: Blessed are the dead that dye in the
Lord for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

LXVII.
What need I be troubled that I find in my self a fear of Death? what
Israelite is not ready to run away at the sight of this Goliath? This fear is
natural; and so far from being evil, that it was incident into the Son of God,
who was heard in that which he feared; Christianity serves not to destroy, but
to rectify nature. Grace regulates this passion in us, and corrects the
exorbitances of it, never intended to root it out: Let me therefore entertain
this fear, but so, as that I may master it; if I cannot avoid fear, let it be
such as may be incident into a faithful man: Whiles my fear apprehends just
terror in the face of Death, let my faith lay fast hold on that blessed
Savior, who has both overcome, and sweetened it; on that blessed estate of
glory which accompanies it; my fear shall end in joy, my death in advantage.

LXVIII.
It is too plain that we are fallen upon the old age of the world; the last
times, and therefore nearest to the dissolution; and if time it self did not
evince it, the disposition and qualities would most evidently do it; For to
what a cold temper of charity are we grown? what mere Ice is in these spiritual
veins? the unnatural and unkindly flushings of self-love abound indeed every
where; but for true Christian love it is come to old David's pass, it may be
covered with clothes, 1 King. 1. 1.
but it can get no heat: Besides, what whimsies, and fancies of dotage do we
find the world possessed withal, beyond the examples of all former times? what
wild and mad opinions have been lately broached, which the settled brains of
better ages could never have imagined? Unto these, how extremely choleric the
world is grown, in these later times, there needs no other proof then the
effusion of so much blood in this present age, as many preceding centuries of
years have been sparing to spill.

What should I speak of the moral distempers of diseases, the confluence
whereof has made this age more wickedly-miserable then all the former? for,
when ever was there so much profaneness, atheism, blasphemy, schism, excess,
disobedience, oppression, licentiousness, as we now sigh under? Lastly, that
which is the common fault of age, loquacity, is a plain evidence of the worlds
declinedness: for, was there ever age guilty of so much tongue, and pen as this
last? were ever the Presses so cloyed with frivolous work? Every man thinks
what he lists, and speaks what he thinks, and writes what he speaks, and prints
what he writes; Neither would the world talk so much, did it not make account
it cannot talk long. What should we do then, since we know the world truly old,
and now going upon his great, and fatal Climacterical, but as discreet men
would carry themselves to impotent and decrepit age; bear with the infirmities
of it, pity and bewail the distempers, strive against the enormities, and
prepare for the dissolution.

LXIX.
There cannot be a stronger motive to awe and obedience, then that which Saint
Peter enforces; 1 Pet. 1. 17.
That God is both a Father and a Judge: The one is a title of Love and Mercy;
the other of Justice. What ever God is, he is all that; he is all Love and
Mercy; He is all Justice; He is not so a Judge, that he has waved the title and
affection of a Father: He is not so a Father that he will remit ought of his
infinite justice as a Judge: He is, he will ever be both these in one; and we
must fasten our eyes upon both these at once; and be accordingly affected unto
both: He is a Father, therefore here must be a loving awe; He is a Judge, and
therefore here must be an awful love and obedience. So must we lay hold upon
the tender mercies of a Father that we may rejoice continually; so must we
apprehend the Justice of a righteous Judge, that we do lovingly tremble; Why
then should man despair? God is a father; All the bowels of mortal and humane
love, Isa. 49. 15.
are straight to his: Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should
not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget; yet will I
not forget thee: says the Lord. That which is the title of his personality in
divine relation, is also the title of his gracious relation to us, Father;
neither can he be other then he is styled; And contrarily how dare man presume,
since this Father is a Judge? It is for sinful flesh and blood to be partial;
foolish parents may be apt to connive at the sins of their own loins, or
bowels, because theirs; either they will not see them, or not hate them, or not
censure them, or not punish them: The infinite justice of a God cannot wink at
our failings: There is no debt of our sin, but must be paid in our selves, or
our surety: 1 Pet. 1. 17.
If then we call him Father, who without respect of persons judges according
to every man's work; why do we not pass the time of our sojourning here in fear?

LXX.
How terrible a motion was that, (which was made by the two Disciples) of
commanding fire to come down from Heaven, and consume the inhospital
Samaritans? Me thinks, I could tremble but at the imagination of so dreadful a
judgment, as they did not fear to sue for; Yet if we look to the offense, it
was no positive act of indignity offered to Christ; but the mere not lodging of
his train; and that, not out of a rude inhumanity, but out of a religious
scruple: what could they have said if these Samaritans had pursued them with
swords, and staves, and stones? Whom shall we hope to find free from cruelty
of revenge, when even the Disciple of Love was thus over-taken? What wonder is
it if natural men be transported with furious desires, when so eminent
Domestics, and followers of our Savior were thus faulty? Surely nature in man
is cruel; neither is there any creature under Heaven so bloody to its own
kind: Even Bears and Wolves, and Tigers devour not one another; and if any of
them fall out in single combats for a prey, here is no public engaging for
blood; neither do they affect to enjoy each others torment; rather entertaining
one another complaints with pity; Let but a swine cry, the rest of the herd
within the noise, come running in, to see and compassionate his pain; only man
rejoices in the misery of the same flesh and blood with himself, and loves to
triumph in his revenge: whiles we are thus affected, we know not of what spirit
we are; we may soon learn; we are even of that spirit who was a manslayer from
the beginning; Joh. 8. 44.
as for the good spirit, his just style is the preserver of men; Job. 7. 20.
and the errand of the son of man was, Luke 9* 56.
not to destroy men's lives, but to save to them: and his charge to these, and
all other his disciples; Luke 6. 36.
Be merciful, as your Father also is merciful and how easily may we observe
that this very disciple (as if in way of abundant satisfaction for this rash
oversight) calls more for love, then all the rest of his masters train,
telling us that God is love, 1 John 4. 16.
and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him: and, Beloved,
let us love one another: 1 John 4. 7.
For love is of God; and every one that loves is of God, and knows God: 1 John 4. 8.
He that loves not, knows not God: for God is love. Shortly then, what would
not this holy disciple have given to have recalled this fiery motion? The more
mercy and charity is in us, the more we have of God; the more fury, and
revenge; of Satan.

LXXI.
Much caution must be had in our imitation of the actions of the holiest:
cautions, both in respect of the persons, and of the actions: God himself; yea,
God clothed in flesh, (though the pattern of all perfection) is not for our
universal imitation; the most of their actions are for our wonder, not for our
exampling; and amongst men; how absurd were it in a Peasant to imitate a King?
or one of the long robe, a Soldier? If Moses climb up the hill of God, Sinai;
shall another Israelite say, Moses goes up, why not I? So he might have paid
dear for his presumption: Moses was called up, the rest were limited; and if a
beast touch the hill, he shall dye. That act may beseem one, which would be
very incongruous in another; The dog fawns upon his master, and has his back
stroaked; if the Ass do the like, he is beaten: We are naturally apt to be
carried with examples: It is one of the greatest improvements of wisdom to
know, whom, in what, and how far we may imitate: Phil. 3. 17.
The best have their weaknesses; 1 Cor. 4. 16.
there is no copy without a blur: 1 Cor. 11. 1.
Be ye followers of me, says the chosen Vessel; but how? Even as I am of
Christ: It is safe following him that cannot erer.

LXXII.
God who is simply one, infinitely perfect, absolutely complete in himself,
enjoys himself fully, from all eternity, without any relation to the creature:
but knowing our wants, and weaknesses, he has ordained a society for our
well-being; and therefore even in man's innocence, could say, It is not good for
man to be alone: And why Lord? why might not man have taken pleasure enough in
the beauty and sweetness of his Paradise, in contemplating thine Heaven, in the
command of thine obsequious creatures, and above all, in the fruition of thy
divine presence, in that happy integrity of his nature without any accession of
other helps? Surely, thou who knew well what disposition thou had put into
him, intendedst to fit him with all meet conveniences: and thou who made him
sociable, before he could have any society; thoughtst fit to stead him with
such a society, as might make his life comfortable to him. Wise Solomon
observes it out of his deep experience, Eccl. 4. 7, 8, 9.
for a vanity under the Sun, That there is one alone, and there is not a
second; and that, two are better then one, because they have a good reward for
their labor.

In the Plantation of the Evangelical Church, the Apostles are not reckoned
single, Matt. 10. 2, 3, 4,
but by pairs; and so does their Lord send them upon the great errand of his
Gospel: And when he seconded that Work by a commission given to his seventy
Disciples; Luke. 10. 1.
He sent them two and two before his face, into every City and place, whither
he himself would come* After this, when our Savior had left the earth, Paul
and Barnabas go together; and when they are parted, Paul and Silas, Barnabas
and Mark are sorted: Single endeavors seldom prosper; many hands make the work
both quick and sure: They can be no friends to the happy estate of a Family or
Church, that labor to cause distractions; Division makes certain way for ruin.

LXXIII.
Under the Law there was difference, as of Ages, so of Sexes: Circumcision was
appropriated to the Male: In the Temple there was the Court of the Jews; and
without that, the Court of the Women; neither might that Sex go beyond their
bounds; and still it is so in their Jewish Synagogues: But in Christ, there is
neither Male, nor Female. As the soul has no Sex; so God makes no difference
in the acceptance of either: As it is the honor of the one Sex, that Christ
the Son of God was a man; so it is the honor of the other Sex, that he was born
of a woman: And if the woman be (as she is in nature) the weaker vessel, yet
she is no less capable of Grace, then the stronger; as the thinest glass may
receive as precious liquor, as the best plate* Good Anna as well as Simeon,
Luke 2. 38.
gave glory to their newborn Savior, to all that looked for redemption in
Jerusalem: And afterward, the holy women were no less zealous attendants of
Christ, both in his life and death, Luke 8. 2, 3.
then the most forward Disciples; yea, they followed him, when his domestic
followers forsook him; neither could be parted by either his Cross, or his
Grave.

And they were the first that were honored with the notice, and message of
their Saviors blessed Resurrection, Joh. 20. 17.
and Ascension; then which, what employment could be more noble? The Lord gave
the word, Psalm. 68. 11.
says the Psalmist, great was the company of the Preacheresses; the word is
Feminine: However therefore in natural, and politic respects, the Philosopher
might have some reason to bless God, that he had made him a man, and not a
woman; yet in spiritual (which are the best) regards, here is no inequality; so
that it is the great mercy and goodness of our common Creator, that though he
has made a difference in the smallest matters, yet he makes none in the
greatest; King James his preface monitory.
and that he so indifferently peoples Heaven with both Sexes, that, for ought
we know, the greatest Saint there, is of the weaker Sex.

LXXIV.
There is nothing more easy then for a man to be courageous in a time of
safety; and to defy those dangers which he neither feels nor sees. Whiles the
coast is clear, every man can be ready to say, with Peter; Though all men,
Mark. 14. 31.
yet not I; If I should dye with thee, I will not deny thee in any wise: But
when the evil hour comes, when our enemy appears armed in the lists, ready to
encounter us, then to call up our spirits, and to grapple resolutely with
dangers and death, it is the praise and proof of a true Christian valor*

And this is that which the Apostle calls standing; Ephesians. 6. 13, 14.
in opposition to both falling, and fleeing: Falling, out of faintness, and
fleeing for fear. It shall not be possible for us thus to stand, if we shall
trust to our own feet; In, and of our selves, the best of us are but mere
cowards; neither can be able so much as to look our enemy in the face: Would we
be perfect victors? we must go out of our selves, into the God of our strength:
If we have made him ours, who shall, yea, who can be against us? Phil. 4. 13.
We can do all things through him that strengthens us: Phil. 4. 13.
All things; therefore conquer Death and Hell: If we be weakness, he is
omnipotence; Romans 13. 14.
Put we on the Lord Jesus Christ by a lively Faith, what enemy can come within
us, to do us hurt? Psalm. 56. 3, 4.
What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee, O God: In thee, O God, have I
trusted, I will not fear what (either) flesh (or spirit) can do unto me: The
Lord is my rock, Psalm. 18. 2, 3.
and my fortress, and my deliverer; my God, my strength, in whom I will trust,
my buckler, and the horn of my salvation; I will call upon the Lord, who is
worthy to be praised; so shall I be saved from mine enemies.

LXXV.
It is disparagement enough that the Apostle casts upon all the visible things
of this world, 2 Cor. 4. 18.
That the things which are seen are temporary: Be they never so glorious, yet
being transitory, they cannot be worthy of our hearts: Who would care for an
house of glass, if never so curiously painted, and gilded? All things that are
measured by time, are thus brittle: Bodily substances of what kind soever, lie
open to the eye; and being seen, can be in no other, then a fading condition;
even that goodly Fabric of Heaven, which we see, and admire, must be changed,
and in a sort dissolved: How much more vanishing are all earthly glories? 2
Pet. 3. 7. 12,
and by how much shorter their continuance is, so much lower must be their
valuation: We account him foolish that will dote too much upon a flower, though
never so beautiful; because we know it can be but a months pleasure; and no
care, no art can preserve it from withering; amongst the rest the Hemerocallis
is the least esteemed, because one day ends its beauty: what madness then were
it in us to set our hearts upon these perishing contentments which we must soon
mutually leave, we them, they us: Eternity is that only thing which is worthy
to take up the thoughts of a wise man; That being added to evil makes the evil
infinitely more intolerable; and being added to good, makes the good infinitely
more desirable.

O Eternity! thou bottomless abyss of misery to the wicked; thou indeterminable
pitch of joy to the Saints of God; what soul is able to comprehend thee? what
strength of understanding is able to conceive of thee? Be thou ever in my
thoughts, ever before mine eyes: Be thou the scope of all my actions, of all my
endeavors: and in respect of thee, let all this visible world be to me as
nothing: And since only the things which are not seen by the eye of sense are
eternal; Lord, sharpen thou the eyes of my faith that I may see those things
invisible, and may in that sight, enjoy thy blessed eternity.

LXXVI.
What is all the world to us in comparison of the Bird in our bosom, our
conscience? In vain shall all the world acquit, and magnify us, if that
secretly condemn us; and if that condemn us not, 1 John 3. 21.
We have confidence toward God, and may bid defiance to men and devils: Now
that it may not condemn us; it must be both pacified, and purged: pacified in
respect of the guilt of sin purged in respect of the corruption:

For so long as there is guilt in the soul, the clamors of an accusing, and
condemning conscience can no more be stilled, then the waters of the Sea can
stand still in a storm: There is then no pacification without removing the
guilt of sin; no removing of guilt without remission; no remission without
satisfaction; no satisfaction without a price of infinite value answerable to
the infiniteness of the Justice offended: and this is no where to be had, but
in the blood of Christ, God, and Man: All created and finite powers are but
miserable comforters, Physicians of no value, to this one.

And the same power that pacifieth the conscience from the guilt, must also
purge it from the filthiness of sin; Heb. 9. 14.
even that blood of the Son of God, Heb. 9. 14.
who is made unto us of God, 1 John 1. 7.
Sanctification and Redemption: That Faith which brings Christ home to the
soul, does by the efficacy of his blessed Spirit, Act. 15. 9.
purify the heart from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit: Being
justified by this faith, we have peace with God: When once the heart is quieted
from the uproars of selfaccusation, and cleansed from dead works; what in this
world can so much concern us, as to keep it so? Which shall be done, if we
shall give Christ the possession of our souls, and commit the keys into his
only hands; so shall nothing be suffered to enter in, that may disturb or
defile it; if we shall settle firm resolutions in our breasts, never to yield to
the commission of any known, enormious sin: Failings and slips there will be in
the holiest of Gods Saints, whiles they carry their clay about them; For these
we are allowed to fetch forth a pardon of course from that infinite mercy of
our God, Zechar. 13. 1.
who has set a Fountain open to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness; by the force of our daily prayers: But
if, through an over-bold security, and spiritual negligence, we shall suffer
our selves to be drawn away into some heinous wickedness, it must cost warm
water to recover us: Neither can it, in such a case, be safe for us, to suffer
our eyes to sleep, or our eyelids to slumber, till we have made our peace with
Heaven: This done, and carefully maintained, what can make us other then
happily secure? Blessed is he whose conscience has not condemned him, Ecclu.
14. 2.
and who is not fallen from his hope in the Lord.

LXXVII.
We cannot apprehend Heaven in any notion but of excellency, and glory; that as
it is in it self a place of wonderful resplendance, and Majesty; so it is the
Palace of the most high God, wherein he exhibites his infinite magnificence;
that it is the happy receptacle of all the elect of God; that it is the
glorious rendezvous of the blessed Angels; that we have parents, children,
husband, wife, brothers, sisters, friends whom we dearly loved, there: For such
is the power of love that it can endeare any place to us where the party
affected, is; much more the best; If it be a loathsome gaol, our affection can
make it a delightful bower; yea the very grave cannot keep us off: The women
could say of Mary, that she was gone to the grave of Lazarus to weep there: and
the zeal of those holy clyents of Christ carries them to seek their (as they
supposed still dead) Savior, even in his Tomb: Above all conceivable
apprehensions then, wherein Heaven is endeared to us, there is none comparable
to that, which the Apostle enforces to us, that, there Christ sits on the
right hand of God: Colos. 3. 1.
If we have an husband, wife, child, whom we dearly love, pent up in some
Tower or Castle afar off, whither we are not allowed to have access; how many
longing eyes do we cast thither; how do we please our selves to think, within
those walls is he enclosed whom my soul loves; and who is enclosed in my
heart; but if it may be possible to have passage (though with some difficulty
and danger) to the place, how gladly do we put our selves upon the adventure?
When therefore we hear and certainly know that our most dear Savior is above,
in all heavenly glory; and that the Heavens must contain him till his coming
again, with what full contentment of heart should we look up thither? How
should we break through all these secular distractions, and be carried up by our
affections (which are the wings of the soul) toward an happy fruition of him?
Good old Jacob, when he heard that his dearling son was yet alive, in Egypt,
how does he gather up his spirits, and takes up a cheerful resolution, Joseph
my son is yet alive, Genesis 45. 26.
I will go and see him before I dye? Do we think his heart was any more in
Canaan, after he heard where his Joseph was? And shall we, when we hear, and
know, where our dearest Savior (typified by that good Patriark) is; that he is
gone before to provide a place for us in the rich Goshen above, shall we be
heartless in our desires toward him, and take up with earth? How many poor
souls take tedious, costly, perilous voyages to that land (which only the
bodily presence of our Savior could denominate holy, their own wickedness
justly styles accursed) only to see the place, where our dear Savior trod;
where he stood, where he sat, lay, set his last footing; and find a kind of
contentment in this sacred curiosity, returning yet, never the holier, never
the happier; how then should I be affected with the sight of that place, where
he is now in person, sitting gloriously at the right hand of Majesty, adored by
all the powers of Heaven? Let it be a covenant between me and my eyes, never to
look up at Heaven, (as how can I look beside it?) but I shall, in the same
instant, think of my blessed Savior, sitting there in his glorified humanity,
united to the incomprehensible -- glorious Deity, attended and worshipped by
thousand thousands of Saints and Angels, preparing a place for me and all his
elect in those eternal Mansions.

LXXVIII.
How lively does the Spirit of God describe the heavenly affections of faithful
Abraham; that he looked for a city which has foundations, whose builder and
maker is God: Heb. 11. 10.
What city was this, but the celestial Jerusalem, the glorious seat of the
Great Empire of Heaven? The main strength of any building is in the foundation;
if that be firm and sure, the fabric well knit together will stand: but if
that be either not laid, or lie loose and unsettled, the tottering frame does
but wait upon the next wind for a ruin: The good Patriark had been used to
dwell in Tents, which were not capable of a foundation: It is like, he and his
ancestors wanted not good houses in Chaldea, where they were formerly planted;
God calls him forth of those fixed habitations in his own Country, to sojourn
in Tabernacles, or Booths in a strange land; his faith carries him cheerfully
along; his present fruition gives way to hope of better things: In stead of
those poor sheds of sticks and skins, he looks for a City; in stead of those
stakes and cords, he looks for Foundations; in stead of men's work, he looks for
the Architecture of God. Alas, we men will be building Castles, and Towers
here upon earth, or, in the air rather; such as either have no foundation at
all; or at the best, only a foundation in the dust; neither can they be any
other, whiles they are of man's making; for what can he make in better condition
then himself? The City that is of Gods building is deep, and firmly grounded
upon the rock of his eternal decree; and has more foundations then one; and
all of them both sure and costly; Gods material house built by Solomon had the
foundation laid with great squared stone; Revel. 21. 19.
but the foundations of the wall of this City of God are garnished with all
manner of precious stones: Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou city of
God: Why do I set up my rest in this house of clay, which is every day falling
on my head, whiles I have the assured expectation of so glorious a dwelling
above? 2 Cor. 4. 1.
For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God; an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

LXXIX.
God, though he be free of his entertainments, yet is curious of his guests: we
know what the great housekeeper said to the sordid guest; Friend how came
thou in hither, not having on a wedding garment? To his feast of glory none can
come but the pure; without this disposition no man shall so much as see God,
Heb. 12. 14.
much less be entertained by him: To his feast of grace none may come but the
clean, and those who upon strict examination have found themselves worthy: That
we may be meet to sit at either of these Tables, there must be a putting off,
Colos. 3. 9, 10.
ere there can be a putting on; a putting off the old garments, ere there can
be a putting on the new; the old are foul and ragged, the new clean and holy;
for if they should be worn at once; the foul and beastly under-garment would
soil, and defile the clean; the clean could not cleanse the foul: As it was in
the Jewish law of holiness, holy flesh in the skirt of the garment could not
infuse an holiness into the garment; Haggai. 2. 12, 13.
but the touch of an unclean person might diffuse uncleanness to the garment:
Thus our professed holiness, and pretended graces are sure to be defiled by our
secretly-maintained corruption, not our corruption sanctified by our graces; as
in common experience, if the sound person come to see the infected; the
infected may easily taint the sound; the sound cannot by his presence heal the
infected: If ever therefore we look to be welcome to the feasts of God, we must
put off the old man with his deeds, Colos. 3* 9, 10.
and put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him
that created him.

LXXX.
It is not for us to cast a disparagement upon any work of our Maker; much less
upon a piece so near, so essential to us: yet with what contempt does the
Apostle seem still to mention our flesh? and, as if he would have it slighted
for some forlorn outcast, he charges us, not to make provision for the flesh:
What? Romans 13. 14.
shall we think the holy man was fallen out with a part of himself? Surely,
sometimes his language that he gives it, is hard: The flesh rebels against the
spirit: Romans 7. 18.
I know that in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing: but how easy
is it to observe, that the Flesh sometimes goes for the body of man; sometimes
for the body of sin: as the first, it is a partner with the soul; as the
latter, it is an enemy; and the worst of enemies, spiritual: No marvel then if
he would not have provision made for such an enemy: In outward and bodily
enmity, the case, and his charge is otherwise: Prove. 25. 21.
If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, Romans 12. 20.
give him drink: but here, make no provision for the flesh: What reason were
there that a man should furnish, and strengthen an enemy against himself? But
if the flesh be the body of the man, it must challenge a respect; but the very
name carries an intimation of baseness; at the best, it is that which is common
to beasts with us; 1 Cor. 15. 39.
There is one flesh (says the Apostle) of men, another flesh of beasts; both
are but flesh: Alas, what is it but a clod of earth better molded, the clog of
the soul, a rotten pile, a pack of dust, a feast of worms? But even as such,
provision must be made for it; with a moderate and thrifty care, not with a
solicitous: a provision for the necessities and convenience of life, not for
the fulfilling of the lusts: This flesh must be fed, and clad; not humord, not
pampered: so fed as to hold up nature, not inordinateness; shortly, such an
hand must we hold over it, as that we may make it a good servant, not a lawless
wanton.

LXXXI.
What action was ever so good, or so completely done, as to be well taken of
all hands? Noah and Lot foretell of judgments from God, upon the old world, and
Sodom, and are scoffed at: Israel would go to sacrifice to God in the
wilderness, and they are idle; Moses and Aaron will be governing Israel
according to Gods appointment; Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi:
David will be dancing before the Ark of the Lord; 2 Samuel 6. 20.
He uncovers himself shamelesly as one of the vain fellows: Matt. 11. 18, 19.
Our Savior is sociable; He is a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and
sinners: John Baptist is solitary, and austere; He has a devil: Christ casts
out devils; He does it by Beelzebub the prince of devils: He rides in an homely
pomp through Jerusalem; he affects a temporal kingdom; and he is no friend to
Caesar that can suffer him to live. He is by his Almighty power risen from the
dead; his Disciples stole him away, whiles the Soldiers slept: The Spirit of
God descends upon the Apostles in fiery and cloven tongues, Act. 2. 13.
and they, thus inspired, suddenly speak all Languages; they are full of new
wine. Stephen preaches Christ the end of the Law; Act. 6. 11.
He speaks blasphemous words against Moses and against God; and what aspersions
were cast upon the primitive Christians, all Histories witness: What can we
hope to do, or say, that shall escape the censures, and mis-interpretations of
men, when we see the Son of God could not avoid it? Let a man profess himself
honestly conscionable, he is a scrupulous hypocrite; Let him take but a just
liberty in things merely indifferent, he is loosely profane; Let him be
charitably affected to both parts (though in a quarrel not fundamental,) he is
an odious neuter, a lukewarm Laodicean: It concerns every wise Christian to
settle his heart in a resolved confidence of his own holy and just grounds, and
then to go on in a constant course of his well-warranted judgment, and
practice, with a careless dis-regard of those fools-bolts which will be sure to
be shot at him, which way soever he goes.

LXXXII.
All Gods dear and faithful ones are notably described by the Apostle, to be
such as love the appearing of our Lord Jesus: 2 Timothy 4. 8.
for certainly, we cannot be true friends to those whose presence we do not
desire and delight in; now this appearing is either in his coming to us, or our
going to him; whether ever it be, that he makes his glorious return to us for
the judgment of the world, and the full redemption of his elect; or, that he
fetches us home to himself, for the fruition of his blessedness; in both, or
either, we enjoy his appearance: If then we can only be content with either of
these; but do not love them, nor wish for them; our hearts are not yet right
with God: It is true that there is some terror in the way to both these; his
return to us is not without a dreadful Majesty; 2 Pet. 3. 10.
for the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise; and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat; and the glorious retinue of his blessed Angels must
needs be with an astonishing magnificence; and on the other part our passage to
him must be through the gates of death, wherein nature cannot but apprehend an
horror; but the immediate issue of both these is so infinitely advantageous,
and happy, that the fear is easily swallowed up of the joy; Does the daughter
of Jephtah abate ought of her timbrels and dances because she is to meet a
father, Judge. 11. 34.
whose arms are bloody with victory? Does a loving wife entertain her
returning husband otherwise then with gladness, because he comes home in a
military pomp? Is the conqueror less joyful to take up his crown, because it is
congratulated to him with many peals of Ordnance? Certainly then, neither that
heavenly state wherein Christ shall return to us; nor the fears of an harmless
and beneficial death, wherein we shall pass to him, either may, nor can hinder
ought of our love to his appearing: O Savior, come in whatever equipage, or
fashion thou will, thou can be no other then lovely, and welcome: Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly.

LXXXIII.
Suppose a man comes to me on the same errand which the Prophet delivered to
Hezekiah; 2 Kin. 20. 1.
Set thine house in order, for thou shall dye, and not live: with what welcome
do I entertain him? Do I, with that good King, turn my face to the wall, and
weep? or do I say of the messenger as David said of Ahimaaz; 2 Samuel 18. 27.
He is a good man, and brings good tidings? Surely, Nature urges me to the
former, which cannot but hold Dissolution her greatest enemy; for what can she
abhor so much as a not-being? Faith persuades me to the latter; telling me
that, To dye is gain; Philip. i. 23.
Now, whether of these two shall prevail with me? Certainly, as each of them
has a share in me; so shall either of them act its own part in my soul: Nature
shall obtain so much of me, as to fetch from me, upon the sudden apprehension
of death, some thoughts of fear; Faith shall strait step in, and drive away all
those weak fears; and raise up my heart to a cheerful expectation of so
gainful, and happy a change: Nature shows me the gastliness of death; Faith
shows me the transcendency of Heavenly glory: Nature represents to me a rotten
carkase; Faith presents me with a glorious soul; Shortly, nature startles at
the sight of death; Faith out-faces and overcomes it; so then, I who at the
first blush could say, Ecclus. 41. 1.
O Death how bitter is thy remembrance; can now upon my deliberate thoughts,
say, I desire to depart and to be with Christ. Philip. 1. 23.


LXXXIIII.
In the carriage of our holy profession, God can neither abide us cowardly, nor
indiscreet: The same mouth that bad us, when we are persecuted in one city,
flee into another, said also; he that will save his life, shall loose it; we
may neither cloak cowardice with a pretended discretion; nor lose our
discretion in a rash courage; He that is most skilful and most valiant, may in
his combat traverse his ground for an advantage; and the stoutest Commander may
fall flat to avoid a Cannon-shot; True Christian wisdom, and not carnal fear,
is that, wherewith we must consult for advice, when to stand to it; and when to
give back. On the one side, he dies honorably that falls in Gods quarrel; on
the other, he that flies may fight again; Even our blessed leader that came
purposely to give his life for the world, yet when he found that he was laid
for in Judea, flees into Galilce. The practice of some Primitive Christians,
that, in an ambition of martyrdom went to seek out and challenge dangers and
death, is more worthy of our wonder, and applause, then our imitation. It shall
be my resolution to be warily thrifty in managing my life, when God offers me
no just cause of hazard; and to be willingly profuse of my blood, when it is
called for by that Savior, who was not sparing of shedding his most precious
blood for me.

LXXXV.
He had need to be well under-laid, that knows how to entertain the time and
himself with his own thoughts: Company, variety of employments, or recreations,
may wear out the day with the emptiest hearts; but, when a man has no society
but of himself, no task to set himself upon, but what arises from his own
bosom; surely, if he have not a good stock of former notions, or an inward
mint of new, he shall soon run out of all, and (as some forlorn bankrupt) grow
weary of himself: Hereupon it is that men of barren, and unexercised hearts can
no more live without company, then fish out of the water: And those Heremites,
and other Votaries, which professing only devotion, have no mental abilities
to set themselves on work, are fain to tire themselves, and their unwelcome
hours, with the perpetual repetitions of the same orisons, which are now grown
to a tedious, and heartless formality: Those contemplative spirits that are
furnished with gracious abilities, and got into acquaintance with the God of
Heaven, may, and can lead a life (even in the closest restraint, or wildest
solitariness,) nearest to Angelical; but those* which neither can have Mary's
heart, nor will have Marthaes hand, must needs be unprofitable to others, and
wearisome to themselves.

LXXXVI.
There is nothing more easy then to be a Christian at large; but the
beginnings of a strict and serious Christianity are not without much
difficulty; for nature affects a loose kind of liberty, which it cannot endure
to have restrained: neither fares it otherwise with it, then with some wild
colt; which at the first taking up, flings and plunges, and will stand on no
ground; but after it has been somwhile disciplined at the Post, is grown
tractable, and quietly submits either to the saddle, or the collar: The first
is the worst; afterward that which was tolerable, will prove easy, and that
which was easy will be found pleasant: For in true practical Christianity,
there is a more kindly and better liberty; Gal. 5. 1.
Standfast (says the Apostle) in that liberty wherewith Christ has made you
free: Lo here a liberty of Christ's making, and therefore both just, and
excellent: for what other is this liberty then a freedom, as from the tyranny
of the law, so from the bondage of sin? Romans 6. 18.
Being then made free from sin (says Saint Paul) ye became the servants of
righteousness: Here are two masters, under one of which every soul must serve;
either sin, or righteousness: if we be free from the one, we are bondmen to
the other; we say truly, the service of God (that is of righteousness) is
perfect freedom; but to be free to sin is a perfect bondage; and to serve sin
is no other then a vassallage to the devil: From this bondage Christ only can
free us; Joh. 8. 36.
If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed; and we are no
Christians, unless we be thus freed: and being thus freed, we shall rejoice in
the pleasant fetters of our voluntary and cheereful obedience to righteousness*
neither would we for a world return to those gieves and manacles of sin, which
we once beld our most dear and comely ornaments: and can truly say, Thou have
set my feet in a large room. Psalm. 31. 8.
I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts. Psalm. 119. 45.


LXXXVII.
I cannot but pity and lament the condition of those Christians who for the
hope of a little earthly dross do willingly put themselves for a continuance
out of the pale of Gods Church: What do they else, but cast themselves quite
out of the Almighties protection; who has not bound himself to follow them out
of his own walks; or to seek them out amongst Turks and Infidels? well may he
say to them (as to the chief Pastor of Pergamus) I know thy works, Revel. 2. 13.
and where thou dwell; even where Satan's seat is; but have they any reason
to expect that he should dwell with them there, under the reign of that Prince
of darkness? These men put upon themselves that hard measure, which the man
after Gods own heart complains to be put upon him by his worst enemies: Psalm
120. 5.
Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with Meshech, and to have my
habitation in the Tents of Kedar: That holy man could in the bitterness of his
soul inveigh against his persecutors for no other terms then these men offer to
themselves: 1 Samuel 26. 19.
Cursed be they before the Lord, for they have driven me out this day from
abiding in the inheritance of the Lord; saying, go serve other gods: I speak
not of those, who carry God along with them in his ordinance; all earths are
alike to us, where we may freely enjoy his presence: but of those straglers,
who care not to live without God, so they may be befriended by Mammon. How ill
a match these poor men make for themselves, I send them to their Savior to
learn What is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world; Matt. 16. 26.
and lose his own soul; or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? God
forbid, I should give their souls for lost, but I must say, they are hazarded;
for herein doubtless, they tempt God, who has not promised to keep them in any
other, then their just ways; and they do in a sort tempt and challenge Satan,
to draw them on either to a love of error and impiety, or at least to a cooling
of their care and love of truth: How unlike are these men to that wise merchant
in the Gospel; He sold all that he had to buy the pearl of great price: Matt.
13. 45. 46.
they sell the pearl to buy a little worthless merchandise. As the greatest
part of their trafick stands upon exchange; so I heartily wish they would make
this one exchange more; of less care of their wealth, for more care of their
souls.

LXXXVIII.
Even when Joseph was a great lord in Egypt, second to none but Pharaoh, and
had the command of that richest country of the world* yet then his old Father
Jacob thought his poor parcel of Shechem worthy to be bequeathed to him, and
embraced of him, as a noble patrimony; because it was in the promised land, and
the legacy of a dying Father: How justly do I admire the faith both of the
father and son in this donation! Jacob was now in Goshen; Shechem was in
Canaan; neither was the father now in the present possession; nor were the sons
in some ages to enjoy it: It was four hundred and thirty years that Israel must
be a sojourner in a strange country, Exodus, 12. 41.
ere they shall enter into the promised Land; yet now, as foreseeing the future
possession, which his posterity should take of this spot of earth, so long
after, Jacob gives Shechem to Joseph, and Joseph apprehends it as a rich
blessing, as the double portion of the divided primogeniture: Infidelity is
purblinde, and can see nothing but that which is hard at hand; Faith is
quick-sighted, and discerns the events of many centuries of years, yea of ages
to come; Abraham saw his Saviors day, and rejoiced to see it, a thousand nine
hundred and forty years off; and Adam (before him) almost four thousand years.
As to God all things are present, even future, so to those that by a lively
faith partake of him: Why do I not by that faith see my Savior returning in
his Heavenly magnificence, as truly as now I see the Heaven whence he shall
come; and my body as verily raised from the dust, and become glorious, as now I
see it weak and decrepit, and falling into the dust?

LXXXIX.
True knowledge causes appetite and desire; For the will follows the
understanding; whatsoever that apprehends to be good for us, the affective part
inclines to it: No man can have any regard to an unknown good: If an hungry man
did not know that food would refresh and nourish him, or the thirsty that drink
would satisfy him, or the naked that fire would warm him, or the sick that
Physic would recover him; none of these would affect these succors: And
according to our apprehension of the goodness and use of these helps, so is our
appetite toward them: For the object of the will is a known good, either true,
or appearing so: And if our experience can tell us of some that can say, with
her in the Poet; I see and approve better things, but follow the worse: It is
not for that evil, as evil, (much less as worse) can fall into the will; but,
that their appetite over-carries them to a misconceit of a particular good; so
as, howsoever in a generality, they do confusedly assent to the goodness of
some holy act, or object, yet upon the present occasion, (here and now, as the
School speaks) their sensitive appetite has prevailed to draw them to a
persuasion, that this pleasure, or that profit is worthy to be embraced: Like
as our first parents had a general apprehension that it was good to obey all
the commands of their Creator; but when it came to the forbidden fruit; now
their eye, and their ear, and their heart tell them, it is good for them, both
for pleasure, and for the gain of knowledge, to taste of that forbidden tree: So
then, the miscarriage is not in that they affect that which they think not to
be good; but in that they think that to be good which is not; for alas, for
one true good there are many seeming, which delude the soul with a fair
semblance: As a man in a generality esteems silver above brass, but when he
meets with a rusty piece of silver, and a clear piece of brass, he chooses
rather the clear brass then the silver defaced with rust: Surely, it is our
ignorance that is guilty of our cool neglect of our spiritual good; if we did
know how sweet the Lord is, in his sure promises, in his unfailing mercies, we
could not but long after him, and remain unsatisfied till we find him ours:
would God be pleased to shine in our hearts by the light of the true knowledge
of himself, we could not have cause to complain of want of heat in our
affections toward his infinite goodness.

Did we but know how sweet and delectable, Christ, the Heavenly Manna, is, we
could not but hunger after him; and we could not hunger, and not be satisfied;
and, in being satisfied, blessed.

XC.
Those which we mis-cal goods, are but in their nature, indifferent, and are
either good or evil as they are affected, as they are used: Indeed, all their
malignity, or virtue, is in the mind, in the hand of the possessor: Riches ill
got ill kept, ill spent are but the Mammon of iniquity; but if well, Pro 14. 24.
The Crown of the wise is their riches: How can it be amiss to have much, when
he that was the richest man of the East, Job. 1. 1, 3.
was the holiest? Yea, when God himself is justly styled the possessor of
Heaven, and Earth? How can it be amiss to have little; when our Savior says:
Blessed are ye poor: Luke. 6. 20.
And if from that divine mouth, we hear a woe to the rich; Luke. 6, 24.
himself interprets it of them that trust in riches: Mar. 10. 24.
If our riches possess us, 1 Timothy 6. 17.
in stead of our possessing them, we have changed our God, and lost our selves;
but if we have learnt to use our wealth, and not enjoy it, we may be no less
gracious then rich: If a rich man have a large and humble heart, and a just
hand, he inherits the blessing of the poor: If a poor man have a proud heart,
Prove. 30. 9.
and a theevish hand, he carries away the woe from the rich: Riches (says wise
Solomon) make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven; So as
we may use the matter, our souls may fly thitherward with them; If we do good,
and be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying
up in store for our selves a good foundation against the time to come, 1 Timothy
6. 18, 19.
that we may lay hold on eternal life. Let me say with Agur, Prove. 38.
Give me neither poverty, nor riches; but whethersoever God gives, I am both
thankful and indifferent, so as whiles I am rich in estate, I may be poor in
spirit; and whiles I am poor in estate, I may be rich in grace.

XCI.
Had I been in the streets of Jericho, sure, me thinks, I should have justled
with Zacheus for the Sycomore, to see Jesus; and should have blessed my eyes
for so happy a prospect: and yet, I consider that many a one saw his face on
earth, which shall never see his glory in Heaven: and I hear the Apostle say,
Though we have known Christ after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 16.
yet now henceforth know we him so no more. O for the eyes of a Stephen, Act.
7. 55, 56.
that saw the Heavens opened, and the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the
right hand of God! That prospect did as much transcend this of Zacheus, as
Heaven is above Earth; celestial glory above humane infirmity: And why should
not the eyes of my faith behold the same object which was seen by Stephens
bodily eyes? I see thee, O Savior, I see thee, as certainly, though not so
clearly: Do thou sharpen, and fortify these weak eyes of mine, Psa.* 36. 9.
that in thy light I may see light.

XCII.
How gracious a word was that which God said to Israel, I have called thee by
thy name, Isa. 43. 1.
and thou art mine. He that imposed that name upon Jacob; makes familiar use of
it to his posterity: Neither is the case singular, but universally common to
all his spiritual issue. There is not one of them, whom he does not both call
by his name, and challenge for his own: Psa. 147. 4.
He that tells the number of the stars, and calls them all by their names; has
also a name for every of these earthly luminaries; He who brought all other
living creatures unto man, to see how he would call them, and would make use of
Adams appellation; Genesis 2. 19, 20.
reserved the naming of man to himself; neither is there any one of his
innumerous posterity, whom he knows not by name: But it is one thing to take
notice of their names; another thing to call them by their names; that denotes
his omniscience; this his specialty of favor: none are thus graced but the true
Sons of Israel. As Gods children do not content themselves with a confused
knowledge of a Deity, but rest not till they have attained a distinct
apprehension of their God, as he has revealed himself to man; so does God
again to them: It is not enough that he knows them in a general view as in the
throng, wherein we see many faces, none distinctly; but he singles them out in
a familiar kind of severalty both of knowledge and respect: As then he has
names for the several Stars of Heaven, Job 9 9.
Cimah, Cesil, Mazzaroth, etc. Job. 38. 31.
And for the several Angels, Gabriel, Raphael, Michael, etc. and calls them by
the proper names which he has given them; so he does to every of his faithful
ones: Of one he says, Luke 1. 13.
Thou shall call his name John: Joh. 1. 42.
Of another, Thou art Simon, Joh. 1. 42.
thou shall be called Cephas: Luke 19.
To one he says, Zacheus, come down; to another, Cornelius, Acts 103, 4.
thy prayers, and thine alms are come up: In short, there is no one of his,
whom he does not both know, and call by his name. What a comfort is this to a
poor wretched man to think; Here I walk obscure and contemptible upon earth, in
a condition mean, and despised of men; but the great God of Heaven is pleased
to take such notice of me, as even from Heaven to call me by my name; and to
single me out for Grace, and Salvation; and not only to mention my name from
above, in the gracious offer of his Ordinances, Luke 10. 2^.
but to write it in the eternal Register of Heaven? What care I to be
inglorious, yea causelessly infamous with men, whiles I am thus honored by the
King of glory?

XCIII.
It is the great wisdom and providence of the Almighty, so to order the
dispositions and inclinations of men, that they affect diverse and different
works, and pleasures: Some are for manuary trades, others for intellectual
employments: One is for the Land, another for the Sea; one for husbandry,
another for merchandise; one is for Architecture, another for Vestiary
services; one is for fishing, another for pasturage; and in the learned trades,
one is for the mistress of Sciences, Divinity; another for the Law, whether
Civil, or Municipal; a third is for the search of the secrets of Nature, and
the skill and practice of Physic; and each one of these divides it self into
many differing varieties; Neither is it otherwise in matter of pleasures; one
places his delight in following his Hawk and Hound, another in the harmony of
Music; one makes his Garden his paradise, and enjoys the flourishing of his
fair Tulips; another finds contentment in a choice Library; one loves his
Bowl, or his Bow, another pleases himself in the patient pastime of his Angle:
For surely, if all men affected one and the same trade of life, or pleasure of
recreation, it were not possible that they could live one by another: Neither
could there be any use of commerce, whereby man's life is maintained; neither
could it be avoided, but that the envy of the inevitable rivality, would cut
each others throat. It is good reason we should make a right use of this
gracious and provident dispensation of the Almighty; and therefore that we
should improve our several dispositions and faculties to the advancing of the
common stock; and withal, that we should neither encroach upon each others
profession, nor be apt to censure each others recreation.

XCIV.
He were very quick-sighted that could perceive the growing of the grass, or
the moving of the shadow upon the Dial; yet, when those are done, every eye
does easily discern them. It is no otherwise in the progress of grace; which
how it increases in the soul, and by what degrees, we cannot hope to perceive;
but being grown, we may see it: It is the fault of many Christians, that they
depend too much upon sense; and make that the judge of their spiritual estate;
being too much dejected when they do not sensibly feel the proofs of their
proficiency, and the present proceedings of their regeneration: why do they not
as well question the growth of their stature, because they do not see every day
how much they are thriven? Surely, it must needs be that spiritual things are
less perceptible then bodily; much more therefore must we in these, wait upon
time for necessary conviction; and well may it suffice us, if upon an impartial
comparing of the present measure of our knowledge, faith, obedience with the
former, we can perceive our selves any whit sensibly advanced.

XCV.
The wise Christian has learned to value every thing according to its own
worth; If we be too glad of these earthly things, it is the way to be too much
afflicted with their loss; and whiles we have them, to be transported into
pride and wantonness; If we esteem them too little, it is the way to an
unthankful disrespect of the giver. Christianity carries the heart in a just
equipoise; when they come, they are welcomed without too much joy; and when
they go, they part without tears: we may smile at these earthly favors, not
laugh out; we may like them, but we must take heed of being in love with them:
For love, of what kind soever it be, is not without the power of assimilation;
If we love the world, we cannot but be worldly-minded: Romans 8. 5, 6.
They that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh; and to be
carnally minded is death: Contrarily if we love God, we are made partakers of
the divine nature; and we are such as we affect: If we be Christians in
earnest; certainly the inner rooms of our hearts, which are the holy of holies,
are reserved for the Almighty; the outer courts may be for the common resort of
lawful cares and desires, they may come and go; but our God shall have his
fixed habitation here for ever.

XCVI.
Nature is sly and cunning; neither is it possible to take her without a
shift: The light huswife wipes her mouth, Prove. 30. 20.
and it was not she: Rachel has stolen her fathers Teraphim, and the custom of
women is upon her: Saul reserves all the fat cattle of the Amalekites; it is
for a sacrifice to the Lord thy God: Neither is it so only in excusing an evil
done, but in waving a good to be done: I am not eloquent, says Moses; send by
him, by whom thou should send; Pharaoh will kill me; there is a lion in the
way, says the Sluggard: I have married a wife, I cannot come, says the
sensual Guest. If I give I shall want; If I make a strict profession, I shall
be censured: Whereas true Grace is on the one side down right, and ingenuous in
its confessions; not sparing to take shame to it self, that it may give glory
to God; on the other side, resolutely constant to its holy purposes. I and my
house will serve the Lord: If I perish, I perish: I am ready not to be bound
only; but also to dye at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus: It is not
hard therefore for us to know what mistress we serve: If our care and endeavor
be by witty evasions to shuffle off both evil and good, we are the vassals of
nature; but if we shall with an humble penitence acknowledge our evil; and set
our selves with firm resolutions upon the tasks of good, we are under Grace, in
a way to glory.

XCVII.
It is good for a man not always to keep his eyes at home, but sometimes to
look abroad at his neighbors; and to compare his own condition with the worse
estate of others: I know I deserve no more then the meanest, no better then the
worst of men; yet how many do I see, and hear to lie groaning upon their sick
beds, in great extremity of torment, whereas I walk up and down in a competency
of health? How many do I see ready to famish, and forced to either beg, or
starve, whereas I eat my own bread? How many lie roting in Goals and Dungeons,
or are driven to wander in unknown deserts, or amongst people whose language
they understand not, whereas I enjoy home and liberty? How many are shrieking
under scourges and racks, whereas I sit at ease? And if I shall cast mine eyes
upon my spiritual condition; alas, how many do I see sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of death; Mal. 4. 2.
whereas the Sun of Righteousness has arisen to me with healing in his wings?
How many lie in a woeful bondage under sin and Satan, whereas my Savior has
freed me from those hellish chains, and brought me to the glorious liberty of
the sons of God? how many are miserably misled into the dangerous bypath of
error, whereas he has graciously kept me in the plain and sure way of his
saving Truth? If we do not sometimes make these (not proud, but thankful)
comparisons, and look upon our selves, not with direct beams, but by reflection
upon others, we shall never be sensible enough of our own mercies.

XCVIII.
The true Christian is in a very happy condition, for no man will envy him, and
he can envy no body: None will envy him, for the world cannot know how happy he
is; How happy in the favor of a God; how happy in the enjoying of that Favor:
Those secret delights that he finds in the presence of his God; those
comfortable pledges of Love, and mutual interchanges of blessed Interest which
pass between them, are not for worldly hearts to conceive; and no man will envy
an unknown happiness. On the other side, he cannot envy the worlds greatest
favorite under Heaven; for he well knows how fickle and uncertain that man's
felicity is; he sees him walking upon Ice, and perceives every foot of his
sliding, and threatening a fall; and hears that brittle pavement, at every step,
crackling under him, and ready to give way to his swallowing up: and withal,
finds, if those pleasures of his could be constant and permanent, how poor and
unsatisfying they are, and how utterly unable to yield true contentment to the
soul. The Christian therefore, whiles others look upon him with pity and scorn,
laughs secretly to himself in his bosom, as well knowing there is none but he,
truly happy.

XCIX.
It was an high and honorable embassy, whereon the Angel Gabriel was sent down
to the blessed Virgin; that she should be the Mother of her Savior: Neither
was that inferior of the glorious Angel that brought the joyful tidings of the
incarnation and birth of the Son of God, to the shepherds of Bethlehem; but a
far more happy errand was that which the Lord Jesus, after his Resurrection,
committed to the Mary's: Go to my brethren, and say to them, Joh. 20. 17.
I ascend to my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God: Lo, he
says not I am risen, but I ascend; as if he had forgot the Earth, whence he
arose; and thought only on that Heaven whither he was going: Upon his Easter,
his mind is on his Ascension day. As there had been nothing but discomfort in
death, without a Resurrection; so there had been little comfort in a
Resurrection, without an Ascension to glory. There is a contentment in the very
act, I ascend; even nature is ambitious; and we do all affect to mount higher;
as to come down is a Death; but this height is, like the ascendent, infinite, I
ascend to my Father: There was the glory which he put off in his humble
Incarnation; there was the glory which he was now to resume, and possess to all
eternity:

And, as if Nature and Adoption could give a like interest, he puts both
together; My Father, and your Father; my God, and your God: His mercy
vouchsafes to style us Brethren; yet the distance is unmeasureable, betwixt
him, the Son of his eternal Essence, and us the naturally-wretched sons of his
gracious Election; yet, as if both he and we should be coheirs of the same
blessedness (though not in the same measure) he says, My Father, and your
Father: First, my Father, then yours; and indeed therefore ours, because his:
It is in him that we are elected, that we are adopted: Without him, God were
not only a stranger, but an enemy; It is the Son that must make us free; It is
the Son that must make us sons: If we be his, the Father cannot but be ours.

O the unspeakable comfort and happiness of a Christian; In respect of his
bodily nature, he cannot but say (with Job) to the worm, Job 17. 15.
Thou art my mother, and my sister; in his spiritual right, God the Son has
here authorized him to say to the Almighty, Thou art my Father: And if nature
shall, in regard of our frail and dying condition, whiningly say, I descend to
the grave; Faith makes abundant amends in him, and can as cheerfully say, I
ascend to my Father: And what son (that is not altogether graceless) would not
be glad to go to his father, though it were to a meaner house then his own? and
therefore is ready to say, I will descend to my Father; How much more, when his
many Mansions are infinitely glorious; and when all our happiness consists in
his blessed Presence, must we needs say, with a joy unspeakable, and glorious,
I ascend to my Father?

C.
God made man the lord of his Creatures; he made him not a Tyran; he gave the
Creatures to man for his lawful use, not for his wanton cruelty: Man may
therefore exercise his just sovereignty over the beasts of the field, and fowls
of the air, and fishes of the sea, not his lawless will to their needless
destruction, or torment: Had man made the Creature, he could but challenge an
absolute dominion over that work of his hands; but now that he is only a
fellow creature to the meanest worm, What an insolent usurpation is this, so
licentiously to domineer over his fellow dust? Yea, that great God, who gave a
Being to the creature; and therefore has a full and illimited power over his
own workmanship, takes no pleasure to make use of that power to the unnecessary
vexation, and torture of what he has made: That all-wise and bountiful
Creator, who has put into the hands of man the subordinate Dominion over all
the store of these inferior Elements, has made the limit of his command, not
necessity only, but convenience too; but if man shall go beyond these bounds,
and will destroy the creature only, because he will, and put it to pain
because it is his pleasure; he abuses his sovereignty to a sinful
imperiousness, and shall be accountable for his cruelty. When the Apostle, upon
occasion of the Law for not muzzling the mouth of the Ox, 1 Cor. 9. 9.
asks, Does God take care for oxen? Can we think he meant to question the
regard that God has to so useful a Creature? Do we not hear the Psalmist say,
Ps. 147. 9.
He gives to the beast his food, and to the young ravens that cry? Do we not
hear our Savior say, Mat. 10. 29.
That not a sparrow falls to the ground without our heavenly Father? And of how
much more value is an Ox then many thousands of Sparrows? Is not the speech
therefore, both comparative and typical? Is the main care that God takes in
that Law, for provision to be made for the beast; and does he not rather under
that figure give order for the maintenance of those spiritual Oxen, that labor
in the husbandry of the Almighty? Doubtless, as even the savage creatures, Psalm
104. 21, 27, 28.
The young lions seek their meat from God; so they find it from him in due
season; He opens his hand and fills every creature with good: Is God so
careful for preserving, and shall man be so licentious in destroying them? Pro.
12. 10.
A righteous man (says Solomon) regards the life of his beast, he is no
better, therefore, then a wicked man that regards it not: To offer violence
to, and to take away the life from our fellow creatures, without a cause, is no
less then tyranny: Surely, no other measure should a man offer to his beast,
then that, which if his beast (with Balaams) could expostulate with him, he
could well justify to it; no other, then that man, if he had been made a
beast, would have been content should have been offered by man to him; no other
then he shall make account to answer to a common Creator. Justly do we smile at
the niceness of the foolish Manichees, who made scruple to pull an herb or
flower, and were ready to Preface apologies and excuses for the reaping of
their Corn, and grinding the grain they fed upon, as if these Vegetables were
sensible of pain, and capable of our oppression; but surely, for those
creatures which enjoying a sensitive life, forgo it with no less anguish and
reluctation then our selves; and would be as willing to live, without harm, as
their owners, they may well challenge both such mercy and justice at our hands,
as that in the usage of them we may approve our selves to their Maker: Wherein
I blush and grieve to see how far we are exceeded by Turks and Infidels; whom
mere nature has taught more tenderness to the poor brute creatures, then we
have learned from the holier rules of charitable Christianity.

For my part, let me rather affect and applaud the harmless humor of that
mis-called Saint, who in an indiscreet humility called every Woolf his brother,
and every Sheep, yea, every Ant his sister, fellowing himself with every thing
that had life in it, as well as himself; then the tyrannical disposition of
those men who take pleasure in the abuse, persecution, destruction of their
fellow creatures, upon no other quarrel, then because they live.

Supernumeraries.
I.
THere is a satiety in all other (even the best) things that I either have, or
do: I can be easily apt to complain of being wearied, or cloyed with the same
objects but in the thoughts of spiritual things, me thinks, I can never have
enough: For as there is infinite scope and variety of matter, wherein to employ
my meditations, so in each one of them, there is such mavelous depth, that I
should in vain hope, after all my exquisitest search, to reach unto the
bottom: Yea the more I look upon the incomprehensible Deity, in any one of his
glorious attributes, or any one of his omnipotent works, of creation,
government, redemption; the more I long to see, and the less am I satisfied in
seeing: and now I find cause to bless that unspeakable goodness, that he has
vouchsafed to give leave to his unworthy creaturs, to contemplate those
excellent glories, and those saving mysteries; and think my self happy in so
gracious a liberty of exchanging these worthless thoughts of the world, for the
dear and precious meditations of heavenly things; and now how justly do I fall
out with my wretched self, that I have given way to secular distractions? since
my heart can be sometimes in Heaven, why should it not be always there?

II.
What is this that I see? my Savior in an Agony, and an Angel strengthening
him? Oh the wonderful dispensation of the Almighty! That the eternal Son of
God, who promised to send the comforter to his followers, should need comfort!
That he, of whom the voice from Heaven said, This is my well-beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased, should be struggling with his Fathers wrath even to
blood! That the Lord of life should in a languishing horror, say, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death! These, these, O Savior, are the
chastisements of our peace, which both thou would suffer, and thy Father
would inflict; The least touch of one of those pangs, would have been no less
then an hell to me; the whole brunt whereof thou enduredst for my soul; what a
wretch am I, to grudg a little pain from, or for thee who were content to
undergo such pressure of torment for me, as squeezed from thee a sweat of
blood! since my miserable sinfulness deserved more load, then thou in thy
merciful compassion wilt lay upon me; and thy pure nature, and perfect
innocence merited nothing but love and glory.

In this sad case, what service is it that an Angel offers to do unto thee?
Luc. 22. 43.
[Lo there appears to thee an Angel from Heaven, strengthening thee] still
more wonder! Art not thou the God of spirits? Is it not thou, that gave
being, life, motion, power, glory to all the Angels of Heaven? Shall there be
need of one single created spirit to administer strength and comfort to his
Creator? were this the errand; why did not all that blessed Chore of celestial
spirits join their forces together in so high an employment? Where are the
multitudes of that heavenly host, which at thy birth, Luke 2. 13. 14.
sung, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace? Where are those Angels
which ministered to thee after thy combat of temptations in the wilderness?
Surely there was not so much use of their divine cordialls in the desert, as in
the garden; O my God, and Savior, thus thou would have it; It is thy holy
will that is the rule and reason of all thine actions, and events; Thou that
would make use of the provision of men for thy maintenance on earth, would
employ thy servants the Angels, for the supply of thy consolations; and thou
that could have commanded Legions of those celestial spirits, would be
served by one; not, but that more were present, but that only one appeared;
all the host of them ever invisibly attended thee, as God, but as man, one
only presents himself to thy bodily eyes; and thou, who made thy self, Heb.
2. 9.
for our sakes, a little lower then the Angels which thou made, would
humble thy self to receive comfort from those hands, to which thou gave the
capacity to bring it; It is no marvel if that which was thy condescent, be our
glory and happiness: I am not worthy, O God, to know what conflicts thou have
ordained for my weakness; what ever they be, thou that have appointed thine
Angels to be ministering spirits for the behoof of them who shall be heirs of
salvation, Heb. 1. 14.
suffer not thy servant to want the presence of those blessed Emissaries of
thine in any of his extremities; let them stand by his soul in his last agony,
and after an happy Eluctation conveigh it to thy glory.

III.
Many a one has stumbled dangerously at a wicked man's prosperity; and some
have fallen desperately into that sin, which they have seen thrive in others
hands: Those carnal hearts know no other proof of good or evil but present
events; esteeming those causes holy and just which are crowned with outward
success: not considering that it is one of the cunningest plots of hell, to win
credit to bad enterprises by the fairest issues; wherein, the Devil deals
with unwary men, like some cheating gamester, who having drawn in an unskilful
and wealthy novice into play, suffers him to win a while at the first, that he
may at the last, sweet away all the stakes, and some rich manors to boot: The
foolish Benjaminites having twice won the field, begin to please themselves
with a fale conceit of Gibeahs honesty, Judge. 20.
and their own perpetual victories; but they shall soon find that this good
speed is but a pit-fal to entrap them in an ensuing destruction. It is a great
judgment of God to punish sinners with welfare; and to render their lewd ways
prosperuos: wherein, how contrary are the Almighties thoughts to theirs; their
seeming blessings are his heavy curse; and the smart of his stripes are a favor
too good for them to enjoy, to judge wisely of our condition, it is to be
considered not so much how we fare, as upon what terms: If we stand right with
Heaven, every cross is a blessing, and every blessing a pledge of future
happiness: if we be in Gods disfavor, every of his benefits is a judgment; and
every judgment makes way for perdition: For me, let it be my care that my
disposition may be holy, and my actions righteous, let God undertake for the
event.

IV
It is no easy thing to persuade a man that he is proud; every one professes
to hate that vice, yet cherishes it secretly in his bosom: for what is pride
but an overweening of our selves? and such is is our natural self-love, that
we can hardly be drawn to believe that in any kind we think too well of our
own: Now, this pride is ever so much more dangerous, as the thing which we
over-prize is more excellent; and as our mis-apprehension of it may be more
diffusive: To be proud of gay-cloathes, which is childish; or, to be proud of
beauty, which is a womanish vice, has in it more fondness then malignity; and
goes no further then the breast wherein it is conceived; finding no other
entertainment in the beholders, then either smiles, or envy: but the pride of
knowledge, or holy dispositions of the soul, as it is of an higher nature, so it
produces commonly more perilous effects: for as it puffes up a man above
measure; so it suffers not it self to bekept in within the narrow bounds of his
own thoughts, but violently bursts out to the extreme prejudice of a world of
men: Prove. 13. 10.
Only by pride comes contention, says wise Solomon: Even pursepride is
quarelous, domineering over the humble neighborhood, and raising quarrels out
of trifles; but the spiritual arrogance is so much more mischeivous, as the
soul is beyond all earthly pelf: For, when we are once come to advance, and
admire our own judgments; we are first apt to hug our own inventions; then to
esteem them too precious to be smothered within our own closets: the world must
know of how happy an issue we are delivered; and must applaud it, or abide a
contestation, and expect a challenge. The fairest paradoxes cannot pass without
a contradiction; it were strange if some as bold, and forward wits as our own,
should not take up the gantlet: now the fray is begun; the multitude is
divided; sides are taken; the world is in an uproare, from skirmishes we grow
to pitched fields: the Church bleeds on both parts; and it were marvel if
kingdoms could be free:

But that which most notably evinceth the deceitfulness of man's heart in this
behalf, is, that this pride is too often lodged in those breasts which are
professedly devoted to a godly and mortified lowliness: for, as for those
persons which are mere flesh, they are carelessly indifferent to error or truth;
neither are at all moved with the success of either; but the religious mind,
when it is once possessed with the conceit of some singular and important truth
revealed to it, and hid from the rest of the world, is ready to say with the
Samaritan Lepers; 2 King. 7. 9.
I do not well; this day is a day of good tidings, and I hold my peace; and
therefore makes it matter of conscience to trouble the Church with a
mis-grounded novelty: Come we to the Test; Let me ask these mis-guided souls
that are no less confidently persuaded of their own humility then Truth; Can it
be any other then an height of pride, for a man to think himself wiser then the
whole Church of God upon earth? wiser then the whole Church of God that has
been upon earth ever since the Apostles of Christ inclusively, in all
successions to this present time? Can they without much pride think they can
look deeper into the great mysteries of Godliness, then those blessed
attendants of our Savior, and their gracious successors, the holy martyrs, the
godly and religious guides of Gods Church, in all the following ages? Had not
they, then, the same God; the same Scriptures, the illuminations of the same
Spirit? Can they imagine it less then insolent to attribute more to their own
private opinion, then to the constant judgment and practice of the whole
Christian world in all successions of Generations? Can they suppose themselves
in their single capacity (though neither Prophets, nor Prophets sons) meet
Judges or Questionists of those matters of Faith which the general Councils of
the purer times have unanimously agreed upon as the main principles of
Christianity? can they think themselves privileged by the liberty of
prophesying to coin new articles, to deface old? Surely, if the hand of pride
be not in all this, I shall never desire to be acquainted with humility; so as
it is too plain, that a man may be exceeding proudly and not know it; this
vicious habit lurks close in the soul, and unless it discover it self by some
scarce -- discernable effects (which break out now and then, especially, upon
occasions of opposition) is rather more concealed from the owner, then from the
eyes of a stranger: But (if ever,) it bewrays it self in the affectation of
undue eminence, scornful under-valuation of others merits, obstinacy in
opinion, sharpness of censures, and impatience of contradiction; Of all these
the world is commonly no less guilty, then all these are guilty of the common
miseries.

Lord deliver us from our pride, and our contentions will dye alone.

V
What a strange praise and privilege is that which is given to Enoch, above
all those generations of men that peopled the first world; of whom the Spirit
of God says; Genesis 5. 24.
Enoch walked with God, and he was not; for God took him: Doubtless, amongst
all those successive families of the sons of Seth, there were many religious
and well-affected souls; yet there was no one of them that had this character
set upon him, that he walked with God, but he: Whether it were, that God did in
a more open and entire way reveal himself to that exemplary Saint; or whether
that holy man did in a more close and familiar fashion, converse with the
invisible Deity, the presence was certain, and the acknowledgment mutual:
neither was this walk short, for a turn, and away; but constant, and continual;
even for the space of three hundred years: Genesis 5. 22.
And what? did the blessed man retire to some desert, far from all humane
society, that he might enjoy this heavenly company alone? Did he this-while
cast off all secular thoughts, and abdicate all the care of his family? Neither
this, nor that; for in this space wherein he walked with his God; he both begat
sons and daughters, and bred them like the children of such a father; as one
that knew to make the world subordinate, not opposite to it is maker: and had
learned to reconcile the use of the creature with the fruition of the Creator:
What then were the steps of this walk, but pious thoughts, heavenly affections,
fervent love, reverential fear, spiritual joy, holy desires, divine ravishments
of spirit; strict obediences, assiduous devotions, faithful affiances, gracious
engagements, firm resolutions, and effectual endeavors of good, and whatsoever
might work a dearness of respect betwixt the soul, and the God of Spirits: O
God, that which thou promisedst (as a reward) to those few Saints of Sardis,
Revel. 3. 4.
that had not defile their garments, thou have before hand fully performed to
this eminent worthy of the first world; he walked with thee in white, in the
white of innocence here; and in the shining robes of glory above; so thou have
told us, He was not, for God took him; Lo; being, and good were wont to pass
for convertible; but here, Enochs not-being, is his blessedness; he was not at
all here; that he might be perfectly above: The best being on earth is but
miserable; even Enochs walk with God cannot exempt him from sorrows; he must
cease to be, that he may begin to be happy; He was then happy, not for that he
was not; (a mere privation of being can be no other then the worst of evils)
but for that God took him: The God with whom he walked so long upon earth, takes
him away from the earth to himself, for eternity: Here below though he walked
with God, yet withal he conversed with sinful men, whose wickedness could not
but many a time vex his righteous soul; now he is freed from all those
spiritual annoyances; enjoying only the glorious presence and vision of the
Divine majesty, the blessed Angels, and the Saints, copartners of the same
immortality. There can be no doubt but that the souls of his holy predecessors
Adam, Abel, Seth, returned to the God that gave them; but had not Enoch been
blessed with a peculiar conveiance to his glory, it had not been said, That God
took him: were only the spirit of Enoch yielded up in the way of an ordinary
death, the man had not been taken; now, whole Enoch, body and soul, is
translated to an heavenly life.

His father Jared, Ecculs. 44. 16.
and his son Methuselah went to God in the common way of men, by a separation
of the spirit from the flesh; but for him, God took him; and clothed him
living with immortality: I find none but him and Elijah that were thus fetched
to their Heaven: It will be happy for us if we may pass in the common road to
blessedness; O God, give me to walk close and constantly with thee, and what
end thou please; let my body pass through all the degrees of corruption, so
that my soul may be immediately glorious.

FINIS.
THE BREATHINGS OF THE Devout Soul.
I.
BLessed Lord God; thou call me to obedience; and fain would I follow thee:
but what good can this wretched heart of mine be capable of, except thou put it
there? thou know I cannot so much as wish to think well without thee; I have
strong powers to offend thee; my sins are my own; but whence should I have any
inclination to good but from thee, who art only, and all good? Lord, work me to
what thou requirest, and then require what thou will.

II.
Lord God, whither need I go to seek thee? Thou art so with me, as that I
cannot move but in thee. I look up to heaven; there I know thy Majesty most
manifests it self; but withal, I know that being here thou art never out of
thy heaven, for it is thy presence only that makes heaven: Oh give me to enjoy
thee in this lowest region of thine heavenly habitation; and as in respect of
my natural being, I live and move in thee, so let me not live and move
spiritually, but with thee, and to thee.

III.
Whither now, O whither do ye rove O my thoughts? Can ye hope to find rest in
any of these sublunary contentments, Alas? how can they yield any stay to you,
that have no settlement in themselves? Is there not enough in the infinite good
to take you up; but that ye will be wandering after earthly vanities? Oh my
Lord, how justly might thou cast me off with scorn, for casting any
affective glances upon so base a rival? Truly Lord, I am ashamed of this my
hateful inconstancy; but it is thou only that must remedy it; O thou that art
the father of mercies pity my wildness, and weak distractions: Take thou my
heart to thee, it is thine own; keep it with thee, tie it close to thee by the
cords of love, that it may not so much as cast down an eye upon this wretched
and perishing world.

IIII.
Lord, I confess to my shame, thou art a great loser by me; for, besides my
not improving of thy favors, I have not kept even-reckonings with thee; I have
not justly tallied up thy inestimable benefits: Thy very privative mercies are
both without, and beyond my account; for every evil that I am free from, is a
new blessing from thee; That I am out of bondage, that I am out of pain and
misery, that I am out of the dominion of sin; out of the tyranny of Satan, out
of the agonies of an afflicted soul; out of the torments of hell: Lord, how
unspeakeable mercies are these? Yet, when did I bless thee for any of them? Thy
positive bounties I can feel, but with a benumbed and imperfect sense. Lord, do
thou enlarge, and intenerate my heart; make me truly sensible, as of my good
received; so of my escaped evils; and take thou to thy self the glory of them
both.

V.
Ah my Lord God, what heats and colds do I feel in my soul? Sometimes I find
my self so vigorous in grace, that no thought of doubt dare show it self; and
me thinks I durst challenge my hellish enemies; another while I feel my self so
dejected and heartlesse, as if I had no interest in the God of my salvation,
nor never had received any certain pledges of his favor: What shall I say to
this various disposition? Whether, Lord, is it my wretchedness to suffer my
self to be robbed of thee, for the time, by temptation? or whether is this the
course of thy proceedings in the dispensation of thy graces to the sons of men;
that thou will have the breathings of thy Spirit, as where, so how, and when
thou please? Surely, O my God, if I did not know thee constant to thine
everlasting mercies, I should be utterly disheartened with these sad intervals;
now, when my sense fails me, I make use of my faith; and am no less sure of
thee, even when I feel thee not, then when I find the clearest evidences of
thy gracious presence. Lord, shine upon me with the light of thy countenance
(if it may be) always; but, when ever that is clouded, strengthen thou my
faith; so shall I be safe, even when I am comfortless.

VI.
O my God, I am justly ashamed to think what favors I have received from thee,
and what poor returns I have made to thee: Truly Lord, I must needs say, thou
have thought nothing either in earth, or in heaven too good for me; and I, on
the other side, have grudged thee that weak and worthless obedience which thou
have required of me: Alas, what pleasure could I have done to thee who art
infinite, if I had sacrificed my whole self to thee, as thou command? Thou
art, and wilt be thy self, though the world were not; it is I, I only that
could be a gainer by this happy match; which in my own wrong I have
unthankfully neglected; I see it is not so much what we have, as how we employ
it: O thou, that have been so bountiful, in heaping thy rich mercies upon me,
vouchsafe to grant me yet one gift more; give me grace and power to improve all
thy gifts to the glory of the giver; otherwise, it had been better for me to
have been poor, then ungrateful.

VII.
Ah Lord, What struggling have I with my weak fears? how do I anticipate my
evils by distrust? What shall I do when I am old? How shall I be able to endure
pain? How shall I pass through the horrid gates of death? Oh my God, Where is
my faith that I am thus surprised? Had I not thee to up-hold, and strengthen my
soul, well might I tremble and sink under these cares; but now, that I have the
assurance of so strong an helper, as commands all the powers of heaven, earth,
and hell, what a shame is it for me to give so much way to my wretched
infidelity, as to punish my self with the expectation of future evils? Oh for
the victory that overcomes the world, 1 John 5. 4.
even our faith; Thou O God, Psalm. 46. 1. 2.
art my refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble; therefore will I
not fear though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into
the midst of the Sea.

VIII.
Lord, I made account my days should have been but an inch; but thou have made
them a span long; Psalm. 39. 6.
having drawn out the length of a crazie life beyond the period of my hopes: It
is for something, sure, that thou have thus long respited me from my grave,
which looked for me many years ago: Here I am, O my God, attending thy good
pleasure; Thou know best what thou have to do with me; Dispose of me as thou will; Only make me faithful in all thy services; resolute to trust my self
with thee in all events; careful to be approved of thee in all my ways; and
crown my decayed age with such fruits as may be pleasing to thee, and available
to the good of many; Lastly, let me live to thee, and die in thee.

IX.
How often, Lord, have I wondered to see the strange carriage of thine
administration of these earthly affairs; and therein to see thy marvailous
wisdom, power, goodness, in fetching good out of evil! Alas, we wretched men
are apt enough to fetch the worst of evils, out of the greatest good, Jude 4.
turning the grace of thee our God into wantonness: but how have I seen thee,
of liveless stones to raise up children to Abraham, of sinners to make Saints?
out of a desperate confusion to fetch order; out of a bloody war, an happy
peace; out of resolutions of revenge, love; out of the rock, water; out of a
persecuter, an Apostle? How can I be discouraged with unlikelihoods, when I see
thee work by contraries? It is not for me, O my God, to examine or pre-judge
thy counsels; take what ways thou will, so thou bring me to thine own end;
all paths shall be direct that shall lead me to blessedness.

X.
How many good purposes, O my God, have I taken up, and let fall to the ground
again without effect? how teeming has this barren womb of my heart been of
false conceptions? but especially, when thy hand has been smart and heavy upon
me in mine affliction, how have I tasked my self with duties, and revived my
firm resolutions of more strict obedience, which yet upon the continuance of
my better condition, I have slackened? Lord, it is from thee that I purposed
well; it is from my own sinful weakness that I failed in my performances; If
any good come me, the will and the deed must be both thine; Prove. 16. 1.
The very preparations of the heart are from thee; Prove. 16. 9.
and if I have devised my way, it must be thou that directest my steps: O God,
do thou ripen and perfect all the good motions that thou put into my soul;
and make my health but such as my sickness promised.

XI.
Every man, Lord, is unwilling that his name should dye; we are all naturally
ambitious of being thought on when we are gone; those that have not living
monuments to perpetuate them, affect to have dead; if Absolon have not a son,
he will yet erect a pillar: yet when we have all done, time eats us out at the
last; Eccles 2. 16.
There is no remembrance of the wise more then of the fool for ever; seeing
that which now is, in the days to come shall all be forgotten. O God, let it
be my care and ambition, what ever become of my memory here below, that my name
may be recorded in Heaven.

XII.
Thy wise providence, O God, has so ordered it, that every man's mind seeks
and finds contentment in some thing; otherwise it could not be (since we must
meet with so frequent crosses in the world) but that man's life would be
burdensome to him; one takes pleasure in his hawk or hound; another in his
horses and furnitures; one in fair buildings; another in pleasant walks and
beautiful gardens; one in travailing abroad; another in the enjoying of the
profits and pleasures of his home; one in the increase of his wealth; another
in the titles of his honor; one in a comfortable wife, another in loving and
dutiful children, but when all is done, if there be not somewhat else to uphold
the heart in the evil day, it must sink. O God, do thou possess my soul of
thee; let me place all my felicity in the fruition of thine infinite goodness;
so I am sure the worst of the world has not power to render me other then
happy.

XIII.
O Lord God, under how opposite aspects do I stand, from the world? how
variously am I construed by men? One pities my condition, another praises my
patience; One favors me out of the opinion of some good that he thinks he sees
in me; another dislikes me for some imagined evil: What are the eyes, or
tongues of men to me? Let me not know what they say, or think of me, and what
am I the better or worse for them? they can have no influence upon me without
my own apprehension: All is in what terms I stand with thee, my God; if thou
be pleased to look upon me with the eye of thy tender mercy and compassion,
What care I to be unjustly brow-beaten of the world? If I may be blessed with
thy favor, let me be made a gazing-stock to the world, to Angels, and to men.

XIV.
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears: What is it which thou would have me do
that I may find rest to my soul? I am willing to exercise my self in all the
acts of piety which thou requirest; I am ready to fast, to pray, to read, to
hear, to meditate, to communicate, to give alms, to exhort, admonish, reprove,
comfort where thou bid'st me; and if there be any other duty appertaining to
devotion, or mercy, let me serve thee in it: But, alas, O my God, howsoever I
know these works are in themselves well-pleasing unto thee, yet as they fall
from my wretchedness, they are stained with so many imperfections, that I have
more reason to crave pardon for them, then to put confidence in them; and if I
could perform them never so exquisitely, yet one sin is more then enough to
dash all my obedience. I see then, O Lord, I well see there is no act that I
can be capable to do unto thee, wherein I can find any repose; it must be
thine act to me, which only can effect it; It is thy gracious word, Matthew. 11.
28.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest; Lo this rest must be thy gift, not my earning; and what can be freer then
gift? Thou give it then, but to those that come to thee; not to those that
come not; To those that come to thee laden and laboring under the sense of
their own wretchedness; not to the proud, and careless; O Savior, thy sinner
is sufficiently laden with the burden of his iniquities; lade thou me yet more
with true penitent sorrow for my sins; and enable me then to come unto thee by
a lively faith; Take thou the praise of thine own work; Give me the grace to
come; and give me rest in coming.

XV.
O blessed Savior, What strange variety of conceits do I find concerning thy
thousand years reign? What riddles are in that prophecy; which no humane
tongue can aread? where to fix the beginning of that marvailous millenary, and
where the end; and what manner of reign it shall be, whether temporal, or
spiritual; on earth, or in heaven; undergoes as many constructions, as there
are pens that have undertaken it; and yet (when all is done) I see thine
Apostle speaks only of the souls of thy martyrs, reigning so long with thee;
not of thy reigning on earth so long with those Martyrs; How busy are the
tongues of men, how are their brains taken up with the indeterminable
construction of this enigmaticall truth? when, in the mean time, the care of
thy spiritual reign in their hearts, is neglected; O my Savior, whiles others
weary themselves with the disquisition of thy personal reign here upon earth
for a thousand years; let it be the whole bent and study of my soul, to make
sure of my personal reign with thee in heaven to all eternity.

XVI.
Blessed be thy name, O God, who have made a good use even of hell it self; How
many Atheous hearts have been convinced by the very operations of Devils? Those
which would with the stupid Saducees, persuade themselves there are no spirits;
yet when they have sensibly found the mavelous effects wrought even by the
base instruments of Satan; they have been forced to confess, Doubtless there
is a God that rules the world; for so great powers of evil spirits must
necessarily evince the greater powers of good; It is of thy wise and holy
dispensation that thy good Angels do not so frequently exhibit themselves, and
give so visible demonstrations of their presence to thy Saints, as the evil
Angels do to their Vassals, though they are ever as present, and more
powerful; What need they; when thou so mightily over-rulest those malignant
spirits, that thou forcest from them thine own glory, and advantage to thy
chosen? Lord, how much more shall all thy other creatures serve to thy praise,
when thy very hellish enemies shall proclaim thy justice, goodness, omnipotence.

XVII.
Speculation, O Lord, is not more easy then practice is difficult; how many
have we known, who, as it was said of the Philosophers of old, know how to
speak well, but live ill; How many have written books of Chemistry, and given
very confident directions for the finding out of that precious stone of the
Philosophers, but how many have indeed made gold? Practice is that which thou,
O God, chiefly requirest and respectest; who have said, If ye know these
things, blessed are ye if you do them; Knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8. 1.
but love edifieth: O Lord do thou enlighten mine eyes with the knowledge of thy
will; but above all, do thou rectify my affections, guide my feet into the
ways of thy commandments; Psalm. 119. 112.
apply my heart to fulfill thy statutes always; Psalm 90. 17.
and Prosper thou the work of my hands upon me, O prosper thou my handi-work.

XVIII.
How often have I wondered, O Lord, at the boldness of those men, who knowing they
must shortly die, yet dare do those things which will draw upon them eternity
of torments? What shall I say, but, The fool has said in his heart, there is
no God; Surely, men love themselves well enough; and would be loath to do that,
which would procure them an inevitable misery and pain; Did they therefore
believe there were another world, and that they must be called to a strict
reckoning for all their actions, and be doomed to an everlasting death for
their wicked deeds, they durst not, they could not do those acts which should
make them eternally miserable: Let me say to the most desperate ruffian; there
is poison in this cup, drink this draught and thou die; he would have the wit
to keep his lips close, and cast the potion to the ground; were it not for
their infidelity, so would men do to the most plausible (but deadly) offers of
sin. O Lord, since I know thy righteous judgments; teach me to tremble at them;
restrain thou my feet from every evil way; and teach me so to walk, as one
that looks every hour to appear before thy just, and dreadful Tribunal.

XIX
The longer I live, O my God, the more do I wonder at all the works of thine
hands: I see such admirable artifice in the very least and most despicable of
all thy creatures, as does every day more and more astonish my observation: I
need not look so far as Heaven for matter of marvel (though therein thou art
infinitely glorious) whiles I have but a spider in my window, or a be in my
garden, or a worm under my feet: every one of these overcomes me with a just
amazement; yet can I see no more then their very outsides; their inward form
which gives them their being, and operations, I cannot pierce into; the less I
can know, O Lord, the more let me wonder; and the less I can satisfy my self
with marvailing at thy works, the more let me adore the majesty and omnipotence
of thee that wroughtest them.

XX.
Alas, my Lord God, what poor, weak, imperfit services are those (even at the
best) that I can present thee withal! How lean, lame, and blemished sacrifices
do I bring to thine altar! I know thou art worthy of more then my soul is
capable to perform; and fain would I tender thee the best of thine own: but,
what I would that I do not; Romans 7. 15.
yea, cannot do: Surely, had I not to do with an infinite mercy, I might justly
look to be punished for my very obedience: But now Lord my impotence redounds
to the praise of thy goodness; for were I more answerable to thy justice the
glory of thy mercy would be so much less eminent in my remission, and
acceptance; Here I am before thee, to await thy good pleasure; thou know
whether it be better to give me more ability, or to accept of that poor ability
thou have given me; but since, when thou have given me most, I shall still, and
ever stand in need of thy forgiveness; Let my humble suit be to thee always,
rather for pardon of my defects, then for a supply of thy graces.

XXI.
O my God; how do I see many profane and careless souls spend their time in
jollity and pleasure. Jsa. 5. 12.
The harp and the Viol, the Tabret and the pipe, and wine are in their feasts;
Whiles I that desire to walk close with thee, in all conscionable obedience,
droop and languish under a dull heaviness, and heartless dejection: I am sure I
have a thousand times more cause of joy and cheerfulness, then the merriest of
all those wild and joviall spirits; they have a world to play withal, but I
have a God to rejoice in; their sports are trivial and momentanie; my joy is
serious, and everlasting: One dram of my mirth is worth a pound of theirs; But,
I confess, O Lord, how much I am wanting to my self in not stirring up this
holy fire of spiritual joy; but suffering it to lie raked up under the dead
ashes of a sad neglect: O thou, who art the God of hope, quicken this heavenly
affection in my soul; Romans 15. 13.
and fill me with all joy and peace in believing; make my heart so much more
light then the worldlings, by how much my estate is happier.

XXII.
What shall I do Lord? I strive and tug (what I may) with my natural
corruptions, Ephesians. 6. 12.
and with the spiritual wickednesses in high places which set upon my soul;
but sometimes I am foiled, and go halting out of the field; it is thy mercy
that I live, being so fiercely assaulted by those principalities, and powers;
it were more then wonder if I should escape such hands without a wound: Even
that holy servant of thine who strove with thine Angel for a blessing, went
limping away, though he prevailed; what mervail is it that so weak a wretch as
I, striving with many evil Angels for the avoidance of a curse, come off with
a maime, or a scar? But blessed be thy name, the wounds that I receive are not
mortal; and when I fall, it is but to my knees; whence I rise with new courage
and hopes of victory; Thou who art the God of all power, and keep the keys
of hell and death, have said, Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you;
Lord, I do and will by thy merciful aid still and ever resist; make thou my
faith as steadfast, as my will is resolute; Oh still teach thou my hands to war,
Psalm. 144. 1.
and my fingers to fight; arm thou my soul with strength, and at last
according to thy gracious promise, crown it with victory.

XXIII.
Oh Lord God; how ambitious, how covetous of knowledge is this soul of mine? as
the eye is not satisfied with seeing, Eccles. 1. 8.
nor the ear filled with hearing; no more is the mind of man with
understanding; yea, so insatiable is my heart, that the more I know, the more I
desire to know; and the less I think I know: Under heaven there can be no
bounds set to this intellectual appetite: O do thou stop the mouth of my soul
with thy self, Ps. 73. 25.
who art infinite; Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desire besides thee: Alas, Lord, if I could know all creatures, with all
their forms, qualities, workings; if I could know as much as innocent Adam, or
wise Solomon; Yea more, if I could know all that is done in earth or heaven,
what were my soul the better, if it have not attained the knowledge of thee:
Since, as the Preacher has most wisely observed, Eccles. 1. 18.
In much wisdom is much grief, and he that increases knowledge, increases
sorrow; Oh then, set off my heart from affecting that knowledge whose end is
sorrow; and fix it upon that knowledge, which brings eeverlasting life: Joh. 17.
3.
And this is life eternal, to know thee the only true God; and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent.

XXIV.
O my God, what miserable uncertainties there are in these worldly hopes! But
yesterday I made account of an eminent advantage of my estate, which now ends
in a deep loss. How did we lately feed our selves with the hope of a firm and
during peace, which now shuts up in too much blood? How confidently did I rely
upon the promised favor of some great friends, which now leave me in the suds,
as the scorn of (a mis-called) fortune? In how slippery places, O Lord, do our
feet stand? If that may be said to stand which is ever sliding, never fixed;
And not more slippery, then brittle; so as there is not more danger of falling,
then of sinking: With thee, O God, with thee only, is a constant immutability
of happiness; There let me seek it, there let me find it; and over-looking all
the fickle objects of this vain world, let my soul pitch it self upon that
blessed immortality which ere long it hopes to enjoy with thee.

XXV.
Lord God, What a wearisome circle do I walk in here below; I sleep, and dress,
and work, and eat, and work again, and eat again, and undress, and sleep again;
and thus wearing out my time find a satiety in all these, troublesome; Lord,
when shall I come to that state, wherein I shall do nothing but enjoy thee; do
nothing but praise thee; and in that one work shall find such infinite
contentment, that my glorified soul cannot wish to do any other? and shall
therein alone bestow a blessed eternity?

XXVI.
O God, how troublesome and painful do I find this Sun of thine, whose
scorching beams beat upon my head? and yet, this excellent creature of thine is
that, to which, under thee, we are beholden for our very life; and it is thy
great blessing to the earth, that it may enjoy these strong and forceable rays
from it; Oh, Who shall be able to endure the burning flames of thy wrath, which
thou intendest for the punishment, and everlasting torment of thine enemies?
And if men shall blaspheme the name of thee the God of heaven, Rev. 16. 9.
for the great heat of that beneficial creature, what shall we think they will
do for that fire which shall be consuming them to all eternity? Lord keep my
soul from those flames, which shall be ever burning, and never, either
quenched, or abated.

XXVII
Which way, O Lord, which way can I look, and not see some sad examples of
misery: One wants his limbs with Mephibosheth, another his sight with
Bartimeus, a third with Lazarus wants bread, and a whole skin; One is pained in
his body, another plundered of his estate, a third troubled in mind; one is
pined in prison, another tortured on the rack, a third languisheth under the
loss of a dear son, or wife or husband; Who am I Lord, that, for the present,
I enjoy an immunity from all these sorrows? I am sure none groans under them
that has deserved them more: It is thy mercy, thy mere mercy, O my good God,
that any of these calamities have fallen beside me; Oh make me truly thankful for
thine infinite goodness; and yet only so sensible of thy gracious indulgence
this way; as that when any of these evils shall seize upon me, I may be no
more dejected in the sense of them, then I am now over-joyed with the favor of
their forbearance.

XXVIII.
O blessed God, what variety of gifts have thou scattered amongst the sons of
men? To one thou have given vigor of body, to another agility, beauty to a
third; to one depth of judgment, to another quickness of apprehension; to one
readiness and rarity of invention; to another tenacity of memory; to one the
knowledge of liberal arts, to another the exquisiteness of manuary skill; to one
worldly wealth, to another honor; to one a wise heart, to another an eloquent
tongue; to one more then enough, to another contentment with a little; to one
valor, to another sagacity: These favors, O Lord, thou have promiscuously
dispersed amongst both thy friends, and enemies: but oh, how transcendent are
those spiritual mercies which thou have reserved for thine own; the graces of
heavenly wisdom, lively faith, fervent charity, firm hope, joy in the holy
Ghost and all the rest of that divine beauye. For any competency of the least
of thy common blessings I desire to be thankful to thy bounty; (for which of
them, O God, can I either merit or requite?) but oh for a soul truly and
eagarly ambitious of those thy best mercies; Oh let me ever long for them, and
ever be insatiable of them; Oh do thou fill my heart with the desire of them,
and let that desire never find it self filled.

XXIX.
How comfortable a style is that, O God, which thine Apostle gives to thine
Heaven, whiles he calls it the inheritance of the Saints in light? None can come
there but Saints; the rooms of this lower world are taken up, commonly, with
wicked men, with beasts, with Devils; but into that heavenly Jerusalem no
unholy thing can enter; Neither can any Saint be excluded thence; each of them
have not only a share, but an entire right to thy glory: And how many just
titles are there, O Savior, to that region of blessedness; It is thy Fathers
gift, it is thy purchase, it is thy Saints inheritance; theirs only in thy
right; by thy gracious adoption they are sons, Romans 8. 17.
and as sons, heirs: coheirs with thee of that blessed Patrimony; so feoffed
upon them, so possessed of them, that they can never be disseized: And, Lord,
how glorious an inheritance it is! An inheritance in light: In light
incomprehensible, in light inaccessible: Lo, the most spiritual of all thy
visible creatures is light; and yet this light is but the effect, and emanation
of one of thy creatures, the Sun; and serves only for the illumination of this
visible world; but that supernal light is from the Al-glorious beams of thy
Divine Majesty, diffusing themselves to those blessed spirits, both Angels, and
Souls of thy Saints, who live in the joyful fruition of thee, to all eternity:
Alas, Lord, we do here dwell in darkness, and under an uncomfortable opacity,
whiles thy face is clouded from us with manifold temptations there above, with
thee, is pure light, a constant noontide of glory; I am here under a miserable
and obscure wardship; Oh teach me to despise the best of earth; and ravish my
soul with a longing desire of being possessed of that blessed inheritance of
the Saints in light.

XXX.
What outward blessing can be sweeter then civil peace? What judgment more
heavy then that of the sword? Yet, O Savior, there is a peace which thou
disclaimest; and there is a sword which thou challengest to bring; Peace with
our corruptions is war against thee; and that war in our bosoms, wherein the
spirit fights against the flesh, is peace with thee: O let thy good Spirit
raise and foment this holy and intestine war more and more within me. And as
for my outward spiritual enemies; how can there be a victory without war; and
how can I hope for a crown without victory? O do thou ever gird me with
strength to the battle; enable thou me to resist unto blood; make me faithful
to the death, that thou may give me the crown of life.

XXXI.
O Lord God; how subject is this wretched heart of mine to repining, and
coffeehouse? If it may not have what it would, how ready it is (like a
froward child) to throw away what it has. I know and feel this to be out of
that natural pride which is so deep rooted in me; for could I be sensible
enough of my own unworthiness, I should think every thing too good, every
thing too much for me; my very being, O Lord, is more then I am ever able to
answer thee; and how could I deserve it when I was not? but that I have any
helps of my wel-beeing here; or hopes and means of my being glorious hereafter,
how far is it beyond the reach of my soul? Lord, let me find my own
nothingness; so shall I be thankful for a little, and, in my very want, bless
thee.

XXXII.
Where art thou, O my God? whither have thou withdrawn thy self? it is not
long, since I found thy comfortable presence with my soul; now I miss thee,
and mourn and languish for thee: Nay, rather, where art thou O my soul? my God
is where he was; neither can be any other then himself; the change is in thee,
whose inconstant disposition varies continually, and cannot find it self fixed
upon so blessed an object. It will never be better with me, O my God, Ps. 51.
12.
until it shall please thee to stablish my heart with thy free Spirit; and to
keep it close to thee, that it may not be carried away with vain distractions,
with sinful temptations: Lord my God, as thou art always present with me, and
can no more be absent, then not be thy self; so let me be always with thee,
in an humble, and faithful acknowledgment of thy presence; as I can never be
out of thine all-seeing eye; so let mine eyes be ever bent upon thee who art
invisible; Thou that have given me eyes, improve them to thy glory and my
happiness.

XXXIII.
My bosom, O Lord, is a Rebeccaes womb, there are twins striving within it; a
Jacob and Esau, the old man and the new: whiles I was in the barren state of my
unregeneration all was quiet within me; now this strife is both troublesome,
and paineful; so as nature is ready to say, Genesis 25. 22.
If it be so, why am I thus? But withal, O my God, I bless thee for this happy
unquietness; for I know there is just cause of comfort in these inward
struglings; my soul is now not unfruitful, and is conceived with an holy seed
which wrestles with my natural corruptions; and if my Esau have got the start
in the priority of time; yet my Jacob shall follow him hard at the heel, and
happily supplant him; And though I must nourish them both, as mine, yet I can,
through thy grace, imitate thy choice; and say with thee, Jacob have I loved,
and Esau have I hated; Blessed God, make thou that word of thine good in me,
That the elder shall serve the younger.

XXXIV.
Alas, my Lord God, how small matters trouble me? every petty occurrence is
ready to rob me of my peace; so as, me thinks, I am like some little cock-boat
in a rough Sea, which every billow topples up and down, and threats to sink: I
can chide this weak pusillanimity in my self; but it is thou that must redress
it: Lord, work my heart to so firm a setledness upon thee, that it may never
be shaken; no not with the violent gusts of temptation; much less with the
easy gales of secular mis-accidents: Even when I am hardest pressed, in the
multitude of the sorrows of my heart, let thy comforts refresh my soul; but for
these slight crosses, oh teach me to despise them, as not worthy of my notice,
much less of my vexation: Let my heart be taken up with thee, and then, what
care I whether the world smile or frown.

XXXV.
What a comfort it is, O Savior, that thou art the first fruits of them that
sleep: Those that die in thee, do but sleep: Thou said so, once, of thy
Lazarus; and may say so of him again; he does but sleep still: His first
sleep was but short, this latter, though longer, is no less true; out of which
he shall no less surely awake at thy second call, then he did before at thy
first; His first sleep and waking was singular, this latter is the same with
ours; we all lie down in our bed of earth, as sure to wake, as ever we can be
to shut our eyes; In, and from thee, O blessed Savior, is this our assurance;
who art the first fruits of them that sleep: The first handful of the first
fruits was not presented for it self, but for the whole field, wherein it grew:
The virtue of that oblation extended it self to the whole crop: Neither did
thou, O blessed Jesu, rise again for thy self only, but the power and virtue of
thy resurrection reaches to all thine; so thy chosen Vessel tells us: 1 Cor. 15.
23.
Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming: So
as, Act. 24. 15.
though the resurrection be of all the dead, both just and unjust; yet to rise
by the power of thy resurrection, is so proper to thine own, as that thou, O
Savior, have styled it the resurrection of the just; Luke 14. 14.
whiles the rest shall be dragged out of their graves by the power of thy
Godhead to their dreadful judgment: Already therefore, O Jesu, are we risen in
thee: and as sure shall rise in our own persons; The Loco-motive faculty is in
the head; Thou who art our head art risen, we who are thy members must, and
shall follow: Say then, O my dying body, say boldly unto Death, Micah 7. 8.
Rejoice not over me, O mine enemy, for though I fall, yet I shall rise again:
Yea, Lord, the virtue of thy first fruits diffuseth it self, not to our rising
only, but to a blessed immortality of these bodies of ours: for, as thou did
rise immortal and glorious, so shall we by, and with thee; Phil. 3. 21.
Who shall change these vile bodies, and make them like to thy glorious body.
The same power that could shake off death, can put on glory and Majesty: Lay
thee down therefore, O my body, quietly and cheerfully; and look to rise in
another hue; 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43.
Thou art sown in corruption, thou shall be raised in incorruption; thou art
sown in dishonor, thou shall be raised in glory; thou art sown in weakness,
but shall be raised in power.

XXXVI.
In this life, in this death of the body; O Lord, I see there are no degrees,
though differences of time; The man that dyed yesterday is as truly dead, as
Abel the first man that dyed in the world; and Methuselah that lived nine
hundred sixty nine years, did not more truly live, then the child that did but
salute, and leave the world; but in the life to come, and the second death,
there are degrees; degrees of blessedness to the glorified, degrees of torments
to the damned; the least whereof is unspeakable, unconceivable: Oh thou that
art the Lord of life and death, keep my soul from those steps that go down to
the chambers of death; and once set it (for higher I dare not sue to go) but
over the threshold of glory and blessedness.

XXXVII.
O Lord my God, I am as very a Pilgrim as ever walked upon thy earth; Why
should I look to be in any better condition then my neighbors, then my
forefathers? Even the best of them, that were most fixed upon their
inheritance, were no other then strangers at home: It was not in the power of
the world to naturalize them, much less to make them enroll themselves
free-Denizons here below; they knew their country, which they sought, Heb. 11.
13, 14, 15.
was above; so infinitely rich, and pleasant, that these earthly regions which
they must pass thorough, are, in comparison, worthy of nothing but contempt.

My condition is no other then theirs; I wander here in a strange country; What
wonder is it, if I meet with forrainers fare, hard usage, and neglect? Why do I
intermeddle with the affairs of a nation that is not mine? Why do I clog my
self in my way with the base and heavy lumber of the world? Why are not my
affections homeward? Why do I not long to see and enjoy my fathers house? O my
God, thou that have put me into the state of a Pilgrim, give me a Pilgrims
heart; set me off from this wretched world wherein I am; let me hate to think
of dwelling here; Let it be my only care how to pass through this miserable
wilderness to the promised land of a blessed eternity.

XXXVIII.
One Talent at the least, O Lord, have thou put into my hand; and that sum is
great to him that is not worth a dram; but, alas, what have I done with it? I
confess I have not hid it in a napkin; but have been laying it out to some poor
advantage; yet surely the gain is so unanswerable, that I am afraid of an
Audit: I see none of the approved servants in the Gospel brought in an increase
of less value then the receipt; I fear I shall come short of the sum. Luke 19.
16. 17, 18, 19.
O thou, who justly hold thy self wronged with the style of an austere
master, vouchsafe to accept of my so mean improvement; and thou, who valuedst
the poor widows mites above the rich gifts cast into thy Treasury, be pleased
to allow of those few pounds that my weak indevors could raise from thy stock;
and mercifully reward thy servant, not according to his success, but according
to his true intentions of glorifying thee.

XXXIX.
What a word is this which I hear from thee, O Savior; Behold I stand at the
door and knock! Thou which art the Lord of life, God blessed for ever, to
stand and knock at the door of a sinful heart! Oh what a praise is this of thy
mercy and long suffering? What a shame to our dull neglect and graceless
ingratitude? Ps. 40. 1.
For a David to say I waited patiently upon the Lord; Truly my soul waits
upon God; Ps. 62. 1.
it is but meet and comely; for it is no other then the duty of the greatest
Monarchs on earth, yea, of the highest Angels in Heaven to attend their Maker;
but for thee the great God of Heaven to wait at the door of us sinful dust and
ashes, what a condescension is this, what a longanimity? It were our happiness,
O Lord, if upon our greatest suit and importunity we might have the favor to
entertain thee into our hearts; but that thou should importune us to admit
thee, and should wait at the posts of our doors, Cant. 5. 2.
till thine head be filled with dew, and thy locks with the drops of the night,
it is such a mercy, as there is not room enough in our souls to wonder at. In
the mean time what shall I say to our wretched unthankfulnes; and impious
negligence? Thou have graciously invited us to thee, and have said; knock and
it shall be opened; and yet thou continuest knocking at our doors, and we open
not; willingly delaying to let in our happiness; we know how easy it were for
thee to break open the brazen doors of our breasts, and to come in; but the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers not violence from thee, though it should suffer it
from us; Thou will do all thy works in a sweet and gracious way; as one who
will not force, but win love; Lord, I cannot open unless thou that knock'st for
entrance, wilt be pleased to enable me with strength to turn the key, and to
unbolt this unweldy bar of my soul. O do thou make way for thy self by the
strong motions of thy blessed Spirit, into the in-most rooms of my heart; and
do thou powerfully incline me to mine own happiness: else, thou shall be ever
excluded, and I shall be ever miserable.

XLI.
In what pangs could thou be, O Asaph, that so woeful a word should fall from
thee, Has God forgotten to be gracious? Ps. 77* 9.
Surely, the temptation went so high, that the next step had been blasphemy;
Had not that good God, whom thy bold weakness questions for forgetfulness, in
great mercy remembered thee, and brought thee speedily to remember thy self and
him, that which thou confessest to have been infirmity, had proved a sinful
despair: I dare say for thee, that word washed thy cheeks with many a tear, and
was worthy of more; For, O God, What can be so dear to thee as the glory of thy
mercy? There is none of thy blessed attributes which thou desire to set forth
so much unto the sons of men, and so much abhorrest to be disparaged by our
detraction, as thy mercy: Thou can, O Lord, forget thy displeasure against
thy people; thou can forget our iniquities, and cast our sins out of thy
remembrance; Micha. 7. 18, 19.
but thou can no more forget to be gracious, then thou can cease to be thy
self; O my God, I sin against thy justice hourly, and thy mercy interposes for
my remission; but oh keep me from sinning against thy mercy; What plea can I
hope for, when I have made my Advocate mine enemy?

XLI.
How happy, O Lord, is the man that has thee for his God? He can want nothing
that is good; he can be hurt by nothing that is evil; his sins are pardoned,
his good endeavors are accepted; his crosses are sanctified; his prayers are
heard; all that he has are blessings, all that he suffers are advantages; his
life is holy, his death comfortable, his estate after death glorious; Oh that I
could feel thee to be my God; that I could enjoy an heavenly communion with
thee; In vain should earth or hell labor to make me other then blessed.

XLII.
How just a motion is this of thine, O thou sweet singer of Israel; Psalm. 31.
23.
O love the Lord, all ye his Saints; Surely they can be no Saints that love not
such a Lord; Had he never been good to them, yet that infinite goodness which
is in himself, would have commanded love from Saints: Yet, how could they have
been Saints, if he had wholly kept his goodness to himself? In that then he
has made them Saints, he has communicated his goodness to them, and
challenges all love from them; and being made such, how infinitely has he
obliged them with all kinds of mercies? How can ye choose O ye Saints but love
the Lord? What have ye, what are ye, what can ye be, but from his mere bounty?
They are slight favors that he has done you for the world; in these his very
enemies share with you; How transcendent are his spiritual obligations! Has
he not given you his Angels for your attendants; himself for your Protector;
his Son out of his bosom for your Redeemer; his Spirit for your Comforter; his
heaven for your inheritance? If gifts can attract love; O my God, Who can have
any interest in my heart but thy blessed self, that have been so infinitely
munificent to my soul? Take it to thee, thou that have made and bought it;
enamour it thoroughly of thy goodness; make me sick of love; yea let me die for
love of thee, who have loved me unto death that I may fully enjoy the
perfection of thy love, in the height of thy glory.

XLIII.
Lord, how have I seen men miscarried into those sins, the premonition whereof
they would have thought incredible, and their yeildance thereto, impossible?
How many Hazaels has our very age yielded, that if a Prophet should have fore
told their acts, 2 Kings. 8. 13.
would have said, Is thy servant a dog that he should do these great things? Oh
my God, why do not I suspect my self? What hold have I of my self more then
these other miserable examples of humane frailty?

Lord God, if thou take off thy hand from me, what wickedness shall escape me?
I know I cannot want a tempter; and that tempter cannot want either power, or
malice, or skill, or vigilance* or baits, or opportunities; and for my self, I
find too well, that of my self I have no strength to resist any of his
temptations: O for thy mercies sake, uphold thou me with thy mighty hand; stand
close to me in all assaults; show thy self strong in my weakness: Psalm. 19. 13.
Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins; Let them not have dominion over
me; then (only) shall I be upright, and shall be innocent from the great
transgression.

XLIV.
It is thy title, O Lord, and only thine, that thou give songs in the night:
Job 35. 10.
The night is a sad and dolorous season; Eccles. 11. 7.
as the light contrarily is the image of cheerfulness; like as it is in bodily
pains and aches, that they are still worst toward night; so it is in the cares
and griefs of mind; then they assault us most when they are helped on by the
advantage of an uncomfortable darkness: Many men can give themselves songs in
the day of their prosperity; who can but howl in the night of their affliction;
Act. 16. 25.
but for a Paul and Silas to sing in their prison at midnight; for an Asaph to
call to remembrance his song in the night, Ps. 77. 6.
this comes only from that Spirit of thine, whose peculiar style is the
Comforter: And surely, as music sounds best in the night, so those heavenly
notes of praise which we sing to thee our God in the gloomy darkness of our
adversity, cannot but be most pleasing in thine ears: Thine Apostle bids us
(which is our ordinary wont) when we are merry to sing, when afflicted, to
pray; but if when we are afflicted we can sing, (as also when we are merriest
we can pray) that ditty must needs be so much more acceptable to thee, as it is
a more powerful effect of the joy of thy Holy Ghost; O my God, I am conscious
of my own infirmity; I know I am naturally subject to a dull and heavy
dumpishness, under whatsoever affliction; Thou that art the God of all comfort,
remedy this heartless disposition in me; pull this lead out of my bosom; make
me not patient only, but cheerful under my trials, fill thou my heart with joy,
and my mouth with songs in the night of my tribulation.

XLV.
It is a true word, O Lord, that thy Seer said of thee long ago; 1 Samuel 16. 7.
The Lord sees not as man sees: Man sees the face, thou see the heart; man
sees things as they seem, thou see them as they are; many things are hid from
the eyes of men, all things lie open and displaid before thee. What a madness
then were it in me to come disguised into thy presence, and to seek to hide my
counsels from thine al-seeing eyes? I must be content, Lord, to be deluded here
by fair appearances; for I may not offer to look into the bosoms of men, which
thou have reserved for thy self; it is only the outside that I can judge by;
Yea, O God, if I shall cast my eyes inward, and look into my own breast, even
there I find my self baffled at home; The heart of man is deceitful above all
things; who can know it? None but those piercing eyes of thine can discover all
the windings and turnings of that intricate piece. What would it avail me, O
Lord, to mock the eyes of all the world with a semblance of holiness, whilst
thou should see me false and filthy? Should I be censured by a world of men,
when I am secretly allowed by thee, I could contemn it, yea glory in their
unjust reproach; But if thine eye shall note me guilty, to what purpose is all
the applause of men? O thou that art the God of truth; do thou open, and
dissect this close heart of mine; search every fiber that is in, or about it;
and if thou find any ill blood there, let it out; and if thou find any
hollowness, fill it up; and so work upon it, that it may be approved of thee
that made it; as for men, it shall be alike to me whether they spend their
breath or save it.

XLVI.
Lord God, What a world of treasure have thou hid in the bowels of the earth,
which no eye of man ever did, or shall, or can see? What goodly plants have
thou brought forth of the earth, in wild, unknown regions, which no man ever
beheld? What great wits have thou shut up in a willing obscurity, which the
world never takes notice of? In all which thou show, that it is not only the
use and benefit of man which thou regardest in the great variety of thy
creation, and acts of administration of the world; but thine own glory, and the
fulfilling of thine own good pleasure; and if only the Angels of heaven be
witnesses of thy great works, thou can not want a due celebration of thy
praise; It is just with thee, O God, that thou should regard only thy blessed
self, in all that thou do, or have done; for all is thine, and thou art all:
Oh that I could sincerely make thee the perfect scope of all my thoughts, of
all my actions; that so we may both meet in one and the same happy end, thy
glory in my eternal blessedness.

XLVII.
Indeed, Lord, as thou say, the night comes when no man can work; What can
we do, when the light is shut in, but shut our eyes, and sleep? When our senses
are tied up, and our limbs laid to rest, what can we do, but yield our selves
to a necessary repose? O my God, I perceive my night hastening on apace, my Sun
draws low, the shadows lengthen, vapors rise, and the air begins to darken;
Let me bestir my self for the time; let me lose none of my few hours; Let me
work hard a while; because I shall soon rest everlastingly.

XLVIII.
Thou see, Lord, how apt I am to contemn this body of mine; Surely when I
look back upon the stuff whereof it is made, no better then that I tread upon;
and see the loathsomness of all kinds that comes from it; and feel the pain
that it often times puts me to, and consider whither it is going, and how noisome
it is above all other creatures upon the dissolution; I have much ado to hold
good terms with so unequal a partner; But on the other side; when I look up to
thy hand, and see how fearfully and wonderfully thou have made it; what
infinite cost thou have bestowed upon it, in that thou have not thought thine
own blood too dear to redeem it; that thou have so far honored it, as to make
it the Temple of thy holy Ghost; and to admit it into a blessed communion with
thy self; and have decreed to do so great things for it hereafter; even to
cloth it with immortality, and to make it like unto thy glorious body; I can
bless thee for so happy a mate; and with patience digest all these necessary
infirmities; and now I look upon this flesh, not as it is, withered and
wrinkled; but as it will be, shining and glorified. O Lord, how vile so ever
this clay is in it self; yet make me in thine interest and my hopes so
enamoured of it, as if I did already find it made celestial. Oh that my faith
could prevent my change, and anticipate my ensuing glory.

XLIX.
Lord, what a dreadful favor was that which thou shewedst to thy Prophet
Elijah, to send a fiery chariot for him, to conveigh him up to Heaven! I should
have thought that the sight of so terrible a carriage should have fetched away
his soul beforehand, and have left the body grovelling on the earth: But that
good Spirit of thine, which had fore-signified that fiery rapture, had
doubtless fore-armed thy servant with an answerable resolution to expect, and
undergo it: Either he knew that chariot, how ever fearful in the appearance,
was only glorious, and not penal; Or else he cheerfully resolved that such a
momentany pain in the change would be followed with an eternity of happiness: O
God, we are not worthy to know whereto thou have reserved us: Perhaps thou have
appointed us to be in the number of those, whom thou shall find alive at thy
second coming; and then the case will be ours; we shall pass through fire to
our immortality: or, if thou have ordained us to a speedier dispatch, perhaps
thou have decreed that our way to thee shall be through a fiery trial. O God,
what ever course thou in thine holy wisdom have determined for the fetching up
my soul from this vale of misery, and tears, prepare me thoroughly for it; and
do thou work my heart to so lively a faith in thee, that all the terrors of my
death may be swallowed up in an assured expectation of my speedy glory: and
that my last groans shall be immediately seconded with eternal Allelujahs, in
the glorious Chore of thy Saints and Angels in Heaven. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

