A VVARNING-PEECE FOR ENGLAND.

By that sad and fearful Example that has happened to Men, Women, and
Children, all sorts of Cattle and Fowls; by Storms, Tempests, Hailstones,
Lightning and Thunder, June 25. 1652.

Written by Charles Hammond.

Joel 2.30, 31. And I will show Wonders in Heaven, and in Earth, Blood and
Fire, and Pillars of Smoke.

The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before the
great and terrible day of the Lord come.

Printed for Richard Burton, at the Horse-shooe in Smithfield.

A WARNING-Peece for all ENGLAND.
BEloved Friends,
I have here presented to you a small Book called, A Warning-peece for all
England; which I would desire all true Christians to hearken to it; and being
forewarned by those wonderful Examples of Almighty Gods heavy Judgments,
which I shall here relate unto you, that has happened in this our Nation of
late, that you may be hereafter forewarned by Prayer to prevent and stop the
heavy wrath of God, which deservedly is like to be poured out upon us all.

This is no Fable, nor invented Story, which is here to be related, but such
truths, that thousands can witness it: but now adays many folks in this our
Nation, are so hard of belief, that they will not believes unless they see;
who are like Thomas Didimus, or like those People in Noah's time, that all the
time he was building the Arc, would not believe the Flood, till such time as
it came upon them and drowned them all.

So in these our times, we have heard of the Judgments that Almighty GOD has
sent in this our Nation, and yet we will not believe it; and if we did, we
never strove by hearty Prayer and sound Repentance to keep the like from us:
but to our great grief, we have of late both seen, heard, and felt the Wonders
and Judgments of the Lord here amongst us; and yet our hearts are as hard as
ever they were: and so stiff-necked we are, that we will not humble our
selves, nor bow down neither our necks nor our knees by Prayer to the Lord our
GOD, that he may stop his Wrath and Judgments, and withdraw his heavy hand
from this sinful and profane Nation.

How many sad and woeful Accidents has there befallen many people since the
beginning of this present Year, by hanging, drowning, and killing themselves,
and one another? It may justly be called a year of Wonder and Admiration, the
like whereof has not in any age been known.

Therefore, all you that are true Christians, and loves the Name of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ I desire you all that read or hear this Book, to
love, honor, and fear that great God of Gods, and King of Kings, who by his
Almighty power can make the Earth shake and tremble, and the Foundations of the
Hills to move, as you shall find it written in the 18 Psalm (when David
called upon the Lord to deliver him from his Enemies) and the 11, 12, and 13
verses; He made Darkness his secret place, his Pavillion round about him were
dark Waters, and thick Clouds of the Skies: At the brightness that was before
him his thick Clouds passed, Haile-stones and Coals of Fire: The Lord also
Thundered in the Heavens, and the Highest gave his voice; Haile-stones, and
Coals of Fire.

The LORD has a long time spoken to this sinful Nation, by the voice of the
Gospel, and by his Ministers; which we not regarding, he now begins to speak
loud to us, by the terrible voice of Thunder and Lightning, which many places
of this our Land has of late felt; as for example:

On the twentieth of June last, at a place called Laughton, a Town in
Cheshire, there happened such a tempestuous storm of Thunder, Lightning, and
Hail, in the Church of that Town, that amazed all the People therein, killed
a great many in the said Church, to the number of eleven, and also hurt many:
Whilst the Minister was executing his place, there came a flash of fire into
the Pulpit, which struck him down, but God be praised it did him no hurt. It
is a wonderful Relation concerning the passages of it: for they that were
stricken dead, never groaned, nor spoke not a word before they dyed; and some
that sat next them never hurt, and yet touched them, to the astonishment of all
those that saw it: Some were stricken and lay for dead, but recovered again;
and others were wounded, and dyed since: there was a Child in the Mothers arms
killed with the flashing of Lightning, and the Mother not hurt.

In several places of this our Nation, there was Houses and Barnes burned and
shattered down, and many great Trees torn up by the roots.

At Greenwich in Kent* there happened such a Storm of Thunder, Lightning, and
Hail, that it broake not only many glasse-windowes, but it broake down the
tops of many Houses in the said Town, and overthrew the gates of the Park by
the violence thereof.

At Uxbridge, by the violence of the Thunder, it threw a great door of from
the hinges, and broke a great part of the house, a man being at the door blew
him down, yet did him no harm*

Also, at Westchester, the side of a Church was beaten down, but did no hurt.

At Ingerstone in Essex, a piece of that Steeple was beaten down, and a Pillar
of the Church.

Three Maids being together disputing one with another, one of the^ having a
Bible in her hand, which Maid was a Papist, it is said immediately came a flash
of lightning and struck her dead, and the other two had no harm, nor the Bible
hurt.

Besides, in sundry places, Hogs, Sheep, Oxen, Horses, and diverse other Cattle,
were killed in this tempest of Thunder, Lightning, and Hail, Great storms and
showers of Hail and Rain in some places, and in some none at all; in some
Towns the people has seen the storms and showers round about them, and no
Rain at all with them: There has been great harm done by the floods and
waters in some places, and within five miles again, great want of rain and
water, to refresh the thirsty land, which wanted.

Now, you may see the wonders of the Lord, and the power of the Almighty; some
of those Haile-stones that fell, it is reported by many credible people that
they were as big as eggs, and very Icie and hard, some had the print of a Rose
and Crown, and some the print of Death.

A most miserable sad Accident happened in the Church and Town of
South-Okenton in Essex, the 21 of this instant June, about six a cloak at
night, at which time was heard a most terrible great Thunder, with much
Lightning: it burned a Barn full of Corn down to the ground, and then took
hold of the Church, burned a great part of the same, melted the Bells and Lead
of the Steeple, and dispersed the same in little pieces all about the Church.

The tenth of June last, it was such a storm in Wales in Glamorgan-shire in
Breknoc-shire, and diverse other parts of that County, that by the storm and
flood that fell after, it drowned many sellers of salt, and carried away many
fields of corn and hay; and to the wonder and astonishment of all that hears
it, it carried away 7 dwelling-houses in one place, and 5 in another, and a
great bridge; it carried not only the houses, but the people and all that was
in the^, a sad woeful sight to behold.

The Lord destroyed the world in Noah's time with a flood, and he destroyed
Sodom and Gomorrah with fire and brimston, and he made a Covenant that he
would not destroy the world no more by water: he has kept his Covenant with
us, but how many Covenants, Oaths, and Protestations have we broaken with him?
Let us consider with our selves, and not provoke the Lord our God, he shows us
by these signs and wonders, that he is the ssame God, and that he has the
seas and waters at his command; he shows us that fire and water are his
ministering spirits to extend ye viols of his wrath on al rebellious and
stiff-necked people

The Foolish has said in their heart (says David) that there is no God; I am
afraid, that in these sad and miserable times, that there are too many of such
Opinions in this our Nation, that do not stick to speak it openly, and say,
that all things comes by Nature, and there is neither God nor Devil: but I
desire all true Christians to beware of such Atheists; for though they shall
not have the happiness to see there is a God, yet they shall acknowledge one
day, to their everlasting sorrow, that they then feel the powerful hand of God
in punishing of such Blasphemy; and that there is a God that can cast the^ into
that place, where they shall see there is a Devil to torment and punish all
such Blasphemers. You see the Lord begins to speak loud to us, to make us know
there is a God, and that he will be feared by all sorts of People.

How many several Warnings has the LORD sent to this our sinful Nation?
First, he sent the Pestilence amongst us, which swept away thousands; and has
not the Sword a long time bin amongst us, insomuch that we have sheathed it in
one another bowels? has not the Father bin against the Son, and the Son
against the Father, and one Brother against another? We know not how soon the
Lord may send a Famine amongst us, for all we have such plenty now, the Lord
be praised.

Has not the Almighty showed Wonders in the Heavens above, and Signe^ in the
Earth below; and will none of all these soften and molli^ie our stonie-hearts,
to seek the Lord our God by unfeigned Prayer, and sound Repentance, and never
let him go, as Jacob did when he wrestled with him, he would not let him go
till he had blessed him, as you may read, in Genesis 32.26.

Beloved Friends, I would not have you think, that those on whom the hand of
the Lord has fallen by these accidents, are greater Sinners then we; for
remember what Christ says in the 23 Chap. of Luke, speaking of those eighteen
on whom the Tower of Siloe fell; for, says he, Unless ye Repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. Therefore let us take warning by those examples, for we know
not whose turn it is next.

Prayer is the safest B^lwarke that we shall find in these times, to protect us
against all our Enemies; if any thing will prevail with God, to stop his Wrath,
which is like to be poured out upon this land, it must be by that means. When
Jonah proclaimed yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed, yet by Prayer
and Fasting the Lord repented him of the evil he pretended, and he did it not;
as you may read in the 3 of Jonah; again, you may read in Martin Luthers time,
one had made a Covenant with the Devil, and had sealed a Bond with his blood,
and delivered it to him, and when he had made it known to Martin Luther, of his
sad condition; by Prayer that zealous Father prevailed so much with God, that
the Devil was forced to come and deliver the Bond up, and so saved this poor
Soul, which was as it were almost lost.

By Prayer Joshua prevailed with God, that the Sun and Moon stood still till
he had avenged hims^^fe of his Enemies, as you may read in Joshua 9.13.

By Prayer Moses prevailed with God, so that he destroyed not the people, as he
intended, when they made the molten Calfe, and worshipped it: But pray hear
what the Lord said unto Moses, Let me alone that I may destroy this people,
Exodus 33.10. So that you may see that Prayer did, as it were, bind the hands
of God, so that he could not destroy the people, by reason Moses prayer was so
fervent to him for them.

By Prayer the Plague ceased in David's time, and by Prayer and Repentance he
had his sins forgiven.

There is a many that are living at this present, that can remember how
wonderfully God did aflict the City of London, and diverse other places in this
our Nation, by his Scourge of Pestilence, but yet by their earnest Prayers and
Supplications to Almighty God, it pleased the Lord to stay his hand.

Nay, what is it that Prayer will not do, if it be done with earnestnes and
sincerity? Therefore I desire all true Christians whatsoever, whether they be
rich or poor, old or young, to arm themselves by Prayer and Repentance,
against the Assaults of the Devil; that they may not run headlong to ruin
and despair, as many of late has done since this Year begun, and made away
themselves, to the great grief of their friends.

Likewise, arm your selves by Prayer and Supplications to Almighty GOD, in the
Name of Jesus Christ our blessed Savior, and you need not fear what man can
do against you, for he has promised Mercy to all those that call upon his
Name.

When had we not more need of Prayer, and when was it less used then now; some
holds it superstition to use the form of Prayer, but let them poor souls
that has not the Spirit of Prayer, let them seek by Form of Prayer, for the
Lord will hearken to the cries of his People: I called unto the Lord (said
David) and he heard me, and delivered me out of all my troubles.

Again I say, arm your selves by Prayer and Repentance, and you need not
fear Thunder and Lightning, Sword, Pestilence, nor Famine: it will be your
best Buckler in the time of War, it will be your best Physician against
sickness, it will be a good Storehouse for you in the time of Famine; and so
I conclude, in that short Prayer that once was used in the Church of England;
in which I am persuaded no good Christian can say that there is any hurt.

From Lightning and Tempest, from Plague, Pestilence, and Famine, Good Lord
deliver us.
FINIS.
depiction of a congregation

