AN EXPOSITION By way of Supplement, ON THE Fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh,
eighth and ninth Chapters of the Prophecy OF AMOS.

Where you have the Text fully explained, other Texts occasionally cleared,
many Cases Stated, many Practical Observations raised, and many Polemical
Points debated: Together With a Confutation of Dr. Homes, and Sir Henry Vane,
In the end of the Commentary.

By THO. HALL, B. D. and Pastor of Kings-norton.

O that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men, that I might
leave my people, and go from them, for they be all Adulterers, an assembly of
treacherous men.

Jer. 9.2. They bend their tongue like their bow for lies, but they are not
valiant for the truth upon the earth, for they proceed from evil to evil, and
they know not me, says the Lord.

Verse 3. LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, near the Little North-door. 1661.

Ornatissimo Viro, amico amicissimo, Ecclesiae Pastorumque fidelium Patrono
notissimo, Orthodoxae fidei propugnatori acerrimo, Gervasio Piggot de Thrumpton
in Comitatu Nottingham. Armigero:
TAm a Romanistarum faece ac Scabie; quam a Fanaticorum Spuma ac rabie,
liberrimo:

Qui Natales eruditione, Eruditionem virtute, Virtutem moribus usque quaque
nobilibus adornavit:

Cui medulla inest and Quintessentia Pietatis, Poesios, Philosophiae ac
Theologiae:

Lucubrationes hasce quales, quales, Amoris and Honoris ergo. D. D. D.

THO. HALL.

TO THE READER.
IN my Exposition on Hosea, I had occasion to consult the Prophet Amos, who was
Hosea's Contemporary; and finding that Dr. Benefield, Lady- Margaret-Professor
in Oxford, had commented on that Prophecy; upon perusal I found that he had
expounded only the three first Chapters; whereupon, I finding the fourth to
be very suitable to our times, I only set upon that, not intending to go any
further; for the clouds thickened so fast over us, that I despaired of
proceeding to another Chapter; but being encouraged by some to go on with so
useful a work begun, I made a further Essay, and by a good hand of providence,
have brought the work (totally beyond my own expectation) to a total
perfection, having finished the Exposition of the whole Prophecy.

Many Posthumous works have had Supplementators surpassing their Predecessors,
this cannot be expected here. All that I can promise thee is this, that I have
not baulkt any doubt or difficulty, but have as fully and faithfully explained
the Text as possibly I could; I have spared for no cost or pains, I have spent
both Purse and Person freely in the work. It Is for the Lord, and I have not
offered to him of that which cost me nothing.

I have studied brevity, the times will not bear long discourses, besides I
naturally affect brevity, and love to see much matter compact together in a
little room.

Here thou have Practicals, Polemicals, References, and what ever else might
complete the work.

Here we have a Glass wherein we may see the Misery of Security, the Downfall
of Sensuality and Idolatry, the Sword, Plague and Famine pursuing an obstinate
and incurable people to destruction. Here we have the sins that ruined Israel,
viz. Oppression and Cruelty, Amos 2.8. and 8.6, 7. Bribery, Amos 4.1 and 5.12.
Notorious Lust, Amos 2.7. Odious Ingratitude, Amos 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Wilful
Ignorance, Amos 3.10. Hating of Reproof, Amos 5.10, 13. Formality, and a
Ceremonious Religion, Amos 5 21, 22. Unrighteousness in dealing, Amos 8.5. And
Weariness of Gods worship, Amos 8.5 And if these be Englands sins, these will
be likewise Englands ruin. Parity of sin will bring parity in suffering. All
the Symptoms of Judgments approaching are upon the Land. 1 Good men fall,
Psa. 12.1. Isa. 57. 1. 2 Ill men rise, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Psalm. 12. ult. 3 Gods
Vine, the Church, is grown wild and luxuriant for want of pruning; Professors
are turned Blasphemers, and instead of the Grapes of Obedience, they bring
forth the wild Grapes of Apostasy, Idolatry, Security, Pride and Hypocrisy.
We grow weary of Mannah, and long to be at our Garlic and Leeks, and Onions
in Egypt again. It was the great sin of Israel, that when the Lord had brought
them out of Egyptian bondage into Canaan, yet then they cried, Come let us make
us a Captain, that so we may return into Egypt again, Numb. 14.4. Such horrid
Apostasy always ends in misery, Isa. 1.4, 7. Ezekiel. 9.9. Heb. 10.38. Besides,
the sad divisions and subdivisions which are amongst us foretell some
approaching Judgment. We cannot gratify Antichrist more, than to weaken our
selves by our divisions. England is like a great Animal (as the Duke of Rohan
has well observed) and cannot dye unless she help to kill her self. Like a
Diamond, she is not so easily broken with hammers and swords, as she is cut in
pieces with her own dust. 'Twas our divisions at first that brought in the
Romans, Normans, and Saxons into this Land; what they may do again, a little
time will show.

Many amongst us have run round to Popery, and therefore it is just with God to
make that the scourge, which so many have made their refuge; and after the Rod
has done its work, then he will burn it; God is letting Antichrist loose once
more, to hasten his fall; the more blood he sheds, the greater will the cry be
against him. The measure of Babylons sins will be made up in blood before her
final ruin; and when she shall have once more filled her self with the blood
of the Saints, she shall have blood given her to drink, for she is worthy.

The good Lord awaken us, and humble us all for our own sins, and for the sins
of the times we live in, and make us to mourn for the things we cannot mend,
and enable us to receive the Truth in the love of it, and make us at last to
serve him with gladness of heart, in the abundance of all things, that we may
not provoke him to make us serve our enemies in want and misery. This is, and
shall be the prayer of

Thy Servant in the Lord, THO, HALL.
Kingsn. July 25. 1661.
Isreal's Obstinacy* A COMMENTARY ON The fourth Chapter of Amos.
AMOS 4.1. Hear this word ye Kine of Bashan, that are in the mountains of
Samaria, which oppress the poor, which crush [or destroy] the needy, which say
to their Masters, bring and let us drink.


THis Chapter contains the sum of the Third Sermon which the Prophet Amos
made to Israel, wherein he exhorts them to Repentance; and because by nature we
are very averse and backward to this duty, 1 He sets before them their heinous
and hideous Sins, which for number and nature were very great and grievous. 2
He rehearses the Judgments which they had already endured, and tells them of
greater Judgments which would follow, unless by speedy repentance they did
prevent them. 3 He sets before them the Goodness, and the Greatness of God, the
better to draw and drive them home unto him.


1 He sets before them his Goodness, viz. he was their God in Covenant still,
ready to receive them to mercy upon their returning to him.

2 His Greatness ( verse. 13.) he forms the Mountains, and creates the Winds,
etc. and can with ease destroy such as rebel against him.

The Prophet had before reproved the Rulers, and people in general for their
Idolatry, Carnal security, Ingratitude, and Apostasy; now he comes to reprove
the Counselors and Rulers of the Kingdom of Israel in particular; for their
oppression and cruelty, for their Epicurism, and beastly kind of life, verse. 1.
Hear this word ye Kine of Bashan. This is the Prophets exordium and Preface,
wherein he calls for attention, both in respect of the Persons he speaks to,
and the matter he treats of, viz. the Sins of the Rulers and People.

2 We have the Judgments denounced against them for those Sins, set forth by a
double Metaphor, ver. 2, 3.

3 Here is the confirmation of this threatening. 1 By the Oath of God, I have
sworn by my Holiness, says the Lord, that I will bring evil upon them; and
secondly, their Sins have justly deserved it: for 1. They are a People given up
to Idolatry, and hypocritical worshipping of me, verse. 4.5. 3. They were
indurate, impenitent, and incorrigible under variety of former judgments,
verse. 6. to 12. The Prophet names Six.

1 Famine, I gave them cleanness of teeth, etc. ver. 6. 2 Drought, I will hold
the rain from them, ver. 7, 8. 3 Blasting, Mildew, and the Palmer-worm, ver. 9.
4 The Pestilence, ver. 10. 5 The Sword, ver. 10. 6 Terrible Destruction, ver.
11.
4 Here is the unhappy success of all these dispensations of God toward them,
which is annexed to every particular Judgment, as a Versus intercalaris, the
burden of this mournful complaint, Yet have ye not returned unto me says the
Lord, verse. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

5 Seeing their incorrigibleness, the Prophet goes on to denounce a sorer and
sharper Judgment than any yet had befaln them, verse. 12. Therefore thus will I
do to thee O Israel. The Judgment was so dreadful that the Prophet seems
unable to express it, and therefore he does as 'twere draw a Vail over what he
could not in words express: with a Thus will I do unto thee; q. d. since
nothing will move thee, I will bring upon thee some direful desolation, and
utter destruction, for so it follows, Chap. 8.14. They shall fall and never
rise up again.

6 He concludes the Chapter with an Exhortation to Repentance, calling upon
them to prepare to meet the Lord, by unfeigned Humiliation, and Reformation,
that so they might prevent those Judgments which were yet coming upon them,
verse. 12.

7 The better to awaken them he uses two Motives, the first is drawn from the
dreadfulness of the impending Judgments, which since they were not able to
resist, he exhorts them to prevent, considering also the advantage they had of
a Covenant yet in being betwixt God and them, ver. 12. The second is drawn from
the Majesty and Power of God, who was marching in wrath against them.

In the first Verse the Prophet prosecutes the Charge which he had begun (
Chap. 3.9, 10.) against the Rulers and Judges of Israel, for their cruelty in
oppressing the poor and needy. These usually are ring leaders in sin, their
examples encourage others in wickedness, and therefore the Prophet begins his
Charge against them; and after descends to the Priests and People, who were
confederate with them in their wickedness. Here we have 1 The Summons, Hear
this word. 2 Who must hear? The Rulers of Israel, whom for their effeminacy he
calls, Kine of Bashan. 3 Where do they dwell? In the mountain of Samaria. This
was the Metropolis and chief City of Israel, situate upon a Mountain; here was
the Kings Palace where these Courtiers resided. 4 What do they do there?


Why they Oppress the Poor. They crush the Needy. They call for drink.


Before he had described them darkly, and figuratively, calling them unruly
Kine, but now he tells them plainly and punctually what they are, they are full
fed Beasts, that goared their fellows, and trampled the poor under their feet:

5 But what said the Lord to all this* Why he swears by his Holiness that they
shall dearly pay for this their cruelty, verse. 2.

So much shall suffice for the Logical Analysis, and resolution of the words, I
come now to the Grammatical explication of them.

Hear this word, viz. of the Lord, as it is explained, chap. 3.1. q. d. I come
not to you in mine own name, or in the name of men, but I come to you in Gods
name, it is his Message that I bring to you, Shimgnu, audita, a shamang,
audivit. obedivit. Genesis 3.17.

Haddavaer Hazzeh, hoc verbum, hoc ipsum.


and therefore justly calls for their best attention and obedience, the
Original implies both. Hear this word, it is emphatical in the Original, for
the Article is doubled, q. d. Hear this word which the most true and eternal
God (all whose words are works) has spoken against you, and hear what he has
decreed to bring upon you.

Ye Kine of Bashan. Thus he calls these wicked, wealthy, wanton Rulers, who
managed the affairs of the Kingdom for the King, and did abuse their power to
the oppressing of the poor; those feasted and fatted themselves with the spoils
of the poor whom they oppressed in judgment; and therefore the Prophet calls
them not men, but Beasts, and fat Bawsons, whose hearts were fat as grease: and
their eyes star'd out with fatness; they were stupid, and therefore he uses
sharp expressions, the better to awaken them; he speaks to them in the feminine
Gender (not because they were Women, as some conceive, for the sins which he
reproves are more proper to men, especially the Rulers of a People) but because
of their effeminate, wanton condition, being given to their bellies,
Metaphoricae designat eos qui opibus and potentia pollebant in regno Samariae,
ac praeeipue confiliarii, Iudices, prafecti. Paraeus in locum.
therefore he calls them in his Herds-mans Dialect, Hoc nomen recte in eos
convenit, quoniam ventri tantum and delitiis indulgebant qui significat cos non
agriculturae, sed immolationi and esui esse praeparatos, i. e. occasioni and
captivitati. Hierom.
Cowes; not Oxen or Horses which Plow and labor for us, but lazy lascivious
Cowes and Heifers which were put into rich Pastures to fill and fat them the
sooner for the slaughter. They were like to fat, unruly, refractory Heifers
which could endure no yoke. It Is usual in Scripture to call such idle,
effeminate, loose persons, by the name of Females, Isa. 3.12. Revel. 17.3, 4,
6, 7, 9, 18. such wealthy wicked men are elsewhere called, fat Bulls, and Bulls
of Bashan, for their fierceness and cruelty, Psalm. 22.12. Ier. 50.11. Hos.
4.16. and 10.11.

2 He calls them Kine of Bashan, because of the plenty of fat Cowes, and rich
Pastures in that Country; hence we read of the fatlings of Bashan, Ezekiel. 39.18.
and Rams of the brood of Bashan, Deuteronomy. 32.14. now the Rulers of Samaria were
like the Kine of Bashan, loaded with fatness, secure and drunken with worldly
wealth and pleasures, insomuch as they slighted the Word of God, and contemned
the Prophets which published it unto them, and so became like fat Beasts fitted
for the slaughter.

Caution. The Lord does not here simply condemn them for their Riches (which
are blessings simply considered in themselves) but for the abuse of their
riches and power. 1. In getting wealth by extortion and indirect practices. 2.
For abusing them to the Oppression of the poor.

Q* Are we not forbidden to revile the Rulers of the People, and commanded to
give no offense to any, and therefore Paul became all things to all men that
he might win them, 2 Cor. 10.32, 33.

Ans. 1. We are forbidden reviling of Rulers, ( Exodus 22. 28. Eccles. 10.20.
Acts 13.5.) but never reproving of them, neither is this an offense given, but
unjustly taken by them.

2. We must distinguish between private reproaches, and Prophetical reproofs;
for a Minister in the name of the Lord to reprove men for their open enormities
is no railing, nor reviling, but a faithful discharge of that duty which God
has entrusted them with, and strictly under severe penalties enjoined them,
Isa. 58.2. Ezekiel. 3.33. 1 Timothy 5.20. and all the Prophets, with Christ and his
Apostles, did practice it. Now Amos was a Prophet of God, and so by virtue of
his Office might do that which a private person who wants that Call, may not
do; besides, he being called extraordinarily, he had an extraordinary measure
of the Spirit, he knew the projects and practices of these ungodly great ones,
and so might the more boldly reprove them. Hence David calls wicked men Dogs,
Lions, Bulls, Psalm. 22.12, 13.21.22. and Solomon his Son calls wicked Princes
hungry Bears, Prove. 28.15. and Paul calls Nero a Lion, and Christ calls Herod a
Fox, and Amos here calls them fatted Cowes. This downright Prophet being not
bred at Court, nor coming from the Hall, where men use silken words, and lofty
titles of Honor; but coming from the Stall, according to his blunt and rustic
language, he calls a Spade a Spade, and such as neglected their duties to
pamper their Carcasses, he calls Beasts, not men; q. d. their flatterers look
upon them as so many Heroes, and Gods on earth, but I that have seen their
loathsome lusts, do look upon them as so many fat Bulls, filthy Swine, and
unruly Heifers, that will not bear the yoke of God.

3 To that of the Apostle, in becoming all things to all men; 1. It was in all
lawful things, and such as rended to the edification, and not to the
destruction of any, 2. It was only in such things as are left indifferent by
the Word of God, and in this sense only the Apostle became all things to all
men, (1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 21, 22.) amongst the Gentiles he walks, as one that was
not under the Ceremonial Law, that he might win them, Acts 15.19, 20. and
amongst the Jews he observed the Ceremonial Law, that he might not offend
them, Acts 16.3. and 18.18.

4 It is the favor of men which is gained by flattering and unlawful means,
which the Scripture condemns, Gal. 1.10. Do I seek to please men? then should
I not be the Servant of Christ; the Interrogation is a strong Negation, q. d.
when I was a Pharisee I pleased men, and followed their Tradititions, but now I
desire in singleness of heart to approve my self to God.

5 When the favor of men is sought in the first place, this cannot stand with
sincerity, but when it is cast in upon us after a faithful discharge of our
duty, we may thankfully and joyfully receive it. It is said of Christ that he
grew in favor first with God, and then with men, Luke 2.52. and it was
Demetrius his Honor, that he had a good report of all men, yea and of the
truth is self, 3 John 12. It is possible for a Christian so to live that he may
approve himself both to God and man; Christ walked so convincingly, that the
Pharisees complained, that all the world went after him, (Joh. 12.19.) and no
wonder, since all the world was made by him; it is prudence therefore for a
Minister so to live, and so to act; that if it be possible (without detriment
to the truth, and a good conscience) he may have peace with all men. A free,
sincere, and prudent discharge of his duty is the only way to obtain this.

Who oppress the poor, and crush or bruise the needy; q. d. By Gnashak,
oppressit vi and dolo. v. Leigh. Critica. S. p. 182
force and fraud you oppress them, and by your might and power you break and
bruise those that have no helper. This is their daily practice, and constant
trade, asrhe Opprimentes pauperes, a^cidentes egenos. Montan.

Ratsati, confringitis ac conquassatis egentes vestua potentia, insignem de
notat violentiam rapacitate conjunctam. Tarnovius in locum. See more in my
Comment. on Psalm 82.2. p. 105, 106, 108.


Participle of the Present Tense, implies. Great Men many times are great
Oppressors of the poor, which cannot help themselves against them. No doubt but
they abused the rich by their Bribery and injustice, yet since the rich have
many friends, but the poor is hated usually by his nearest relations, therefore
they exercise their cruelty on them who have no helper.

Which say to their Masters, Mali principes quid aliud faciunt quam intimes
suos, qui merito Domini eorum sunt, quos conciliis suis regunt, exhortari, ut
spolient populum, ut ipsi babeant suarum alime^ta voluptatum* Hos recte Homerus
(...) appellat, i. e. populi devoratores. Ribera in locum.
bring, and let us drink. Those corrupt Rulers thought it not enough that
themselves oppressed the poor, but they encouraged such as had authority over the
People to fleece and flay them, that they might make merry together with their
spoils. They call on their Comrades to add affliction to the afflicted, and to
oppress the oppressed, which is such gross inhumanity, and horrid cruelty, that
the Lord swears in the next verse, that he will not pardon it.

They say to their Masters, Adonehem, Dominis suis, i. e. potentioribus qui
sunt Domini pauperum.

Dominos appellat hic, exactores, quibus feil. pauperes erant obarati. Calvin.


or Lords of the poor, that is, to such as have the mastery over them, viz.
their rich Creditors, and Usurers, who have and keep them under as their Slaves
and Vassals; these Rulers say unto them, Bring, that we may drink; that is,
bring in Money and Presents, bring bribes and rewards that we may make merry,
drink wine, and Shatch, bibit, convivatus est, quia in convivio largitur bibi
solet. Summam impudentiam notat, quod non modo quaevis muucra sponte oblata
recipiant; verum etiam ille sibi efferri pestulent; and quidem non in alium
usum quam ut Po^andi and voluptandi materie sufficiat. Gualter in locum.
feast with the prey and spoils of the poor. Thus they claw one another in
their wickedness, saying, Bring but Money and ye shall have what ye will,
especially against the poor and needy, we will deliver them into your hands,
do you pick their bones, suck their blood, and use them as you please; only
bring and bribe well and you may have any thing at our hands against them. At
feasts they were wont to drink freely, Ad hilaritatem non ad ebrietatem, for
cheerfulness, not excess, ( Genesis 43.34. Cant. 5.1. Ioh. 2.10.) and therefore by
a Synecdoche, Drinking is put here for Feasting, where there is both eating and
drinking, yet because drinking of Wine was much used in feasting, therefore in
Scripture it is often put for feasting; as Isa. 5.11. Joel 1.5. Amos 6.6. hence
the Greeks called their Feasts, Symposia, compotiationes, not eatings, but
drinkings.

1 God wants not Instruments to do his work; if he will have a people taught,
he can raise up Amos an Herdsman to reprove a brutish people; yea by an Ass
he can reprove the madness of a Balaam, 2 Pet. 2.16. He usually chooses the
things that are not, viz. of any esteem in the eyes of carnal men, to confound
the things which are of high esteem amongst them, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. 1 Samuel
2.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 8.2. and 78.70, 71. Matthew. 4.18.

Caution, not that this gives liberty for every one that supposes himself
Gifted to Preach without any Call; for though Amos were an Herdsman, yet he was
both gifted and called extraordinarily by God, as appears, Amos 7.15. The Lord
took me as I followed the flock, and said to me, Go, Prophecy unto my people
Israel. Here is his Call, and he showed his extraordinary Call, by his
extraordinary gifts; whereas those Enthusiasts amongst us, who pretend to an
extraordinary Call, upon trial are found not to have ordinary gifts; they can
hardly write one line of true English.

2 Obs. It is lawful sometime to use a Preface, the better to quicken
attention. We are by nature dull and slow to believe, or practice the truths
of God, and therefore we had need of all good means to quicken us. But of this
See my Comment. on Psalm. 82.1. p. 9, 10.
elsewhere.

3 Obs. Ministers must Preach the Word of God to the people. They must not
preach their own Fancies, or men's Inventions, but they must publish Gods
Counsels, teaching men to observe whatsoever he commands them, Matthew. 28.20. 1
Cor. 11.23. De Deo nil sine Deo, we must do nothing in Gods Worship without
the warrant of his Word; all must be done according to Gods pattern, See this
Point excellently enlarged, and all superstitious cavils answered, by Master
Attersol, on Numb. 3.4. p. 137. to 143. and p. 167
without adding or detracting, Deuteronomy. 12. ult. Prove. 30.6. Hence it is that all
the Prophets (as Amos does here.) came with a Dixit Dominus, Thus says the
Lord, and, Hear the Word of the Lord, Ezekiel. 1.3. Hos. 1.1. Jonah 1.1. Micah
1.1. Zech. 1.2. Mal. 1.1. He that preaches to Gods people must publish his
Oracles to them, 1 Pet. 4.11. such a man may preach with power and authority.
It is this Word of God which Gods people must read, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. this they
must search into, Ioh. 5. 39. this they must meditate on, Psalm. 1.2. and this
they must practice, Joh. 13.17. and therefore great reason that this, and this
Word only they should hear.

1 Away then with those Atheistical Sectaries who contemn Gods Word, and prefer
their own brainsick Revelations. Raptures, New Lights, and Satanical delusions
before the pure and perfect Word of God, These are not of God, because they
reject his Word, 1 Ioh. 4.6. these follow lying Vanities, and so forsake their
own Mercies; they reject the Law, which shows they have no light in them, Isa.
8.20.

Those Ministers then are to be blamed: that instead of saying with Amos, Hear
the Word of the Lord, they cry, Hear what Aristotle, Tully, Plato, Plutarch,
Pindarus, Seneca, say; how often do they cry, Thus says Austin, and thus says
Ambrose, when it may be they never once saw, much less perused those Authors,
only they name them to get a name for Learned men, when indeed it is a very
poor piece of learning to get a few fragments, and scraps of Latin in that
kind together. We are Gods Ambassadors, and must keep close to our
Commission; and though we may See my Schools Guard, chapter 3. p. 48.
occasionally (as the Apostle did) and sparingly cite Heathens to convince them
out of their own VVriters, or else to shame Christians that come short of them;
yet we may in no wise make it our constant practice.

4 Obs. Gods Ministers who are sent by him, must plainly tell even great men of
their sins; so does Amos here, he sleights the sinful greatness of men, and
emboldens himself upon his authority and calling, Though they were fat and
full, high and haughty, yet he tells them to their faces, that they acted
rather like Beasts, than men, and should dearly pay for their cruelty. It is
true, poor men must be reproved when they sin, but rich men especially, because
the sins of great men are great sins, See more in my Comment, on Psalm. 82.2.
Obs. 1. p. 96, 9^,
and by their example they do much hurt to others. Hence Samuel reproves Saul,
and the man of God reproves Jeroboam for usurping, and intermedling with the
Priests Office, which belonged not unto him, 1 King. 13.1, 2, etc. Their falls
are not only Personal, but Epidemical, and teach general disobedience, as they
complained of Queen Vashti, that her disloyalty would make others disloyal,
Hest. 1.16, 17. It is in the body Politic, as in the body Natural, if the
Vitals be poisoned, the inferior parts cannot be free; each Vein, and Nerve,
and Artery, like the flowing streams of some polluted Springs, are receptacles
of their infection, as well as nature. Let Jeroboam but set up Calves, and all
Israel is presently upon their knees to them. How many silly people by
following their Rulers have run themselves into destruction; like the Prince of
Frisland, V. Munsters Co^mograph in Frisland.
who asking what became of his Progenitors and Friends that were dead in their
ignorance and error? Answer was made, That they were in Hell; he desperately
replied, that then he would go thither after them. Subjects are ambitious to
follow their Princes, Tenants their Landlords, and Servants their Masters,
though they forsake God to do it. It was none of the worst counsel which the
good Judge in Lucian gave to Sostratus when he released him; Be good (says
he) and see thou teach not thy offense to others; for there are some who do
at once, in the very same act, both commit and teach sin, and so to the
numberless number of their own transgressions, add the sins of thousands.

Ye Kine of Bashan.

5 Obs. Wicked men are brutish men. Their prosperity and pomp besots them, Ier.
^.5.21. it fills them with insolence and blasphemy ( Psalm. 73.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.)
and debaseth them beneath the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.20. because they
have no changes, In my Comment. on Psalm. 73.22. Obs. 6. and on Psalm. 82.4. Obs.
6. p. 122
therefore they fear not God; because they are not emptied from vessel to
vessel, but they live secure and at ease, therefore their scent abides within
them, Ier. 48.11. Hence it is that they are so often compared in Scripture to
Bulls, Bears, Dogs, Swine, etc. as I have else where showed at large.

That dwell in the Mountain of Samaria. 6 Obs. God takes notice of the
dwellings of men. He knows where his enemies dwell, Obadiah 3. and he knows
where his people dwell, Ezekiel. 26. Zech. 2.7. Revel. 2, 13. he knows our See
this point largely handled, in Attersol, on Numb. 1.6. Doct. 2. p. 20. to 28.
names, our natures, our callings and conditions, Act. 16.14, 15, yea not only
our integral parts, but even the hairs of our head are numbered by him, Mat.
10.30. He sees us though we see not him, John. 1.47. and knows us by our names
before we have a being, Josiah was called by his name three hundred years
before he was born, 1 King. 13.2.

God has a particular and distinct knowledge of every man and woman in the
world: he perfectly knows all things past, present, and to come, ( Acts
15.18.) and that not successively and by discourse, by debating and searching
out the causes of things, but in a moment, by one eternal act of understanding
he knows all things, with their causes and conditions, in himself, and of
himself, without any reasoning or help from others, what was done, or is to be
done a thousand years hence, is as present with him as a thing that is past,
Psalm. 90.4. He calls the things that are not as if they were, Romans 14.17. and
knew Jeremy before he was formed in the Womb, and ordained him to be a Prophet,
Ier. 1.5. Gods knowledge is infinite, and eternal, like himself; our knowledge
is dark, imperfect, uncertain, confused; but Gods knowledge of us, and ours, is
an absolute, perfect, clear, certain, distinct knowledge; we know the outside
and superficies of things, but God searches the heart, and knows not only our
faces, but our spirits (1 Samuel 16.7. Ier. 17.9, 10.) all things are naked and
anatomized before him, Job 34.21, 22. Heb. 4.13.

How careful then should we be, to walk in the midst of our houses with perfect
hearts, ( Psalm. 101.2.) since Gods eyes are upon our habitations, and he sees
our walking there. This should make us dedicate our houses to the service of
God, ( Psalm. 30, the title of the Psalm, 2 Samuel 6.20.) that so they may be
Bethels, houses of God, and not Betha-vens, houses of vanity and iniquity. We
should put away sin far from our Tents and Tabernacles, that the eyes of Gods
jealousy may see nothing amongst us to displease him, Job 22.23 see the
benefit, v. 24. to 30. Let the name of our dwellings be, Jehovah Shammah, the
Lord is there: Ezekiel ult. ult. let not idleness, riot, and profaneness dwell
there, but let the glory of the Lord, and his fear dwell there; let it be said
of your houses as Hagar said of her Well ( Genesis 16.14.) Beer-la-hai-roi, the
Well of him that lives and sees me. So say thou, Beth-la-hai-roi, The house and
dwelling of him that lives and sees me. We shall never be sincere till we
can walk as in Gods eye continually, as Enoch and Abraham did, Genesis 5.24. and
17.1. and 24.40.

7 Obs. Great men many times are great Oppressors. It is these fat Cowes of
Bashan that goar their fellows. Riches accidentally make men cruel and
insolent; it were rich men that oppressed the poor, and drew them by violence
before Judgment Seats, Iam. 2.6.

8 Obs. Luxury breeds oppression. As covetousness is never satisfied, so
neither is intemperance; when great men are wedded to their lusts, then to
maintain them they fall to oppression, crying, Give, give, that we may drink.
Men devoted to their lusts are insatiable, though they have enough, yet, like
fat beasts they must drink more; they make their bellies their gods, and
therefore it is no wonder to see them active in promoting its interest to the
utmost, Isa. 22.13. 1 Cor. 15.32. this ruins Persons and Nations. The Curii,
and Fabritii, by their contentation and temperance advanced the Roman Empire,
when their Successors by Covetousness and Luxury destroyed it.

9 Obs. Wicked Rulers usually are great Bribers. They are all for gifts and
rewards, Against Bribery, see my Comment. on Psalm. 82, 1. p^ 89.
crying, Hab, Hab, Give, give, Bring, bring, Hos. 4.18. they ftirre up Lawyers,
Attorneys, and other inferior Officers, to bring in Griest to their Mills,
that they may divide the spoil, and make a prey of their poor Clients. Great
men want not instruments to assist them in their wickedness be it never so
vile; let Iesabel but contrive the Tragedy of Naboths death; and she will find
Elders that will act it for her. If Amnon be sick of Lust, there is a Ionadab
ready to add fuel to the flame. Did not the Lord bind Kings in chains, and
great ones in fetters of iron, setting them their bounds which they cannot
pass, there would be no living for good men in the world.

10 Obs. It is the property of wicked men to encourage one another in their
wickedness. They cry, Come, let us drink, and be merry with the spoils of the
poor. Thus Persecutors say, Come let us lay our heads together, and work
wisely, that we may destroy Gods people, Exodus 1.10. Prove. 1.11. The unclean
Person also has his Come, let us take our fill of lust, Prove. 7.18. The
Idolater has his, Come, let us join together to make our Idols, Isa. 42.7. The
Drunkard says, Come, let us fetch Wine, and fill our selves with strong drink,
to morrow shall be as to day, and much more abundant, Isa. 56. 12. q. d. though
we drink till we be drunk, and stark mad, yet we fear no punishment, we shall
fare no worse to morrow than we have done to day; God regards not such things
as these; and if the wicked have their Comes, Genesis 11.3. why should not Gods
people have their Comes? we should encourage each other in goodness, and call
one another to the public Assemblies, saying, Come, let us go to the house of
the Lord, Isa. 2.3, 5. Zech. 8.21. we should call men to Christ as the Prophet
does, saying, Come, come, come, Isa. 55.1.3. Philip calls Nathaniel to come to
Christ, and the Woman of Samaria calls her Neighbors, Ioh. 1.46. and 4.29.
this duty of stirring one another up to the best things is often commanded, as a
special preservative against sin, 1 These. 5. 11. Heb. 3.12, 13. and 10.24. it
is not sufficient that we practice the Truth our selves, but we must
encourage those about us also so to do, Genesis 18.19. we are dull and backward
to the best things, and have need of quickening, Prove. 27.17.

VERSE 2.
The Lord has sworn by his Holiness, that lo the days shall come upon you,
that he will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with fish-hooks.
IN the precedent Verse we had the Sin of the Rulers of Samaria, now comes
their Punishment. The Prophet here tells them, that the time is even now at
hand when the Lord will visit for all their Idolatry, Oppression, etc. and to
procure the more credit and authority to what he spoke, he brings in the Lord
himself swearing their destruction; Gods bare word had been sufficient, but the
better to awaken these secure Sinners, and assure them of some approaching
Judgment, he tells them, Becodsho, in sanctita^e sita, i. e. per sanctitatem
suam, Heb. enim Beth, i. e. In, est nota jurantis.
that the Lord had sworn by his Holiness; that is, by himself, for Holiness is
so essential to God, that he may as soon cease to be God, as cease to be Holy,
and Good. Man when he swears must swear by a greater than himself, but since
there is none greater than God, therefore the Lord swears by himself, Heb.
6.13. it is himself that is meant when he swears by his great name, Jer. 44.26.
By his Soul, Jer. 51.14. Amos 6.8. and by his Holiness, as here; for whatsoever
is in God, is God himself.

In this Verse we have two parts.

1 A Commination of a dreadful Judgment. 2 A Confirmation of this Commination
with an Oath; the Judgment threatened is in these words, Lo, the days shall
come upon you, (i. e.) direful, dismal days, full of misery, and calamity
shall certainly and suddenly surprise you, when you shall be carried away
captive by the Assyrian ( Amos 5.18, 19, 20.) As men have their days of
sinning, so God has his appointed times when he will visit for sin, Ierem.
46.21.
Obj. We are rich and mighty, and cannot easily be carried away?

Ans. Riches avayl not in the day of Gods Wrath; the Assyrian shall as easily
carry you away as the Fisher does his little Fish which he catches with his
hook or thorn, Facilitatem indicat qua bostes eos non aliter ac pisc^eulos
solent Piscatores capturi s^nt and abd^eturi. Mercer.
and puts into his bag; they shall not need Carts to carry you away,
Fish-hooks shall do it. It is a Metaphor frequent in Scripture, as 2 King.
19.28. Job 41.1, 2. Ezekiel. 19.4. and 29.9. and 38.4.

2 Here is the aggravation of their misery, they shall not only perish
themselves: but their posterity shall suffer with them; You shall be taken away
with Hooks like Tsinnoth, spinis, i. e. hamis, v. Leigh. Critic. S. Heb. p. 200.
Thorns, and your posterity with Besiroth dugah, hamis piscatoriis, Stroth a
Sir, spina, olla, hamus, significat spinas seu hamos quibus minora animalia
trajici solent, and venalia proponi, etc. Sanctius.
Fish-hooks, q. d. you shall be like Fishes which are industriously caught,
easily pulled up, and suddenly carried away on a Thorn, or Fish-hook, ye shall
be no more like fat Kine which abide in their Pasture, but I will root up you
and yours, you shall be carried into Captivity. As the Fisher drives the Fish
out of his holds, and then catches and kills it; so shall the Assyrians
violently pull you out of your holds and habitations for the slaughter.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Obs. Swearing in it self is not unlawful. God himself who cannot sin, yet
swears by his Holiness; so Isa. 45.23. and 62.8. Ier. 51.14. Heb. 6.13. but of
this at large elsewhere. In my Com. on 2 Timothy 4.1. p. 305. Doct. Gouge on Heb.
6.13. p. 83. to 92.


2 Obs. God is Holiness it self. It is essential to him, and therefore it is
here put for himself. The Lord has sworn by his Holiness; that is, by himself.
Holiness in Angels and Men is Accidental, they may lose their Holiness and yet
be Creatures still; Beauty of Holiness, chap. 1.
but Holiness is so con-natural to God, that he may as soon cease to be God,
as to be holy. But of this elsewhere.

3 Obs. It is a very hard thing to convince secure Sinners of an approaching
Judgment. God is constrained to swear here, to assure them of the certainty
and infallibility of his Threatenings. As in times of Adversity and Temptation
men are hardly brought to believe the Promises, See more in Greenhil on Ezekiel.
12.22. Obs. 1. p. 493. and Mr. Trapp on Jer. 22.21
( Psalm. 116.11.) so in times of Prosperity: it is hard to convince men of the
truth of Gods Threatenings; I spoke to thee in thy prosperity, and thou would
not hear, Jer. 22.21.

4 Obs. Sin and Punishment are inseparable. In the first Verse we had their
Sin, and in this second, their Punishment; as men have their days of sinning,
so God has his days of punishing for sin, Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17, etc. Psalm. 37.13.
Ier. 46.21. and 50.27.31. Joel 1.15. Luke 19.43. Revel. 18.8.

No sooner had Ahab killed Naboth, and taken possession of his Vineyard, but
presently the Lord sends Elijah with a whole volley of Judgments against him,
1 King. 21.16. to 25.

5 Such as oppress others, shall at last be oppressed themselves. Look what
measure men mere to others, God will raise up some that shall mere the like to
them again. These fat Beasts did goar the poor, and get their estate from them;
now the Lord raises up the Assyrian against them, who with their Hooks should
pull them out of their estates and habitations, as Fishes out of the water. God
loves to pay Sinners in their own coin, and to retaliate the wrongs which they
have done to others. Thus Adonibezek confesses, that as he had done to others,
so God had requited him, Judge. 1.7. such as show no mercy to others, shall have
none themselves, Iam. 2.13. Babylon, that had tortured and abused the Saints,
must have double given her, Revel. 18.6. the Sodomites that burnt with lust,
were burnt with fire from heaven. Genesis 19.5.24. Joseph's Brethren that sold him
into distress, were at last distressed themselves, and acknowledge Gods Justice
in it, Genesis 4.21. David's Sin in numbering the people, was punished with
diminishing of the people. Hereby God does more sensibly convince men of their
Sin, when they may read it in the punishment.

Thus those who are disobedient to their Parents, God raises up of their
Children that shall rebel against them. Those that abuse their first Wives, are
oft-times punished by the second; and those Servants that were false to their
Masters, shall be punished with Servants that will be perfidious to them. Let us
therefore by the punishment labor to find out the Sin that brought it, and
judge our selves for it, and we shall not be judged of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.32.

6 Obs. When a People are ripe for ruin they shall suddenly and easily be
destroyed. God stays but till the sins of a People be full, and then he
suddenly brings them down, Genesis 15.16. look how easily the Fisher pulls up his
little Fish with his Hook, and carries it away; so easily did the Assyrian
carry away this Idolatrous people into Captivity, now that their day was come.
See more in Greenhil on Ezekiel. 29.4. p. 553. and in my Comment. on 2 Timothy 3.9.
p. 183.
There is no power or policy against God, he can destroy the stoutest enemy
with the greatest facility, Isa. 25.11. if he be angry with a People, he wants
not Fishers, Hooks, Hunters, to pursue them, and carry them away, Ier. 16.16.
Hab. 1.14, 15, 16.

7 Obs. Children many times fare the worse for their wicked Parents. The
Parents are taken away with hooks, and the Posterity with Fish-hooks; root and
branch must be stockt up. It is just with God to cut off the wicked with their
seed, as we kill the Wolf with her Litter, In my Comment. on Hos. 13.16. Obs.
12. p. 80, to 86. and Attersol on Numb. 14. 34. p. 615.
and the Fox with her Cubs, Deuteronomy. 28.41. Hos. 13.16. But of this at large
elsewhere.

VERSE 3.
And ye shall go out at the breaches, every Cow at that which is before her,
and ye shall cast them into the Palace, says the Lord.
THe Prophet continues his Threatening, as appears by the Copulative, And, ye
shall go out of the Breaches. He amplifies their calamity by that fear and
consternation which should surprise them; the walls of Samaria being broken
down, those Grandees which before went in great state and order, should now
confusedly, like so many frighted Beasts, flee out at every breach to save
themselves; so that in this Verse we have, as in the former, 1. A Commination,
or Judgment threatened, Ye shall go out at the breaches. 2. A confirmation of
this Commination, says the Lord. The better to awaken them he adds this again,
that they had not to do with man, but with the Almighty, who will not be
mocked, nor dallied withal.

The Prophet goes on in directing his speech to the Nobles, Judges, and
Counselors of the Land, though he spare not the inferior sort, yet because
the Rulers were the ringleaders in sin, therefore he bends his speech
principally against them.

1 Here is the Title which he gives them, viz. Gowes, a blunt term, but a fit
one; this is implied in the feminine Gender, Una quaeque scil. vacca, as verse
the first, q. d. you look upon your selves as great men, but in my eye ye are
as so many fat Beasts, and not one of you shall escape Gods revenging hand, 2
King. 17.20.

2 Here is the misery that attends these wanton luxurious Beasts, they shall be
so full of fear, that they shall run out at the breaches of the walls, leaving
all their riches behind them.

The words admit of some difficulty, and therefore I shall open them distinctly.

Ye shall go out of the breaches, viz. Which the enemy has made in your
walls. Samaria had been long besieged, and the Assyrian had made many breaches
in the walls of the City, at which they attempted to run out and save
themselves by flight, even as Beasts when they are frighted run out at a gap.

Every Cow at the breach which is before her; that is to say, any way, for they
had neither Gates nor Walls whole. Valiant men keep their ranks and files in
despite of all opposition, Joel 2.7, 8. but faint-hearted, fearful sinners
shift for themselves, and take the next gap to run out at. As beasts when
chased, run on heaps disorderly, so these fly from their enemies tumultuously,
and confusedly, without any respect to their companions; seeking only to save
themselves, Amos 2.14, 15, 16.

And ye shall cast them into the Palace; q. d. that ye may fly away the
swifter, ye shall cast away your pleasant and precious things, and shall fly
naked from your enemy. The Learned conceive there may be an Ecclipsis in the
words, which may be thus supplied; ye shall cast away those things [ which ye
have brought ] into the Palace, as Bribes, Treasures, Jewels, and precious
things which you brought into the Palace, for security and safety in that
strong place; ye shall now in your fear cast them all away. This is conceived
to be the most genuine sense, yet the learned are divided.

1 Some render the word thus, Ye shall be cast as Captives into Armenia, or
into Mount Armon, but these mistake the Original word, Haharmonah: where Harmon
is not a proper name, In Harmon, vulg. in Armeniam, Chald.
but a common name, and signifies a Palace, High-house, or Tower, from Ram,
altus, excelsus.

2 Others thus, You shall cast your selves into the Palace, viz. to hide your
selves there, from the fury of the Assyrian, but in vain, for he shall batter
those Towers, and take you there.

3 Calvin thus, You shall cast your selves, e Palatio, out of the Palace, that
is, ye shall fly for your lives, and leave all your pleasant things behind you
in your forsaken Palaces.

4 The Dutch Annotations thus, Ye shall throw away that which was brought into
the Palace, ( i. e.) that which you gathered into your Palaces by violence and
robbery, Ye shall cast away the things of the Palace, so the Margin of our
Bible.
you shall now throw it away, alluding to that of Amos 3.10. Ye store up
violence and robbery in your Palaces; but when the Sword comes ye shall throw
all away, and think it well if ye can save your lives; so that in these two
Verses we have a threefold punishment threathed against Israel, 1. Banishment,
and transplantation out of their own Land, Verse. ^. 2. Flying before their
enemies. 3. Loss of goods, ver. 3.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Fear and amazement is the proper portion of wicked men. Those that fear not
God, have cause to fear every thing. All are enemies when God is an enemy,
Deuteronomy. 28.65. Prove. 28.1. Joel 2.6. these men here run, some this way, and some
another way; one runs out of the City, and another runs into the Palace, but
all in vain, for there is no escaping when God pursues, Amos 9.1, 2, 3, 4.
though wicked men may seem full of courage and confidence in times of peace,
yet when Judgment shall arrest them, In my Com. on Psalm. 73.19. See Attersol
on Numb. 22.3. p. 874, 875
none so amort and amazed as they, Levit. 26.36. Isa. 33.14. Dan. 5.6. But of
this at large elsewhere.

2 Obs. Wicked men are the Pests of the places where they dwell. By their sins
they bring down the walls of Cities, and make breaches in them for their
enemies to enter and destroy them, See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.16. Obs. 7.
p. 71
the very stones and timber cry for judgment against them, Zech. 5.4.

3 Observe, Partners in sin will leave men in their sorrow. Those that were
united before, yet when judgment comes they look for the nearest Breach to run
out at, not staying for others. When Judas was troubled in conscience for
betraying his Lord and Master, his companions in sin leave him to shift for
himself, with a Look thou to that, Mat. 27.4.

4 Obs. Creature Comforts cannot steed us in a day of wrath, Prove. 11.4. Silver
and Gold will not then avayl, Ezekiel. 7.19. all Jewels and Treasures fayl us in
time of distress, See my Com. on Hos. 13.15. p. 58, 59, 60.
only the jewel of a good Conscience, like a faithful friend, will never leave
us, nor forsake us.

VERSE 4.5.
Come to Bethel and transgress, at Gilgal multiply transgression, and bring
your Sacrifices every morning, and your Tithes after three years.

And offer a Sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven, and proclaim and publish
the Free-offerings, for this likes you, O ye children of Israel, says the
Lord,


THe Prophet goes on with his Charge against Israel, and that the justness of
Gods Judgments, which he threatened to bring upon this people might be made
apparent to the world, he comes to set forth their gross Idolatry, together
with their obstinacy and induration therein, insomuch as no Punishments could
work upon them; this makes the Lord begin with a most biting and bitter
Sarcasm, saying, Go to Bethel and transgress.

The Prophet had before charged them with cruelty, now he upbraids them for
their Idolatry, and false-worship, set up by Jeroboam their first King,
augmented by many of the succeeding Kings, and endured so long as the Kingdom
endured; till at last it brought them into Captivity, In my Com. on Hos. 13.16
as I have showed at large elsewhere.

The Prophet here by a Prolepsis, prevents an Objection, whereas they might
think to escape Gods Judgments by their Sacrifices, and Idolatrous services;
the Prophet tells them, that this is so far from pacifying Gods wrath, that
it incenseth him the more against them, and therefore to express his great
indignation against them, he sarcastically bids them, Go to Bethel and
transgress, etc.

In the words we have, 1. An Ironical concession, or Sarcastical exhortation,
Go to Bethel and transgress. This seems to be a Precept, Est vox indignantis,
Ironi^e quidem lo quitur Deus, sed interea Pro^ert indignatiozem suam. Calvin.
but is indeed a strong Prohibition, as appears, Hos. 4.15. Amos 5.5.21, 22.
Seek not Bethel, enter not into Gilgal, and therefore the Chaldee Paraphrast
sets it down positively by way of assertion* Ye have come to Bethel and
transgrest, ye have multiplied sins in Gilgal* There they Worshipped the
golden Calves out of a good intention, conceiting that they Worshipped God,
when indeed they sacrificed unto Devils (2 Chronicles. 11.15.) and therefore the
Lord here in an holy indignation Ironically upbraids them with their Idolatry,
q. d. Since by no means you will be reclaimed, but are desperately set on your
own ways, since there is no remedy, go on, take your own hearts lusts, and
fill up the measure of your iniquity. He gives them the reins in wrath, and
since they will be filthy, he bids them be filthy still. As angry Parents are
wont to say to their desperate Children, I see you will have your own ways,
why since there is no remedy, go on and perish. The like Sarcastical, taunting
speeches, testifying Gods indignation against sin, we have in other places; as
Ier. 7.21. Ezekiel. 20.39. Go and serve every one his Idols, q. d. follow your
Idols if you please, I had rather ye did so, than dissemble as you do, to my
dishonor.

2 What must they do, or rather what must they not do at Bethel? why, 1. They
must transgress, viz. the Law of God concerning his Worship. 2. Multiply
transgressions. 3. Bring their Sacrifices every morning. 4. Their Tithes at
three years end. 5. Yet more, offer a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving; and 6.
Proclaim the Free-will-offerings.

3 Here is the ground of all their Idolatry, superstition, and Will Worship,
for this pleases you, O ye children of Israel; q. d. it is not I that command
you so to do, but it is your own rebellious wills that set you on work, you
love and desire to have it so.

Come to Bethel; Dan, Bethel, Gilgal, were the three chief places in which the
Israelites did worship their Idols; 1 Dan was defiled with the Idolatry of the
golden Calves, (1 King. 12.29, 30. Amos 8.14.) 2 Bethel signifies the House of
God, it was the place where God appeared to Jacob, and after appointed it for
the place of his Worship, Genesis 28.17. and 35.1. Hos. 12.4. but Jeroboam setting
up the golden Calves here, turned Bethel, the House of God, into Beth-aven, the
house of Vanity and iniquity, of confusion and misery, Hos. 4.15. and 5.8. and
10.5. The people had a good conceit of the Holiness of Bethel, where God
appeared to Jacob, this made Jeroboam to set up a Calf there. This place
formerly was called Luz, but upon Gods extraordinary appearing to Jacob there,
when he fled from his brother Esau, he changed the name, and called it Bethel,
the house of God. 3 Gilgal was the key of Canaan, situate between Jordan and
Jericho, this place was famous for sundry services there performed to God,
there was the Tabernacle, and there Sacrifices were offered unto God. But now
it became degenerate and infamous, insomuch that the Lord complains, Hos. 9.15.
All their wickedness is in Gilgal, that was the common sink and sewer where all
their Idolatry met, and therefore the Lord forbids his People to go to Gilgal,
that they might not be tainted with the Idolatry of the place. Those Idolatrous
Israelites, thought it not sufficient to worship the Golden Calves at Dan and
Bethel, but they would worship Baal, and other Idols, at Gilgal too; so
dangerous it is to give way to superstition and false-worship, there is no end
nor measure with such persons; they add Sin to sin, and Idolatry to Idolatry,
till they come to ruin.


Multiply Pesha^g, transgressio, praevaricatio, def^ctio, rebellio, non simplex
and qualiscunque sed maliciosa, Musculus. Proprie significat deficere ab ^jus
mandatis sub cujus imperio sic Ming.
transgressions, rebellions, prevarications, by your frequent Sacrifices, q. d.
Go on still and persevere in your perverse, malicious practices, adding sin to
sin, and one provocation to another, that all the world may see your madness,
and the justness of Gods Judgments on you.

Bring your Sacrifices every morning,; for so the Magna fuit audatia in hoc
Propheta, qui etiam summa and optima in speciem opera, quae Deo vere fiebant,
non veritus est damnare and rejicere. Luther.
Law enjoined them to offer a Lamb without blemish in Sacrifice every morning,
and another at evening, Exodus 29.39. Numb. 28.3, 4. under the Morning Sacrifice
is included also the Evening Sacrifice, but the Prophet expresses only the
Morning Sacrifice to note their diligence, and great pains which they took in
observing these external Rites, they were at it as duly as the morning came.

And your Tithes after three years; or, in the third year. In the letter of the
text it is after three days; it is an usual Hebraism to put days for years,
She'osheth Iamim, tribus diebus, i. e. tertio anno.
as Genesis 24.1. Numb. 9.22. Levit. 25.29. 1 Samuel 27.7. some understand it of
their three solemn feasts appointed to be observed every year by the Law, viz.
the Passover, Pentecost, and feast of Tabernacles; in which none might appear
empty-handed, but certain kind of Tithes were then to be spent, Exodus 23.14,
15, 16, 17. Levit. 23. Deuteronomy. 16. but the most genuine sense is that which
alludes to the Law, Deuteronomy. 14, 28, 29. and 26.12. for the right understanding of
this Law, we must know that there was a threefold Tithe paid by the Jews, the
first were the yearly Tithes given to the Levites; a second Tithe was set apart
by the Owners for their journies, sacrifices, and feastings at Jerusalem thrice
in the year, and yet there was a third Tithe laid up in store, See more fully
Mr. Art. Iackson's Annot. on Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29
which was distributed among the Levites, the poor, the fatherless, and the
widow; and this is the third years Tithe here mentioned. Now these Idolatrous
Israelites the better to color their Hypocrisy, like Apes did seem to imitate
this Law, that so they might not be wanting in any external duty of piety or
charity.

Q. But since these Israelites did what God commanded in the Law, wherein did
they fayl?

Ans. 1. They failed in sacrifizing to Idols, and not to God. 2. In bestowing
those Tithes on false Prophets, which were ordained for the maintenance of the
true. 3. Though some of them did offer such Sacrifices as were commanded, and
that to the true God, yet they failed in the place, for they should have
offered their Sacrifices at Jerusalem, where God had set his Temple ( Deuteronomy.
12.5, 6.) and they go to Bethel and Gilgal, where Idols were set up.

The sum of all is this, Thus says the Lord in great indignation against you,
O house of Israel, for your provocations, since ye obstinately refuse to
hearken to me, and my Prophets, Go too, proceed in your Idolatry, and since
you are so besotted by Satan, and his Agents, as to worship Calves instead of
me, go on, and take your fill, glut selves with sin, and fill up the measure
of your iniquity, that wrath may come upon you to the uttermost, and since you
refuse to go to Jerusalem and Worship me, go to Beth-aven and worship
Devils. Go on also in your Hypocrisy; and the Worship which I have appointed
to my People, that do ye imitate, bring your Morning Sacrifices which are due
to me, and offer them to your Idols; and that which the Law required of you,
for the maintenance of my Levites and the Poor, viz. to lay aside the Tithes of
every third year for pious and charitable uses; do ye give that also to your
Idols. Go on also and Hypocritically imitate my people in Sacrifices of
Thanksgiving, and Free-offerings, for in these external Ceremonies, ye
delight, more than in internal obedience.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Ironical and Sarcastical, taunting biting speeches may lawfully be used as
occasion requires against wicked men. Those Stoical stocks the Quakers are
against all laughter, and against all ingenious Ironies and Sarcastical
speeches, as if they favored of the flesh, when it is clear from many places
of Scripture that they may lawfully be used; for, 1. We find that God himself
used them, Genesis 3.22. The man is become like one of us; i. e. see how unlike to
us he is become. So Judge. 10.14. Go cry to the gods which ye have chosen; i.
e. let your Idols help you if they can in your distress. So Isa. 8.9, 10. and
47.12. Ezekiel. 28.3, 4, 5. 2. Christ used them, Matthew. 23.32. and 26.45. 3. The
Prophets used them. Thus Elijah derided the worshippers of Baal, 1 King. 18.27.
and Micajah to Ahab, 1 King. 22.15. and Job 12.2. and 26.2, 3. and Solomon to
the young man, Eccles. 11. 9 and the Church to her enemies, Lam. 4.21. Rejoice
O Edom and be merry; but know that thy feasting shall be turned into fasting,
and thy mirth into mourning. So Ier. 22.20. and 46 9, 11. and 51.8. 11. Zech.
11.13. Paul used them, Ironiae species, est Sarcasmus, sed Ironia est acerbior.
Glassius.
1 Cor. 4.8.10. and 2 Cor. 11.19. and 2.12, 13. yea the Scripture affords many
Sarcamus, which are biting taunts, they are somewhat like an Irony, but that
they are somewhat more bitter; as Genesis 37.19. Exodus 14.11. Nahum. 3.14.

2 Obs. We must shun those places where Idolatry is set up. Israel must not
once go to Bethel, and Gilgal, where Idols are, Hos. 4.15. Amos 5.5. what
Solomon says of the Corporal Harlot, may fitly be applied to the Spiritual
one, Prove. 5.8. Remove thy way far from her, come not nigh the door of her
house. As we shun Pest-houses, so should we shun those infectious places. Such
as partake with the wicked in their sins, shall share with them in their
plagues, Revel. 18.4. not only Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, but their followers
also perished with them, Numb. 16. It is dangerous for men to hear Quakers and
Seducers, for by your example you do not only encourage others so to do, but
you make your selves accessory to their sin and punishment; what Solomon says
of all the wicked in general, See more in my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.5. p. 138, etc.
holds true in this particular ( Prove. 4.14, 15.) we should take heed of going
in the way of evil men, avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away.
See how the Holy Ghost uses variety of expressions to the same purpose and all
to make the matter sink deeper into our hearts.

3 Obs. Idolatry and Sin debase places. Bethel and Gilgal formerly famous for
the Worship of God, yet now become infamous for Idolatry, Gods people must not
once come there. As sin debaseth persons, and makes them that they can never
excel ( Genesis 49.4.) so it debaseth places too, and turns Bethel, the House of
God, into Beth-aven, the house of vanity and iniquity, Hos. 4.15. what Michal
said of David falsely, Thou have made thy self vile, (2 Samuel 6.20.) that is most
true of all Sinners, they make themselves, and the places where they live, vile
and contemptible.

4 Obs. There is no inherent holiness in places; if there had, Bethel had not
been Beth-aven, nor Rome become an Harlor. Places are not holy per se and
simpliciter, but only propter usum, by reason of the praying, preaching, and
dispensing of the holy Sacraments there. See this Point largely discust by D.
Willet, Synop. Papismi. controvers 9th Q. 6. Art. 2. p. 480. edit. ult. and
Hildersham on John 4.23. Lect. 33. p. 139 Attersol on Numb. 7.8, 9. p. 456, and
p. 494.
The place does not commend the Prayers, but the sincere affection of him that
prays; neither does the place sanctify the Prayers, but the Prayers the
place; Churches are made of Wood and Stone, and so are incapable of Holiness;
Christ came to redeem and sanctify Souls, not seats. The Legal, Ceremonial,
Typical Holiness of places is by the coming of Christ abolished, now, the
substance is come, and the shadows are gone; in Gospel times there is no
difference of places in respect of Holiness. God will now be Worshipped in
every place, Mal. 1.11. Ioh. 4.23. 1 Timothy 2.8. the Field and the House are now
as holy as the Church, yea Paul and Silas pray in Prison and are heard, Acts
16.25. so that Churches in themselves are no more holy than other places; but
it is the Ordinances of God, and the Assembly of Gods People met there, to
celebrate those Ordinances, which for that present make it more holy, and more
to be esteemed by us than all other places, or pieces of ground whatsoever,
Psalm. 84.10. and therefore they should be kept sweet and decent, though not
pompous and gaudy. The Heathen Poet could say, Dicite Pontifices, in sacro quid
facit aurum? Persius.
It is vanity to have gold in Temples. Here then is the difference between us
and the Papists, they make Churches to be holy per se, in respect of the ground
and building, but we in respect of the end and holy use for which they serve,
viz. for the Service of God, and the Assemblies of his People; but the
exercises of Religion being ended, and the Congregation dissolved, there is no
more inherent Holiness rem^ining in it, more than in another place.

5 Obs. It is a great provocation to set up Idols there, where we have
received signal mercies. God had done great things for his people at Bethel, it
was the place where he appeared to his people; and Gilgal was very See 9
things which made Gilgal famous, in Buroughs on Hos. 4.15. p. 181, 182*
famous for many Mercies, at Gilgal they were Circumcised, there God rolled
away the reproach of Egypt from them, there they had the Passover, and there
was Sacrificing, etc. now to multiply transgressions at Gilgal, and to have all
their villainy acted there ( Hos. 9.15.) must needs be a great aggravation of
their sin, and hasten wrath. To sin against signal Mercies does double the sin.
It is said of the Israelites, that they provoked him at the Sea, even at the
red Sea (Psalm. 106.7.) where God showed them a remarkable Mercy, in leading
them safely through the Sea, and drowning their cruel enemies, yet there they
provoked him, at the Sea, even at the red Sea; it is spoken Emphatically, even
at that Sea which God had carried them safely through. Thus they made a Calfe in
Horeb (Psalm. 106.19.) where the Lord appeared unto them, gave them his Law, and
Made a Covenant with them, yet here they provoked him to wrath to their own
destruction, Deuteronomy. 9.8. it greatly aggravates sin when it is committed in a
Canaan, and in a Land of Righteousness to deal unjustly, Isa. 26.10. We of
this Land have received many signal Mercies, if we go on to abuse them, as
we have done of late years, Minus fait peccatum Deum verum in imagine adorare,
quam plane a Deo vero apostatare, and servire Diis alienis, Rivet.
what can we expect but signal judgments.

6 Obs. Wicked men grow worse and worse; They fall away more and more, they do
not only sin, but they multiply sin; they think it not sufficient to worship
the golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, but they must to Gilgal also, and there
Worship Baal, which was the vilest and highest Idolatry, for those that
worshipped the Calves, worshipped God, but in a false way, but those utterly
forsook the true God to worship Baal, whom they made their God, as appears by
that of Elijah, If Baal be a god, implying that they esteemed him so. When
wicked men begin to fall they know not where they shall rest, they have no
foundation, In my Com. on 2 Timothy 3. 13. p. 229. Attersol on Numb. 14. p. 592.
but run from error to error, till at last they end in Atheism. (But of this at
large elsewhere.) Evil men and deceivers grow worse and worse, though they be
wearied in their wicked ways yet they will go on, Ierem. 9.3.5. they are in
this like the lewd Woman, Lassata, non satiatia; they never come to their
Maximum quod sic, in sinful ways, Prove. 23. ult. Sin and Error is endless, it
knows not when, nor where to stop, Hos. 10 1. and 13.2. Ahaz that at first
burnt Incense to Idols, at last burnt his Children to them, 2 Chronicles. 28.3.
Error minimus in principio, fit maximus in fine, The cloud that at first shows
but like a man's hand, may suddenly overspread the whole Heavens.

7 Obs. Good intentions are no warrant for evil actions; Jeroboam pretended
well when he set up the golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, saying, Behold thy
Gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt (1 King. 12.28.)
his meaning was not to cast off the true God, but to set him forth by some
visible resemblance, thinking that this might be as good a way of Religion, as
the Ark and Cherubims at Jerusalem; but the Lord tells them, that since they
had set up a worship of their own inventing, he abhorred both them and their
services, ( Amos 5.21, 22.) and calls it a worshipping of Devils, 2 Chronicles.
11.15. Thus Aaron and the Israelites pretended well when they set up the golden
Calf, Exodus 32.4, 5. Micah and his Mother had a good meaning when they erected
the Ephod, and Teraphim for the service of the true God, Judge. 17.3.13. Paul
had a good meaning when he persecuted the Saints, Acts 26.9. yea and many that
kill them think they do God good service, Ioh. 16.2, 3. Uzzah it is conceived
was a good man, and out of a good intent would have kept the Ark from falling,
yet for meddling with that which belonged to the Priests, God smote him dead, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7.

Those gifted men amongst us that presume to Preach without a Call, no doubt
but many of them have good intentions, and think they do God good service, but
because they have no command nor commission from God so to do, it is an
abomination to him, and he will one day ask them, Who required this at your
hands? Saul out of a good intent; viz. that he might sacrifice, spared the fat
Cattle; and Gideon made an Ephod for Gods Worship, which God had not commanded,
but this ruined both them and their Families, Judge. 8.27. 1 Samuel 15.21. Nadab
and Abihu had no evil intent in offering strange Fire, yet were smitten dead
for their pains, Levit. 10.2, 3. So the Papists, and the worst of men have
their good meanings, which at last brings them to evil ends. It cannot excuse
their evil dealing with God and his people. What Sin so vile that is not
covered with the vayl of a good meaning? How many ways are there which seem
good in men's own eyes, yet the issues thereof are the ways of death, Prove.
14.12. we may not therefore do every man what seems good in his own eyes,
but what is good in Gods eyes, Deuteronomy. 12.8.

Nulla necessitas incidere potest, quae legem in Christo latam evertere nos
cogat; nam huis parere summa eft necessitas. Tilenus
Those things which in themselves are evil, may not for any good ends, or
plausible intentions be practiced. None may do evil that good may come
thereof, Romans 3.8. we must have a command from God for what we do, else our
own^ good minds and meanings will do us no good; yea this would open a gap to
all manner of villainies; the Murderer, the Drunkard, the Traitor, etc. See more
in Mr. Youngs Drunkards Character, Sect. 53. p. 206
they all pretend they have good meanings in what they do; but such vain
conceits and crooked Rules of multitudes, custom, good meaning, etc. has
brought thousands to destruction; we must to the Law, and to the Testimony, and
walk according to that rule if ever we expect peace, Gal. 6.16.

8 Obs. In the Worship of God we must keep close to the Rule, for matter,
manner, time, and place; Israel failed here in these particulars, and therefore
God rooted them up. 1 They changed the place of Gods Worship, 1 King, 12.29.2.
The time, verse. 32.3. The manner, verse* 28.4. The Priests, verse. 31, 33. and
this ruined them, 1 King. 13.33, 34. it is not the Traditions of men, or
Customs of Forefathers, Antiquity, or Succession that is our rule; the
Israelites here might have pleaded Prescription for their Idolatry for above
two hundred years, all their twenty Kings successively were Idolatrous from
first to last, and the people generally followed them, yet this did not make
their practice good; all will worship is vain worship, Mat. 15.9. it is a Sin
equalized to Murder, Levit. 17.3, 4. it is called here transgressing, and
multiplying transgressions in Gilgal. In Gods Worship we must do nothing
without the warrant of his Word, See more in Mr. Strong his thirty one select
Ser. on Zech. 14.9. p. 465. Mr. Burgess on Orig. Sin. p. 281. Mr. Vines Sermon.
on 2 Cor. 11.3. Drunkards Character, Sect. 54. p. 2.11. etc. Mr. Cawdry against
Doct. Hammond, in a Treatise of his against Superstition and Will Worship, Mr.
Crofton against Altars.
Numb. 15.39. Deuteronomy. 12.8.11.13, 14. ult. Ezekiel. 20.19. Mat. 28.20. Col. 2. ult.
his Worship must be simple and pure, agreeable to his own will, not ours. The
Head of the Sacrifice was to be cast away, implying, that in matters Divine and
heavenly, we must cast away our own fancies and devices, keeping close to Gods
Word, as Moses and Gods people did, Exodus 39.2.5.7.21.26.29.32. 42, 43.

9 Obs. Religious duties must be our daily task. We must not bring our
Sacrifices once a month, or once a year, but as the Lord renewes his Mercies
every morning, so must we renew our sacrifices of Prayer and Praises ( Exodus
29.38, 39. Numb. 28.3, 4.) our daily wants, our daily dangers, our daily
temptations, call upon us for daily Prayer; such constant Customers shall be
sooner and better served, than such as are strangers to those duties. David was
a constant Trader in Prayer Morning and Evening, and see what follows? Thou
shall hear me, Psalm 55.17. As the Priest was every morning to renew the Fire on
the Altar, and to lay thereon the Morning Sacrifice, so should we when we awake
be still with God, Psalm. 139.18. all things are blessed unto us by Prayer; As
the Ark when it came to the house of Obed-Edom it brought a blessing with it;
so when duties are set up in their power, there God comes and blesses his
people, we should therefore dedicate our houses to God by Prayer as David did,
Psalm. 30. title, and 2 Samuel 6.20. It was an high commendation of Aurelian the
Emperors Family, See at large At^ersol on Philemon 2. Reyners Precepts for
practice, p. 87 Edit. 11.
that is was refertabon s, and Ecclesia Dei, it was full of good people, and
was a little Church. So were the houses of the faithful in the Primitive times,
hence we read so often, To the Church in thy house, Romans 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.19. Col.
4.15. Philemon 2. the words will bear a double construction. 1. It implies,
that the people of God met in those houses to hear his Word preached, to
celebrate the Sacraments, and Pray; for public places were not then allowed
them. 2. Or else it notes unto us that their private Families were now so
piously ordered, and religiously instructed, that they seemed to be little
Churches rather than ordinary houses, because of the Praying, Reading of Gods
Word, singing of Psalms, and other religious Exercises that were practiced
there. So Joshua resolved, that he and his house would serve the Lord, Josh.
24.15. Religion makes the best Families, it breeds the best Children, and makes
the most obedient Subjects, and Servants, as we see in Abraham's Family. Sad is
the condition then of those Christians that take no care of their Families, but
let Luxury, Riot, and disorder debase them; such houses may better be called
Taverns, or Tap-houses, rather than Churches of God.

That daily duties ought to be performed in Families, see Mr. Rob. Boultons
Direct. for Walking, p. 244.249. Fenners Catechism, p. 76. Cobbet on Prayer, p.
88. Ier. Dyke his Epistle Dedicatory to Philemon. Ambrose his Medita. p. 199,
etc. Mr. Philip Goodwin his Family Duties.

10 Obs. It is not sufficient that we be religious toward God, but we must
also be righteous and merciful toward men. It is not enough that we bring our
Sacrifices to him every morning, but we must also bring our Tithes to maintain
his Messengers, and to succor the poor, the fatherless, and the widow. Many
will seem religious-towards God, yet are unrighteous toward men; and others
there are that will seem righteous toward men, and yet are irreligious toward
God; both these miscarry and come short of Heaven, the one for his religious
unrighteousness, and the other for his righteous-irreligiousness; the one for
his Hypocrisy, the other for his mere Morality and civility. God hates
Holiness when it is not joined with righteousness. He has redeemed us, that we
might serve him in holiness and righteousness; not in holiness or
righteousness, the Holy Ghost has joined them, and we may not separate them,
Luke 1.75. 2 Pet. 1.6, 7. Psa. 15.2. Tit. 2.12. we must practice equity as well
as piety, remembering that See more in my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.3. p. 81, 82. Sal
Terrae, cap. 8
unrighteousness is an abomination as well as ungodliness. Ministers have a
right to their maintenance both in foro poli, and in foro soli, both by Gods
Law, and man's Law (as I have elsewhere proved at large) and he that robs them,
robs not men, but God.

2 For Mercy to the Poor, there is scarce any Duty more pressed upon us in the
Scripture, with precepts and presidents, ( Dan. 15.7.10. Luke 6.36.) What
promises and rewards are made to the merciful? and what heavy curses are
denounced against the unmerciful and cruel man? He that wants mercy of mercy
shall miss, But he shall have mercy that merciful is, Aspiciunt oculis superi
mortalia justis, En eget auxilio qui non tulit.

Ovid. Meta. Lib. 13.


He shall have judgment without mercy that shows no mercy, Iam. 2.13. as he
stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry, and shall not be
heard, Ocsidisti si non pavisti. Ambro.
Prove. 21.13. Dives that showed no mercy to Lazarus, at last had none himself;
and if they be accounted Murderers who do not releeve the poor, what are those
that oppress them, and grind their faces? the Lord has a quarrel and
controversy with such as show no mercy, Hos. 4.1. Amos 2.6, 7. such
penuriousness is the way to Poverty, Prove. 11.24. There is that spares more
than is meet, and it tends to poverty. The way to increase Corn is not to keep
it in the Bag, but to sow it. The curse of the Poor lights upon the cruel, (
Prove. 28.27.) and brings a curse upon their Children, ( Psalm. 109.12.16.) Let
none pity his fatherless Children, why so? because he remembered not to show
mercy to the poor.

Let Sodomites be cruel and merciless ( Ezekiel. 16.49.) and Heathens that know
not God ( Romans 1.30.) but let us that are Christians resemble Christ our
Head, See ten disswasives from unmercifulness in Mr. Greenhil on Ezekiel. 16 49.
p. 297, 298 etc.
and be merciful as he is merciful, who went up and down doing good, to the
souls and bodies of men, and whose usual saying was, It is a more blessed thing
to give than to receive, Acts 20.35. He was even compounded of love and
compassion, and became poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich, 2
Cor. 8.9.

To encourage you to a merciful frame of spirit, in a time when mercy is almost
fled out of the world, take these following Consideratins.

1 By this we shall evidence our Election and Sanctification, Col. 3.12. Put on
as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies; Do not only give an
Alms, but give it with a compassionate heart, and render affection; this will
make us like the elect children of God, who are all in their generation
liberal, bountiful men, according to their several abilities, they are such as
devise liberal things, Isay. 32.8. Job was eyes to the blind, and feet to the
lame, Job 29. he never did eat his morsel alone, Job 31.20. David describing
the godly man, makes this one Character of him, that he is gracious, full of
compassion, disperseth to the poor, shows favor, and sends, Psalm. 112.4.5.9.
Paul how often does he command, and commend such as did administer to the
necessities of the poor Saints? Dorcas clothed the poor with those garments
which she made of her own cost in her life time; Zacheus when he was converted,
gave the one half of his goods to the poor, Luke 19.8. it is not I will give at
my decease, when I can keep them no longer, but it is in presenti, I do give.
2. Not of another man's goods, but of mine own. 3. Not to the rich, but to the
poor. 4. Not a penny, but the one half of my goods, do I give to the poor. See
how grace enlarges the heart, and looseneth it from earthly things; yea I have
read of the Turks, that once a year the Bashaws and great men have their whole
estates cast up by their Stewards, and they give the tenth part yearly to
charitable uses; if this be true, how will these Infidels rise in Judgment
against most Christians. 2 Consider that it is a service and sacrifice well
pleasing unto God, Phil. 4.18. Heb. 13.16. Hence it is that the Lord so often
calls for it, and in some cases, prefers Mercy before Sacrifice, Hos. 6.6.
Learning and Valor may make a man admired, but it is humility and bounty that
makes us best beloved. Homines nulla repropius ad Deos ascedunt quam dando.
Cicero.

Regia, creed mihi, res est succurrere lapsis, imo divina res est Tanto, aliqua
virtus est melior, quanto facit hominem Deo similiorem. Aquinas secunda
secundae, q. 30. Art. 4.


3 This will make us like unto God, then are we men after his own heart, when we
are merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful, and good as he is good; not by
way of Equality, but by way of Analogy and similitude, according to our degree
and measure, Mat. 5.45. now the more like unto God we are, the more he loves
us, for similitude is the ground of love. 4 Hereby we bring must glory to God,
Ioh. 15.8. As he that oppresses the poor, despises him that made him; so he
that pittieth the poor, honors him that made him, for God takes the kindness
done to them as done to himself, He that gives to the poor lends to the Lord. 5
It is one chief end why the Lord gives us riches, viz. that we might be his
Almoners to succor the poor; he could feed them and cloth them without our
help, but he has ordained that there shall be Poor always with us, to try our
bounty, love, and pity, and to manifest it unto the world, Ioh. 12.8. it is
Gods Corn and Wine that we enjoy, it is his blessing and free bounty that has
made us rich, when others are poor; all that we have comes from him: and it is
of his own that we give unto him, 1 Chronicles. 29.14, 16. if he have given us
pounds, we may well give pence by way of thankfulness to his poor afflicted
ones; else, he that has raised us can as easily ruin us, and strip us naked
as in the day that we were born. Let us put our selves in the poor man's case,
if we our selves were poor and in distress, we would think it the rich man's
duty to succor us. As ye would have others should do to you, so do you to
them; for with what measure you mete to others, it shall be meted to you again.
6 All Profession, Duties, Gifts, and Graces, without this are but counterfeit.
Hence St. James places all religion as it were in this duty of Mercy, Iam. 1.
ult. not that this is the life or form of other Graces (as Papists vainly) but
it is a sign and evidence of the truth of other graces, even as breathing and
acting is a sign of living. He that says he has all Gifts, and yet has not
Love, is but as sounding Brass, or a tinckling Cymbal, a mere noise and nothing
else, 1 Cor. 13.1. hence Christ commands us rather to sell what we have and
give to the poor, than be wanting to our selves or others in this duty, Luke
12.33. so did Barnabas, that Son of consolation, when the Church wanted, he
sold his Land to succor it ( Acts 4.36, 37.) not that we are bound always to
sell our Land for pious uses, but if the Church of God should come to that
distress, that either we must succor it, or else it will sink, then is a time
to part with all. As Lot would have parted with his Daughters to save his
Guests; so should we part with our estate to save Gods people from perishing;
and if Drunkards to satisfy their lust, will sell their Lands in the Devils
service, much more should we to glorify God, part with our Land and estate to
glorify God the giver of them. (...) Mr. Ia^m^s Ser. on Mat. 5.7. p. 9, ^0,
11, etc. p. 19.20.
7 It shall be fully rewarded. God has a Book of remembrance, wherein he
registers all we do for him and his, Acts 10 5. Heb. 6.10. even to a cup of
cold water, all shall be rewarded, Matthew. 10. ult. He cannot be a loser who
has made God his Debtor, He that gives to the poor lends to the Lord, and
that which he has given he will pay him again, Prove. 19.17. He is the best
Play Master, none more able, none more willing to recompense any service that is
done for him, or his.
1 He shall have Temporal rewards, Prove. 11.24. There is that scatters and is
more increased, and he that waters others, shall be watered himself. This is
the best means to preserve our estate, Isa. 32.8. The liberal man devises
liberal things, and by it he is established. He that honors the Lord with his
riches, shall have his Barns filled with plenty, Prove. 3.9, 10. Mercy and Truth
shall be to them, Prove. 14.22. God will bless his Trade and Calling, Deuteronomy.
15.10. and make his little, increase unto a thousand. Charity is the best
Policy, for by helping others we benefit our selves, Job 29.13. As the Poor had
Jobs Alms, so he had the benefit of their Prayers, and fared the better for
them. That which is well laid out, is best laid up; a diligent hand, and a
distributive heart make a man truly rich, such giving is getting, such bounty
is the way to plenty, and a godly liberality is a prevention of poverty; he
that gives to the Poor has Gods promise (which is sure pay) that he shall not
want, Vis ditari? amicum habeas Deum, and omnium ditissimus eris.
Prove. 28.27. Give and it shall be given to you again, good measure, pressed
down, shaken together, running over (Luke 6.38.) see what a heap of expressions
the Holy Ghost here uses, to assure us of a full reward of all our labor of
love. He says not barely, Quadruplex bon^m datur a Deo. 1. Bona fortunae, ut
divitiae, haec dicuntur bona menfura. 2, Bona naturae, ad quae refertur mensura
conferta. 3. Bona gratiae, quo spectat mensura coagitata. 4. Bona gloriae, quo
spectat mensura superfluens. Stella in locum.
Give, and it shall be given you; but 1. You shall have good measure, i. e.
just measure according to your gift, given to you again. 2. You shall have it
pressed down, light things we use to press down to make good measure. 3. Yet
more, shaken together; as Corn that goes closer together by shaking. 4. This is
not all, for as if all that he had spoken had not been sufficient, he adds, you
shall have it running over. Now, a measure will run over as long as you poor;
there is no stint, no bounds to that gift, which shall be given running over. A
Vessel will run over continually, pour as long as you will. 5. Yet more, all
this shall be given you into your bosom; that is, you shall be made sensible
of the sweetness, and experimentally find the goodness and greatness of your
reward. This work is wages, and like Sampsons Lion, it carries Honey in the
belly of it; it is no spending, but lending; no laying out, but a Praemitt^mus
in alterum orbum, quicquid volumus non am^ssum. Drexelius. Nunquam hoc ^ollet
fiscus, quod semel habuerit Christus. Clemangiis.

Unius corruption, est alterius generatio; artifi^iocissimum lucre genus est,
perdere ut acquirar. Chrysostom.


laying up of treasure in Heaven, above the reach of Thieves and Pirates, Math.
6.19. Men are all for gain, why this is the best gain: by parting with
Temporals to get Eternals, Luke 16.9. Hence the Apostle calls the Macedonians
Alms by the name of Fruit, Romans 15.28. Phil. 4.17. I desire not a gift, but I
desire fruit that may further your account. We pleasure not the poor so much
by our giving, as we profit our selves by their receiving. Hence in Italy their
ordinary form of Begging is, Such do good to their own souls, Prove. 11.17.
Fate ben pro voi, Do good for your own sakes. Christ that fed five thousand,
could also have fed himself and his followers without any help; but he would
be releeved by others, that so their faith and love might be made more apparent
and resplendent to the world, Luke 8.2, 3. Ioh. 4.7.

2 Thou shall be blessed in thy Body with health, or if sickness do surprise
thee (as all things come alike to all) yet God will make thy bed in thy
sickness, Non memini me legisse mala morte mortuum qui libenter opera
charitatis exercuit; habe^ en^m multos intercessores. Hieron. ad Nepotian.
and comfort thee upon thy bed of languishing, Psalm. 42.2, 3.

3 In thy Name, Hezekiah and his kindnesses are commended to posterity, 2 Chronicles. 32.32. Phebe and Onesiphorus are commended on this account: such are an
ornament to their Profession, and amiable in the eyes of all, Romans 5.7. for a
righteous man one would scarcely dye, but for a good man one would even dare to
dye. A Man of a severe innocence is hated, rather than loved, but a good and
bountiful man wins so upon the hearts of men that they would even dye for him;
scarcely will a man dye for a righteous man, who is only fair and just in his
dealings, but for a good man, that has been merciful and pitiful to others,
and has done much good in his life, some may venture their lives for him.

4 In thy Posterity, such as have showed mercy to others, God will raise up
some that shall be merciful to theirs. Hence Cyprian was wont to say, The more
children the more charity should be used; for as Wells by drawing, spring more
freely, so our substance increases by bounty, and is blessed to our posterity.

5 Blessed in Soul, we shall have light in darkness, peace in trouble, audience
in Prayer, etc. Isa. 58.7, 8.10, 11. if thou deal thy bread to the hungry, etc.
then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer thee; and though we be sick and
silent, yet works of mercy cry aloud in Gods ears for us, they have a vertual
and vital, though not a vocal call, Job 31.20. The very loins of the poor shall
bless us, even when we are sleeping in our beds, yet then are they pleading for
us. Hereby we evidence our election, and lay up a good foundation for the time
to come; though Christ alone be the foundation fundamental, yet good works may
be a foundation evidential, 1 Timothy 6.19. 1 Ioh. 3.14. Obadiah proved that he
truly feared God, because he hid the persecuted Prophets of God, and fed them
in a time of danger.

See Mr. Iacombs Ser. on Mat. 5.7.
6 Thou shall be eternally blessed, Psalm. 41.1. Prove. 14.21. Mat. 5.7. and
25.34, 35. it is the way to the Kingdom, though not the meritorious cause of
reigning there. This will help to loosen our affections from the earth, we
must shortly part with all these things below, now our parting with them before
hand to pious uses, will make our last parting with them more easy to us, as
the Apostle said, I dye daily; his daily trials were as so many petty deaths
unto him: so our daily giving will make us daily see the vanity of these
things, and make our affections dye to them. The way to Heaven, it is an high,
hard, long way, it is up-hill, and we had need to unburden our selves of this
thick clay. When one asked a good man why he gave away his money so freely, his
answer was, Ut levius ascenderem scalum Iacobi.

Thus we see there is no loss in Works of Mercy, as the unmerciful, unbeleeving
world imagines, for one penny we give we shall have that as will be equivalent
to many. Hence bounty to the Poor is called sowing of seed, 2 Cor. 9.10. the
Husbandman for one Seed that he sowes has twenty, thirty, forty, etc. or
more, again.

2 Though the Seed be hidden with Clods for the present, and seem to dye, yet
at Misericordia comes defunctorum, Thy good works will follow thee to heaven,
Rev. 14.13.
last it arises again with great increase to the Sower, ( Eccles. 11.1, 2.)

3 As men sow so shall they reap, if they sow sparingly they shall reap
sparingly, if liberally they shall reap liberally.

4 The Husbandman does not sow all his Seed in one place, but some here, some
there; so we must disperse our charity, and give a portion to seven, and also
unto eight.

5 The only way to preserve our Corn is to sow it, for if it be kept in our
Barns, and Garners, it rots and perishes; but if it be cast into a fit ground
it multiplies. Riches are lost by keeping, Habeo quod dedi, per didi quod
servavi. Epitaph.
and kept by spending on the poor; and if Idolaters will lavish gold out of the
Bag, and spend their choysest treasures on Idols and Images, and if the
Israelites could part with their Gold and Earrings, to an Idol that could not
help them, nor thank them ( Exodus 32.3.) then surely we should spend freely on
the living Images of Christ, especially since they can help us by their
Prayers, and glorify God in the use of that we give them; Let us therefore
abound in this work of the Lord, for as much as we know our labor is not in
vain in the Lord. How abundantly was the Shunamites kindness to the Prophet
Elisha recompensed? 1. By the gift of a Son after long barrenness. 2. By
restoring her Son to life again (2 King. 4.16.) 3. By fore-warning her of a
famine approaching (2 King. 8.1.4.) 4. By directing her to the King, in such a
season that she recovered her Land; so good it is to have an interest in the
Prayers, and affections of Gods Messengers.

This Duty though excellent, yet meets with much opposition; though it be
well-pleasing to God, yet it is unpleasant to most men; which has made them
invent so many shifts and excuses to save their purses. As,

1 Obj. I have a Family, a Wife, Children, Servants, and Kindred to provide
for, etc.

Answ. 1. Wicked men are called absurd, unreasonable men (2 These. 3.2.) and not
without reason, for see what illogical Logic they here produce; because men
have Families to provide for, therefore they cannot, or rather, they will not
do good to any other. We read of many that had great Families, and yet were
very merciful men, as Abraham, Job, David. The Macedonians had Families to
provide for, yet they releeved others beyond their ability (2 Cor. 8.3.) though
they had but little themselves, yet out of that little they were willing to
give somewhat.

I have read of one Mistress Owen of Islington that had two and twenty Children,
yet in her lifetime she built an Hospital, and gave fifty pound per annum to
it; she built a Free School, and gave a good stipend to it, and gave two
thousand and five hundred pounds to other pious uses. The Lord Harrington had
but one thousand pound per annum (which was but a mean estate to maintain a
Lord and his followers) yet out of that he spared one hundred pound per annum
for pious uses.

2 By discreet giving, you provide Gods blessing for your Children, which is
the best portion, Psalm. 112.2, 3, 5.6. as you have succored others, so God
will raise up some to succor yours; David speaking of his own experience,
tells us, that he never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed beging their
bread, Psalm. 37.25. such giving is no hindrance to us or ours, but brings a
blessing on what we have. Hence the Lord commands his people, to leave some
gleanings for the fatherless and the widow; Why so? That God may bless thee in
the work of thy hands, Deuteronomy. 24.19, 20. all thy carking and caring is but lost,
if God give not his blessing; many have scraped abundance of pelf together for
a prodigal Heir, that has in a trice consumed all. Men know not who shall be
their Heirs, the riches of the wicked are laid up for the just, yea many times
a man's enemies have been his heirs.

3 Many are single, and have no Families to provide for, and yet are as
hide-bound to any pious uses as any others; and therefore this is but a mere
pretense and fig-leaf to hide their miserable minds withal.

2 Obj. I have nothing to give but what I get by my labor?

Ans. The Apostle expressly commands such to give, Ephesians. 4.28. See Master
Iacombs Sermon. on Mat. 5.7. p, 25, etc.
Have but a farthing? give that; the poor Widow that had but two mites, which
make a farthing, is commended by him, who looks not so much at the gift, as at
the good will of the giver, Mark 12.41, 42, 43. if we have but an handful of
Meal, and a little Oil, yet Gods Elijahs must be releeved with it, 1 King.
17.12. All that do not receive should give, the Servant, the Day-laborour, the
Artificer, etc. should spare somewhat for the poor, the Servant that has none
to maintain but himself, may better spare somewhat for the poor than many
Housekeepers.

2 If God have not given thee ability to do good, Deus co^onat volunta^^m ubi
non invenit facultatem. Aug*
yet if thou had means would thou be liberal? why then know, that if there
be in thee a willing mind, God will accept of the will for the deed, and of the
Affection, where there is no ability for present Action; and if thou have
nothing else, yet Da lachrymalam, give a tear.

3 Obj. The Poor have many faults, they are lewd, and lasie, unworthy, and
unthankful, and can scarce afford us a good word for all that we do for them?

Ans. And have thou none? Poor folks faults are easily seen, but men may see
greater (if they will) in their Accusers, as Pride, Prodigality, Malice,
Cruelty, Hard-heartedness, etc. It is the Poor, and not the sins of the Poor
that they hate, for they can love Rich men that have worse sins in them than
the poor have. Now, true hatred is against the whole kind, he that truly hates
sin as sin, hates it wherever he sees it, be it in the rich as well as in the
poor, so that this is but a pretense to save their money.

2 Grant that they be unthankful, disobedient, etc. yet are not we so unto God?
now if God feed us, though we walk dis-ingeniously toward him, why should we
harden our hearts against our poor brother?

3 We give, Non homini sed humanitati, non peccatori sed pauperi, We give not
to the wicked man, to uphold him in his wickedness, but to supply his present
wants.

4 Though their tongues should curse thee, yet their loins will bless thee, Job
31.20.

5 It is for Pharisees to look for the praise and thanks of men here, Gods
people must look for their reward in heaven. This is our Seed-time, and though
our Seed be now buried, yet then it will arise: and though men thank us not
now, yet then we shall have thanks before Men and Angels, our secret love and
obedience shall have open acknowledgement and recompense, Christ himself will
be our Encomiast then, Mat. 25.34, 35, 36.

6 Their unthankfulness hurts themselves, not us; it is their sin, not thine.
We must not fayl in our duty because they do in theirs: Another man's Sin will
not excuse mine. We may not be uncharitable because they be unthankful.

7 It is a good sign that our charity is sincere, when we can give to those
that revile us, and behave themselves unthankfully toward us. To give to those
that give to us, Heathens will do so; but to bless such as curse us, and feed
such as hate us, and so overcome evil with good, this is truly Christian, Romans
12.21.

8 Suppose they be wicked, yet giving may better them, and thy kindness may
melt them, and heap coals of fire upon their heads. The way to break a Flint is
to lay it upon a soft pillow, Romans 12.20.

9 Though some poor people be wicked and unthankful, yet all are not so, we may
not therefore punish all for the fault of some.

4 Obj. I see many rich men give little or nothing, and therefore why should I
give?

Ans. 1. Few rich men are saved, Not many mighty, not many noble; some, but not
many great men, are good men. We must therefore live by Rule, not by Example,
especially of rich cormudgeons, who had as leive part with their blood as part
with a penny to a pious use. Now the rule is, that all who are of ability
should give, and show compassion to their brethren, Zech. 7.9. 1 Cor. 16.2. Let
every one lay aside somewhat for the poor, as God shall prosper him, the
command is universal, without exception or restriction. Rich men indeed, who
abound with worldly goods, and have not only for necessity, (...) praecipe,
denuntia, Command and charge them in the name of the most High, etc.
but variety and superfluity, those have a strict and severe charge given them,
to be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate (1 Timothy
6.17, 18.) now some rich men are rich in good works, as Abraham, Job, Zacheus,
Cornelius, etc. and if you will needs follow rich men, follow the best, and
honor the Lord with thy riches, and do good with thy goods, remembering how
uncertain they be, (1 Timothy 6.17.) they have wings, not of a Sparrow, but of an
Eagle to fly aloft from us, Prove. 23.5. improve them therefore to spiritual
advantages whilst you have them, for as the ungodly poor are the most
miserable, because they are doubly poor, Divitis superflua pauperi sunt
necessaria, aliena retinet, qui ista tenet. Aug. in Ps. 147
both in soul and body; so merciful rich men are most happy, because they are
doubly rich, viz. in wealth and good works. Besides, God has given the poor a
kind of interest in the rich man's store, Non jus proprietatis, sed charitatis,
He has a share in them though he may not be his own carver, Prove. 3.27, 28.
Withold not good from him to whom it is due; that is, from thy poor Brother.
When thou see any in greater necessity than thy self, thou must to thy power
succor them. The Macedonians themselves were but poor, yet when the Church was
in distress, they gave beyond their ability. Many have been poor in goods, yet
rich in good works; Christ himself in respect of Temporal riches was poor, he
had not a house of his own to dwell in ( Matthew. 8.20) no Lands nor Livings, yet
was he mindful of the poor, and gave bountifully to them, for he had a bag to
succor the poor withal, In dando, animi qualitas potius spectator, quam
eleemosynae quantitas.
Ioh. 13.29. The poor Widow gave all her substance, and is highly commended for
it, for God looks not so much at the gift as the sincerity of the giver; hence
she is said to have given the greatest gift, because she gave it out of an
enlarged, liberal heart; others gave out of their superfluity, but she out of
her penury gave all that she had, and so rested solely and singly upon the
Promise; John Baptist commands him that has two Coats, not only he that has
four or five, to part with one to the poor, Luke 3.11. yea our Savior calls
sometimes for a cup of cold water, which puts us to no cost of heating ( Mat.
10.41.) which takes off all excuses whereby men would exempt themselves from
giving.

5 Ob. I pay my Assesments to the Poor, and what would you have me do more?

Ans. The vilest of men pay what the Law compells them to give, but Gods people
must do more than others. There are many modest poor Housekeepers which have
more need then many which the Law provides for; we must not therefore confine
our selves to the Law, but as occasion requires, we must lend freely, help to
redeem Captives, to raise poor men that have losses by fire, shipwreck, or that
have a great charge of children; we must help to train up poor ingenious
Children in Learning, and honest poor Couples that marry in the Lord, etc.

6 Obj. I must provide against old age, sickness, etc.

Ans. True, in a moderate way you must do so, as Joseph in the years of plenty
did lay up against times of scarcity. But to provide excessively by Usury,
cruelty, and un mercifulness to the poor, this is to provide a Curse for thy
self, and not a blessing. By this means thou deprivest thy self of Gods
provision; for as when we revenge our selves, God will not plead our Cause, so
when we cark and care, and think by our own excessive, disfidential providing
to help our selves, we undo our selves, for God will leave us to our selves.

7 Obj. We pity the Poor, and love them, we never took any thing from them?

Ans. Dives who is now in Hell did not rob Lazarus, but because he did not
releeve him he was damned; so those reprobates, Mat. 25 42, 43.

2 Many do hate the Poor, and tyrannize over them, and if there be so much
love in their hearts, See many more Cavils answered in Mr. Bernard of Batcombes
Treatise of Charity, chap. 24. p. 434. and Mr. Capel on Tentat. Part. 3. Sect.
8.^, 3 29, etc.
how comes so little to appear in their lives. He that has a loving heart will
have a bountiful hand, for love is bountiful, 1 Cor. 13.4. it is in vain to
boast of love unless we show it in our works, Iam. 2.16. 1 Ioh. 3.17, 18.

Now did men but consider who it is that asks, and what an honor it is to be
his Almoners, and what profit comes by so doing, they would never excuse
themselves as they do, from this eminent duty.

We therefore that are the Ministers of Christ, observing the backwardness of
our people to this necessary duty, should get the words of the wise, which are
as Goads to rouse men out of their security; neither is it sufficient that we
only preach and press the duty, but we must (in our spheres and places) see
that those precepts be put in practice according to the mind of Christ; the
Deacons and Collectors must gather it, yet the Minister by counsel and advice
should see to the right distributing of it. Hence the Apostles call upon Paul
to remember the poor, which thing (says he) I was diligent to do, Gal. 2.10
neither is it sufficient that we direct our people, but by our Practice also
we must lead them the way; so did Paul, himself did minister to the Saints at
Jerusalem, ( Romans 15.25.28.) he does not put off the duty to others, but
himself leads them the way. People look more what we do, than what we say.
Then we may preach and press it with more zeal and confidence on others, when
we our selves do go before them in the duty, else they will quickly upbraid
us, with a Thou that teach another to be merciful, art thou unmerciful?
Hence the best of men only have been the greatest pressors and promoters of
this duty. How often does Solomon the wisest of men, by Precepts and Promises
quicken us to this duty, Prove. 11.24. and 19.17. and 22.9. and 28.27. Eccles.
11.1, 2. and Christ himself, a greater than Solomon, did both by Precepts,
Promises, and Practice, incite his Disciples to this duty, Matthew. 5.7.42. and
19.25. and 25.34, 35. Luke 11.42. and 12.33. Acts 20.35. How often did Paul press
this duty upon the People in all his Epistles, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. and 2.8.7. and
9.5. Heb. 6.10 and 13.16.? and gives a strict charge to Timothy (1 Timothy 6.17,
18.) that he charge those that are rich, to be rich in good works. And the
ancient Fathers the better to excite their people to works of Mercy, have
written whole Books in the praise of it.

But since God looks more at the manner than matter of our duties, and loves
Adverbs (as Austin has it) better than Adjectives, he looks not so much quam
bonum, how good the thing is, as quam been, how well we do it. I shall
therefore give some directions for the right performance of it; for, Modus rei
cadit sub praecepto, God has prescribed the manner, as well as the matter of
our duties, according to that old saying, Est modus in dando, quid, cur, cui,
quomodo, quando.

Now he that will give Rightly, must Give 1 Beleevingly. 2 Cheerfully. 3
Righteously. 4 Sincerely. 5 Speedily. 6 Sensibly. 7 Largely. 8 Discreetly. 9
Constantly.


1 We must give beleevingly, for without faith it is impossible to please God;
our persons must please before our performances can be acceptable, God had
first respect to Abel, and then to his Offering: A wicked man may give an
Alms, and do an act which is materially good, but as it comes from him who is
in rebellion against God, it is odious to him; for the sacrifices of the wicked
are an abomination to the Lord. To make an action Morally good, three
circumstances must concur. 1. The man must be Righteous, he must have both an
imputed and imparted Righteousness. 2. He must do righteous things. 3. He must
do them righteously. He must be a Believer, that will be a right Almes-giver,
for it is not the Alms of every one, but of a See Mr. Watsons Plea for Alms,
p. 61
believing Abraham, Job, Zacheus, Barnabas, etc. that is pleasing unto God. 2.
Get faith to believe the Promises. God has made many precious Promises to the
merciful, it is mere unbelief that makes men question the truth of them, and
this distrusting of God is the very root of all that unmercifulness that is in
the world; if men did but believe that for one corn which they sow they should
have an hundred, and that if they give rightly to the poor they should never
lack, men would not sow so sparingly as they do; get faith in the Promises,
and this will loosen your hearts from these low enjoyments. He is rich who
has interest in the Promises, though he has nothing else in the world, for
they are virtually every thing, they are better than money in our Purses, or
bread in our Cupboards. Shall the Husbandman Plow, and Sow, in hope of a
doubtful Crop, and the Merchant venture through many dangers at Sea, for
uncertain Riches; and shall not we venture to give, who are promised a sure
reward?

2 Give cheerfully; God loves a cheerful giver, he prefers the willingness of
the mind, before the worthiness of the gift, 2 Cor. 8.11, 12. we must be ready
to distribute, willing to communicate Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 6.18.
Free-will-offerings are most pleasing to God. that is the best Honey which
flows from the Comb without crushing, and the best Wine which comes from the
Grape with least pressing. We should rejoice when God calls us to works of
Mercy, and honors us so far as to be his Almoners upon earth; when men give
grudgingly, and unwillingly, S^ panem dederis tristis, and panem and praemium
perdidisti. Aug.
and give Panem lapidosum, a bit and a knock, they loose their alms. Unwilling
obedience is no obedience, it must not be forced from us by Law, but flow from
love, we must not only do mercy, but love mercy, Micah 6.8. Love is a
bountiful affection, it thinks it can never do enough for the party beloved;
it is the weight which sets all the wheels of the Soul on going. When David had
set his affections on God, then he thinks all the thousands that he gives to be
as nothing, 1 Chronicles. 29.3. Many give, but it is with much calling upon, and
importunity, it should come like water from a Spring, freely and fluently, and
it comes like fire from a flint, with much knocking; it comes from them as if
you plucked a Rib, a Leg, or an Arm from them. They should speak comfortably to
the poor, and they give them hard words, and ugly looks, and so mar all.

3 Give Righteously; as we must love Mercy, so we must do justly, Micha 6.8.
we must give of our own goods justly gotten, not by oppression, theft, usury,
etc. it must be Thy bread ( Eccles. 11.1.) and not stolen from others by any
indirect courses, God hates See Dyke on the Deceits. of man's Heart, chap. 16.
p. 209. and Mr. Iacombs Ser. on Mat. 5.7 p. 33. and Aquinas. 2 a. 2 ae. q. 32.
Art. 7.
robbery for burnt-offerings, Isa. 61.8. we may not rob Peter to cloth Paul,
but if thou will honor the Lord, let it be with thy own riches, Prove. 3.9. so
did Zacheus, the one half of my goods, not of another man's do I give to the
poor, Luke 19.8. Job warmes the poor with the fleece of his own flock, Job
31.20. Goods ill gotten call for Restitution, not for distribution. Our Alms
must be not only Works of Mercy, but also of Minuitur census, sed augetur
justitia; laudas mercatorem qui vendit plumbum, and acquirit aurum, and non
laudas mercatorem qui erogat pecuniam and acquirit justitiam? Illud minuitur
quod relicturus es, illud augetur quod in aeternum possessurus es. Aug. in
Psalm. 111.
Righteousness. Hence works of mercy are frequently called Righteousness, (
Psalm. 112.9. Prove. 11.18. Dan. 4.27.) not only because it is just and righteous
that we should part with some of our wealth to the poor, but also because it
must be given of goods rightly gotten, and therefore those cruel men that rack
Tenants, and enclose Commons to themselves, that oppress the Poor, and then
when they dye build them an Alms house; that steal the Goose, and then stick
down a Feather; both they and their gifts are an abomination to the Lord.

4 Sincerely; not for any by or base ends, of Pride, Vainglory, Merit, or to be
seen of men, but singly and sincerely that God may be glorified, Matthew. 5.16.
and 6.1. to 5. it is the end that makes or mars an action, An act that is
materially good, yet may be formally evil, if not rightly circumstantiated.
it is this that does denominate; let the work be never so good, yet if the end
be Self, all is lost. The Pharisees did much* yet because they sought
themselves, and not Gods glory, they lost the true reward. Give secretly, let
not thy left hand know what thy right hand does; the more we conceal our alms
here, the more apparent will they be made at that great Day. Let us take no
notice what we have given, how much, how often, or to whom; let it content us,
that though we forget our good works, yet God does not, but our Father who sees
in secret he will reward us openly. Let us therefore give in simplicity of
spirit, ( Romans 12.8.) without any thoughts of merit, for what we give is Gods,
See Willets Synopsis, Pap. contro. 19. Q. 1 p. 1065. Edit. ult.
not ours, it is of his own that we give unto him, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.16. Heaven is
Christ's Purchase, and not ours, Romans 6. ult. it is a gift, and what more free
than gift?

5 Speedily. A little given in time may do more good than much given
afterward; I^ nullo gloriandum est quoniam nihil est nostrum. Cyprian.
delay is a kind of denial, and therefore we are commanded to be ready to
distribute, and if we can releeve our Brother now, we may not say to him, Go,
and come again to morrow, Prove. 3.28. we know not what a day may bring forth,
Multa eadunt inter calicem supremaq, labra.
many things fall our between the cup and the lip; the man may be dead, or we
may be disabled for giving. Croesus to day, may be Irus to morrow; or the man
may be put upon some desperate course of stealing, etc. when by seasonable
giving we might have prevented his ruin. We should prevent men's suits with our
readiness, and not cause the eyes of the Widow to fayl with waiting, Job 31.16.
as the Sun communicates its Light freely, and God prevents us with his
blessings, often giving us before we ask ( Psalm. 21.13.) so should we deal with
our poor brother.

Gratia ab officio quod mora tardat abest.
It is irksome to an ingenuous nature to stand craving and begging, and the Gift
loses a great part of its grace when we put off the Suppliant with delays,
such deferring, torments the soul, and makes it sick, Prove. 13.12.

They also that put off giving till they dye, are much to be blamed, those are
men of good wills, but bad deeds; when they can keep their riches no longer,
then they will give somewhat, not out of love to God, but for fear of Hell; as
the Merchant does cast his Goods into the Sea in a storm, for fear of drowning.

2 How do thou know whether thou shall have a heart to give, many that have
wanted a hand in their lifetime, want hearts when they come to dye, as we see
in churlish, hardhearted Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.37, 38.

It will be our wisdom therefore in our health, and wealth, whilst we have
time and opportunity to do good to all, Prove. 3.27, 28. Gal. 6.10. it is good
to make our own hands our own Executors, and our own eyes our own Overseers;
and not leave our substance to be disposed of by those who may sell it,
misplace it, and abuse it.

2 Every thing is beautiful in its season, but our lifetime is the fittest
season for giving, whilst we are full, and have somewhat to give, and whilst
our brother wants. Alms is compared to sowing ( Psalm. 112.9.) now the Husband
man is very careful to observe the fittest season for the Seeding of his
ground. See Mr. Watson on that text.
He that puts off his works of charity till death, is like the man that puts
off his sowing till Harvest-time, when he should reap.

3 It is more pleasing to God, and a more infallible evidence of a strong faith
and affiance in him. God loves those best that trust in him most; now when a
man can in his lifetime part with his Goods to glorify God, it is a good sign
that he rests only upon Gods Promises and Providence, and not upon
Creature Comforts. Let us then imitate the righteous man, who is ever merciful,
and lends ( Psalm. 37.26.) a wicked man may be sometimes merciful, or do an
act of mercy, but he is not constant in the duty, but usually puts it off till
death; now as late repentance is seldom true, so Eleemosyna sera est raro
vera. To quicken men to do good in their lifetime, I shall set down a notable
president in our own times, of one Mr. Jones a Citizen of London, who in his
lifetime gave above seven thousand pound amongst his poor Kindred, and fifty
pound per annum to a Preacher at Monmouth, where he was born, and caused a
house to be built there with all convenient necessaries fit for a godly
Minister. He erected a Free School there in his lifetime, and also built a
fair house for the Schoolmaster, giving fifty pound yearly to the head
Schoolmaster, and thirty pound per annum to the Usher for ever.

He also built an Hospital in the same Town (16^0) for twenty poor people,
allowing every one a Gown yearly, and two shillings six pence weekly, and gave
about two thousand pound more to finish the work.

By his last Will and Testament he gave five thousand pound, to be disbursed
for the maintenance of a Preacher at Newland in Gloucestershire, and certain
poor in that Parish.

He gave to the Company of Haberdashers in London, one thousand four hundred
pound for the support of the Poor of that company. He left six hundred pound,
and a fair house in the City of London, to be distributed amongst the poor
Preachers in England. He gave to the Hospitalls in England five hundred pound.
To the poor in Stoade, two hundred pound.

To the poor in Hanborough one hundred pound.

To the Company of Haberdashers by way of thankfulness for their care taken,
and to be taken, in the right managing of these acts of charity, he gave a
considerable sum.

I have mentioned this at large, to shame the rich men of this age for their
coldness, and aversness to works of Piety. Where, oh where shall we find such
Ioneses as this! He gave pounds, See more presidents, in Willets Synopsis, Pap.
p. 1220. Edit. ult.
we give not pence; he gave thousands, we give not hundreds; he erected
Schools, and Hospitalls, he promoted Preachers, and Piety; when we are ready to
pull down all. The zeal and piety of this good man will rise in Judgment
against the Luke-warmness, and impiety of the men of this Generation.

6 Sensibly and compassionately, with a tender, pittifulsympathizing-heart. We
must not only pour out our riches, See Mr. Iacombe his Ser. at the Spittle, on
Mat. 5.7. p. 5.6.
but our souls to the poor, Isa. 58.10. we must have a sight and sense of their
miseries within our selves, considering that they are flesh of our flesh, we
are all of one and the same blood, Isa. 58.7. Acts 17.26. as good hands made
them as made thee, and as great a price was paid for their Redemption; and
though thou may be his superior in Temporals, yet he may excel thee in
Spirituals, in faith, obedience, humility. Great reason therefore that we
should put on bowels of mercy, i. e. all sorts of mercy, to soul, body, estate;
give, lend, visit, cloth, counsel, comfort, and do all that in us lies for
them, Coloss. 3.12. The good Samaritan when he saw the misery of the man that
fell amongst Thieves, he took compassion on him, Luke 10.33. Job wept for
those that were in trouble, and his soul was in heaviness for the poor, Job
30.25. let a man give never so much, if he do it with an upbraiding,
insulting, and not with a compassionate spirit, it is abominable. It is a
greater mercy to have a compassionate heart, than it is to give an Alms. A
wicked man may give some of his Goods, but a compassionate man gives some of
himself. To move compassion in us, 1. Let us put our selves into their cases,
and make them our own. 2. Make use of thine Eye, that is one great means to
work upon the heart; observe their poor fare, their tattered clothing, their
cold lodging, and feeble bodies. The Samaritan saw the Wounded man, and then
he had compassion on him; See this Point enlarged upon by M. N^hem. Rogers in
the Good Samaritan, p. 112, etc.
Christ saw the People as Sheep without a Sheperd, and had compassion on them.
By this means we shall the better know the necessities of the poor, and how to
suit our alms to their wants. This will make us thankful when we see how
others lie on Straw, drink Water, want Clothes to their backs, and bread for
their Bellies, etc.

7 Largely, and liberally. As Araunah gave to the King like a King, so should
we give bountifully to works of mercy. A mean man must be frugally liberal, a
man of an ordinary estate must be moderately liberal, but a rich man must be
magnificently liberal, especially in great and extraordinary cases. A Christian
must be a man of a more excellent spirit, ( Numb. 14.24.) not of a sordid,
low, ignoble spirit. Alms is compared to Sowing, which usually is done with a
full hand; to encourage us, the Apostle adds a gracious Promise, that if we sow
liberally we shall reap liberally, 2 Cor. 9.6. we should therefore abound in
this work of the Lord, and be merciful, not as Abraham, or Job were merciful,
but as our heavenly father is merciful. Now the Lord abounds in mercy to us,
and so should we in our degree to others. We should not confine our Alms to an
Easter Day, or a Christmas-Eeve, or a Communion-day, but be ready on all
occasions for the duty; we should not give a penny, but a portion to the poor,
Eccles. 11.1, 2. Cast thy bread; that is, Visito, (...), (...), redimo, tego,
colligo, condo. Ad corpus. Consule, castiga, solare, remitte, fe^, (...). Ad
(...) referuntur. Aguinas secunda, secundae, q. 32. art* 2. (...).
all things necessary for thy poor Brothers support, cast it franckly and
freely without grudging or repining at him; but then it must be Thy bread, got
by thy lawful labor; cast it on the Waters, that is, upon the Poor, and though
it may seem to be lost, as that which is thrown down the River, yet after many
days we shall find it. 1. Sometimes in this life we shall have an hundred
fold. The Shunamite that entertained the Prophet had a Son. The Widow of
Sarepta by succouring the Prophet had an increase of her Oil. 2. Sometimes to
the Posterity, when the fathers dead, then the Child has favor showed him,
Psalm 112.3. 3. Sometimes not till the Resurrection, Luke 14.13 we should
therefore give a portion to seven, and also unto eight; that is unto many, for
Bonum quo communius eo melius, the more communicative our goodness is, the
better.

Obj. But we know not what evils may come upon us, and therefore we will save?

Sol. Nay therefore give (says Solomon) whilst thou have any thing to give,
before all be gone, for thou know not what evils shall be upon the earth.
Sad times may come, and then those that have been bountiful to others, shall
find bounty from others; and as they have meted to others, so God will raife
up some to mete unto them again. We see the Wheel turns round, and those that
have been on the top, as Bajazet and Belisarius, have been brought to the
bottom; we should therefore improve our Talent while we have it, to our Masters
praise. God has much dishonor done him by miserable, unmerciful men; we
should help to take off those dishonours by our pious, merciful, and munificent
walking; they instead of giving bountifully, give basely to the poor,
mouldy-bread, stinking meat, that one would scarce give to Dogs; yea their
horses many times have more and better Corn than poor wanting Christians. If
base offerings were abhorred of David's soul, how much more are such sordid
gifts abhorred of Gods soul.

8 Discreetly, according to our estate and abilities, and proportionable to our
neighbors necessities. Rich men must give like rich men, and poor men must do
as they can. Thus, Acts 11.29. when the godly were in distress, Non debent
effundi opes, sed (...). Ambros.
the Church resolves to send them relief according to their ability. We must so
give to one, that we do not disable our selves from giving to others. Though
few offend on this hand, yet it is better and safer offending in the excess and
giving too much, than too little. The Macedonians are commended for giving
beyond their ability, 2 Cor. 8.3. The poor Widow had rather want her self, than
be wanting to others; and in the Primitive times they sold all that they had
to supply the Churches necessities, Acts 2.45. and 4.34. But ordinarily the
measure of our alms must be regulated according to our estates; this is to
order our affairs with discretion, Psalm. 112.5. according to the ability
wherewith God has blessed us, we must lay aside somewhat for the poor, 1 Cor.
16.2. Divines conclude, that the tenth part of our comings in ought to be set
apart, by way of thankfulness for pious uses; upon this account Jacob vowed the
tenth to God, Genesis 28. ult. Hence we read not only of the Levites Tenths, but
of Tenths for the Poor, (Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29.) and to these Tenths the text
alludes; and if the Jews who had so many Sacrifices to offer, and Tenths to
pay, yet must give another Tenth to the Poor; shall not we that are freed from
those Ceremonial burdens, be much more bountiful?

2 We must be discreet, Benesaeiendum est omnibus, secundum tamen debitas losi
and temporis circumstantias. Aquinas secunda secund^, q. 31. art. 2.
in respect of the persons to whom we give; though we are bound to give to all
that are in extreme necessity, Luke 6.30. Give to every one that asks, viz.
if he be truly in need, and thou art able to releeve him. But especially we
must succor the godly poor, and communicate to the Saints necessities, Gal.
6.10. we must give unto them Majore affectu and effectu, with greater love, and
greater bounty; Joseph showed kindness to all his Brethren, but Benjamin whom
he loved had a five-fold mess. Those are near and dear to God, and so they
should be to us. They often meet with hard usage from the world, and therefore we
are commanded to supply (what in us lies) their necessities, Romans 12.13. Next
to those our poor Kindred, and the poor of our own Town must be releeved, Deuteronomy.
15.7. and then Strangers, though they be far distant, Gal. 2.10. yea enemies,
if they be in want must be fed by us, 2 King. 6.21, 22. Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.20.

Only such as are lusty, wandering Beggars, that are able to work, but are lazy
and will not, we must take heed of releeving such, unless they be in extreme
necessity, and that with admonition. There are two sorts of Poor in the world,
1 Impotent Poor, of Gods making. 2 Impudent Poor, of the Devils making.


Pasce fame morientem, quia si non paveris occidisti. Ambros.
1 Impotent poor, when God by Sickness, Fire, Shipwreck, Persecution, great
charge of Children, Old age, etc. such poor whose work is done, must be
succored by us, Levit. 25.35.

2 But Impudent poor, who are talkative, brazen-faced, idle, dissolute, and
disordered; correction is the best alms for such as can work and will not. A
rod is fittest for the back of such fools.

1 God has expressly said, He that will not labor shall not eat; it is not,
he that is sick and cannot, but he that is able and will not labor shall rot
and perish, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. Prove. 20.4.

2 Such as maintain them in this idleness sin against the good Laws of the
Land.

3 Against the Law of Nature, which teaches every man by his industry to
provide for his own.

4 They are Thieves, and eat up that which should maintain the true poor.

5 By a constant releeving of them, you maintain them in their idle trade,
harden them in their sin, and so become accessory to all their abominations.

6 The Godly that have been very tender to other kind of poor, yet have been
very terrible to these. Job that was eyes to the blind, yet made these to run
and hide themselves, Job 30.3, 4, 5. Paul condemns them for their disorderly
walking, and commands us to withdraw from such. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.10.14. They are
the Devils Nursery, and Seminary, out of which he chooses some for Theft, some
for Bastards, some for Murderers, and all manner of villainy. Hence Plato (one
of the wisest Heathens) allowed not any Beggars in his conceited Commonwealth,
as being a great blemish and dishonor to it.

3 We must be discreet in shunning the causes of Poverty, which disable us from
works of Mercy.

The first is Idleness, this wastes and consumes the estate, so that in a short
time a man cannot help himself, much less others. Idleness and uncharitableness
were Sodoms Sins, Ezekiel. 16.49. the virtuous Woman is commended for her
liberality to the poor, but what enabled her for it, why she seeks for Wool,
and Flax, and works willingly with her hands, Prove. 31.13, 14, 20.

2 Intemperance, in eating, drinking, pleasures, and pastimes, etc. when men
shall give five pound for a Dog, ten pound for a Hawk, twenty pound for a
Horse, and forty pound spent on a Whore, and hundreds in Drink and Tobacco,
when men shall thus make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lu^ts of it, no
wonder if such cannot help others, when they have beggered themselves, Prove.
21.17. and 23.21.

3 Familiarity with lewd Women, The Harlot will bring a man to a morsel of
bread, and will quickly root out all a man's increase, Job 31.12.

4 Pride, when ordinary building will not serve, sumptuous building breeds
sorry-house-keeping; So pride in Apparel eats up charity; when men have such
large Items for Silk, for Satin, for Laces, for Ribbands, etc. when men shall
carry Woods and Lordships on their backs, no wonder if they have nothing for
the poors bellies. As B. Jewel complained sometimes, that he had no Benefices
to bestow on good men, for Capon his Predecessor had devoured them all; so
these have nothing for the Poor, for Dr. Pride has devoured all.

5 Rash Suerti-ship has disabled many, and therefore Solomon so often cautions
us against it, Prove. 6.1, 2, 3. and 11.15.

9 Give constantly. In the morning let us sow our Seed, and in the evening let
us not hold our hand. Let us never be weary of well-doing, for in due time we
shall reap if we faint not; so long as there are poor to be releeved, and we
have goods to releeve them withal, we should be distributing amongst them; now
the poor we shall have always with us, so long as the world endures, so long
the poor shall endure, and therefore we must still be sowing. As God is always
succouring us, so should we always be succouring our Brethren. As he renewes
his mercy to us every morning, so should we renew our bounty; we must ever be
following that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.15. Job was addicted to it from his
youth, and in his old age he practiced it, Job 31.18. As the Husbandman thinks
it not sufficient that he has sown his ground in former years, but he
continues his sowing to the end of his days; so must we in this Spiritual
sowing, our last days must be our best days, and our works more at the last
than at the first, Revel. 2.19. Constancy is one ingredient that helps to make
an action Morally good: It must be done Scienter, Volenter, Constanter; first
we must know our duty, and then perform it cheerfully and constantly; and this
serves to distinguish between the charity of the Hipocrite and the godly, the
one gives by starts and fits, when the wind of praise, and the weight of profit
moves them; but the righteous does righteously at all times, and that from a
Principle of life, and habit of grace within.

He that would see more, may peruse Drexelius De Eleemosyna, Taffin on
Amendment, p. 121, etc. Synopsis Purio^is Theolog. Disput. 37. p. 473. Trapp at
the end of his Comment on N. T. p. 1049. folio, Clerks Mirror, chap. 19. p.
63. folio, Mr. Wheatly's Poor man's Advocate, Dr. Harris on Matthew. 5.7. Perkins
Cases of Consc. lib. 3. c. 5. p. 143. etc. folio, Church his Treasury, p. 283.
and Miscellanies, p. 87. Byfields Marrow, p. 584. Capel on Tentat. p. 319. Mr.
John Downams Plea for the Poor. Mr. Bernard of Batcombs Way to Good Works,
Watsons Sermon. on Psalm. 112.9. Greenhil on Ezekiel. 16.49. and instar omnium
Binchius mellificium Theolog. Loc. 15. p. 230. pars 3 a. Mr. Iacombs Ser. at
the Spittle, on Mat. 5.7.

VERSE 5.
And offer a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving with leaven, and proclaim and publish
the free-Offerings, for this likes you, O ye Children of Israel, says the
Lord.
IN this Verse the Prophet continues his Sarcasm, and bids the Israelites go
on in their superstitious practices, imitating Gods people in their choysest
Sacrifices, viz. in their Eucharistical, Votive, Free-will-offerings; but
withal he lets them know, though this please them, yet it displeases God, as
appears by those several Judgments which he had already laid upon them, and
yet further threatens against them.

Offer a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving with leaven; q. d. imitate Gods people, who
in their Sacrifices of praise did offer leavenned bread according to the Law (
Levit. 7.13.) so do ye in the Worship of your Idols, what Gods people did
holily at Jerusalem to the true God, that do ye hypocritically at Bethel and
Gilgal, to your false gods.

Q. But here a doubt arises, whether this people did sin in offering leaven
with their Sacrifices of Thanksgiving?

A. Some learned men conceive they did sin, and that their Sacrificing here
with leaven was contrary to the Law, Levit. 2.11. But as learned men on the
other side say, they did not sin in so doing; for though the Lord did forbid
leaven in other Sacrifices ( Levit. 2.11.) yet in Eucharistical and
Thank-offerings, as here, they might bring leavened bread, Levit. 7.13. The
Lord therefore does not blame them here for offering with leaven, Vide Planius
Piscator. in Amos 4.5. in Scholiis.
for himself had so appointed it, and in these external circumstantials they
were very diligent; but the Lord blames them because they offered those
Sacrifices of praise which were due to him, to their Idols, and that in the
Temple of Idols.

Q. But why did the Lord forbid leaven in other Sacrifices, and yet command it
in Eucharistical ones?

A. Sundry Reasons might be given.

1 The Lord might enjoin it, to intimate unto us the due preparation of our
hearts before we praise him; for so we find Leaven to be used, sometimes in
Scripture in good part, for the secret working, preparing, and fitting of the
Dough for baking* making it rise and heave, which else would be sad and heavy
( Mat. 13.33.) so does Gods Spirit prepare and raise our spirits in love and
thankfulness to God for his mercies, Psalm. 108.1. to 6.

2 To teach us to temper our joys with sorrow, and in all our approaches to God
in this duty, to rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2.11. Hence the Passover was to
be eaten with sower herbs.

3 Or else to signify to us his gracious acceptance of our praises, though
mixed with the leaven of many infirmities.

4 To mind them (say some) of their deliverance from those things which are set
forth by leaven, viz. false Doctrine, Hypocrisy, Prophanness, and the like.

Proclaim and publish the Free-offerings, q. d. though you bring your
Sacrifices to me every morning and evening, according to my Commandment, and
though ye offer other Sacrifices on your Feastival-dayes, yea and though ye
add to them all Voluntary-oblations, solemnized with great pomp and Majesty;
yet all this is but adding sin to sin, it is a burden, and an abomination to
me, because not done in that place, and by those Priests which I have ordained
for that work. Those Voluntary-free-will-offerings we read of, Levit. 7.16. and
22.18. Numb. 15.3. Deuteronomy. 12.17. these were commanded by Law, and these the
Israelites did imitate. These they did publish and proclaim by public
authority, Kiru, vocata ecclesiam and caelum populi ad osserandum victimas and
alias oblationes.
with great pomp and solemnity, being very curious in Ceremonies, but careless
in substantials; yet for the better clearing of this Point, we must know, that
those Free Will offerings were a kind of Peace Offerings for some Blessings
received: of which we find three sorts: Some were 1 Eucharistical. 2 Votive. 3
Voluntary.


1 Some were Sacrifices of Thanksgiving and praise, for some Blessings already
received, as recovery from Sickness, victory over Enemies, success in a
Journey; for blessings of the Field, of the Womb, etc. they were to come to
the Holy place, and bring a Bullock, or the like, and offer it as a Sacrifice
of Thanksgiving to God, for those mercies received, Levit. 7.11, 12, 13.

2 There were Votive Sacrifices, which were joined with Prayer for a blessing
upon their undertakings; or as others say, for the performance of some Vow made
upon the obtaining of some special blessing from God, Lev. 7.16.

3 The Free-will-offering was of mere Devotion, when a man was not tied either
by general or special obligation, ( Levit. 7.16,) either of Mercies received,
or of the want of any blessing; but of Devotion in general, by way of
acknowledging Gods goodness to them in the general, and testifying their desire
of the continuance of his love and favor to them; Ahabtem, dilaxistis, from
Ahab, dilexit, chorum habuit.
For this pleases you, or, this ye love, O ye Children of Israel, says the
Lord. What the Prophet had spoken before Ironically, now he speaks plainly
without a Figure, and shows that he did not exhort them to do such things, but
shows what things they delighted to do, and therefore he bids them go on,
and take what they get; you love to have it so, but you consider not what will
be the end thereof, Ier. 5. ult. q. d. This kind of sacrifice may please you,
who have made your own wills your rule, delighting your selves in outward
shows and Ceremonies; but it is aispleasing unto me, though you love to have
it so, yet I hate your doings, and require no such things at your hands. My
Sacrifices I expect at Jerusalem, yet you think any profane place will serve
turn, you should have consulted my Law, and my Messengers, and observed what
pleased me; but you have despised my Law, and despited my Messengers, and
followed your own inventions to your own confusion; go on therefore in these
your rebellious practices, and perish.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Hipocrites are very strict in observing outward Ceremonies and
Circumstances, but very negligent in fundamentals and substantials. They strain
at a Gnat, yet swallow a Camel; they have a form of godliness, but they have
not the power of it; they may have their morning and evening Sacrifices, they
may pay Tithes, bring Euchari^tical and Free-will-offerings, and go as far
in outward performances as (if not further then) the people of God, Vide Dyke
on the Heart, p. 29 and p. 110.
and yet for want of sincerity be nothing. Ignorance and impudence, gain, and
applause of men, will carry men a great way. Most men's religion now adays lies
in censuring of others, in holding some seemingly strict Opinions, and
high-flown Notions beyond the rule; in disputing and questioning every thing,
but believing nothing. The Scribes and Pharisees, what ado did they make about
Tything of Mint, and Cummin, and Annise; but the weighty matters of the Law lay
unregarded; these forget that obedience is better than sacrifice. Thus our
perfect Pharisees the Quakers, how precise seem they in their words, even
beyond the rule; What ado do they make about Pulpits, Hourglasses, Churches,
Steeples, Bells, Gowns, Clokes, Laces, Fringes, Hatbands, making of Legs,
Curchies, Titles of Honor, etc. and yet these Atheistical Libertines, whose
Religion is mere Irreligion, make no bones of Blasphemy, Heresy, Lying,
Equivocating, Railing, Witchcraft, etc. God will smite such gross Hipocrites.

2 Obs. Sacrifices of praise are due only to God. The Lord was here greatly
displeased with Israel, for offering their Sacrifices of praise to their Idols,
which were due to him. As it was their Sin that they spent the silver and the
gold which God had given them, in the service of Baal ( Hos. 2.8.) so to give
the calves of their lips (as Praises are called, Hos. 14.2.) as well as the
calves of their stalls to Idols, must needs be a God-provoking sin. As all our
Blessings come from him, so it is great reason that all our Praises should be
given to him. This has ever been the practice of the Saints, Psalm. 56.12. and
93.30.33. and 107.22. Jonah 2.9. and is often commanded, Psalm. 50.14, 15. Ephesians.
5.20.

3 Obs. God delights in Free Will offerings. The Prayers and Praises that we
offer unto God must be voluntary, ingenuous, free, Exodus 25.2. 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
Esa. 1.19. 2 Cor. 8.12. Christ saved us willingly ( Psalm. 40.6, 7.) and
therefore we should serve him willingly; yea the Angels which are more noble
Creatures than we, yet serve God willingly, Psalm. 103.20. we must resemble
them, yea the unreasonable creatures delight to serve God, Psalm. 19.5.

Compulsive obedience is no obedience; the service we perform to God must have
three ingredients in it, it must be done Scienter, Volenter and Constanter.

1 Our service must be reasonable service, for blind obedience is no obedience,
Romans 12.1.

2 It must be performed cheerfully and willingly, for as God loves a cheerful
Giver, so he loves a cheerful Hearer, a cheerful Prayer, and a cheerful
observer of his Sabbaths, Isa. 58.15. It was Prophesied, that in Gospel times
Gods people should be willingnesses in the abstract and Plural Number, Populus
spontaneitatum, i. e. summem spontaneus. Heb.
that is, they should be a prompt People, that are even composed as it were of
willingness, so ready should they be to worship him, Psalm. 110.3.

3 It must be See more in Mr. Burgess Spi. Refining 1 Part, Sermon. 91. p. 542.
See ten Qualifications of Obedience in Mr. William Shepherds Treat, of
Sincerity, p. 198. etc.
constant, we must not only do righteousness at sometimes, but at all times,
Psalm. 106.3.

4 Obs. Idolatry is mavelous pleasing to our corrupt natures. Men love to
have it so, Ier. 5. ult. Corrupt Principles suit well with our corrupt hearts.
Hence it is that men are said to be wedded to their Idols, V. Weems on the
second Com. chap. 7. p. 85.
Hos. 4.17. those they love and serve, and seek to worship, Jer. 8.2. this
makes multitudes go after the Whore with her bewitching, alluring golden Cup,
Revel. 13.3. on this side Hell there is not a sorer Judgment, than thus to be
given up to our own currupt affections.

VERSE 6.
And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your Cities, and want of
bread in all your places; yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.
WHen God would convert a People, he uses Blessings and Curses, Mercies and
Judgments, one or both of which usually work upon all ingenuous natures,
Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. and 30.1, 2. God had tried all conclusions upon this
people, he had tried to reclaim them by Mercies, ( Amos 2.9, 10, 11. and 3.2.)
but these being ineffectual, he now tries what Judgments will do; and
therefore sends his three Arrows of Famine, Pestilence, and Sword amongst them
to convert them (if it might be) and not to destroy them, as appears by that
Emphatical Epistrophe annexed to every punishment; yet have ye not returned
unto me, says the Lord. Not only his Mercies, but his Menaces; not only his
favors, but his frowns and rods were all ineffectual upon the hearts of this
impenitent people. As a tender father will use all means to reclaim his
rebellious Son, so God had used all means to reclaim this People from their
Idolatry, and Apostasy, but all in vain, for they were so wedded to their
lusts, that they had rather lose their Land and Lives than part with them; so
that this is the third Sin which the Lord by his Prophet charge them withal,
viz. Obstinacy and incorrigibleness; no cords of love could draw them, nor
judgments drive them. The Lord had wasted all his rods on them in vain, five
or six he mentions here, viz. 1 Famine. 2 Drought. 3 Blasting. 4 Mildew. 5
Plague. 6 Sword.
But they were so far from returning, that they grew worse and worse, and
therefore the Lord resolves to make a final end with them. In this Verse we
have, 1 A Judgment executed, and that is Famine, which is Paraphrastically set
forth by cleanness of teeth, E^st Periphrasis famis and inopiae.

The Vulgar following the Septuagint render it Stuporem dentium, but corruptly,
for the word is Nikion, and significat munditiem and vacuitatem dentium, c^m
dentes vacui sint a cibo.


and is exegetically explained in the next Clause, by want of Bread, and
provision, I have given you cleanness of teeth, what is that? why want of bread
in all places; when men have nothing to eat, their teeth are clean, nothing
adheres to them to foul them. In the precedent Verse the Lord tells us what
pleased Israel, viz. Sin, and now he tells us what pleased him, viz. to punish
them for their sin; as they had abused their food like fat Beasts, to luxury
and riot, so now they should fast for it; and I also have given you, or
therefore have I given you cleanness of teeth; it is a suitable Judgment that
unclean hearts and lives should be punished with, cleanness of teeth. This
Judgment was in part fulfilled in Elijahs and Elishaes days, when in Ahabs
reign there was a three years famine, 1 King. 17. and 18. and 2 King. 6.25. and
8.1. and in the days of King Ioram, for the Idolatry that then reinged, 2
King. 4.38. yet some conceive that the Prophet here speaks of some latter
famine which was then fresh in their memories. 2 Here is the Extent, or
Universality of this Judgment, the famine was not in one or two, but in all
their Cities, and in all places. 3 Here is the effect which this Judgment had
upon them, viz. It was ineffectual; yet have ye not returned to me, says
Lord. Their hearts were so hardened, and they so indurate in sin, that they were
become incorrigible, and incurable; they were Judgement-proof, no chastning
could work upon them. Yet have ye not, etc. This yet shows that there was
great reason why God should expect their return, and that he had done that
which in all probability might have caused them to return, when he sent these
Judgments on them; therefore God inculcates, and often repeats this sentence,
Yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord; as being greatly troubled
that his corrections had no better operations on them; when even Phrygians and
Barbarians are bettered by blows, yea the dull Ass is quickened by the Rod, and
the heavy Ox by the Goad.


OBSERVATIONS.
1 Famine is one Judgment which God sends upon impenitent Sinners, When God
is greatly incensed against a People, then he sends the Famine, which he calls
one of his four sore Judgments, Ezekiel. 14.21. it is an Arrow which he shoots
against a People of his wrath, Ezekiel. 5.16. The Lord can no sooner call for a
Famine, but like a faithful Servant it presently obeys, 2 King. 8.1. he called
for a Famine, and it came upon the Land seven years, Psalm. 105.16. when it
comes in extremity it is very sad; hence it is called the terrible Famine, Lam.
5.10. This will appear in seven particulars.

1 It makes men unnatural, and cruel, even to their nearest Relations, as Wife
and Children. Nature binds a man to tender and pity these, yet in time of
Famine, we read of Mothers eating their own Children, 2 King. 6.28, 29. Ier.
14.9. Lam. 4.10. this Curse the Lord threatens against disobedient ones, Deuteronomy.
28.53.56.57. 2 It is a lingering, languishing death, other Judgments cut men
off suddenly, but this consumes a man as it were peecemeal, Lam. 4.9. They that
are slain with the Sword are better than they that are slain with hunger; Why
so? for these pine away for lack of sustenance. 3 It makes men faint and
feeble, and so unfits men for the Service of God in their calling, Genesis 47.13.
they faint by reason of the famine. Hence Bread is called the staff, stay, and
strength of our natures ( Levit. 26.26. Psalm. 105.16. Isa. 3.1. Ezekiel. 4.16.)
take a Staff from a weak man and he falls to the ground. 4 It makes men howl
and lament ( Hos. 7.14. Joel 2.11) yea rage and be mad, Isa. 8.21. 5 Hunger
burns like a fire, which is a most terrible element, it wastes the radical
moisture, Deuteronomy. 32.24. Jeremy describing the Famine in Jerusalem, tells us,
that their face was black like a Coal, and their skin was black like an Oven,
because of the terrible Famine ( Lam. 4.8. and 5.10.) when the Calor nativus
has nothing to feed upon, it consumes the Humidum radicale, and so the man
dies. 6 It brings Poverty with it, now extreme Poverty is a sore Judgment, and
puts men upon desperate attempts, as robbing, killing, etc. Prove. 6.30. and
30.8, 9. it makes rich men poor, and forces them to sell their Land, Catrel
Goods, Cloth, etc. Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his
life. The Egyptians sold all that they had to Joseph for bread, and when all
was gone they sold themselves, Genesis 47.18. 7 It is usually attended with other
Judgments, as Sword and Plague, such great Judgments seldom go alone, Ier.
14.15, 16. and 24.10. Ezekiel. 7.15. and 14.21.
Let us then fly from sin, which turns that God; who is mercy and pity it
self, into fire and fury, and provokes him to send such terrible Judgments on
his people. Especially take heed of four sins.

1 Intemperance, Drunkenness and Gluttony bring the famine on a Land, Abuse of
plenty loses plenty, when men rise early to follow strong drink, then their
honorable men are famished, Isa. 5.11, 12, 13. Joel 1. 2 Covenant Breaking;
when there was a three years Famine in the days of David, he inquired of the
Lord what was the ground of it; the answer was, that it was for Saul, and for
his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites, contrary to Covenant
confirmed by an oath, Josh. 9.7.15.18. 2 Samuel 21.1. Ier. 34.17, 18. 3 When men
spend the strength which they receive from the Creature, in the service of the
Devil, consuming them upon their lusts, or in sacrificing to Idols, as the
Israelites did here, they served Baal with the Corn and Wine which God had
given them, therefore God took it from them. 4 Contempt of the Word, the ways
and Worship of God. God often punishes our abuse of Spiritual food with the want
of Corporal, See more Sins in Mellif. Theolog, Binchius, Loc. 12. P. 2. p. 14^
and D. Gouge his Arrows, p. 2. p 139, etc. Topsel on Joel, p. 119. and 213.
Clerks Mirror, chap. 51.
They that hate his Messengers shall dye by the Famine, Ier. 11.21, 22. so when
men prefer their own interests before Gods, and can dwell themselves in
seiled houses, but the House of the Lord must lie wast, this brings a Curse
upon their Crops and Labors, Hag. 1.6.9.10. and 2.17.18, 19.
2 Since it is the Lord that sends cleanness and want of bread amongst us, let
us be patient under it, let us be dumb and silent because the Lord has done
it. There is no evil in the City of this kind especially, but the Lord is the
Author and orderer of it, it comes not by Accident, but by Divine appointment,
it is the Lord that sends Famines to Cities and Kingdoms; and the rather we
should be patient, when we consider that our Famines are nothing to what our
sins deserve. 2 Nothing comparatively, when we consider the seven years Famine
in Egypt, when for five years together there was neither Earing nor Harvest,
Genesis 41.40. and 45.6. In the three years Siege of Samaria, the people within
did eat their own Children, and fed upon Dung, (2 King. 6.25.28.29.) an Asses
head was sold for eighty pieces of Silver, which is ten pound in our coin, and
the fourth part of a Kab of Doves dung for five pieces of Silver, now a Kab
contained four pound and five ounces, and the fourth part was thirteen ounces,
and for this they gave ten shillings and upward. But no famine was like
Ierusalems famine, In the Siege of Rochel, 1628. there died of the Famine
sixteen thousand persons, an Egg was sold for 8 s. a pint of Milk 30 s. a
Bushel of Wheat 20 l. a pound of Butter 30 s, etc. See Book of Martyrs 3 Vol.
in fine, p. 73, 74, Edit. ult.
as we may see in the Lamentations of Jeremy, when the Children cried for
bread and there was none to give them, those that were clothed in Scarlet
embraced the Dunghill, their beautiful Nazarites were blacker than Coals, and
the pitiful Mothers became Butchers of their own Children. As the Lord said to
his people, Go to Shiloe, so say I, Go to Germany, and to Rochel, and consider
what God has done to them for their Sins, there you shall see Dogs, Cats, and
Rats sold in the Markets, and men and women fighting for them. There you shall
see Women eating their own Children, the living feeding upon the dead, and
digging up dead Corpse out of their Graves that they might feed upon them.
Beggars coming to doors have been killed and eaten, yea the skins of Horses,
Sheep, and Oxen, have been their food; let us take heed lest Germanies
Heresies, Blasphemies, Apostacies, Drunkenness, etc. be found in England, lest
Germanies Plagues come hither also. O let us be an obedient people, let us not
fight against God with his own blessings, nor abuse his plenty to his
dishonor, but serve him with gladness of heart in the abundance of all things,
for it is Piety that breeds plenty, Psa. 81.12, 13. Isa. 1.19. if there be but
a sincere will and desire to obey, we shall eat the good of the Land, and in
time of famine we shall be fed, Psalm. 33.19. and 34.10. and 37.19. Job 5.20.
Prove. 10.3. Isa. 33.15, 16.

Fides fam^m non formidat, Hieron.
2 Live by faith, and then in an holy security at destruction and famine you may
laugh, Job 5.22. Faith answers all distrustful cares and fears, as Abraham
did in another case, God will provide.

Obj. But thou may dye by the Famine?

A True says faith, and that is best of all for me, for that will free me from
sin, and from all the miseries that attend it. He cannot dye ill that lives
well, let him dye by Famine, Sword, Pestilence, or whatever Disease, yet if he
dye in the Lord, in his fear and favor, he is blessed, Revel. 14.13. Though
the Fig Tree should not blossom, yet a believer can rejoice in the Lord in the
want of all ( Hab. 3.17.) he knows that the Lord can bless a little, and make
the Widows meal to increase by spending, 1 King. 17.17. he knows that God can
put virtue and nourishment into the Creature, and make us walk in the strength
of one meal for many days together; as he did Elijah, who went forty days
together in the strength of one dinner; or if he take away our meat (as the
Martyr said) he will take away our appetite also; See Mr. Trapp on Mat. 4.4.
Man lives not by bread only, but by every word of God, Mat. 4.4.

2 Obs. God pays Sinners many times in their own coin. As men deal with
others, so God deals with them. These Idolatrous Israelites kept Gods faithful
Ministers hungry, and spent all on Idols, and false Prophets, and now God keeps
them hungry; they like fat Beasts were luxurious, and abused their food, and
now they shall be kept short, and want food; they abused their Wine; and now
they shall want Water; and though Great men many times escape in times of
famine, yet God can smite them with such Diseases, that they shall neither eat
nor drink, In quo quis pescat, in eo punitur. Absolon that was proud of his
hair, at last it became an Halter that helped to hang him; David that abused
another bed, has his own bed defiled by Absolon, who lay with his Concubines;
when he proudly numbered the people, he lost them by the Pestilence; so
Hezekiah that was lifted up with his Treasures, lost them, Isa. 39.5. Such is
our corruption that we seldom know the worth of Mercies till we want them,
Carendo potius quam fruendo, when we want food, health, wealth, peace, and the
Gospel of Peace, then we begin to know the price of these mercies.

3 Obs. The principal end that God aims at in our corrections, is our
conversion. He corrects us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
Holiness, See Mr. Dyke on Afflictions, p. 342. etc. at the end of his Com. on
Philemon.
Heb. 12.10. he sent the Famine on this People, that so they might return unto
him. This is his special end, Job 33.19. to 28. and 36.8, 9. Psalm. 94.12. and
119.71. Luke 15.14. to 30. we should not therefore lose the benefit of our
Afflictions, nor frustrate Gods end in correcting us, but say with the Martyr,
Lord do thou beat, and I will bend. As the Apostle says of Patience ( Iam.
1.4.) Let patience have its perfect work; that is, let it be sincere, and
endure to the end; so say I of Repentance, let it not be a half turn, or make
you howl as the Famine did those Israelites (Hos. 7.14.) but let his rods bring
us home fully to himself, that we may return to him with all our hearts, and
then we shall be happy.

4 Obs. Such as turn truly, must turn to God. This is implied here in that the
Lord complains, Yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. Many turn
from sin to sin, they turn from Drunkenness to Covetousness, from Idolatry to
Libertinism, etc. This is a changing of one sin for another, but true
conversion is a turning from all sin to God, it is a turning from sin which is
the greatest evil, unto God who is the chiefest good, Deuteronomy. 4.30. Ier. 3.1. 22.
Lam. 3.40. Hos. 14.1. Joel 2.12.

5 Obs. Hardened Sinners are incorrigible and incurable. When men have got a
custom of sinning and have long rejected the Word of God, then it is not all
that Mount Sinai, or Mount Sion can afford, not all the dreadful Curses of the
one, nor all the gracious Promises of the other, that can work upon them; as
we see in Cain, Pharaoh, Saul, and others; Let the Lord spend all his Arrows
upon them, yet they return not unto him that smites them, See Mr Proffets Fast
Ser. on Isa. 9 13. and Mr. Yongs Drunkards Charact. p. 243 and my Com. on Hos.
13.16. p. 132. D. Reynolds on Psalm. 110, 1. p. 336, 337. folio.
Isa. 9.13. but the more they are smitten, the worse they are, Isa. 1.5. like
the Smiths stithy, the more it is stricken the harder it is; let God smite them
yet they refuse to receive correction. ( Ier. 2.30.) The Bellows are burnt (the
Prophets Lungs are consumed) and the Founder melts in vain, for the wicked are
not turned from their wickedness, therefore reprobate silver shall men call
them ( Ier. 6.29, 30.) because their scum still abides in them, Ezekiel.
24.6.12.13. How impregnable are the consciences of wicked men, who are no more
moved with the threatenings of Gods Ministers than the people which live under
the fall of Nilus are at the sound thereof; their continual familiarity with
that noise, either quite deafs them, or else makes them dis-regard it. They are
as senseless of what is spoken as the Pillars which they lean to, or the Seats
which they sit upon; so that many men come short of the very faith of Devils;
for they believe there is a God, and that all which he has spoken in his Word
is true; they believe the Power, Justice, and Wrath of God so far as to tremble
at it, and herein they go beyond most wicked men, who never go so far as to
quake and tremble at Gods threatenings, yea the Devil has taught them a lesson
which he cannot learn himself, viz. to mock at Gods threatenings, saying in
their hearts they shall never come upon us. See this Point very well enlarged,
by Mr. C^ler, on Jam. 2.19. p. 98. Corripimur sed non corrigimur, plectimur sed
non flectimur. Salvian. See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.13. p. 22
The Devil quakes and fears, whilst these are senseless and incorrigible. How
many are corrected, but not amended; beaten, but not bettered; this doubles
men's sins and makes them out of measure sinful, when neither the Word nor the
Sword, neither Mercies nor Menaces, neither Promises nor Threatenings can work
upon men; when sin is grown too strong for that means which God has ordained
to suppress it, they are nigh to utter destruction. This plainly appears by
this people of Israel, after their defection and Apostasy from the Worship of
God, they never Prospered but had one Judgment after another till they were
quite destroyed. We are apt to wonder at Isreal's induration, and yet this is
Englands Sin. God has done as much to reclaim us as ever he did for Israel,
and yet we have not returned to him.

1 The Lord has punished our neighbor Nations to make us fear, we have seen
what he has done to Germany, Ireland, Savoy, etc. he expected that their
desolation should have been our Instruction ( Zeph. 3.6, 7.) but yet we have
not returned to the Lord.

2 He has sent amongst us many Elijah^ and Elisha's, to woo us, and to warn
us, and yet we have not returned to the Lord.

3 He has drawn us with the cords of love, and given us Mercy upon Mercy,
Deliverance upon Deliverance, Victory upon Victory, and yet ye have not
returned to me says the Lord.

4 We have had Sword, Plague, and Famine amongst us, and yet ye have not
returned unto me says the Lord.

5 And now the Lord seems to threaten greater Judgments, and to deal more
severely with us for our obstinacy, and impenitency, and yet we are as stupid
and stubborn as ever, and never once think of returning to him that smites us.
O that the Lord would awaken every soul of us out of this deep and deadly
sleep! oh that every one would now go into his Closet, and there seriously ask
his soul, What have I done? Against what light and love, against what wooings
and warnings, against what Mercies and Judgments have I rebelled! None so
beloved of his God as I, and none that has so abused his love as I have done.
Oh that we could now take shame to our selves for our stubborn standing out so
long against so good and gracious a God! oh that we could judge our selves for
our rebellion, and loathe our selves for our great provocations, then would the
Lord repent of the evil he intended against us, and we might hope to see better
days than yet we have seen.

6 Obs. Hipocritical turning is no turning in Gods esteem. This People did
sometimes howl in their misery, and fast and pray ( Hos. 7.14.) but it was but
counterfeit, and therefore the Lord charge them still with this, Yet have ye
not returned to me, says the Lord. False things in Scripture are counted as no
things. A wicked man is accounted as no man, Ier. 5.1. the streets of Jerusalem
were full of men, but because they were not good men, God calls them no men.
Thus the wicked are said to have no heart, i. e. no good heart, and so as good
have none at all, Hos. 7.11.

VERSE 7.8.
And I also have withheld the rain from you, when there were yet three
months to the Harvest; and I caused it to rain upon one City, and caused it
not to rain upon another City; one piece was rained upon, and the piece
whereupon it rained not, withered.

So two or three Cities wandered unto one City to drink water, but they were not
satisfied, yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.


THe Prophet descends to the enumeration of new Judgments, two of which were
the Causes of the Famine. The first was Drought, and want of Rain, verse. 7, 8.
The second was Blasting, Mil-dew, and the Palmer-worm, verse. 9.

This People were like Clouds without water, and yielded no obedience to God,
but followed Idols; and now his clouds have no water for them. When God is
against us all are against us; so that here we have a second Scourge,
wherewith the Lord chastised this people that he might bring them home to
himself, viz. Drought and Barrenness; he had before punished them with Famine,
and want of Bread, now he punishes them with Thirst, and want of Water. Thus
the Lord tried all conclusions to better them, but in vain, as will appear by
the sequel.

In this Verse we have 1. The efficient cause of this Judgment, viz. the Lord,
Manang, cohibui, prohibui, coercui.
I have withheld the rain from you, viz. the latter rain, which that hot
Country had most need of, I have forbidden it to fall upon you, says God.

2 Here is the continuance of the Judgment, it was not for a week or two, but
for three months, even till the fruits of the earth withered and were
destroyed, and this the Lord did, the more deeply to affect them with their
sins. One months want of rain, in that hot Country especially, should have
startled them, two months should have astonished them, but three months should
have fully awakened them, yet such was their gross senslesness and stupidity,
that they laid it not to heart. And therefore the Lord the better to set forth
his patience, and this peoples impenitency, sets forth his dealings
particularly with them, and tells us how he brought the Famine, the Drought,
the Palmer-worm, and the Pestilence, etc. upon them. He came not suddenly upon
them, but gave them space to repent, and time to consider their ways, and the
tokens of his displeasure against them. But such was their obstinacy and
malice, that nothing could work upon them, their Disease was too strong for the
Physic, and their Maladies for Gods remedies, his labor was lost upon them.

3 Here is the juncture of time when this rain was withheld from them, viz.
three months before Harvest, which was about March, for about the latter end of
May in that hot Country was their Harvest; this was called the latter rain, and
was very needful to fit, fill, and ripen the Corn for Harvest. For the better
understanding of this, we must know that the Land of Canaan was not like the
Land of Egypt, for in Egypt they seldom or never had any rain ( Zech.
14.18.) for the River Nilus did once a year overflow the greatest part of
their Country, and so did mellow and soften the earth for all the year after.
But Canaan was a mountanous place, and could not be so watered, and therefore
the Lord took more special care of it, and watered it with rain from Heaven, (
Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11.) In this Land there were two more especial seasons for rain,
viz. the former rain about September, when the Seed was sown, that it might
take the better rooting; and the latter rain in the Spring time, when the Corn
was grown up and earing, to fit it for the Harvest; and this was called the
latter rain, which is said to fall in the first month, that is, in March, which
with them was the beginning of the year, Joel 2.23. Hence are those frequent
expressions in Scripture of the former and the latter rain, Deuteronomy. 11.14. Ier.
5.24. Hos. 6.3. Zech. 10.2. Iam. 5.7. for in Harvest it seldom or never rained
in those hot Countries, and therefore when Samuel by Prayer had obtained rain
in Harvest, they looked upon it as a prodigious thing, 1 Samuel 12.16, 17, 18,
19. now the want of either of these rains was sad, but specially the latter,
when a man shall see his Corn sown, grown up, and then when he expects a
Harvest after all his pains, for want of rain to have it wither and dye before
his eyes, this must needs be grievous to him.

4 Here is the accurateness of Gods Judgments, he distinguishes between City
and City, Field and Field, I caused it to rain upon one City, and not upon
another. As he commanded the Sun to shine on Goshen, Ne putaretis hoc lege
naturae fieri, and ast^orum cursu, super unam civitatem plui, super alteram non
plui. Ribera.
and not on Egypt, so he commands the rain to fall on some, and not on others.
These things came not by chance, but by providence; it is I (faith the Lord)
that commanded it to rain upon one parcel of ground, and not upon another.

5 Here is the effect of this Judgment, it makes them run from City to City
for water ( verse. 8.) but in vain, for they could not get enough to satisfy
their necessities. They were sensible of bodily wants, but insensible of
Spiritual wants, and therefore

6 The Lord concludes with the usual Epostrophe, Yet have ye not returned unto
me, says the Lord. Though they were thus sadly afflicted, yet were they not
bettered, but remained incurable under all corrections.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Want of seasonable rain is a punishment for sin. When God is angry with a
People, then he withholds the former and the latter rain from them. God has
rain enough in store, but it is our sins which keeps in from falling upon us;
his hand is not shortened that it cannot save, but it is our iniquity that turns
away good things from us; these shut the Heavens, and make them hard as Iron,
so that they cannot hear the earth, when (in its kind) it gapes and cries for
rain, Deuteronomy. 28.23, 24. Hag. 1.9, 10. it is obedience that brings rain. Those
Cities that were rained upon in the text, some conceive to have been godly
Cities which hated Idolatry, and worshipped the true God, though the text will
not bear such a gloss, for God makes his Rain, which is but a common Blessing,
to fall in the Wilderness ( Job 38.26, 27.) and upon the unjust as well as upon
the just; yet it is most certain that Piety has the promise even of Temporal
blessings, and such as are faithful with God in Spirituals, shall have
Temporals given in to the bargain, Levit. 26.3, 4. Hos. 2.21, 22. Hag. 2.18,
19. Zech. 8.12. Matthew. 6.33. beware then of Disobedience, Apostasy, and
abusing the Creature to intemperance, or the service of Idols, which provoke
the Lord to strip us of our mercies, Ierem. 14.4, 5, 6. we find the people
mourning for want of rain, but verse. 7.10. you may see the procuring cause of
that Judgment, for our backslidings are many, and we have sinned against thee,
and have loved to wander after Idols; and this was Isreal's Sin here, which more
especially brought this Judgment on them.

2 Obs. Rain falls by appointment, and not by accident; by providence, and not
by chance. It is not the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, or any other Natural
cause, much less any Idols that can procure rain; but it is the Lords
Prerogative Royal to give and order rain, it is he that makes it rain on one
City, and not on another. The Clouds are Gods Servants, he bids them go rain
here and not there, and they exactly obey his commands ( Job 37.11, 12, 13.)
hence they are called His Clouds, (Job. 26.8.) 1. In respect of Effi^iency, he
causes the Sun to draw up moist Vapors, and then turns them into Rainwater,
preparing the Clouds to hold it. Hence God is called the Father of the rain,
Job 38.28. and 36.27, and 37.6.2. They are his Clouds in respect of
Subserviency, they are no sooner produced but they are presently acting in
their sphere, and region for their Lord and Master, one while raining on this
Country, and anon on that; These are Gods Waterpots with which he waters the
World, the Bottles of Heaven, ( Job 38.37.) out of which God sends rain to
refresh the earth and make it fruitful; he crowns the year with his goodness,
when he makes his Clouds to drop down fatness on us, Psalm. 65.12. The earth is
as it were Gods Garden, the Sea his Cistern, and the Clouds his Bottles to
refresh the earth, and mollify it, and make it fit for our service. This is a
great mercy, let not the commonness of it take away the sense of it; but let us
fear to offend him who gives us rain; God takes it ill when we slight his
Providence in this particular, Ierem. 5.24. neither say they, let us fear the
Lord, who gives the former and the latter rain q. d. what a strange thing is
this that the sweet showers of rain have not softened your hard hearts, and made
you fear to offend him; we should fear him who has not only Fire, but Seas of
water to pour on such as displease him. Give not thou Gods glory to another,
many ascribe rain, as the Philistims did their destruction, to chance; (1 Samuel
6.9.) so say many, this wind has brought us rain, or this Moon or this Planet,
or this Idol god; the Prophet confutes all these in the text, It is I that
caused it to rain, says the Lord. Hence the rain is called His gift, See more
in Mr. Caryl on Job 5.10.
Job 5.10. Psalm. 104.13, 14. and 147.8. Isa. 30.23 which is given sometimes in
mercy, Psalm. 68.9. Acts 14.17. and sometimes in judgment, Ezra 10.9. Job
37.13. Prove. 28.3. Ezekiel. 38.22. no Men nor Creatures, no Idol-gods, no nor the
Heavens themselves can give a shower of rain without a word of command from God
( Ier. 14.22.) and therefore the Lord commands us in the want of rain to ask it
of him, Zech. 10.1. so did Elijah, Jam. 5.18. and he promises to hear our
Prayers in this particular, 1 King. 8. 35, 36. 2 Chronicles. 7.13, 14.

Away then with those vain Prognosticators, that take upon them to foretell
rain, and snow, and the times and seasons which God has concealed from the
sons of men. Rain is a future contingent thing, and therefore no man can
positively say it shall rain on such a day, See Mr. Perkins his Resolution of
the Countryman, proving it utterly unlawful to buy or use our yearly
Prognosticators, Vol. 3. p. 653.
but not on such a day; besides, the text tells us, that it may rain on one
City, and yet not rain at the same time on another. The folly of such persons
is sufficiently known to every observant eye, Nulla dies sine errato, let a man
write fair weather when they write foul, and he may hit as true as they.

Especially take heed of Judicial Astrology, when men take upon them to
Calculate men's Nativities, to foretell Wars, Plagues, Famines, and changes
in States and Kingdoms, and all this by the Stars; Vendunt imperitis hominibus
miserabitem servitutem, ex notatione syderum velle nascentium mores, actus,
eventa praedicere; magnus error, and magna dementia. Aug. de Doct. Christ. l. 2
c. 21.
this is a Satanical cheat, it is great folly and madness; if you will believe
St. Austin, They bring people into miserable slavery, who take upon them to
foretell by the Stars, the manners of men, together with the acts and events
of things. This judiciary Astrology is the very Key that opens the door to
Witchcraft and Idolatry. Hence we find South-sayers, Astrologers, and
Idolaters, many times yoked together, as Dan. 2.2.11. Amos 5.16. The Devil
delights to have men study this Art.

1 Because it robs God of his glory, and ascribes the foretelling of things
contingent to the Stars, which is proper only unto God, Isa. 41.23.

2 It is injurious to men, and keeps them in perpetual fear and slavery,
telling them, that if they be born under such or such a Planet, then they must
be burnt, drowned, or hanged, etc. When people believe not Gods Word, then he
gives them up to these delusions, Isa. 66.4. have nothing therefore to do with
those Pandors of the Devil, and Brokers for Hell; buy not their Lying, Juggling,
ambiguous Books, but burn them, Acts 19.19. if such Books as derogate from
great men must be burnt, how much more such as draw men's hearts from trusting
in the living God? Mellific. Theolog. Loc. 5. p. 6.
The Astrologer (says the learned Binchius) sins against God, against men, and
against himself: because this Art is full of Pestilent curiosity, of tormenting
fear, Sir Hen. Savil in Oratione coram Regina. Elizab. 1592. Inter subtiles
fatuos hos numerassem, nisi rudibus essent rudiores. Luther
and deadly slavery. The learned and laborious Knight has long since condemned
this Devilish Art; take it in his own words, Astrologia eventu fallax, usu
superstitiosa, a Barbaris nationibus importata, bonis temporibus Graeciae
ignota, etiam malis Roma pulsa. Ars, quod in art turpissimum est, nullis texta
principiis, nulla subjux demonstratione, nullo constans syllogismo.

Against this cursed Art, see Archbishop Abbots Thesis tertia. Fulleri
Miscelan l. 1. c. 16. p. 99. Spanheim. Dub. 33. P. 2. p. 331. Brochman. Cas.
consc. p. 88. folio. Gataker against Lilly, Lord Virulams Advancement of
Learning, p. 147. Weemse Vol. 4. p. 21, etc. Barclaies Argenis, chap. 17.
Calvin Opuscula, Tract. adversus Astrologiam, p. 801. Vicars against Heyden.
Waterhouse Defense of Humane Learning, p. 30, etc.

VERSE 8.
So two or three Cities wandered unto one City to drink water, but they were not
satisfied; yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.
RAin in the Land of Canaan where Israel dwelt, it being a very hot Eastern
Country, was very necessary, not only for the fruits of the earth, but also
for the quenching of thirst both of Man and Beast, especially if it be true
which some learned men affirm, viz. That there were but few Springs here, and
no considerable rivers but only Jordan; this made them glad to keep Rainwater
in Cisterns for all uses, being most afflicted with Thirst and Drought if it
rained not.

This made them run from one City to another to seek water; for as hunger, so
thirst breaks through all di^ficulties. Those Cities that had no water, did run
to those Cities that had either Spring Water, or Rainwater, but they were not
sufficed, says the text, so great was the Drought, and so many that wanted,
that they could not get water enough to relieve their necessities, no not in
those places where they had heard that it had rained. This shows the great
straight that they were in, no digging nor delving for Water at home could help
them, no new nor old Springs could supply them, but they were forced to leave
their houses, and to go from City to City to seek water, and yet they could
not be satisfied; for the Wells, or Water which might supply one City, yet
could not supply so many. This one would think should have awakened them, and
brought them to Repentance, no doubt but it did afright them, and made them
sad, but yet they were not bettered by their sadness, for they went on still in
their sins and superstitions dangerously, and desperately, without any
returning, and therefore the Lord upbraids them once more with a yet have ye
not returned unto me, says the Lord.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Sin, and specially the sin of Idolatry brings a People into great straights.
The Earth here languisheth, the Corn withers, and men run up and down for
water to quench their thirst* and yet cannot get it, and why is all this? why
for the sin and Apostasy of this people, 1 King. 8.35. and 17.1.

2 Obs. God has variety of Judgments in store, wherewith to punish a
rebellious people. If want of Bread will not mend them, he will try what want
of Water will do, and if neither of these will work, yet he has the
Pestilence and Sword to follow. Great Judgments are like great men, they
seldom go alone, they have many attendants. Hence when the Lord had threatened
many sore Judgments against his People, he tells them that if they will not
be reformed by these things, he will yet plague them seven times more,
according to their sins, yea and seven to that, V, Babington on Exodus 11.1. p.
221. folio.
and seven to that ( Levit. 26.18.21.24.28.) seven times, that is, many times,
and more extremely than formerly; if one Judgment will not work upon Pharaoh,
he has nine more that shall, and if lesser will not stir and mend him, he has
greater that shall end him, Exodus 11. and 12. God has not only written
Judgments, but also many unwritten ones to send upon a rebellious people,
Deuteronomy. 28.61.

3 Obs. True repentance is a very difficult thing. It is not so easily wrought
as many imagine. This people here had Line upon Line, Sermon upon Sermon,
Prophet upon Prophet, and Plague upon Plague, and yet you see the charge lies
against them still, that they had not yet returned to the Lord. The change of
nature is no easy thing, it is an act of Omnipotency; now true repentance is
no less than the changing of the nature, it is not only a change of the words,
or of the works, but of the heart and inward man; it is the changing of a Lion
into a Lamb, of a Wolf into a Sheep, of Fire into Water, Se Mr. Case his
Morning Lecture, quarto p. 487.
and of Darkness into Light, Isa. 11.8. Ephesians. 5.8. None can change Nature, but
the God of Nature, no rods or afflictions of themselves can do it; they rather
stupifie men, or else make them fret, and so drive them further from God, till
he by his grace do sanctify them, and set them home upon our hearts, they
will never better us; how many are corrected, but are never taught; but when
the Lord See an excellent little Tract of Mr. Cases, on Psalm. 94.12. and Mr.
Harsnets Cordial for the Afflicted, and Trapps Love Tokenss
teaches Mortification, Sanctification, Humiliation, and obedience by our
sufferings, then happy are we, Psalm. 94.12.

VERSE 9.
I have smitten you with Blasting and Mildew, when your Gardens, and your
Vineyards, and your Fig Trees, and your Olive Trees increased; the Palmer-worm
devoured them, yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.
WE are now come to the third Scourge which God used for the amendment of this
People, and that is the smiting of their fruit which grew in their Fields,
Gardens, and Vine-yards. They had abused them to Luxury and Idolatry, and now
they lose them. God had given them Corn to supply their necessity, and Vines,
and Figgs, and Olives for delight; but their sins deprived them both of the one
and the other. In the words we have, 1 The Person smiting, and that is the
Lord, it is I, your Creator, Preserver, Deliverer, that has blessed you so long,
that now does blast you, It is I that have smitten you. 2 Here is the Rod with
which he smites them, consisting of three Lashes. 1 Blasting. 2 Mildew. 3 The
Palmer-worm.



Blasting and Mildew, Haec duo and opinor, morbi and vitia segetum sunt, nam
proxime horti and plantae majores ab eruca dicuntur esse consumpti. Sanctius.
that may have relation to the Corn, and be one cause of the Famine before
mentioned, Verse. 6. (and the Palmer-worm may have relation to the fruit. God
used variety of Judgments that they might the better see his hand in all, and
not attribute things to Fate, or Fortune, to Stars, or second causes.

Blasting is a Curse threatened against a disobedient People; ( Deuteronomy. 28.22.) it
usually comes from an See my Comment on Hos. 13.15. Siddaphon, est uredo,
ariditas and percussio segetum, quando ventus orientatis ingreditur spicas, ut
n^n maturescant.
East Wind, which is a scorching drying Wind, withering the Corn, and making it
look yellow, Genesis 41.6.

Mildew is the spoiling of the Corn by excessive moisture, making it look
Ierakiou, rubigo, significat pallorem, Jer. 30.6.
pase; so that it never comes to maturity, for the natural greenness is gone
before it be ripe, and the color is faded.

The Palmer-worm is a noisome, devouring Worm, Ultimum and p^ssimum malorum est
e^uea. Hierom. Gazam, eruca, a Gazem, q. tonsor, rasor, rosor, excisor, quia
detondet and carpit herbas quibus insedit, est vermiculus villosus and
hirsutus, oleribus infensus and arboribus. Sanctius.
it is one of Gods great Armies which he sends against a rebellious People, to
destroy their Vine-yards and Fig Trees, that is, the fruits of their Vines,
Fig Trees, and Olives, by a Metonimy of the subject. These are worse than
Locusts, for that feeds only on the tops of the ears of Corn, as he flies; but
the Palmer-worm sticks close to the Fruits and Flowers they light on, and will
not off till they have consumed them. It makes clean work, leaving nothing
behind it. These Israelites that neglected their Souls, yet used great care and
pains about their Vines, Olives, Gardens* and Orchards, but all your cost and
care says the Lord shall be lost, and become a prey to the Palmer-worm.

3 Here is the time when the Lord smote them, Harbot, in multiplicando, i. e.
augentibus hortis vestris, vel cum multum ferrent horti vestri^
and that was in the very flower and prime, when Gardens, and Vineyards, etc.
were increased, and laden with fruit, when they were multiplying, then he
blasted them; or the multitude of your Gardens and Vineyards did the
Palmer-worm devour; so the Margin of our Bible.

4 Here are the Persons whose fruits were smitten, viz. the rebellious
Israelites, included in the Pronoun Possessive, yours, yours, yours; your
Gardens, your Vine-yards, your Fig Trees, your Olive Trees,; it is for your
sins, and your sakes that these are smitten.

5 Here is the unsuccessfulness of these rods upon them, yet have ye not
returned unto me, says the Lord. One Judgment should have wrought upon them,
or a second at least, but when a third and fourth shall come, and yet a people
shall not be wrought upon, it argues the height of obstinacy and malice, and
that such Persons are exceedingly blinded, and besotted by the Devil to their
own destruction; it is a God-provoking Sin, thus still to sin against the
remedy of their recovery; and therefore the Lord still lays his finger on this
sore, and often complains of it, as here, so elsewhere. Isa. 9.13. Ier. 3.10.
and 5.3. and 8.5. Hos. 7.10. Hag. 2.17. How often does he require the amendment
of this fault, See more before on verse 6. Obs. 5.
making many promises to encourage them, Ier. 3.1.7.14.22. and threatens them
if they will not, Ier. 15.7. and yet still they continue impenitent.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 God wants not Hosts and Armies of Creatures to subdue a stubborn and
rebellious people. He has the Host of Heaven, and the Hosts of the Earth at
his beck, and if he but hiss, or stamp, or give the least intimation to them,
they are presently up in arms against us, Isa. 5.26. and 7.18. Frost and Snow,
Hayl and Tempests, are all his servants, ready pressed to do his will ( Exodus
9.23. Psalm. 147.16, 17, 18. Hag. 2.17) with these he can destroy our Fruits
in the bud, or in the blade, or when they are come to maturity, yea when they
are in the Barn he can send Lightning and consume them. If he be angry with
us, he can call for an Army of Insects, and contemptible Animals, and by these
he can destroy us. When Pharaoh rebelled against him, the Lord sent an Army of
Froggs, Flies, and Lice against him, and by these he vexed him ( Exodus
8.2.16.21.) the Lord has Hosts of Men and Angels at command, but he chooses
rather to confound his enemies by these contemptible Creatures, that he may
exalt his own power, and abase proud man; he has the Cankerworm, the
Palmer-worm, the Locust, and the Caterpiller, these are called his great army,
which he sends against a disobedient people, Joel 2.11.25.

Obj. We are not troubled with an Army of Locusts, Palmer-worms, etc. these
were proper to those Eastern Countries?

Ans. It is true, literally, our cold Southern Climate is not subject to the
annoyance of these; yet if the Lord be angry with us, he can send even these
upon us, for South and East are alike to him. Mystically, and Metaphorically,
he has troubled us with an Army of Locusts, Caterpillars, Canker-worms, etc.
yea in kind, he sent a strange Grub which devoured only the Barley (which is
most abused by Drunkenness) in many parts of the Land, in the year one thousand
six hundred forty nine, yea and he can and will (if England go on to fin after
the rate that it has done of late years) bring in an Army of Foreigners,
fierce and savage men, whose Language we understand not, who shall show no
mercy to the Old, nor pity to the Young; what is said of the Natural, is most
true of these Metaphorical Palmer-worms, they are the last and the worst of
evils; they sweep all away before them, and make clean work where they go,
Joel 2.3. and this is that Judgment which the Lord seems at this day to be
preparing for England, and yet we are not affected with it. The Churches
enemies are strongly united, and have made a kind of Universal peace amongst
themselves, Gebal and Ammon, and Amaleck, the Moabites, the Ismalites, the
Hagarens, etc. France, Spain, Italy, Curland, Holland, Denmark, etc. are all
confederate and united; and the Churches of Christ who should join to their
Dove-like simplicity, Serpentine wisdom, when in this juncture of time they
should be most strongly united, they are most sadly divided, both within and
without, the King of Denmark, with the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, join
with Papists against the Protestant interest, and so does the Hollander. What
sad Massacres have been in Savoy and Poland is well known to the world; and
Plots are preparing for the destruction of the Protestants both in France and
Switzerland; and England that was always wont to preserve the Protestant
interest, and assist it in all Nations, yet is so sadly divided, and crumbled
into so many Factions, and Fractions, into so many Divisions, and Subdivisions,
that without a Miracle of Mercy, we are like to be made a prey to the Common
adversary, who labors with all his might to divide us, that so he may destroy
us. Let us then serve the Lord with one shoulder, and with one consent; let us
not provoke this great God, who has so many Armies in store ready to execute
his Judgments on us, Ier. 15.3. He is the best friend, and the saddest foe;
if he be for us, all is for us, but if he be against us, all creatures are
against us. We should therefore make peace with this great Lord-General of all
Armies, and then they will all be at peace with us; when our ways please the
Lord, he will make even our enemies to be at peace with us, Prove. 16.7. the men
of Tire and Sidon desired to be at peace with Herod, because their Land was
nourisht by the Kings Land, Acts 12.20. all we have, we have it from God, we
are Tenants at will to him, and therefore should be careful to preserve his
favor. Many when Blasting and Mildews are abroad, go not to God, but to a
Bush for aid; They will May their Corn, and stick up a Bush, thinking by this
means to keep it from Blasting; a Heathenish custom, to be abhorred of all such
as acknowledge the Providence of God. Such Atheistical practices may justly
provoke the Lord to blast thy Corn indeed. Little better is that of the Popish
Processions about the Fields, with Flaggs, and Banners, and Bables. The best
and only remedy in this case, is humble penitential Prayer, 1 King. 8.37, 38,
39. to such the Promise runs, If Blasting, Mildew, Locust, or Caterpillars be
in the Land, if Gods people shall pray, and know every man the plague of his
own heart, that is, his Sin, which is the cause of all other Plagues, then will
the Lord hear in heaven, and forgive and heal the Land, 2 Chronicles. 6.28, 29, 30.
and 2.7. 13, 14.

2 Obs. Loss of fruit is a punishment for sin, and a sign of Gods displeasure
against a people. Fruit, Corn, Cattle, Trees, all fare the worse for sinful
man. God turns a fruitful Land into a Wilderness for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein, Psalm. 107.34. and therefore when the Lord is angry with a
People, we read how he brake their trees with hayl, and destroyed their Vines
and Fig Trees, Exodus 9.25. and 10.5. Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17, 18.39, 40. Psalm. 78.48.
and 105.33. we should therefore overlook second causes, and see Gods hand
afflicting us in these losses. Many impute that to Winds, Frosts, Blasts, etc.
which are indeed the finger of God, pointing to our abuse of the Creatures,
which provokes him to take them from us. See more in M. Austine his Treatise of
Fruit Trees, p. 16.17. the best on that subject for Natural and Theolog.
observations that I have seen.
It will be our wisdom therefore when ever the Lord gives us plenty, to take
notice of Gods hand, and praise him; and when we want them, to be humbled
before him, and to beg the restoring of them at his hand, who gives to all that
ask in faith, liberally, and upbraideth no man.

VERSE 10.
I have sent among you the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt, your young
men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your horses, and I have
made the stink of your Camps to come up into your nostrils; yet have ye not
returned unto me, says the Lord.
IN this Verse we have a Fourth and Fifth Rod, wherewith the Lord chastned
this stubborn people, viz. the Pestilence, and the Sword. Before they were
smitten with the Famine, which rich men many times feel not; now follows the
Plague and Sword, as usual Concomitants on the former; hence all these three
are so often joined together in Scripture. These meet with the rich, as well as
the poor; yea the Sword ayms principally at rich men; Soldiers do not use to
enquire, where dwells the poor man, but where dwells the Usurer, the rich
Oppressor, etc. the poor escape best many times in such combustions, Ier. 39.20.

Q. The Question will be, what Pestilence this was, and when it fell upon
Israel?

A. 1. It is conceived that the Pestilence of Egypt here meant, was not any
one particular Plague, but a complication of Plagues; and specially the Fifth
and Tenth Plague of Egypt, which brought Murrain on the Cattle, and Mortality
on men. First, there was so great and so grievous a destruction of Cattle, that
all the Horses, Asses, Camels, and all the Cattle of Egypt dyed ( Exodus 9.6,
9.) 2 All their firstborn dyed, there was not a house in which there was not
one dead, Exodus 12.29. Psalm. 78.50, 51. so it was amongst this people, there
was a sore slaughter both of men and horses. The Prophet seems to allude to the
days of King. Iehoahaz King of Israel; See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 143.
when the King of Syria made so great a slaughter amongst them, that of the
whole Army of Israel there were left but fifty Horsemen, ten Chariots, and ten
thousand Foot, all the rest were destroyed, and made like the dust by threshing
(2 King. 13.7.) Hereupon the Air was corrupted, and the loathsome stench of so
many dead Bodies, helped to bring the Pestilence amongst them.

In this Verse we have these parts considerable.

1 The Judgments inflicted, which are two.

1 The Pestilence. 2 The Sword.
2 Here is the nature of this Pestilence, it is not an ordinary one, Deber,
Pestis, ^ee this word fully explained by Mr. Greenhil on Ezekiel. 5. 12. p. 455.
and Fulleri Miscel. l. 1. cap. 7. p. 50
but it is a most noisome, grievous, deadly Pestilence; such a one as God
inflicted upon his professed enemies, the Egyptians, when Man and Beast
suddenly dyed. Jeroboam when he was in Egypt learnt the Worship of the golden
Calves, this he taught to Israel, and having made them like the Egyptians in
Idolatry and Sin, the Lord now makes them alike in Judgment, I have sent
amongst you the Pestilence, after the manner of Egypt. The words in the
fountain are, Bedereck, in via, exponi potest per Kedereek, i. e. instar via,
velsecundum viam, i. e. secundum rationem modum and morem Aegypti. A Lapide.
Bachurim, electos vestros i. e. juvenes, ita dicantur a d^clectu, quod ad
bellum and negotia deligi soleant. Mercer.
I have smitten you with Pestilence in the way of Egypt, it is an Hebraism
used in other places, as Isa. 10.24, 26. Ezekiel. 20.30. and is as much as after
the manner of Egypt, as our Translation renders it well, q. d. As I sent sore
Plagues upon the Egyptians, in like severity will I deal with you, who have
walked in their obstinacy and Idolatry.

3 Here is the special Object, or the Persons slain by the Sword, and these
are their young and strong men, Your young men have I slain with the sword.
Young men are for War, and more fit for service than old men, by reason of
their strength, spirit, boldness, and activity; Old men are for counsel, and
young men for action. Young men in the height of their blood sin with more heat
and violence, and so their sins are more displeasing unto God; and therefore he
often cuts them off in the height of their sin.

4 Here are two Adjuncts and Concomitants which usually attend upon War; the
first is the loss of horses, I have taken away your horses, and carried them
into captivity, with your haughty young men who trusted in them. These are the
strength of the battle, but the Riders being taken, the Horses must needs be
taken with them.

2 Loathsome stench, and noisome smells, I have made the stench of your Camps
to come up into your nostrils, partly by such as dyed of the Plague, B^^sh,
significat putredinem and foetorem.
and partly by the multitude of men and horses that were slain, and lay
unburied, and so infected the air.

5 Here is the old complaint continued still, yet have ye not returned unto
me, says the Lord. Though ye have been thus sadly smitten with all my great
Rods, yet all my labor is but lost upon you, for you still contemn the remedy
of your recovery, and have not yet returned unto me says the Lord.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 When lesser Rods will not mend a people, God usually comes with greater. See
more in my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 68.
Blasting, Mildew, Palmer-worms did not work upon this People, and now comes
Pestilence and Sword, Gods great Rods to destroy them utterly.

2 Obs. Judgments, especially great ones, seldom go alone, Sword, Plague,
Famine, often go together. As men multiply Sins, so God multiples Plagues; and
as they have variety of sins, so he has variety of punishments, as I have
showed before on Verse. 8. Obs. 2.

3 Obs. Parity of Sin, brings parity of Judgment. The Egyptians were
obstinate Idolaters, no Plagues could work upon them, therefore God destroyed
them. And this was Isreal's case, they were obstinate Idolaters like the
Egyptians, and now God follows them with Plague upon Plague as he did them, I
have sent upon you Pestilence after the manner of Egypt. They were incurable
and incorrigible like the Egyptians, and now God smites them with Egyptian
Plagues, according to that threatening, Deuteronomy. 28.61. I will cause the diseases
of Egypt to cleave unto thee. Sin hardens Gods heart against his people, and
makes him deal with them, as he uses to do with his enemies. It turns him,
who is our best friend, into the saddest foe. That power which he used in
destroying his peoples enemies, if his people forsake him, and rebel against
him, he will exert that power in destroying them. Thus the Lord used here the
same weapons of his wrath against his people, as before he used in destroying
the Egyptians.

And may not England now fear, lest that power, which the Lord has showed in
the saving of us from the hands of unreasonable men, should now be turned
against us for our Blasphemies; and Apostacies? and as we have partaken with
Germanies sins, and Polands sins, and Irelands sins; so we should be made like
them for plagues. We have given the Lord just cause by our provocations to
turn his hand against us, and to consume us after he has done us good. ( Josh.
24.20.) And as he has made us the head, so now he might make us the tail;
and as he has made us the terror of the Nations, so now he may justly make
them a terror to us for our ungrateful, dis-ingenuous walking toward him.

4 Obs. The Pestilence comes more immediately from God; It is his Messenger, it
is commanded and commissioned by God, to go to such and such Families, Towns,
and Persons, that so if any one ask, How came the Pestilence here, why I sent
it said God; it is a servant of his sending, 2 Samuel 24.15 and an Arrow of his
shooting, Psalm. 91.5. with this he wounds, kills, and consumes his enemies,
Ezekiel. 5.16, 17. The Plague is not Casual, but Providential, there is a Divine
hand of immediate Providence in this Judgment; as there is no evil of
affliction in the City, so much less this signal evil* but it comes from God,
Amos 3.6. It is he that decrees it, he increases it, and he removes it, how
and when he pleases. Hence it is called his Sword, 1 Chronicles. 21. ult. it is not
the sword of a weak man, but of an Almighty God, which none can resist or fly
from; it is his Hand out of which none can deliver us, 2 Samuel 24.14. Moses
tells Pharaoh, that if he refuse to let Israel go, behold the hand of the
Lord, i. e. the Plague shall light on thy Cattle, Exodus 9.3. this hand of his
will find out all his enemies, Psalm. 21.8. this is a sign of Gods great Wrath.
God brings not out this great Rod, till men have greatly provoked him by their
great sins, Numb. 11.33. and 16.46, 47. Levit. 26.25. Deuteronomy. 32.22, 23.

As 1. Idolatry. This is a God-provoking, and a Land-destroying Sin, and brings
the Plague upon a Land, Psalm. 106.29. Ezekiel. 5.11, 12. Rev. 16.2, 11.

2 Contempt of Gods Word and ways, Deuteronomy. 28.21. Ier. 29.18, 19.

3 Fornication and uncleanness. For this Sin God cut off twenty four thousand
of the Israelites with the Pestilence, Numb. 25.9. men will not judge and
punish such, but God will, Heb. 13.4.

4 Murmuring and unbelief; when men repine at Gods dispensations, and will
teach him how to rule the World; this brings the Plague, Numb. 14.2.3.11.12.36,
37. and 16.46.

5 Persecuting Gods Ministers and people. Pharaoh, that persecuted Israel, had
variety of Plagues laid on him. God shoots this Arrow especially at such, Psalm.
7.13. Ier. 29.18. and 38.2. The Heathen Emperors which persecuted the
Christians, were punished with great Plagues.

6 Profanation of holy things. This brought the Pestilence (as it is
conceived) upon the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.30. he will be sanctified of all
that draw nigh unto him; in mercy* if they come preparedly: in judgment, if
they come irreverently.

We should therefore be careful by unfeigned Repentance and Humiliation to
remove Sin which is the cause, and then the Plague which is but the effect will
soon cease; but without this, all Physic, flying, washings, burning, etc. are
but vain. Till God be appeased, the Plague will never be appeased; till we
humble our selves before him, he will not heal us, 2 Chronicles. 7.13, 14. till by
faith we fly unto him, he will not hide us from the Pestilence, Psalm. 91.1. to
8.

1 This speaks Terror to the wicked and impenitent; they have not to do with
men in this Judgment, but with God, who is a consuming fire, and from whom
there is no flying, Amos 9.1. to 5. when men oppose men, they may make some
resistance; but when Omnipotency comes against Impotency, and the Creator
against the Creature, whose heart can be strong, or whose hands endure? Ezekiel.
22.14. The Plague, when it seizes upon a man in wrath, it is a Terrible
Judgment* and that in many respects.

1 In respect of pain, it torments men with terrible burning, in so much that
many run mad, and make away themselves; yea and the stronger men are, usually
the sooner they are cut off by the Pestilence. It is a noisome, loathsome
Disease, hence called, The noisome Pestilence, Psalm. 91.3. and if any do
recover, yet are they seldom well; some lose their Hearing, some their Sight,
some their Memory, most carry the prints of it with them to their Graves. It is
a woeful Judgment, and brings with it woeful fears, woeful sorrows, woeful
desolation, and woeful terrors, even the terrors of death.

2 It is a Judgment that seldom goes alone, but is attended with famine,
poverty, depopulation, ruin, Ier. 22.6* 9. and 28.8. Ezekiel. 14.21.

3 It deprives us of many choy^e Blessings, which in other distresses men do
enjoy.

1 It deprives us of the liberty of Gods House and Ordinances. A sad
affliction, much lamented by David, Psalm 42. and 84.

2 It deprives us of our Callings, so that we cannot serve God in them, which
is one great end why a good man desires to live.

3 Of the comfort of Friends, which in other Diseases they enjoy. Two are
better than one, and woe to him that is alone.

4 The suddenness of it adds much to its terror, it slayes thousands suddenly;
we read of seventy thousand slain in three days, 2 Samuel 24.15. it is an Arrow
that flies speedily, Psalm. 91.5. In Senacheribs host in one night there dyed of
the Plague (as some conceive) one hundred fourscore and five thousand men, 2
King. 19.35.

See B. Halls Balm of Gilead, p. 173.
2 It may comfort the Godly, that they have not to do with unreasonable men,
whose tender mercies are cruelties; but with a gracious God, who in the midst
of his Judgments remembers mercy. It is the Cup which their Father gives them,
it is his Hand, his Arrow, his Messenger; he sends, he orders, he moderates,
and mittigates it; He bids it go, and it goes; stay, and it stays, 2 Samuel
24.15, 16. It is a mercy when the Lord corrects us himself, and does not sell
us into the hand of Slaves who have no mercy. This made David choose the Plague
rather than the Sword, 2 Samuel 24.14. God keeps his people safe in the very
midst of the Pestilence, when thousands, and ten thousands fall round about
them, Psalm. 91.7. many a wicked man flies, and the Plague overtakes him; many a
good man stays, and God preserves him.

Q. The Question then will be, Whether it be unlawfal to fly in time of
Pestilence?

A. 1. Some hold it utterly unlawful, because our days are numbered, and as we
cannot prolong our days, so we cannot shorten them, Job 7.1. and 14, 15. This
reason will not hold, for it is no trusting* but a tempting of God, it is
rashness and presumption to run into danger because our days are numbered.
Providentia Dei non tollit causas secundas, sed eas sta^uit, quia per eas
decreta sua exequitur. Zanchy.

Legitima media non obsistunt divinae providentiae, sed ei subordinantur. D.
Geo. Abbot. Thesis quinta. Omni animalium generi a natura tributum est, ut se,
corpus, and vitam tueatur. Cicero.


A man may not go into the Fire, nor cast himself into the Water, or go meet
a Lion or a Bear, because God has determined how long we shall live. Christ
would not tempt God, by casting himself down from the Pinnacle, as the Devil
would have had him, Matthew. 4.6, 7. As God has ordained the end, so he has
ordained the means to bring us to that end; as God has determined our days,
so he has determined that we shall fly dangers, and hurtful things which may
shorten our days. When Saul threw a Javelin at David he fled from him, 1 Samuel
19.10. we see men fly from Sword and Famine, and why not from the Pestilence
when God gives us an opportunity?

Nature teaches every Creature to preserve it self from danger, and if the
Lord should reveal it to us, that we should be safe from the Plague, yet we
must use the means. Noah knew he should not be drowned in the Flood, and yet
he builds an Ark; Paul knew that God would save him, and his Partners in the
Ship, yet they must use the means, and row toward the shore, Acts 27.34, 38,
39, 40.

2 Obj. Charity commands us to visit the Sick, and to help our Neighbors in
their distress.

Ans. Charity begins at home, I may not to help my Neighbor kill my self, and
(...) family, by rash and presumptuous running into infected places without a
call. He that commands that I should not kill another, commands also that I
should not kill my self. The Plagues of God are terrible, and not to be played
withal. In the time of the Law we see how careful the Lord was of the safety
of his people, Levit. 15.45. he commanded that the Leper should be separated
from others, he sets down signs how they should know it, he must wear a
different garment, and must cry, I am unclean, unclean; now if in the Leprosy
which was a less infectious disease, and not deadly, such care was to be used,
how much more in the Pestilence.

2 We may visit them by others, and send our charity by such as are appointed
to tend them; and though in body we are absent from them, yet we may and must
sympathize with them, and by writing, praying, directing, providing of food and
Physic for them, we may and must according to our places and abilities help
them.

3 Obj. We must shun unbelief, but this flying argues weakness of faith, as if
we could not be safe unless we fly.

Ans. A pious use of the means, which God has ordained for our safety, does
not destroy but establish faith. I believe, that God will preserve my life, yet
I eat and drink, and must use means notwithstanding, else I should not trust,
but tempt God.

2 We must distinguish.

1 There is a flight of Diffidence, and contempt of Gods Judgments, as if we
would fly from his hand and presence, that it should not over-take us, and this
is Atheistical.

Shun two rocks, 1. Stultam temeritatem. 2. Nimium timorem. Si Pestis imminet,
fugiat qui volet, ac praecipue isti qui sunt pavidi. Luther.
2 There is a Prudential, providential, religious flight, when God gives us a
way to escape, and to provide for our selves and our families, and this must
thankfully be embraced; for David had strong faith, and yet he was afraid of
the Pestilence, 1 Chronicles. 21. ult.

4 Obj. Yet David did not fly from it.

Ans. 1. He was a Magistrate, and so bound by his place to abide amongst his
people. 2. It continued but a short time, but three days. 3. It was his fault
more especially that procured it. 4. He could not fly out of his Kingdom,
unless he would fly into his enemies hands.

2 We must therefore distinguish of Persons.

1 Some are set by God in place of Public trust, as Magistrates, Ministers,
Overseers of the Poor, etc. These must not fly, but must keep their places,
that they may suppress disorders, and by their Government, Counsel, and
Prayers, they must lie in the breach, as Moses and Aaron did, Numb. 16. 46, 47.
now when a man has this Call, he may keep his station with comfort and
courage; for the Lord has promised to keep us whilst we keep our ways, as
appears in that precious ninety first Psalm, the most comfortable of all the
Psalms in times of Pestilence; God can destroy the Egyptians by it, and yet
preserve his people. How many Midwives, Physicians, and renders of infected
persons, some of which have lain in the same bed with infected persons, yet
being called by God to the service, have been preserved from infection. Or, if
a good man should dye of the Pestilence, yet being found in Gods way, he is
blessed, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, whether they
dye of the Plague, or by the Sword, or Famine, it matters not, so they dye in
the fear and favor of God.

Caution. Not that a Magistrate or Minister is bound in person to go visit
infected Persons, for then he makes himself incapable of Public employment and
the Ministers Auditors will be afraid to come hear him; so that in this case
the Public good must be preferred before a private, and a greater good before
a less. Charitatem laudo, non factum, Zanchins in Phil. 2.30. ubi plura.
That good man Bullinger going to visit one infected with the Plague, brought
it home to his family, so that his Wife and two Daughters dyed of it. The
Church of God, and our own Families, are to be preferred before any private
person; Public persons are set over a Society, and not over one or two. Hence
when David would have gone out with his Soldiers to battle, the people answer,
Thou shall not go, for thou art worth ten thousand of us, 2 Samuel 18.3. But
private persons who are free, and have no public tie by duty or charity to
stay, they are free, and may for a time absent themselves if they please.

5 Obj. I am a godly man, and God has promised that such shall not dye of the
plague, Psalm. 91.10.

Ans. God has no where promised an absolute freedom to his people from the
Pestilence, but only conditionally, viz. so far as it shall be good for them;
indeed he always preserves his people from the evil of it, so that it shall
never be a Plague, or a Curse, but a fatherly correction to them; and so the
Promise is fulfilled. There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall the Plague
come nigh thy dwelling, viz. as an evil or curse, Psalm. 91.10. The evil is
always taken away from the godly, and the sting pulled out, and God makes it
up to them in some better kind. By it he takes them away from greater evils,
and makes the Pestilence like Elijahs fiery Chariot, to conveigh them more
speedily to heaven. In respect of outward afflictions, all things come alike to
all. Eccles. 9.2. the same Sithe cuts down good corn and weeds, but for a
different end and purpose. We may not therefore censure them all as wicked men
that are visited with the Plague, for God may try his dearest Servants in this
kind. David, Job, Hezekiah, and the Corinthians are conceived to have been
visited all in this kind. Bullinger had it, Beza had it three times, Iunius and
his pious Wife dyed of it, and a thousand holy men and women dyed of it in
Cyprians time. What is for our profit we patiently bear, this is sent for good
to good men, and as all other things, so this shall turn to their everlasting
good, Romans 8.28.

[See more of the Plague in Rivet on Psalm. 91. D. Bound on Psalm. 20. Attersol
on Numb. 14.11. p. 597. folio. Dr. Gouge his Arrows, p. 1, etc. Roberough on 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Mr. Clerks Mirror, chap. 98. folio. Et prae aliis Binchii
Mellificium Theologicum, Loc. 12, P. 2. page 142, etc.]

5 Obs. It is God that sends War upon a disobedient people. This is his last
and worst Rod, which he brings forth against obstinate sinners, Levit. 26.25.
Deuteronomy. 28.25. Judge. 2.13, 14. and 3.8. and 4.1, 2. and 6.1. and 10.6, 7. and
13.1. Esa. 42.24, 25. Ier. 15, 6, 7. Ezekiel. 14.17.21,

This may inform us that War is lawful.

1 It is that which God commanded, Deuteronomy. 20. 1 Samuel 23.2.

2 It is commended in the Saints. Abraham fought against four Kings, and
conquered them; Moses warred against the Amalakites, and prevailed against
them; Joshua fought against the Canaanites, and subdued them; Gideon fought
against the Midianites; Iephthah against the Ammonites; Sampson and David
fought against the Philistims, and God prospered them all, and they returned
the praise of these Victories unto God, who teaches his peoples hands to
war, Psalm. 144.1. and directs them in the battle, Josh. 6, 2, 3, 4. he is
their Captain, Josh. 5.14. he gives them success, Psalm. 144.10. Heb. 11.33, 34.
Revel. 17.14. so that the Anabaptists who condemn War as sinful, do charge
God with Sin, and so are guilty of indirect blasphemy at least.

Obj. War might be lawful in the Old Testament, but it is unlawful in the New
Testament.

Ans. This is Gratis dictum, it is said, but it is not proved, yea the contrary
appears by Christ himself, who commends the Centurions faith ( Matthew. 8.20)
without any bidding him leave his Military employment, which doubtless he would
have done had it been sinful; by this we see, that warring and believing may
well subsist together in the same man. John Baptist teaches the Soldiers how
they should behave themselves in their stations, which he would not have done
had the calling it self been unlawful, Luke 3.13, 14. neither did Peter
dissuade Cornelius from his Military kind of life, but Baptized him without any
injunction of forsaking his Military station, which had it been unlawful he
would have done, Acts 10.1, 2, 4. Besides, in the New Testament, the Magistrate
must not bear the sword in vain, but must be a terror to those that do evil;
and this he could not be, if he did not raise Armies sometimes against the Sons
of Belial that rise against him. Yea the Anabaptists themselves in Germany,
when they had once got power into their hands, they defended themselves by
Arms, and made foul spoil where they came.

Obj. God would not suffer David to build him an house, because he was a
Warrior, and had shed much blood, 1 Chronicles. 22. 8. but Solomon a Prince of peace
must do it.

Ans. The Temple was to be a Type of the Church the proper subject of peace,
and therefore Solomon a Prince of peace must build it, who was also a Type of
Christ the Prince of peace, and in this respect David could not be a Type of
Christ, because he had shed much blood. Not that God does here condemn David
for fighting his Battles, for he had Gods command, assistance, and approbation
for what he did; but because the Temple was to be a Type and Figure of the
Church, whereof Christ is head, therefore Solomon a man of Peace must build it.

Obj. We are commanded not to resist evil.

Ans. Such places speak against private revenge, and not against the
Magistrates Power, In my Com. on Psalm. 82.1. p. 26
who is appointed by God to be a terror and punisher of such as do evil; as I
have at large showed elsewhere.

Obj. In the Primitive times the Church suffered Persecution, without any
defending of themselves by any other arms than prayers and tears.

Ans. Those times and our times differ; for in those Primitive times the
Magistrate that should have defended the Church, was an utter enemy to it, and
they might not take the Sword out of his hand, but must patiently suffer. But
we live under a Christian Magistrate, who calls for our assistance against the
enemies of the Church, which call, (when rightly Circumstantiated) we are
bound to obey.

[See the lawfulness of War proved in thirteen particulars, by Dr. Gouge in
his Arrows, p. 209.2 P. and in M. Ley his Fast Ser. on Ier. 4.21, 22. p. 11.
etc. Preached 1643. Sharpius Loc. Com. Loc. 43. Q. 10. p. 246. Tactica Sacra.
cap. 6. ss. 9. p. 163, 164. see fifteen Anabaptistical Cavils refelled by Peter
Martyr on 2 Samuel 2.24. mihi p. 193. and Dr. Gouge his Arrow, p. 210.]

2 This must deeply humble us when even the Sword lies on us, since we have not
only to do with men, but with the great God in it; it is he that raises War
against us, and lays this sore Judgment on us, and is therefore called the
hurtful Sword, Psalm. 144.10. the powerful Sword, Job 5.20. the oppressive
Sword, Jer. 46.16. the devouring Sword, which destroys from one end of a Land
unto another, Ier. 12.12. War is the saddest of Judgments, as having usually
all other Judgments attending on it, with confusion, Robbing, Rapes,
Plundring, Firing of Towns, devastation of Countries, Imprisonment of men's
Persons, doleful Outcries, and confused Noyses, with Garments rolled in blood,
( Isa. 9.5.) when there is measuring of Cloth by the long ell, i. e. the Pike,
and no Laws can be heard for Drums. This turns a Garden of Eden into a
desolate Wilderness ( Joel 2.3.) as we see in Germany, Savoy, Poland, etc.

See seventeen Sins* which bring War upon a Land, Binchius Mellif. Theolog.
Loc. 12. P. 2. p. 134.
Let us therefore beware of provoking the Lord by our sins, to bring this
direful Judgment on us. Let us judge our selves, and so prevent this
Judgment, Judge. 10.10. and put our mouths in the dust if there may be hope,
Lam. 3.26. let us by our Prayers and Tears first conquer God, and then we shall
quickly conquer all, Psalm. 81.13, 14. It is he only that raised our Wars,
that can make them cease; it is he that gives the Sword its commission; and
till he take away its commission, Belli ingressum, progressum, and egressum a
Deo. Binchius.
it will not cease. It is he that makes Wars to cease not only at home, but
also abroad, even to the ends of the earth, Psalm. 46.9. It is not men that put
an end to War, for if some might have their way we should never have peace;
like Salamanders they love to live in the fire of war and contention, these
are Monsters, not Men; David's Prayer shall be mine, Scatter the people that
delight in war. It is the Lord that subdues our enemies, and creates peace
for his people. Hence Moses in that excellent Song ascribes all to God, ( Exodus
15.1. to 14.) The Lord has triumphed gloriously, He (not we) has thrown the
Horse and his Rider into the Sea, He is our strength, He is our Salvation, Thou
Lord have overthrown them, Thou have destroyed them, Thou have delivered thy
people, etc. when ever therefore we want Peace, let us go to this God of
peace, and by Prayer and patience wait on him, who can with a word of his mouth
speak us into peace, and make all wars to cease amongst us.

[See more concerning War, in Gerards Loc. Com. de Magistratu, Tom. 2. folio,
p. 416. in fine libri. Dr. Gouge his Arrows, p. 177. Clerks Mirror. chap. 134.
B. Halls Cases of Consc. Decad. 2. cha. 9. Grotius de Jure belli. B. Babington
on Exodus 17.1. Binchius Mellif. Theolog. Loc. 12. p. 133. P: 2. see sixteen
excellent Sermons in Latin on this subject, by Sibelius, on Exodus 17.1. etc. 1
Vol. folio, p. 216, 217, etc.]

6 Obs. Obstinate sinning provokes the Lord to cut off young men. Your young
men have I slain with the sword. Their Sins are acted with more impetuous
violence, and so are more displeasing unto God. As God is much delighted with
the obedience of young men, when they can break through many difficulties to
serve him ( Ier. 2.2.) so he is greatly displeased with the heady, haughty,
outrageous courses of young men, whom no counsel will reclaim, nor warning
amend. That age which is most prone to sin, is nearest to Judgment; and when
God shall awaken Conscience, and set the sins of thy youth in order before
thee, then thy mirth will be turned into mourning, and thy joy into heaviness,
Eccles. 11.9. When young men dishonor God, and prefer the Devil his professed
enemy before him, giving the wine and flower of their days to the Devil, and
the dreggs to God; he will give such up to spiritual Judgments, and take no
pleasure in them, Isa. 9.17. I will not joy in your young men; implying, that
when young men walk in Gods way, they are Gods joy and delight, but when they
are proud, profane, idle, unclean, etc. then comes the Fever, the Plague, the
Sword, and cuts them off; such rude rebellious persons shall not live out half
their days. When Israel fell to Idolatry, then a fire consumed their young
men, Psalm 78.63. and when they grow obstinate and incorrigible, as in the
text, then the Sword destroys them.

On that Young men then would be persuaded to fly from the lusts of youth, See
more in my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.15.
deny themselves betimes, and make the Lord the God of their youth, and then
he will be the God of their old age, he will never leave them, nor forsake
them.

7 Obs. Sin robs us of our Creature Comforts. Before they lost their Young men,
Adjunct a captivita^e equorum. Heb.
and now they lose the Horses, and the Riders too; your Horses are gone into
captivity, and are taken from you. A Horse in it self is a useful creature, it
Fights for us, Draws for us, and Carries us up and down; but sin robs us of
them, and makes them unsuccessful and vain, Psalm. 33.17. These Israelites had
trusted in their Horses, ( Hos. 14.3.) and now God makes them sensible of their
folly, in trusting to creatures that cannot profit them, nor save them in a
time of trouble. God had left them, and now Peace leaves them, Horses leave
them, Plenty leaves them, and their Young men which were the strength of their
Battle, leave them; so sad it is with people when God departs from them, Hos.
7.13.

8 Obs. Noisome stenches are a punishment for sin, Isa. 34.3. Joel 2.20. As we
have abused all our Senses, so God may justly punish us in them all.

Bless the Lord then for the Winds, those Fans of the world, which are a means
to keep the Air pure from infection, which otherwise with Damps and ill sents
would poison us every moment.

VERSE 11.
I have over-thrown (some) of you [or some amongst you] as God over-threw Sodom
and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning, yet have
ye not returned to me, says the Lord.
WE are now come to the Sixth and last Rod which God wasted on this stubborn
People in vain, and that is the subversion of their Cities. I have over-thrown
some of you, etc. Where we have, first the Judgment executed, viz. the
subversion of some of their Cities. Some read the words Prophetically, as if
they were a Prophecy of some Judgment to come, q. d. I will raise up
Salmaneser the King of Assyria, Hapachti, subverti, vel everti vos, i. e.
civitates vestras. Met. subj. Possessores prore possessa.
who shall besiege Samaria, and take it, and shall subdue the Kingdom of
Israel. But this is clear against the text and context, for the word is in the
Preterit Tense, and not in the Future; it is not I will, but I have overthrown
your Cities; and yet ye have not returned unto me; which clearly shows that he
speaks of Judgments past, and such as had been ineffectual upon them, and
therefore he goes on to threaten more grievous things against them. But now,
thus will I do unto thee, etc.

2 Here is the Author of this subversion, viz. the Lord, I have overthrown some
of you as God overthrew Sodom, q. d. As I overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, so have
I overthrown your Cities. God speaks of himself according to the Hebrew Dialect
in the third Person, setting forth thereby his Honor, and his power in this
signal Judgment. The like expression we have, Genesis 19.24. The Lord rained fire
and brimstone upon Sodom from the Lord; that is, from himself. It is an
Hebraism, when a Noun is put for a Pronoun, the more emphatically to express
that it was not by Accident, or any ordinary course of Nature, but by the
immediate and almighty Power of God, that such showers of Fire came upon them.

3 Here is the dreadfulness of this subversion, it was like the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah. As God made them examples of terror to all the wicked in
succeeding Generations, by consuming them with fire from Heaven (2 Pet. 2. 6.
Jude 7.) so the Lord brought those Israelites to the very brink of utter ruin
and destruction.

Q. We read of no Cities in all the Scriptures, that ever the Lord destroyed
with fire and brimstone immediately from Heaven, but only Sodom and Gomorrah,
upon whom he brought the saddest and most stupendous destruction that ever we
read of; how then are these Cities said to be destroyed like them?

Ans. It is an Hyperbolical speech, frequently used in Scripture, to set forth
the most terrible desolation, and dreadfullest devastation that can befall a
People, and therefore when the Holy Ghost would set forth the signal Wrath of
God against a place, he tells us it was like the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah. Thus it sets forth the destruction of Babylon, Isa. 13.19. and Jer.
50.40. and so of Moab and Ammon, Zeph. 2.9. so that it is a Figurative speech,
and must not be taken Literally, Synecdoc. specici.
but Allusively; Sodoms destruction is put for dreadful and extreme desolation,
and does denote rather the measure of Gods displeasure, than the manner of the
punishment, so Isa. 1.9. Ier. 49.18. Hos. 11.18. Israel here was brought so
low, and to such extremity by their enemies, that their destruction seemed
like that of Sodom and Gomorrah, and those that escaped out of those great
trials were so few, that they seemed like a brand pulled out of the fire. This
seems to relate to that time when God raised up Hazael, and the Syrians, who
smote Israel in all their Coasts, burnt their Cities, laid wast Gilead and
Bashan, killed their young men, slew their Children, ripped up their Women with
Child, oppressed them in their Estates and Persons, so that they became like the
dust by threshing, that is, very weak and contemptible, their strong Holds were
lost, and they had no Humane helper; they had but fifty Horsemen left, and ten
Chariots, and ten thousand Foot, a poor Guard for a Kingdom. To so low an ebb
were they brought, as appears 2 King. 10.32, 33. and 2 King. 13.3.7, 20, 22.
and 14.26.

4 Here is Gods mercy to Israel, set forth by a kind of correction or
mitigation; ye were indeed like Sodom, yet not altogether like Sodom, for
all their Cities were burnt and none escaped; but the Lord has spared your
Metropolis, and chief City Samaria, and pulled some of you as a brand out of
the fire, q. d. when you were in a very low and lost condition, being like a
piece of Timber half burnt, yet then had I pity on you, and remembered my
Covenant, and rescued you out of your present misery by the hand of Jeroboam
the second, the Son of Ioash, even as a brand out of the flame, and saved a
remnant of you from the sword (2 King. 14.25.) To pull one as a brand out of
the fire is a Proverbial speech, Torris ab incendio. Proverb.
and signifies the great danger which a man is in. Thus Joshua the High Priest,
whom the Lord delivered out of the Babylonian fiery Furnace, is called, A brand
plucked out of the fire, Zach. 3.2.

5 Here is their horrid obstinacy still under this hideous and stupendous
Judgment, Versus intercalaris dicitur, qui frequenter post aliquantulos
interponitur versus.
Yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. This is Versus
intercalaris, the usual burden of Gods sad complaint, though he had sent
amongst them Egyptian Plagues, and Sodomitical destructions, yet so obdurate
were they, that neither the one nor the other could work upon them.

The sum of all is this, That I might leave no means unassayed (says the Lord)
to reclaim you, I have added this to all the rest of my Judgments, that I have
overthrown some of your Cities, and brought you so low, that you were almost
like Sodom and Gomorrah, and you of Samaria were left out of the common
destruction, as a brand taken out of the sire, yet all this has not moved you
to return unto me, says the Lord.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 If the Word of God work not upon men's hearts, neither will Judgments work
upon them. These people had Elijah, Elisha, Jonah, Joel, Micah, Hosea, Amos, to
preach to them, but their Ministry was ineffectual, and now we see that no
Judgment can work upon them. Those that are Sermon-proof, and will not believe
the Word of God, will quickly be Iudgement-proof, and contemn Gods Sword. Those
that have Moses and the Prophets, and yet will not believe them, neither will
they believe though one should arise from the dead, Luke 16. ult. If a man
should come roaring from Hell, it would affright men, but it is easier to
fright men out of their wits, than out of their sins. Lazarus rose from the
dead, yet the Pharisees were so far from being bettered thereby, that they
grew madder against Christ. So at the Resurrection of Christ, many arose, and
appeared to many, and no doubt but they told them, how it was with those that
were dead, and yet it could not work upon them. He that cavils at the Word,
will also cavil at Miracles, as the Pharisees did at the Miracles of Christ.
Qui adeo induratus est, ut Scripturae non credat, nec mortuis resurgentibus
credet Stella.
He that will not believe the Spirit of God speaking in the Prophets, will not
believe a man pretending that he came from the Dead, and telling what the
Damned suffer there. How should he believe a Creature, that will not believe
the infallible testimony of his Creator?

The Scriptures are a surer ground for us to build upon, than an Angels voice
(2 Pet. 1.19.) No revelations are to be compared to them, God will never set in
with ways of men's invention, when they despise the ways of his own
Ordination. The blind world which is weary of true Doctrine, is apt to think,
that if an Angel from Heaven, of a Ghost from Hell would come and teach them,
then they should be converted. These are like Saul, who contemned the counsel
of Samuel living, yet desired to speak with him when he was dead. But, 1. why
do you not believe Christ who dyed, and is risen from the dead, and speaks
daily to you by his Ministers? 2. Why do you not believe the Prophets, who
being dead yet speak to you, and have left us a more sure word of Prophecy? 3.
Suppose one should come from Hell all in flames, and tell you what the Damned
suffer there, yet how is it probable that this should do you good, when God
tells you the same thing in his Word, and yet you will not believe him? It is
most certain, that those who despise Gods Ordinance, will never believe a
report from a doubtful and erring authority. Desire not therefore Miracles, or
Revelations and Enthusiasms, this is a tempting of God; but suffer God to teach
thee in his own way, by his Word and Sacraments; so did Si in manu mea res
esset, non vellem Deum mihi loqui de caelo, aut apparere mihi; hoc autem vellem
and quotidie precor, ut in honor digno habeam verbum and Sacramenta. Luther.
Luther, and this is the desire of all the Saints, that God would guide them
with his counsel here, that is, with his Word and Spirit, and so bring them to
glory, Psalm. 73.24. The conversion of a Sinner is not so much from the
excellency of the means, or the abilities of the Speaker, as from the power of
Gods Grace, which teaches us to profit, and makes the means effectual to us.
Great then is the folly of those, who take upon them to teach God, how he
should teach the World* they would have Miracles and Angels to do it, when
God says they shall have Ministers, and Preaching by men to do it. It is a
Satanical delusion for men to think of being converted, or comforted by any
other way, than that which God himself has prescribed. If God has planted
thee under a godly and a faithful Ministry, Non est necesse ut infornum
descendam, and videam quomodo illic saeviat Divina justitia; sufficit mihi ut
came in hoc mundo contempler. Granatonsis.
and that cannot convert thee, then assure thy self if an Angel from Heaven, or
a Ghost from Hell should come and preach every Sabbath to thee thou would not
be converted. Sad is the condition then of many amongst us, who visifie and
contemn, who mock and scorn at the Preaching of the Word, accounting the
publishers of it the Pests of a place, and the troublers of Israel (1 King.
18.17.) grudging at their maintenance, and slaying their persons, this is a
sign of remediless ruin to a Nation, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. Levit. 26.14, 15, 16.
Ier. 25.4, 7, 8, 9. Prove. 13.13.

2 Obs. There is a Divine hand of Providence, that governs the world. This
brings plenty and poverty, rain on one City, and not on another; one City is
fired, and another is rescued, as a brand out of the fire. These things come
not by chance, or fortune, but there is a signal providence of God in them all.
He feeds the Sparrows, clothes the Lillies, numbers our Hairs, and takes
special care of his people. He has a directing, protecting, compassionate,
vindicating care over all his, See M. Ienkins his Ser. on Deuteronomy. 32.11
he tenders them as the apple of his eye, and writes them upon the palms of
his hands, they are ever in his sight, Isa. 49.15. and 63.9 Ezekiel. 16.8. Zach.
2.8. Mal. 3.17. Acts 9.4.

This Providence of God is 1 Watchful. 2 Distinct. See all these Heads enlarged
in Mr. Robinsons Ser. on Psalm. 73.24. p. 25. preached at a Funeral, 1654.
3 Strong. 4 Wise in working.
We should therefore comfort our selves in this special Providence of God, and
cast all our burdens of cares and fears on him. He that provides for the
meanest creatures, will not suffer his noblest Creatures to want. He that
provides for Sparrows, (said good Mr. Herne when he was dying, to his sad wife)
will not suffer Herns to want. Yea he that provides so liberally for his
enemies, what will he not do for his friends? Away then with all carking, V.
Godolphin his Holy Limbeck, p. 207
distrustful care, only commit thy way unto the Lord, and he shall direct thy
paths. Be patient under all wrongs and injuries, remembering that Gods eye
takes special notice of all the wrongs that are done to his people, to avenge
them, Exodus 3.9. 2 Chronicles. 16.8, 9. Let our moderation be made known to all,
since the Lord is at hand, Phil. 4.5.

[See more of the Providence of God in Mr. Perkins on the Creed, Artic. 1. p.
154. folio. Vol. 1. Peter Martyr on 1 Samuel 10. p. 56, 57. Lessius de
Attributis, p. 625. Dr. Gouge his Arrows, p. 373. Rutherford Lect. Latin, c.
11. p. 122. Corbet Fast Ser. on 1 Cor. 1.27. p. 5, etc. Dyke on Matthew. 4.4. p.
260, etc. Strong 31 select Ser. p. 657. Raworth Jacobs Ladder, p. 5, etc. B.
Andrews Catechis. chap. 7. folio. mihi p. 29. Herberts Poems, p. 109, etc.
Pemble, folio. p. 263. to 279. Minutius felix per totum. Par his Grounds of
Divinity, p. 33, etc.]

3 Obs. God is the destroyer of sinful Cities. If you would know, who it is
that overthrows your Cities, It is I says the Lord, that in justice for your
provocations have made your Cities a desolation; I fired Sodom, destroyed No,
Niniveh, Samaria, Babylon, Jerusalem. As the Lord raises Cities, and defends
the good (2 King. 19.34. and 20.6.) so he ruins and lays waste the bad, Hos.
13.16. Luke 19.44. keep sin then out of your Cities, if you desire to keep them
from fire, plunder, See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 70, 71.
ruin. Take heed of offending God, who is a consuming Fire, and can in a trice
consume us, and turn our dwellings into ashes.

4 Obs. In the midst of Judgments God remembers mercy. He does not stir up
all his wrath, nor suffer his whole displeasure to arise, but lets fall only
some drops upon us, when he might pour a whole Sea of wrath upon our heads,
Psalm 78.38. God might justly have destroyed all these Israelites for their
Idolatry and Apostasy, yet he remembered his Covenant, though they had foully
forgot it, and transgrest it ( Hos. 6.7.) and saves a remnant, he destroyed but
some, not all their Cities. So often elsewhere we read of a remnant that were
saved, 2 King. 19.31. and Isa. 1.9. and 10.22. Romans 9.27.

5 Obs. Neither Judgments nor Mercies can work upon hardened Sinners. Some of
these Israelites were destroyed like Sodom, and others in mercy were pulled
like a Brand out of the fire; yet nothing works upon them, but they are Israel
still, as Idolatrous and obstinate as ever. When the heart is once hardened by
a long custom of sinning, it is not all that Mount Ebal, or Mount Gerizim,
Mount Sinai, or Mount S^on can afford; not all the dreadful Curses of the one,
nor all the gracious Promises of the other, that can work upon men's hearts,
Prove. 23.29, 34, 35. Ezekiel. 20.5, 6, 7, 8, 18, 21. neither John's austerity, nor
Christ's lenity could work upon hard-hearted Jews. If God by his Spirit set not
in with the means, nothing works kindly upon us; yea we shall be the worse
for beating, as these Israelites, all these six Rods do but stupifie them, and
make them fitter for a greater Judgment. One rod being sanctified may bring a
man home to God, as the Prison did Manasses, want the Prodigal, and the
Earthquake the Jailer; they had Gods Spirit, that taught them to profit by
afflictions, and so were blessed, Psalm. 94.12. but a thousand stripes on a
Pharaoh, Saul, etc. do but make them the more senseless and indurate; and is
not this Englands Sin? may not we behold our own faces in this Glass? may not
the Lord justly complain of us, as he does here of Israel? I have smitten
England with Sword, Plague, and Famine; some of their Towns and Cities I have
fired, and the rest were as a brand pulled out of the fire. Many a time have I
broken and blasted the Power and Policy of many great Achitophels, and
delivered them from many eminent imminent dangers; and yet such is their
incorrigibleness, and incurableness, that they have not returned unto me, says
the Lord. If any thing destroy this Nation, it is our obstinacy and
impenitency, under all those various Dispensations of Mercies, and means which
we have so long enjoyed. God like a good Physician, has long studied our
Disease, and given us many Purgative draughts to drink; he has visited us with
variety of Judgments, and has let us blood several times, the better to
obtain our Cure, and yet he may complain of us as he does of Israel here,
that we have not for all this returned to him.

VERSE 12.
Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel, and because I will do thus
unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.
WE have heard before of Isreal's Sin, and Isreal's Punishment for their sin. We
are now come to the third and last part of this third Sermon of the Prophet,
which contains an Exhortation, or Invitation to Repentance; where we have,

1 The Illative Particle, or the note of Inference, Therefore; The Lord draws a
conclusion against them from the former Premises, q. d. since none of my former
Judgments will reclaim you, I am now resolved, that you shall reap the fruit
of your disobedience, you shall no longer be my People, but I will cast you out
of Covenant, and send you into an impure Land; so that ye shall not only lose
your Land, but your Religion too; not only your Soil but your Souls to boot;
not only your goods but your God. I have sent out my Footmen (says God) and
you have contemned them, and contended with them; I will now see, what you will
do with Horsemen ( Ier. 12.5.) I my self will now arise in arms against you,
as against a pack of rebels.

2 Here is the Lords Commination of some greater Judgment, implied and couched
in general terms, Thus will I do unto thee. The Lord seeing their
incorrigibleness, goes on to denounce a sorer and sadder Judgment against
them, than any yet had befallen them. He does not tell them how, or in what
kind he will punish them, but leaves them to imagine the worst, thereby
intimating that he would bring upon them sadder evils than they could imagine.
Thus terribly, thus severely, in a more furious manner than formerly, will I
deal with thee. The Judgment was so dreadful, that the Prophet seems either
loath, Quid sit facturus, ^acet, ut dum ad singula paenarum genera pendent
incerti, paenitentiam agant, ne inferat, quae minatur. Hieron.
or at least unable to express it; and therefore he does as it were draw a Vail
over what he could not in words set forth, with a Thus will I do unto thee;
q. d. I will bring upon thee some direful desolation, and utter destruction,
for so it follows, Amos 8.14. They shall fall and never rise again. Since they
be impenitent, I will speedily execute upon them what I formerly threatened (
ver. 2, 3.) I will give Samaria your Metropolis into the Assyrians hand, and
you shall be carried Captive into a strange Land. There seems to be in the
words a kind of Pathetical Aposiopesis, when a man for anger and indignation
cannot speak out his words, Haec figura perturbatis atque offensis animis
accomodata est, Sanctius.

See more in my Schools-Guard, p. 153. Egone illam? quae illum? quae me? quae
non? Terent.


but cuts off some word, or part of a sentence which is to be understood; and
such kind of speech is very frequent both in sacred and profane Writers. Thus,
Psalm. 95.11. Quos ego (scil. acerime puniam) sed (nunc) motos praestat
componere fluctus. Virg. Aeneid. l 1
To whom I swear in my wrath, if they enter into my rest, q. d. they shall
never enter into my rest; if they come there, let me not be God, or let me not
be true. Thus the Hebrews in their execration Oaths were wont to speak. Thus
and thus let God do to me (1 Samuel 25.22.) without expressing the imprecation,
as fearing to name those dreadful evils.

3 He allaies this sharp Commination with a gentle and sweet exhortation, Vide
ut te tui taedeat, and resipiscendo ad Deum tuum, cum nondum plana te abdicat,
revertaris, ut antevertas faciem iratam ejus.
full of clemency and consolation, telling them that he is yet their God in
Covenant, ready to receive them, if they will but truly repent, and come in
unto him; and therefore he counsels them speedily to prepare (for where no time
is expressed, there, as the Debt, say Lawyers, so the Duty, say Divines, is
presently to be performed) to meet him, Isa. 21.12. return and come, but when?
why presently, that is implied. So here, prepare to meet thy God; but when? why
presently, before the decree bring forth, and it be too late, Zeph. 21.2. The
Lord having told them what he would do to them, now (such is his goodness)
that he shows them what they should do, to prevent his Judgments, viz.
prepare to meet him. Since he was ready to cast them off, he advises them to
cast themselves down, and to implore his mercy, and make peace with him.

Q. But what is meant by preparing to meet God?

Ans. To meet one has various meanings in Scripture; 1. Sometimes we go to
meet Persons, that we may honor them, thus Abraham and Lot went to meet the
Angels, Genesis 18.2. and 19.1. 2 Sometimes we go to meet Persons, that we may
scoff and jear at them, as Michal the Daughter of Saul did David, 2 Samuel 6.20.
3 Sometimes we go to meet Persons to fight with them, as David did with
Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.48. And thus some take the words in the Text for an Ironical
taunting speech, as if the Lord had said, Since I am coming against thee,
prepare your selves to meet me, Te pares ad sustinendum impetum irae meae; aut
ut occurras mihi vera resipiscentia and emendatione. Drusias.
and see if ye be able to encounter me, and keep me back, who am coming
against you as an enemy; come on, and meet me with your hardened hearts, muster
up your Armies, recollect your Forces, call in to your aid all your
Creature-confidences, and see if they can deliver you from my hand, and save
you from my wrath, which is even ready to seize upon you. But this sense is
very harsh, and contrary to the scope of the place; for all along the Lord
calls upon them, not to stand out against him, but to submit unto him, and
therefore he so often complains, even five times, Yet have ye not returned unto
me, says the Lord. Besides, there is no meeting of God with Arms and Armies,
or any warlike Forces; what can all the hosts in the world do against the Lord
of Hosts, or who ever hardened himself against him and prospered? Job 9.4. let
the Potsheards strive with the Potsheards of the earth, but woe be to him that
striveth with his Maker.

4 Sometimes we go out to meet Persons to humble our selves before them, and
to submit to them, as Shimei did to David, 2 Samuel 19.16. and thus it is in the
text, Prepare to meet thy God, Praepara ut invoces Deum tuum. Septuag. Syriac,
Arabic. Verse.
viz. by Prayers and tears, by humble supplication, and real humiliation for
sin, by forsaking your Idols, and cleaving to Gods true Worship, and by
amendment of your lives run to meet him, that you may prevent the execution of
his wrath upon you, etc. This is the most proper meeting of God which is here
called for, this is the genuine and true scope of the place; for the words are
not a challenge, Come out and meet me; but a precious direction, showing us
what we must do to appease and pacify God, viz. not meet him in a way of
Opposition and rebellion, for this were to set Briars and Thorns in battle
against a consuming fire ( Isa. 27.4.) but meet him in a way of submission, as
Abigail met David, when he was coming to destory Nabal and his house, 1 Samuel
25.32. So here, since the Lord has taken up this determination to punish thee,
O Israel, and is resolved to bring some greater Judgment on thee, therefore
prepare thy self (says the Prophet) by unfeigned humiliation and repentance,
Carrat poenitentia, ne praecurrat sententia. Chrysologus.
that so thou may prevent the execution of the sentence. Put on thy mourning
weeds, take up a lamentation, make ready thy Petition, go forth upon thy knee,
and beseech him to spare thee, that so thou may prevent thy utter destruction
which is now at hand.

Q. But why does the Lord call upon his people to prepare themselves, when
their hearts were hardened, and he tells us that the way of man is not in
himself, and that the preparation of the heart is his work, and not ours.
(Psalm. 10.17.) Besides, he had decreed here to carry them into captivity, and
he tells them as much, and therefore all their repentance was but vain.

Ans. 1. The Lord had some elect and hidden ones both called, and to be called
amongst them, and to these he principally speaks; for all Gods commands are
effectual in believers: they are not an empty sound, as they are in the ears of
unbeleevers, but there goes forth a power from god inableing them to obey; if
he command them to believe, he inables them so to do. If he command them to
prepare to meet him by repentance, there goes forth a power from him which
inables them so to do. As when our Savior commanded Lazarus to arise, there
went forth a power from him that raised him, Moti movemus, acti agimus, when
the will is regenerate and made pliable, then it readily obeyes all Gods
commands, be they never so hard or harsh to flesh and blood; yet they can do
all things Evangelically through Christ that strengthens them. God gives them
his preventing, assisting, cooperating, persevering grace, Job 11.13, 14.

2 Such commands as these show us our duty, not our ability, and must make us
in the sense of our own inability, prepare our selves to sue unto him for
preparation.

3 Such commands make the wicked more inexcusable, who had power in Adam to
obey all Gods commands, but they in him have lost it, and by their daily
obstinacy, and falling away from God, and his ways, they have justified that
grand Apostasy of our first Parents.

4 The threatenings of God are not always absolute and irrevocable, See more in
Mr. Caryl on Job 23.13. p. 436.
but for the most part they are conditional, and to be understood with this
exception, viz. except they repent and amend; and this condition is sometimes
expressed, as Ier. 18.7, 8. Joel 2.13, 14. and sometimes suppressed and
concealed, as Jonah 3.9. Yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed; that
is, if they repented not. So here, though Isreal's case seemed desperate, yet
the Lord bids them turn, and he would be propitious to them.

5 Admit the Judgment be irrevocable, and Gods people must notwithstanding
their repentance, be Captives to the Assyrians, yet their repentance had not
been fruitless, for they should have escaped eternal misery.

2 In this Life, the punishment of such Penitents is often mitigated, though not
totally removed. Hence we usually see, that in times of public Calamity it
goes best with the best men; to them these are but fatherly Chastisements,
when to the wicked they are forerunners of greater wrath. A Jeremy, Ezekiel,
Daniel may go into Captivity, but it is for good, as the Lord said sometimes
of his People, I will send them into the Land of Caldea for good, Ier. 24.5.
such mourners shall be marked for Mercy when Judgment comes. Ezekiel. 9.4.

4 Here are the Persons, to whom this Exhortation is applied and directed, and
that is, to the ten Tribes, who are often called by the name of Israel, as
being his offspring, 1 King. 14.18. and 2 King. 3.3. and 10.32. he names them
twice, and ingeminates the title, the better to awaken them, and quicken their
attention, as also to show his great affection to them, as David named Absolon
twice, whom he loved. So our Savior speaking to Jerusalem, doubles the title,
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37. to awaken them, to show his tender love and
compassion to them, and to show his anger against their sins, he Pathetically
cries out, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, etc. q. d. Thou
that have been the place which God has honored with his special presence, and
chosen above all the places of the earth for his habitation, to fix his name
there, art thou become a den of Devils and Murderers? So the Lord here, the
better to rouse these Israelites out of their security and impenitency, by an
Epanodos, doubles their name, saying, Thus will I do to thee, O Israel, and
because I will do thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.

5 Since we are backward and averse to this duty of Returning, he backs his
Exhortation with a double Motive.

1 The first is a drawing Motive, taken from the consideration of Gods
readiness to pardon Penitents. He is thy God, prepare to meet thy God; he is
thine by Profession, though thou have walked unanswerably to it. And 2. he is
Thy God in Covenant with thee, and so ready to receive thee, if thou will but
truly turn to him.

The second is a driving Motive, and is drawn from the consideration of Gods
Almighty Power ( verse. 13.) who was now marching against them. This power (the
better to awaken them) he sets forth by six Royalties.

1 He forms the Mountains. 2 Creates the Winds. 3 Knows men's Thoughts. 4
Makes the Morning-darkness. 5 Treads upon the high places of the Earth. 6 He
is the Lord of Hosts.
OBSERVATIONS.
1 When lesser Judgments will not mend a People, God usually comes with
greater. When Blasting, Mildew, Famine, Pestilence and Sword can do no good,
then look for a Thus will I do unto thee; that is, I will utterly destroy
thee, for remedies are in vain, when the sore is so desperate. So Isa. 1.5. Why
should ye be smitten any more? q. d. your case is desperate and incurable, and
therefore I will trouble my self no more with you, but will now utterly destroy
you. And this is that, which highly aggravates Englands Sin, we have been long
incorrigible under See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.16. Obs. 4. p. 68.
lesser Judgments, and therefore what can we now expect, but that the Lord
should come with a Thus will I do unto thee, O England, and because I will do
thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O England.

2 Obs. God will not stick to punish his own people, and that severely, when
they sin against him. Where he bestows the greatest Privileges, there he
inflicts the greatest Judgments. He is sharper with them than with Heathens,
because they are nearer to him, and so their sins do more dishonor him. The
sins of a David do more dishonor God, than the sins of many uncircumcised
Philistims. God will be sanctified of all his nigh ones, ( Levit. 10.2.) He
dwells amongst his people, and cannot endure their provocations. We can endure
dung in our fields, but not in our houses; we can bear with briars and thorns
in the Wilderness, which we cannot endure in our enclosed Gardens. See more in
my Com. on Hos. 13.15. Obs. 3.4. p. 48. to 53.
Such sin against great light, and great love, and therefore will be surely
and sharply punished for their iniquity ( Amos 3.2.) as we see in Eli, David,
Hezekiah, Zachariah, Jerusalem, Esa. 22.1. Dan. 9.12.

3 Obs. Ministers must apply the Word unto their people. Thus will I do to
thee O Israel. This is the only way to convince and convert men; In my Com. on
Ho. 13.16. Obs. 2. p. 67.
what is spoken in general to all, few will apply to themselves. It is this
Soul-searching Preaching that is the best teaching. But of this elsewhere.

4 Obs. God usually warnes before he smites. In mercy here he warnes his people
of approaching Judgments, and bids them prepare to meet him. He Lightens
before he Thunders, and shoots off his Warning-peeces, Calamitas dicitur
ventura ut agente populo paenitentiam non veniat. Hieron.

See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 65


before he shoots off his Murdering-peeces. He might have come suddenly upon
them, and swept them away like dung from the face of the earth for their
obstinacy, but see his transcendent clemency and pity, he warnes them before
he destroys them, and counsels them before he condemns them.

5 Obs. God usually mingles Mercies with his Judgments, and Consolations with
his Comminations. He tells Israel here of Judgments, but withal he tells
them of mercy upon repentance; with the one he draws us, as with cords of
love, and with the other he drives us home to himself. The best have need of
both, we have all need to hear of Judgments, to keep us from presumption; and
of Mercy, when humbled, to keep us from despair. Hence God so often joins both
together, as Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. and the Prophets do usually allay the
terrors of the Law, with the comforts of the Gospel, Joel 2.14.

6 Obs. God ownes his people, even when they are guilty of great sins. He is
God, and not like Man, that casts off men for every light offense. He tells
them here, I am thy God still by profession, though thou have not walked up to
that privilege. I am thine by Covenant, and thou art mine Israel still,
therefore prepare to meet me, and stand no longer out against me. See more in
my Com. on Hos. 13.13. Obs. 6. p. 23.


7 Obs. When the Lord is coming against a people in Judgment, he then expects
that they should presently prepare to meet him by humble supplication, and real
repentance.

1 We must meet God with a Petition in our hands; thus Subjects usually address
themselves to their Sovereign; especially when they come under the notion of
Offenders, or Malefactors to beg a pardon. We should dispatch these our
Ambassadors, our Prayers and tears, to meet him in the way, ( Luke 14.32.)
while he is yet afar off, Mittamus precos and lac^rymas cordis legatos.
Cyprian.
that we may prevent the Wrath that is coming upon us. Thus did Moses, when he
perceived that Gods Wrath was kindled against Israel, he sought by humble and
fervent Prayer to stop it, Exodus 32.11, 12, 13. so when the Plague was new
broke forth, he commands Aaron presently to mediate and intercede for them,
and so stayed the Plague, Numb. 16.46, 47, 48. Yea God takes it ill, when in
public calamities there is no intercessor to meet him thus, and mediate for a
Nation, Esaias 59.16. Ezekiel. 22.30. See my Com. on Psalm. 82. ult. p. 182.
These Ambassadors in all ages have prevailed wonderfully with God. A Prayer
rightly qualified, and circumstantiated for man, matter, manner, what cannot it
do with God?

1 It has an Universal power in removing Judgments, or procuring Mercies. The
most signal providential changes that ever were made in the world, have been
made by the Prayers of Gods people. Prayer is as it were the Midwife to bring
great Blessings into the world, and remove great Judgments from us; and
therefore when the Lord would destroy a people, he commands his Ieremies to
forbear praying for them, they must not meet him in this kind to mediate or
intercede for them, ( Ier. 7.16. and 14.11.) thereby implying, that he cannot
deny the Prayers of his people.

2 These Ambassadors have an awakening power. God seems to sleep and take no
notice of the miseries of his people many times, but then by their Prayers they
must awaken him, Job 8.5, 6. There are two things which do more especially
awaken God, 1. The Rage of wicked men (Psalm. 12.5, and 78.65, 66.) and 2. The
Prayers of Gods people, Psa. 82. ult. and 141.1. Isa. 51.9.

3 They have a binding and a loosening power. Confidera hic quid precibus
sanctorum tribuatur, quomodo illis Deus teneatur and ligetur. Quis te ligavit
Domine? ligatum habent sancti Deum, ut non puniat nisi permisserint ipsi Bern.
Moses by his Prayers binds Gods hands that he cannot strike, till he ask
leave as it were of Moses, and bid him let go that he may smite them, Exodus
30.10. Numb. 14.17, 18, 19, 20. And Prayer has a loosening power, sin ties
Gods hands, that they cannot help, but Prayer unties them, Judge. 10.10. to 17.

4 They have a commanding power, such is Gods great condescension, that though
he be the Commander of all, yet he suffers himself to be commanded by the
Prayers of his people, Isa. 45.11. Gods people have often experienced the power
of Prayer, and therefore in all their distresses they fly to their Prayers, and
have ventured their lives, resolving rather to loose them, than their praying
opportunities, Dan. 6.10. yea and this has made them so earnestly beg the
Prayers of Gods people, Romans 15.30. they will not part with their interest in
them for a Kingdom. Yea, such is the power of the Prayers of the godly, that
even wicked men, when they are in distress, have begged for them. Thus Pharaoh
beseeches Moses to pray for him, and Saul calls for the Prayers of a Samuel.
The time would fayl me, to tell of the great exploits, which the Prayer of
faith has done; no Conqueror can show such famous Trophies and Triumphs as it
can do. Prayer actuated, and inlivened by faith, has subdued Kingdoms,
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge
of the Sword, etc. Heb. 11.32, 33, 34, 35, 36. and has done the Churches
enemies more mischief, than all the Armies in the world ( Psalm. 56.9.) how
Nihil relictum est Britanicum domare Caesarem, Ni (...) preces Gregis. V. May
his History of the Parliament of England, l. 3. c. 5. p. 90, 91. folio.
lightly soever wicked men esteem of them. This is Gods Ordinance, and he
ever loves to be found in his own way. 2. The Prayers of Gods people suit best
with Gods interest and ends; they seek the advancement of Gods glory, the good
of his Church, the increase of his graces in their souls; all which are very
taking with God. 3. Their Prayers must needs be powerful, if you consider the
Persons praying, they are Gods Sons and Daughters, See the prevalency of
Prayer, in Mr. Neh. Rogers his friend at midnight, Mr. Love on Luke 11.8. and
Mr. Fenner on Luke 11.9. p. 163. folio. Mr. Will. Sedgwick his Fast Ser. on
Isa. 62.7. p. 28. and 43. preached 1642. D. Harris his Fast Ser. on Luke 10.6.
p. 43, etc. p. 3. preached 1642.
his peculiar people, the Spouse of Christ. Now Relations can do much; and if
we, who are evil, will give good things to our Children, when they cry to us,
much more will God supply the wants of his, when they call upon him, Matthew.
7.11. 4. They are put up in Christ's name, and indicted by his Spirit, and God
cannot deny Christ that makes intercession for us, and his Spirit, that makes
intercession in us, with sighs and groans.

2 We must meet the Lord humbly and submissively. As Benhadads servants met the
King of Israel, with ropes about their necks, because that they had heard, that
the Kings of Israel were merciful Kings. So let us put ropes about our necks,
as signs of our acknowledgement, that we are worthy of death; and the rather,
because the God of Heaven is a merciful God, (1 King. 20.31.) Rising and raging
at Gods Chastisements like a wild Bull in a net, when men are full of the fury
of the Lord ( Esaias 51.20.) this is the way to provoke God, to go on in wrath
against us, and to double his strokes upon us, Levit. 26.24. If a Potent Prince
should raise a great Army against us, and we had no strength to oppose his
strength, the only way is to meet him with humble, submissive Supplications,
and so make peace with him. So, when ever we find, that the great God is angry
with us for our sins, let us lay down the weapons of our rebellion; submit unto
him; judge our selves, and then he will not judge us; accuse our selves, and he
will acquit us; be sharp, and severe with our selves, and he will be merciful
to us; let us accept of the punishment of our iniquity, and justify him, in
all that he has done unto us, and then we have his promise for pardon, Levit.
26.40, 41, 42. we know, it is not for Gods honor to trample upon worms. The
Lion will not seize on a yielding Prey, the Maftiff will not fall on the little
Dog, that lies on its back, turns up all four, and cries quarter. The bending
Reed is preserved, when the stubborn Oak is plucked up by the roots. It is the
proud and haughty, whom God resists; he sets himself in Battle array against
them, and delights to manifest his power in their subversion, Esaias 2.12. to 18.
But the humble are his habitation and delight. Let us therefore meet him
submissively, considering we are not a match for him. Sinful Nations are too
weak for God, how much more are single Persons, Esaias 40.15. 1 Cor. 10.22. It is
God, that overturns Kings and Kingdoms at his pleasure, he has overthrown
Kingdoms that stood like firm Rocks. Of all things here below, we count Metals
the strongest, as Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, of which Nebuchadnezzars Image was
composed, ( Dan. 2.32, 33.) whereby is meant the Babylonian, Persian, Grecian,
and Roman Monarchies, the four greatest Monarchs of the World, yet three of
these the Lord has already dashed in pieces, and the Iron one of Rome only
remains, which God will shortly lay in the dust.

3 We must meet God with grace in our hearts. If we go to meet God, our
business is to make our peace with God, which we cannot do without grace, for
to the wicked there is no peace. Now grace th^ugh it has many other, yet it is
chiefly woven up, and composed of these two golden threads, 1. Love to God. 2
Hatred of sin.

V. Mr. Case his Morning Lect. in quarto p. 54, 55.
1 Love to God. We must love him appretiative and intensive, with highest
intention of affection. Love is our best affection, and therefore most fit for
God who is our best friend.

2 Hatred of Sin. There are two Affections especially which set themselves
against sin, which are, Hatred and Grief. Hatred respects the nature of sin,
and Grief respects the nearness of sin. If we had no sin we should hate it, but
if it were not near us, we should not grieve for it. There are many, that hate
sin but never grieve for it, but we must meet God with both these affections in
us; we must hate sin as to its own nature, and grieve for it as it is our
own sin, and as we offend God thereby; and this is to meet God with grace in
our hearts.

4 We must meet God with Christ in our arms. There is no seeing his face,
unless we bring this our elder brother with us. God is holy, and we are unholy,
so that he will not treat with us without Christ, nor can we think of God out
of Christ, but with extreme horror; besides, God will have satisfaction for
sin past, before he treat for the time to come; now Christ is our Atonement,
and our Mediator, and we can expect no good from God without him, therefore
let us meet him with Christ in our arms.

5 We must meet God with true Repentance. Sorrow befits a Sinner, as a garment
does the body. The garment of Repentance was made for sinners. Had we never
sinned, we had never sorrowed. Repentance is Gods delight, it is his favorite,
which he comes down from Heaven to salute and embrace, Esaias 57.15. Luke 15.20.
Sin arms God against us, but repentance disarmes him; he cannot withold
Mercies from the penitent, his promise has given repentance power to prevail
with him, it is the way of his own prescribing, when he would have his people
to find mercy in his eyes, he bids them take this course, Isa. 1.16, 17. and
55.7. Cant. 6.13. Ier. 4.14. and 13. ult. Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. Joel 2.12, 13. Zeph.
2.1, 2, 3. Acts 17.30. Iam. 4.8, 9, 10. This is a never failing remedy, it
always obtaines either the blessing sought for, or some better thing; as we
see in Manasses, the Ninivites, Mary Magdalen, the Prodigal, Paul, the
Israelites, Judge. 10.15, 16.

Yea, the very shadow of repentance can do something for the removal of a
temporal Judgment; as we see in Ahabs hypocritical humiliation, and Rehoboams,
2 Chronicles. 12.6, 7. The Israelites that cried unto the Lord only in their
trouble, yet were delivered out of their distress; and if the shadow can do so
much, what will not the substance do? Repentance qualifies the soul, and fits
it for Mercies Temporal, and Spiritual. It makes the heart soft, tender,
flexible, and ready to receive any impression from God, Acts 9.6. This is that
Panacea, that Catholicon, that Universal remedy against all maladies, 2 Chronicles.
7.14. Ier. 18.7, 8. These tears and waters of repentance are very medicinal,
and can prevail with God, when no others can, to extinguish the fire of his
wrath, which is now gone forth against us. England is now upon her Sickbed,
and we have great cause to fear, that she is upon her Deathbed, and will
scarcely recover; we shall shortly see whether she will live or dye, her
critical hour is now at hand, and we may justly suspect her death; and that
because God has cast his dealings with us into so many moulds and forms, and
tried us every way, and yet we do not prepare to meet him. God has been
pleading with England, this hundred years by his Word, for his Worship, for his
Day, for his Discipline, and for the power of godliness, and yet we have not
prepared to meet him.

God has of late years been pleading with Fire and Sword, and though these
bloody Arguments have spread abroad, and there is scarcely a Town where blood
has not been shed; yet have we not prepared to meet the Lord. The Rod has a
voice, but we have not heard it, Micah 6.9. It is a sad Symptom of destruction,
when we shall see the Rod, but not hear it; it is a sign that we are either
deaf, or dead. God has spoken to us with anger in his countenance, and thunder
in his voice, will ye still profane my Holy things? persist in your
formality? and go on in your rebellion against me? and yet we turn the deaf
ear to him, hating to be reformed. And now when we thought all Gods Judgments
were buried, and the memory of them was almost obliterated, yet they seem to
revive, and to be raised out of their Graves again. We are now dying and know
it not, gray hairs are here and there upon us, and we take no notice of it (
Hos. 7.9.) God cries to us by his Judgments, To day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts; while it is called to day make your peace with
me, before the night of war, dearth, and death surprise you. God has set
forth a Third Edition of War, he has printed his Wrath in Capital letters,
his Spurs stick deep in our sides, and our lashes are heard over all parts of
Christendom; and yet how little are we affected therewith, and how careless
are we to prepare to meet the Lord. With what a horrid stupidity are we
benumbed? the Plague of Lots Wife has fallen upon us, and we are turned into
Stones and Pillars; so that as our Savior wept over Jerusalem, so should we
weep over England for its induration, and not knowing the day of her
Visitation. There is a dark and dismal cloud of wrath hangs over our heads;
there is but one way left to prevent its falling on us, and that is, 1.
Personal Repentance, every one to amend one. 2. Domestical Repentance, every
Family apart must humble themselves for their family sins, Zach. 12.12. 3.
National Repentance, when the Magistrate shall command the whole Nation to
humble themselves, for the crying sins, and great provocations, which have been
daily committed in the midst of us. Till this be done, I shall never expect
that truth or peace should abide long amongst us. Let us then every one fall
heartily to this work, which must of necessity be done, or else we are undone,
Luke 13.3. Ioh. 3.5. let us humble our selves, and then God will raise us up,
Job 22.29. Iam. 4.10. Let us weep now, and we shall have joy when troubles
come, Job 5.22. Hab. 3.16. Our sins are the Achans which have troubled our
Israel; our sins are the Ionahs which have raised these storms and tempests
amongst us; our sins are the Sheba's that have raised rebellion in the Land, it
is our malignant sins, which have raised up against us malignant enemies; let
us then stone these Achans, and our troubles will cease; drown these Ionahs,
and our storms will over; cut off the heads of these Sheba's, and our troubles
will end; let us destroy our malignant sins, and God will soon destroy our
malignant enemies. If men would but judge themselves, they should not be judged
of God, 1 Cor. 11.31. Let us then set upon this Soul-inriching-work of
Self-examination, See this Point excellently enlarged, by Mr. Ant. Burgess, in
his Treatise of Self-judging
and Self-judging. Let us arraign our selves, and set our selves as in Gods
presence, before his bar. Let us examine, and take a view of our selves, in the
Glass of Gods Law, and when we have found out our corruptions, let us with
shame and sorrow confess them, and spread them before the Lord, to move him to
show pity to us. Let us judge our selves worthy to be destroyed for them,
humbly imploring pardon, in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ. Do but
this soundly, and sincerely, and it will qualify thee, for mercies Temporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal; and give thee title and interest in many gracious
Promises; as Levit. 26.40, 41, 42. Prove. 28.13. 1 Ioh. 1.9. The Lord is now
upon his march against us, it is time therefore for us to meet him with our
Prayers, and mollify him with our Tears, considering our own inability to
grapple with him; Can dust and ashes contend with the God of Heaven and Earth?
Can we with ten thousand Lusts, meet the Lord with twenty thousand of Angels?
Can impotency vie with Omnipotency? O no.

2 Consider, we cannot run from God ( Psalm. 139.7. Amos 9.2, 3.) we can go no
where from God, but we must fall into his hands. Let us therefore run from him,
to him, Ab irato ad placitum, from him as an angry God, to him as a reconciled
Father. Bloodletting is the cure of bleeding, and to close with an enemy is
the way to avoid the blow.

3 Consider, If we go not to meet God, he will fetch us. He will either fill
our souls with terrors, or else send outward afflictions to arrest us. When
Ioab would not come to Absolon, he commands his field of Corn to be fired, and
then Ioab arose and came, 2 Samuel 14.30, 31. Physicians sometimes to cure the
Lethargy, do cast into a Fever; so does God, often cure us of one evil by
another. If the Word cannot, the Sword shall fetch us in, or else do that
which is worse, send us to Hell. Let us then learn to prevent blows; hearken to
counsel and you may be safe, else rods are prepared for the backs of fools,
Prove. 26.3. If we come not in of our selves, let us expect some sad Messenger
to fetch us; therefore while the sea is calm, and the weather fair, let us set
out to meet our God. What the Lord said of Hezekiah, is too true of England,
that he rendered not according to what he had received; so we are much behind
hand with God, we receive much, but we return little; the Christian World is
turned Bankrupt, and God is now issuing forth Process to seize upon Body,
Goods, and Life. He cannot have what he would have, he will therefore have
what he should have. He is now setting us as low, as we have hitherto set his
love. Long-suffering is now at an end; God will have all paid now, or else
Justice will set abroach our blood. O England, then repent, and prepare to meet
thy God; and to encourage us, know, that if we will go to meet God, he will
come to meet us; he will meet our sorrow with his sense of it; our Prayers with
his presence, and propitious answers; and our tears with his handkerchief. Nay,
he will meet us with embraces, as the father of the Prodigal did his returning
Son, Luke 15.20. Let us then go to him, with humble acknowledgements in our
mouths, and say to him, Father, we have sinned against Heaven, and before
thee, we have abused thy Mercies, despised thy Judgments, despited thy Spirit,
and have not returned unto thee. Let us thus in humility fall down at Gods
feet, and he will fall on our necks, and embrace us in the arms of his love.
Seeing therefore God will do thus unto us, let us prepare our selves to meet
our God.

[See more concerning the necessity, and excellency of Repentance, in Master
Perkins, Mr. Dyke, and Doct. Tho. Tailor, their particular Treatises of
Repentance, Mr. Hookers Souls-preparation for Christ, Mr. Bridge on Matthew. 4.2.
D. ^restons Judas Repentance, and Paul's conversion, Mr. Fenners Danger of
deferring Repent. Many Treatises of Mr. Baxter about Conversion, Mr. Swinnocks
Key to Regeneration, on John 3.3. Binchius his Mellific. Theolog. Loc. 19. P.
4. p. 90. and Doct. Holdsworth on Hos. 14.2. Dyke on Conscience, p. 49. and on
the Sacrament, p. 37. Taffin on Amendment, p. 422. Mr. Baines Ser. Rev. 2.4. p.
17. Doct. Loves Ser. on Isa. 21.12. Doct. Burges his Fast Sermon. on Jer. 4.14.
Harsenet on Repentance, Mr. Case his Morning Lectures in quarto, p. 485. etc.
Reyner his Precepts for Practice, p. 4, 5.]

VERSE 13.
For lo, he that forms the Mountains, and creates the Winds, and declares
unto man what is his thought; that makes the morning darkness, and treads
upon the high places of the earth; the Lord, the God of Hosts is his name.
IN the precedent Verse the Lord seeks to draw his People to himself by
Mercies, he minds them of his Covenant, and tells them they were his Israel
still, and therefore they ought not to stand it out against him, but speedily
submit themselves, and meet their God with entreaties of peace, who was still
ready to receive them. But least this should not work upon such indurate
Sinners, the Prophet comes in this Verse to proclaim Gods Majesty,
Omnipotence, Omniscience, etc. The better to affect and awaken these drowsy
ones, and to make them fear; We have here a multiplicity and heap of excellent
Titles given to God; for the bare naming of God is little regarded by most men,
but when the Transcendent Excellencies of God, shall in variety of words, be
set forth to the life unto us, this strikes an awe and reverence in our hearts.
In the words we have, 1 An elegant description of the glorious Majesty of God,
set forth in state and solemnity, by Six Royalties. 2 Here is the note of
Attention, Lo, or behold, q. d. do not lightly pass over this, but deeply
ponder, and diligently consider, the Power, and Majesty of this great God, with
whom thou have to do. 3 Here is the reason of this glorious description of
God, included in the Particle For, for he that forms the Mountains, and
creates the Winds, etc. It is he that is marching in fury against thee, who is
a consuming Fire, whose Power and Majesty thou art not able to resist; and
therefore beware of provoking him to wrath against thee, by thy impeniten^, for
Quot tituli, tot ora; all these Titles, and Elogies, are as ^o many mouths to
call upon us, to fear the Lord, and to turn unto him. As first, It is he that
forms the mighty and the massy Mountains; therefore fear him, and turn unto
him. 2. It is he that by his Almighty power creates the fierce and terrible
Winds, therefore fear him, and turn unto him. 3. It is he that searches the
heart, and tries the reins, therefore dissemble not with him, but truly and
totally turn unto him. 4. He can turn the light into darkness, Adhuc non
timetis Deum, qui etiam diem quo carere non poteslis, auferre vobis potest?
Luther.
and thy joy into sorrow, therefore fear to offend him, and prepare to meet
him. 5. He is the most High, having the Heaven for his Throne, and the Earth
for his footstool; therefore beware of provoking him, and return unto him. 6.
He is the Lord of Hosts, and can arm all the Powers in Heaven, and Earth, and
Hell against thee, therefore resist him not, but speedily prepare to meet him,
with entreaties of peace, before his wrath surprise thee, and it be too late.


This Verse is a Mine full of rich Treasures, I shall therefore dig for them.

1 He forme^h the Mountains. They were not cast up by Noah's Flood (as some
weakly have imagined) but are here expressly said to be formed, and framed by
the most wise God, for the benefit and ornament of the Universe. God made them
out of the rude Mass, and confused Chaos of earth, when he gathered the Waters
into one place, and the dry land appeared, Genesis 1.9. and it is apparent, that
the Mountains were in being before Noah's Flood, for it is said, that all the
high Mountains were covered with waters (Genesis 7.19.) they were then in being,
before they are said to be fixed, and settled by God ( Prove. 8.25.) and framed
in weight and measure by him, Isa. 40.12. He has made the Mountains strong and
stable, high and unmovable, for his own glory, ( Psalm. 148.5, 9.) and the good
of Mankind. ( Psalm. 65.5.) By the Mountains the violence of the Winds are
broken, and kept from hurting us, and so they are for Muniment. By them the
Universe is adorned, and made more glorious and wonderful, and so they are for
Ornament. By them the Valleys are kept warm, and enriched, by them they are
watered with Springs, and showers that run down from them ( Job 24.8. Psalm.
104.10.) To them men run for shelter and defense in times of trouble, Psalm.
11.1. Josh. 2.16. Matthew. 24.16. Heb. 11.38. By them Cities are defended under
God, against their enemies, Psalm. 125.2. upon them grows Grass for the sheep,
and beasts of the field, and here they feed, Job 39.8. Psalm. 50.11. and 148.9.
Isa. 18.6. Here many Treasures of Metals and Minerals, of Lead, Iron, Brass,
Stone, Silver, Gold, etc. are hid, Deuteronomy. 8.9.

This should make us, 1. Love the Lord, who has so curiously formed, and
framed the Universe for the good of man.

2 It should make us fear to offend him, who by his Almighty Power has created
these mighty, massy Mountains, and before whom they tremble, and melt like
Wax. These obey God, and praise him in their kind ( Isa. 44.23.) and if the
Lord of these Mountains be against us, no Mountain can fence or shelter us,
Ier. 3.23. Ezekiel. 38.20. A due apprehension of Gods Majesty, will make us
perform all our Duties with fear and reverence, Psalm. 2.11. Heb. 12.29. We
should take shame to our selves, for our hardness of heart, and great
insensibleness, when we consider, how the Mountains, and inanimate Creatures
tremble at his presence; how much more when he is angry; and if these be
overthrown by God in his anger, Job. 9.5. and 28.9. much more shall wicked men,
those metaphorical Mountains, which exalt themselves against God, and his
ways, be overturned by him, Isa. 64.1. Zach. 4.7.

2 He creates the Wind. This is the second Prerogative Royal of the great
God. By creating the Mountains and the Wind, two mighty things (under which
Synecdochically are comprehended the other Works of God) the Prophet sets forth
Gods Omnipotency, for it would have been too much to have enumerated all the
rest of God glorious Works, and therefore he pitcheth on some chief ones, and
leaves us to conclude of the rest. Before he had spoken of the creating of the
Mountains, now he comes to speak of the Winds, which arise (as some conceive)
out of those Mountains. These two differ in nature, for the one is gross and
unmovable, but the Winds are of an airie, thin substance, which cannot be
seen; and yet such is their power that they toss the Seas, overthrow the
strongest Trees, cast down Houses, yea and overturne Mountains, when these
Winds are shut up in their bowels. The word Ruach is Homonymous, Ruach,
Ventus, Spiritus, flatus.
and has various significations, which has bred various Lections, and various
interpretations.

1 Some read it thus, he creates the Soul or Spirit. Calvin conceives that the
Prophet speaks of the spirit of man, though he excludes not the VVind, and his
reason is because of that which follows, viz. The showing to man his thoughts.
But if this way of reasoning were valid, Ab ordine verborum nulla est
argumentatio.
we may better say (Salva semper reverentia tanto viro dignissima) that he
speaks of the Natural Winds, because immediately before he spoke of the
Mountains, from whence Philosophers conceive that these Winds proceed, and the
word Ruach is often put for the Natural Winds; as Exodus 10.13, 19. and 15.10.
See Caryl on Job 28.25.
Job 28.25.

2 The Socinians and their followers take this word for a Spirit, and that
Spirit to be the Holy Ghost; this they do to destroy the Deity of the Holy
Ghost. See here what windy, idle, addle conceits Heretics have, and what
feeble, sandy foundations they build upon; they catch at any chrotchet which
may please their humors: For it is plain here that the Prophet speaks of the
created VVind, or if they will needs read it Spirit, yet it is a created
Spirit, He creates Ruach the Wind, or the Spirit. But the Holy Ghost is not
made or Created, but proceeds from the Father, and the Son, and is God
blessed for ever; as is See D. Cheynel on the Trinity, chap. 4. p. 31. D. Owen
against Bidle, Chap. 15. p. 351. D. Arnold Religio Socin. p. 131. etc. D.
Cloppenburgh and Estwick against Bidle, and above all (as having much in a
little room) The Blasphemer slain with the sword of the Spirit.
abundantly proved by others.

As for the Natural causes of the VVind, Philosophers differ; Some conceive
that the Sun drawing up Vapors and Exhalations, and they falling down again by
violence, become Winds by the coldness of the middle region.

2 Others conceive, that the air being pent up in the Vaults and Caves of the
earth, having a vent do break forth, and so spread into Winds, and for this
they bring Psalm. 135.7. Ier. 10.13. and 51.16. He causes the Vapors to
ascend from the ends of the earth, he makes Lightning for the rain, and
brings the wind out of his treasuries; Especubus and locis abditis, in quibus
velut in Thesauris continet ventos. V. Polan. Syntag. l. 5. c. 17. Robinsons
Types of Christ. p. 92. and especially Mr. Caryl on Job 28.25.
That is, say they, out of his Vaults and Concavities, wherein it is kept as in
a Treasury. But God himself, who has made the Wind, tells us plainly, that we
know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes, Ioh. 3.7. we may therefore well
be ignorant of that, which God in his wisdom has hidden from us. An humble
ignorance in deep Mysteries, whether Natural, or Supernatural; whether in the
works, or the Word of God, is better and safer than proud curiosity.

We have many Reasons to bless God for the Wind. It is indeed a common
Blessing, but yet we could not live without it.

1 If the Air be thick, dark, and unwholesome, the VVind clears and purges
the air for the health of our Bodies, and for the preservation of the
Creatures. They dispel noisome Vapors, and therefore are called Scopae mundi,
the worlds Beesoms, with which God sweeps his great House, the world. 2 If we
want Rain, the Winds carry the Clouds, and bring us rain; at the Prayers of
Elijah, after three years drought, the Heavens were darkened with Clouds and
Wind, whence came a great rain, 1 King. 18.45. 3 They cool the Air in the heat
of Summer, and help to refresh us. 4 They help our Ships to sail, and bring
Commodities from all Nations to us; and help our Mills to grind our Corn. 5
They serve for the Miraculous help of Gods Church and People. When the Lord had
brought Israel by a strong hand out of Egypt, he caused the Sea to go back
by a strong East Wind, and made the Sea dry land for his people to pass
thorough, Exodus 14.21. 6 They help to execute Gods Judgments on the wicked.
With an East Wind the Lord brought Locusts, and Grasshoppers on Egypt to
devour their fruit ( Exodus 10.13, 19) and by a VVest-wind he drove them away
again. Theodosius praying against his enemies, the winds brought back the
enemies Arrows on their own heads, which made Claudian cry, O nimium dilecte
Deo, cui militat ether,
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti!
Ascribe not then great Winds to Conjurers, Witches, Devils, etc. The Winds
are Gods servants, and do readily obey his commands ( Psalm. 148.8. Matthew.
8.26.) and not the Devils. Satan without Gods leave cannot raise so much wind
as will toss a feather. He could do nothing in this kind against Job, till he
had a Commission from God, Job 1.16, 19.
3 This is not all, for the Prophet descends to man, and tells us, that since
God made him, he also can tell him his thoughts, meditations, and purposes. He
can tell what Language men have in their hearts, and what they talk within
themselves, as the rich fool did, Luke 12.17. Our words are not so intelligible
to men, as our thoughts are to God. Christ knew what was in man, he knew their
thoughts ( Ioh. 2. ult. and therefore he answered his enemies many times, not
according to their words, but according to their thoughts, Matthew. 8.20. yea God
knows our thoughts before we think them, and our conceits before we conceive
them, he understands them afar off, Psalm 139.2. he being intimo nostro
intimior, nearer to us than our flesh is to our bones; he knows our thoughts
in Posse from all eternity; so great is his Omniscience! As a man that knows
what Roots he has in his Garden, though there be no flower appearing, yet he
can say, when the Spring comes, this and this will come up. So it is here, God
knows our frames, our Principles, our Projects, and what the issue will be,
nothing is hid from his All-seeing eye. The words are diversely read.

1 Some refer the Affix to God, thus, He declares to man his own mind and
meditation, and tells him what he intends to do ( Esaias 41.26. Amos 3.7.) thus
he revealed his mind to Abraham before he would destroy Sodom, and Christ
reveals his secrets to his Disciples, John 15.15.

2 The Septuagint mistaking the Original, read it thus, He declares unto man
his Christ, Meshicho, Christum, vel Unctum suum; but the word is Quid sit
cogitatio vel meditatio sua, vel eloquium suum, nam Suach est secum cogitare,
vel secum colloqui. Sanctius.
Masecho, what is his thought. But the proper scope of the Text, is to convince
the Israelites, that they had not to do with men, but with the Omniscient God,
who searches the heart, and tries the reins, and knows the hidden things of
man, even the most secret turnings and windings, ploddings and purposes of the
Soul, so as he cannot be deceived, neither will he be mocked. A man may know
much by himself, but God knows more; our Consciences may accuse us of some
things, but God is greater than our Consciences, and knows all things.

Q. But how does God declare unto man his Thoughts?

Ans. Diverse ways. 1. Sometimes he discovers and disappoints the most secret
aims, and intentions of men, and so makes their thoughts visible to the world.

2 By his Ministers, they opening the Word of God, which is a Soul-searching
Word, do discover to men the thoughts, and intents of their hearts, Heb. 4.12.

3 Sometimes without the Word, God by his Spirit checks men, and convinces the
Conscience of the vanity, and sinful imaginations which are in them.

He makes the morning darkness.

The Prophet goes on still to show the Almighty Power of God, who can turn the
brightest morning into dreadful darkness, and the most glorious day into a
dismal night. If he be angry: How the Abstract does augment the signification,
see my Schools Guard. Rule 36.
he can make the morning not only dark, but darkness it self in the Abstract;
that is, exceeding dark.

2 Others read the words thus, He makes the morning and the darkness; that is,
he makes both Day and Night. God shows his Power, not only in creating the
World, but also in governing the whole course of Nature continually, exactly
ordering the Vicissitude and change of Day and Night. It is he that makes the
Light and the Darkness, in the morning he makes the light to arise out of
darkness; and in the evening he makes the darkness to follow the light. This
sense is good. But the first I look upon as most genuine from the text.

He treads upon the high places of the earth. This is true, both in a
Literal, and in a Metaphorical sense.

1 Take the words Literally for the highest Hills, and the lofty things of the
World, even these are subject unto God, and lie at his feet; he treads upon all
worldly glory and excellency. As Heaven is his Throne, so the Earth, even the
highest places of the earth are his footstool. He treads upon high Mountains,
high Buildings, high Fortifications and walled Cities, Omnia sabjicil
quantumvis munita and excelsa, and propter altitudinem indecessa. Livelius.
all which are comprehended under the name of High places (Deuteronomy. 32.13.) these
he turns upside down, when ever pleases him. This is the most proper sense.
But take it Metaphorically, either for the high places of the earth, where
Bamah. excelsa, it a dicuntur vel a celsitudine montium in quibus arae ad
sacrificandum constituerentur; vel ab ipsis aris quae altae sunt.
Altars were erected to Idols (as Numb. 33.52. 2 Chronicles. 11.15. and 33.3. Ier.
32.35. Ezekiel. 16.16.) even these will God tread upon and destroy, Levit. 26.30.

2 If you take it for the high and lofty of the earth, even these Gods hand
does reach, V. Ravaneh in V. excelsus.
yea and his feet tread upon. He makes the proud of the earth his footstool,
Psalm. 110.1. though they be high, yet he will make them know, that there is an
higher than they, Eccles. 5.8. though they be mighty, yet they shall know,
that there is one who is Almighty, who pulls down the mighty from their seats,
and is terrible even to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76.12. Esaias. 2.10. Luke
1.52. Now though the literal sense be here principally intended, yet the
Mystical and Metaphorical sense would not be excluded.

Q. But who is it that does these great and glorious things?

A. The Prophet tells you, it is Jehovah the God of Hosts, that is his name, a
name full of Power, Majesty, and Excellency, and therefore to be reverenced of
all his people.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 God is Omnipotent. Creation is a work of Omnipotency, but that is here
ascribed to God; it is he that forms the Mountains, and creates the Winds,
and turns Light into darkness, and has all Creatures at his command, and
therefore he must needs be Almighty. Man can make something out of something:
but to create the Universe out of nothing, and that by the word of his mouth;
this speaks his wonderful Omnipotency, Psalm. 33.6, 9. He is able to do
whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115.3. yea his Power is beyond his Will, for of
stones he could raise up Children unto Abraham, but he will not, Matthew. 3.9.
There is nothing too hard for him, no difficulties can hinder him in his
working, Job 4.9. Matthew. 19.26. Luke 1.37. Those impossibilities in nature
which are the reproach of Physicians, yet are they Gods Cure. The power that is
in the Creature is but derivative, and by participation; but all Power is in
God perfectly, eminently, infinitely, and originally.

Fear then to offend him; See Mr. Case his Morning Lect. in quarto p. 58.
choose rather to displease all the world than to displease him: ( Ier. 5.21,
22.) they can but kill the body, but he can kill both body and soul, Mat.
10.28. A Tenant, especially if he be a Tenant at will, is afraid of displeasing
his Landlord, who can when ever he pleases cast him out of all. The men of
Tire and Sidon made peace with Herod, because their Land was nourished by the
Kings Land, and he might do them a displeasure, Acts 12.20. Believe and fear
his Power now, else you are like ere long to feel it, for though he be slow to
anger, yet is he great in power, and will by no means acquit the wicked, Nahum.
1.3.

2 Serve him with fear, and do all that we do to him with the greatest
reverence. So did Job, chapter 40.4. and 42.5. and Esaias 6.5. let us readily do his
commands. If he do but call to any of the Creatures, they stand up together,
as ready to execute whatever their great Lord and Master commands them, Esaias
48.13. yea so pliant are they to do his will, that they contradict their own
natures to serve him. Fire descends from Heaven at his command, and the fluent
Waters stand as a wall to defend his people, and destroy their enemies; which
may shame us out of our rebellion, and disloyalty, when we see how the
inferior Creatures serve him with one consent.

2 It likewise serves for singular comfort, and that many ways.

1 It may be thou have great enemies coming against thee, yet remember still,
that there is a greater than they. Suppose Nations, all Nations should come
against thee, yet compared to God, they are but as the drop of a busket,
nothing, less than nothing, Esaias 40.12, etc, and 51.12, 13. Romans 8.30. There
are more with us than are with them; with them is but an arm of flesh, but
with us is the Almighty, not as a bare Spectator, but as an Assister, and
fighter for us, 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8.

2 It may be thou art troubled with strong corruptions, why go unto this
strong God, there is nothing too hard for him. Though thy sins have been
habitual, customary, con-natural sins, yet he is the God of Nature, and can
change Nature. Though we cannot make a Black-more white, yet he can, Ier.
13.23 though thy sins have been of a Crimson dye, yet he is able to make them
white as Snow, Esaias 1.18.

3 Art thou troubled with great tentations, and sad afflictions, yet remember
God is Almighty, and can make Medicines of these Poisons; and will in the
conclusion turn all to thy good, Romans 8.28. and therefore be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might, See Mr. Gournal, and Doct. Gouge on Ephesians.
6.10.
Ephesians. 6.10.

4 It may comfort us against Apostasy. Thou fear, that thou shall never be
able to hold out; walk humbly with thy God, and then thou needst not fear what
Man, or Devil can do unto thee; for stronger is he that is in us, than he that
is in the world, In te stas and non stas. Aug.
1 Ioh. 4.4. Did we stand by our own strength we were undone, for in his own
strength shall no man be strong; but we are kept by the mighty Power of God,
through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Though we be weak, yet our Redeemer
is strong, Ier. 50.33, 34. and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against us.
Let the world rage, the Devil roar, and corruption fret, yet God is greater
than all, and none shall be able to pull them out of his hand, Ioh. 10.28, 29.
He that has called us has promised to keep us, he is both able, and willing
to do it, Esaias 42.5, 6.

5 It may comfort us against the fear of death; what though thy Body lie
rotting in the Grave, and Worms consume thy flesh, yet God is Almighty, and can
raise these vile bodies, and make them like to Christ's glorious Body, Phil.
3.21. Though for a time we may lie in the dust, yet the time is at hand, when
we shall awake and sing, Esaias 26.19. He that made all things out of nothing,
he can raise us out of something. Thy ashes are precious in his sight, and all
thy bones are kept by him, yea the very hairs of thy head are numbered.

6 It may comfort and assure us, See more Uses in Mr. Perkins on the Creed, the
first Art. 1. Vol p. 136, 142, etc.
that the Jews in Gods due time shall be called. Though now they be a
scattered, cursed, contemptible people, for their rejecting Christ, yet the
Apostle argues from Gods Power, and comforts us with this, that God is able to
raise them up again, Romans 11.23.

2 Obs. The serious consideration of Gods Omnipotency, should move us to meet
him by repentance. No wise man will stand it out against a potent enemy, that
is far too strong for him. We are all by nature Traitors, and Rebels against
God, he is marching against us in wrath, and we have no way to help our
selves, but to meet him, and humble our selves before him (1 Pet. 5, 6.)
imploring his pity, and his pardon. Hence it is, that the Lord so often in
Scripture, does set forth to the life his glorious Majesty, and transcendent
Sovereignty, ( Job 9. and 36.24. to 33. and cha. 37. and 38. and 39. and 40.
Esaias 40.12. to 27. Ier. 10.6, 7. Amos 5.8. and 9.6.) We should not only tremble
at Gods Word ( Esaias 66.2.) but also at the consideration of his glorious
Majesty, appearing both in his Works of Creation, and Providence.

3 Obs. It is Gods Prerogative Royal to be the heart-searching God. None can
exactly and thoroughly know the heart but he alone, he only is that (...), Deus
cordiscius, the Heart-seeing, and the Heart-searching God, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Prove.
17.3. Ier. 17.9, 10. Acts 1.24. and 15.8. Rev. 2.23. He knows all the secret
plots and projects, all the turnings and windings of our deceitful souls. He
knows not only what is in our hearts at present, but also what has been, and
what will be there, Psalm. 139.1, 2. Esaias 46.10. The Lord tries the heart, as
the furnace tries the gold; when Metals come to be put into the Furnace,
there is a great deal of dross in them, so that the Metal sometimes can hardly
be discerned by the Artificer, till the Furnace has separated the dross from
the metal; so the All-seeing eye of God, which is compared to a flaming fire (
Revel. 1.14.) searches and separateth good from evil. For,

1 God has made all hearts, and therefore he must needs know what is in them.
They are beasts, and brutish, that will not acknowledge this, Psalm. 94.8, 9,
10, 11. Every Artificer knows best the thing that he has made; a man that
makes a Watch, knows every wheel of the Watch, and every Pin, which another
cannot discern. Known to God are all his Works, Acts. 15.18. but the chief of
Gods Works is Man, and therefore man's heart must needs be known to him: and if
the spirit of man knows what is in man ( Prove. 20.27. 1 Cor. 2.11.) then God
who has made that spirit must much more know what is in man, Ioh. 2.24, 25.
and 1 Ioh. 3.20.

2 He takes the wise in their own Plots, which he could not do if he did not
know their hearts, Job 5.13. 1 Cor. 3.19. Of all men God delights to befool the
grand Politicians of the World; he takes them in their own traps; and blows
them up, as it were with their own Gunpowder. As a man that will go beyond a
man in discourse, he must know the Arguments which he will bring, that so he
may bring other Arguments beyond them; so God out-shoots the Achitophels of the
World in their own bow. Haman was a subtle man, and thought he had made all
sure, but we know how the Lord turned his Plot upon his own pate. In the thing
wherein he dealt subtly, and proudly, the Lord was above him, Exodus 18.11.
Pharaoh was a subtle Persecutor, yet see how God takes him in his own Net,
Exodus 1.10. he would work wisely, and will kill all the Male-Children of the
Hebrews, yet see how God blasts his Project, for amongst them he saved Moses,
yea Pharaohs Daughter shall bring him up at Court, who shall be Pharaohs
destruction. Many Politicians walk in the Clouds, as if the Lord should not see
them, Psalm. 94.7. but they must know, that the Lord is a God of knowledge, and
all their actions are weighed by him, 1 Samuel, 2.3.

3 God is the Judge of all the World; and this he could not be, if he did not
know the hearts, as well as the acts of men. How should he distribute Rewards
and Punishments according to men's demerits, if he knew not the intents and
thoughts of their hearts? If God did not search the heart, how many secret sins
would go unpunished, and many secret wrongs done to the godly and innocent man
go unrevenged? The Lord therefore searches the heart, that he may give to
every one according to his works, Ier. 17.9, 10.

Obj. Prove. 25.3. The heart of the King is unsearchable, how then can God
search the heart?

A. He speaks in respect of men, God uses many times to endue his Vicegerents
with such depth of wisdom, that it surpasses the ordinary judgment of
Subjects to find them out; but it does not surpass Gods knowledge. God could
not turn Kings hearts if he knew them not, Prove. 21.1. When we are to deal with
a man whose disposition we are not acquainted withal, we know not what
Motives will persuade him; whereas if we have to deal with one that we know,
then we know what Motives will persuade him; so the Lord that made the hearts
of Kings, he knows how to persuade them, and win upon them.

2 This searching must not be taken properly, but figuratively; as for man he
must search, and by discourse and going from one thing to another, labor to
find out a matter; but it is not so with God, who is perfectly wise, and
knows every thing in it self without discoursing, God is all eye. Suppose a
man's whole body were an eye, he need not then to turn himself to see things,
for he would see on every side; but he that has but one eye must turn himself
about to see things. But God who is all eye, and sees into the nature of
things, needs no turning about to discourse, and so to search out things as we
do; and therefore one said well, Things that are spoken after the manner of
men, must be understood according to the Majesty of God.

3 This Metaphor of searching, is taken, 1. Either from Students, who when they
come to a hard point, they are put to a great deal of pains to search out the
matter before they can know the depth of it. Or, 2. From Refiners, the Lord
tries the heart ( Prove. 17.3.) not only as a Lodestone, but like a Furnace to
separate the gold from the dross; when God comes to search the heart of his
Elect, he has a power beyond all other refiners, for look what is good, he
makes it better, and what is naught he takes away, and makes it good. He turns
the vilest earth into the purest Gold, and the vilest Metal, a proud heart, he
turns into an humble heart. He casts a Christ-despising-soul into the Furnace,
and it comes out a high-prizing soul of Christ.

Obj. How is it said, that God only knows and searches the hearts of men (1
King. 8.39.) whereas it is said, that a man knows his own heart (1 Cor. 2.11.)
yea Samuel could tell Saul all that was in his heart, 1 Samuel 9.19. and if the
evil Angels know our hearts, Joh. 13.2. then good Angels much more.

Ans. There is so great a difference between Creatures knowing of the hearts,
and the Creators knowledge of them, that ours is nothing in comparison of his.

1 They differ in respect of their Original; God knows the heart of himself,
and needs not that any man should tell him, John 2. ult. But Angels and Men
know by revelation from God, or revelation from others. Thus God revealed to
Samuel, which was Saul, that should be King of Israel, 1 Samuel 9.15, 17. Thus
Elisha knew the covetousness of Gehazi, and Peter the Hypocrisy of Annanias
and Sapphira. Thus the good Angels know what is in us by Revelation, and the
evil ones by the working of our fancies, they know what will take with us, 1
King. 22.22.

2 In respect of Certainty, we know things but conjecturally, darkly, and by
halves; but God knows all things exactly, and perfectly; he knows us better
than we know our selves. Christ knew Peter's heart, when he knew it not
himself; and God knew Hazaels heart, when himself could not believe the
wickedness which was there. Thus he knows our thoughts afar off ( Psalm.
139.2.) men may see the thoughts of others near hand, when they begin to break
out, and bewray themselves in the face and countenance, in gestures, words, and
looks; by these we sometimes pump out what is in men, Prove. 20.5. But this is
but conjectural, and we are often deceived, as we see in David, he thought
Absoloms purpose had been sincere, in going to fulfill his Vow at Hebron, and
that Achitophel had been a faithful Counselor. Thus the Disciples took Judas
to be like themselves, and therefore when Christ said, One of you shall betray
me, every one asked, Master, is it I? But God did most certainly know Absoloms
Hypocrisy, Achitophels Policy, and Judas his Treachery. In our thoughts there
is the object which we think on, and the impress of it, as it lies in our
fancy; and this the Angels being Spirits may know, and see what is in the
fancy. But now to make up a full thought, there must be an act that passes on
this object, that carries with it an Affirmative, or Negative, for an hundred
men may think on one and the same object, and yet they may act diversely; now
because the mind of man may work several ways on one and the same object, the
Angels cannot certainly know the hearts of men, which made the Devils Oracles
to speak so ambiguously, because they knew not certainly what should come to
pass. But God has a clear and exact knowledge of all things, and perfectly
knows all the turnings and windings, all the imaginations and thoughts of our
hearts, whether good or bad, sudden or deliberate, past, present, or to come,
Genesis 6.5. Job 42.2. Psalm. 44.21. He knows our thoughts before we think them,
Deuteronomy. 31.21. though men have fair words, yet he knows they have many times
foul hearts, Deuteronomy. 5.28, 29. God takes notice of every wanton thought which is
in our hearts, which made Job (chapter 31.1.) to make a covenant with his eyes,
that he might not so much as think on a Maid, least he should sin against God,
and displease him, who takes notice of all the motions of our hearts. God took
notice of Saul's murderous thoughts toward David, when he was playing before
him, he thought to have murdered him; and of Felix his covetous thoughts, when
he sent so often for Paul, thinking that money should have been given him. But
God in goodness to us, has locked up the hearts of men from the knowledge of
men, for the preservation of Humane society, for man is a sociable Creature;
now if there were a window made in the Soul of every man, to know what is in
him, there would be no living one by another, so vile and fierce we are by
nature, ( Titus 3.3.) every one has several ends, and if we could see whose
heart opposes us in the pursuit of them, we should hate them. Besides, every
man has secret fins, which if all the world should know, we should be ashamed
to look one another in the face, and afraid one of another.

1 Woe then to Quakers, who assume to themselves Gods Prerogative Royal, of
knowing the heart, How often have they told us, that they know men's hearts (when
it may be they know nor their names) so soon as ever they see their faces;
they know who are Hypocrites, or profane, at first-sight. But it is no wonder,
that those who have printed that they are equal to God, as holy as God, as just
as God, as good as God; if they also say, they are as knowing as God. These
high-flown Atheistical ones assume more to themselves, than the very glorified
Saints or Angels dare do. Such prodigious Pride, and Blasphemy, will be
punished with some signal fa^l.

2 This must humble us in all our approaches before this Omniscient,
Heart-searching God. We have not to do with men, but with the All-seeing God,
who cannot, and will not be mocked. We are apt to think highly of our selves,
but God knows that by us which we know not by our selves. We know but in
part, but he knows us thoroughly* and if our Conscience do accuse us of
something, yet he is greater than our Conscience, and knows all things. Men
may secretly and subtly hide their sins from men, but nothing is hid from
God, he sets our secret sins in the light of his countenance. It is dangerous
to plot any thing either against him, or any thing which relates unto him; for
as he sees men's sins, so he has power to punish them. Woe then to such as
oppose Gods Truth, these oppose God, and rob his people of the choycest
purchase. 2. Such as oppose his Ambassadors do oppose him, he accounts the
indignities done to them as done to himself. 3. Such as abuse his people, and
despise them for their purity, despise God who made them so.

3 It must make us serious and sincere in all that we do, since we have to do
with a God that searches the heart, and ponders the spirits of men, and if
they be but a grain too light, his beam will soon discover it, Prove. 16.2. Did
we but set the Lord always before us, it would keep us from falling, either on
the right hand, or on the left, Psalm. 16.8. David kept all Gods Precepts,
because he knew that all his ways were before him, Psalm. 119.168. So Job
34.21, 22. There is much in the eye of men to keep us from sin, and quicken us
to duty, how much more in Gods All-seeing eye, Job 24.17. He looks upon Sinners
with a Vindictive eye. It is said of Hercules, and some others, that they had
such sparkling eyes that they terrified men, so that they durst not look upon
them. This is most true of God in a Spiritual sense* if he but look on Pharaoh,
and his Host, it puts them all into terror, Exodus 14.24. yea if he but look
upon the earth, which never sinned, it trembles before him, Psalm. 97.4. Men may
dissemble with men, but there is none can deceive God. No Sinner is more hated
of God than the Hypocrite, because no sin is so directly opposite to his
Nature. Iehu his zeal was, to settle himself in Ahabs Throne, but God sees
through such Tiffany-designs, and says to such, as the Prophet said to the
Wife of Jeroboam, Come in thou Wife of Jeroboam, why feignest thou thy self to
be another than thou art? God will one day smite such painted walls. Esau a
cunning Hunter, may get the Venison of this World, but it is plain, sincere,
single-hearted Jacob that gets the blessing. Let us therefore always walk as
in the presence of God, as Enoch ( Genesis 5.24.) Abraham, ( Genesis 17.1.) and
Hezekiah did, Esaias 38.3.

4 This should make us to keep a strict watch over out Thoughts. God is a
Spirit, and he more especially eyes the bent of our spirits. It is not so much
our words and works, as our hearts which the Lord ponders. So that what the
Apostle says of our words, But of this at large, in my Comment. on 2 Timothy 3.2.
p. 28, 29.
is most true of our Thoughts; he that offends not in thought, the same is a
perfect man. He is right indeed, who is right within. When the Lord comes to
search men, he ransacks the heart, and observes what imaginations and thoughts
lodge there, and judges of men accordingly, Genesis 6.5.

5 It may inform us, that the holy Scriptures are the Word of God, because of
that lively, powerful, heart-searching excellency that is in them, Heb. 4.12,
13. Men's words are dead, but here is living water; sharp and quick, discovering
the very thoughts and intents of the heart; we should not then quarrel with
the Word, when it nakedly discovers our selves unto our selves, but fall on our
faces and worship God, confessing that he is in his Ministers of a truth (1
Cor. 14.24, 25.) We must bless, and not blaspheam, as some that say, The Devil
is in the Minister, he has some Familiar, else how could he know my thoughts?
when it is not we that know your thoughts, but it is God who searches your
hearts, and by his Word does discover the secrets of your hearts, though we
know not your faces. It is the Lord who directs the Word to the hearts of his
people. Austin reports of himself that when he had been Preaching to his own
people, he fell from the subject he intended, to confute the Manichees. When
he came home, he said to those at dinner with him, Did you not observe how I
went from the subject intended? they answered yes. Then said he, Surely the
Lord did this for the good of some soul that was present. Not long after came
one Firmus, a Merchant to him, with tears in his eyes, blessing God, that had
brought him to confute the Manichees, whereby he was converted. God is a free
Agent, and works when he will, on whom he will, and by whom he will.

6 It serves for Consolation many ways.

1 It may comfort us against the reproaches and slanders of the wicked. This
comforted Job, when his friends accused him falsely, that the Lord knew the way
which he took, Job 23.10. q. d. Though my friends accuse me for an Hypocrite,
yet Lord thou know not only an act or two of mine, but thou know the very
way that I take. He knows the bent of our Souls, and will reward us
accordingly. This uphold Jeremy under this very temptation, Ier. 15.10, 15. and
Paul, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4, 5. The godly have hidden Mannah, which comforts them
against the calumnies of the world; and a white Stone, which arms them against
the black Stones which are thrown at them by the world; and a new Name, to
comfort them against the nicknames of the world.

2 It may comfort us in all our troubles, that the Lord sees them, Exodus 3.9.
Acts 7.34. Our groanings are not hid from him, Psalm. 38.9. Though wheels go
cross, yet God has a wheel in those wheels; Though we know not how, yet he
knows how, and when it is best to deliver his, 2 Pet. 2.9.

3 It may comfort us in point of Weakness. It may be thou can not express thy
mind in words, I but the Lord knows our thoughts, and desires, afar off, even
before we think them, and our words before we speak them. Before we call he
answers, and if we have but sincere desires, See more in Mr. Dyke on the Heart,
cha. 31. p. 397, etc.
he has promised to hear them, Psalm. 10.17. It may be that thou art under a
Tentation, and can see no faith, nor love in thy heart; yea but God can.
Grace is Gods handwriting in our hea^^s, ( Ier. 31.33.) which he can read,
when we cannot; so that as Paul said, I know no evil by my self, yet am I not
thereby justified; so may thou say, I know no good by my self, yet herein am
I not condemned.

4 It may encourage us, to be much in secret with God, in secret Prayer,
Meditation, and Communion, Thy Father which sees in secret, he shall reward
thee openly. Thy secret obedience shall have open recompense. Jeremy that wept
in secret, had his life given him, when the King had his eyes put out, and many
Nobles were slain.

4 Obs. The Lord can turn our light into darkness. He can turn the morning
(which usually brings light with it) into the darkest night. Thus he dealt with
Egypt, he brought a dismal darkness on them for three days, even such
darkness as might be felt, Exodus 10.21, 22. So when Christ was Crucified, there
came a great darkness on the Land, Mat. 27.45. If we provoke the Lord to anger,
he can quickly turn our day into night ( Amos 5.8.) and our mirth into
mourning. He is the God of Nature, See the misery of darkness both Natural and
Spiritual, in my Com. on Psalm. 82.5.
and can when pleases him invert the order of Nature, and stifle us with gross
darkness. The Light is a pleasant thing, but the light of the Gospel, that
Supernatural Light, oh how pleasant and precious is that! We may better want
the Sun in the Firmament (for that is but a common blessing) than the glorious
light of the Gospel, which shows us the way to eternal life. We should
therefore be thankful to God for all manner of Light, and take heed of
offending him, who can at once deprive us both of Natural and Supernatural
light. He can make our Sun to set at Noon, and darkness to surprise us in the
brightest day, and make us run from Sea to Sea to hear a Sermon, and it shall
not be granted to us, Amos 8.9, 10, 11, 12. Let us then walk in the light
whilst we have the light, lest our unthankfulness deprive us of it, John 12.35.
Romans 13.12, 13.

5 Obs. If we take the words in the second sense, then observe, That God is the
Maker both of Day and Night. He creates Light, and he creates Darkness; he
makes the Morning, and the Evening; the rising, and the setting Sun give
praises unto him ( Genesis 1.5.) and we are bound to him for both. 1. That he has
given us the Day wherein to serve him; and secondly, that he has given us the
Night, wherein to rest, that we might be fitted for his service.

6 Obs. See my Com. on Psalm. 82.7.
God is the most High. This appears in that all high places are subject to him,
whether you take them Literally, or Metaphorically, he treads upon all the high
places of the earth, all Mountains, all Idols, all high conceits of men, and
whatsoever exalts it self against his Kingdom, Quicquid magnum est and excelsum
in terra, huie subjicitur. Luther.
he will bring it down. If he touch any of these Mountains they presently
vanish into smoke, Esaias 64.1. Iam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5.

7 Obs. God is Jehovah. This is the most proper Name of God, and therefore is
so frequently given to him in the Old Testament. S. Jerome observes, that there
are ten Names given to God in Scripture, of which Jehovah is the chief and most
proper, and is never given to any but only unto God. It sets forth his eternal,
infinite, incomprehensible Self-being, and serves to distinguish him from
Idols, which have no life or being in them. Hence it is called, Gods glorious
and fearful Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. To let pass those Jewish and Rabbinical
nicities, and quiddities about this Name, we have the sum and substance of it
in Exodus 3.14. and 34.6. Revel. 1.4, 8. He is Alpha, and Omega, who is, who
was, and who is to come.

This name implies 1 Gods Self existency. 2 Eternity. 3 Sovereignty. 4
Immutability. 5 Fidelity.


1 God is Jehovah, one that has his being in himself, and of himself, and from
no other. He is an absolute, perfect, independent Self-being. All Creatures
depend on him ( Psalm. 104.27.) but he needs none of us, Job 22.3. etc. 35.6, 7.
All have their D. Arrowsmith on John 1.3. p. 46.59
being, and their well-being from him, and therefore great reason we should
live unto his praise, Prove. 16. Acts 17.28. Romans 11. ult.

2 He is an Eternal Self-being, without beginning or ending, from everlasting
to everlasting, he is God, Heb. 13.8. of all Gods Names this does most fully
set forth Gods eternal Essence. This must comfort us in all our distresses,
when all other beings fail, yet God is an eternal being. When the Cisterns are
broken, yet this Fountain abides; when Fathers and Mothers dye, yet he lives
for ever, Psalm. 18.46. and 102.27, 28. Our Fathers where are they? and the
Prophets do not live for ever; but the God of the Prophets lives for ever.
Zach. 1.5.

3 He has supreme, absolute, and unlimited Sovereignty over all. He is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords. All have their dependence on him, but he depends
on none.

4 Immutability, he is I Am, still the same, there is not in him so much as a
shadow of changing, Mal. 3.6. James 1.17.

5 Fidelity, he is most true both in his Threatenings and Promises. They are all
Yea, and Amen, and shall certainly be fulfilled first or last to Gods people.

[See more of this Name Jehovah, in Zegedines, Loc. com. p. 599. Rivet on Exodus
3.13. Doct. Gouge his Arrows, on Exodus 17.15. p. 317, etc. V. Wilsons Dict.
and Ravanel. in V. Iehova and prae aliis Gerard. Loc. com. Loc. 2. Vol. 1. p.
225. ad p. 235. Edit. ult. Una cum Illyrico in calce clavis Script. p. 354. ad
p. 360. Binchius Mel. Theolog. Loc. 2. p. 30. Fullers Miscel. Lib. 2. cap. 6.
p. 201. and l. 4. cap. 13. p. 550.]

Concerning Gods other Attributes, see Doct. Preston on the Attributes, Stock,
Larkham, Church his Miscelan. Zanchius, and Lessius de Attributis, Mr. Leighs
Body of Divinity, lib. 2. c. 2. M. Randal his Treat. of God, and Christ, p. 19,
etc. Mr. Norton his Orthodox Evangel. p. 4.10.

Obs. 8. God is the Lord of Hosts.

This Title is often given to God, as 1 Samuel 1.3. and 4.4. and 2 Samuel 5.10. Psalm.
24.10. God is the sovereign Lord of all Creatures, whether visible or
invisible, reasonable or unreasonable, living or liveless, they are all his,
not only Elohe, Deus, one of Gods Titles in the Text, is a contract of Eloah,
and in the plural number Elohim, this is one of the most frequent Names of God
in Scripture: and denotes unto us that God is the Creator, Governor, and Judge
of the World. On this Title see my Com. on Psalm. 82.1 and Binchius Mellif.
Theol. P. 1. p. 30.
because he created them, and preserves them, but because he governs them, so
that they stand continually ready pressed for his service, when ever he shall
command them, Psalm. 103.21. Isa. 45.12. God has all Armies in Heaven, Earth,
and Hell at his command.

1 He has the hosts of Heaven at his beck. The Angels are ready to execute his
will, Genesis 32. Numb. ^2.22. Job 25.3. The Stars of Heaven fight for his people,
Judge. 5.20. Isa. 40.26. Thunder and Lightning, Wind and Hayl observe his
commands, Job 37.4. and 38.24. Psalm. 18.14. and 29.3. and 13.5, 7. and 148.8.

2 He has Terrestrial Armies at his command; as 1 All men whether good or bad,
he can make them execute his will even against their own. 2 The Beasts of the
field, Levit. 26.22. 2 King. 2.24 and 17.25. 3 He has Armies of Insects, and
inferior Animals to vex his enemies withal, as Froggs, Flies, Lice,
Catterpillars, Locusts, etc. Exodus 8. Deuteronomy. 28.28. Joel 1.4. and 2.25. Amos
7.1. and if these will not do, he has the Sea to drown men, Genesis 7.11. Exodus
14.28. and the fire to burn them, Genesis 19. and the earth to swallow them up
alive, Exodus 15.12. Numb. 16.30. and 26.10.

3 All the Devils in Hell are Gods Sergeants to arrest the wicked, and his
Jaylors to keep them fast till the Judgment of the great Day. But of this see
more at large before on Verse. 10. Obs. 5.

AN EXPOSITION, WITH Practical OBSERVATIONS UPON The Fifth Chapter of Amos.
VERSE 1. Hear ye this word which I take up against you, even a lamentation, O
house of Israel.


IN this Chapter we have the sum and substance of the fourth Sermon of the
Prophet Amos, which contains a Lamentation for the Captivity, and utter
desolation, which was coming upon the Kingdom of Israel for their obstinacy
and Idolatry.

Where we have 1 A short Exordium to quicken attention, verse 1. Hear this
word which I take up against you.

2 Here is a Commination and denouncing of Gods Judgments against them. 1 More
briefly, verse. 2, 3. 2 More amply and Rhetorically, verse. 11, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 27.

3 Here is a Catalogue of those enormities and crying sins which brought these
Judgments upon them: As 1 Unrighteousness, verse. 7. 2 Obstinacy and hating of
Reproof, verse. 10. 3 Cruelty and Oppressing of the poor, verse. 11. 4 Bribery,
verse. 12. 5 Presumption and vain confidence, in their vocal and instrumental
singing, in their sacrifices and hypocritical services, promising themselves
safety and deliverance, though they lived in all manner of wickedness, verse.
18, 21, 22, 23.


The sum of the Prophets Argument is this, That people which is unrighteous,
obstinate, cruel, hypocritical and Idolatrous, shall perish; But such are you,
O ye house of Israel: Therefore ye shall perish.

4 Here is an exhortation to Repentance, repeated again and again, to make the
deeper impression upon their hearts, that so they might prevent the Judgments
approaching, and this is done partly for the Elects sake that they might not
perish with the wicked, and partly for the wickeds sake that they mighr be
left without excuse.

Here we have the two parts of Repentance. 1 The terminus a quo, from what
they must turn, viz. from Idols which cannot help in a day of wrath, verse. 5.
and from the evil of sin, which brings with it the evil of punishment, verse.
14, 15.

2 The terminus ad quem, to whom they must return, viz. to God, which is often
repeated to show the great necessity of it, verse. 4, 6, 8, 14, 15, 24. Seek ye
the Lord, seek goodness, seek righteousness.

2 Here are Motives to enforce the duty. The first is a drawing Motive taken
from the benefit which attends Repentance, viz. life and salvation, verse. 4.
Seek ye me, and ye shall live, and with all the gracious favor and presence
of God, verse. 14, 15.

The second is a driving Motive, drawn from the evil which will necessarily
follow the neglect of it, God will be to them a consuming fire, verse. 6. Seek
ye the Lord, lest he break forth like fire in the house of Joseph, and devour
it.

A third Motive is drawn from Gods power, which is seen in the works of
Creation. He makes the seven Stars and Orion, verse. 8.2 In his works of
Providence, He strengthens the spoiled against the strong.

VERSE 1.
Hear this word which I take up against you, even a Lamentation, O house of
Israel.
IN this Chapter the Lord goes on with his charge against Israel, and the
Prophet as his Atturney-general does manage the charge against them. He opens
the case, shows them their sins, and Gods Judgments coming on them for those
sins; yet withal puts them in a way to prevent them, by persuading them to
reform the things amiss amongst them.

In this first Verse the Prophet makes as it were an O yes, calling for silence
and attention. Hear ye this word which I take up against you. He had called
for audience twice before Amos 3.1. and 4.1. but this people had stopped their
ears, and hardened their hearts, they were become Sermon-proof, and
Judgement-proof, nothing could work upon them, yet the Prophet calls a third
time, if by any means he might work upon them.

This Verse is as it were the Preface to the Sermon, and is set in the front to
quicken attention; where we have, 1 The matter to be attended, and that is the
word of the Lord published by the Prophet Amos. Hear this word which I take up
against you; Nasa, sustulit, sumpsit.
or as it is in the Original, which I lift up against you, that is, which I
utter against you by Gods command, more clearly, and more fully, with more
spirit and life than formerly, so Job 21.2.

2 Here are the persons against whom this Sermon is intended, and that is the
ten Tribes, here called, The house of Israel, q. d. I speak not against
strangers, but against you, O house of Israel, and therefore it concerns you to
attend.

3 Here is the nature of the Sermon, it is a Lamentation, or lamentable
Prophecy of the utter destruction of Israel, q. d. Both I and Hosea, and other
Prophets, have for a long time warned you of approaching judgments, but since
you slight our Threatenings, and give your selves to mirth and merriment, I
will now take up a Lamentation for you, and will mourn for you that will not
mourn for your selves.

So that this Lamentation implies first, the deep sense and apprehension which
the Prophet had of that misery which was coming upon Israel for their Idolatry,
^^nah significat lamentationem amarissimam. Tarnovius.
Incredulity, Security, and Impenitency. This was to him matter of bitter and
great lamentation, as the word imports, Ezekiel. 2.10. and 19.1, ult. and such
lamentation the Lord expects from his people, Ezekiel. 26.17. and 28.12. and 32.2.
Thus David lamented for Saul and Jonathan, Threnodia seu carmen lugubre quo
regni Israelitici interitus deploratur, Gualter.
2 Samuel 1.17.

Ego tollo super vos sermonem qui eos adluctum and lamentum coget, etiamsi nunc
sint praefracti contra Deum. Calvin. See Mr. Trap on Mal. 1.1.
Secondly, This Lamentation implies a sad song, a doleful ditty, a burdensome
and lamentable Prophecy of dismal judgments against Israel; that which the
Prophet calls a Lamentation here, is often called a Burden, as Isa. 13.1. and
22.1. Ezekiel. 12.10. Nahum 1.1. Hab. 1.1. Zach. 9.1. Mal. 1.1.

q. d. You laugh at my Threatenings now, but you will find them an heavy burden
shortly, and that which will bring great lamentation with it.

Quest. But why does the Prophet lament for these impenitent sinners that would
not lament for themselves? he should rather have rejoiced in Gods just
judgments on them, according to that, Psalm. 58.10. The righteous shall rejoice
when he sees the vengeance.

Answ. We must distinguish of sinners.

1 Some are within the pale of the Church, and are Gods people by profession,
being in Covenant with him, having a remnant of elect ones mingled amongst
them. Now Gods judgments either imminent or present on these, have been in all
ages lamented by the Saints, they have always been deeply affected with the
misery of Sion, though their sins have brought it justly upon them, yea and the
Lords own bowels do yern over them, even when in justice he cannot but punish
them, Hos. 6.4. and 11.8* Besides we must lament the sins to these, even when
we adore Gods just judgments on them, and must denounce his theatnings
against them with tears and lamentation.

2 Others are without the Church, and many within, that are malicious,
implacable, incorrigible, and incurable enemies to God, his ways, his worship,
and his people; now in the destruction of such we may, and must rejoice, we are
commanded so to do, Psalm. 58.10. Prove. 11.10. Rev. 18.20. and 19.12.

Cant. Not that we may rejoice in their destruction simply as they be our
enemies, or as they be creatures, but as they are wicked, rebellious creatures,
and implacable enemies to God and his ways, so we may, yea and God himself
does rejoice in their destruction, Deuteronomy. 28.63. Prove. 1.26.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Ministers may sometimes preface as occasion requires, so did Paul, Act.
13.16. Men of Israel hear, and ye that fear God, give audience. But of this
before on Amos 4.1.

2 Obs. Ministers must not preach their own inventions, but what God commands
them. Hear the word which God commanded me to deliver to you. But of this at
large before on Amos 4.1.

3 Ministers must preach Judgment as well as Mercy. Law as well as Gospel, and
Lamentation as well as consolation. See Amos 6.1.

4 It Is our duty to be affected with the miseries of Gods people, whether they
be imminent or present; we must weep with them that weep; and as fellow members
of the same mystical body, we should have compassion one of another, Romans
12.15. 1. Pet. 3.8. See more at large on Amos 6.6.
Especially this concerns Gods Ministers to commiserate the sad condition of
Gods people, and to intercede for them at the Throne of Grace, Ier. 9.1. and
18.20. Joel 2.17. So did Moses for Israel, Exodus 32.31, 32. and Samuel for
Saul, 1 Samuel 15. ult. Jeremy writ a whole book of Lamentations for Jerusalem,
and Christ wept over it, Luke 19.41, 42. Hence the Lord so often commands the
Prophets to take up a Lamentation for the Princes of Israel, Ezekiel. 19.1. yea
for Tire, Ezekiel. 27.2. and for Egypt, Ezekiel. 32.2.16. and threatens such as
neglected this duty, Ezekiel 13.5. and 22.30, 31. How great then is the sin of
those wicked men who mock at such as mourn for them, who hate those which help
to keep off judgments from them, who seek the destruction of those which seek
their salvation, and desire their death, who use all means to bring them to
life; such horrid ingratitude shall not pass without some signal vengeance.

5 Obs. Such as contemn Gods Judgments, shall at last lament their folly.

These obduratesi nners scoft at the Prophets Threatenings, and asked, when will
the day of the Lord come? why it shall come upon you in a day that you look not
for it, and shall be a lamentation and a burden that shall sink you: Patience
abused turns into fury, See my Com. on Hos. 13.12.
though God bear long, yet he will not always bear.

VERSE 2.
The Virgin of Israel is fallen, she shall no more rise, she is forsaken upon
her Land, there is none to raise her up.
IN the precedent Verse the Prophet tells us of a Lamentation given him by God
to publish against Israel. In this Verse he comes to tell us exegetically what
it is, viz. the fatal and final overthrow of the whole Kingdom of Israel, set
forth in emphatical terms, and variety of words to assure this unbeleeving
people of the certainty of those Judgments which they should shortly feel. In
the words we have the sum of this Funeral Lamentation, or Samaria's Epitaph;
The Virgin of Israel is fallen. Where we have, 1 A Judgment threatened, and
that is a fall. Israel is fallen, viz. into the hands of the Assyrians. 2 Here
are the persons upon whom this judgment shall fall, and that is upon the
Virgin of Israel, or the ten Tribes. 3 Here is the certainty of it, Is fallen,
that is, they shall as surely come down, as if they were this day in the dust.


Quest. How is Israel called a Virgin, whereas she had played the Harlot with
Idols, and is therefore called on Harlot? Hos. 1.2.

Answ. Kingdoms and Cities are called Virgins in Scripture on several
accounts: As 1 when they flourish in riches and renown, and remain unconquered,
and unaccustomed to any yoke of servitude; Virgo Israelis i. e. regnum Israel
quod simile est Pulchrae Virgini propter opes, and tranquillum statum, Piscator
now such in Scripture, though they be Heathenish and Idolatrous, yet are
called Virgins: As Tire, Isa. 23.12. Babylon, Isa. 47.1. and Egypt, Jer. 46.11.

2 In respect of their Effeminacy, Delicacy, and Wantonness, priding themselves
in their Beauty and Bravery, and tricking themselves up like Virgins; Israel
vocatur Virgo, non propter integritatem, sed propter ornatum and
pulchritudinem. Estius in Loc. difficil.
and thus Israel was effeminate, living daintily and deliciously, giving
themselves up to feasting, mirth, and music, Amos 6.4, 5, 6. priding
themselves in their wealth, and ornaments, and in this respect they might be
called Virgins.

3 In respect of their weakness, and unableness to help themselves; so Israel
shall fall, and be like a poor, helpless, forlorn Virgin, that sits alone in
distress without any helper; she shall now be deflowred, and wasted by the
Assyrian.

4 Israel is here called a Virgin after her Apostasy, but this is in relation
to former times, before they were Idolatrous, as in David's time (before the
division of the ten Tribes) when they served God in purity, without the mixture
of humane inventions; and likewise in relation to their duty, showing what they
should have been, and not what now they were; and in this sense Judah is also
called a Virgin after their Apostasy, Ier. 18.13. and 31.21. they had both the
name of Virgins, but were indeed Idolaters, and by consequence Adulteresses,
that broke the Covenant of their God.

5 The City of Samaria was a maiden City, it was never subdued or conquered by
any Nation, before the Assyrian King Salmaneser brought it under the yoke of
Servitude, and carried the ten Tribes captive into Assyria and Media; and in
this respect it might be called a Virgin.

3 Here is the certainty of this Judgment set forth in the Present Tense,
Praeterita profuturis ponit ad majorem rei certitudinem. Mercer.
The Virgin of Israel is fallen; that is, she shall as surely fall as if it
were already done; and this is usual with the Prophets, to signify the
certainty of a rhing, by putting it in the Present, or praeterit Tense. Thus
the Scripture speaks of Eastern and Western Babylon in the Present Tense,
Cecidit, significat actum instantem and quasi inchoantem secundo cecidit, i. e.
jam cadere incipit, ac brevi prone casu cadet Babylon. A Lapide.
Babylon is fallen, is fallen; that is, it shall suddenly surely, and
irrecoverably fall, Isa. 21.9. Ier. 51.8. Rev. 14.8. and 18.2. So Jude 14. The
Lord comes, that is, he will as surely come, as if he were now coming to
Judgment. This was about forty years before the final overthrow of Samaria,
that the Prophet foretold this; yet since God had decreed their fall, he tells
them, it shall as surely be effected as if it were done this day; and it is
usual with all the Prophets to speak thus assertively, not only because of the
certainty of what his denounced, but because from the first denuntiation the
plague begins, though not discerned, nor sometimes accomplished till many years
after.

4 Here is the aggravation of her fall; 1 She shall fall so that she shall
never rise again. 2 She shall be forsaken in her own Land. 3 There shall be
none to raise her up.


Many fall but they rise again, but when a Kingdom shall fall from its former
splendour and dignity, and never be restored again, that is very sad; yet this
was Isreal's case, they were carried Captive into Assyria, and the body of the
Kingdom, and generality of the People never returned again; nor had they ever
the face of a Kingdom more, 2 King. 17. Hos. 4.5. and 5.5. When the remainders
of Judah returned out of the Babylonish Captivity to Jerusalem, some few of
Israel joined themselves with them, and are reckoned with Judah, the rest of
the ten Tribes being scattered, and dispersed up and down the world,
degenerated into Gentiles, and some of those dispersed were converted in the
Apostolical times, as appears by the inscriptions of the Epistles of James and
Peter.

Obj. But we read in our Saviors time of the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, Matthew 10.6. and 15.24. and that Nicodemus was a Master in Israel, Ioh.
3.10. and therefore some conclude, that the Kingdom of Israel was not totally
ruined.

Ans. The word Israel has many significations in Scripture, but that in
Matthew has relation to the Kingdom of Judah, for in Christ's time there was
no other Kingdom of Israel extant but that, and that also was very low when
Christ came, as I have showed on Amos 9.11. and by a Master in Israel is meant
no more but a Teacher in the Church of God, for the Church is often called
Israel, Psalm. 115.12. Galat. 6.16.

Obj. It was foretold, that the ten Tribes should be made one with Judah, and
should return with them, Ezekiel. 37.16, 17, 19, 22.

A. This is spoken of Gospel times, and implies a Spiritual, not a Corporal
returning of a remnant of those despised and dispersed ones in the days of the
Messiah, who should be united to Judah, and by the preaching of the Gospel be
brought into the unity of the Church.

She is forsaken upon her Land. She had forsaken God, Nittesca, derelicta,
deserta, abjecta, humi projecta.
and now all desert and forsake her; she had laid Piety and Justice in the
dust, and now God resolves to lay her in the dust, she shall be smitten to the
earth, and dashed against it by the Assyrian with such force, that like an
earthen pot it shall never be sodred together again.

And which greatly aggravates their misery, all this should happen to them in
their own Land, they should want men to help them in their own Land, as
appears in the next verse. They should be afflicted and brought low, not in an
enemies Country, but even in their own; they should be slaughtered and
enslaved in the sight of their own Country, which had been like a Mother and
Nurse unto them, and was dearly beloved of them. It aggravates a Virgins
misery, to be slain in the sight of her own Mother.

There is none to raise her up. God will not, and then Creatures cannot. She
shall fall without any help or hope of restoration, no neighbor Nation shall
once reach out an helping hand to raise her out of the dust, but there let her
lie, like one that is felled to the ground, and not able to rise of himself,
and forsaken of all others must needs remain as he fell; so Israel should
never recover his pristine splendour, and flourishing condition, though some
remnants should remain, or as it follows in the next verse.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Sin lays famous and flourishing Kingdoms in the dust.

Those Maiden-Cities and Kingdoms which were never touched, nor taken, yet if
sin reign in them (as it did in Samaria) it will ruin them. Where are the
Babylonian, Persian, Grecian Monarchies, which were sometimes famous and
flourishing, and the terror of the world? they are long since laid in the dust.

2 Impenitent sinners shall certainly perish.

Though they may flourish for a time, yet when their sin is ripe, they shall
come down; and therefore the Prophet speaks in the Present Tense, Israel is
fallen; that is, he shall as certainly fall as if he were down already. So
Babylon that lives in Luxury and security, shall at last be burnt, Revelat.
18.7, 8, 9, 10.

3 When God is against us, all forsake us.

See Mr. Gr^enhil on Ezekiel. 9.2. p. 211.
Israel is forsaken in his own Land, and so sadly forsaken, that there is not
one to raise him up. The Land did formerly abound with men, yet now they have
none to help them in their misery; to the dust they must, and there they lie*
As God will not cast away the righteous man, but will assist him in his
troubles; so he will not take a wicked man by the hand, Job 8.20. but as he
brings them into trouble, so he leaves them there, Ezekiel. 22.20. and 29.5. his
own he will not leave, and if men will not succor them, yet he will, Job 5
19. Ier. 30.17. he will give his not only the grace, but also the blessing of
peace, Psalm. 29.11. Levit. 26.6. when our ways please him, then all are at
peace with us, Prove. 26.7.2 Chro. 30.9.

4 God often retaliates sinners, and pays them in their own coin.

Israel that forsook God, is now forsaken of all, and those that overthrew
Justice, and oppressed the poor, are now overthrown themselves, and oppressed by
others. But of this see Amos 6. ult. Obs. 8.

VERSE 3.
For thus says the Lord God, the City that went out by a thousand shall leave
an hundred, and that which went forth by an hundred, shall leave ten to the
house of Israel.
WHat the Prophet had spoken before in general, now he comes to express more
plainly and particularly, viz. That the Kingdom of Israel should perish; yet
not so totally, but that a remnant should be spared; though the body of the
people should be cut off, yet a decimation should live to praise God.

So that in this verse we have the reason of the Prophets lamentation and
doleful ditty, and that is the great havoc which God would make amongst this
people; he would cut off nine parts, and leave but a tenth. When the Roman
Armies did mutiny, the Commanders did use to decimate them, punishing every
tenth man. But the Lord goes further here, being incensed against Israel, he
tells them, that by the Sword, by Captivity, by the Pestilence and Famine, he
would make such a slaughter amongst them, that the City which went out by a
thousand, should be brought to an hundred, and an hundred to ten; that is, of
a great multitude very few should return. Such a woeful decimation there should
be amongst them, that very few should escape. The like Threatening we have set
forth under another Metaphor, Amos 3.12. As the Shepherd takes out of the
mouth of the Lion, two legs, or the piece of an ear, so shall the children of
Israel be taken out of Samaria, etc. q. d. as a Shepherd when a Lion has been
devouring his flock, finds some mangled remains of a leg, or an ear; so shall
it be with Israel, some one or two shall escape the general slaughter and
Captivity.

The City that went out by a thousand; that is, The City which had a thousand
Inhabitants passing to and fro through the gates thereof; or more genuinely,
The City which sent forth a thousand able men to the Wars, or that could
furnish, and set out a thousand men fit to bear Arms, shall have but an hundred
left. The Prophet seems to allude to that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 1.15. where the
people are divided under Captains over thousands, and Captains over hundreds.

This Threatening was partly fulfilled in the three years siege of Samaria, 2
King. 18.10. and partly after, when there was a great devastation of men
amongst them.

Lastly, To assure them of the reality and truth of all that he had spoken;
he brings in the Lord asserting it, Thus says the Lord God, q. d. You have
not to do with impotent men, but with an Omnipotent God, who both can and will
execute his judgments upon the heads of the wicked.

The sum of all is this, So few shall be left alive after the long* and hard
sieges of the Assyrians, that in those Cities of Israel out of which a thousand
able men had wont to go forth to War, now there should be left but an hundred,
and an hundred shall be brought to ten, says the Lord who does this.

OBSERVATIONS.
Sin is the grand depopulator of a Kingdom. It makes Cities that go out by
thousands to return by hundreds, and reduces their hundreds to tens. We use
to complain of such as unpeople Towns and Villages; sin is the
Arch-depopulation of Towns and Cities, it brings the Sword, Plague and Famine
upon Nations, which sweep men away by thousands. As obedience multiplies a
people, and makes them like the sand of the Sea for multitude, 1 King. 4.20. So
disobedience makes men few in number, which were before as the Stars of heaven
for multitude, Deuteronomy. 28.62. We should therefore unanimously rise in arms
against this Cutthroat sin; if an enemy should come to Town that had killed
our fathers, mothers, wives and children, and robbed us of all our pleasant
things, with what indignation and fury would men, women and children jointly
rise to ruin such an enemy? Sin is this adversary, it robs Sovereigns of their
subjects, Pastors of their people, and robs us of our dearest relations. We
should therefore do by it as the Jews did by Paul (whom they looked upon as
their adversary, Act. 22.27, 28.) when they saw him, they stirred up all the
people, and laid hands on him, saying, Men of Israel help, This is he that is
against this people, and against the Law, and against this place. So should we
encourage each other against sin, and suppress it, saying, Magistrates,
Ministers, men and brethren help, this is that which destroys our people,
wastes our Cities, unpeoples our Towns, opposes the Laws, and brings confusion
every where.

2 Obs. In the midst of judgment, God remembers mercy. All had deserved death
here, yet such is his clemency that he spares a Tenth, and leaves a remnant,
Isa. 1.9. and 6.11, 12, 13. It Is the Lords singular mercy that any remain
alive, and it is his overflowing goodness that we are not all utterly
consumed, and hurled out of the world at once, Lam. 3.22. In the midst of these
devastations, here is a gleaning left to praise him.

3 Obs. The threatenings of Gods Ministers are Gods threatenings. Thus says the
Lord, the City that went out by a thousand, shall leave an hundred. It Is not I
(says Amos) but the Lord by me his weak instrument, that tells you this. We
are Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. Now the words of an Ambassador are
esteemed as the words of him that sent him. This made Cornelius (though a
Soldier and a Commander) yet to set himself as in Gods presence, and so to
hear as if God himself spoke to him, Act. 10.33. and so did the Thessalonians,
1 Thessalonians. 2.13. when our preaching agrees with the word of God, it is to be
esteemed as the word of God himself. If this were truly believed, it would make
us come with other affections to hear the word than most now do.

VERSE 4.
For thus says the Lord unto the house of Israel, seek ye me, and ye shall
live.
THe Prophet having showed this people their misery, and affrighted them with
the Threatenings, he comes now unto the Remedy, and shows them how they may
prevent all that misery which like a flood was rushing in upon them, especially
for their Idolatry, and that is by Repentance, by forsaking their Idols, and
turning to the Lord. Where there is no ground of hope, people grow desperate
and run from God, and therefore the Prophet gives them some glimpse of mercy,
inviting them once and again to seek the Lord, that so they might prevent his
fury.

In the words we have 1 A preface, Thus says the Lord. This is often used before
by this our Prophet, in the first, second, third, and fourth Chapters: and this
he does, 1 To quicken attention* 2 To make them attend with the greater
reverence and fear, since it is the word of God, and not of man; 3 To assure
them of the certainty and truth of what he spoke, See more in D. Ben^field on
Amos 1.3, 6.
and that it should be certainly and suddenly effected, for he that is
Almighty has said it.

2 Here are the persons to whom he speaks, viz. To the house of Israel, i. e.
to the ten Tribes. The invitation is general, to take off all excuse, that none
might say, They were not exhorted to the duty.

3 Here is a Precept, Seek ye me.

Where we have 1 The Act, Seek. 2 The Object, Me.


4 A Promise, And ye shall live.

The Precept is short, but very comprehensive. It is indeed a brief of the
whole body of Religion, or a summary of the whole duty of man. The Scripture
does in many places epitomize our duties, reducing them sometimes to eleven
heads, as Psalm. 15. Sometimes to six, as Isa. 33.15. and Heb. 6.1.2. Sometimes
to three, viz. Justice, Mercy, and humble walking with God. Micah 6.8. Our
Savior has epitomized them, and reduced them all unto two, viz. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self. But
our Prophet here comes and sums them all up in one, saying, Seek the Lord.

It Is not Bakash, voluit petiit, but Parash, accurate, diligentissime, and summa
cura quaerere.
The word Seek is emphatical, and signifies not a bare wishing or woulding, or
some cold velleities, but an earnest, accurate, exquisite inquiring after God,
and his ways; and therefore the Septuagint render it by a compound word which
signifies to seek out with earnestness and diligence till we find the Lord.
The Apostle uses the same word, Heb. 11.6. The Lord is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. It Is not (...), quaerite, but (...), diligenter inquirite.
Chi, ide^, qu^circa.


The word implies labor, industry, and constancy, we must never rest till we
have found the Lord, as the woman that had lost her groat, continued seeking
till she had found it, Luke 15.8.

3 Here is the causative particle, For, which may be rendered, therefore, and
then the sense will be more current, thus, q. d. Since the Lord has threatened
to make such havoc amongst you, therefore seek him sincerely that ye may
live, for he desires not your ruin, but your returning.

Yet some make the particle redundant here, and look upon it only as an
expletive particle, often so used by the Hebrews. The sense is here entire
without it.

4 Here is the object of our seeking, and that is God, Seek ye me, Excellent
things are the object of our desires; now there is none like God, and therefore
none to be desired like him. He is our Creator, Redeemer, Preserver, ours in
all sweet Relations, our Father, Husband, Lord, King, etc. and therefore to be
sought and served by us in an especial manner. One of these obligations call
for observance and duty, but when all shall concenter, and meet in one, how
great should our observance be.

2 This seeking of God implies a sincere turning to him, a loving him with all
our heart, a seeking him simply for himself, it notes a trusting in him, a fear
to offend him, a forsaking of all Idols and false ways (as it follows in the
next verse) delighting only in his pure word and worship, 1 Chronicles. 16.10. and
praying to him, Psalm. 34.4. Matthew. 7.7. It implies also an obeying his
Commands, 2 Chronicles. 14.4. and seeking his face and favor at all times, Psalm.
27.10. Isa. 55.6. These are those things above, which we are commanded to seek,
Colos. 3.1.

Thus we see, what a Magazine of matter is comprehended in this little Precept,
V. Gerhard. Loc. com. de lib. arbitr. Tom. 2. ss. 73. mihi. p. 225. edit. ult.
Seek ye me.

Obj. This command to seek God (say Papists and Arminians) implies, that we
have Free Will of our selves to seek him, and turn to him, else why does the
Lord command us so to do, if we had no power to do it?

Ans. It does not follow, that because the Lord commands us to seek him,
therefore we have power of our selves to do it. For, 1 These commands show us
our duty, but not our ability; they show what we ought to be, but not what we
are. 2 Yet these Exhortations are not in vain, for the Lord makes them
effectual in the hearts of his people; what he bids them do, he enables them
in some measure to do. 3 The Lord had a remnant of his Elect mingled amongst
this heap of chaff, and their wills being changed, and made conformable to Gods
will, See more in my Beauty of Holiness, p. 6, 7, etc
are willing and ready to seek and serve him. 4 Hereby the wicked are made more
inexcusable, and their malice and obstinacy made more apparent to the world,
since they stand out against so many invitations to come in.


[Against Free Will, see Davenants Determ. Q. 9. p. 45. D. Sibbs, Concio ad
clerum, p. 69. Laurent. in Apoc. 2.5. p. 125. Camero Theses de Great. and Lib.
arb. p. 273. ad 296. Paraeus contra Bellar. Tom. 1. Totaliter. Alting, Loc.
com. P. 2. p. 460. and Hornbec. contra Socin. l. 3. c. 5. p. 611. Brochmand
Cas. Cons. de homine primo, cap. 1. p. 134. folio. Walaeus Lo^^ com. P. 1. p.
16. and p. 437. Mr. Burgess against Orig. sin. l. 2. chapter 4. p. 289. Rolloc in
Romans 8. p. 152, etc. Dr. Arrowsmith on John 1.13. p. 189. and 198, Mr. Case
Morn. Lect. quarto, p. 207.]

5 Here is a promise to encourage them to seek the Lord, drawn ab utili, from
the benefit they should reap thereby, Ye shall live, or live ye; the
Imperative Mood is put for the Future tense, by an usual Hebraism, Prove. 3.4.
and 4.4. to show the certainty of a thing, as here, Seek the Lord and live;
that is, ye shall certainly live: You shall have a Natural Life. You shall
have a Spiritual Life. You shall have a Eternal Life.


1 If you seek the Lord, and return to him, you shall have your Natural life
prolonged; whereas you are in danger of dying by the hand of the Assyrian, yet
do but return to me unfeignedly, and you shall experimentally find that your
lives shall be given you for a prey; at least ye shall not be utterly
destroyed, but instead of War, you shall have peace and prosperity in your
borders. This seems to be the most genuine sense of this place (though we may
not exclude the other, for it is a known Rule, that it is safe taking the words
in the largest sense, if neither matter, phrase, nor scope hinder) for in the
foregoing verse, the Lord tells them what slaughter he would make amongst
them, therefore he bids them here, return and live.

Yet we may not solely confine it to a Natural life, because it is a Legal
promise, Sub nomine vitae Hebraei omnem hominis felicitatem complecti solent.
Gualter.
and they usually do comprehend Spiritual mercies in them. The Hebrews
frequently under the name of Life, do comprehend all manner of prosperity and
felicity, both Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal, Deuteronomy. 4.1. and 5. ult. Psalm.
34.12. and 133.8. Prove. 4.4. Ezekiel. 18.9. The like expression we use at this
day, at the Inauguration of Kings, when we cry, Vivat Rex, let the King live;
that is, all health, prosperity, and happiness attend him.

2 You shall live a spiritual life of Grace here, your souls shall enjoy
communion with God, they shall live to him here, and at last shall live with
him for ever; for Grace is the suburbs of glory.

3 You shall live eternally, Ezekiel. 18.17. ult.

Obj. But had not the Lord decreed the destruction of this people, how then
does he bid them return and live?

A. Such threatenings of Temporal Judgments are not always absolute, but
conditional, viz. if they repent not, I will destroy them; and though this
condition be not always expressed, yet it is understood, as appears by that
notable place, Ier. 18.7, 8, 9, 10. so that when people repent of their sin,
God will repent of the punishment, Deus novit mutare sententiam, si nos
noverimus mutare mores. Aug.
and stay the execution of the sentence which he had denounced against them, as
he did by the Ninivites. The changes is in us, and not in God.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Such as seek God rightly, shall live assuredly.

I say, such as seek God rightly, which cuts off many pretenders to religion,
who seem to seek and serve the Lord, but it is feignedly, and hypocritically;
they halt between God and Baal, between Christ and Belial; like Agrippa, they
are almost, but not altogether Christians; they have a name to live, but they
are dead indeed.

2 Others seek for the living amongst the dead. They seek the Lord amongst the
traditions and customs of men. Such men's religion is vain, Mat. 15.9. Amos 5.5.

3 Others seek, but it is too late; like Esau, that never cries till he had
lost the Blessing. So those, Luke 13.24, 25.

4 Others instead of seeking the Lord, sit all the day idle, they forget the
Lord days without number, he is not in any of their thoughts, Ier. 2.32. It is
not the somnolent, but the violent that get heaven, Against these see Mr.
Gelaspies Miscel. chapter 10.11.
Mat. 11.12. where then will those Idle, Atheistical Seekers of our time
appear, who are mere Scepticks in religion, that question every thing, but
believe and practice nothing? some of them have been Professors this forty
years, yet now they are to seek their religion. These men have laid good
foundations the while, that are going out of the world, before they know how to
live in the world; when the Lord has so clearly showed us what he requires of
us, Micah 6.8. what madness is it to be still running after New Lights, which
are no Lights for directions?

5 Others instead of seeking God, they persecute those that do sincerely seek
him, like the Scribes and Pharisees, that would neither follow Christ
themselves, nor suffer others so to do. Stripes are prepared for scorners, and
such mockers shall have their bonds made strong, Isa. 28.22.

6 Others seek, but it is amiss; for they seek riches, honor, pleasures,
instead of God, and things above. Those three are the Worlds Trinity, they are
the grand (...) of our times. David tells us, there be many of this stamp,
Psalm. 4.6. Many say, who will show us goods? Paul goes further, and tells us,
All men seek their own ease, wealth, ends, and respects; that is, All
comparatively, they are but few that seek the things of Christ, Phil. 2.21.

Q. Since there are so many Seekers, and so few good ones, how must I seek
aright?

A. That you may seek the Lord and find him, you must seek him, 1 Early. 2
Sincerely. 3 Zealously. 4 Sensibly. 5 Constantly. 6 Regularly.


1 Those that will find the Lord when they seek him, must seek him early, in
the morning of their youth, whilst the day of their Visitation lasts. To such
the Promise runs, Prove. 8.17. They that seek me early shall find me. It was
Iosiahs commendation, that when he was young, and but sixteen years old, he
began to seek and serve the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34.1, 3. and Timothy knew the
Scriptures from a Child, 2 Timothy 3.15.

See eight Reasons for this in Mr. Gatak. Ser. on Mat. 6.33. p. 43. folio. and
Mr. Burgess, Spi. Refinings. Ser. 75. p. 453.
We must also seek him orderly, seek his Kingdom in the first place, both
before, and above all other things, Matthew. 6.33.

2 Sincerely and cordially, nor hollowly and complementally. We must seek him
with all our might, to such the Promises run, that they shall find him, Deuteronomy.
4.29, 2 Chro. 15.15. Ier. 29.13. Then shall ye seek me and find me, when ye
shall search for me with all your heart. Thus David sought him, and found him,
Psa. 119.10. never any mist that ever sought him in truth, Psalm. 145.18. If we
be the genuine Seed of plain, sincere Jacob, we shall never seek his face in
vain, Isa. 45.19. before they call, he will answer such, and will run to meet
them, as he did the Prodigal, Isa. 65.24, Luke 15.18, 19, 20.

Yea, a wicked Ahab shall not altogether seek to God in vain; and if the shadow
can do so much, what will the substance and real seeking of God do?

3 We must seek him zealously, and earnestly; Magnamagn^, such great things
must be sought with f^rvent affections, Deuteronomy. 15.5. fleight seeking loses all.
Precious things are not easily attained. Pulsandi M^taphora ard^r and zelus
notatur, cum ob^^acula omnia assiduitate precandi perrumpimus. Car^w^ Harm.
Even the worlds wealth comes not with a wish, much less heavenly treasures.
They that will have them must ask, and if that will not do they must seek, if
seeking will not do they must be more importunate, and knock; it is not a bare
Repetition, but a Gradation, Mat. 7.7. we must seek as men do for silver, and
gold, with utmost diligence, Prove. 2.4. let not the children of this world be
wiser, and more industrious for their trash, than we for true treasure.
Remember, that none shall be rewarded fully, but such as seek him diligently,
Heb. 11.6.

4 Sensibly. See how we are undone without him, though we were Lords of all the
world, yet without the favor of God, who is Lord of all, we are nothing. Sense
of our wants will sharpen our desires after him, and make us resolve with
David, to give no rest to our eyes, nor slumber to our eyelids till we have
found him, Psalm. 132.4.

5 Constantly. 1 Chronicles. 16.11. We must never rest till we have found him,
persevere in the use of all good means, as Prayer, Meditation, etc. resolve to
take no denial, importunity will do much. Comfort will come in the end, and
will abundantly recompense all our waiting. Though hope deferred may make the
heart sick, yet when it comes it will be as a tree of life, Prove. 13.12.

6 Regularly. We must inquire for the good old way of P^rity and Peace and walk
therein, Ier. 6.16. we must not walk according to the superstitious Customs and
Canons of men, but according to the Canon of Gods Word. Galat. 6.16.

Q. But what benefit shall I have by seeking God?

A. Thou shall have Life, and that is a very powerful motive; life is so sweet
and desirable a thing, that the Devil could say, Skin for skin, and all that a
man has, will he give for his life, Job 2.4.

Now Piety has the promise. See my Beauty of Holiness, chapter 7. obj. 4.
1. Of Life Temporal, so far as shall be good for the righteous, Psalm. 34.12.
and 37.3. Prove. 3.17. and 22.4.

2 You shall have Spiritual life, Isa. 55.3. Ezekiel, 16.6. which is indeed the
only excellent, See the excellency of this spiritual life in Mr. Lawrence his
Life of says, p. 7. etc. and Mr. Obad. Sedgwick on Isa. 55.3. chapter 13. p. 489.
sweet, and durable life. Natural life is common, every wicked man lives it,
and it is imbittered with many crosses, and it last not, it is a vapor that
suddenly vanishes; but this spiritual life is a special, comfortable, endless
life, death it self cannot extinguish it.

3 If this be not enough, you shall have Eternal life, Joh. 3.16. and 6.51.
and 17.3.

VERSE 5.
But seek not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal, and pass not to Beersheba, for
Gilgal shall surely go into Captivity, and Bethel shall come to naught.
TRue Repentance consists of two parts, 1 There is terminus a quo, from what
we must turn: 2 Terminus ad quem, to whom we must turn. In the foregoing
verse, the Prophet sets down positively and affirmatively whom we must seek,
and to whom we must turn, and that is to the Lord. He comes now to show us
negatively, what we must not do, and what we must not seek, and that is
Idols. Seek the Lord, but seek not Idols. God puts a But and Block in their way
to keep them from them. But seek not Bethel. God can do all things; but Idols
can do nothing; great reason then we should forsake them, and cleave only to
God, who would have us first Table-men to worship him according to his own will
revealed in his word; and then second Table-men, in righteousness toward our
neighbor, verse. 15.

In the words we have 1 A Dehortation from Idolatry, to this end they must
Three places infected with Idolatry.
shun Bethel, shun Gilgal, and shun Beersheba.


1 That Bethel and Gilgal were such, I have showed before at large on Amos 4.4.
Bethel was the place where Jeroboam set up a golden Calf.

Gilgal was a City full of Idols, Hos. 4.15. and 12.11.

Beersheba was a City in Canaan where Abraham had formerly dwelt, Genesis 21.31,
32, 33. here God appeared to Isaac, Genesis 26.24 and here Jacob sacrificed, Genesis
46.1. This made these superstitious people think that there was more holiness
in this place than in others, and therefore hither they came, when God had
ordained them to go to Jerusalem.

This City was afterward allotted to the Tribe of Judah, Josh. 15.28, and 1
King. 19.8. yet it was inhabited by the Tribe of Simeon, See more on Amos 8.
ult.
Josh. 19.2. It was situate on the utmost South-border of the Land of Canaan,
as Dan was on the North. It was a City given to Idolatry, as Bethel and Gilgal
were, and therefore the Lord gives a strict injunction here, that they should
not go to any of them.

But seek not Bethel, etc. q. d. If you will be my people, you must cast away
your Idols, you must not go to worship the golden Calf at Bethel, nor to the
High Places and Idolatrous Altars at Gilgal and Beersheba, for these places
shall perish with the Idols that are in them.

Pass not to Beersheba. The Kingdom of Israel was divided from the Kingdom of
Judah, yet so mad were this people on Idols, that they will post over the
Country of Judah after them, when they had too many at home already.

2 To strengthen the Dehortation, here is a reason added, drawn from the danger
which would follow if they followed Idols, both they and their Idols should
perish. For Gilgal shall surely go into Captivity; that is, the Inhabitants of
Gilgal ( Met. subj.) going they shall go, i. e. they shall suddenly and
certainly go into Captivity by the hand of the Assyrian. Gilgal, Galo, jigleh,
migratio, migrando, migrabitur, vel volvendo volvetur. See more in my
Schools-Guard, on the figure Paranomasia.
There is an elegant Paranomasy in the words. Gilgal signifies rolling, Gilgal
shall roll to ruin; or rolling he shall speedily roll into Captivity. They
trusted in this place for safety, but both they and it should perish.

And Bethel shall come to naught. Bethel signifies the house of God, but by
reason of its Idolatry, it is called Beth-aven, Hos. 4.15. a house of vanity and
iniquity, Hos. 5.8. and 10.5.

Aven signifies an Idol, Aven, mendasium vanitas, inanita^.
vanity, inanity, and naught, and therefore the ruin of Bethel is set forth by
this Title. Bethel shall be Aven, or be brought to naught; that is* it shall
be totally ruined, and nothing shall remain of it, but the prints of Gods
indignation against it.

So that it is great folly for any to run to such Idolatrous places for
shelter, which can neither defend themselves from ruin, nor their Idols from
spoil, Hos. 10.5, 6.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Idolatrous places must be shunned. As they might not go to Bethel, Gilgal,
or Beersheba, so we may not go to Spain, Italy, France, etc. with the least
hankering after their Idols, if you do Satan will quickly make a prey of you;
for sin, especially the sin of Idolatry, is like Bird-lime, if a man go once to
touch it, he will be so entangled in it, that he cannot easily be shut of
it. In my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.5. p. 138. etc.
Hence it is that the Lord so often commands us to shun wicked society for fear
of infection, as I have showed at large elsewhere.

Against such, see B. Halls Quo vadis? p. 639, folio.
How great then is the sin of those, that do spontaneously travel into
Idolatrous Countries needlessly? such oft-times return infected both in body and
soul. Jeroboam that traveled into Egypt, brought home the Idolatry of Egypt
with him, with which he infected all Israel.

2 Obs. True converts must for sake Idols. They must say with repenting
Ephraim, What have I to do any more with Idols? Hos. 14.8. Many would fain
serve the Lord and their Idols too, but that will not be, if you will be mine,
you must renounce your Idols, says God, You must forget your kindred, and your
fathers house, Psalm. 45.10. that is, we must abandon all those corruptions
which we are strongly inclined unto by nature; and those Idolatrous, and
superstitious practices, which we were brought up in; we must renounce them
all, and give up our selves entirely to Christ our spiritual Husband, then, and
not till then will he take pleasure in us, and desire our beauty. Such as
desire to have communion with God, must first put away their Idols, Genesis 35.1,
2. Josh. 24.22, 23. Judge. 10.16. 1 Samuel 7.3. Psalm. 16.4, 5. True converts turn
from those vanities to the living God, Act. 14.15* and have a special command
given them to keep themselves pure from Idols, 1 John 5.21. They know that the
Lord is a jealous God, and cannot endure corrivals, not to have his worship
mixed with the inventions and fancies of men. As I have showed at large before
on Amos 4.4. Multi sunt hodie mediatores, qui dum vident non posse improbari
nostram doctrinam, vellent a ^quid medium fingere, i. e. vellent reconciliare
Papatum cum doctrina Evangelii, and Propheta oftendit talem mixtutam non posse
ferri a Deo. Calvin in locum.
God cannot abide halting and halving between two opinions, 1 King. 18.21. if
we will Worship God, we must abhor Idols, for we cannot serve both, Josh.
24.14, 15. No man can serve two such contrary Masters, that have contrary
commands, ways, and ends. There can be no communion between Christ and Belial,
2 Corinthians. 6.15. and therefore they that will go to Against going to Mass, see
Willets Sy^ops. Controveis. 13. p. 698. D. Geo. Abbots Thesis, Quaes. ^. p.
139. Perkins Cas. Consc. p. 89. B. Halls Cas. Consc. Dee. 3. cas. 13. p. 183.
Edit. ult.
Mass with their bodies, pretending that they keep their hearts for God, are
mere dissemblers. They partake with Idola^ets in their sin, harden them in
their Idolatry, and sin against the Prophets counsel here, that forbids men to
go after Idols.

3 Obs. Superstition is a toylsome thing.

It makes men that they cannot rest, but they must run up and down, now to
Bethel, anon to Gilgal, and then traverse the Country, and go a Perigrination
to Beersheba; so mad are men upon Idols, that they are not content with those
at home, but they must be gadding abroad after more. Thus the Papists at this
day, See more on Amos 8. ult. Obs. 5. and Mr. Greenh^l on Ezekiel. 20.27, Obs. 4
p. 87, 88.
though they have Idols more than a good many at home, yet must go a
Perigrination after more; and here see the perverse nature of man, how directly
opposite it is to God, he bids us go one way, and we go quite another. He
bids us go to Jerusalem, and they go one to Dan, another to Bethel, another
to Gilgal, and a fourth to Beersheba. So true is that, Homo est inversus
decalogus, Man is a perverse, cross-grained-peece to all Gods holy commands.

4 Obs. Idolatry brings desolation and ruin upon Cities and Kingdoms.

Gilgal shall go into Captivity, and Bethel shall come to naught, and the
Virgin of Israel shall fall. When Bethel Gods House, shall become Beth-aven, a
house of Idols and Vanity, then follows Beth-any, an house of misery and
affliction. They that follow such lying vanities forsake their own mercies.
Idols themselves are most vain, Vanity, and things of naught* and nothing do
they bring but naught with them. Hence the Scripture calls them, Elilim, things
of naught, Levit. 19.4. 1 Chronicles. 16.26. Psalm. 96.5.

2 Gnatsabim, Sorrows, because they bring men to sorrow, captivity, and misery,
1 Samuel 31.9. Psalm. 16.4. and 115.4.

3 Gillulim, filthy dung and excrements, because they are loathsome to God,
Levit. 26.30. Deuteronomy. 29.17. Ezekiel. 6.4, 5, 6.

4 Shi^utsim, detestable, loathsome abominitions, Ezekiel. 7.20. and 11.21. and
20.8. Ier. 32.34.

5 Segnirim, Devils; such as worship Idols, are said not to Worship God, but
Devils. They forsake the Lord and his Worship, to worship Devils, Levit. 17.7.
Deuteronomy. 32.17. 2 Chronicles. 11.15. 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. Rev. 9.20.

Great reason then that we should abominate Idols, which bring such sorrow and
misery upon places, incensing the Lord to set fire upon them, as it follows in
the next verse.

VERSE 6.
Seek the Lord and ye shall live, lest be break forth like fire in the house
of Joseph, and devour it, and there be none to quench it in Bethel.
GOod things are hardly believed, and slowly practiced, and therefore the
Prophet here renewes his Exhortation of seeking God by true Repentance, and
that he might the better prevail with them, he uses a double Motive.

The first is drawn from the danger which would ensue if they refused; the
Wrath of God would break forth upon them like a consuming fire, so that all
their superstitious Sacrifices at Bethel should not be able to quench it.

The second is drawn from the glorious and tremendous Majesty of God, with whom
they had to do; and this is accurately set forth, verse. 8, 9.

In this Verse we have a Repetition of the foregoing Exhortation to seek the
Lord, that they might live, q. d. If ever you desire to be truly happy, you
must forsake your Idols, and false-worship, devoting your selves wholly unto
God.

2 Here is a Reason to enforce the duty, Lest the Wrath of the Lord break out
like fire in the house of Joseph, and devour, it, and there be none to quench
it in Bethel.

Here the Holy Ghost seems to prevent an evasion, the Israelites might say, If
the Lord be thus angry with us, we will go to our Gods at Bethel, and they
shall succor and shelter us. Nay, says the Lord, you do but make lies your
refuge when you go thither for aid, for none of your Idols shall be able to
quench the fire of my wrath, no not in Bethel.

By Fire here is meant the Wrath of God, Ignis, i. e. sae^vissima Dei manus.
Mercer.
which should break forth like fire, in sudden, terrible, and irresistible
Judgments, devouring all before it, so that none should be able to quench it;
Tsalach, perrumpere, pervadere, feliciter Pertransire superatis omnibus
impedimentis. Rivet in Isa. 53.10.
so much the word in the Original imports. It is used for the carrying on of a
thing against all difficulty, or a successful breaking through in despite of
all opposition. All the world compared with God is but as so much dry stubble,
or a few dry thorns before a consuming fire, Exodus 15.7. Isa. 27.4. and 47.14.

Fire is taken two ways in Scripture, 1 Literally, and strictly, for the
Element of Fire, or for ordinary fire. 2. Figuratively, and Metaphorically, for
the Wrath of God, or any effects of his wrath any Judgment which he sends
upon the wicked, be it Sword, Plague, Famine, or whatever distress; yea the
very Flood which drowned the world may in this sense be called Fire. Thus it is
usually put in Scripture of all manner of dreadful Judgments; as Psalm. 18.7,
8. Isa. 66.15. Ier. 49.27. Amos 1.4. from this fire of Gods wrath comes fire
from Heaven and consumes the wicked, Genesis 19.24. Exodus 9.24. Levit. 10.2. Numb.
11.2. 1 King. 1.10. and at last they must lie in unquenchable fire, Isa. 30.33.
Mat. 3.12. and 25.41.


In the house of Joseph; that is, amongst the Israelites, or ten Tribes, who
are often called Jacob, Joseph, Ephraim, Samaria. By Joseph here is meant
Ephraim, for Joseph is often put for Ephraim his Son, Amos 6.6. Revel. 7.8. and
Ephraim is often put for the ten Tribes, because Jeroboam the first King of
Israel (after the division of the ten Tribes) was of the Tribe of Ephraim, 1
King. 11.6.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 So great is the patience and clemency of the Lord, that he is very loath to
destroy men.

See M. Burgess spi. Refining, 1 P. Sermon. 66. p. 403.
Hence it is that he sends his Ministers, rising early, and coming late unto
them, exhorting them again and again to seek him, and turn to him, that they
may live and not dye. See verse. 4, 5, 6, 14, 15. Greenhils Ser. on Rev. 22.17.
p. 145.


2 Obs. The Wrath of the Lord is exceeding terrible.

Hence it is compared to fire, which is the most terrible, tormenting, and
affrighting Element. Reyners Precepts for Practice, p. 41, 42.


Quest. But how is anger said to be in God, when he is impossible?

Ans. Anger and Wrath are ascribed to God improperly, and Metaphorically, by
an Anthropopathy; not as a perturbation, and trouble of mind, as it is in us;
but as an act of revenging Justice, which Justice as it simply burns against
sin, is called anger, but when it does more fiercely wax hot against sin, and
Sinners, it is called Wrath and Indignation, Isa. 64.5.

This Wrath of God is, 1 Formidable. 2 Durable. 3 Inevitable. 4 Irresistible. 5
Unexpressible.


1 It is formidable and terrible; Fire of all Creatures is the most dreadful.
Hence the doleful Torments of Hell are set forth by fire, Mat. 3.12. and Gods
Wrath is called, a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 4.24. which burns up all that stands
in its way. This made him cast out Angels, hurl out Adam, drown the old world,
fire Sodom, root out the Canaanites, Lev. 18.25. and destroy Jerusalem. As all
in God is infinite, his Mercy, Justice, See D. Preston on Romans 1.18. p. 114,
etc.
etc. so is his Wrath, which makes it so exceeding terrible and intolerable.
Should all the Creatures set to their help, yet they were not able to uphold a
man under the burden of Gods wrath.

Hence the dearest of Gods Servants (though they have had Gods Spirit to uphold
them) yet have cried out of this, as a burden too heavy for them to bear; and
have chosen rather to endure any tortures, than to lie under the wrath of an
angry God. They fear not him who can but kill the body, but they say with the
Prophet, Psalm. 76.7. Thou, even thou art to be feared, and who may stand before
thee when thou art angry? Gods wrath is like a great Bell, it is long in
raising, but when it is up, it makes a hideous noise. Or like Lead, which as
cold of it self, but when once melted, nothing scalds more terribly. What
calmer and smoother than the Sea, yet when stirred what more tempestuous?

2 It is Durable. It is not for a day or two, but it is an abiding wrath, Joh.
3.36. it is a fire that never goes out, but shall abide on the bodies and souls
of the Reprobates to all eternity, Matthew. 18.8. and 25.41.

3 It is inevitable, there is no flying from it, Amos 9.1, 2. if a King be
angry with us, we may fly out of his Dominion* but if the King of Kings be
against us there is no flying out of his Territories.

4 It is irresistible, it is like a violent wind, or a mighty flood, which
carries down all before it, Psalm. 90.7, 8, 9. Should all the world rise in
opposition against God, they would be no more before the fire of his wrath,
than a little dry stubble, or a few crackling thorns. Wood is longer in
burning, and leaves some coals behind, but stubble and thorns are suddenly and
utterly consumed, and scarce any ashes left, Exodus 15.7. Isa. 5.24. and 9.18.
and 47.14. Fire and water have no mercy, there is no entreating them; such is
Gods wrath in reference to the wicked, as good speak to the fire not to burn,
or the water not to drown, as to the wrath of God not to consume wicked men, it
must and will burn them, and none shall quench it, Deuteronomy. 29.20. Though Moses
and Samuel stood before the Lord to entreat, yet the sentence cannot be
reversed, wrath must devour and consume the wicked, Ier. 15.1. Though prayer
has in many cases quenched wrath, yet sometimes the wrath of God cannot be
quenched by prayer, nor entreated down, there is no speaking to it.

5 It is unexpressible. It is infinite, and so beyond the tongues expression,
See more in Mr. Leighs Body of Divinity, l. 2. c. 9. and Mr. Ienkin on Jude V.
7. Obs. 5.6.
or the hearts imagination. Hence Moses asks, who knows the power of they
wrath? Psalm. 90.11. It surpasses our knowledge, We may over-fear the wrath of
men, but we cannot have too dreadful apprehensions of the wrath of God. All
other fire is but like painted or imaginary fire compared with this. Hence the
Holy Ghost is fain to use metaphors and allusions to set it forth to us.
Sometimes comparing it to fire which is a most furious element, laying all
waste before it, Nahum 1.5, 6. Sometimes to water, and to a mighty flood which
swiftly and irresistibly carries down all before it, Job 22.16. Isa. 8.7. and
59.19.

Sometimes to a Moth, which secretly and insensibly eats thread by thread till
the whole piece be consumed, Job 13. ult. Psalm. 39.12. Hos. 5.12. Sometimes to
the Wrath of a King, and if that be as the Messenger of death, Oh what is the
wrath of the King of Kings? Prove. 16.14.

1 Then take heed of provoking him to anger, better have all the world enraged
against us, then God against us. Their wrath is but finite and limited, both in
respect of time and place, but Gods wrath is infinite without either bank or
bottom.

Take heed of all sin, especially of those God-provoking sins, as 1 Idolatry,
Deuteronomy. 4.23, 24. and 32.21, 22. 1 Cor. 10.5, 7. and following Antichrist, Rev.
14.9, 10. and 19.20. 2 Profanation of holy things, Lev. 10.2. Numb. 16.35. 3
Neglecting to reform the things amiss in Gods worship, Ezra 7.23. 4 Fornication
and Sodomitical sins, Genesis 19.24. 1 Cor. 10.5, 8. 5 Murmuring at Gods
dispensations, 1 Cor. 10.5, 10. 6 Apostasy and back sliding, Heb. 10.38*


2 When ever we perceive the fire of Gods wrath to break out in Sword, Plague,
etc. by our prayers and tears we should labor suddenly to quench it, Numb.
16.46. A fire the longer it burns, the more dreadful it is, and the harder it
is to quench it.

3 In all our approaches to this great and mighty God, whether in Prayer,
Sabbaths, Sacraments, etc. come with the greatest fear and reverence, Tanta
reverentia aliquid petit ut cum Deo; tanta fiducia ac speut cum pat^e and amico
se loqui sentiat. Mel. Adams in vita Luth.
for he is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.28. This holy fear must be an ingredient
into all our services, Psalm. 2.11. It is said of Luther that he prayed with
such fear and reverence, as remembering he had to do with God, and yet with
such affiance and confidence, as with a Friend, and Father.

4 Be thankful for Christ, who has delivered us from wrath to come. The
Angels fell and lie under this wrath, but Christ was cursed that we might be
blessed, and has undergone Gods wrath for us, that we might be freed from
it, In time of tentation, set this as a skreen between the fire of Gods wrath,
and thy soul. Hide thy self in the clefts of this Rock, and get thy soul
covered with thy Saviors Righteousness, and then thou may stand with
comfort and confidence before this consuming fire.

VERSE 7.
Ye who turn Judgment into wormwood, and leave off Righteousness in the
earth.
THe Prophet having called on Israel to repent, he comes now to set before
them their sins which they should repent of. He had called upon them before to
forsake their Idolatry and sins against the first Table, verse. 5. now he calls
on them to repent of their sins against the second Table, viz. their perverting
of Judgment and Justice, their cruelty, and oppressing of the poor, verse 11.
and their Bribery, verse 12.

Seek ye the Lord, ye who have turned Judgment into wormwood.

1 Here is a fin reproved, and that is perverting of Judgment, set forth by an
elegant Metaphor and Allusion of turning Judgment into wormwood.

2 Here is an exegesis or fuller explication of this sin, They leave off
righteousness in the earth. It is usual in Scripture to make the latter clause
explain the former.

3 Here are the persons which are guilty of this sin, and those are the
Princes, Judges, and Rulers of Israel, included in the Pronoun Ye.

4 Here is their duty set down in the next verse, They must turn from their
sin, and seek the Lord who is the great Creator and Governor of all:

q. d. O ye rulers of Israel, who have not only provoked me by your
Idolatry, but have also cast away all care of Righteousness and Equity, and
given your selves up to all manner of cruelty, bribery, rapine, and iniquity,
and have thereby turned the sweetest Justice into the bitterest wormwood; now
repent, and seek the Lord, that ye may live for ever.

The Prophet here principally taxes the great ones, and the Rulers of the
people, who had the deepest share in this guilt; they should have been patterns
of Justice and Righteousness to their inferiors; but they being evil
themselves, corrupted the rest, as bad humors use to flow from the head to the
body, and therefore the Prophet falls heavy upon them, as he did before, Chap.
4.1.

These corrupted Justice, and made that which is in it self most profitable and
pleasant, to become bitter and distasteful by oppressing the poor and helpless.
This is called Wormwood here, and gall and poison, Amos 6.12.

1 Because such unrighteousness and oppression is very displeasing and bitter
to God.

2 It is bitter to the poor and oppressed.

3 In the end it will be bitter to the Oppressors themselves. This is finis
operis, though not finis operantis. In the conclusion it will be gall and
wormwood, yea deadly poison to their souls, though they intend it not.

Justice and Equity is a most sweet and precious thing, and does wonderfully
help to preserve the peace and prosperity of a Land. This is a sanctuary and
shelter for the innocent and the oppressed; but these oppressing, self-seeking
Rulers had made a poison of a remedy, and turned that which was ordained for
the safety of the afflicted, to his ruin. These Rulers had turned Justice into
wormwood many ways.

1 By Bribery, Amos 4.1. 2 By Partiality, justifying the wicked rich man,
favoring the kinsman, the friend, the briber, but condemning the poor and
innocent, who had no bribes to give them. 3 By delays tyring out the poor, and
so forcing him to give up his cause. 4 By wresting and perverting the Law to
their own ends, contrary to the genuine sense of it. See my Com. on Psa. 82.4.
p. 101, 113, 114, etc. and p. 200, 201.
5 By hindering such evidence as might clear the cause.
And leave off righteousness in the earth. They let it lie in the dust, and
trod it under foot. That which was their duty, yea their glory, viz. the
execution of Justice, that they neglected and slighted as a most contemptible
thing: They abused the righteous, and did grind the faces of the poor, Amos
8.4, 5, 6. There was no place left for any righteousness amongst them; their
seats of justice, were places of injustice; and their Courts of equity, Courts
of iniquity.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Perverting of Justice is very bitter, and displeasing to God and man.

Look how distastful Gall and Wormwood is to us, so distastful is
unrighteousness to the righteous God; It is as poison and hemlock to him, Amos*
6.12.

Hence he so often complains of it, See more in my Com. on Psalm. 82.2. Obs. 5. p.
100. and Mr. Patricks Jewish Hyp. chapter 9. p. 112.
and denounces so many woes against it, as in Psalm 82.2, 3. and in Isa. 5.7,
20, 23. and 10.1. and 59.4, 13. and Lam. 3.35, 36. As nothing is more sweet and
delightful than an impartial administration of Justice, so nothing is more
bitter and displeasing to God and man than unrighteousness. It is a sin to omit
righteousness, but it is a far greater aggravation of the sin to contemn it,
and trample it under foot, as these did here. Great is the number of wicked
men, and were it not for Justice that did restrain them, every man's lust would
be a law, and the reins would be let loose to all manner of villainy; so that it
would be safer living amongst so many wild Beasts, than amongst men. Justice
is Rulers duty, security, and glory, as I have showed at large on Psalm 82.4.
p. 35, 36, 111, 139.

VERSE 8.
Seek him that makes the seven Stars and Orion, and turns the shadow of
death into the morning, and makes the day dark with night, that calls for
the waters of the Seas, and pours them out upon the face of the earth, the
Lord is his name.
THis rustic plain Prophet begins here to raise his style. The better to
awaken these sensual and secure sinners, he sets before them the dreadful and
glorious Majesty of that God with whom they had to do, q. d. you have not to
do with a dead and impotent Idol, that will be pleased with dead and dull
services, and pacified with childish toys and trifles; but you have to do
with the living and Omnipotent God, who is the Creator and Governor of all
things, who appoints the vicissitudes of Day and Night, of Summer and Winter;
who numbers the Stars of Heaven, and calls them all by their names; who
waters the earth with rain, and strengthens the weak against the strong, and
makes the spoiled victorious over the spoyler. It was the great study of the
Prophets, and specially of this our Prophet, to set forth the Lord in his
Majesty and Glory, that they might the better work upon their Hearers. See Amos
4.13. and 6.14. and 9.6.

In this Verse we have a magnificent description of Gods Omnipotency, he is,
The Creator of the Stars, The Disposer of the Times, The Former of the
Clouds, and The Orderer of VVarres;
And therefore the Prophet calls upon them yet once more, to seek this Great,
Almighty one. This often pressing of this duty notes the necessity, Excellency,
and difficulty of it. It is not so easy a matter to repent as many imagine,
the heart of man is exceeding hard, and his ears are stopped against Gods
counfels, so that the Lord is forced to call again, and again, for audience and
admittance.

See ye him. These words are not in the Original, but are necessarily
understood, and to be supplied from Verse. 4, 6.

Who makes the seven Stars, and Orion.

The Prophet begins first with the Stars, because the Majesty, Power, and
VVisdome of God is wonderfully seen in their motion, order, multitude, and
magnitude. Under these two Constellations all the rest of the Stars are
comprehended, by a Synecdoche of the part for the whole, for he that made one
made all, and the least are ordered by him as well as the greatest. But because
these two were most eminent and obvious, and commonly known, therefore he
chiefly instanceth in these two; they are mentioned only three times in
Scripture, viz. Job 9.9. and 38.31. and in the Text.

The Pleiades o^ seven Stars, and Orion, are opposite one to another.

1 They have contrary situations, Orion dwells in the East, and Pleiades in the
West.

2 They appear in contrary seasons, Pleiades arises about March, and brings in
the Spring, but Orion appears about November, and brings in Winter; so that
when he says, Seek the Lord who made Pleiades and Orion, it is as if he had
said in plain English, Seek him who makes Summer and Winter.

3 They have different Influences:

1 Pleiades is a Constellation usually called the seven Stars; They arise in
our Hemisphere about the Spring, and are therefore called Vergiliae, quasi ver
is vigiles. Hence we read in Job 38.31. of Pleiadum deliciae, the sweet
influences of the Pleiades, because they bring in the sweet and pleasant Spring
with them; when they appear, the trees and plants begin to flourish. (...) a
navigando.
These Pleiades have their name from sailing, because after the cold and stormy
Winter is past, Sailors begin to put to Sea. These Chimah or seven Stars appear
in a cluster about the midst of heaven, they are commonly known by Shepherds
and Rusticks. Amos being an Herdsman had taken notice of them.

Orion is a Con^tellation of Stars that produces cold, Orion ci^ca Novembrem
exoriens, coelum and terram vary tempestatibus turbat, Mercer.
when it appears then Winter comes. It arises in our Hemisphere about
November. As the Pleiades do loose the earth and set it at liberty that it may
bring forth delightful fruit; so Orion by his frosty bands is said to bind up
the earth, Job 38.31. and bring in variety and change of weather, with many
storms and tempests: Hence the word Chesil, as it signifies a fool, and one who
is unconstant, now of one mind, and anon of another; so this Star is called by
this name by reason of the unconstancy and mutability of weather which it
brings with it.

Seek ye him who turns the shadow of death into the morning.

These words are taken by some literally, and by others metaphorically, I shall
take in both, though the literal be most genuine; q. d. It is this great and
mighty Lord who makes great changes in the Air, and wonderful alterations in
States and Kingdoms. See more in Amos 8.9.
It is he that turns the grossest darkness into the brighrest day, and the
lowest adversity into the highest prosperity; and on the contrary, he can
(when pleases him) turn our day into night, ourlight into darkness, and our
mirth into mourning.

Tsalmavet umbrae mortis, i. e. maximae and densissimae tenebrae, quae timorem
mortis incutere possunt.
By the shadow of death, here is meant great, gross, horrible, and terrible
darkness, such as is the very image of death. Any darkness is sad, but
darkness, and the shadow of death is the height of sadness. Such deadly
darkness Job wishes to the day of his birth, Job 3.4, 5. and David put the
worst of his case, and the best of his faith, when he said, Though I walk in
the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none evil, Psalm. 23.4. that is,
in the greatest of evils, I will fear none evil. In the very danger of dangers,
in exceeding great dangers, he would comfort himself in his God. It may also
signify symbolically and metaphorically great dangers, and deep distress.

And makes the day-dark with night. The vicissitudes of day and night are not
casual, but providential. It is the Lord who is the great disposer and
dispenser of time, that by his Almighty power has appointed the day to succeed
the night, and the night the day, which no gods nor Idols can do.

Who calls for the waters of the Sea [by vapors and clouds] and powers them
out upon the face of the earth [by showers of rain.]

He calls for the waters of the Sea viz. beyond its ordinary bounds, that it
may overflow the earth with inundations, so some.

But more genuinely thus, It is the Lord that appoints and orders the waters
(as by express command) to rise up from the Seas, and turn into rain, which
afterward he powers forth upon the earth. The Sun draws up vapors out of the
Sea, which are condensed in the middle region of the air into rain and then
fall down upon the earth. See more on Amos 9.6.
These waters which come salt and bitter from the Sea, and so in all
probability should make things barren, yet are so strained and purified by the
Almighty hand of God, that they become sweet and fruitful. Est ipsum esse, tum
suum formale, tum causale, rerum omnium, qui est Oceanus essendi, and immensum
pelagus existendi, a Lapide.


Quest. But who is it that does all these wonderful things?

Answ. Why it is Jehovah, The Lord is his name, be is no dead Idol, as Baalim
the god of the Sidonians, or Moloch the god of the Ammonites; but he is
Jehovah who has his being in himself, and who gives life and breath and being
to all creatures; from him, by him, and in him are all things, and therefore
he will not be deluded with your superstitious fopperies.

The sum of all is this, Seek ye him who has formed and framed the heavens,
and all the Stars therein, who turns the blackest night into a clear morning,
and causes the brightest day to end in a dark night, who waters the earth with
rain, the Lord is his name who does this.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 It is lawful for a Minister to press the same truths again and again upon
his people. Thrice in this Chapter does the Prophet call on Israel to seek the
Lord. Thrice in one Psalm is Gods Almighty power repeated, that the Church
might triumph in it, Psalm. 46.1, 7, 11. Christ presses that Precept, He that
has an ear to hear let him hear, again and again, Rev. 2.11. Paul often put his
hearers in mind of what he had delivered to them, Romans 15.14, 15. So Peter
put his hearers in remembrance of the same things, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13. Yea so long
as I live I will put you always in remembrance. See Mr. Robinson on Ephesians.
6.12. p. 3, 4.
This is profitable and safe for our people, Phil. 3.1. To write the same
things to me is not grievous, but for you it is safe. Abundans cautela non
nocet. This is a means to help the memory, we are naturally forgetful of the
best things, and therefore had need to have line upon line, and precept upon
precept, Isa. 28.10, 13. especially fundamental, practical precepts, such as
Faith, Repentance, Obedience, Death, Judgment, etc. should often be pressed. When
the Gentiles heard Paul preach Christ, they desired to hear the same things
again the next Sabbath day, Act. 13.42.

This helps to strengthen our graces, to quicken us to our duties; as the
sounding of the Trumpet quickens the spirit of a valiant Soldier, and it
confirms us in the truth of the things delivered; as the doubling of Pharaohs
dreams assured him of the certainty of the thing.

Caut. Yet a Minister must not preach the same things out of idleness, spending
all the week in an Alehouse, or in some secular affairs, and then come with a
crambe recocta, some crude, idle, addle, undigested stuff, Cursed are such as
do this work of the Lord negligently. An idle Minister is the worst man in a
Parish, for whereas an idle Artificer hurts but his Family, an idle Minister
hurts a whole Congregation.

But when we repeat and inculcate things out of conscience, and for the good
of our people, this is commendable. Besides, there is no Minister that is
studious, but if he do come to press the same point again, he has some new
arguments or enlargements; for Divinity is such a depth, that we are always
learning, and may find out somewhat which we knew not before.

Be not then offended when you hear necessary truths often pressed, this is ^afe
for us, and good for you. Many have itching ears, they must have novum, aut
nihil, they are all for novelty, they cannot endure wholesome, plain preaching;
whereas we have but two things to preach, credenda and agenda, faith and good
works.

2 Obs. The names which are commonly given to Stars may be used by us.

Chimah, and Kesil, Pleiades and Orion were names given to those Stars by men,
and yet the Holy Ghost uses them here, and speaks with the vulgar in their own
language. So it uses Heathenish names in the New Testament, Act. 28.11. we
read of a Ship in which Paul sailed, called Castor and Pollux, two
Pagan-sea-gods. So for days and months we may call them by such names as are
best known to the people with whom we live. If we live amongst a people that
usually say the first, second, third month or day, we must say so too. But if
we live in a land where they say January, February, March, etc. Monday,
Tuesday, etc. we must say so too, else how shall we understand one another?
Thus the Jews called their months sometimes by Caldean names, as Nisan, Adar,
Cisleu, and Tammuz, from the Idolatrous feasts of Tammuz, which they celebrated
yearly in the fourth month, Ezekiel. 8.14. we may as well say Lammas, as the Jews
say Tammuz.

It is true, David says, he will not once make mention of Idol gods, Psalm.
16.4. but that was by way of adoration and reverence, or to swear by them, but
in a civil respect to distinguish days, and to make known our minds to those
that we speak to; thus the Prophets themselves have used them.

3 Obs. The Lord is the maker of the Stars.

He that made these two Constellations, made all the rest, for under these two
the rest are comprehended, Job 9.9. It is he, and he only that has garnisht
the heavens with Sun, Stellae sunt Lunae famulae, noctis oculi, militiae coeli.
Moon, and Stars, Job 26.13. Much of Gods Power and Wisdom is seen in the
Stars of heaven, every flower of the field sets forth his praise, but these
declare his glory in a more eminent manner, Psalm. 19.1. and therefore the Lord
calls upon his people in the Text to seek and serve him, why so? for it is he
that made Pleiades and Orion, i. e. he made all the glittering Stars; and if
the floor of heaven be so admirable, what is the inside?

We should therefore daily admire and praise him, who has made the Sun to
rule the day, and the Moon and Stars to rule the night, for his mercy endures
for ever, Psalm. 136.7, 8, 9.

Much of God is seen in the Multitude, of the Stars. Magnitude, of the Stars.
Motion, and Influence of the Stars.


1 For Multitude, they are for number numberless, none but God that made them
can number them, Psa. 147.4. He tells the number of the Stars, and calls them
all by their names, he knows them as exactly and particularly as we know those
men, whom we can presently upon sight call by their names. Men can reckon
some, and count to about a thousand three hundred, but he calls them all by
their names.

2 Their Magnitude, such great bodies show the greatness of that God which made
them. Most men look upon the Stars as some small lights, like the blaze of a
candle, but when it shall be made appear by reason that one Star is bigger
than the whole earth, it may well move admiration in us.

3 Their swift and regular motion. That these mighty bodies should be carried
about the world every day, and more exactly in order, not one of them out of
course, though they have shone above five thousand years, yet still they
continue their former vigor and brightness. The fixed Stars keep their own
Orbs constantly; so should we be constant in Gods way, and not be like
Planets or wandering Stars, carried to and fro with every wind of doctrine, Jude
13.

4 They have great Influence upon the creature, though not so great as judicial
Astrologers would make the world believe.

5 Obs. Rain is the gift of God.

It is he that calls for the waters of the Sea (by whose vapors the clouds
and rain are made) and pours them out upon the earth, Job 5.10. But of this
at large on Amos 4.7. and 9.6.

5 Obs. That second causes must lead us to the first cause of all.

The Prophet here describing the Physical original of the rain, and showing
that the waters of the Sea were the material cause of it, and the Sun the
instrumental cause to draw up those vapors, yet he tells us that God is the
efficient cause of all, it is he that calls for the waters of the Sea, and
unless he move, the other can do nothing, Nil si prima vetat, causa secunda
valet. Many talk of nature, and study nature so long till they forget the God
of nature, and pore so much upon the creature, that they forget their Creator.

6 The consideration of Gods Omnipotency should humble us.

This is the reason why the Prophet so much insists on this point, Amos 4. ult.
and 9.6.

VERSE 9.
That strengthens the spoiled against the strong, so that the spoiled shall
come against the Fortress.
THe Prophet having set forth Gods Omnipotency in the works of Creation, comes
now to clear it further by his works of Gubernation and Providence, he can
with ease strengthen the weak and destroy the strong; there is nothing too hard
for him.

In this verse we have a Prolepsis, or preventing of an objection, whereas the
Israelites might say, We dwell in Samaria, a strong fortified City that has
stood it out many a time successfully against its enemies, we have likewise a
potent and successful King, Jeroboam the second, and therefore it is not for us
to fear.

To this the Prophet answers, that they had no reason to trust in these
creature-co^fidences, for the Lord could easily raise up the Assyrian who
should spoil both them, and their Kingdom.

Object. If he do come, we will fly to our strong Holds and Fortresses.

Answ. And I will send the Destroyer (says the Lord) against the Fortress.
There is no power nor policy against the Lord, all Forts and Fortifications are
but vain if he be our enemy. God can send mighty Adversaries against us who
shall destroy our Forts, and us in them.

In the words we have 1 A Position or Proposition. God strengthens the
spoiled against the strong.

2 An Inference, Hammablig, confortans, corroborans, from Balag, robora vit,
consortavis.
Therefore the spoiled shall come against the Fortress, and take it. The vulgar
Latin, and all the Popish gang, that leave the Original, and follow the Latin
Translation, render it subridet vastatorem, God laughs at the destruction of
wicked men. But the word signifies to corroborate and strengthen, and not to
laugh or smile.

Others conceive, that the Lord here threatens that if they did not seek him,
but would trust in their strength, and creature-confidences, and still went on
to conremn his warnings, he would send some weak, Qui vires auget infirmis
contra fortes, and direptoribus super propugnacula fortissimorum imperium
donat. Chald. Paraph.
spoiled, contemptible enemy, and strengthen him with the spoil which he
should get, so that he should destroy them, for he gives victory to whom he
pleases, and can make the weak to prevail against the mighty; and therefore
Israel ought to stand in awe of him, and sue unto him for mercy. This way the
Chaldee Paraphrase goes.

But the Original favors the Geneva Translation, which runs thus, He
strengthens the destroyer against the mighty, and the destroyer shall come
against the Fortress.

The original word Shod which our Translation renders spoiled, Shod, vastato^,
devastator, rapina.
is usually rendered a Destroyer, a Waster, a Spoyler, a Plunderer, Isa. 16.4.
Let mine outcasts dwell with thee Moab, be thou a covert to them from (Shod)
the spoyler, for the Extortioner is at an end, the spoyler cease, and
substantively it is put for devastation, waste, and spoil, Isa. 22.4. and 59.7.
Hos. 7.13. So that we may take the words either generally, that the Lord is
he that strengthens the Destroyer against the Mighty, Gn^l gnaz, super
robustum fortem, valentem.
when they sin against him, and provoke him.

Or particularly, as spoken to Israel, it is the Lord that strengthens the
Assyrian (who is called the Spoyler by way of eminency) against these
Idolatrous Israelites who thought themselves strong and mighty.

And the Lord will bring him against the Fortress: that is, against the
fortified City of Samaria, and the other Cities and Towns depending on it, Isa.
17.3.

q. d. You think your selves safe and well, because you are armed and
fortified, and therefore you slight my Threatenings, and promise your selves
peace, and think that none shall bring you down, not once considering that you
have to do with God, and not with man, who can strengthen the weak against the
strong, and has many Destroyers at hand ready to execute his vengeance upon a
rebellious people.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 If we take the words according to our Translation, the Observation is, That
God can strengthen the weak, and make them overcome the strong. It is he that
strengthens one, and enfeebles another, Ezekiel. 30.24. and can make wounded men
to subdue his enemies, Ier. 37.10. He can make one Abraham with his family to
conquer four Kings, Gen 14.9.18. he can make a Joshua to slay Amalakites,
destroy Midianites, and subdue Canaanites, Number. 31.7. We should not then kiss
our own hands, or sacrifice to our own nets, but ascribe the praise of all our
victories to the Lord, who strengthens the wasted and the spoiled against the
spoyler, and can make Jacob a worm to thresh mighty Mountains, Isa. 41.14, 15.
so Josh. 6.5, 15. 1 Cor. 2.27. Ier. 31.22.

2 No Forts, nor Fortifications can preserve a sinful people from destruction.

In my Com. on Hos. 13.16. O^s. 7. p. 71.
Though they should build walls as high as heaven, and dig ditches as deep as
hell, yet if sin be within, all Fortifications without are vain; as I have
showed at large elsewhere.

VERSE 10.
They hate him that rebukes in the gate, and they abhor him that speaks
uprightly.
THere are two great impediments that keep men from Repentance. The one is a
low conceit of God; The other is an high conceit of themselves. The first the
Prophet removed Verse 8.9. by setting before them the glorious Majesty of God.
The second he comes to remove in this and the following verses, by setting
before them their sin and misery, that so (if possible) he might fit them for
mercy.

In this Verse we have a second sin and cause of Isreal's ruin, and that is
obstinacy and hating of reproof. This was their sinning sin which helped to
ruin them with a witness; the Lord in great mercy sent Physicians to them, but
they abused them, and like frantic Patients threw the physic to the walls,
they hated to be reformed, and cast Gods words behind them.

The words admit of some difficulty. The question is, Of whom does the Prophet
here complain, whether of the Rulers, or of the people?

Answ. Of both. 1 Of the people, They hate him that reproves in the gate; that
is, they hate the Judges who executed judgment in the gate; they hate him who
thus censureth and judges them for their sin; for there is a double reproof, 1
A civil reproof given by the Magistrate, his just sentence upon the wicked is a
real reproof of his wickedness, and that Magistrate which faithfully and
impartially thus reproves men in the gate, must look to be hated by the wicked
of the world, so was Job that renowned Magistrate, Job 30.1, 10.

2 And most genuinely, it is taken for spiritual reproof, by the Prophets who
were wont to reprove open sins openly: They hate him that reproves in the gate,
that is, in the public and open Assemblies; for the gates of the City were
places where usually was much concourse of people, Prove. 1.21. and 8.3. There
the Judges kept their Courts of Judicature, and erected their seats of
Judgment for the administration of Justice, and determining of causes, as
appears, Genesis 34.20. Deuteronomy. 21.19. and 22.15. Ruth 4.1. Job 5.4. and 29.7.
Psalm. 127. ult. They had Justice in the gates.

1 For the ease and convenience of the Citizens, that they might follow their
suits without impediment to their other affairs.

2 That Countrymen might have justice easily and freely before they entered the
City.

3 That the Judges might take heed of doing unjustly, since they had so many to
see and hear what they did.

4 To show the equality and indifferency of Justice from which none were
excluded, but as the gates of the City were open to all, to go in and out at
pleasure, so should the Courts of Justice.

5 To intimate that the chiefest strength of Cities, and safety of States does
consist in the due execution of Justice, which is as gates and bars against sin
and wickedness. Take away this, and gates of brass cannot preserve a City from
destruction.

Here sometimes the Prophets did preach Gods word, and publish their Prophesies
to the people, either in the gates of the Temple, as Ier. 7.2. or in the Gates
of the City, as Ier. 17.19, 20. and 19.2. and 22.2. and 26.10.

2 Here is an Aggravation of their sin, They abhor him that speaks uprightly,
Integrum abominantur verbum.
or that speaks what is sincere and right; that is in plain English, they
abominate that man, and abhor that Minister that faithfully declares the
counsel of God unto them without halting or halving, and this is made a
Periphrasis of a faithful Minister, Senes and judices loco Dei positos, ad judi
candum sedentes, oderant, non ferentes eorum correptiones. Pari insania
perfect loquentem, i. e. veros Prophetas qui solum and perfectissimum Dei
serm^n^^n annunciabant. Mercer.
he is one that does not blend, nor mix the word of God, but he delivers his
will plainly and sincerely to his people. They hated the Judge, but they
abhorred the Minister; now abhorrency is the height of hatred.

The people could not bear the censures of their Rulers, but neither Princes
nor people could endure the plain and powerful reproofs of the Prophets; and
therefore the Prophet here charge the Judges, and the great ones more
especially (as appears by the context, verse 7.11, 12, 15.) for hating the
Prophets which reproved them in the gates. These great ones had acted their
unjustice openly in the gate, Est hoc extrem^ corruptionis argumentum, quando
illic loci correpti^ nulla admittitur, ubi disciplina publica maxim regnare
debet. Gualter.
and for any one to be so bold as to come there and reprove their
unrighteousness, they could not bear it.

Great men love to live as they list, they love not bands of restraint, they
must do what please themselves with a non-obstante, without control. Videmus,
and reges, and quicunque in mundo potestate aliqua praediti sunt, velint esse
sacro-sancti, nec ullam admittant reprehensionem. Calvin.
Though they do unjustly, yet none must tell them of it, for they have eyes,
but they neither can nor will see, they have ears, but they will not hear, for
their hearts are hardened to their own destruction, Isa. 6.9, 10.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Open sinners must be openly reproved.

Those that sin before all, must be reproved before all, that others may fear,
1 Timothy 5.20. These Judges who acted unrighteously in the gate, See my Com. on 2 Timothy 4.10. p. 421.
must be reproved by the Prophets in the gate.

2 Obs. It is a sad aggravation of men's sins to hate those, whom God has
authorized and commissioned to reprove them for their sins. To lay snares for
him that reproves in the gates, Isa. 29.21. To devise devices against
plain-dealing Ieremies, and with Ahab to hate Gods faithful Micaiahs, and to
seek their death and destruction, who labor to bring us to life and salvation,
is the height of wickedness, Genesis 19.9. 1 King. 22.24, 26. Ier. 38.6. Matthew.
14.3. Act. 7.54. and 9.29.

Truth breeds hatred, and light is irksome to the sore eyes of wicked men. They
draw the Curtains, and cannot endure the light that reproves them; Amant lucem
splendentem, non redarguentem.
and it is worth observing that the viler men have been, the more they have
hated plain reproves, as the Sodomites, Pharaoh, Ahab, Herod, etc. they were
all reprehension-proof. But the better men have been, the more submissive to
reproofs, as David, when Abigail stopped him on one hand, and Nathan on the
other, he blesses the one, and loves the other. So Hezekiah when the Prophet
Isaiah told him that he must lose all* he receives it meekly, with a Good is
the word of the Lord which thou have spoken, Isa. 39 ult. So Constantine and
Theodosius, how tractable and submissive were they to the Ministers of Christ,
when the Roman Caesar's (most of them) persecuted to the death such as opposed
them in their Tyrannical practices, they were punished as seditious and
troublers of the State, that did in the least trouble them for their sins.

See Hildersham on Psalm. 51. Lect. 9. p. 52. etc.
And this is the great sin of England, and bodes some judgment approaching,
that we cannot endure a plain-sound-soul-searching-Ministery: we must have
smoothe things, or nothing, Isa. 30.10. The Idolater must not be told of his
Idols, the superstitious man of his ceremoniousness, nor the incontinent man of
his Herodias, etc. Men love such as will daub over their vices, and give them
such service or starvis as will not bite them, Missa non mordet. It is observed
that the French Reformed Churches some years before that bloody massacre, did
affect a frothy, flashy kind of preaching, not regarding that which touched
the conscience. Whether this be not our case, let the Reader judge.

VERSE 11.
Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the poor, and ye take from him
burdens of wheat, ye have built bouses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell
in them, ye have planted pleasant Vineyards, but ye shall not drink of them.
We are now come to a third sin, for which the Prophet reproves this people,
and that is for Oppressing the poor, and this was more peculiarly the sin of
their Rulers and Grandees. They that should have been the keepers of the Law,
they were the greatest breakers of it; they that should have been the
Vindicators, they were the Violators of it. The Prophet therefore strikes not
at the foot, viz. the common people; but he strikes at the head, from whence
all disorders descended unto the body.

In this Verse we have 1 Their Sin, 2 Their Punishment.


1 Their sin was Oppression, which appeared by two cruel acts 1 They trod upon
the poor, 2 They took away his corn.


2 In the Punishment we have, 1 Their Projects, 2 The frustration of those
Projects.


Their Projects were 1 Building of fine houses, 2 Planting of Vineyards.


Their frustration follows, 1 They shall not dwell in the one, 2 They shall not
drink of the other.


Your treading is upon the poor; that is, upon the afflicted, and godly poor
especially, Amos 2.7, 8. where the hedge is lowest, there these beasts get
over, Amos 4.1. These they tread upon in a most contemptible manner, as the
dirt and mire in the streets; grinding them with cruel impositions, and
oppressing them with grievous vexations, keeping them under in extreme slavery,
and laying them as low as the dust; now to lie in the dust implies a very low,
base, and despicable condition, 1 King. 16.2. Job 16.15.

The word in the Original signifies properly to despise or trample under feet
by way of contempt, Bosces, deducitur vel a Rad. Bosc. i. e. pudefacere, vel
potius a Bos, i. e. conculcare pedibus: cui vicinum est Baz, s^oliare,
praedari, diripere.
Isa. 14.25. and 18.2. and 63.18. But Metaphorically it signifies to oppress
and vilify.

Ye take from him burdens of Wheat: that is (say some) you extort such great
bribes, and lay such great burdens on them, that they are forced to sell their
necessary food to feed you with money.

Others refer it to the great men, who lent the poor money till their harvest
came in, and then were so rigid and severe in exacting their debts, that they
made them bring their very corn which should support their Families for payment.

Others refer it to the cruel Usurers, who were not content with money for
their money, but they must have corn too, which after they sold at dear rates
to the poor, Amos 8.4, 5.

But what ever Oppression it was specifically, yet in general the Prophet
reproves it as a crying sin, that they dealt so harshly and cruelly with the
poor, as first to rob them of their money, and then by force or fraud to make
them bring and bear upon their own shoulders that little which they had left to
sustain themselves, and their families. To take away men's goods and cattle is
sad, but to take away their corn, which is the staff and stay of their
household, and to make them carry it themselves, and become their own
executioners, in carrying away the livelihood of their Families, is such a
crying sin, that the Lord swears that he will bear no longer with such
Cannibals that devour the poor alive, Amos 4.1, 2.

We have seen their Sin, now follows the Punishment, They shall build houses
of hewn stone, but shall not dwell in them. Ordinary houses will not content
these Earthworms, they must have curious Palaces built with hewn, Domos
excisionis, i. e. excisi and dolati lapidis, Mercer.
squared, polished stones, that they might be beautiful, firm and durable.

This was their project, by rape and rapine, by bribery and extortion, they
built fine houses, But they shall not dwell in them. This But spoils all,
either they shall go into Captivity, or be cut off by untimely death, as the
rich fool, Luke 12.20. or their houses shall be burnt, or else their enemies
shall possess them, according to that threatening, Deuteronomy. 28.30,39. Thou shall
build a house and not dwell in it, thou shall plant a Vineyard and not eat the
grapes thereof. But who then shall enjoy them? why thine enemy. As thou shall
betroth a wife, and thine enemy shall lie with her, so the like misery shall
attend thee in thy building and planting. It is misery enough to have these
things taken away by enemies, but it is a great aggravation of this misery,
when after we have taken much pains to get them, and have set our hearts upon
them, and are filled with hopes and expectations of enjoying the fruit of our
labors, then on a sudden to have them all snatched from us, and so our hopes
to be frustrated, and others to enjoy our labors, this is bitter.

Or if they should escape these miseries, yet the Lord can smite them with
sickness, so that they shall not enjoy what they Idolized; or else they have a
prodigal heir, or some other vexation befalls them; so that in the very fullness
of their sufficiency they shall be in straits, Job 20.22. Jer. 17.11.

2 They should plant pleasant Vineyards, but not drink the wine of them. Great
was their care and cost to build houses and plant Vineyards (under these two
synecdochically are comprehended all other creature-delights) but they were
deceived in their hopes, for they should neither enjoy the one, nor the other;
and we see by daily experience, how these transitory things are tossed like a
football from one to another; now one man has it on his Toe, and anon
another, at last comes one and trips up his heels, and gets it from them both,
and at last comes death and strips them of all.

Ordinary dwellings and plain Vineyards content not these men, they must have
the choysest stone buildings, and the most exquisite and desirable Vineyards,
so much the Original imports, Vineyards of desire, Charm chemed, Vineas
desiderii, i. e. desideratissimas, Praestantissimas, elegantissimas.
i. e. most desirable and delicate Vineyards. The Hebrews have no superlative
degree, and therefore they use to express it by putting the Substantive in the
Genitive Case; see Dan. 9.23. he is called Ish Chemedoth, a man of desires, i.
e. a most precious and desirable man. See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.15. p. 45.
So a pleasant Land is called, a Land of desire, i. e. a most desirable Land,
Ier. 3.19.

Yet their sin deprived them of all these temporal delights, the Lord did
retaliate them in their own kind, as they had spoiled the poor, and taken all
from them, so now the Assyrian should come and cast them out of all.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Oppression and trampling upon the poor is a crying sin.

It will not let the Lord rest till he bring Judgments upon the heads of the
oppressors, See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 106.
Psalm 109.16. Ezekiel. 16.49. Joel 3.19. Amos 3.1.

2 Obs. Wordly men lavish all upon self.

These should have honored the Lord with their riches, and spent them in works
of Piety and pity to the poor; but they spent them in building sumptuous
houses, and pleasant Vineyards; all of the best save the best religion; they
Idolized the Creature, and loved it above the Creator, this ruined them. Like
Swine they fed upon the mast, but forgot the donor.

3 Obs. Luxury breeds cruelty.

When ordinary building cannot content, nor necessaries, please, but they must
have all of the finest; then follows trampling upon the poor, wracking of
rents, and inventing all base means for money. Such great sins seldom go
alone, but like great men they have many attendants, Amos 2.7, 8.

4 Sin and punishment are inseparable.

They are both yoked together in this verse. But of this often before.

5 Sin blasts men's labors and expectations.

They must rise early, and sit up late, build houses, and plant Vineyards, In
my Com. on Hos. 13.15. Ob. 8. p. 58, 59.
but disobedience blasts all. Deuteronomy. 28.30. Micah 6.15. Zeph. 1.13. As piety
brings plenty, Isa. 65.21. so sin robs us of all our pleasant things. But of
this at large elsewhere.

6 God often retaliates men, and pays them in their own kind.

God will spoil those that spoil his people, Isa. 33.1. Hab. 2.8. Woe unto thee
that spoylest, and wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt
not treacherously with thee; when thou shall cease to spoil, then shall thou be
spoiled. He speaks here of the cruel Assyrian, who spoiled Gods people
causelessly, and unprovoked; and dealt treacherously with those that offered no
such measure unto him. God will retaliate such in their own kind, and when
they have done spoiling others, God will raise up the Chaldeans who shall spoil
them. God usually raises up some to deal hardly with those that deal hardly
with his people. These Rulers here trod upon the poor, and now the Lord raises
up the Assyrian to trample on them. They built their houses upon the bones and
ruins of the poor, and now they lose them. So true is that, Job 20.22. The
hand of the wicked shall be upon him, viz. to oppress and spoil him who had
spoiled others before. But of Retaliation see more on Amos 6. ult.

VERSE 12.
For I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins, they afflict
the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the gate from
their right.
IN this Verse we have a Reason why the Lord would bear no longer with this
people, viz. because of their obstinacy, cruelty, bribery, and unrighteousness,
and because the high and lofty ones of the world are apt to contemn the poor
plain Prophets of the Lord, and to sle^ght their Message, and say to Gods
Amoses, you wrong us, for we are not the men that you take us for, therefore,
the Prophet brings in the Lord himself, saying,

I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins. q. d. Though you
act your wickedness never so secretly, and hide your oppressions, and palliate
and put glosses on your unrighteous practices before men; yet nothing is hid
from mine eye. I understand your thoughts afar off, and know them before you
think them, your words before you speak them, and your works before you do
them, Psalm. 139.1, 2, 3, 4. So that however you may deceive men with your
pretenses of Law and Equity, yea and deceive your selves too, yet you cannot
deceive me, for all things are naked to mine eye.

The Prophet having to do with stubborn Sinners, to make the threatening the
more ponderous and effectual, he brings in the Lord himself, saying, I know
your ways, and your wickedness, you think your selves Lords Paramount, and
none may question you, or say unto you, what do you? But you must know that
there is a Lord above you, and a greater than you, to whom you must certainly
and suddenly give an account.

The Prophet sets down the Sins of these great ones especially.

1 Generally, and in the lump. 1 They were for Number, Rabbim, many. 2 For
Nature, Gnatzumim, great and grievous.
Their sins were not secret infirmities, but great and crying enormities, so
hideous that they were no longer to be endured or born, and therefore the Holy
Ghost multiplies words, the better to work upon them. They were guilty of
Transgressions, manifold transgressions; Sins, and mighty sins. The word which
we render Transgression, Peshegnechem, a Pashang, transgressio, praevaricatio,
rebellio. Guatsum, sortis, potens, n^merosus. Peccata fortiae i. e. gravia,
grandia, crudelia, obstinita. V. Schools-Guard, Rule 25
signifies a proud transgressing of Gods Law, and a malicious rebelling against
God, Psalm. 5.10.

The word Guatzumim signifies both mighty in strength, and many in number. Such
were the sins of this people, they were for number numberless, and for nature,
grand and grievous, habitual, chronical sins. They were such as admitted of all
manner of aggravations. 1 They were multitudes, they were three transgressions,
and four, often so called, Amos 2.4 6. i e. they were exceeding many and
manifold, for so the number seven is often used in Scripture for many, as Levit.
26.24. Eccles. 11.2. they abounded with Idolatry, Oppression, Unjustice,
Security, etc. 2 All these were acted in a time when God was pouring Mercies
upon them, saving them by the hand of Jeroboam the second, and giving them
Victory over their enemies, 2 King. 14.25, 27. now these are called strong
Sins, either because they cried strongly for punishment, and did as it were
bind Gods hands that he could show them no mercy; or rather because they were
committed with a stiff and stubborn mind strongly bent upon sin and wickedness,
drawing on iniquity with the cords of vanity, and sin as it were with
Cart-ropes, Isa. 5.18 they were wilfully set on sin, and did use all means to
draw it to themselves.

2 He sets down their sins particularly, specifically, and as in were by retail.

1 They afflict the just. 2 They take bribes. 3 They oppress the poor.
Hosts ^usti, vel affligentes justum. Vatabl.
1. They afflict the just, whom they should have defended. This Sin was written
in Capital Letters, as it were on their foreheads, and therefore they are so
often charged with it. The word Tsorer signifies to bind one hard together as we
do an enemy, and straiten, vex, oppress, and afflict one. So Psalm. 129.14.
Many are they that afflict me from my youth, God has cut their cords.

2. They take a bribe, viz. to pervert Justice, contrary to Gods express
command. Exo. 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.17. and it is made the badge of a wicked man to
do so, Prove. 17 23. they condemned the poor innocent man that could not bribe
and abso^ved the wicked rich man that could bribe well. Thus they justified the
wicked, and condemned the just, both which are an abomination to the Lord,
Prove. 17.15.

Cophar, (...), vel redemptionis pretium.
The word which we translate a Bribe, signifies a Ransom; these mercinary
Judges put Malefactors to ransom themselves with money, and to pay a rate for
their redemption. E. G. If one had killed a man, it was but paying a Ransom
(though the Law say, no Ransom shall be accepted for such a sin, Numb. 35.31.)
and he was quit. So if any were accused for Theft, Adultery, Witchcraft, etc.
it was but bribing lustily, and they were presently acquit, and pronounced
innocent; thus instead of punishing them with death for their sins, they only
fined and merced them.

They turn aside the poor in the gate from their right.

The Judges sat in the gate to do Justice (as I have showed before, verse. 10.)
yet even there they perverted Justice. They oppress the poor in the gate, In
porta i. e. in publico judicio. Met. subj.
i. e. in the public judgment which was exercised in the gate. In open Court
they perverted the cause of the poor, either by a corrupt stating of the case,
or concealing the merit of the cause, or by delays, etc. The good man trusting
to the equity of his cause, is cast, and for want of a bribe (which the rich
man brings) is non-suted. Thus their Fountains did run poison, their Courts of
Justice were Courts of Injustice; and their Courts of Equity, courts of
Iniquity; and therefore the Lord is now resolved to bear no longer with them,
but even to destroy them.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Hardened, incorrig^ble sinners are not worthy of a reproof: And therefore the
Lord here turns his speech from these Rulers, and complains to himself and to
his people, saying, They afflict the just, In my Com. on Psalm. 82.5. Obs. 1. p.
130.
take bribes, etc. We do but wash a Blackmore, and labor in vain, when we
speak to such posts and stones, as I have showed elsewhere.

2 Obs. All the ways and works of men are under the inspection of an
All-seeing God.

All things are naked and anatomized before the eyes of him with whom we have
to do, Psalm. 94.9, 10. Heb. 4 13. He knows not only an action or two, but he
knows all the ways that men take, Job 23.10. Men may deceive others, and
themselves too, but they cannot deceive God; he sees through their projects,
and says to them as the Prophet said to the wife of Jeroboam, Come in thou
wife of Jeroboam, why fainest thou thyself to be another than thou art? See
Hildersham on Ioh. 4.16. Lect. 14 p. 64. Dyke on Ioh 2.24. p. 84.
The secret plottings and contrivements of men's hearts are not hid from him,
Psalm. 94 11. Ezekiel. 11.5. The great ones of the world may vail their villainies,
and hide them from the eyes of men, and escape their hands; but there is a
greater than they whose eyes behold all their doings, and whose hand will bring
them unto justice. All their pomp shall shortly lie in the dust, and they stand
stripped and naked before Gods dreadful Tribunal.

Ne pecces, Deus ipse videt, bonus Angelus astat, accusat Satanas, conscia men's
cruciat. See more in my Com. on 2 Timothy 4.3. Obs. 1.
We should therefore all of us lead a life worthy of such a presence, and take
heed of provoking him by our sins, who cannot look upon them but with a
vindictive eye, and one look of his eye puts all into terror* if he but look
on the earth (which never sinned against him) it trembles, Psalm. 104.32. I have
read of some, that have had such lively, sparkling eyes, that they have
affrighted such as beheld them, but what are their eyes compared with Gods?

3 Obs. Wicked men by long continuance in sin come at last to be high and
mighty sinners.

As in goodness the repetition of the act intends the habit, and the sons of
Sion go on in Gods ways to perfection, Philip. 3.13, 14. Heb. 6.1. So the sons
of Belial conceive sin, travel with it, and then bring it to perfection, James
1.15. As men when they come to their full growth, are strong, and men of might;
so when sinners are come to their full growth, they become great and mighty
sinners, as we see, Eccles. 8.11. Ier. 3.5. and 44.16, 17. Hos. 2.5. They set
their hearts upon sin; their greediness after it, shows the strength of their
affection to it, Ephesians. 4.19.

See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 109. etc.
This bodes some judgment approaching, when men's sins are for number many, and
for nature heinous and habitual. As there is a woe hangs over the heads of such
as are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to power down strong drink
Isa. 5.21. Fortes and strenui sunt non contra bostes, sed ad ^xbauriendos
catices, gigantes non ad b^llandum, sed ad potandum and peccandum.
So judgments are prepared for all obdurate, mighty sinners, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
It is said of Nimrod that he was a mighty Hunter, Genesis 10.9. so we may say of
too many, they are mighty Oppressors, mighty Worldlings, mighty Epicures, etc.
and therefore we must look for mighty miseries. Ingentia beneficia, ingentia
vitia, ingentia supplicia. As it is the glory of a man to be much and mighty in
the service of God, Luke 24.19. Act. 7.22. So it is men's great debasement, when
they are much and mighty in the service of sin and Satan, Ier. 8.2. Micah. 7.3.

See more in my Com. on Psalm. 8.2. Index Bribery, and on Amos 4.1. Cartwright
on Psalm. 15. ult.
4 Obs. Bribery is base.

It blindes the eyes, perverts judgment, condemns the innocent, acquits the
nocent, and brings confusion and disorder into a land. These wicked men acted
their sins in all the six Cases, but would confess them in no case. They acted
in the Nominative case by seeking a name to themselves. In the Genitive by
fornication both spiritual and corporal, Amos 2.7, 8. In the D^rive by Bribery.
In the Accusative by detracting and slandering of the righteous. In the
Vocative by flattering, Mr. Patrick in his Jewish Hypocrisy, chapter 9, 10. etc.
and in the Ablative by robbing.

5 Obs. Perverting of justice to the oppressing of the poor, is a
Land-destroying sin.

That which brought Israel and Judah into Captivity, See my Com. on Psalm. 82.2,
3, 4. p. 100, etc.
was more especially their sins of Injustice and Cruelty, as is fully proved by
a learned Pen.

Verse 13.
Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time.
THe Prophet goes on to show the sad and deplorable condition of this obstinate
people, whom neither God nor man could work upon. The Lord tells them in the
precedent verse, that he knew all their works, and the Prophets told them of
judgments coming upon them for those wicked works; but they misused the
Prophets of the Lord, and hated him that reproved them in the gate, and were so
resolvedly set upon sin, that the Prudent resolved to bestow no more counsel in
vain upon them.

In the words we have 1 The property of the Pious, they are prudent, wise,
intelligent men. True believers, and such as fear God, are the truly wise men
of the world. They do nothing rashly and inconsiderately, but do all with good
advice. They wisely compare things together, they observe the mysterious ways
of providence, and so become men of much sagacity, and can guess at the
consequences of affairs. These are called prudent men. 1 Samuel 16.18. Prove.
13.16. and 16.21. Isa. 3.3. They forecast, and consider what is to be done and
spoken, how, when, where. As his words are spoken super ratis suis, Beophnau
Prove. 25.11. in season, with a due concurrence of all circumstances, so his
works are done in due season, fitly and successfully.

The Original word signifies a cautious, circumspect, prudent understanding
man: hence they are often called wise men, intelligent men, and men of good
understanding by a Metonymy of the effect, Hammaskil, ille prudens,
intelligens, erudiens, a salal intellexit, prudens fuit, consideravlt,
prospexit, circumspexit.
because Prudence is a fruit of wisdom. 2 It signifies an Instructor and
Teacher, who gives instruction, and makes others to understand; hence many of
the Psalms are entitled, Maschil le David, i. e. a Psalm of David, teaching
and giving Doctrinal instruction. 3 Sometimes by a Metonymy of the effect it is
put for prosperity and happiness, because they usually attend upon Prudence. So
1 Samuel 18.30. Isa. 52.13.

Prudence is threefold.

1 Carnal. 2 Ethical and Moral. 3 Theological.
1 There is a Carnal Wisdom and Prudence, when men are wise only for
themselves, seeking their own ends, ease, and advancement, Luke 16.8. this is
so far from wisdom, that it is called and counted folly in Gods Dictionary,
Luke 12.20. 1 Cor. 1.19. and 3.19.

2 There is a Moral Prudence, which is found in the civil wise men of the
world, Isa. 29.14. and 49.7 Matthew. 11.25. Acts 13.7.

See more in Dr. Burges his Ser. on Amos 5.13. p. 3, 4. printed. 1660.
3 There is a Theological and Divine wisdom, which is conversant about Divine
and Spiritual things, and in this sense the faithful and regenerate are called
Wise and Prudent, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Matthew. 7.24. and 25.2.

Some Critics make Wisdom to be the speculative part, and Prudence the
practical, Wisdom to be infused, and Prudence acquired. See Ward on Mat.
11.25. p. 91. ubi plura.
But these are so involved one in another, that one cannot be without the
other; and therefore we find them often confounded in Scripture, and used
promiscuously one for another.

2 Here is the effect of their prudence, They shall keep silence.

3 Here is the time when they shall keep silence, it is In that time, viz. in
that time of Isreal's obstinacy, and in that time when God shall punish them for
their obstinacy, and give them up into the hand of the Assyrian for a prey, for
he speaks not of present, but future evils, and therefore it is not in hoc, but
in isto tempore, it is not in this, but in that time.

4 Here is the reason of their silence, and that is, because it is an evil
time; both in respect of the evil of sin, and of the evil of suffering. Rang,
denotat malum culpae, and malum paenae.
1. They were evil times in respect of the evil of sin, All manner of sin in
all manner of persons abounded both in City and Country. Sin was come to that
height amongst them that it was dangerous to speak truth unto them; yea they
silenced the true Prophets, and commanded the Amos to be gone, and molest them
no more with his preaching. They hated reproof, they afflicted the just, and
oppressed the poor, therefore the Prudent shall keep silence.

2 The times were evil in respect of the evil of Punishment; for where the evil
of sin goes before, the evil of punishment always follows. The Sword, Plague,
Famine, should all pursue them, and if they escaped one of those evils, yet
another should arrest them, verse. 19. In both these respects times are called
evil in Scripture, Ier. 18.11. Ephesians. 5.16. 2 Timothy 3.1. Tempore in illo, i. e.
tempore paenae, quae modo fuit denuntiata. verse. 11. Piscat.
though the latter seems here to some to be the most genuine, it is a time of
evil, viz. of punishment, of great misery and desolation, so the word is often
used for the evil of punishment, Psalm. 37.19. Ier. 15.11. Micah 2.3. therefore
the prudent shall be silent before the Lord, and not once murmr against his
just dispensations.

3 Others but not so properly, make the words to be a commination of a
punishment, q. d. Since you will not hearken to the counsel of my Prophets, but
shut your eyes against the light, hating to be reformed, and abhorring such as
speak truth unto you, verse. 10. therefore I will punish you with the silence of
the true Prophets, Ezekiel. 3.26. and other pious men; they shall bestow no more
counsel in vain upon you, since you are snarling Dogs, my holy things shall
not be given to you, Mat. 7.6. but I will leave you to Sycophants and
Flatterers, that shall daub over your sins, and lead you blindfold to
destruction. They could not endure sound Doctrine, and therefore they should be
fed with lies, for that pleased them best. There is hope of good when good men
speak, their lips will disperse knowledge, Prove. 15.7. but when a people shall
delight in none but fools and flatterers, their ruin is not far off.

4 Others thus; Pauper si prudens, eliget potius, dum fraus and potentia
dominantur in judiciis, pecuniam amittere, and seipsum scel^ri^ reum aut
injustum pecuniae possessorem feteri, quam fori molestiam, judicum calumniam
and honorum suorum majora multo dispendia subire. Hieron*
their enemies shall be so Tyrannical and cruel, that it will be their prudence
not once to mutter, but silently keep in their grief to themselves, lest if
they complained they should exasperate their enemies, and so be worse used.
This is an ancient Gloss, but not so genuine.

5 These times were evil times, for even the Rulers of the people were unruly,
and corrupt both in doctrine and manners. They were grown so violent and
virulent, that they would neither hear, nor bear a reproof; they sought his
death, who sought their life; and threw dirt in his face, who showed them the
glass; if any reproved them, they wrested and misinterpreted all their sayings,
devising devices against them to destroy them. They were come to that height of
sin, that the malady was too strong for the medicine; and good counsel could
do them no good, it was but casting Pearls before Swine, which would be
trampled under foot and lost; the more they reproved them for their Bribery,
Oppression, Idolatry and cruelty, Silebit, cum aliis nihil profit, sibi vero
malum afferat. Grotius.
the more they enraged them, and therefore the prudent shall keep silence,
since it is such an evil time. This sense suits best with the context, ver. 10,
11, 12, 13.

Q. But must not Ministers speak against Sin, for fear of bringing themselves
into danger, nor speak against the evils of the times, unless they be sure to
be free from suffering?

Ans. Ministers are bound by their Office to witness against the worst of evils
in the worst of times; so did the Prophets, so did the Apostles. A Minister
must not presently give over his Ministry, or forbear reproof because of some
approaching danger, yet he may be silent and forbear reproof, when those sins
have been sufficiently witnessed against already, and men sin not for want of
light, but desperately against the light; in such a case we have no reason to
run our selves upon danger; and therefore our Savior bids us let such alone,
Prophetas vocat prudentes, quorum munus est peccatum arguere, qui cum viderint
eo tandem erupisse bominum picca^a, ut r^vocari non possint, ^acebunt. Sanctius.
Mat. 15.14. when we see that our reproofs do but exasperate and harden we may
yield for a time, and reserve our selves and our exhortations for better times;
when men's passions are qualified, and they will hearken to us; so that this
makes nothing for Court-Parasites, and Time-servers, who under pretense of
Prudence live like dumb Dogs, never once barking against the Idolatry,
Superstition, Apostasy, and profaneness of the times, for fear of displeasing
the Grandees of the time; they dare not pray for Sion, nor speak in defense of
Gods Cause and People, for fear of suffering. This is so far from prudence,
that it is the greatest imprudence in the world for any man, for fear of man's
wrath to run into Gods displeasure, and to avoid Temporal pains to run into
eternal, Christ will be ashamed of such as be thus ashamed of him, and his
truth, before an adulterous Generation, Mark 8. ult. Rev. 21.8.

Obj. Tyrants threaten me.

Ans. And thou must learn to contemn their threatenings. Non est Minister
Christi qui non est ad mill mortes paratus. Chrysostom.
He is not fit to be a Minister of Christ, that cannot suffer as well as do
for him.

Every Minister is, or at least ought to be a Soldier of Christ's, now a
Soldier must not be a whining Milk-sop, but a hardened, seasoned piece, 2 Timothy
2.3. Necessity is laid upon us, and woe to us if we preach not the Gospel, 1
Cor. 9.16. When God commands us to preach, and man forbids, the Apostle in this
very case tells us, that it is better to obey God than man, Acts 4.19. and
5.29. It is no dishonor to the Kings on earth to see the King of Heaven served
before them; yea the worse the times are, the more should the zeal for Gods
glory consume us. When Lot saw the wickedness of Sodom, his righteous soul was
vexed from day to day with their a^ominations. No prudent man can be totally
silent, when he sees his God openly dishonored, as we see in David, Nathan,
Michaiah, Paul, etc.

The Prophet therefore speaks not here De jure, but De facto; not what men
should do, or not do; but he rather intimates (such was the iniquity of the
times, and the malice of those in authority) that De facto, they would not
suffer them to speak against the corruptions of the times. Silere hic sumitur
pro non redarguere scelerae quae grassantur, ad quod tamen silentium redactus
est, non sponte sud, sed violentia tyrannorum in illum savientium. Ravanel.
So that they should be silent not Actively, and Spontaneously, but Passively,
by reason of the rage of wicked men, and their obstinacy in their Idolatry,
Superstition, and unrighteousness. They would not suffer any to speak against
these their beloved sins, or if they did, they would cast them into Prisons, or
Banishment, or blast them with slanders, or some way or other make them
contemptible, and then slay them.

6 And lastly, the most genuine sense of the place is this; The Prophet had
told them, that for their mighty and manifold sins they should lose their
Houses and Lands, their Orchards and Vineyards, and all their pleasant things;
now he tells them that God was so just in his Judgments, that all pious
prudent men, should in an holy silence and submissiveness of spirit, Silebit i.
e. non murmurabit contra Deum, quia agnoscunt Paenam esse justam. Piscat. See
more on Amos 6.10.
adore and admire the Justice of God therein, without any fretting or murmuring
at them; though they were great and grievous, yet considering the multitude and
magnitude of their sins, and comparing Gods dispensations with their
provocations, they could not but say, Righteous is the Lord, and just are his
Judgments. The true believer which judges aright of sin and its concomitants,
shall silently acquiesce in the evils of Punishment, which God shall bring upon
Israel, Tacebit prudens, pr^bans and laudans justum Dei judicium and impiorum
supplicium.
but not in the evil of sin which men commit; so that their silence here is
opposed to murmuring against God, and not to their reproof of the sins of the
time: for we read that the Prophets did not hold their peace, but Amos and
Hosea especially did sharply reprove those wicked men, and denounced Gods
Judgments against them to the last.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Pious men are prudent men.

He that truly fears God is the true Hammaskil, he is the only wise,
intelligent, prudent man. When we walk exactly according to Rule, that is true
wisdom, Ephesians. 5.15. Hence fifty times in the Proverbs the godly man is called
a Wise man, Quicunque pec^at, agit contra rationem rectam, quae est prudentia.
Aquinas.
and every wicked man a fool. When men know the true God, and serve him in a
true manner with a perfect heart, this is real and supernatural wisdom, Job
28. ult. all other men be they never so worldly wise are fools, and madmen (as
I have proved at large elsewhere) He only is the wise Merchant that has
parted with all for Christ, In my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.9.
Matthew. 13.44. The world looks upon good men as a pack of Fools, scarce fit to
live in the world, but see how the Holy Ghost here dignifies them with the
title of prudent men, whose understandings are well enlightened in the knowledge
of their duty, and what is fit to be done, Rerum exitus prudentia metitur.
Boethius.
in respect of time, place, manner, event, etc. he searches into the very
bottom of things, and sees them inwardly.

1. Their prudence appears, in a wise discerning of times and seasons. There is
a fit time for every thing, and what is done in that season it is beautiful.
Now the prudent man observes the season, he has a singular skill in timing a
word, Isa. 50 4. He knows when to speak, so did Abigail, 1 ^am. 25.36. and
Hester 1.13. and when to be silent 2 King. 18.36. It was an high commendation
of the men of Issachar, See Dr. Annesly Ser. on 2 Chro. 12.32. preached 1655.
that they were men of understanding and knew the times, and what Israel ought
to do, 1 Chronicles. 12.32.

2 His prudence appears in works of Piety, he reads, prays, meditates, etc.
with prudence and discretion. He observes fit times to hear, and he is swift to
hear, James 1.19. He watches unto prayer, and observes the fittest times for
that exercise, Ephesians. 6.18.

3 In works of mercy. See Caryl on Job. 3.2. p. 320.
1 To the soul, he prudently times his speech, and wisely considers the party
which he speaks to, and what his condition requires, Isa. 50.4.

2 To the outward man, before on Amos 4.4. p. 50. etc.
he gives discreetly according to those known circumstances, required in giving.

Est modus in dando, Quid, cur, cui, quomodo, quando.

4 In executing Justice, See my Com. on Psalm. 82.4. p. 112.
he weighs and ponders all circumstances, and then gives sentence accordingly.

5 In the discharge of his particular calling, he orders his affairs with
discretion, Psalm. 112.5. Prove. 14.8, 15.

6 He fore-sees dangers, and prepares for them before they come, Job 3.25.
Prove. 22.3. and stops troubles in the beginning, Genesis 13.8, 9. He is
quick-sighted, and wise as a Serpent, though harmless as a Dove, Matthew. 10.16.
Religion does not destroy our wisdom, but rectifies it, and makes it more
solid. Hence Jacob used all prudent means to pacify Esau, Genesis 38. 4, 5, etc.
and Paul to deliver himself, pleads that he was a Roman, and set the Pharisees
and Sadduces at variance about the Resurrection, the better to escape himself,
Act. 16.37, 38. and 22.25. and 23.7. and Christ himself used it, Mat. 21.24.
Hence he is said to deal prudently, Isa. 52.13.

7 His Prudence appears in his Prudent choice. A man's wisdom appears in
nothing so much as in that. He passes by transitory, fading, uncertain,
earthly things, and chooses real, solid, substantial, durable riches, which
none can take from him, Luke 10.41, 42. and 16.9. He seeks Gods face and
favor, and makes him his ultimate and chiefest good. Hence to be wise, and
seek after God are joined together, Psalm. 14.2. He is most solidly wise, who
does most solidly and seriously seek God.

8 They act so strenuously as if they were to do all themselves, and when they
have done all, yet they rest upon God, and seek unto him by prayer as if they
had done nothing, Genesis 32.7. to 11. and 43.10. to 14. Neh. 4.9.

Nullum numen abest, si fit prudentia. Iuven. Sat. 10.
So that prudence you see is a Cardinal virtue, of all virtues it is one of the
most eminent and excellent, and makes us most like unto God. Where this virtue
is in reality, no virtue is wanting. This is one special means to raise men to
honor, In omni virtute debet esse. 1. Prudentia. 2. Iustitia. 3 fortitudo.
as we see in Joseph, David, Abigail, Nehemiah, Daniel, etc.

To attain it, 1 We must beg it of the God of Wisdom and Prudence, who is the
true doner of it, 1 Chronicles. 22.12. 1 King. 3.9.11, 12. Psalm. 119.125, 144, 169.
2 Cor. 1.10, 11, 12. James 1.5.

2 Get acquaintance with the word of God, make it the man of your counsel,
consult with it in all your actions and undertakings. This will make you wiser
than the Ancient, wiser than your enemies (though they may be deep Politicians)
and wiser than your Teachers, Psalm. 1^9.98, 99, 100, 104.

Temeritas est florentis aetatis, prudentia sene^tutis, Cicero.
3 Treasure up experiments: As in all other Arts and Sciences a man can never
excel, till he has by long practice gained experience: so it is here, We see
that youth it is heady and rash, but Prudence is usually with the aged, Job
12.12. With the Ancient is wisdom.

[See more Balls Power of Godliness, l. 1. c. 2. p. 3. to 29. Bain on Ephesians.
5.15. Hieron on Psalm. 51.6. Leighs Body of Divinity, l. 7. c. 29. p. 58. etc.
Lessius de Iure, and Just, p. 1. etc.]

2 Obs. That it is a point of prudence sometimes to keep silence.

As there is a time to speak Eccles. 3.7. viz. when God may be glorified, and
our brethren edified, so there is a time to be silent, viz. when we have no
call to speak, or understand not the depth of the matter in question* or when
our own passions, or the passions of those we speak to are up, and men are in
an heat, then it is good to be silent. A man that will give counsel, or take
counsel must have a composed, calmed, quiet spirit, before he can profit
himself, or others; even Christ himself, though he had many things to say, yet
seeing his Disciples could not bear them, he concealed them, Job. 6.12. Hence
silence is often made a note of prudence, Prove. 11.12. and 12.16. and
13.17.27.28. Herein Saul's wisdom appeared, 1 Samuel 10. ult. and David's, Psalm.
35.12, 13, 14. and Christ's, Mat. 26.63.

But especially when a people are incor^igible and incurable, when they are
dogs and ^wine, flying in the face of a reprover, and trampling Gods truths
under their feet, we are then commanded to forbeat, Prove. ^.7.8. Hos. 44.17.
Mat. 7.6. and 15.14. left they abuse, not only the truth, but those that
publish it too, for God is tender as of his Gospel, so of those that publish it
also. So when those sins, we reprove have been sufficiently witnessed against
already, so that men sin not for want of light, but directly against light, in
such a case we have no obligation to run our selves into danger; so when there
is no probability that the evil which we bring our selves into, shall be
balanced with any proportionable good to others; for this is an affirmative
precept, and binds semper, but not ad semper; it binds at all times, but not
to all times, but only when God may be glorified, his people edified, and his
enemies mouths stopped; and therefore it is well observed by a Reverend Divine,
That when times are so evil, Mr. Caryl on Job 29.9. p. 492.
that they will not bear evil to be spoken against, nor good to be spoken, it
is time for the prudent to keep silence; for though in some cases we must bear
our testimony openly for truth and holiness, whether men will hear it or no,
yet we are not urged with that necessity at all times, etc. Such times there
may be, when it will be our wisdom to be silent (at least for a time) as
Mariners use to cast anchor in a storm, and rest for a time till it be over,
and Watermen when the Tide is against them, they creep by the Bank-sides till
having advantage of the Tide they can get over more easily. Paul was zealous
against Diana at Ephesus, See my Com. on 2 Timothy 4.2. p. 339.
yet his prudence so moderated his zeal, that he spoke not particularly against
Diana, but only delivered this general Doctrine, That they were no Gods which
were made with hands. The prudent man considers not only what he ought to do,
but also what he can do^, and sometimes gives place to the storm, reserving
himself for better times as Elijah did when he fled from Iezabel, and Paul was
let down in a Basket.

Many cry out the times are bad, when by their unadvised speeches, See Mr. Edw.
Symons Ser. on Amos 5.13. preached 1642. Greenhil on Ezekiel. 29.21. and Mr.
Baxters Ser. on Iam. 1.25. p. 231.
rash censures, and bitter invectives, even against Dignities, and those in
Authority, they help to make them worse. This they make a part of their
wisdom, when they never show themselves more fools, and indiscreet; for if
they be prudent that keep silence in evil times, then they are fools that prate
so much. Prayer and patience is the best cure for calamitous times.

Caut. I speak not this as if we might dissemble our Religion, and like
Scepticks deny that to morrow which we hold to day, See Balls Power of
Godliness l. 1. c. 2. p. 18. etc.

Against Scepticks Gelaspies Miscel. c. 11 p. 134.


and so have a menstruous faith, turning with every wind, that so we may sleep
in a whole skin. No, we must be rooted and grounded in the truth, always ready
to make an open, plain, and bold confession when ever God shall call us to it
by Authority, Matthew. 10.8, 9. Romans 10.9, 10. 2 Timothy 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.15. we must
be ready not only ((...), but (...)) to make an answer, but to Apologize in
defense of the truth, else we shall be accounted as enemies, He that is not with
me, is against me, Matthew. 12.30. There is no true faith within, Parum interest
inter fidem negare, and nolle asserere, Fulgent.
when no true love without.

3 Obs. The godly must be patiently silent in calamitous times.

They must not fret nor fume, but kiss the hand that smites them, judging
themselves, and justifying God in all his dispensations to us, such a holy
submissive frame was in David, 2 Samuel 16.10, 12. Psalm. 39.9. and 37.7 and Job.
1.21. and 2.10. and 40.5. and in Christ, See more in Amos 6.10.
Act. 8.22. 1 Pet. 2.21.

The prudent man can see a good hand of providence in all, he can see light in
darkness, comfort in discomfort, rising in ruining, all things for good, Romans
8.28. and this keeps him silent. He sees an absolute Sovereignty in providence,
the Lord may take away health, wealth, life, etc. and none may say unto him,
what do thou? Job 9.12. The prudent man sees all Gods dispensations, ordered
with infinite wisdom, Job 9.4. The Lord weighs all the afflictions which he
dispenses to his people, Ier. 18.11. and frames the evil which he brings upon
them, Lam. 2.17. yea he deliberates and devises evil even against Babylon,
Jer. 51.12. He likewise sees Justice in all, and that he is punished less than
his sins deserve; and this makes him lay his hand upon his mouth, and say,
though the Lords dispensations seem harsh and hard, yet the Lord is righteous
in all his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm. 145.17. Micah 6.9.

Lastly, Motives to Patience, see my Com. on Hos. 12.13. p. 10, 11. Mr. Symons
Ser. on Luke 21.19. p. 97, etc.
he considers that all is done, by an infinite reaching providence, which looks
at many things at once; the same War shall humble the Church, destroy
Babylon, and set Jeremy free; God has Plots above the plots of Politicians,
and ends that they think not of; his ways are deep and mysterious, above our
reach, Isa. 45.15. The same pillar of Cloud shall be dark to Egypt, yet give
light to Israel. The same fire shall refine the metal, and consume the dross;
let patience then have its perfect work, Iam. 1.4. so shall we keep the
possession of our own souls, and it may be get the possession of other men's
too.

VERSE 14.
Seek good and not evil, that ye may live, and so the Lord the God of Hosts
shall be with you, as ye have spoken.
THe Prophet once more renewes his Exhortation to Repentance, he had called on
them thrice before, Seek, seek, seek; he comes now with a fourth Quaerite (if
by any means he might work upon them) Seek good and not evil.

In the words we have 1 A Precept. 2 A Prohibition. 3 A Promise.


1 We have a Precept, Seek good, viz. such as is prescribed by God in his Word:
q. d. You have formerly followed evil and the Devil the father of it, in
worshipping Idols which are often called Devils; but now return to the Lord, seek
good, especially seek God who is the fountain of goodness, that you may live
indeed.

Judicious Calvin following the Chalde Paraphrase, renders it, Quaerere bonum
n^hil aliud est quam dare operam beneficentiae. Calvin in locum.
Seek beneficence, (at salva reverentia tanto viro dignissima) I conceive this
Exposition to be too strait, for by seeking of good is here properly meant,
seeking of God, as appears by comparing this place with verse. 4, 6. To seek God
is to seek good, and to find life, for with him is the fountain of life Psalm.
36.9.

2 I do not find the word Tob to signify beneficence in any place of
Scripture, but it is rendered good, pleasant, profitable, fair, sweet, joyous;
all which are very desirable things, and therefore should quicken our
endeavors after them.

3 Yet I deny not but beneficence may be one branch of that good which is here
called for; seeing they had been given to violence and rapine, now he calls
upon them to return, and by beneficence and works of mercy to break off their
trade of cruelty, and to seek God, and all manner of good contained both in the
first and second Table, Quaerere bonum and non malum ^st studiose sectari
bonum, a malo vero abhorrere; atque adeo est resipiscere, pietati and bonis
operibus studere, and vitam sanctam agere. Ravanel.
that so they might live.

2 Here is a Prohibition, Seek not evil any longer, to which you have been
addicted for so many years, Amos 2.4. If you will be mine (says the Lord) you
must give your sins a Bill of divorce, Rang, malum, in q^um, durum.
for no man can serve two such contrary Masters. Shun evil, i. e. all manner of
sin without exception, for Sin and Evil are Synonyma's in Scripture, Romans 7.19,
20. that which the Apostle calls evil in one verse, he calls it sin in the
next. Sin is truly called evil, 1. Formaliter and per se. 2 Effective. 1. It is
evil in its own nature, it is a transgression of Gods Law, and is directly
opposite to him who is the chiefest good. 2. It is the cause of all the evil of
punishment both in this life and the next, Romans 6.2^. Sin is the cause of Gods
Wrath, and Gods Wrath brings destruction and misery with it; so that sin being
Causa causae, must needs be Causa causati. 3. It comes from the Devil, that
evil one, and leads to him, and so may well be called evil, 1 Job. 3.8.

3 Here is a double promise to encourage them to set upon the duty. 1. You
shall live, of which before, verse. 4. 2. The Lord of Hosts will be with you; if
you will but return, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance* you shall be
secured from wrath to come, and received into Gods favor, he will dwell in the
midst of you, and bless you. There is an Emphasis and weight in that little
word, So, Seek good and not evil, and when you are so qualified, fitted, and
prepared by holiness for communion with an holy God, and your wills are made
conformable to Gods will, then he will be with you, by his Wisdom to direct
you, by his Power to protect you, by his Mercy to pardon you, by his goodness
to provide for you, so as you shall want nothing that may be for your good,
according to those precious promises, Levit. 26.12, 13. 1 King 6.13. Psalm.
84.11. Thus when the people were called to the Passover, they are commanded to
prepare themselves, and so to come, 2 Chronicles. 35.6.

4 Here is the manner how the Lord will be with them, and that is, Even as ye
have spoken, q. d. you boast and brag that you are my people, my peculiar, my
inheritance, my Children, and that I will direct you, defend you, and provide
for your safety, but these are but your own vain dreams and delusions, for
you cannot be my people, so long as you walk contrary to my commands,
persecuting my Prophets, trampling upon my Poor, hating righteousness, and
loving iniquity. But if you will be my people indeed, then walk as becomes my
people, Seek good, and not evil; return sincerely unto me, and then the Lord
will be with you indeed, as you have spoken. You shall find him really present
with you, to assist and comfort you, but till this be done you cannot expect
his favor, two cannot walk together till they be agreed, Amos 3.3.

Others read it thus; So the Lord shall be with you as you desire, q. d. It is
your desire and prayer that God should abide with you, do you seek and serve
him faithfully, and then you shall find it true that ye have spoken. But the
former reading is most genuine. The sum of all is this, Hitherto your life, O
ye men of Israel, has been a series of iniquity, you have followed Idols and
evil, but not good; you have contemned God despised his Prophets, despited his
Spirit, oppressed the poor, multiplied sin; and yet you promise your selves peace
and prosperity, life and happiness, beasting that the Lord is your God, and you
are his Vovenant People, and therefore you need no fear. But if you will indeed
live, then hearken to my counsel, Turn from your Idols, Worship the Lord in
sincerity, amend your lives, and give up your selves to God, walking in paths
of piety and obedience before him, and then the Lord will be with you indeed,
and you shall live in his favor for ever.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 The destruction of wicked men is from themselves, Hos. 13.9.

See Mr. Obad. Sedgwick on Isa. 55.1. p. 397, 402, etc. See Fenner on Wilful
Impenitency.
The fault is not in God, for he calls upon them here again, and again, to
return and live, and swears that he desires not the death of sinners, Ezekiel.
18.31, 32. and 33.11. he gives them hopes of pardon if they will but come in,
and lay down the arms of their rebellion. God is not to be blamed, it is men's
own wilful impenitency that ruins them.

2 Obs. Such as seek God shall find good.

Before he called upon them to seek God, and now he explaines himself, and
tells them what that is, it is to seek good. Good is the object of our desires,
now there is none good but God, he only is Essentially, infinitely, absolutely,
and independently good; all the good that is in the Creature it is finite,
dependent, derivative, and is found eminently only in God. All the goodness
that is scattered up and down in the Creature meets eminently in him, so that
have him, and have all. The Devil, the World, and Sin promise men good, but
there is no reality in those promises. They make golden promises, but leaden
performances; they promise joy, but bring forth sorrow* they promise liberty,
but they bring men into thraldom. But God is better than his word to his
people, and does for them above all that they can speak or think. Seek
therefore him, See a nine-fold good in God, Mr. Obad. Sedgwick on Isa. 55.2.
chapter 11. p. 441.
and you shall find all manner of good for soul and body, for this life and a
better; and after all changes you shall experimentally conclude with David, It
is good for me to draw near to God, Psalm 73. ult.

3 Obs. It is not sufficient that we seek good, but we must also turn from evil.

God has often joined them together, and we may not separate them, Psalm. 34.14.
and 37.27. Isa. 1.16, 17. Matthew. 3.10. Luke 13.7, 8. Ephesians. 4.22, 23. Colos.
3.9, 10.1 Pet. 3.11. It is not sufficient that we turn from evil, but we must
do good. A negative Christian is no Christian. Dives did not rob Lazarus, yet
is condemned for not releeving him. So those, Matthew. 25* 42, 43. etc. Many
would have God and their sins too like the Samaritans that served God, and
their Idols too 2 King 17.33, 34 but he that turns to God, must give a bill of
divorce to his former sins, he must forget his kindred and his fathers house,
Psalm. 45.10, 11. we that were sometimes slaves to sin, must now become servants
to God, and it must be as natural and delightful to us to serve him, as ever it
was to sin against him. As a vessel that is full of poison must be emptied of
it, before it can be filled with better liquor; so our hearts must be purged
from corruption, before they can be filled with grace. Most pretend that they
are the Lords people, and that they belong to him; but if we be his, he says
to us; as Iehu said to the men of Samaria when they complemented with him, and
told him they were his servants, and would do all that he should bid them. If
you will be mine, (says Iehu,) then cut off the heads of your Masters sons,
and send them to me, 2 King. 10.5, 6. So if we be the Lords real servants, we
must cut off not the heads of our sons, but of our sins; nor sacrifice our
children, but our selves to God, mortifying our beloved corruptions, and then
he will be our God, and we shall be his people.

4 Obs. The special presence of God with a people, is a choice mercy.

Hence the Church so often glories in this, Psalm. 46.1, 7.11. The Lord of hosts
is with us, and the God of Jacob is our refuge; and sadly laments the want of
it, Ier. 14.8, 9 as the inlet into all misery, Deuteronomy. 31.17. Ier. 6.8. Gods
special presence is the glory of a place, Zach. 2.5. God himself will be an
impregnable wall of fire to defend his people, and to offend their adversaries,
and their glory in the midst of them. Where God comes, peace and plenty,
consolation and protection, and all good comes. Hence they are pronounced
blessed and happy, that have the Lord for their God, Psalm. 144. ult. as I have
showed at large elsewhere. In my Com. on Psalm. 73.25.
As the residence of a King is the glory of a place, so Gods presence amongst
his people makes them glorious. Hence the name of Gods Church, is
Iehovah-Shammah, The Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48. ult. he is there as the founder,
favourer, and preserver of it: It is more to say, The Lord is here, than to say
peace and plenty, and all creature comforts are here, you may make what you
will out of it, for all happiness is summed up in this short promise, I am with
thee.

5 Obs. Impenitent sinners may think themselves highly in Gods favor, when he
is greatly incensed against them for their wickedness.

These Israelites because they had some privileges, therefore they concluded
that God loved them, and would never punish them for their Idolatry, bribery,
cruelty. But they conceited that he would abide still amongst them, as they had
vainly said; but the Lord tells them, That he abhorred both them and their
services whilst they walked in such irreligious practices, verse. 21, 22, 23. So
it was in Judah, their Judges were corrupt, and their Prophets covetous, yet
they lean upon the Lord, and conclude that God was amongst them, and for them
still, Micah 3.11. but verse. 12. they found that he was amongst them to their
sorrow.

VERSE 15.
Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the gate, it may
be that the Lord God of Hosts will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph.
THe Prophet still goes on with his Exhortation to Repentance, he had to do
with an hardened people, upon whom slight Exhortations would make no
impression, such hard knots and knarls must have hard beetles and wedges; such
tough humors must have stronger physic; and therefore the Prophet that he
might drive this nail to the head, renews his Exhortation, and calls upon them
a fifth time to forsake their ev^l ways, and to turn to the Lord who was ready
to receive them.

Repentance consists of two parts: The first is dying to sin: The second is a
living to Righteousness. We have both in the Text. 1 We must hate evil, there
is dying to sin. 2 Love good, there is living to Righteousness.

Sineu rang, odio habete and prosequimini malum.
Hate evil, that is, hate sin which is the evil of evils. It is evil in it
self, and the cause of all the evils in the world. Do not only forbear sin,
and refrain from it for a time, and then return with the dog to his vomit; but
hate it, not with a slight, toothless hatred, but with a deep, implacable
hatred, such as men use to have against their deadly enemies, whom they
prosecute with the greatest violence.

Do good. Ahebu to^, ardenter and vehemen^er diligite bonum.
It is not sufficient that we shun evil, but we must also do good. We must not
only pull up weeds, but we must bring forth good fruit, for man, matter and
manner. We must do good not compulsively and forcedly, but freely, Psalm. 110.3.
sincerely out of love to goodness, cheerfully, Deuteronomy. 28.47. and constantly,
Iusti fuere justitia sincera, non simulata, nec tantum hominibus se probabant,
sed Deo. Cartwr. Harm.
Luke 1.5, 6, 7. Zachary and Eliazabeth lived in the days of Herod a known
Tyrant, yet they feared him not, but kept their righteousness, not only in
their youth, but in their old age, the Text says they were well stricken in
years, yet they continued righteous before God.

3 Because their Master-sin was injustice, therefore he calls upon them to
testify the truth of their repentance by parting with their beloved sin,
establishing justice openly in the gate, by setting up such just Judges as
should execute justice faithfully and impartially without respect of persons,
q. d. Hitherto ye have neglected justice, Amos 4.1. and 5.12. and have made
your lusts your Laws, and have ruled according to your own will, and not
according to my will; but now repent, and execute justice, then will I show
mercy and favor to you.

4 The better to encourage them, here is a promise of mercy. The Lord will be
gracious to the remnant of Joseph. The Assyrian had made great slaughters
amongst them, and left them but a remnant, 2 King 14 26. yet he bids this
remnant re^urn, for then he would be gracious to the remnant of Joseph, that is
to the remnant of ^srael, as before, verse 6. He had told them before, verse. 3.
that God would decimate them, and here he tells them that God would be merciful
to this decimated Remnant if they would but return to him.

5 To keep them from security, the Prophet comes in with a peradventure, the
Lord will be gracious to you: He says not positively and absolutely, The Lord
will destroy you, for then he had made them desperate; nor yet assertively
that God would deliver them, for that would have made them presumptuous and
careless; but he uses a prudent, well tempered speech, which on the one hand
might keep them from presumption, and on the other from desperation (so wise
and cautious should all Gods Ministers be) yet he gives them a little crevise
of light and hope, and comes with a peradventure the Lord may yet be gracious
to them. He speaks somewhat doubtfully to show the difficulty of the work, and
the better to excite their industry, and awaken them out of their security.
Such been sperantium formulae, such hints of hope are very frequent in
Scripture, 1 Samuel 14.6. and 2.12, 22. and 16.12. Lam. 3.29. Joel 2.14. Jonah
3.9. Zeph. 2.3.

Ob. The Papists to keep their vassals in darkness and doubting, amongst other
Scriptures they bring in this to prove that no man can be assured of his
Election and Salvation in this life.

Answ. But the Answer is easy; 1 The Lord does not speak here of the Election,
or eternal salvation of such as truly repent; but of their deliverance from
outward afflictions and calamities which were threatened against them for their
sins, verse. 6. These sometimes the Lord inflicts upon his people
notwithstanding their repentance (as we see in David) and this he does either
for chastisement to make them fly from sin for the future, or else for trial.

2 The Lord sometimes after he has threatened judgments upon the wicked, yet
upon their feigned humiliation holds his hand (that the world may see how
highly he esteems the true repentance of his people) as we see in Ahab and the
Ninivites. Considering therefore these various dispensations of God, the
Prophet speaks doubtfully here, and exhorts them to repent, referring the event
to Gods wise and gracious providence. So that such places speaking of temporary
chastisements, make nothing against the certainty of our Election.

3 The particle Ulai, peradventure, is not always dubitative, but sometimes
assertive, q. d. seek the Lord sincerely, and then without doubt, he will
receive you graciously, and so the word is used, Josh. 14.12. Peradventure the
Lord will be with me, and I shall drive them out. Caleb speaks not here
dubitatively, but beleevingly, q. d. Though the work be difficult, yet the Lord
will be with me, and by his help I shall drive out these formidable Giants out
of Canaan, so Hester 4.14. So here the Prophet does not question whether God
will receive a penitent sinner to mercy, for that the Scripture proves
abundantly, Ezekiel. 33.11. but the Prophet by this peradventure, gives them some
hopes that if they would turn to God, he would turn to them, and either remove
or sanctify these calamities which were coming on them.

4 Dato, Suppose we grant that it is a doubting speech, yet it makes not for
their purpose, for it is not to be referred to God, as though it were doubtful
whether he would pardon the sins of penitents, for we have his hand and seal
for that. But it is to be referred to those secure sinners, of whose repentance
the Prophet might well doubt, lest either it would be none at all, or else but
feigned and hypocritical.

Yea fifthly, Should we grant that it is a doubtful speech, and to be referred
to God, yet it makes nothing for Popish or Arminian doubting, for the Prophet
seeing to what a height of impiety these sinners were come, thought it not fit
to comfort them presently, and raise them up suddenly, but first to humble
them, and by speaking doubtfully to give them a hint of the hainousness of
their sins, as though it might well be doubted whether the Lord would forgive
them or no, that so they being feared and humbled, might be fitted for mercy:
And because things that are hardly come by are more earnestly sought, therefore
the Prophet intimates unto them, that it was no easy matter to obtain
forgiveness for such heinous sins, that he might hereby incite them to a more
through repentance, and crying for mercy.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Good things must be often pressed upon us.

This People were so hardened and habituated in sin, and Satan had so besotted
them, that they took darkness for light, and evil for good; so that the Prophet
was forced to double and treble his Exhortations to them, and to give them line
upon line, and Precept upon precept, and to drive the nails of the Temple day
after day, till they were fastened in their hearts, Eccles. 12.11. We are like a
dull Knife, which must be whetted over and over till it be brought to an edge;
It is the very metaphor of the Holy Ghost, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Thou shall teach (or
whet) my word upon thy Children; Shanan, ite^avit, repetiit, acuit.
they must so sharpen it that it may make a deep impression upon their hearts.

See the evil of Sin in D. Preston, on Acts 9.6. p. 271, ^72. D. Bolions Ser.
on 2 Samuel 24.10. and Mr. Buroughs Evil of sin. B. Ushers Meditat. p. 93, 121.
2 Obs. Sin is an evil thing.

Hate evil, that is, hate sin, it is indeed the evil of evils; all other
plagues and evils are as nothing compared with this. A man may lie under sad
afflictions, and yet be under dear affections. It is sin alone that makes us
the object of Gods hatred, and therefore it should be the object of ours, it
should be abominable in our sight which is so abominable in it self, Ier. 44.4.

3 Obs. We must not only forbear sin, but we must hate it.

As many a man refraines from an Oath, that yet never fears an Oath, Eccles.
9.2. so many a man forbears sin, that does not truly hate it. A wicked man for
fear, or shame, or for some self ends may refrain sin for a time, (...),
abhorrentes a malo. The simple Verb imports detestation, which is increased by
the composition.
but a good man hates it with a deep, deadly, implacable, irreconcilable
hatred. Such as love the Lord cannot but hate evil, Psalm. 97.10. yea they abhor
it, now abhorrency is the height of hatred, Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is
evil; hate it, as you would hate Hell it self.

2 We must hate it Universally, true hatred is (...), (says Aristotle) it is
against the whole kind. He that truly hates one sin as it is sin, will hate
every sin, Quatenus ipsum includit de omni. As the Persecutors hatred is not
against one or two good men, but against the whole Church of God, his desire
is, that the very name of Israel might be had no more in remembrance, Psalm.
83.4. and therefore they seek to raze it to the very foundation, Psalm. 137.7.
even so should we deal with sin.

See D. Reynolds on the Passions. Chap. 12.13, 14, etc. Church his Miscel. p.
107. and D. Tho. Tailors Ser. folio. p. 439. Balls Power of Godliness, lib. 3.
ch 3. p. 201.
3 We must hate it not only Odio aversationis, but also Odi^ i^imicitiae, not
only fly from it, but pursue it with an hatred of enmity.

4 Obs. Executing of Justice and Judgment is a duty very pleasing unto God.

Hence the Lord so often calls for it both here, and elsewhere, Ier. 1.17. Psalm.
82.3, 4. See my Comment on that place.

5 Obs. When the Lord delivers his people from outward Judgments, or pardons
their sins, it is mere grace and mercy, but no merit of ours that moves him to
it.

Peradventure the Lord will be gracious to you; It is one of Gods royal
Attributes to be Gracious, and to love freely, Exodus 34.6. from the Alpha of
our Election, In my Com. on 2 Timothy 4.8. p. 408, 409.
to the Omega of our Salvation, all is Free Grace, as I have showed elsewhere.

6 Obs. In times of distress God usually gives his people some grounds of hope,
and some glimpse of comfort to quicken them to duty.

Hence he so often comes with a peradventure God may give repentance, 2 Timothy
2.25. who can tell, and who knows whether God may not repent of the evil that
he intends against us? Joel 2.14. Jonah 3.9. let us then use the means, and
commit the success to God. Take away hope, and you take away endeavor;
impossibility of obtaining breaks the heart. Though thy sins have been great
and grievous, yet pray, and use the means, peradventure they may be pardoned,
Acts 8.22, 23. arise and be doing, and say as Jonathan did, when he went up
against the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14.6. Come, let us go against these
uncircumcised, it may be the Lord will work for us, for it is all one with him,
to save with many: or with few. Be not therefore dejected or despondent, it is
the nature of faith to oppose discouragements, Love knows no difficulties, but
makes men active; say thou as the Lepers, 2 King. 7.3, 4. Why sit we here till
we dye? if we stay in the City we shall dye of the famine, if we sit still we
perish; come, let us fall upon the Host of the Syrians, we can but dye. Nothing
venture and nothing have.

VERSE 16, 17.
Therefore the Lord the God of Hosts, the Lord says thus, Wailing shall be in
all streets, and they shall say in all High ways, Alas, alas! and they shall
call the Husbandmen to mourning, and such as are skilful of lamentation, to
wailing.

And in all Vineyards shall be wailing, for I will pass through thee, says the
Lord.


THe Prophet had often forewarned this obstinate people of Judgments
approaching, and called upon them to fly from the wrath to come; but since they
contemned the Word and warnings of the Lord, he tells them now that the Sword
should come and cut them off; and as they had sinned generally both in City and
Country, so now they should be punished generally, for all places should be
filled with weeping and wailing.

The Prophet having finished his Exhortation to Repentance, now returns to his
Threatenings again; where we have the sad Calamities which were coming upon
Israel;

Set forth 1 By the wailing which should be in all streets. 2 By the weeping
which should be in all Highways.


2 By the Persons which should mourn.

1 Natural, real mourners, as the Citizen. Husbandman. Vinitor.
2 Artificial, hired mourners, and such as had skill in Lamentation.
3 Here is the reason and ground of all this weeping and wailing, and that is
Isreal's impenitency, and contempt of those warnings which God gave them by the
Prophets. They would not hearken to their counsel, but hated reproof, Therefore
wailing shall be in all streets.

4 Here is the certainty of all this, It is the Lord, the God of Hosts that
says it. The better to awaken them, he tells them they had not to do with a
dead Idol, or with an impotent man, but with an Omnipotent God, who was able to
inflict whatever he had threatened against them, as appears by the majestic
Titles which are given to him, who is the Lord, the God of Hosts. This people
were apt to sooth themselves, and cry peace when there was no peace, and
therefore the Prophet deals plainly with them, and bids them not flatter
themselves with thoughts of impunity, for their mirth should now be turned into
mourning, and their singing into sorrow; yea such sad calamities should come
upon them, that all should mourn, both Citizens and rusticks, both real and
Artificial mourners.

1 The Citizen shall lament in the streets, the loss of his friends, and riches:

2 The Husbandman shall lament, to see all his labors swept away by the cruel
Assyrian.

3 The Vinitor that was wont to sing for joy, shall now lament for the loss of
his Vintage.

4 All others should lament in the very high ways, Ho, ho, heu, heu! quae vox
est gementis and plangentis stragem Samariae. Hierom.
the several distresses which should come upon them, crying, Alas! Alas!

5 Their calamity should be so great, that those which were wont to be hired in
an Histrionical, mimical manner to lament and howl at Funerals, should now
mourn in sober sadness, and good earnest, and therefore the Prophet says, they
shall call not only for the Husbandmen, but also for those that are skilful in
lamentation, that they may weep together. As in a time of mirth men call their
neighbors together to rejoice with them, Luke 15.6. So in this time of great
mourning, they shall call the Citizen, the Husbandman, the Vinitor, and the
Artificial mourner to bear their parts in this doleful Ditty.

Call for such as are skilful of lamentation to wailing.

It was the custom of those times in those Eastern Countries in times of great
mourning to send for singing-men and singing-women that could sing Artificial
lamentations to provoke men to weeping, 2 Chon. 35 25. Job 3.8. Eccles. 12.^.
Their miseries here should be so great that they could not sufficiently bewail
them themselves, and therefore they should send for these to help them. The
Jews of latter times borrowed such a corrupt custom of the Heathens to augment
their grief at Funerals.

1 They had Minstrels, which with their mournful tones and sad tunes inclined
the affections of the people to mourning for the dead. Of these there were two
sorts, 1 Some played on Pipes. Cantabat maestis tibia funeribus. Ovid. Fastor.
l. 6.
2 Others sounded Trumpets. At the Funerals of great men they sounded Trumpets,
and at the Funerals of inferior persons they sounded Pipes. Hence we read that
when Jesus raised Iarius his daughter, he cast out the Minstrels, Mat. 9.23.
Mark 5.38.

2 The women especially that had an art in mourning, and skill in making
exquisite lamentation, were hired at Burials for the same purpose, where going
along with the Corpse by outward significations of their sorrow both by voice
and gesture, they moved the company more strongly to mourning and to sympathize
with them. See in Mr. Caryl on Job 3.8.
These the Romans called praeficas, quasi in hoc ipsum praefectas, chief or
skilful mourners. These had venales lachrymas, Ut qui conducti plorant in
funere, dicunt Et faciunt prope plura dolentibus ex animo. Horat. de art. Po^t.
they made a trade of their tears, making a greater howling and noise than real
mourners did, as Horace testifies. From the Heathen this custom came to Rome
also, where for money, the vilest of men shall have outside mourners more than
a good many. All kind of hypocrisy is odious to God, but this is gross
hypocrisy to make a great howling when there is no reality. It is only vox,
clamor, ululatus, and praeterea nihil. The Prophet therefore does not approve
of these hypocritical howlings, and artificial lamentations to get money, but
only shows that their sorrow should be so great that it should need help to
express it.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 When the word cannot mend a people, then comes judgments and ends them.

First, God hews men down by the sword of the Spirit, Hos. 6.5. and then cuts
them off by an enemies sword. This is Gods usual method, as has been
experienced in all ages. When men will not hearken to the voice of Gods
messengers, it is a certain sign that God intends to destroy them, 1 Samuel 2.25.
2 Chronicles. 25.20. Prove. 29.1.

2 Obs. Where sin goes before, there sorrow follows.

We read before of this peoples Idolatry, bribery, cruelty; now comes weeping,
wailing, lamentation, etc. Wicked men's mirth ends in mourning. See more on Amos
8.3.

VESSE 17.
And in all Vineyards shall be wailing, for I will pass through thee, says the
Lord.
THese Israelites boasted much that God was with them and he would never leave
them who were his Vovenant People. The Prophet tells them that God would abide
no longer with them, but would now pass through them in wrath; and not only the
Citizens and Husbandmen, but even the Vinitors also should mourn for the spoil
that should be made among them. In the time of Vintage there was wont to be
great mirth and jollity, Psalm. 4.7. they sung merrily, and did shout for joy,
Isa. 16.10. Ier. 25.30. yea but their sins had marred their mirth, so that now
they shall have weeping instead of singing. In all Vineyards shall be mourning.
All had sinned, and now all shall suffer.

2 Here is the reason of their mourning, viz. because the Lord will pass through
them, Verbum transeo, cum de Deo dicitur, semper plagas and adversa denotat.
Hieron.
he will not dwell, nor abide amongst them in love and favor as they vainly
fancied, but he would pass through them like an enemy, and execute justice on
them, Isa. 27.4. The Prophet seems to allude to the Lords passing through Egypt
when he sent an Angel to smite all the firstborn thereof, and thereby filled
every house with wailing and lamentation, Exodus 11.4. and 12.12. so I will pass
through you with plagues, and will cause the destroying enemy to pass through all
your land, says the Lord.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Sin incenseth God against a people:

And makes him pass through them in wrath, like lightning, doing general
execution upon them, terribly, suddenly, irresistibly. But of this before on
verse. 6.

2 Obs. Generality of sin, brings generality of plagues.

Citizens, Husbandmen, Vinitors, all had sinned, and now weeping and wailing
shall be amongst them all. But of this see Amos 6. ult.

VERSE 18.
Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord, to what end is it for you? the
day of the Lord is darkness, and not light.
WE are now come to the third part of this Chapter, where the Prophet inveyes
against two sorts of sinners. The first are mockers and deriders of the
Prophets threatenings. The second are such as trusted in their Ceremonies and
Sacrifices, Verse. 21, 22, 23.

In the precedent Verse the Prophet had told them that the Lord would pass
through them in wrath, these impudent sinners in a taunting, sarcastical way ask
the Prophet when this would be, q. d. You Prophets tell us of a dark and dismal
day, a day of wrath and trouble which will come upon us, but we see nothing
comes; if God be in earnest let him make speed and come when he will, we fear
neither him nor thy threatenings; nor do we believe that ever such a day will
come, or if it do come, yet it will not be such a dreadful day as you speak of;
for God will not forsake his people which he has spared so long from
destruction.

Thus these desperate Atheists being wholly drowned in security, sensuality,
and carnal delights, scoff at the Threatenings, and jest at Gods judgments,
neither fearing the one, nor expecting the other, but esteeming the words of
the Prophet as wind and his comminations as a vain mockery.

To these Flouters at the Threatenings and mockers at the Lords long-suffering,
the Prophet answers, Woe to you that desire the day of the Lord, it will come
too soon upon you without wishing for; did you but know the terror of it, you
would never desire it. To what end is it for you thus to speak? Did you but
know what kind of day it is that is hasting on you, you would not so much
desire it, you will think it comes too soon when it comes (the Devils thought
so, Matthew. 8.29.) when God comes he will come as an armed enemy against you to
your utter destruction; so that you have great cause to fear, and by repentance
to prevent, rather than to desire that day; yet these hypocrites either as
conceited of their own innocence, and confiding in their privileges, desired
this day; or else in mockery and scorn, they cry, When will that day come,
which Amos so much talks of, we would fain see it. So you shall (says the
Prophet) time enough to your sorrow; For it is a day of darkness, and not of
light; and therefore woe be to you that thus scoffingly desire the day of the
Lord, you will find it no jesting matter when it comes, it will be a dark and
dismal day to you, though now you make your selves merry with it.

By a day of darkness here is meant, the time in which God would destroy the
Kingdom of Israel, according as the Prophets had foretold. Allegorically and
allusively this is true of the day of Judgment, it will be a day of darkness
and terror to all wicked men; but literally this day of darkness and not of
light, that is, this day of exceeding darkness (as the Hebrew Idiom imports) as
we may see Amos 9.4. I will set mine eye upon them for evil, and not for good.
The denial of the contrary has a great emphasis in it, q. d. I will bring upon
them all manner of evil, but no good. So here, It shall be a day of darkness,
and not of light; that is, it shall be a very dark and dismal day in which they
shall find no light of comfort from the Lord, but wrath shall come upon them
to the utmost. In that day the Lord will exert his power in executing his
vengeance on the Kingdom of Israel for all their Idolatry, Apostasy, Security,
Hypocrisy, etc. The various and inevitable calamities of this day, are
elegantly set forth in the next verse, where the Prophet shows how the
judgments of God should beset them round, so that if they escaped from one
evil, yet another should apprehend them, and if they fled from a Lion, yet a
Bear (which is more savage) should devour them.

It is usual in Scripture to call a day of Adversity, misery and distress, by
the name of Darkness, as Job 20.16. and 23.17. and 30.26. Isa. 5.30. and 21.12.
Joel 2.2. Zeph. 1.14. to 18. Hence the doleful condition of the damned is
called utter darkness. As light signifies prosperity, joy and comfort, Hest.
8.16. Job 18.6. and 38.15. Psalm. 97.11. and 112.4. So darkness signifies
calamity and sorrow, as I have showed on Amos 8.9.

Quest. But why does the Prophet denounce a Woe against those that desire the
day of the Lord, when it is the earnest desire of the Saints in Scripture that
the day of the Lord would come, and they daily pray, Thy Kingdom come, and it
is made a kind of a Periphrasis of a believer, that he is one that longs for
the day of the Lord, 2 Timothy 48.

Answ. We must distinguish, 1 Of days; 2 Of persons. 1 There is a double day
of Judgment; 1 There is a day of temporal judgment when the Lord arises to
execute judgment upon the heads of incorrigible sinners, such as the old
world, Sodom, Jerusalem; and these days have in them a glimpse and shadow of
that great day of the Lord, and therefore they are called a day of blackness,
and darkness, a great and terrible day which none can abide, when the earth
shall tremble, and the Sun and Moon be dark, and the Stars withdraw their
light, Joel 2.2, 10, 11. All these hyperbolical terms set forth the dreadful
desolation which should fall upon the wicked in this life. But this is not that
day which the Saints desire.

The day which the godly so much desire and long for is, that great and general
day of Judgment, that day of their full Redemption when they shall enjoy both
in body and soul full communion with Christ their head.

2 We must distinguish of persons, some are believers and some are unbeleevers,
and hypocrites; the Prophet speaks not here of believers, but of
self-conceited-hypocrites, who being puffed up with high conceits of their own
innocence, and thoughts that God would acquit them, though the Prophets
condemned them, they conceited that would God deal more gently with them, than
those harsh, plain-dealing Prophets, and would not judge them so bad as they
had reported them to be. But (...) alas to you that thus desire the day of the
Lord! for if our day ^e terrible, how terrible will the day of the Lord be? if
you cannot bear our words, how will you endure his heavy hands? you think us
Lions, and therefore you fly from our day, but the day of the Lord will be as
a Bear, which will tear and torment you worse.

The sum of all is this, Woe to you incredulous and (...) sinners, that mock
at the tidings of the dark and dis^^^ day which is coming on you, scornfully
asking when will it come? assure your selves it will come soon enough to your
sorrow: you shall find that it is not a day of mirth and pleasure, but of
anguish and trouble, when you shall fly from (...) danger, (...) into another,
as if one should fly from a Lion, and a Bear should (...) him.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 In all ages there have been some profane mockers and deriders of Gods
judgments.

Thus it was in the Prophets times, when they told the wicked of the burden of
the Lord, that is of Gods wrath which should light upon them in some heavy
judgments for their sins. Isa 13.1. and 22.2. they usually mock them for
their pains, saying, What is the burden of the Lord, and when will it come? you
have often told us of it, but as we do not feel it, so we do not believe it,
and therefore let it make (...) that we may (...) Prophet tells them of a night
of misery that was coming on them, but those accursed Edomites tauntingly ask,
Watchman, what of the night? Isa. 21.11, 12. q. d. You talk much of a night of
horror and desolation, of war and confusion, but when will it come? Oh says
the Prophet, the morning comes, and also the night; you have had a morning of
prosperity, assure your selves you shall also have a night of adversity, and
therefore if you will enquire of the Lord by me his Watchman, do it seriously,
and not sarcastically, return, and come to God with speed.

Thus some conceive that the Prophet recites the scoffs of profane ones, when
he says, Precept must be upon precept, and line upon line. Tsaf latsaph, Kaf
lakaf, the very tone and sound of the words carries a jeer in them, Isa.
28.10. Peter and Jude both foretell us, what we have found too true in our own
days, That in the last days there should be mockers, which should walk after
their own ungodly lusts, 2 Pet. 3, 3.4. Jude 18. Of old they mocked at the
particular days of judgment which the Prophets threatened them withal,
Against mockers, see Mr. Ienkin on Jude 18. and Mr. Cawdry his Ser. on Prove.
29.8. preached before the House of Com. 1643.
but in the last days they will mock at the general day of Judgment, saying,
Where is the promise of his coming? since the Fathers fell asleep, all things
continue as they were from the beginning of the world. Because judgment is not
presently executed on the heads of wicked men, therefore they set their mouths
against heaven, and blaspheme the most High.

2 Obs. God will not bear with scorners.

When sinners are come to that height of impudency and profaneness, that they
jeer at Judgments, and mock at Gods Messengers, then shall their bonds be made
strong, and their sorrows multiplied, Isa. 28.14, 15, 16, 17.22. 2 Chronicles.
36.16. Prove. 3.3, 4. Ier. 23.33, 34. Ezekiel. 7.5, 6. and 12.22. to 28. The day of
the Lord, especially that last day will be a dreadful, and a dismal day to
fueh; they will not be able then to stand-in the Judgment, Psalm. 1.5. and
therefore the Apostle asks, Where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? 1 Pet.
4.18. the Apostles interrogation is not dubitative, but assertive, they shall
appear no where with comfort, nor with confidence, especially in three days.

1 In a day of public calamity, when Sword, Plague, Famine comes, then the
hearts of the wicked shall fail, when they shall howl upon their beds for the
loss of their creature comforts, and shall have a trembling heart, failing
eyes, and sorrow of mind, Deuteronomy. 28.65. As the righteous that prepare for
troubles, shall rejoice in the midst of them, Job 5.22. Hab. 3.17. so the
wicked shall be overwhelmed with amazement and horror, and shall rage like
wild Bulls in a net, Isa. 51.20.

(...). Aristot.
2 The day of death is a dismal day to the wicked, even the King of Terrors,
Job 18.14. the most terrible of all terribles said Aristotle when he came to
dye. The thoughts of it will make a Belshazzars knees to knock one against
another for fear.

3 But specially that great day of the Lord, when he shall come as a Thief in
the night, suddenly, terribly, and unexpectedly upon the wicked of the world, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2, 3. 2 Pet. 3.10. that will be a dark and terrible day to them, when
even the Kings and Captains of the earth shall cry to hills and mountains to
hide them, Rev. 6.16, 17.

Where then will those blasphemers of our time appear that scoff at Gods
Threatenings, and desire their own damnation, which the Devils themselves dare
not do, for they believe and tremble? Who are these that provoke the Lord to
anger? are they stronger than he? who can abide his wrath, or the thunder of
his power? Job 26. ult. Shall the whelp challenge the Lion, the clay its
Potter, or the creature its Creator? Let the potsherds strive with the
potsherds of the earth, but woe to him that striveth with his Maker, Isa. 45.9.
To such as these the day of the Lord will be darkness, Eant reprobi, and
voluptatum suarum de^deria multa ^ni^quitate consumant, atque eo temporalia
stagella non sen^iant, quo aterna ^o^ supplieia expectent. Aug. in Psalm. 93.20.
and not light, i. e. full of perplexity and misery, leaving them void of
comfort or counsel.

VERSE 19.
As if a man did fly from a Lion, and a Bear met him, or went into the house,
and leaned his hand upon the wall, and a Serpent hit him.
THis people still dreamed of impunity, and because the Lord bare long with
them, therefore they concluded he would never come; or if he did, they would
shift for themselves, and if troubles were in one place they would fly to
another; but the Prophet tells them, that these shifts would not avail them in
the day of Gods wrath, for all places should be full of snares and dangers, so
that there should be no safety at home or abroad; for God would multiply evils
upon them. So that if they escaped one, yet another should apprehend them; as
if a man being in the Field or Wood should fly from a Lion, and a furious Bear
should meet him, or flying from a Bear, a Serpent should bite him. It is a
kind of Gradation, where the speech rises, and the Prophet shows that if they
escaped one evil, yet they should fall into a worse. To have a Lion pursue a
man is very dangerous, but to fall into the mouth of an hungry Bear that is
worse, but to escape both, and flying into an house for shelter and succor,
and laying his hand upon the wall to ease and uphold himself, to have a Serpent
sting him there where he looked for most security, this is worst of all. The
Lion is a more noble, generous creature, Corpora mag^animo satis est prostrasse
leoni. At lupus and turpes instant mo^ientibus ursi, Ovid. Trist. l. 3 Eleg. 5.
Ursus leone truculent^or, etsi non fortior; leo enim pa^cit prostratis, u^sus
etiam in cadavera saevit. Rivet.
it spares a yielding prey, and seizes not on dead carcasses; but the Bear
spares none, no not the dead. The two and forty children which mocked Elisha
were torn in pieces, not by Lions, but by two Shee-bears, 2 King. 2.24. which
are more savage and cruel. Hence comes the Proverb, Leonem fugiens incidit in
Ursum, he fled from a Lion, and fell into the mouth of a Bear, that is, he fled
from one danger, and fell into a worse. There is no creature more fierce and
fell than a Bear, especially when she is robbed of her Whelps, and therefore
when the Lord threatens to come against Ephraim in a dreadful manner, he tells
them he will come against them as a strong Lion, as a subtle Leopard, yea as a
raging Bear that is robbed of her whelps, Hos. 13.7, 8. The like expressions
are frequent in Scripture, 2 Samuel 17.8. Prove. 17.12. Lam. 3.10. Ne putetis
quicquam fo^e levation^s etiamsi centies volvatur mundus, and mutetur temporis
conditio. Calvin.
These hypocrites conceited that changes would ease them, if the Lion were but
dead, oh then they should be quiet. No (says the Prophet) a Bear shall meet
you. Oh but if the Bear were but dead, then we should have rest, no (says the
Prophet) a Serpent shall bite you. These are a proverbial kind of speech, by
which is set forth the great danger which should encompass Israel, no place
should be free, Incidit in Scyllam cup^ens vitare Charybdim. P^ov.
but they should be set round, so that when they thought to fly from one
trouble, they should fall into a worse; and whilst they shunned the Scylla of
one calamity, they should fall into the Charybais of another. If they went
abroad, there were Lions and Bears to devour them; if they staid at home, there
were Serpents and Snakes that lay lurking in holes and walls that should bite
them, and sting them to death. Thus when the day of the Lord should come, they
should not be able to escape, but flying from one cruel enemy, they should fall
into the hands of a worse, one misery should follow in the neck of another
until they were quite consumed.

By a Lion here some understand Tiglathpileser King of Assyria, who formerly
oppressed Israel, and by a Bear, Salmaneser a latter King of Assyria, which
dealt more sharply and severely with Israel, and who at last proved a stinging
Serpent to them, when he besieged and ransacked Samaria, and took all Israel
captive. To this some conceive the Prophet Hosea alludes, Hos. 13.7, 8. The
Lord had been as a tender Nurse unto this people, he brought them out of Egypt
into Canaan, chose them for his own peculiar above all the people of the world,
and gave them the dews of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, as you may see,
Deuteronomy. 32.10. to 15. but they abusing those mercies to the dishonor of that God
that gave them, he now resolves to meet them no more like a Father to embrace
them, but like a Lion to tear them, like a Bear to devour them, and like a
Serpent to sting them to death.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 There is no escaping when God pursues.

Neither fields nor houses can shelter us if he be against us. Let men fly up
to heaven, or dig into hell, or hide themselves in the bottom of the sea, yet
there Gods eye does see them, and his hand will find them out; as I have
showed at large on Amos 9.2, 3, 4. Let Jonah fly to sea, and God will meet him
there with a tempest, Jonah 1.3, 4. If men escape the paw of the Lion, yet the
Bear and the Serpent shall meet them. God wants not rods to chastise a
disobedient people. He has variety in store, and if one will not do, another
shall. He will send evil upon evil, loss upon loss, and enemy upon enemy, until
he has quite destroyed us. Neither swiftness, strength, nor courage can save
us in a day of wrath, Amos 2. 14, 15, 16. Let men fly from an iron bow, yet a
bow of steel shall smite them through, Job 20.24. and if they get out of a pit,
they shall fall into a snare that shall hold them fast, Isa. 24.17, 18. Ier.
48.44. and if they fly seven ways, yea seven hundred ways before their
enemies, yet they shall not escape, for God will send a sword as many ways
after them, and if they escape one danger, yet another shall arrest them, Deuteronomy.
28.25. Wicked men think to escape by shifting, e. g. when they be in trouble of
conscience then they desire to dye, thinking thereby to free themselves from
misery, by running into eternal misery. So when Gods Ministers by the preaching
of the word do startle people, they think that God would deal more gently with
them, and therefore they appeal to him; now what is this but to fly out of the
smoke into the fire, and to avoid a lesser, to run into a greater mischief?

VERSE 20.
Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light? even very dark, and
no brightness in it?
THe Prophet having showed this people the terror, and unavoidableness of that
great day of the Lord which was coming upon them for their sin, concludes all
with this sharp and sacred Epiphonema, Is not the day of the Lord darkness, and
not light?

The Interrogation is a strong Affirmation, q. d. To what and do you desire
this dreadful day of the Lord? Do you not know that it will be a dark and
dismal day, when you shall lose your ^^ves and liberties, your goods and your
relations * when your joy shall be turned into sorrow, your prosperity into
adversity, and your light into the shadow of death. It is not therefore for
such obstinate sinners as you, to think that the day of the Lord should ^ver
yield you any light or comfort, for the Lord will come as an armed enemy
against you, who have been so long open enemies to him.

2 To assure them of the truth of what he spoke, he doubles it, saying, It
shall be a day of darkness, even very dark, q. d. Take it for a most certain
truth that you shall have all sorts and degrees of darkness amongst you, you
shall have outward and inward, corporal and spiritual darkness and misery. See
more verse. 18.

Epitasis est in affirmatione cum negatione contrarii.
3 To make the words more weighty and emphatical, there is added a denial of the
contrary to the Affirmation, which is an usual Hebraism, and intends the
speech. So Isa. 38.1. Thou shall dye, and not live, i. e. thou shall surely
dye. So Ezekiel. 18.21. He shall live, and not dye, i. e. he shall surely live. So
Ioh. 1.20. he confessed and denied not, i. e. he plainly and openly confessed
that he was not the Christ; so it shall be a day of darkness, and no light, or
brightness in it, that is, it shall be a very calamitous day, which will bring
with it many evils, but no good; much sorrow, but no joy; much darkness, but no
light of comfort, ease, direction, or good counsel.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 A dark and doleful day will certainly and suddenly seize upon secure and
obd^rate sinners.

Therefore the Prophet doubles and trebles it, saying, The day of the Lord will
be darkness, and not light; then he asks the question, and doubles the
Interrogation, and all to assure them of the truth of what he spoke, and to
hasten their Repentance. The darkness of sin brought upon them darkness of
sorrow, and provoked the Lord to take away his corn and wine, and oil, and to
strip them naked, as in the day when they were born. Since they would not serve
him with gladness of heart in the abundance of all things; now they should
serve the Assyrian in woe and misery, and in the want of all things, Deuteronomy.
28.47, 48.

A good man if he fall into trouble, yet he rises again, but the wicked shall
fall, and never rise more, Prove. 24.16. If a good man sit in darkness, yet the
Lord will be a light unto him, Psalm. 97.11. Micah 7.8. and turn all to his good
in the conclusion. As the wicked man in the fullness of his sufficiency is in
straits, Job 20.22. So the good man in the fullness of straits has an
All Sufficiency of comfort, so that he cannot but say, the Lord has done all
things well, and it is good for him that ever the Lord afflicted him; yea that
great and terrible day of the Lord, when Christ shall come in his glory to
judge the world, shall be a day of joy and refreshing to all the Saints, Ps.
98.4. to 9. Luke 21.28. But to the wicked, who have Christ the Judge for their
enemy, how dark and dreadful will all his days of Judgment be? When he shall
lay his Vindictive hand upon them here, how full of despondency and despair
will they be, when they shall be totally forsaken of all their hopes and
comforts? So that if they look upward God is against them; if downward, Hell
and the Grave wait for them; if inward, a guilty Conscience accuses them; if
outward, all the Creatures are ready as so many Sergeants to arrest them, on
the behalf of their Lord and Master. Thus we see how the Day of the Lord will
be darkness, and no light nor brightness in it to the wicked.

VERSE 21, 22, 23.
I hate and despise your feast-dayes, and I will not smell in your solemn
assemblies.

Though ye offer me Burnt-offerings, and your Meat Offerings, I will not
accept them, neither will I regard the Peace Offerings of your fat beasts.

Take thou away from me the noise of thy Songs, for I will not hear the melody
of thy Viols.


WE are now come to the Fourth and last part of this Chapter, which contains,

1 A Reproof. 2. A Commination of these hypocritical Israelites, who confided
in their Services, and Sacrifices, in their Festivals and Songs, conceiting
that the bare performance of those external Rites (though separated from
internal obedience) were highly pleasing unto God; and that he would never
destroy a People that served him as they did. This their folly the Prophet
confutes in the following Verses, where he tells them, that all their services
were odious unto God, and so far from appeasing him, that they incensed him
the more against them; and that because they were unsound For Man. For Matter.
For Manner.


1 The Sacrificers were grand Apostates and Idolaters. They rested in the work
done, and in their Ceremonious observances, and bodily worship, devoyd of all
faith or true obedience, and so became abominable to God.

2 They failed in the Matter of their Worship, it was not of Divine
institution, but of their own invention, and therefore it is so often
Emphatically called, yours. I hate your feasts. They went directly contrary to
Gods command, for he commanded them to worship at Jerusalem, in his Temple
there, but they left the Temple, and went a whoring after Calves and Idols at
Bethel, Gilgal, Dan, and Beersheba. Thus they changed the place of Gods
Worship, 1 King. 12.29. then they changed the time, verse. 31. and the Priests,
verse. 31, 32. no wonder then if God reject their services.

3 They failed in the Manner, they should have performed all these duties
singly and sincerely, in obedience to Gods command, but they merely sought
themselves in all they did, hypocritically resting in their external
observations of Feasts and Sacrifices, of Songs and Music in their Temples,
thinking by this means to expiate their sins. In this Verse therefore we have a
Prolepsis, or preventing and anticipating of an Objection, whereas they boasted
that they were the people of God, and did service to him. To this the Prophet
brings in the Lord, saying, I hate and abhor your Services, since they come
from such wicked persons, who are my professed enemies, and what you do, has no
foundation in my Word, but is a mere will worship of your own inventing.

In this and the two next Verses we have, 1 The particulars of their worship,
they had 1 Feastivals, as Sabbaths. New Mons. Solemn Assemblies.
2 Sacrifices, as Burnt-offerings. Meat Offerings. Peace Offerings.
3 Singing, 1 Vocal. 2 Instrumental.

2 Here is Gods abhorrency of all these Services, expressed in variety of words,
as 1 I hate them. 2 I abhor them. 3 I will not smell them. 4 I will not accept
them. 5 I will not regard them. 6 Away with them.
3 Here is the reason of this abhorrency, and that is because they are, 1 Your
Feasts. 2 Your Sacrifices. 3 Your Songs.



They are none of mine, either for matter or manner, but they are of your own
inventing and appointing, and therefore I abhor them.

I hate, Maas, contempsit, repulit cum fastidio tanquam vile and contemptum
quid.
I despise your Feast-dayes; or, I hate and reject your Feastivals with much
disdain, as vile and contemptible things, you think you highly please me with
them, and think to pacify me by them, but your thoughts and mine differ much,
for I tell you plainly, I hate and abhor both your persons and performances;
till you mend your manners, and execute Justice and Righteousness in the earth,
all you do is odious to me, Reprobavi festivitates vestras. Chald. Paraph.
and I look upon it with the greatest displicency imaginable; you think that I
should delight in your solemnities as you do, but my stomach loathes them, and
turns at every dish and duty. The Stomach closes with wholesome food and turns
to it, but that which is unwholesome the stomach turns at the very sight and
sent of it. When people feast sincerely, God uses (in a sense) to feast with
them, and their wine cheers him, Judge. 9.13. it is an hyperbolical speech, and
imports, that God is delighted with the sacrifices of his Servants, and highly
approves of their obedience in them. But the hypocrisy of these Israelites,
like Coloquintida in the pot, spoiled their feasts, and made the Lord to loathe
them, as we do meat which is burdensome to the stomach, which makes us sick
till we have rid our stomachs of it; as Christ threatened to do with lukewarm
Laodicea, Rev. 3.16. I hate, I despise, the doubling of the word is emphatical,
and shows the greatness of Gods indignation against them for their hypocrisy,
for of all sins God most abhors that, as being most directly opposite to his
Nature, who is a God of Truth and Righteousness. I hate your feasts, or
feastival Sacrifices, the word which we render ^easts, signifies both a Feast,
and the Sacrifices which were offered on those Feast-dayes. Chaggechen,
festivitates vestras, a chagag, salta^e, festum celebrare, hinc ^hag, dies
festus, and laetus in quo homines ed int, bibu^t and saltant, and synecdochice
hostia quae die fes^o offerebatur.
Hence some render it, I hate your sacrifices, so the word is used, Exodus
23.18. Ps. 118.27. Isa. 29.1. The fat of my feast, i. e. of the Lamb which was
sacrifized at my Feast, shall not be kept until the morning; so that it
imports, that God hated both the feastivals, and the sacrifices which they
offered at those feasts.

But our reading is good, I hate your Feasts, for the despising of their
Sacrifices follows in the next verse. The Jews had many Feasts, they had
Sabbaths, New Moons, the Feast of Tabernacles, Pentecost, Trumpets, and the
Jubilee. But the Lord tells them, That he will not smell in their solemn
assemblies. It is a Meiosis, q. d. I greatly loathe them; meet as often. as you
will, but I will not meet you there, nor once smell in your assemblies. To
smell a sweet savor, signifies Gods favorable acceptance and approbation;
thus when Noah offered a Burnt-offering to the Lord, it is said, the Lord smelt
a sweet savor which pleased him well, Genesis 8.21. so Levit. 26.31.

In diebus interdicti vestris. Heb.
I will not smell in your days of restraint or prohibition, so the words are
in the fountain; that is, I delight not in your Feastival days, wherein people
are restrained and prohibited their ordinary labors, Levit. 23.7, 8, 36. Joel
1.14. when they offered sacrifice in a right manner, then God esteemed them as
a sweet smelling sacrifice, Exodus 29.18. Levit. 1.9, 13, 17. Ezekiel. 20.40. they
were very grateful and acceptable to him, being types of Christ, in whom he is
well pleased. The burning of the Sacrifice in it self yielded no such sweet
smell, but the faith and obedience of the person being in Christ, this made it
so delightful to God.

The people when they brought their Offerings, they brought Frankincense with
them, V. Moses unvailed. ff. 29. p. 108.
to burn for a sweet savor to the Lord, Exodus 30.34. Levit. 2.1, 2. and 16.12.
Numb. 16.14. Deuteronomy. 33.10 Psalm. 66.15. Ezekiel. 16 18. the better to represent the
sweet odours of our Saviors Sacrifice, Non ex opere operato, nee ex opere
operantis, non ex merito offerentis, nec ex merito operis, sed ex solo merito
Christi gratum est.
Ephesians. 5.2. But these Formal^sts resting in the bare doing of the work without
faith and obedience, their sweetest incense was as noisome dung in the nostrils
of God, Isa. 1.13. Mal. 2.3. this may be more truly said of all Popish
Incensing in their Idolatrous Mass.

Obj. But did not the Lord institute and appoint Sacrifices, how then is he
said to hate them?

A. It is true, the Lord for good ends did command them, as 1. To keep up the
public assemblies of the faithful in their meetings to serve the Lord, which
else would quickly have decayed. 2. To mind them of Christ and his Sacrifice,
of which these were shadows. 3. Hereby they made an open confession of their
faith to the world, testifying what God they served, See Binchius Mellif.
Theolog. Part 3. p. 23, etc.
and in whom they believed. 4. Hereby they testified their thankfulness for
mercies received. 5. They served for the maintenance of the Ministry, and by
consequence to further the Worship of God, 1 Cor. 9.13.

The Lord therefore does not simply condemn Sacrifices, and religious services,
but the formal and hypocritical performance of them when men fail both in man,
matter, and manner, as these did. So that when the Scripture seems to condemn
Sacrifices, Loquitur non (...), sed (...), and secundum quid. See Dr. Gouge on
Heb. 10.5. ss. 16 p. 434. and M. Patrick on Micah 6.8. See my Schools-Guard,
Rule 32
and says, I require not Sacrifices; this must not be taken Absolutely, but
comparatively, q. d. It is not so much the outward sacrifice, as the sacrifice
of an humble and contrite heart which God requires, Psalm. 51.16, 17. so Matthew.
9.13. I will have mercy and not sacrifice, i. e. mercy rather than sacrifice.
God requires both inward and outward obedience, but that which he chiefly
delights in, is the inward.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 External Sacrifices, and Services separated from internal obedience, are
odious to God.

Many think they highly please him by such hypocritical, Hypocritae quasi sub
Ajacis clypeo occultant sua scelera, sub suis Caeremon^is. Calvin.
outside services, when they never more displease him. Of the hypocritical
Jews (who did yet partake of the Sacraments) it is said, that with many of
them God was not well pleased, i. e. he was highly displeased. It is a Meiosis,
1 ^or. 10.5. Circumcision without obedience, is uncircumcision, Romans 2.25, 26.

There is scarce any sin in all the Scripture that has harder terms given it
than this* See D. Bolton on Isa. 58.2, p. 26^, folio.
See Isa. 1.11. to 16. and 57.6. and 58.2. etc. Prove. 7.14, 15. Ier. 6.20. and
7.8, 9, 10, 11. and 11.15. Ezekiel. 20.28, 39. Hos. 8.13. Micah 6.6, 7, 8. Mal.
1.10. see what an heap of disliking expressions are here.

1 To what purpose are your Sacrifices? 2 I delight not in them. 3 Who required
them at your hands? 4 Bring no more vain Oblations. 5 They are an abomination
to me. 6 Your Feastivals I cannot away with. 7 They are iniquity. 8 My soul
hates them. 9 They are a trouble to me. 10 I am weary of them. 11 I will hide
mine eyes from you. 12 I will not hear your Prayers.
See more before on Amos 4.4. and 5.5. and in my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.5.
All their Sacrifices were as the offering of a Dog, or a Swine, in Sacrifice,
which had been a heinous crime in the time of the Law; yea the Lord accounts it
as Idolatry and Murder, Isa. 66.3. It is to no purpose for Israel to cry, My
God we know thee, unless they do the thing that is good, Hos. 8.2, 3. The
Scribes and Pharisees went far in externals. Hence we read of the strict,
accurat, exquisite Sect of the Pharisees, Acts 26.5. but our righteousness must
exceed theirs. It is obedience that God preferres before all the Sacrifices in
the world, Psalm. 50.8, 9, 14, 25. and 51.16, 17. hence Samuel tells Saul, that
obedience is better than sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22. it is more Spiritual, See
this Point fully and learnedly proved, by Mr. Patrick on Micah 6.8. p. 98 to
131. and in his Jewish Hypoc. chapter 16 p 247. Noli extrins^cus pecus, aurum,
arie'em quarere, habes in te quod occidas. Si te excelsum feceris,
longinquabitur a te, si te humiliaveris, propinquabit ad te. Aug. Adverbia apud
Deum praevalent verbis, ut in naturalibus forma est decentier materia; sic in
moralibus plus commendatur modus, quam actio. Luther.
and so more pleasing to God. A wicked man may sacrifice a Beast, but a good
man offers himself in sacrifice, Romans 12.1. now the more difficult the service,
the more acceptable it is to God, and all good men. A zealous David loves not
cheap, outside services, he will not offer to his God of that which cost him
nothing; the service which God delights in, is spiritual service, Ioh. 4.23,
24. and this Gods servants delight to give him, Romans 1.9. As they desire that
God should not put them off with shows and shadows, and shelles of duties; so
they desire not to serve him by halves, but to do what they do for him, and
to him, with all their hearts, and with all their might. Luther was wont to
say, that God preferred Adverbs before Adjectives, and loved been better than
bonum; he looks to the manner as well as the matter of our services. This may
convince any sober man, that the Popish Religion is a false religion, because
it is such a Ceremonious, outside religion; all for Bowing, Ringing, Singing,
Saying, Knocking, and the traditions of men: and in these outside performances
they exceed the godly; as an Harlot in painting and outward attire may excel an
honest Woman; but the Kings Daughter has an internal excellency, she is all
glorious within, being adorned with all the graces of the Spirit, Psalm. 45.13.

VERSE 22.
Though ye offer me Burnt-offerings, and your Meat Offerings, I will not
accept them, neither will I regard the Peace Offerings of your fat beasts.
THis people confided much in their hypocritical Services, and multiplicity of
Burnt-offerings, Meat Offerings, Peace Offerings, etc. they thought by the bare
performance of these duties to pacify Gods wrath against them for their sins.
The Prophet therefore goes on still to convince them of this their folly, and
tells them plainly, that God neither regarded them, nor their Sacrifices.

In the time of the Law we read of diverse Oblations and Sacrifices, See
Binchius Mellific. Theolog. Part 3. p. 23, etc.
amongst the rest we have three in the text, 1 Burnt-offerings. 2
Meat Offerings. 3 Peace Offerings.


1 The Burnt-offering, was one of the most excellent, and the choysest of all
the Sacrifices for sin, and the most acceptable to God; Ab (...), totus, and
(...), cremandus.

Gaul^h, ascentio, elevatio, Holocaustum. See Caryl on Job 1.5.


it is called an Holocaust, or whole Burnt-offering, because it was wholly
consumed by fire, there was no part reserved for the Priest, or for the People,
but all was burnt and offered up to God. It has its name from ascending,
because by burning all in the fire, it went up in smoke and vapor. It was a
daily sacrifice made by fire, Numb. ^8.3. Levit. 1.9. Job 1.5. and 42.8. and
was used both at ordinary and extraordinary Feastivals. It consisted either of
Fowls as Turtles and Pigeons, See how it Typified Christ in D. G^ild, Moses
unvailed. ss. 32. p. 116.
for the poorer sort, Levit. 1.14. or else of Lambs, Rams, Goats, and Bullocks,
etc. for the richer sort. The end of it was to make an atonement for Sinners,
Levit. 1.4.

Obj. But the burning of a Beast is a poor unsavory thing, and unfit to
represent so great a mercy.

Ans. We must not look upon Gods Ordinances with carnal, but spiritual eyes,
else to an eye of sense, Circumcision (which was an honorable seal of the
Covenant) would seem contemptible and dishonorable, yea a bloody and a cruel
thing, as it did to carnal Zipporah, Exodus 4.25.

So in our Sacraments, how contemptible to a carnal eye, is the sprinkling of a
little water, a bit of Bread, or a sup of Wine, but consider them as Gods
Ordinances, which he has ordained, to seal and assure us of our reconciliation
with him in the Blood of Christ, and so they are weighty matters. A little Wax
and Paper are small matters to look upon, yet they may be a means to convey
matters of great worth unto us.

Ainsworth on Levit. 2.1. sets down nine sorts of Meat Offerings.

Minchah, prop^ie significat munus farinaceum, and erat accessio victimae.
Calvin. See Moses unvailed. ss. 36. p. 129, etc. See Mr. Iacksons Annot on
Levit. 7.15. and Moses unvailed. chapter 37 p. 132.


2 Meat Offerings, Minchah, in a large sense is taken for any gift, but here it
is taken strictly for an Oblation made of fine flower, Levit. 2.1, 2. Numb.
6.17. and 15.4. and 27.39. 2 Chronicles. 7.7. Ezekiel. 43.27. it was always joined to
the Burnt-offering or daily Sacrifice; only the voluntary Meat Offering was not.

The end of it was to acknowledge, that they had all their food and provision
from the bounty and blessing of God.

3 Peace Offerings; These were Euchariftical for Mercies received, and
resembled our sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving, Heb. 13.5.

It is called Shelem, because this sacrifice was offered for the peace, safety,
and prosperity that they had already received, or should hereafter receive,
either generally or particularly; and this they did either voluntarily of their
own accord, or as bound by vow, Levit. 7.15. 1 Chronicles. 16.1, 2. and 2 Chronicles.
7.7. but the other Sacrifices were necessary and commanded

2 Here is Gods detestation of all their Sacrifices; I will not accept them,
neither will I regard them, i. e. I abhor them; yea though ye bring the
fattest of your Beasts, I will not vouchsafe them a look. They were wont to
feed their Oxen very fat, that so their Sacrifices might be the more
acceptable. But the Lord tells them, that since the persons that offered them
were so lewd, and lean in obedience, that he took no pleasure in such
sacrifices; and therefore he bids them desist till they had mended their
manners, and reformed the abuses that reigned amongst them.

But here Bellarmine (that great Achilles of the Antichristian Cause) comes in
with his Sophistry, Bellarm. de effectu Sacram. lib. 2. cap. 14.
and would prove from hence the ine^ficacy of the Sacrifices of the Old
Testament.

But the Answer is easy. 1. Legal Sacrifices are to be considered, either
abstractly, absolutely and simply in themselves, and so the blood of Bullocks
and Rams could not expiate sin, But secondly, consider them Relatively, and
Typically, as relating to Christ, who was the Lamb slain from the beginning
of the world Vertually, though not Actually, Revel. 13.8. and so they were of
great weight and worth, assuring believers that by the Blood of Christ all
their sins were blotted out and pardoned.

2 We must distinguish of Sacrifices.

1 Some are commanded by God, and offered to him by believers, in a right
manner, and these are highly pleasing unto God, and beneficial to believers; as
we see in Abel, Heb. 11.4. and Levit. 5. God never says to the seed of Jacob,
Seek my face in vain. The sincere services, and sacrifices of such, are a sweet
smelling savor unto God.

2 There are Sacrifices which are mere Will Worship, offered up by wicked men,
in a false manner, without faith; and of these Amos here speaks, and says,
that their Sacrifices were odious unto God.

Now, Fallacia a d^cto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter.
let us see what Jesuitical and Sophistical arguing here is; 1. Because
Sacrifices do not expiate sins per se, therefore they do not expiate sins
Relatively, viz. by the merits of Christ typified by them.

2 Because God abhorres the sacrifices of wicked men, therefore he abhorres the
sacrifices of all men. Now, who knows not, that A particulari ad Universale
non valet argumentum. Because some men are Sophisters, therefore all men are
Sophisters, and because some men oppose the truth against light (to get or keep
a Cardinals Cap) ergo all men do so, is a gross Non sequitur.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Wicked men may perform all the external duties of religion as well as good
men.

Does the good man offer Burnt-offerings? so do these. Does he offer
Meat Offerings, and Peace Offerings? so do they. Yea, do they offer the Fat?
so did these. Cain offered Sacrifice as well as Abel, Genesis 4.5. Does the good
man Fast, Pray, give Alms? etc. so did Scribes and Pharisees. Yea the
Hypocrite may excel the child of God in externals, See Dyke on the Heart, p.
29. and p. 111.
as hired mourners make a greater noise than real ones.

Let no man then rest in externals, and think because he barely does such
duties, therefore he is in Gods favor, all these and more may be done by a
Natural man. But let us sincerely live our Prayers, and live up to our Duties
and Privileges, so shall we do more than any Hypocrites whatsoever.

2 Obs. The Sacrifices and Services of wicked men though never so fat, and good
for matter, yet as coming from them are odious unto God.

If the person please not, nothing pleases; God had no respect to Cain, and
therefore he rejected his Offering, Genesis 4.5. The Sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8. and 21.27. the tree must be good before
the fruit can be good. We should therefore labor for faith and repentance that
our persons may please, and then all will be pleasing. The Lord had first
respect to Abel, and then to his Offering, Genesis 4.4. Though for matter the
Sacrifices may be the same, yet when they come from a believing heart, they are
far more excellent and acceptable, Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offered a more
acceptable Sacrifice than Cain.

3 Obs. The Services and Sacrifices which we offer unto God must be of the best.

We must bring the finest flower, Levit. 2.1. and the fattest of our flock,
Exodus 29.13. Levit. 3.3. if the blind and the ^ame were abhorred of David's
soul, how much more of Gods? he curses such as bring such maimed sacrifices to
him. We may not offer unto God of that which cost us naught. But as he is the
best of beings, so we must give him the best of our days, our youth; and the
best of our services, thankfully acknowledging that all our fatness, riches,
comforts, and prosperity comes from God. It is said of Prometheus, that himself
did eat the flesh of his Sacrifice, but the skin and the bones he gave to
Jupiter; even so deal too many with the Almighty, they keep the flesh and the
fat to themselves, they spend their youth and health in their own pastimes and
pleasures, offering the skin and the bones of their dotage to God; If they have
a Son amongst all their children that is weak and sickly, why set him to the
Ministry. So in their Tithes and dues they keep the fat to themselves, and
give the starvelings to their Ministers. The worst is thought too good for God,
the worst Corn, the worst Calfe, the worst Lamb, etc. his Ministers shall be
sure to have, yea it may be none at all of many.

VESSE 23.
Take thou away from me the noise of thy Songs, for I will not hear the melody
of thy Viols.
THe Prophet goes on in reproving them for their hypocritical services,
wherewith they thought to please and pacify God. Take away from me the noise
(or multitude) of your Songs; they contented not themselves with a song or two,
but they had their multitudes of songs. Hypocrites that delight in toys and
human inventions, and a Ceremonious, external, pompous worship, know no bounds,
they spare for no cost or pains, but even tire out themselves in will worship;
morning, noon, night, midnight, all too little for Idols, but nothing for God,
Putabana se sua deliria lyr and^ tegere, and suavi concentu aures Dei irati
mulcere, eumque quasi incantare. a Lapide in locum.
he is not in any of their thoughts. They placed a great part of their Religion
in Singing, and Music, and external services, they thought that God was like
themselves, and would be pleased with such things as pleased them; and as
Children are stilled with rattles, so they thought to pacify God with their
songs and melody.

But away with your Songs and Music (says God) they are a burden to me, you
do but tire your-selves and me too, to no purpose. Do not think to please me
with the Musical harmony of your formal devotions, whilst I hear and abhor the
discordous noise of your sins and enormities.

In the time of the Ceremonial Law God did indulge the Jews the use of many
Musical Instruments in his Worship, which are now abolisht (as I have proved at
large on Amos 6.5.) Vocal and Instrumental Music was at that time a part of
Gods instituted Worship, as appears, 1 Chronicles. 25. and 2 Chronicles. 23.18. now the
ten Tribes did imitate Judah in their Songs, but abused them to the Worship of
their Idols, and polluted them with their Impiety, Idolatry, and Hypocrisy,
when they should have Worshipped God in Sion, they Worshipped Baalim, with the
Calves at Dan and Bethel. Hence the Lord threatens to turn their music into
mourning, Amos 8.3.

Hamo^, strepitus, rixa, tumultus, maltitudo.

Tumultum vocat, quod sine spiritu clament and ululent. Mercer. Hic strepitus
fu it Deo molestus, ut grunnitus suis, aut clamor asinorum. Hieron.

See more on Amos 6.5.

Nebel est Instrumentum Musicum eujus species nobis est incognita, Calvin.


The word which we render, Noise, in the Original signifies a clamor, a
trouble, a tumult, a multitude; which being all united make a complete
Periphrasis of a Popish Quire. It is a clamorous, troublesome, tumultuous
multitude, when they meet together they make a horrid, hideous noise, which
takes with God no more than the grunting of a Swine, or the braying of an Ass,
as St. Jerome long since has well observed.

The Viol is here put Synecdochically for all kind of Musical Instruments,
which David had prepared in great abundance for the praising of God; which
these abused to the praise of Idols. The word Nebel which we render a Viol, is
by some called a Psaltery, a Harp, an Organ; the Instrument is now out of use,
and it is not certainly known what it was.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 All the singing and praises of wicked men is an abomination to the Lord.

Away with them (says God) they are a burden to me, your Vocal and
Instrumental Music, your Viols, Harps, and Organs, your Songs and Sonnets are
in mine ears but as the howling of a Dog. Praise is not comely in the mouths
of Sinners. As for the wicked, says God, What have thou to do to take my name
into thy mouth? Christ would not be praised nor published by Devils. The
bellowing of those Bulls of Basan, and roaring Stentors in the Papacy (many of
them being deep in the Quire, and deeper in the Alehouse) with all their
Theatrical Music is an abomination to the Lord, his soul loathes such swill,
and that one Quere* Who has required these things at your hands? is enough to
sweep both the workmen and their work, out of the Church of God. These are a
mere Noise, a Voice, and nothing else; they draw nigh to God with their lips
(scarce that) when their hearts are far from him; In Papatu, Organorum
concentus, and campanarum boatus, non postrema cultus Divini pars esse
creditur. Gualter.
yet this is the greatest part of their Worship (as Gualter has well
observed.) Ringing of Bells, and roaring of Organs, is a great part of Papists
Divine Service.

It is the music of the Heart, and not of the Tongue that God delights in, See
more on Amos 6.5.
it is this which makes us like the Angels in Heaven, when in our degree we
praise that God on earth, which the Angels continually adore and praise in
heaven. We should therefore be much in this duty of praising God, for though
the Ceremony be vanished, yet the substance abides still.

Away then with that Histrionical and confused chaunting, which even the
Learned and wiser sort of Papists have condemned, as Aquinas, Alredus an Abbot,
Cajetan, and others, as I have proved at large on Amos 6.5. At present hear
what A Lapide the Jesuit says against those, A Lapide in Amos 5.23.
Qui inconditis and confusis vocibus tumultuarie boant and ululant. Videant
cantatores ne totam Psallendi devotionem collocent in voce c^nora, in
subtilitate modulandi, in agilitate tonos minuendi, etc. Dum instar avium
minuriunt, ut curiosorum aures titillent, and ad se rapiant, ne a^diant a Deo,
Aufer a me tumultum canticorum tuorum.

VERSE 24.
But, let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.
WE have seen before what God did not require of this People, and that was
Sacrifices without faith and obedience. 2. We are come to that which he did
require of them, viz. an active lively faith, showing it self in justice and
righteousness toward our neighbor; so that if they should say, Since God
rejects our Services and Ceremonies, what would he have us do? why the Prophet
answers, He has showed thee O man what is pleasing to him, and what he
desires of thee, viz. to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God.

Interpreters vary about the sense of the words, 1. The Rabbis and those that
follow them, make it a comm^^at^on of Gods Judgments against Israel for their
sins; they read it thus, And judgment shall run down, or be revealed as
waters, q. d. Though you abound with Ceremonies and Sacrifices, and think to
shroud your selves under their shadow, yet I will cause my Judgments to break
in upon you like waters in abundance, and my righteous vengeance as a mighty
stream shall bear down all before it, because of your Idolatry and Hypocrisy.

2 But the words are properly an exhortation to amendment of life, this people
had been grossly guilty of injustice and unrighteousness; and therefore God
calls upon them now to break off their unrighteousness, Iiggal, volvat, a Rad.
Galal, volvere, convolvere, obruere.

The vulgar Latin mistaking the root, render it, Revelabitur; and render Vau
by and, when it is often used adversatively, (as it is here) by sed.


and to give themselves up to equity and righteousness, that their repentance
might be as eminent as ever their sin had been. Let Judgment therefore run
down, or rou^ down like waters, i. e. be always ready to do Justice and
Judgment, let it abound and extend it self to all, do not suppress it as
formerly you have done, Amos 4.1. and 5.7, 12. but let it run fully and freely
to every one that has need; content not your selves with a drop or two, but
g^^ rivers of righteousness, which may abundantly refresh all the oppressed and
needy of the Land; so much the phrase imports, as you may see, Isa. 48.18. O
that thou had harkened to my Commandments, then had thy peace been as a
river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea, q. d. Had thou obeyed
my commands, then had thy peace been as a river, that abides and runs
continually, and thy righteousness, i. e. the fruits of thy righteousness, viz.
thy prosperity and happiness should have been as the waves of the sea, which
are abundant and perpetual. This sense is most genuine, and agrees best with
the contexture and thread of the discourse; the former sense is Rabbinical and
wrackt.

3 Others distinguish between judgment and righteousness, thus.

1 By Judgment they understand a faithful and impartial execution of justice.

2 Under Righteousness they comprehend all the duties of the first and second
Table, relating both to God and man. So the word righteousness is sometimes
used in Scripture, as Romans 6.18. Ephesians. 6.14.

But with submission to better judgments, I conceive that Judgment and
Righteousness here are Synonima's, signifying one and the same thing; and that
the latter clause is exegetical and illustrates the former, as it does
frequently in the Scripture, Benacha^ Ethan, tanquam torrens fortis, vel
fluvius vehemens.
Let Judgment run down as waters, what is that? why let righteousness run down
as a mighty stream, i. e. let nothing hinder you from a constant and vigorous
execution of Justice and Equity, and this execution of Justice is often called
Righteousness, Psalm. 72.2. Acts 17.31.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 God delights in Justice and Righteousness more than in Sacrifices.

I hate your Sacrifices, I abhor your feasts (says God) but let judgment run
down as waters; it is that I delight in. As obedience is better than Sacrifice,
and Mercy than Burnt* offerings, Hos. 6.6. so Justice and Equity (which is one
branch of our obedience) is better than Sacrifice; of the two, God had rather
have Justice without a Sacrifice, than Sacrifice without Justice; and therefore
(says God) Away with your songs and sacrifices, give me righteousness and
obedience. It is not thousands of Rams, nor rivers of Oil, but doing justly,
which God requires of us, Micah 6.8. so Isa. 1.17. Learn to do well, seek
judgment, releeve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow;
without this all our religion is vain. Let men profess Angelical Sanctity, yet
if they do not what is just and righteous, all is but hypocrisy, James 1. ult.

2 Obs. Rulers must abound in judgment and righteousness

Actio una non denominat hominem.
They must not only do an act or two of righteousness, for one act does not
denominate; but they must be rivers always running with righteousness. This
elegant Metaphor of a River may give us some hints how Justice should be
executed.

Viz. 1 Openly. 2 Fully. 3 Freely. 4 Universally. 5 Constantly. 6 Zealously.


1 Judgment must be executed openly, that all may see the equity of the
sentence. Rivers run openly, who so will may see them. So Courts of Justice
should be open; hence the Judges of old sat in the Gates, where all might see
and hear what they did.

2 Fully, Justice must run with a plentiful and an abundant stream. They must
not confine Justice, nor imprison it, but as occasion requires they must
abundantly dispense and disperse it abroad. They must not content themselves
with a few drops or acts of Justice, but it must run down with a mighty stream.
Goodness is of a diffusive nature; now Justice is a singular good, and
therefore should be communicated to all.

3 Freely, the river offers it self freely to all, who ever is athirst, may
drink of it freely. Men should not be bribed and hired to do Justice, but it
should flow as freely and spontaneously from a Ruler, as water from a spring.
The light of the Sun, and the liberty of the Air should not be more cheap and
free, than Justice amongst us.

4 Universally and commonly, without respect of persons. When justice is duly
administered, it must run down as waters, and streams, which run by the poor
man's doors, as well as by the rich; and by the poorest Cottage, as well as by
the stateliest Palace.

5. Constantly, Rivers run continually, the stream is always rolling down: so
should Magistrates be constant pro re nata, as occasion requires in the
execution of Justice, in the places of their abode.

6. Zealously and vigorously. Rapido montano flumine to r^ns, Sternit agros,
ste^nil sata laeta, boumque labores. Virg. Aeneid. l 2.

See more in my Com. on Psalm. 82.4. p. 112, etc

See Mr. Patrick Jewish Hypoc. chap. 14 p. 226.


A mighty stream carries down all before it: So a good Ruler breaks through all
impediments, discouragements, and temptations that might hinder the free course
of Justice. No friends nor foes, no gifts nor bribes can hinder him from a
faithful discharge of the duties of his place. As we see in Moses, Job, Samuel,
Nehemiah. This is Gods work, and he is cursed that does it negligently. When
men are good, it is a joy to them to do judgment, Prove. 21.15. and this is the
way to safety and settlement, Isa. 32.16, 17, 18. Dan. 4.27.

VERSE 25.
Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness forty
years, O house of Israel?
THe Prophet comes now to conclude the Chapter with an Amplification of the
Superstition and Idolatry which from first to last did abide in Israel. Their
Forefathers of old were Idolaters in the wilderness, there they worshipped the
golden Calf, and Baal-Peor, Numb. 25.1, 2, 3. No sooner were they come to
Canaan, but they were on their knees to Baal and Ashtaroth, Judge. 2.13.

Yea and then their Posterity (says the Prophet) have justified them in their
Idolatries, and showed that the evil is hereditary, and so the more to be
abhorred; in that you have added Calves to Calves, and Idols to Idols, lest
they should boast of their Ancestors, the Lord upbraids them with their
Forefathers, and tells them that they were Idolaters before them, and were
punished for their Idolatry, and so should they; as they had been like them in
sin, so they should be like them in suffering.

In the words we have, 1. Isreal's sin, They sacrificed not to God, but to
Idols, as in the next verse.

2 Here is a double aggravation of their sin, both in respect of Time and Place.

1 Here is the Time how long they grieved the Spirit of God, not forty days,
but forty years, even the whole time of their abode in the wilderness.

2 The Place, it was in the Wilderness, where they lay under the Rod, and were
kept under severe Discipline, and where the Lord lead them miraculously, and
fed them miraculously, with Mannah from Heaven, giving them waters from the
Rock, and with a mighty hand protecting them, and carrying them upon Eagles
wings, above the reach of many dangers and distresses, Amos 3.1, 2.

This is locus difficillimus (says Mercer) this verse, and especially the next
are two of the hardest verses in the whole Prophecy. Many doubts do here arise.

Quest. 1. Why does the Prophet charge this people with not offering sacrifice
in the wilderness, when they never lived in the wilderness, but lived many ages
after their Forefathers came out of the wilderness? as appears by the series
of those Judges and Kings which governed them since the time that they came
from Egypt.

Answ. Though the same numerical men were not in the wilderness, yet the house
of Israel was there, and what their Forefathers did, is imputed to the
posterity who made up one body with them, and were bound up in the same bundle
with them.

These walking in the Idolatrous steps of their Forefathers, justified their
Idolatry, and as they worshipped the golden Calf in Egypt, so these worshipped
the golden Calves at Dan and Bethel. Thus they being heirs of their Fathers
guilt, and imitators of them in their Idolatry, the Lord charge them here
with their sin also, saying, Have ye offered to me sacrifices in the
wilderness? He does not say, Have your Forefathers offered sacrifice to me?
but he charge them with the sin; and this is usual in Scripture, when the
children walk in the Ancestors sins, to charge the children with the sins also,
as Mat. 23.35. Our Savior charge the Jews with the blood of Abel and
Zacharias, whom they slew. How could they slay those that were slain long
before they were born?

Answ. By imitating their cruelty, they approved of the like cruelty in their
progenitors, and so became partakers with them in their sin, and should partake
with them in their plagues; not only for the murdering of John the Baptist,
and those of latter times; but even for the blood of all the Saints that ever
was shed to that day, even from the blood of righteous Abel, the first that
ever was slain, to the blood of good Zacharias, who was so barbarously slain
between the Temple and the Altar, q. d. God will visit the sins of the Fathers
upon you their children, that have walked in their wicked steps, with the
greatest severity, because ye have sinned against the greatest light; and if
the blood of one innocent Abel lay so heavy upon Cain, that he cried, his
punishment was greater than he could bear; how sad is your condition that are
charged with the blood of so many thousands of innocent, holy men! so that as
all Believers are the children of Abraham, and have Interest in all the
Promises that were made to him: So all persecutors are the seed of Cain, and
have interest in all the curses which fell upon him.

Quest. 2. How are all condemned here as Idolaters, when we read of some good
men amongst them that sacrificed to God, and not to Idols? as Moses, Eleazer,
Joshua, Caleb, Phineas, and Aaron, the Saint of the Lord, as the Psalmist calls
him, Psalm. 106.16.

Answ. The Prophet condemns the body of this people indefinitely, Quod major
multitudo abrepta fuerat, ideo totus populus merito damnatur. Calvin.
and not all and every individual person, singly. He speaks against the wicked
Ancestors of wicked children, and against those wicked children which walked in
the steps of those wicked Ancestors; God had his remnant amongst them, and some
grains of wheat in this heap of rubbish and chaff.

Quest. 3. Have ye sacrificed to me? The Interrogation is a strong Negation.
So Joel 1.2. q. d. You have not sacrificed to me all that time, but you have
discovered your averseness from me, and your proneness to Idolatry on all
occasions. But how can this be true, when we read that the Israelites did
sacrifice to God in the wilderness? when the Covenant was ratified, they
offered Eucharistical sacrifices to Jehovah, Exodus 24.4, 5. And after the
dedication of the Tabernacle, and the consecration of Aarons sons, and at the
celebration of the feast of the Passover, Levit. 8.21, 28. and 9.2. Numb. 7.3.
and 9.

Answ. Though they did offer some sacrifices the first and second year that
they were in the wilderness, yet after they did not so ordinarily and so
frequently, as when they came to Canaan, for in the wilderness they lived in
want, and had not that plenty of Sheep and Oxen, as they had when they came
into Canaan. They had scarce any flesh to eat, much less to sacrifice,
therefore the Lord fed them with Mannah and Quails. Besides, they were in a
fleeting condition, and so unfit for sacrificing, or for circumcision and
therefore 'twas omitted in the wilderness for a time. They were not settled nor
fixed, but as the Tabernacle removed, so they removed, and till they came to
fix and settle, they could not so well sacrifice.

2 The Answer lies most genuinely in that little Emphatical word Me, Have ye
offered sacrifice to me? q. d. It Is true, I grant, you have offered sacrifice
(says the Lord) but 'twas to your Idols, and to Devils, Deuteronomy. 32.16, 17. and
not to me, both you and your Fathers worshipped Calves and Creatures, and the
host of Heaven (as in the next verse) and not me, and therefore I will punish
you as I did them. Ezekiel. 20.15, 16, 18, 21. Isa. 43.22, 23, 24.

It Is true, they thought they worshipped God, and did him good service, but
since they kept not to the Rule, but worshipped the Lord according to their own
inventions, with rotten hearts, and unhallowed lives, therefore the Lord
disowns all that they did, and tells us, that they did not sacrifice to him at
all.

Quest. 4. How is it said that for forty years space in the wilderness they did
not sacrifice, whereas it is apparent that the two first years at least they did
offer sacrifice?

Scriptura plenum ac integrum numerum usurpat Synecdochic^^ pro part^, cum
paululum quiddam a^t desit, aut excedat. Aug. de Civit. De^. l. 15. c. 24.
The Answer is easy; It Is usual in Scripture for roundness of number (though
some few years may be under or over) to name a full and complete number, as
here forty years for thirty eight, that is, not forty precisely, but well nigh
forty. So Abimelech is said to kill his seventy Brethren, when he killed but
sixty nine, for Iotham escaped, Judge. 9.5. So the seventy two Disciples are
called the seventy. So Genesis 42.13. it is said, Thy servants are twelve
brethren, yet in the same verse it is said, one is not. By the like Synecdoche
they are called twelve Apostles, when one was wanting, 1 Cor. 15.5. So the Lord
threatened to punish Israel forty years in the wilderness, V. Before D.
Reynolds de lib. Apochry. Praelect. 219. p. 1288, etc. See the large Annotat.
on 2 Samuel 5.5.
whereas they were not punished forty years complete, for the punishment began
to be inflicted on them about the second year of their departure out of Egypt,
as appears by comparing, Numb. 1.1. with 14.33. and 32.13. See more Deuteronomy. 29.5.
Judge. 20.46. 2 Samuel 5.5.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Teaching by Questions and Interrogations is very Emphatical and lively.

Have ye offered sacrifice to me? did ye serve me? or rather, did ye not
serve your selves in the wilderness? The Scripture abounds with such Questions,
Adam where art thou? Genesis 3.9. So said Christ, How read thou? what think
you? Mat. 18.12. and 21.28. Luke 7.42. James 4.5. This quickens and awakens
men, it makes them heed things better, and consider what to answer. Be not then
offended when Gods Ministers ransack thy soul, and question and quicken thee
out of thy Lethargy, and deep security.

2. God bears long with sinners.

Forty years he was grieved with Israel, in the wilderness. He bore with those
ten Tribes well nigh three hundred years before he destroyed them; He bore with
the old world a hundred and twenty years; He bore with the Amorites four
hundred years. It Is one of his Royal Attributes, that he is a God of infinite
Patience, See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.12. p. 4. to 11.
and Long-suffering* Exodus 34.6. Psalm. 103.8. Jonah 4.2. We have all daily
experience of this his goodness to us.

3. To sin against mercy aggravates sin.

For this people to sin against God in the wilderness where he led them, See
more in my Comment* on 2 Timothy 4.10. p. 427, 428.
and fed them miraculously, and upheld them in the midst of so many dangers,
does greatly heighten their sin.

4. Long continuance in sin is very displeasing unto God.

Hence the Lord so often mentions this forty years obstinacy of Israel, See
more in my Com. on 2 Timothy* 4.10. p. 429.
as that which exceedingly offended and grieved him, Numb. 32.13. Psalm. 95.11.
Act. 7.42. and 13.18. This made the Lord to complain of Jerusalem, Jer. 13.
ult. Oh Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? when shall it once be? He
denounces a woe against them for their hypocritical dallying and delaying; Woe
unto thee, will thou not be made clean? Frustra expecto quia obduruisti in
scelere, desperata est tua correctio, funditus ergo te evertam. Hieron.
it is not, can thou not? but will thou not? They were wilfully impenitent;
it is this rebellious will of men that destroys them, Psalm. 78.10. Isa. 30.9,
15. and 42.24. Ier. 5.3. and 6.16. and 8.5. and 44.17. Zach. 7.11. Romans 8.7.

Obj. We will turn.

Answ. You do but dissemble (says God) with me, When shall it once be? what?
not after so many wooings and warnings? what? not after so many years purifying
Sermons? nor so many melting mercies? nor so many awakening judgments? nor
after so many Sabbaths and Sacraments, fasts and feasts? will nothing cleanse
thee from thy old abominations? Oh when shall it once be? This obstinate
persevering and continuing in sin, makes the Lord so often to upbraid men with
it, as that which will be their bane, Exodus 16.28. Neh. 9.30. Psalm. 78.40. Luke
13.44.

5. Children that imitate their Forefathers in sin, shall be like them in
punishment.

See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 82. and 146.
God will visit the sins of the Fathers upon those children that tread in their
steps, Exodus 20.5. Hence the Lord so often forbids us to follow sinful
Forefathers, Psalm. 78.5, 6, 8. Ezekiel. 20.18. Zech. 1.4. And Stephen aggravates
the sins of the Israelites, saying, That as your Fathers did, so do ye, Act.
7.51.

6. Idolatrous, Hypocritical service, is no service.

Have ye offered Sacrifice to me? (says the Lord to those Hypocrites) no, you
have not served me at all.

1. Since you do not worship me according to Rule, but according to your own
inventions, I abhor it, and account it as null.

See my Schools Guard. Rule 22.
2. Your hearts are rotten; what the heart does not, God accounts as not done,
Isa. 43.22, 23, 24. Though they abounded with sacrifices, yet God says there,
They brought him none, viz. in sincerity. As knowledge without practice is no
knowledge, 1 Samuel 2.12. so duties not practiced are no duties in Gods esteem.
Quia non soli Deo offerebant, perinde erat ac si no^ offerebant. Mariana.


3. They served not God alone, but served him and their Idols too, and
therefore God disowns all they did, as not done to him, for he will be served
truly and totally, without halting or halving, 1 King. 18.21. 2 King. 17.33.
Ezekiel. 20.30. Zeph. 1.5.

VERSE 26.
But ye have born the Tabernacle of your Moloch, and Chiun, your Images, the
star of your god, which ye made to your selves.
THese Hypocrites were ever and anon boasting of their Sacrifices, to them the
Prophet in the person of the Lord here further answers, and tells them, it is
true, Your forefathers made a show of serving me, carrying my Tabernacle, and
all things belonging to it, in the Wilderness; but their hearts were set upon
their Idols, and they Worshipped their Moloch, and the other Images of those
Planetary gods, and not me.

This But spoils all.

The better to convince them of their Idolatry, the Prophet here instanceth in
three of their chief Idols, Moloch, Chiun, and The Host of Heaven.


1 The Prophet instanceth in these Heathen Idols to shame Israel.

2 Here are the setters up of these Idols, and those are, these wicked men
themselves, which ye made to your selves.

3 Here is their love and affection to those Idols, they bare them, and carried
their Images about with them.

This is, Locus difficilis and valde perplexus (say Interpreters) it is a
difficult, knotty, perplexed Text, I never yet met with its fellow, Quot verba,
tot mysteria, it has more mysteries, and various interpretations than words. I
shall endeavor to clear up all.

1 Q. The first Quere is, What is meant by Moloch here?

A. Under this grand Idol are Synecdochically comprehended the rest of their
Idols. This Moloch was an old abominable Idol, which the Ammonites, and other
Heathens worshipped. Hence it is often called, the abomination of the Ammonites, 1
King. 11.7. and 2 King. 23.13. in other places it is called Molech, Levit.
18.21. and Milcom, 1 King. 11.5, 33. Zeph. 1.5. and by Amos and St. Stephen it
is called Moloch, Acts 7.43. they both upbraid the Jews for worshipping this
abominable Idol, and that in the Wilderness, where the Lord showed them so many
signal Miracles and Mercies; there they began to practice this foul Idolatry.
The Ammonites had many gods, but one among the rest was their Patron, and
tutelar god, which they called their King, Ier. 49.1, 3. Amos 1.15. (as they
did this Moloch) but the Holy Ghost calls it an abomination, for that which is
highly esteemed in the sight of men, is an abomination in the sight of God.
This Idol not only Ammon, but Israel trusted in as their Guide, and Leader in
their travels; which shows their horrid ingratitude in casting off God, who
had been so long their Protector and their King, and now to choose an Idol, and
a Moloch for their God and Guide, and therefore it is emphatically called
yours, Your Moloch, which you chose for your God and King. To this Idol the
Israelites most inhumanely, and barbarously offered their Sons and Daughters in
Sacrifice, Levit. 18.21. and 20.2. 2 King. 23.10.

What this Idol should be, is hard to determine. 1. Some say, it was an hollow
Idol shaped like a man.

2. Others make it an hollow Image made of Brass, having the face of a Bullock,
and hands spread abroad like a man, that opens his hands to receive somewhat.
There were seven Chapels built for it, before which the Image was set, who so
offered a Fowl or Dove, went into the first Chapel; if he brought a Lamb, he
went into the second; if a Ram, into the third; if a Calf, into the fourth; if
a Bullock, into the fifth; if an Ox, into the sixth; and if he offered his Son,
into the seventh, and he kissed Moloch; as the Sacrificers in Hosea kissed the
Calves, Hos. 13.2. The Son was set before Moloch, the Image having fire put
under it was made burning hot, then the Priest taking the Child, put him into
Molochs burning arms, V. Ialkut in his Heb. Com. on Jer. 7.
and to the end that the father might not hear the cry of the Child, they did
beat upon Tabers, whence the place was called Tophet, of Toph, which is a Taber.

V. Tertul. Apologer. c. 9.
3 Others conceive that it was the star of their god, probably Saturn, the
highest of the Planets, to whom the Phaenicians sacrificed their Children,
says Tertullian.

4 Many think it was the same Idol which we call Baal, to whom they sacrificed
their Sons and Daughters, Ier. 7.31. and 19.5. and 32.35.

5 And most genuinely, it is conceived that this Moloch whom they worshipped
was the Sun: which is King of Planets, and chief of Stars: V. Eusebius. Praep.
Evang. l. 1. and l. 4. c. 7.
the most operative of them all, and fullest of splendour; which some did
worship by the name of Beel-samen, Lord of Heaven; for as the Moon is called
Melachah, the Queen of Heaven, V. Strabo Geog. lib. ^5.
Ier. 7.18. and 44.17, 25. So the Sun is called Melech, the King of Heaven,
whom the Persians worshipped as their God.

And Chiun your Images. Their second Idol was Chiun, and here again
Interpreters are divided, and though it be not much material to know what this
Idol was (the sin reproved being not in the name, but in the thing, which was
an abominable Idol, however called) yet 1. Some say this Chiun was the Idol
Hercules, which in the Egyptian Language was called Chon, but varied into
another Language might easily make Chiun. St. Luke calls this supposed Deity,
Remphan, Acts 7.43. from Repha, which signifies a Giant, V. Beza in Act. 7.43.
and thereupon some have thought it was Hercules, who was wont to be pourtraied
in a Gyant-like form. The Evangelist uses this name rather than Chiun.

1 Because he followed the Translation of the Seventy, who being appointed by
Ptolomy King of Egypt to translate the Bible, they use the Egyptian name
Remphan in their Greek Translation.

2 The name Remphan being better known to the Jews in those days, (who made
great use of the Septuagint) than that of Chiun, therefore the Evangelist
mentions that rather than the other.

3 Others conceive that it might be Jove, or Mars, or Venus especially, which
Planet they worshipped as their Guide and Leader in the Wilderness; it being
the Leader of the Morning, and forerunner of the Sun, and is called Lucifer,
which is said to be placed in the forehead of Moloch, because it goes before
the Sunrising. This Planet the Sarazens worship at this day.

3 But most genuinely it seems to be the Idol Saturn, which in the Arabic* and
Persick Language is called Chiun, and Amos speaking of that time more
especially when Israel wandered in the Wilderness of Arabia, where they
committed this foul Idolatry, calls the Heathen god after the Arabic Language,
Chiun, or Chivan. Besides, the Egyptians at this day call Saturn in their
Language, Rephan, or Remphan, as Luke does.

You have born the Tabernacle of your Moloch. Melkekem, regi vestro.
Or, you have erected a Tabernacle to him, as to your King. Some read it, you
have born the Tabernacle of Siccuth your King, which they conceive to be the
name of some Idol; indeed Siccuth may serve to have some affinity with Succoth,
a Goddess of the Babylonians, 2 King. 17.30. But the Holy Ghost which is the
best interpreter of it self, (...), Tabernaculum Moloch. Sept.
by St. Luke (who following the Septuagint, which read it Succoth, not Siceuth)
renders it a Tabernacle, and so justifies our Translation.

And Chiun your Images. Netsatem, porta^tis, i. e. amaftis, suscepistis,
approbastis. Mercer.
Here we see the love and affection of these Idolaters to their Idols, they bear
them, and carry them on their shoulders (say some) by way of pomp and honor,
as Idolaters are wont to do, Isa. 46.7. the Prophet speaking there of an Idol,
tells us, that he is born on men's shoulders to the place where he must stand,
to be seen abroad.

2 Others conceive that the Images of this Idol-god were enshrined in some
little portable Tabernacles (as the Image of Diana had its shrines, little
houses, or caskets to put it in, Acts* 19.24.) which the people as many of them
as were given to Idolatry, carried about with them among their stuff. So
Rachel stole her fathers gods, and brought them with her stuff into Canaan,
Genesis 31.34. As good men by Prayer take in God for their companion with them in
their journeys, Genesis 35.3. Acts 21.5, 6. so Idolaters carry about with them
their Idols, Hosts, Crucifixes, etc. for religion and protection sake, as so
many tutelar gods in their voyages and journies.

3 Here is the multitude of their Idols, set forth in the Plural number, and
Chiun your Images, which imports the great number of them, and doubles their
sin. 1. They make New-gods. 2. They make Images of those New-gods in honor of
them, contrary to Gods express Command, Exodus 20.4.

Or Chiun your Images, that is (say some) your notable Image, the plural number
for the singular (as often) especially in names of dignity.

Hence we may observe against the Papists, Tsalmech^m, from Tselem, Imagines
vel figuras vestras.
that the Scripture condemns not only Idols (which themselves confess unlawful)
but also Images for religious Worship; God will not be Worshipped by any
visible Picture, and therefore the Prophet condemns both Moloch and Chiun with
their Images, See more, Dr. Reynolds de lib. Apocryph. Lect. 219. and de
Idolol, Romans Eccles. l. 2. c. 3. Sect. 40. p. 422. and Rivet in Hos. 8.4. and
above all, Mr. Durham in his elaborate Com. on Revel. 9. p. 454.
yea the Evangelist condemns the very Figures of those Idols which they make
to themselves, Acts 7.43.

The star of your god. Or, Cocab elohechem, stellam vestrorum Deorum.
the star which is your god, or rather the Images which you worship are like a
Star, either like the Sun, or Saturn; for their gods were nothing but Planets,
or Stars which they worshipped, in, or by Images representing them, Acts 7.41,
43. Figures which ye made to worship them (says St. Stephen) even the Host of
Heaven, as the Stars are often called, Deuteronomy. 17.3. Psalm. 33.6. Isa. 34.4. and
45.12. Ier. 33.22. Dan. 4.35.

The Heathen Idolaters were great worshippers of the Host of Heaven, and this
piece of Idolatry the Jews had learnt from them, Ier. 8.2. and with this St.
Stephen charge them, Acts 7.42. that they worshipped the Host of Heaven, i.
e. Sun, Moon, and Stars, as it is written in the Book of the Prophets, viz. of
the lesser Prophets, (of which Amos is one, out of which this text is quoted)
all the twelve being bound together in one Book, lest they should be scattered,
or lost, by reason of their smallness.

Many of the Jews conceited that all the Stars were Gods, and that there was
some Deity in them, and therefore they worshipped them, as appears 2 King.
23.11. Ier. 7.18. and 8.2. and 19.13. and 44.17, 19, 25. Zeph. 1.5.

With the like Sin the Prophet here charge them, viz. with Idolizing the star
of their god, or the star your gods. He speaks it sarcastically and
tauntingly, q. d. see what goodly gods ye have gotten, These Israelites had
many other deasters, and false gods, if we may believe Josephus Antiq. l. 4. c.
6.
these are thy gods O Israel; Stars and Planets, Idols and Images; you have
forsaken the living God for dead ones, and so have changed your glory into
shame; and have left the God that protected you, for Idols that cannot protect
themselves.

Which ye have made to your selves. All these feigned Deities with their
Images are your own inventions, and figments of your own brain, I never
commanded any such kind of worship from you. Hence Idols are called the work of
men's own hands, Psalm. 115.4. and the Lord threatens such as worshipped the
work of their own hands, because they provoked him to anger thereby, Ier. 2.16.
and 25.6. and 44.8. Acts 7.41. to show the vanity and nothingness that is in
Idols, and the folly of Idolaters in worshipping such things as themselves had
made, they are often called, The work of men's own hands, and their own
inventions; with which they please themselves, though they displease God.

Q. But whom does the Prophet charge here with all this gross Idolatry, whether
the Ancestors, or the Posterity?

A. Both. 1. He begins with their forefathers in the Wilderness, and the
better to humble them who so much boasted of their forefathers, (...)
Portastis tabernaculum Moloch, pertinet ad 40. annos in Deserto, cum
sacrificarunt non Deo, sed Moloch and Idolis, Act. 7.43.
he labors to convince them of their gross Idolatry, and shows how early they
began to practice this Sin, when they worshipped the Golden Calf, and Moloch,
as appears by the prohibitions against the worshipping of it, Levit. 18.21. and
20.2.

2 He charge the Posterity, and brings down this Idolatry along to their
times, showing how they had justified their ancestors in their Idolatry, by
worshipping the Calves at Dan and Bethel, and following Baal, yea and
worshipping the Host of Heaven, 1 King. 11.5. and 2 King. 23.5.11. Ezekiel. 8.16.
Zeph. 1.5.

The sum of all is this. It is true, O ye children of Israel, that your
Progenitors made a great show of serving and honoring me, carrying my
Tabernacle about with them, in the Wilderness, pretending that it was their
glory to have me present amongst them; when indeed their hearts were set upon
their Idols, and false Deities, as Moloch, and Chiun, the Sun, the Moon, the
Stars, and all the Host of Heaven, as appears by the multitude of those
Images, and representations of their Idol-gods which they carried about with
them to Worship them; and you their Posterity have trod in the sinful steps of
your forefathers, and have out-gone them in Idolatry; therefore I will now
banish you to the remotest parts of Assyria, even beyond Babylon.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Naturally we are exceeding prone to Idolatry.

This is clear from the example of these Israelites, to whom the Lord so often
appeared, Exodus 19. and 33, etc. both in ways of Judgment, and of Mercy. To
them the Law was given, and to them were committed the Oracles of God, Psalm.
147.19, 20. Romans 3.2. and 9.4, 5. and yet how frequently and fearfully did they
and their Fathers fall into this sin; See more in M. Caryl on Job 31.26. Obs. 1.
and this was not only the temper of these Jews, but of us Gentiles also, we
are easily seduced, and lead away with dumb Idols, 1 Cor. 12.2.

2 When men know God, yet walk not up to their light, See more in my Com. on 2 Timothy 4.4. Obs. 5.
but wilfully sin against it, then God gives them up to a reprobate sense, so
that they worship Stocks and Stones, Stars, and Images, as these did here,
Acts 7.42.

Thus it was with the Gentiles, Romans 1.24, 25, 26, etc. Those that will not
believe and obey the Truth, God will give them up to strong delusions to
believe lies, 2 These. 2.10, 11. false Prophets shall arise and cry down
Ordinances, and you shall believe them; they shall cry up Superstition,
Idolatry, Libertinism, etc. and you shall follow them. This is a sad Judgment,
yet usually God thus punishes Sin with Sin, as blindness with blindness,
ignorance with greater ignorance, and idolatry with grosser idolatry; when men
begin to fall from God, Error minimus in prin^ pio, fit maximus in fine. See
Manton on Jude 12. p. 421. and my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.13. p. 230, etc. Greenhil on
Ezekiel 8.16.
they fall to worship Calves, Stars, Stocks, and Images. They never rest till
they come to destruction.

As all Sin, so especially this of Idolatry is very prolifical. The Cloud that
at first is like a man's hand, will suddenly overspread the whole Heavens. The
little Wheel sets the great one a going. A little Defeat at first may become a
total Rout at last, Per scelera ad scelus, one sin usually makes way for
another. Sin and error is endless, wicked men (when the Devil drives) know not
where, nor when they shall stop or stay, Prove. 23. ult. Hos. 10.1. and 13.2.
Ier. 9.3, 5. Sin has no foundation, Fertilis est Idololatria ut ex uno Deo
fictitio centum mox gignantur; ex superstitione una s^aturiant mill. Calvin.
but runs on and multiplies in infinitum. Ahaz that at first burnt Incense to
Idols, at last burnt his children to them, 2 Chronicles. 28.3. as these Jews did
theirs to Moloch. It concerns us then to keep close to the Rule, for if we
swarve never so little from that, we shall suddenly run our selves into a
Labyrinth of Superstition, sin and error.

3. Forefathers must not be followed in sin.

See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 146.
These Israelites forsook the Rule to follow their Forefathers in their
Idolatry, and now they perish with them. But of this before.

4. Idolaters are deeply in love with their Idols;

They hug them, they carry them, they kiss them, Hos. 13.2. In Ier. 8.2. we
have five expressions to set forth the strong affections which Idolaters bear
to their Idols. They love, serve, seek, worship, and walk after them, as if
they could never do enough for them. They had as lieve part with their lives,
as part with them, Judge. 18.24. Ye have taken away my gods (says Micah) and
what have I more? q. d. you have even taken all, since you have taken away mine
Idols, which are so near and dear to me. They are married to them, no wonder
then if they love them, Hos. 4.17. Besides, they are gods of their own making,
Exodus 32.1. and it is natural to every one to love its own workmanship.

5. Idolatry besots men.

It makes men worship Posts and Pictures, Stars and Planets, Quis nescit qualia
demens Aegyptus portenta colat? Iuven. Sat. 15. V. Godwin. Jewish Antiq. l. 4.
c. 7. p. 164. and M. John Smith, his select discourse. p. 25. and my Com. on
Hos. 13. p. 119.
Dogs and Cats, Onyons and Leeks, any thing save God. As those that are given
up to corporal uncleanness, care not with whom they commit it: So it is in
spiritual Whoredom. Affection blindes the judgment, and besots men. Idolatry
is a bewitching, flesh-pleasing-sin, which steals away the heart, Humanarum
mentium ludibrium superstitio. Curtius.
and therefore is compared to fornication, Ezekiel. 23.2. to 18. which infatuates
and steals away men's hearts. The Whore of Babylon has all alluring Ceremonies,
Altars, Images, Gorgeous Vestments, Music, etc. with many other enchantments
to seduce men, Rev. 17. 1, 2, 4. Hence we read of the delectable things of
Idolaters, Isa. 44.9. The sight of the Sun, Moon, Stars, and all the host of
Heaven, should have convinced them of the Majesty and Glory of their Creator,
and have induced them to worship him, but they being besotted and blinded by
sin and Satan, worshipped the creature instead of God, and serve those which
were made for their service.

Besides, what man that is well in his wits will trust in such gods for safety,
as cannot save themselves from fire and spoil? All their Idols, the Calves and
all, Hos. 10.5, 6. were carried away by the Conquering Assyrian, according to
the custom of Conquerers, which was to carry away the gods of the Conquered
Nations, Ier. 43.12.

6. God has many Hosts and Armies at command.

He has the Host of Heaven, 1. Angels, 1 King. 22.19. Luke 2.13. 2. He has
Sun, Moon and Stars, even the Stars in their kind shall fight against Sisera,
Judge. 5.20. These Stephen calls the Host of Heaven. 3. All creatures are his
Hosts and Armies, ready to execute what ever he commands, Job 25.3. Amos 9.6.
Amos 4 ult.
Fear therefore to offend this Lord of Hosts. But of this before.

7. To worship the Host of Heaven is a great sin.

Hence the Lord upbraids these Israelites both fathers and children with this
sin, and threatens to send them into captivity for it. This the Lord often
forbade them, Deuteronomy. 4.19. and blames them for it, 2 King. 17.16. 2 Chronicles. 33.3,
5. Ier. 8.2, 3. and 19.13. and 44.17. Ezekiel. 8.16. and commands that he should
dye that did it, Deuteronomy. 17.3, 4, 5. Job calls this kind of Idolatry a denying
of God, and a sin to be punished by the Judges, See Caryl on Job 31.26. Obs. 4.
Job 31.26, 27, 28. How much greater is their sin which worship gods of their
own making, gods of Wood and Stone, Crosses, Crucifixes, Images, etc. Idols
which their own heads invented, and their own hands have made, yea that with
five words of consecration can create their Creator, and then worship the works
of their own hands. Talis esset Idololatria, qualis in orb terrarum nunquam
vel visus, vel auditus fuit. Coster. Encherid. c. 12.
How great this Idolatry is, Costerus the Jesuit shall tell you, if (says
he) Christ be not really and corporally present in the Eucharist, then are the
Catholics the grossest Idolaters in the world.

8. Will Worship is displeasing unto God.

When men make Gods to themselves, they make Rods for themselves. God will rid
his hands of such, and send them beyond Damascus, yea beyond Babylon, there
they shall live in misery and slavery, serving sin and Satan in the want of all
things, who would not serve God with joy and gladness of heart in the abundance
of all things. See more Caryl on Job 31.26. Obs. 3. and my Com. on Hos. 13. p.
89, 120.
The Israelites of old made a golden Calf, and worshipped the works of their
own hands, but it cost many of them their lives, Exodus 32.27. It Is a good Rule,
De Deo, nil sine Deo, In Gods worship we must do nothing without the warrant of
his Word, Deuteronomy. 12. ult. Mat. 28.20. all must be done according to the Pattern,
even to a Pin, Exodus 27.19. hence it is said nine times in one chapter, That all
was done as the Lord commanded Moses, Exodus 39.1, 5, 7, 21, 26, 29, 32, 42, 43.

VERSE 27.
Therefore I will cause you to go into Captivity beyond Damascus, says the
Lord, whose Name is the God of Hosts.
WE have all along seen Isreal's sin, we are now come to their suffering.

I will cause you to go into Captivity. The Lord had freely given them the holy
Land for their Inheritance, to the end that they might serve him with gladness
of heart, in the abundance of all things; but since they had defiled that good
Land with their abominations, the Lord resolved to rid the Land of them, and to
send them into captivity beyond Damascus, which was fulfilled when Salmaneser
took Samaria, and subdued the Kingdom of Israel to himself, 2 King. 17.6, etc.

q. d. Since your Forefathers were bad, and you are worse, treading in their
Idolatrous steps, and out-going them in sin; therefore I will bring upon you
the judgments threatened, driving you out of your own Land, and despersing you
in foreign Countries.

In the words we have 1. A judgment threatened, and that is banishment and
captivity. I will cause you to go into captivity.

2. Here is the extent of this captivity, it is beyond Damascus, says Amos,
beyond Babylon, says Stephen.

3 Here is the meritorious and procuring cause of this suffering, and that is
their sin, implied in the Illative particle Therefore, you have been
Idolatrous, superstitious, hypocritical, etc. therefore you shall go into
captivity.

4. Here is the confirmation of this commination; it is not I, but the Lord,
whose name is the God of Hosts, that has said it, and he both can and will do
it, unless by timely repentance ye prevent it.

I will cause you to go into Captivity beyond Damascus. q. d. I will send you
packing farther than the people of Damascus, for the Syrians of Damascus were
carried captives but to Kir, 2 King. 16.9. but you shall be carried captives
far beyond them, even to Persia, and the Region of the Caspians, Ezra 8.17.

2. And more genuinely, whereas they looked on Damascus, (the Metropolis of
Syria, a City of praise, i. e. a renowned, goodly, wealthy, strong City, Isa.
7.8. and 8.4. Ier. 49.25.) as an impregnable fortress, and frontier defense for
all their Country, and they might think to get shelter there, the King thereof
being their confederate; the Prophet tells them that Damascus should not save
them, for they should be carried captives beyond Damascus, even into the
farthest and remotest parts of Assyria, beyond Babylon.

Quest. But how shall we reconcile Amos and Stephen? Amos says they shall go
beyond Damascus, but Stephen says they shall go further, even beyond Babylon,
Act. 7.43.

Ans. 1. Some conceive it might be some mistake of the Scribe, beyond Babylon,
for beyond Damascus, but there is no ground for such a conceit.

2. The Answer is easy, the difference is only verbal, not material, in
words, but not in sense. What the Prophet spoke somewhat darkly, Stephen
declares more clearly, according to the truth of the history, See more,
Sharpius Sym^hoa. Loc. 57. p. 212. Schools-Guard. Rule 20.
and the verity of what was done; and it is a known Rule, that the Penmen of the
New Testament do give the sense, though not the very words of the Prophets
which they quote; when they cite places, they do not translate, but explain and
expound them rather; Luke writing in Greek, follows the Greek Version which
then was so common amongst them.

3. Peradventure the Prophet might mention Damascus, that he might not add
affliction to the afflicted, and utterly dismay them; had he told them they
should go beyond Babylon, the very thoughts of their banishment into such a
foreign Land, so far distant from their native Country would have broken their
hearts; and therefore he conceals what St. Stephen utters, Ye shall go beyond
Babylon, and so they did, for they were dispersed into Persia, Media, and
Assyria. This was fulfilled in part by Salmaneser King of Assyria, V. Joseph.
Antiq lib. 9. c. 14. and lib. ^1. c. 5.
2 King. 17.6. but fully by Esar-haddon, 2 King. 17.23, 24.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Idolatry is a Land-destroying sin.

This great sin brings with it great destruction. This cast Israel here out of
all, 2 King. 17.22, 23. This is a Covenant Breaking, and a God-provoking sin,
See my Com. on Hos 13. V. Index Idolatry.
what ever sin he bears with, he cannot, he will not bear with this. As I
have elsewhere showed before.

And did the Lord punish Israel for this sin, and shall England think to
escape? No, no, parity of sin, will bring parity in punishment. How are we
infatuated, and given up to strong delusions to believe lies? The lies of
Popery, Arminianism, Socinianism, Anabaptism, Quakerism, etc. Yea have we not
Judicial Astrologers, (Satan's familiars) who sacrifice to Moloch and Chiun, and
all the host of Heaven; that make the stars their Gods and Guides; by them they
can calculate men's nativities, help men to their stolen goods, cast figures,
yea foretell (if you will believe them) famine, sword, pestilence, peace, plenty,
and what not? what is this but to draw men's hearts from confiding in God, to
trust in lying vanities? and shall not the Lord visit for these things? and
does not his wrath burn against us for that we have Sorcerers like the
Philistims. Isa. 2.6. The good Lord quicken the hearts, and strengthen the
hands of our Magistrates against all the workers of iniquity, before Gods wrath
break forth upon us, and it be too late.

The end of the Fifth Chapter.
AN EXPOSITION, WITH Practical OBSERVATIONS UPON The Sixth Chapter of Amos.
VERSE I. Woe to them that are at ease in Sion, and trust in the Mountain of
Samaria; which are named chief of the Nations, to whom the house of Israel came.


IN this Chapter the blunt Prophet raises his style, grows Rhetorical, In hoc
capite est admirabile quoddam artificium, t^m ad morem, quam ad ornatum and
venustatem orationis. Aug. de Doct. Christ. lib. 4. cap. 7.
and is very eloquent; (as St. Austin from this very Chapter has long since
observed) not with a fantastic, frothy, affected eloquence; but with a grave
and decent elegancy of speech, suitable to the dignity of the matter which he
treats of. He that makes the dumb to speak, and out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings has ordained strength to confound his enemies; can by his Word and
Spirit make a stammering Moses, a rustical Amos, and silly fishermen, fluent
of speech. No matter what the Instrument is, if God be but the Teacher.

In this Chapter is contained the Sum of Amos his fifth Sermon, where we have
sin and sorrow, security and misery attending each other.

1 Here is a reprehension of Judah and Israel, for their carnal security, and
sensuality. V. 1. to 6th.

2 For their stupidity and sottishness, in taking no warning by the example of
their rich and populous neighbor Cities, which God had destroyed for their
sins. Verse. 2.

3 For their contempt of Gods Threatenings, which brought forth oppression and
tyranny. Verse. 3.

4 For Pride, Luxury, and Riot, especially in their Rulers and rich men. Verse.
4, 5, 6.

5 For Inhumanity, want of sympathy, and brotherly compassion toward such as
were in distress. Though the whole Land was depopulated, and all the open
Country was exposed to the fury of the merciless enemy, yet because their
fenced Cities (whereof Jerusalem and Samaria were the chief) were at present
free, they lived at ease, and never regarded the miseries of others. Verse. 6.

6 There was amongst them, perverseness, obstinacy, and rebellion. Verse. 12.

7 Perverting of Justice. Verse. 12.

8 Carnal confidence, and gloriation in that which could not help them. Verse.
13.

The Lord had born long with these their great provocations, and used all means
to amend them, but all in vain, and therefore now follows their woe and
punishment. As first Captivity, banishment and deportation out of their own
Land. Verse. 7.

2 Detestation of them and their privileges. Verse. 8.

3 Desolation and destruction of their Cities, by the Sword, confirmed by Gods
Oath. Verse. 8.

4 Desperation, and sinking under their carnal confidences. They should be so
terrified, that they should not once dare to make mention of the name of the
Lord. Ve^s. 10.

5 The Pestilence should rage so terribly, that if a numerous family be reduced
to ten, those ten shall dye, and for want of others, a man's Uncle shall bury
him. Verse. 9, 10.

6 An Epidemical and general destruction of rich and poor, Palaces and
Cottages, none shall escape, but as all had sinned, so all should now be
punished for their sins, from one end of the Land to the other. A foreign enemy
like a violent flood should overrun the whole land from North to South, and
from one side to the other.

Woe to them that are at ease in Sion.

In this first Verse, the Prophet thunders against the secure, and sensual
Inhabitants of Judah and Israel and especially against the great ones, Qui ut
divitiis, sic vitiis primi fuere; as they abounded in wealth, so in wickedness
also; who gave themselves to Pastimes, and Merriment, in despite of the
Prophets threatenings, and that in a time when Gods Judgments were round about
them. Though Amos were primarily sent to Israel, yet Judah being partaker with
them in Sin, he all along in this Chapter joins them together in reproof.

In the words we have, 1. A Judgment denounced, included in the Particle, H^i,
Woe, which is used three ways in Scripture.

1 By way of Commiseration, when we are grieved at the calamities which we see
are coming upon a people, Ier. 6.4. and 13. ult. Micah 7.1. 2 By way of
Imprecation, when we pray for the destruction of the incurable enemies of Gods
Church, Psalm 40.14, 15. 3 There is a woe of Prediction, Vae, est interjectio
summam and gravissimam calamitatem alicui obventuram significans* Ravanel.
and denu^tiation, which is the Woe here meant, where the Prophet fore-tells,
and denounces Judgments temporal and eternal, against this obstinate and
backsliding people. He threatens them with a Woe of Captivity, and general
desolation here, which was but a forerunner of their eternal destruction
hereafter. And this woe of denouncing miseries against an impenitent People, is
very frequent in Scripture; as Isa. 3.11. and 5.11, 18. Ezekiel. 16.23. Mat.
11.21. and 23.23, 25. Luke 6.24. The Prophet had often foretold them of evils
approaching, but they were no whit awakened thereby, but Princes, and people
still lay secure, and sung a requiem to themselves; putting the evil day far
from them; therefore the Prophet falls to denouncing Woes against them, the
better to awaken them out of their deep sleep, and security. The Woe prefixed in
the front of this Verse, is to be understood in the rest of the Verses, as
verse. 3. Woe to them that put the evil day far from them. Woe to them that
lie upon beds of Ivory, etc. verse. 4. Woe to them that chant to the sound of
the Viol, verse. 5. Woe to them that drink Wine in bowls, ver. 6.
2 Here are the Persons against whom this Judgment is denounced, and those
are, Hass^aanannim i. e. quetis, insolentibus and securis; tranquillilas ^n^m
homines ^uros and insolentes reddit. Radix Shaan videtur constata ex sheen, i.
e. q^i nihil tiin^nt, current, ag^nr; sed in summa pace and rerum affluentia,
securam, otiosam, tranquillam, and delicatam agunt vitam, a Lapide. The
Septuagint mistaking the root Shaat, for Shaan, do render it corruptly, Vae
spernentibus Sion.
1 Secure wealthy sinners, who lived quietly, and carelessly, at ease, in pomp
and pleasure, without any fear of Gods judgments, or any sense of his
displeasure. This more especially concerned the great ones of those times, who
took no notice of Gods hand on their inferiors; though the Regions round about
lay wast, yet they lay snorting, and secure, in their fenced Cities, making
their guts their God, and slighted all his threatenings; they were full
themselves, and they little regarded who else wanted. 2 He thunders against
Carnal confident-ones, who trusted in the Mountain of Samaria; that is, they
trusted in the strength and riches of Samaria, their chief City, as if it were
invincible; and by reason of its situation impregnable. They trusted not in
God, but in their wealth and walls. 3 Ungrateful men; God had made them the
Head of the Nations, and brought them into Canaan, a Land flowing with Milk and
Honey; and by his own Almighty Power he planted them there, and drove out the
Canaanites before them, ( Psalm. 44.3. and 78.55.) but they forgot the God of
their Mercies, Nekube, i. e. famofi, celebres. R^scit, significat, pr^mit^as,
and principium gentium inter quas eminebat Israel, tanquam populus a Deo
ele^tus, Deique primo genit^s. a Lapide.
and fell to Luxury and Riot. He made them the chiefest, most famous, and
renowned of all the Nations, he had separated those twelve Tribes from all the
rest of the World, to be his own peculiar people ( Exodus 19.5. Ier 2.3.) they
were to him as the flower and first fruits of the Nations, whom he prized and
preferred before them all.


To whom the House of Israel came. This is another Privilege; these two
Cities, Jerusalem, and Samaria were the chief Seats, and residence of their
Kings, and therefore here was a great confluence of people, both for Civil and
Ecclesiastical affairs, Judah and Benjamin went to Jerusalem, and the ten
Tribes to Samaria,

3 Here are the Places where those Sinners dwelt, and that is in Jerusalem, of
which Mount Sion was an eminent part, and therefore is often put for Jerusalem it
self ( a part praestantiori fit denominatio) this was the Metropolis of Judah,
as Samaria was of the Ten Tribes* Samaria is principally threatened, yet because
the other two Tribes were their brethren in sin, therefore he threatens them
with parity of punishment.

The inhabitants of these two chief Cities were more secure and sensual in the
midst of Gods Judgments than other parts of the Land, and therefore the
Prophet deals more sharply and roundly with them, and by a Prolepsis prevents a
cavil, whereas they might object, that they were the chief of the Nations, and
all the people resorted to their Cities for Justice, and for the Worship of
God, and therefore they concluded, that God would not destroy them, Yea,
therefore says the Prophet, God will destroy you, because you sin against such
Mercies and Privileges.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 The Scripture is full of Divine Rhetoric and Eloquence.

Carnal-worldly-wise-men look upon the Bible (as St. Austin did before his
conversion) as a book of a low, Aug. Confess. l. 3. c. 5.
incompt, unlearned style. This very sixth of Amos will in part confute such.
V. Perkins on Heb. 11.12. p. 93. and Rivet Isagoge ad Scripturas, cap. 28. p.
1026. fol. Vol. 2.
The Prophecy of Esaias abounds with such a fluent, divine, grave, and lofty
style, that all the eloquence of Cicero, and all the flowers of Demosthenes,
with the rest of those admired Heathens, is but as Chaff to Wheat, and Dross to
refined Gold. Hence the Scripture is compared to a pleasant Garden bedeckt with
Flowers, and a rich Garment beset with Pearls; when the depth of learning that
there lies hid is uncovered, then the glory of the Word does affect us, and
leaves a deep impression of its excellency upon our spirits. We should not
therefore barely read the Word, but search the Scriptures, and dig those
Mines, that we may the better find out the Golden Oar, John 5.39. We
should also bless God, V. Mr. Ant. Burgess on 1 Cor. 3.5. p. 74.
who has given such variety of gifts unto men, for the good of his Church.
Some are Eloquent Orators, Isa. 3.3. Others are Acute Disputants, and mighty in
convincing, as Apollos, Act. 18.24, 28. Some are mild and gentle, as Barnabas,
others more fierce and fervent, as Peter and Paul. Naim, i. e. pulcher,
speciosus, suavis, tales enim sunt Psalmi quos David composuit, and cani
jussit, a Lapide.
Some excel in Prose, others in Poetry, as David, who is styled, the sweet
singer of Israel, many spiritual songs are scattered up and down the Scripture,
but none excelled in that gift, like David, who was more especially inspired by
the Holy Ghost, and singularly qualified for that purpose All these has God
gifted for the good of his Church, 1 Cor. 3.22.

Observe. 2. Those that are highest in Privileges may be nearest to miseries.

Woe to Sion first, and then to Samaria; So Romans 2.9. Wrath falls upon the Jew
first, See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.15. p. 48, 49.
and then upon the Gentile. To be secure in other places was sinful, but to be
dead and careless in Jerusalem the City of the Living God, where his Temple
and Worship was, this doubled their sin, and therefore the Prophet Emphatically
sets a Woe upon their heads. Woe to them that are at ease in Sion.

3. Gods Ministers must denounce Woes against the wicked.

As they must proclaim promises to the penitent, so they must denounce
judgments against the obstinate. They must make a difference, to some they
must show lenity, and to others severity, Jude 22, 23. What dreadful woes do
all the Prophets denounce against impenitent sinners. Christ, who was love it
self, and in whom there was no gall, nor guile, yet how many dreadful woes did
he denounce against the hypocritical Pharisees, even eight woes together, Mat.
23.13, 14, 15, 16, 23, 25, 27, 29. If men will be so bold as to proclaim their
wickedness, Ministers must be so bold, as to proclaim their woes.

4. Woe and sorrow is the portion of secure sinners.

Both Legal woes, and Evangelical woes; temporal, spiritual, and eternal woes.
The Law cries, Woe to such sinners, and so does the Gospel; but Gospel-woes are
the sadder of the two; for if the Law say, woe to us, yet the Gospel may say
mercy to us; but if the Gospel say, woe to us, where shall we find mercy? It Is
true, sinners may laugh and be merry in the acting of sin, See my Com. on Hos.
13.13. p. 14.
but woe and weeping is in the conclusion, Luke 6.25. The end is death, Romans
6.21. As all the promises of Grace and Mercy hang over the heads of the godly,
and drop blessings upon them which way soever they go; so clouds of wrath hang
over the heads of the wicked, dropping judgments upon them even in their
highest prosperity, when they think themselves most free from misery. The mirth
of every secure sinner that goes singing to hell, is no better than madness;
for where security goes before, destruction ever follows; When men cry Peace,
Peace, then comes sudden and swift destruction, Luke 12.19, 20. 1 These. 5.3.
Secure Laish became a booty to its enemies, Judge. 18.27. Careless Ethiopians
shall be made afraid, Ezekiel. 30.9. And careless Daughters shall be troubled,
Isa. 32.9, 10, 11. God is much displeased with a people, when the fire of his
wrath shall beset them round about, and yet they remain unhumbled and
insensible, Isa. 22.12, 13. and 42. ult.

5. God usually fore-warns us of woe, before he sends woe.

He first cuts men down with the sword of his mouth, before he cuts them off
with the sword of his hand. He delights not to take sinners at an advantage,
but loves to exercise his patience toward them, that they might repent, as we
see in both the destructions of Jerusalem, the one by the Caldeans, which was
foretold by the Prophets, and the other by the Romans, In my Com. on Hos.
13.16. p. 64, etc.
which was foretold by Christ. But of this at large elsewhere.

6. Carnal Confidence ruins a Land.

When men forsake God, and trust in men and mountains, in Kings and Kingdoms,
in Guards and Garrisons, both they and their creature-confidences shall perish;
for, as there is no policy, so there is no power or fortifications that can
defend us against God, Prove. 21.30, 31. Use means we may, but we must not
Idolize them; prepare armies, and strongholds, but not trust in them. They are
branded that trust in Riches, Psalm. 52.7, 9. and cursed that trust in men, Jer.
17.5, 6.

7. Ingratitude is a God-provoking, and a Land-destroying sin.

God had made this people the head of the Nations, and chose them for himself
from amongst the Nations, See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 101, 102.
but they fought against God with his own blessings, and as they were
increased, so they sinned against him, abusing the good Land which he had
given them, to Idolatry, riot, and excess, till at last the Land spewed them
out.

VERSE 2.
Pass ye on to Calneh, and see, and from thence go to Hemath the great; then
go down to Gath of the Philistims, be they better than these Kingdoms? or
their borders greater than your borders?
THE Prophet goes on to awaken Israel and Judah out of their security, and to
drive them from their carnal confidence in their Mountains, Ammunition, and
fortified Cities; to this end he sets before them Gods Judgments on the
Assyrians, Caldeans, and Philistims, those Idolatrous and Heathenish Nations,
whose bounds were larger, and their Cities stronger than theirs.

He instanceth in three, Calneh, Hamath, and Gath.


Fuit urbs munitissima, and obtinuit summum imperium, deinde vicina regio
amaena fuit and fertilis. Calvin. V. Plin. lib. 6. c. 26.
1. Calneh, this was an ancient, wealthy, great City; built by Nimrod after the
Flood, in the Territories of Babylon, Genesis 10.10. It was afterward enlarged by
the Parthians, and called Ctesiphon, and was made the Metropolis of the
Kingdom.

2. Hamath, called here the great and mighty City to distinguish it from a City
of that name in the Land of Israel, Josh. 19.32, 35. Hebraice dicta est Chamat,
i. e. sol, quod quasi sol inter urbes orientis ^ffulgerit, a Lapide.
It lay on the North side of Israel, and was a boundary of the promised Land,
Numb. 13.21. and 34.8. Zach. 9.2. 'Twas built by Antiochus, and thereupon
called Antiochia, and was the Metropolis of Syria. 'Twas destroyed by the
Assyrian for all its power and greatness, Isa. 10.9.

3. Gath, a strong City of the Philistims, well known to Israel for its enmity
against them, 2 Samuel 1.20. 'Twas at last taken, its walls were broken down, and
it made tributary to others, 2 Chronicles. 26.6.

These bordering famous Cities were well known to them, and therefore the Lord
instanceth in them, though under them synecdochically other flourishing Cities
which were made a desolation, may also be included. He bids them See, It Is
not Nabat, vidit, but Reu, from Raah, observavit, curi^se inspexit.
and diligently consider the downfall of those places, that their falls might
make them fear, and fly from security, oppression, and carnal-confidence, lest
they be ruined as these were, and they be made an example unto others since
they will not be warned by others.

Be they better than these Kingdoms, or the borders of their Land greater
than your borders?

These words admit of some difficulty. Some make the Interrogation a Negation,
q. d. Are these Nations better than yours? in no wise, for do but compare your
Kingdom of Judah and Israel with those Kingdoms, your Cities with their
Cities, and your borders with theirs; and it will easily appear, that none of
those Nations are better than your Nation, for either they are Tributary to
others, or ruined: God has done more for you, than for them in many respects,
the greater is your sin, and the sorer will your punishment be, if you abuse
so pleasant a Land, and such rich mercies to the dishonor of him that gave
them. Thus they bring in the Lord upbraiding them for their ingratitude, that
they had not rendered according to the mercies he had showed them.

This sense is good, and many learned men go this way, and though it must be
acknowleded, that if we look on Canaan, Isreal's Land with all its privileges,
it was the glory of all Lands, Ezekiel. 20.15. yet other Nations might surpass it
for strength, and greatness of Cities, for largeness of borders, and for
amenity and fruitfulness of soil, as Babylon did.

But with submission to better judgments, I conceive the Interrogation to be
here an Assertion, V. Schools-Guard, Rule 3*
and the genuine sense of the place to be this, That it was in vain for them
to trust in their Mountains, Riches, and strong Cities, since other Nations
with their Metropolies which were greater and stronger than theirs, were now
decayed and ruined. That Almighty hand which brought them down, notwithstanding
all their Ammunition and Fortifications, will also bring Israel down
notwithstanding all their riches and strength. Behold therefore as in a glass,
whither Luxury, Oppression, Security, and abuse of Mercies has brought those
Cities, and do you fear by their Examples.

The sum of all is this, O ye Inhabitants of Jerusalem and Samaria, that
glory in Mount Sion, and trust in the Mountain of Samaria; Go and see what I
have done to Calneh, Hemath and Gath, three potent, populous, famous Cities,
seated in three different Kingdoms, viz. Babylon, Syria and Palestina;
consider how I have made them a desolation for their sins, and have brought
their borders into a narrower compass, though they were larger and pleasanter
than theirs, and were fortified both by Art and Nature: Be warned therefore by
their example, and go not on in your Idolatry, Luxury, Security, and Obstinacy,
lest you also become a desolation like to them.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. We should diligently observe, and carefully consider the Judgments of God
on others.

We should not let a judgment pass that we see at home, or hear of abroad,
without learning something of God from it. As we should consider his mercies
to make us love him, so we should consider his judgments to make us fear him.
Hence it is that God bids his people here, Go, Go, Go; Go to Calneh, Go to
Hemath, Go to Gath, and consider what I have done to them for their sins. Go
not with your feet, but with your affections; go not in body to view the ruins
of those places, (for that you may do and be never the better) but in your
Meditations go thither, and observe Gods hand upon them to awaken you. As a man
may go to Heaven even whilst his body is on earth, yet by Meditation he may
ascend thither; so by Meditation we may go to Germany, Savoy, Ireland, Poland,
and see Gods Judgments there. Do not barely think of Gods Judgments, but
ponder every circumstance, and rest not till you have sucked some benefit out of
them, and got your heart affected with them.

Wicked men never once think of God or his judgments, they forget him days
without number, and he is not in any of their thoughts, and as for his
judgments they are far above out of his sight; or if he slightly think of
them, that is all: But you must know that there are three Acts of the Soul, 1.
Cogitation. 2. Meditation. 3. Consideration. Cogitation is a thought and away.
Meditation is a dwelling longer upon an Object. But Consideration looks round
about, and weighs all Circumstances of Judgments and Mercies, that they may
take a deeper impression upon our hearts; and this is that which the Lord so
often calls for; He would have us consider our ways, to humble us, Hag. 1.5, 7.
His Judgments to fear us, Job 23.15. His Mercies to allure us, 1 Samuel 12.24.
His Word, that we may attain the practical knowledge of it, 2 Timothy 2.7. See
more in my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.4. p. 118.
This consideration fortifies the soul against sin, it lays before us the
loss and hurt which attends upon sin, so that we cannot rush into it with
that boldness, as the wicked and inconsiderate do. Ier. 8.6.

2. Gods Judgments on others must awaken us.

Their destruction must be our instruction. As Gods people here must go to
Calneh, Hemath, and Gath, so he bids them go to Shiloh, and consider what he
did to that privileged place, See more in my Com. on Psalm. 73. ult. Obs. 1.
and be warned by their woes, Ier. 7.12. It Is a great favor when the Lord
teaches us our lessons on other men's books, and backs, making them examples
unto us, when he might have made us examples unto them.

3. Sin brings famous Cities to ruin.

We see here three famous Cities with all their Territories made a desolation
for their sins. See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 71.
Let men make walls as high as heaven, and ditches as deep as hell, yet if sin
reign within, it will ruin all, Deuteronomy. 18.9, 12. This brought the Kingdom of
Israel into the hands of the Assyrians, 2 King. 17.7. to 19. and Judah into the
hands of the Chaldeans. Sins, especially crying sins, do emasculate men's
spirits, and weaken the hearts and hands of a people, so that they become an
easy prey to a cruel adversary.

VERSE 3.
Ye that put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to draw
near.
IN this Verse the Prophet goes on with his charge, especially against the
Judges, Rulers, Counselors, and those in Power and Authority in the Kingdom
of Judah and Israel. He charge them in this Verse with two sins, which were
the effects and evidence of their security before mentioned, Verse 1. The first
is the contempt of Gods Threatenings, God often foretold them by his Prophets that
Judgments were coming upon them, but they would not believe it, but put the
evil day far from them; Sleighting Gods Threatenings as if they had been but
fables, and would never surprise them. Though they walk in ways of
wickedness, adding sin to sin, and daily provoked the Lord to anger, yet they
blessed themselves in their evil ways, promising themselves peace and prosperity
for all that. They were settled upon their lees, and lived without any fear or
thought of danger, giving themselves up to Idleness, Wantonness, Pride,
Luxury, Violence, and all manner of Iniquity; not once thinking of the
destruction which was coming upon themselves, and the Kingdom. Yea they
counted it a loathsome thing (as the word in the Original signifies) once to
mention the evil day. Middah, from whence comes Menaddim, significat
remotionem, seu quicquid prop* er immunditiem removetur; quod omnes fugiunt and
aversantur.
They were so given up to mirth and jollity, that they would not once hear of
sorrow. They thought themselves privileged by having the Temple* and Gods
worship amongst them, against all storms and tempests. But the further they put
away the evil day, the nearer it was to them; and though they could have wished
there had been no such day, yet their wishes were but vain; for the Lord had
decreed to bring a dismal day upon them, and it is not the counsels of men, but
the counsels of the Lord that shall stand, and the thoughts of his heart unto
all generations, Psalm. 33.10, 11. As they had their evil day of sinning, so God
was determined to bring upon them an evil day of suffering.

Q. But what was that evil day?

Diem mali, i. e. diem panae, synes. Genesis
A. The evil day here meant, was more especially the day of their Captivity,
when the Assyrian should come and carry away Israel, and the Babylonian should
come and carry away Judah out of their own Land into Captivity and banishment.
This evil day the Prophet calls before, a day of darkness, and not of light,
Amos 5.18. 19, 20.

Separati estis in diem malum, vulg.
The words are read by some passively, thus, Ye are separated, and set apart by
divine Justice for an evil day, even for a day of banishment and slaughter, q.
d. Ye have long lived in sensuality and security, Though the evil day be here
primarily m^ant of some particular judgment coming upon Israel, yet it may be
extended unto the day of the general Judgment, which will be unto the wicked
(^n a way of eminency) the evil day of sad and doleful tidings. Iea^es.
as if you had been far from an evil day, and yet you are marked out, and set
apart for an evil day. All the evil days which you have hitherto escaped, do
but lead you to an evil day from which there will be no escaping.

But the words are better read actively (according to our Translation) setting
forth the danger that attends voluptuous and sensual men, Menaddim, elongatis,
procul repellitis, and cum fastidio quodam and contemptu a vobis rejicitis diem
malum. Mercer.
whose belly is their God, who lie upon beds of Ivory, and sing to the sound of
the Viol, yet put the evil day far away. Their work all the day long was to do
evil, and yet they put the evil day far from them with abundance of scorn and
contempt.

And cause the seat of violence to draw near.

Here is a second effect and fruit of their security, and that is Tyranny, and
Injustice, Cruelty and Oppression. They cause the seat of Violence to draw
near. This sin does necessarily follow the former, for when men are hardened in
sin and security, putting off the Threatenings of God, and driving away all fear
of danger from themselves, such must needs grow outrageous and cruel, Chamas,
Violentia, rapina, injuria, injustitia and iniquitas.
terrifying others with their Violence, Oppression, Rapine, and
Unrighteousness, Amos 3.10. So much the word in the Original implies; Iniquity
acted by force, and violation of Justice.

Quest. But what is meant by causing the Seat, or Throne of Violence to draw
near?

Answr. 1. Negatively; it cannot be meant of the Assyrian, or any other enemies
power that was coming near; Ye cause the seat of Violence to draw near; that
is, (say some) by your sins ye cause the violent Assyrian and Babylonian to
draw near, and come against you to your own destruction. This is a Truth, but
not from this Text.

2. Much less can it be meant of causing any false feasts or Sabbaths to draw
near; The word is, Shebet, Seeds, it is not Shabat quiescere.
as the Septuagint mistaking the Original (as they do very often) do render it,
appropinquantes Sabbata mendacia, as if they had set up false Sabbaths, which
God abhorred. But this is far from the scope of the Text.

3. Neither is it put Antithetically, by way of opposition to the former
clause, q. d. O ye voluptuous and secure sinners, ye put the evil day far
from you, and yet by your sins ye pull it upon you, persevering still in your
oppression and cruelty; you would fain put off the judgment from you, yet you
will not remove your sins, which cause the Judgment.

But the meaning briefly is this. The Prophet charge them with their going on
in their Luxury and Inhumanity, oppressing, and vexing the poor and needy,
which had no helper. They were so hardened in their sin, that now nothing but
unrighteousness, and violence reigned amongst them. They had turned the Seeds,
i. e. tribunal. (Syn^c. Gen.) Violentia, i. e. in qua p^onuntiatis violentas
senicutias, seu in qua violentiam exercetis sententiis vestris. Met. adjuncti.
Seat of Justice into the Seat of Injustice, and the Throne of Majesty into the
throne of Iniquity, establishing mischief by a Law ( Psalm. 94.20.) rushing
violently into sin, as the Horse into the battle; abusing their power to the
abasing of their brethren. So much is implied by the Seat, and Throne of
violence, as appears by the like expression, Revel. 2.13. Christ commends the
Church of Pergamus for her constancy to the truth, and that in a place where
Satan had his throne, i. e. in a place where Heresy, Superstition, Idolatry,
and all kind of wickedness prevailed, and bare sway without control: for where
sin reigns, there Satan rules, and there he erects his throne. Solium in
quitatis significat patentiam, mignitudinem and dominium impietatis. Mercer.
So these sensual and secure sinners, had set up a throne of violence, and a
seat of iniquity, that is, they were come to the height of oppression, and
cruelty, as being monsters, rather than men.

OBSERVATIONS.
Three Observations do Naturally flow from these words.

1 That God has an evil day, to bring upon evil men. 2 That evil men put this
evil day far from them. 3 That when they do so, then they run into violence
and outrage.
1 Of the first, That God has an evil day, to bring upon evil men. As they
have had their time of provoking him, with the evil of sin, so he will find a
time to vex them, with the evil of punishment. V. My Com. on Psalm. 82.2.
Such violent oppressors are the proper objects of Gods hatred, Psalm. 11.5. and
though for a time they may escape trouble, yet they are not delivered from it;
all their preservations from evil, are but reservations to greater evils. The
Lord has many ways to deliver the godly, but he has no way to deliver the
wicked, they having refused all ways of his appointment for their own
deliverance, therefore as to them, he knows many ways to reserve them to the
Day of Judgment, to be punished, 2 Pet. 2.9. When Beasts have been fatted in
pleasant Pastures, then they are brought forth to the slaughter, Ier. 12.1, 3.
As God has made all things for himself, so he has destinated the wicked for
wrath, Prove. 16.4.

2 It is the property of wicked men, to put the evil day far from them. They
look upon Gods Judgments at a distance, not so much as once dreaming of them,
till they light upon them. They cry, Peace, peace, when sudden and swift
destruction is at hand. This is usual with wicked men, the god of this World
has blinded their eyes, and they wilfully put out their own eyes, lest they
should see that which would but trouble them, and hinder their carnal mirth.
They cry, Let us eat and drink (even when Judgments are ready to fall upon
their heads) and if we must dye to morrow, let us be merry before we dye. Isa.
22.13. thus they are jeering, when they should be fearing; they take no notice
of Gods Judgments, they are far above out of his sight, Psalm. 10.5. Let Noah
warn the Old World one hundred and twenty years together, of an approaching
Judgment, yet they knew nothing till the flood came, and swept them all away;
and as it was then, so says our Savior it will be at the end of the world,
Mat. 24.37, 38, 39. 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. This hastens wrath, when men cry, the days
are prolonged, and because Judgments are deferred, therefore they will never
come; this makes the Lord come suddenly upon such sinners, Ezekiel. 12.22, 27.
Amos 9.10. Sensuality and security close men's eyes, that they cannot see an
evil day approaching, Luke 21.34. it makes men feel trouble before they see it,
and to be past hope before they had any fear of hurt.

Wicked men, when they are in prosperity, they dream they shall so continue to
eternity; hence the Prophet brings them in, making Covenants with Death, and
agreements with Hell, and compacts with all other troubles, that they should
not come nigh them. Thus they foolishly conceit, and speak, Isa. 28.15. If the
overflowing scourge pass through, yet it shall not come nigh us. Thus they make
lies their refuge, and under falsehood do they hide themselves. Notwithstanding
all the Judgments threatened against them for their sins, yet they vainly
promised themselves safety, and impunity, as if they had been at a fee with the
Devil, and Hell, and thereupon call for Wine, and strong drink, pampering and
flattering themselves in their sin, confidently concluding (as if all the
World, and Time it self were at their dispose) that to morrow should be as this
day, and much more abundant, q. d. Those sad Predictions of the Prophet will
never come, but we shall escape as well for the future as we have done hitherto,
yea better, and more happily, Isa. 56. ult. But let us be moved with fear as
Noah was, Heb. 11.7. and get into the Ark of Gods favor and protection, and
then we may sweetly sing, The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom should I
fear? at famine and destruction in an holy security thou may laugh, for in
six troubles the Lord will be with thee, and in the seventh he will not leave
thee, (...). Timor facit consiliativos. Arist. Rhet. l. 2. c. 6.
Job 6.19, 20, 21, 22. get an holy, prudential, providential fear, to prepare
for troubles before they come, and then you will not be dismayed at them, when
they do come; Darts foreseen are dintless, Job 3.25. Psalm. 46. and 112.6, 7.
Hab. 3.16. Realize dangers as if they were present, that will help to awaken
us; but when men look upon Judgments at a great distance, Quae procul sunt, ea
non metuuntur; sciunt enim omnes se aliquando morituros, sed quia mors non
prope esse videtur, ideo eam nihil curant. Arist. Rhet. l. 2. c. 6.
and think it may be many years hence ere they come, or they may not come in
their days, or they may not come at all; this breeds security, and security
breeds tyranny and oppression, for so it runs, They put the evil day far
away, and then cause the seat of violence to draw near.

3 Obs. Where carnal security, and Atheistical contempt of Gods Judgments
goes before, there cruelty, violence, and all manner of wickedness follows.
Where health, wealth, peace, and security goes before; there pride, oppression,
blasphemy, and cruelty usually follows, Psalm. 73.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and 94.4, 5,
6, 7. especially when wickedness gets into the Throne, and sits on the seat of
Judicature, having all power in its hand to oppress the poor, and vex the
needy, then it becomes exceeding tyrannical and cruel.

VERSE 4.
That lie upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and
eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall.
THe Prophet goes on with his Charge against the Rulers of Judah and Israel. In
this verse he charge them with a fourth Sin, which was an effect and
evidence of their security, and that is Luxury and Sensuality; they spent their
time in eating, drinking, sleeping, in mirth and music, without any sense or
sorrow for the afflictions of Joseph. Like Swinish Epicures, they minded
nothing but their pleasures, stretching themselves on their Ivory-beds, eating
the fattest of the flock, inventing variety of Music and Melody, and new ways
to increase their mirth; drinking wine in deep carousing cups, and anointing
their bodies with the principal and most precious ointments which those times
and places afforded. And that which highly aggravates their sin was this, that
all this was done in a time of mourning, when Gods hand was upon the Regions
round about them, and they should have humbled themselves in dust and ashes,
and lay on the very ground for their great provocations; yet then were they
lying on beds of Ivory, and gave themselves up to all manner of pastimes and
merriment. The Prophet therefore the better to awaken them, does raise his
style, and in a most curious Rhetorical strain does set before them their lust
and luxury, their sin and misery.

Quest. The question then will be, whether this curious fare, costly beds, and
other creature-delights be simply unlawful?

Ans. They are not per se, and in themselves simply unlawful. God allows great
men to lie better, and fare better, and go finer than inferior persons,
provided they use them soberly, seasonably, and thankfully. The Lord has given
us all things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17. But then we must not abuse them to
riot and excess, V. my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.3. p. 89, 90.
especially in a time of mourning, for that is a God-provoking sin, Isa. 22.12,
13, 14. So that it is not the sober use, but the profane abuse of the creature
which displeases God; use them we may, but not luxuriously and unseasonably.
'Twas the sin of this people, that they were riotous in a time of mourning, and
did indulge themselves in these sensual delights, even when the fire of Gods
wrath was kindled against them, and the Prophets were denouncing the utter
destruction both of King and Kingdom; when they should have abated, rather
than abounded, and have abridged themselves of their lawful liberties, ^eeing
Gods hand on their Brethren round about them; but they, like sottish Epicures,
laid not to heart the afflictions of Joseph, but like the rich glutton, they
fared deliciously every day, not once thinking of the misery of poor Lazarus,
Luke 16.

So that here we have, 1. The Sin reproved, and that is, Luxury. 2. The kinds
or specification of this Luxury, and that is fourfold,

They exceeded 1 In Eating, Verse 4. 2 In Music, Verse. 5. 3 In Drinking, Verse.
6. 4 In Costly Ointments, Verse. 6.


They lie upon beds of Ivory.

Ordinary beds content not these effeminate ones, they must have costly,
curious beds made of the finest Ivory, filled with the softest feathers, and no
doubt but they were adorned with gold and silver, as others had been before
them, Hos. 1.6. They were so proud, that even their beds, which should have
minded them of their graves, proclaimed their pomp and vanity.

They lie upon Ivory bed-steeds; or as the words are in the fountain, Gnal
Mittoth Shen, super lectis dentis. Met. Mat.
they lie upon Bed^steeds of the Tooth, viz. such as were made of the Elephants
Tooth, which we call Ivory. Not that the Bed-steeds were wholly made of Ivory,
but some principal parts of them were adorned with this rarity, which came from
India, and remote parts, Ezekiel. 27.15. They were not lecti eburnei, but eburati,
not totally made, but checkered or covered with Ivory; for herewith stately
things were wont to be garnished because of its whiteness and dearnesse, for
what is far fetched, and dear bought, delights the wantons of the world. In
those Eastern parts they delighted much in Ivory; hence in Scripture we read
of Ivory-houses, 2 Kings 22.39. Amos 3.15. Ivory-Palaces, Psalm. 45.9.
Ivory-Thrones, 2 Chronicles. 9.17. Ivory-benches, Ezekiel. 27.6. Ivory-Towers, Cant.
7.4. Ivory-Vessels, Rev. 18.12. and Ivory-beds, as in the Text. Hashshokebim,
Iacentes, ^ Shacab, procubuit, jacuit; It was their daily Trade so to do, as
the participle implies.
On these they lay sleeping, having little else to do. They were not lecti
discubitarii, beds to lie and eat on, (as the custom then was) but lecti
lascivi, soft beds on which they lay sleeping, and stretching themselves idly
and lasciviously, for so it follows,

They stretch themselves upon their Couches. When they should be serving God in
their places and callings, they in a lazy, luskish, lustful manner, lie yawning
and stretching their pampered carcasses upon their Couches.

Some read the words thus, They are luxurious upon their Couches, that is, they
stretch themselves luxuriously and lasciviously upon their beds, verse. 7. the
word is used, Ezekiel. 17.6. for a luxuriant Vine. The sense is the same.

They eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the
Stall.

Sins seldom go single; before they lay daintily, and now they feed daintily;
ordinary fare will not down with them, they must have the fattest and finest
that can be picked out of the flock, Marbec, saginarium, ubi vitali saginantur.
and most fa^ning fold. They choose the fattest out of the places where they
were kept to be fatned, be it field or fold. Great beasts are fed in Pastures,
but Calves are fed in Stalls, Agnos e grege and Vitulos e niedio saginarii, i.
e. Agnos optimos e grege, and Vitulos op^imos ex saginario; nam Praepositio Ex,
nomini apposita (...) and praeminentiae cujusdam significationem ipsi quandoque
tribuit, seu (...) notat. Glassius in Philog. S. l. 3. Tract. 6. Canon. 8. mihi
p. 765. Ubi Plura.
where they are fed with their Damms milk quietly and obscurely, which helps
concoction, and fattens them sooner. Thus they gave themselves up to ease and
delicacy, pampering themselves with the finest fare.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. A lazy, sensual, Epicurean life that is spent in eating and drinking,
sleeping, and pastimes, is very displeasing unto God.

This makes him set a woe upon the head of those that are at ease in Sion,
lying on beds of Ivory, stretching themselves upon their Couches, and feeding
on the finest fare, fatting, and feasting themselves every day, like the rich
glutton, Luke 16.19. Such Sensualists, that live in pleasure and wantonness St.
James rebukes, James 5.5. These are sins Majoris adhaerentiae, they are hardly
shaken off; these sensual Epicurean lusts do estrange the heart from God, See
the vileness of Epicurus, in Ross against Browns vulgar Errors, p. 255. and
Culverwells Light of Nature, chapter 17. p. 185.
close up the eye of the soul, emasculate the spirit, and unfit men for the
service of God or man. Hence the Scripture so often condemns them, Against Luxury
and Gluttony. See Mr. Greenhill on Ezekiel. 16.13. Obs. 1. p. 183. and 16.49.
p.280.
Deuteronomy. 21.20. Eccles. 10.16, 17. Luke 21.34. Romans 13.13, 14. We should
therefore carry weaned affections to these creature-enjoyments, and use these
things, as though we used them not. He that has beds of Ivory, and lives in a
Princely Palace, yet should carry such mortified affections to them, that if
the Lord should call him to lie on a pad of straw in prison, he must be ready
cheerfully to do it. Grace it humbles a man, and makes him know his deserts; a
good man that goes in Silks and Sattins, yet can be thankful for Rags (when
God calls him to them) knowing that he is less than the least of all Gods
mercies. We should therefore keep a watch over our hearts in our eating,
drinking, sleeping, clothing, for fear of excess. Licitis perimus omnes.

2. Ministers must not rest in Generals, but they must descend to particulars.
2 Samuel 12.7.

When the Prophet had denounced a woe against those that were at ease in
General, verse. 1. now he descends to Particulars, and tells them of the sins of
their beds and boards, of their gluttony, drunkenness, sensuality, inhumanity,
etc. This particular applying of the Word to the souls of people, is the only
way to convince and convert them; for what is spoken in general to all, few
will apply particularly to themselves. This made the Prophets and Apostles to
deal so plainly with their people, See more in my Com. on 2 Timothy 4 10. Obs. 2.
p. 421.
Isa. 58.1. Ezekiel. 16.2. Mat. 11.21, 23. Ioh. 4.17, 18. Act. 2.36, 37.

Be not then offended at the plain and powerful preaching of the Word. You will
suffer the Lawyer to tell you of the flawes in your estates, the Physician to
tell you of the diseases in your bodies, the Watchman to tell you of an
approaching enemy; and will you not suffer the Minister to tell you of eternal
dangers, that so you may prevent them?

3. Sins (especially great ones) seldom go alone.

Security went before, now follows Luxury, Sensuality, Drunkenness, and
Inhumanity. As great men have great attendance, so great Sins have many
followers; and as there is a concatenation of Virtues, See my Com. on 2 Timothy
3.2. p. 21, etc.
2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. so there is a concatenation of Vices al^o, 2 Timothy 3.2, 3,
4, 5.

VERSE 5.
That chaunt to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves instruments of
Music, like David.
THe Prophet goes on, in aggravating the Sins of these loose, luxurious Rulers,
who gave themselves up to mirth and merriment, to feasting, singing, and
Music, as if they had been continually at some Wedding, or celebrating some
Feast to Bacchus; and that in a time of mourning, when Gods Wrath was upon the
regions round about them, the inferior people were in deep distress, and
Samaria it self was ready to be made a prey by the cruel Assyrian; yet in this
juncture of time, when they should have fallen to Prayers and Tears, they fall
to mirth and merry-making, not bating an ace of their wonted pomp and pleasure;
and therefore the Prophet goes on, in denouncing Gods Judgments against them,
saying, Woe to them that chaunt, or quaver, as it is in the margin, to the
sound of the Viol; They join their voice to the Instrument, they play and sing.

Before they pleased their Palates, and now they delight their ears with
Musical Instruments, Happoretim, i. e. qui particularizant ad os nablii, qui
propria and particularia cantica concinunt, eaque varia juxta varium concentum
nabili, a Lapide. V. Leigh C^iti^a S. in V. Poretim. p. 195. fol. Nullum vitium
sine patrocinio.
that nothing might be wanting to complete their pleasures. They sing to the
mouth of the Viol (so it is in the fountain) they curiously quaver, and sing
their part in Consort; they form and frame their Tones, rising and falling
according to the Tune, and Harmony of the Viol, or Psaltery, the word will bear
both. It was an Instrument that was round and hollow, muuch like a bottle; and
Nebel signifies a Bottle as well as a Viol. The Seventy call it Psalterion, and
so the word is rendered. Psalm. 33.2. Sing to the Lord with the Psaltery, or
Viol. Before they had luxurious feasts, and now they add lascivious music.

The better to Patronize their profane Music, they bring in David for their
pattern. They invent Instruments of Music like David. Quod exemplo fit, id
jure fieri putant Cicero.
David was a great Master of Music, he invented many Musical Instruments,
which he used in Spiritual praising of God, and raising of his Spirit in his
Worship, 1 Chro. 23.5. But these abused their Music, to the satisfying of
their sinful lusts and pleasures, and that in an unseasonable time; as if they
would outface God, and his Judgments, and their prosperity should never
change. Under the Viol, Synecdochically is comprehended other Musical
Instruments then in use, as Harps, Sackbuts, Organs, Timbrels, Trumpets,
Cymbals, etc. under one kind the rest are comprised; so says the text, They
invent to themselves Instruments of Music. They were not content with one or
two sorts of Instruments, but they invent variety of them, the better to
gratify their lusts. Plain Music pleases not them, but they beat their
brains to get the most curious Organs and Instruments that can be gained for
love, Chasab, ex cogitavit, deliberavil, consultavi^.
or money. They set their heads, and their hearts to work, that they might find
out ways to please their lusts.

OBSERVATIONS.
V. Polydor. Virgil. de Invent. Rerum. l. 1. c. 14. Weemse Christian Synagog.
^. 6. p. 143.
1 Abused Music is displeasing to God. Music in it self is a good gift of God,
Genesis 4.21. and must be used to Gods glory, and not to gratify our lusts.
Epicures are all for mirth and Music, for singing, feasting, dancing, and
drinking, they have their portion in this life, and they care for no other.

Now Music is abused when it is, 1 Excessive. 2 Unseasonable. 3 An incentive
to Lust. 4 A promoter of Idolatry.


1 Music is sinful when it is Excessive, when men give themselves up to mirth
and Music, neglecting the duties of their calling. These tempt the Temptor to
destroy them, and sin against their own Prayers, when they desire they may not
be led into temptation, yet by such profane courses they lead themselves into
them.

2 When it is unseasonable; so here, in a time of mourning they fell to Music,
and drove the fear of God far from them. A woe is denounced against such,
Isa. 5.11, 12.

3 When it is made an Incentive unto Lust, and is used with drinking, dancing,
feasting, dalliance and filthy Songs, jearing at Piety and pious men. Thus the
Drunkards made Songs of David, Solent resp. cum Musica mutari. Plato de legib.
lib. 2.
Psalm. 69.12. and the Churches misery was their enemies music, Lam. 3.63. such
kind of corrupt music has a great influence in corrupting men's manners.

4 When it is used to promote Idolatry, V. D. Willet Synops. p. 683. Edit. ult.
Exodus 32.18. Dan. 3.5. Amos 5.23. In Popery, the greatest part of their Divine
Service is spent in Theatrical Music, and singing of Anthems, where the
peoples ears are tickled, but their hearts are never touched. Aug. Confess. l.
10. c. 33.
St. Austin complains, that in his time he was more taken with the Music,
than with the matter that was sung. Idolatry has many props to uphold it, as
the Authority of great men, glittering Pictures of Gold and Silver to please
carnal eyes, and variety of Music to tickle men's ears, and allure the
ignorant, who have their minds in their ears, and are apt to admire what they
never understand. They were Idolaters, who had the Cornet, Flute, Harp,
Sackbut, Psaltery, Dulcimer, and all kind of Music in their Worship, Dan. 3.5.

Apostolical simplicity suites best with Gospel Worship. It is not the custom
of our Churches (says Justin Martyr) to sing their Meeters with any such kind
of Instruments, Justin Mart. Explic. Quaest. a Gentibus positarum. Quaest. 107.
p. 446. See more in an excellent seasonable Sermon of Mr. Pool on Joh. 4.24*
preached at Paul's, 1660.
but their manner is only Plain-songs; and gives very good Reasons in the same
place for it.

Q. But do you condemn all manner of Music?

A. No, for Music it self is not unlawful, but the abuse of it. We must
therefore distinguish of Music.

1 There is a grave, composed, pious Music, by which contemplation is
promoted, V. Cassiodor, l. 2. Epist. 40. Aristot. in Polit. l. 8 c. 3.4, 5, 6,
7, 8. Plato de Rep. Dailog. 3.
the affections are moved, sadness is expelled, the spirits are raised and
revived, composed and fitted for Gods Service and praise; and to this end the
most pious and noble spirited men have used it; as Moses, Exodus 15. Deborah,
Judge. 5. Hezekiah, Isa. 38.20. Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 22.27, 28. the Levites,
Nehem. 12.27. 1 Chronicles. 9.33. and the Saints, Revel. 14.2, 3. Thus Elisha called
for a Minstrel, 2 King. 3.15. the better to quiet and compose his spirit, which
had been disquieted by a wicked King; and to stir it up in praying and praising
God, that so he might be the fitter for Prophecy, and the duties of his
calling, and to receive what God should reveal unto him; and for this end the
Prophets also used it, 1 Samuel 10.5. Thus David used it, and commanded it to be
used in praising God, 2 Samuel 6.5. 2 Chronicles. 5.12. Psalm. 150. As profane Music
delights the Devil, and lets him into the soul, so holy Music and singing is
like a scourge to drive Satan out of our hearts and houses. When the devil
spirit vexed Saul with sadness and melancholy, David with his Harp helped to
drive it away, 1 Samuel 16.23.

2. There is a light, loose, lustful, profane, emasculating Music, whereby
the corruptions which are in the heart are excited, and the fear of God is
expelled. Job brings in the wicked with their Timbrel and Harp, rejoicing at
the sound of the Organ, Job 21.12, 13. Against such the Prophet denounces a
Woe, Isa. 5.11, 12. and 24.8, 9.

The Philosopher told the Fiddlers, that he could be merry without such music,
much more may Christians say so. St. Ierom says, Hieron. Epis. 10. ad F^riam.
Let the singer be thrust out of thy house as noxious, expel out of thy doors
all Fiddlers, Singing-women, with all this Quire of the Devil, as the deadly
songs of Sirens. So Chrysostom, Cymbals, and Pipes, and filthy songs, are the
very Pomps and Hodg-potch of the Devil. Antigonus, Master to Alexander the
Great, Chrysostom. Hom. 42. in Acta.
hearing his Scholar sing, he broke his Harp, and threw it away, saying, Aetati
tuae jam regnare convenit, non canere; It Is time for you now to reign, and not
to sing. The former sort of music in private may be useful, but this latter
sort is odious and abominable.

Obj. We read of Harps, Timbrels, Organs, and other Instruments of music used
by the Jews in their public worship of God, as appears by the Titles of many
Psalms, Psalm. 4. and 5. and 6. and 8, 45, 54, 60, 61, 67, 69, 70, 80, 81, 150.
and therefore we may use Music now in Gospel times.

Answ. It does not follow, for there were many Ceremonial Rites used in the
time of the Law, which are abolisht in the time of the Gospel, of which this is
one. The Church was in its infancy in Old Testament-times, and therefore the
Lord allured them to his worship by external Rites and Ceremonies, which by the
coming of Christ are abolished, the Substance being come, the Shadows are gone.
The Gospel calls for a plain, simple, spiritual worship, John 4* 23, 24.

As for the Music of the Temple, it was typical, and prefigured the joy of
Gods people in the remission of their sins in Gospel Times.

There was both Precept and President in the Old Testament for Music in the
public worship of God, 2 Chronicles. 29.25, and 2.7, 6. But there is no Precept nor
President in all the New Testament for the use of Organs, or any Musical
Instruments in the public worship of God in these Gospel Times, that ever I
could see; They were not used in public worship in the Primitive times, as I
have showed before out of Justin Martyr. V. de Croy Conform. 1. chap. 26. p.
62. Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 4. c. 17.
Organs were brought into the Church (say some) by Pope Vitalian, or Vitellius,
about the year 660. He was a lusty Singer, and great Musician, he brought
Prick-song, Descant, and all kind of pleasant Melody into the Church; and the
better to delight vain people, he joined Organs to his singing. Thus was Paul's
Preaching, and Peter's Praying turned into vain singing, and childish playing,
to the great loss of time, and utter undoing of many men's souls.

Alredus an Abbot in Yorkshire, In his Speculum Charitatis, l. 2. c. 23.
Papa^us, totus Organis and Musicis cantibus perstrepens, dat sieve mente sonum.
Danaeus.
about the year 1160, inveys notably against Popish Musicians; All types and
figures now ceasing (says he) whence has the Church so many Organs, and
Musical Instruments? To what purpose is that terrible blowing of Bellows,
expressing rather the cracks of Thunder, than the sweetness of a voice. To what
purpose serves that contraction and inflection of the voice? This man sings a
base, that a small tune, this a treble, that a divid, etc. So that poor people
come not to an Oratory, but to a Theater; not to pray, but to gaze about them;
neither is that dreadful Majesty feared before whom they stand, etc.

Cornelius Agrippa complaining of the men of his time, In lib. de Vanitat.
Scient. c. 17. Boantes potius quam Oran^es. Pet. Martyr.
tells us, That it was more like the lowing of beasts, than the voice of men;
whilst the Choristers ney descant, like a sort of Colts; others bellow a tenor,
like a company of Oxen; others bark a Counter-point, like a kennel of Dogs;
others roar a treble, like a sort of Bulls; others grunt out a base, like a
company of Hoggs* so that a foul, ill-favored noise is made; but the matter is
not understood. Thus he.

It Is clear against the Rule, which commands, That all things should be done to
edification, and with understanding, 1 Cor. 14.19. but such a hideous noise
breeds confusion, Facessant superstitiosi boatus Papistarum, qui Psalmos in
Templis. reboruntes Musica^ Theatrali sed lingua non intellecta tanto strepitu
and tumultu ut si uterentur lingua Vernacula, nemo tamen quid ab illis dicatur
intelligat. Pet. Martyr.
as is apparent in Popery, and is condemned by all our learned Modern Divines.

2. The Organs used by David differed much from ours; Theirs were (...)
Pulsatilia, such as the Harp, Viol, etc. which they played upon with the Quill,
or with the fingers; Organorum species hujusmodi est, canora, cithara, december
chordis ^oaptata, and haec cum plectro percutitur. Nabla vero duodecim sonos
habens, digitis tangitur, and reliqua. Hinc perspicere licet istiusmodi Organa
a David confecta, diversa fuiffe a nostris, etc. Polyd. Virgil. de Invent.
Rerum. lib. 1. cap. 15. mihi p. 52.
they were not (...), flatilia, such as our Organs are, which are acted by
wind. Iubal was called the Father of such as handle the Organ, Genesis 4.21. he
was the first Inventor of Musical Instruments; where by the Organ is not meant
such Organs as are used in our days, which were invented some thousands of
years after, but 'twas an Instrument of joy then in use, as appears. Job 21.12.
and 30.31. Psalm. 150.4. De Croy fetches the Original of Church-Musick from the
Heathen, Cantabat fanis, cantabat tibia ludis, cantabat maestis tibia
funeribus. Ovid. Fast. l. 6. V. De Croy Conformit. 1. chapter 26.
it was practiced in Numa Pompilius his time, which was above one thousand
years before Pope Vitalian, as appears by Ovid.

Object. This is but some novel opinion of some Precise persons.

Answ. Such kind of Church-Musick was not used in the Church, in Justin
Martyrs time, who lived in the first Century. Bellarmine confesses that for
820 years after Christ, ^^llarm. de bonis operibus lib. 1. c. 17. V. Altar
Damascenum p. 490, etc. Et Bodium in Ephesians. 5.19. Et Danaeum de Precatione cap.
3. p. 618. folio. Et Tibeni Syut. p. 793.
the Church wanted it. Had such Organical Music been necessary and useful, in
all probability it would have found a speedier admission into the Church. Hence
it is that the wiser sort of Papists have condemned it, as Judaizing. So did
Aquinas, and Cardinal Cajetan on Aquinas, and in his Commentary on 1 Cor.
14.19. and the Jesuit Salmeron on the same place. Yea the Jesuit de Valentia
tells us expressly, that in Aquinas his time, which was about 1270 years after
Christ. Musica Instrumenta magis animum movent ad delectationem* quam perea
formetur interius bona dispositio. In vet^ri autem Testamento usus erat talium
Instrumento rum quia populus erat magis durus and carnalis; unde erat per
hujusmodi Instrumenta provocandus, sicut and per promissiones terrenas, tum
etiam quia per hujusmodi Instrumenta corporalia aliquid figurabant. Aquinas 2
a. 2 ae. q. 91. art. 2. Hooker Eccles. Polit. p. 259.
Musical Instruments were not used in the Church, for fear least they should
seem to Judaize. That curiosity of singing and quavering, so that the matter
which is sung cannot be understood, is condemned by the Learned Hooker, and by
Queen Elizabeth, Injunct. 49. and by the Homily of the Place and Time of
Prayer, Part 2. p. 131. where such chaunting and playing on Organs, is said to
have displeased God sore, and filthily defiled his house and place of prayer,
and that for it justly he destroyed many Nations; and if this kind of worship
were of absolute necessity, then not only Cathedrals, but all Churches and
Chapels were bound to get it. Latin service, I suppose, is abhorred by all,
but this kind of chaunting, when people know nor whether men curse or bless,
wherein is it better?

Caution, yet this must not take away Vocal Music, which is still to be
practiced by Gods people in the solemn Assemblies. The melody of the heart and
voice is the sweetest harmony in Gods ear. This is Apostolical, and is often
commanded 1 Cor. 14.15, 26. Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. James 5.13. 'Twas practiced
by Christ himself, Mat. 26.30. and by the Primitive Christians in Trajan the
Emperors time, whilst St. John the Evangelist lived. When ever the people of
God received any signal mercy, they presently framed it into a song of praise,
that they might the better remember it, Quinque metris constant, Job, David,
tres Solomonis. Greg. Nazian.
Numb. 21.17. Deuteronomy. 31.19. Judge. 5. Yea many portions of Scripture were put
into songs, as the book of Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Solomon Song. Singing
of Psalms is an ancient Ordinance practiced by Saints, Simplex cantio
cogitationes malas amolitur, mentem ad fructificationem divinorum rigat,
Pictatis decertatores generosos and fortes per constantiam in rebus adversis
efficit; omnium rorum quae in vita tristes accidunt, piis affert medicinam
Just. Martyr. Quaest. 1. ad Ortbod. 107. mihi p. 462.
both in the Old and New Testament. Holy singing is an excellent means to
scatter the Devils temptations, to allay passions, and to make us courageous in
Gods ways. When we are dull and heavy, this is a means to quicken our
affections, and refresh our spirits. Be not drunk with Wine, but be filled with
the Spirit. How? by singing of spiritual songs in a spiritual manner, Ephesians.
5.18, 19. Paul and Silas the better to quicken and comfort themselves in
Prison, sing Psalms there, Acts 16.25. In the Psalm that is entitled for the
Sabbath, Psalm. 92.1, 2. the Psalmist tells us, it is good to praise the Lord,
and to sing to the name of the most high. God delights to see his people
practice this Ordinance, he is not only pleased with the Prayers, but also with
the Praises of his people; and gives them victory not only for Prayers, but for
Praises also, 2 Chronicles. 20.21, 22. When the Ark was brought into the Temple with
singing, it is said, The glory of the Lord filled the house, 2 Chronicles. 5.13.

Woe then to those that glory in their shame, viz. in singing profane, filthy,
obscene Songs; but are ashamed of their glory, viz. of singing the Songs of
Sion, which is not only our duty, but our glory; not a burden, but a blessing;
not only a service, but an Angelical privilege; yet how many dare not sing a
Psalm in their Families, for fear of reproach and suffering? Christ will be
ashamed of such as are ashamed of him, and his Worship, and will shut them out
of Heaven, that fear men more than him, Mark 8. ult. Revelations 21.8.

We must begin our Heaven here, if ever we will sing with the Saints in glory
hereafter, Revel. 14.3. and 15.3. They that will not sing here, must howl
hereafter. Our Tongues are called our glory, and we cannot use them better,
than in glorifying God with them.

That we may perform this Duty rightly,

We must do it 1 Understandingly. 2 Affectionately. 3 Religiously. 4 Decently.


1 We must sing with the Spirit, and with understanding, Psalm. 47.7. 1 Cor.
14.15. Many sing, but understand not a word of what is Sung. God abhors such
blind sacrifices. It is reasonable service that he requires, Romans 12.1.

2 Affectionately, with grace in the heart, Col. 3.16. that is, we must
exercise the graces of the Spirit in singing, we must sing with joy, faith,
fear. We must act the graces of the Spirit in singing; when we sing of
Judgments, we must tremble, when of Promises, believe; when of Commandments,
obey. This is to sing David's Psalms with David's Spirit. Get your spirits
tuned, Non aliud cogites, and ^liud cautes. Bern.
and framed to what is Sung, that it may not be a Carnal, but a Spiritual Song.
Hence David used to tune, and prepare his heart before he sang, Psalm. 57.8, 9.
Heart and Voice must go together. Singing with Music in Public was
Ceremonial, and Typical, it is now gone; but singing with Heart and Voice is
Moral, and perpetual. We should therefore labor rather to get our hearts
affected with the matter, than our ears and senses with the manner of singing.

3 Religiously. To the Lord, and not to Saints must we sing praise, and it must
be done (as all other Duties) with reverence, as in Gods presence.

4 Decently. As all other Duties must be done decently, and in order, Non est
strepitus o^is, sed Iubilus cordis, non son^s labiorum, sed motus gaudiorum;
voluntatum, non vocum consonantia. Bern.
so must this, 1 Cor. 11. ult. As all curiosity, Quavering, and Vain-descants
must be avoided; so rudeness disorder, and confusion must be shunned. We must
observe the Tune, and join all together as one man in the Duty, as those
Singers did, 2 Chronicles. 5.13. with the voice all together must we sing unto God,
Esaias 52.8.

[See more about singing of Psalms, and all Cavils answered, by Master Cotton,
in his Treatise for singing of Psalms: and Mr. Sydnam, in his Treatise of
Infants Baptism, p. 165. Mr. Manton on James 5.13. Downams Guide to Godliness,
l. 3. c. 17. p. 240. Mr. Ambrose his Media p. 259. M. Eaton against the
Quakers, p. 25. Clapham against the Quakers, in the end of his Treatise against
them. Mr. Philip Goodwin, in his Family-Religion, p. 269, etc. Mr. Sam.
Cradocks Knowledge and Practice, Part 2. Cha. 6. p. 340. Zanchy in Ephesians. 5.19,
20.]

2 Obs. Wicked men are apt to abuse the Practices, and Examples of Gods people.

Sometimes they take offense, V. Dyke, Deceitfulness of the Heart, c. 12. p.
147. Bis peccat, qui exemplo peccat.
and stumble at their infirmities, and falls, which should be a means to keep
them from falling. Sometimes they imitate their good actions, but then they do
it in an evil manner, and to an evil end; if David dance before the Ark, then
the wicked will dance before Dagon, and wrest that Magis miror David saltantem,
quam pugnantem. Greg.
purely zealous act of David, to Patronize mixed dancing. If David set up Music
to praise God, they will set up Music to please their Lusts. They had Music
here like David, but they had not the heart of David. They had the matter, but
they failed in the manner. They abused David's example, for though he was a
great Musician, a Master of Music, and the sweet Singer of Israel; yet all his
Music was not for Carnal, but Spiritual pleasure; to fit him the better to
praise God, and to meditate upon his works.

Two men may do one and the same thing, and yet not be the same; because it
comes not from one and the same Principle, nor tends to the same end. Cain and
Abel both offer Sacrifice, yet from different Principles, and with different
acceptance, Genesis 4.3. The Pharisee, and the Publican, both pray, the one
hollowly, the other heartily, Luke 18.10. wicked men may do the very same
work, which good men do Materially, but formally and finally they differ much.
David here used Music piously, but these Epicures profanely. David was
bettered by it, and his affections were raised Heavenward; but these were
corrupted by their Music, and their hearts made more sensual and base.

VERSE 6, 7.
That drink Wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointments, but
they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.

Therefore they shall go Captive with the first that go Captive, and the
banquet of them that stretch themselves shall be removed.


THe Prophet goes on with his Charge against the Grandees, and Rulers of Judah
and Israel. In this Verse he charge them with Apostasy, Inhumanity, and want
of compassion to their distressed brethren. The whole Land was overrun, and
exposed to the mercy of merciless men; but because themselves were safe in
their fenced Cities, viz. Jerusalem and Samaria, they lightly regarded the
afflictions of others; but instead of mourning with such as mourned, they drunk
Wine in bowls, and drowned themselves in sensual delights.

So that we have here a further amplification, and fuller description of their
Luxury, 1 They drink Wine in bowls. 2 They anoint themselves with the chief
Ointments. 3 Which highly aggravates their Sin, they did all this in a time of
sorrow, even when Joseph, that is, their Brethren and relations round about
them were in deep distress, but they were not at all affected, or afflicted
with it.


They drink Wine in bowls. They made it their Trade so to do. The Participle
of the Present Tense notes a continued act. They drunk not Wine in ordinary
Cups, Hashatim, bibentes, from Shatah, bibit, convivatus est, quia in conviviis
largiter bibi solet. V. Schools Guard, Rule 56.
Beakers content not them, they must have Bowls; and those not ordinary ones,
but large and capacious Vials and Vessels, Silver or Golden Goblets like
Basins; Mizrek, pelves sparsoriae, phialae sive crateres, ex quibus aspersiones
fiebant. Hinc Mizrak, a spargendo deducitur, and proinde vas patulum, amplum,
and capax admodum significat. Gualter in locum.
for so the word Mizrak is used, for such Vials or Basins as used to carry the
blood of the Sacrifices to the Altar, where it was poured out, Exodus 27.3.
Numb. 7.13. 1 King. 7.40. Zach. 14.20. They drunk by measure out of measure,
they were so addicted to drinking, that they could scarce find Vessels big
enough to satisfy their lusts.

They anoint themselves with the chief Ointments. In those hot Eastern
Countries the Jews were wont to anoint themselves (especially at Feasts) with
sweet smelling Oil, and other sweet Ointments, to express their joy and
cheerfulness, and for the refreshment and consolidation of their Limbs. With it
they anointed their Members, and specially their Head, for the preserving of
health, and reviving of the spirits; hence those Aromatical Ointments were of
great esteem amongst the Jews, as being a special part of their treasure, 1 Samuel 8.13. 2 King. 20.13. The thing was lawful in it self, and therefore we
find it commanded by Christ, Matthew. 6.17. and practiced by holy Persons, as
Ruth 3.3. David, 2 Samuel 12.20. and 14.2. Psalm. 23. ult. Hezekiah, 2 King.
20.13. Hence our Savior justified the Woman that anointed his feet with
Ointment, Luke 7.46. And another that poured a box of precious Ointment upon
his head, Mat. 26.7. to 13. 'Twas used much by the Jews at their Feasts and
Funerals, Luke 23.56. but now in Gospel Times, and especially in our cold
Countries, it is out of use.

The thing in it self was good, for God gives Non est eorum usus omnino
expellendus, sed unguento tanquam medicamento, and auxilio utendum est, ad
vires languentes excitandas. Terbul. Paedagog. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Wine and Oil to delight us, Psalm. 104.15. Job 29.6. Prove. 27.9. And therefore
the Prophet does not here simply condemn the use, but the abuse of these
things. He blames them for their riot and excess; they must have Wine in great
bowls; and the Reshith (from Rosh caput) Shemanim primitiis olearum ungunt
sese, i. e. lectissimo and praetantissimo unguentorum, idque ad luxum non ad
munditiem aut sanitatem.
first or top of the Oil, that is, they must have the best and costliest
Ointment, not for necessity, but for luxury and lust, and that in a time when
Gods judgments were on the Regions round about them, and many were gone into
captivity; yet they are not at all moved with it, but go on securely in their
mirth and merriment, without any sympathy of the afflictions of Joseph, for so
it follows.

But they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.

This But is a sore blot upon them, let Joseph sink or swim, yet they are not
broken in spirit for the breaches of Joseph; they have no pain, Nechlu, from
Chalah, doluit, aegrotavit, animo tristis fuit.
fellow-feeling, or heart-grief for the oppression of their brethren, or for
those calamities past or present, which were upon them.

Some take this affliction to be that particular breach, and great rupture
which the Syrians made amongst them, when they had broken them to shivers (as
the word imports) as appears, 2 King. 13.4.22. and 14.26. Their affliction was
bitter, Gnal Sheber, pro confractione Joseph, i. e. populi Israelitici. Met.
effic. and S^n. partis.
for there was none shut up, nor any help left; many were slain, and many
carried into captivity.

Though this be a truth, yet it is better taking the words in a larger sense,
viz. for all those afflictions which the house of Joseph suffered (which was a
type of the Church) by their corrupt Judges at home, and by the cruel Syrians,
and merciless Assyrians, abroad. They had endured much already, and were like
to suffer more; yet these secure, vicious, voluptuous Rulers laid it not to
heart.

By Joseph here, is more especially meant the Ten Tribes, or the whole Kingdom
of Israel, so the word is used, Psalm. 77.15. and 80. 1. Amos 5.6, 15. Hear O
thou Shepherd of Israel, i. e. of the Ten Tribes, which are synecdochically
called Joseph. 1. In respect of Dignity, and the right of Primogeniture, which
was taken from Reuben, and given to Joseph, the best of Jacobs sons, and a
principal Patriarch, Genesis 48.16, 22. 1 Chronicles. 5.1. 2. Because of Jeroboam, the
first King of the Ten Tribes, who was of the posterity of Joseph. 3. The
Prophet seems to allude to the history of Joseph, Joseph, pro quovis fratre hic
ponitur, quia inter fratres Joseph fuit celebris, vel propter mala quae pendit,
vel propter bona quae rependit. Aug. de Doct. Christ. lib. 4. cap. 7.
who was cast into a pit by his brethren, and after sold to the Midianites for
a slave, his brethren in the mean time, eating, drinking, feasting, and little
regarding the misery and anguish that Joseph was in, Genesis 37.23, 24, 25, 27.

The sum of all is this, Though your Brethren, the seed of Joseph, be in
great distress, and even broken in pieces with Violence and oppression, which
might have made them even sick with sorrow; yet such is your inhumanity, that
you have given up your selves to all Intemperance and sensual delights, pouring
down Wine out of your carousing-cups, and anointing your selves with the most
precious and fragrant Ointments, without any minding of your brethrens
miseries, or once regarding their doleful condition.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Voluptuous men spare for no cost or pains to gratify their lusts.

These men sent to India for Ivory, to the folds for the fattest; they provided
music to please the ear, odoriferous perfumes and ointments for the smell; the
fat and sweet for their palats, and fine beds for their lusts. Here is all for
self, nothing for God that gives all, he is not in any of their thoughts, Isa.
57.8, 9. When the Kingdom of Heaven should suffer violence by them, they are
violent for sin; they lavish gold out of the bag for it, Isa. 46.6. every one
acts in his sphere for Idols; The Children gather wood, the Fathers kindle the
fire, Otiosus nemo in amantis domo. Genesis 18.6, 7, 8,
and the Women knead the dough, Jer. 7.18. so great is their affection to
Idolatry, that every one in the family confers something, and acts that part
which is most proper for him; it is for Children to gather sticks, for men to
make the fire, and Women to bake; The like industry for Idols, we may see, Isa.
41.7. and 44.12, 13, 14. Wicked men delight only in sensual things, which makes
them so active for them. They delight in eating, drinking, anointing, in silk,
sattins, purple, pearls, marble, etc. See what a shop of such wares mystical
Babylon has, Rev. 18.12, 13, 14. Great men have many great advantages of good
education, wealth, time, power and reputation, which they should improve to the
doners glory, and not fight against God with his own Treasure. As is
excellently set forth in that elaborate Tract, styled, The Gentleman's Calling.

2. Ministers must have a special eye upon the manners of their people.

See how the Prophet here charge this people with their excessive and
inordinate eating, drinking, anointings, music, etc. If a Minister do but
touch upon these things, how apt are people to cry, what? may we not eat,
drink, and play as we please? no, you may not; for you may perish by the use of
lawful things, if you use them unlawfully.

We Ministers are Watchmen, and must see that our people go not astray in
manners, as well as in doctrine; and therefore when the Prophet Isaiah had
reproved the men for their sins, he then sets forth his Looking-glass for
women, Isa. 3.16, etc. and gives us an Inventory of the females vanity, setting
them forth in their colors from top to toe.

3. There is a woe hangs over the heads of drunkards.

Woe to them that drink Wine in bowls, till they have besotted themselves, and
are made insensible of Gods judgments on themselves and others. Every Prophet
has a woe against such. Woe, says Isa chap. 5.11, 12. And, VVoe, says Joel,
chap. 2.5. And, VVoe, says Habakkuk chap. 2.15, 16. Drunkenness blots the
name, See my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.3. p. 92, 93, etc.
consumes the body, and destroys the soul, as I have showed at large elsewhere.

4. Lawful things when abused become unlawful.

See my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.3. p. 90, etc.
Feasting in it self is lawful, but feasting in a time of mourning is unlawful.
Wine and Oil are things in themselves lawful, and may be used moderately for
necessity and delight, to refresh and fit us for the service of God, but not
for Luxury, Judge. 9.13. Psalm. 104.15. 1 Timothy 5.23. Thus the Saints used them
(as I have showed before in the Explication) but to abuse them to lust and
luxury, is a great provocation, Prove. 7.17. Ezekiel. 23.41.

5. Luxury brings forth cruelty.

Where riot and excess go before, there cruelty, inhumanity, oppression, and
contempt of Gods people follows. This we see in the Sodomites, Ezekiel. 16.49.
And those voluptuous wantons. James 5.5, 6. As piety makes men pitiful, hence
good men are called Chasidim, misericordes, merciful men; such was David, Job,
Zacheus, etc. so impiety breeds cruelty, as we see in Nabal, Dives, etc. So
true is that of Phythagoras; first (says he) Pleasures and pastimes creep into
Cities, then luxury and saturity, Apud. Lacri. lib. 7.
after that violence and cruelty, and then destruction. Hence Solomon condemns
luxury especially in Great ones, as that which makes them pervert judgment,
Prove. 31.4. Eccles. 10.16.

6. To be feasting in a time of fasting, and singing in a time of sorrowing, is
a God-provoking-sin, Isa. 22.13. Joel 2.16, 17. James 5.1, 5.

Here is a woe set upon the heads of those that laugh when Sion weeps, for this
woe must be applied to all that went before, Verse. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6. VVoe to them
that are at ease in Sion, but they are not grieved for the afflictions of
Joseph. VVoe to them that eat, and drink, and sing, but they are not grieved
for the affliction of Joseph; This is the burden of this doleful Ditty, that
they did not mourn in a time of mourning, nor once take notice of Gods anger,
which yet they could not but see was kindled round about them, and ready to
seize upon them, as it did suddenly after. Many are so stupid, that they will
not bate a lust or a pleasure, though Gods people be in never so deep distress;
like the King and Haman, that sat sotting and carousing, when Gods people were
in great perplexity, Hest. 3. ult. To such I may say, as Elisha said to Gehazi,
2 King. 5.26. Is this a time to receive gifts and garments, Olive-yards and
Vineyards? the Leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave to thee, and to thy
seed for ever. So say I, Is this a time to drink healths, to rant, to dance,
and roar, when the Church of God, like Joseph, is sold, imprisoned, massacred,
and murdered? will not the Lord visit for these things, and shall not his soul
be avenged on such a Nation as this?

7. God takes notice of our sins of omission, as well as of our sins of
commission.

It Is not sufficient that we do not oppress or spoil Gods* people, but it is our
sin, and we must answer for it, if we be not grieved when they grieve, and weep
not when they weep. Dives did not rob Lazarus, but he went to Hell for not
relieving him, Luke 16.29, etc. and at the last day men must answer, not only
for oppressing the poor, but for not succouring them, and sympathizing with
them, Mat. 25.41, 42. No praying, no reading, no hearing, may bring a man to
Hell, as well as an irreverent and formal performance of these duties.

8. It Is our duty to sympathize with Gods people in their miseries.

God hates a stoicall apathy; he commands us to remember those that are in
bonds, as bound with them, Heb. 13.3. And to weep with them that weep, as well
as to rejoice with them that rejoice, Romans 12.15. And to show pity and
compassion to our Brethren, Zach. 7.8, 9, 10. 1 Pet. 3.8. And as it is
commanded, so it is commended to us by the Example of Gods servants, See more in
Mr. Brinslys Ser. on Psalm. 14. ult. and Mr. Case on Psalm. 94.12. p. 5, 6, 7,
etc.
who have over-lookt their personal comforts, when the public has sat in
sorrow. Thus Moses, though he lived at Court amidst all the delights of Egypt,
yet hearing that Gods people were in distress, he leaves all, and joins
himself to the people of God, choosing rather to suffer affliction with them,
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.24, 25. Hester so far
sympathized with Gods people in their misery, When the Emperor bid Terentius
ask what he pleased, and he should have it; Templum petiit pro Orthodoxis.
that she ventured her life for their preservation. Good Mordecai was very much
troubled at their troubles, Hest. 4.1, 2. and gracious Nehemiah, though he was
cup bearer to the King, lived at Court, and wanted for nothing, yet see how
deeply he was affected with the afflictions of Gods people, Neh. 1.4, etc. So
holy Daniel searching the Prophecies of Jeremiah, and thereby foreseeing the
calamities that were coming on the Church, though himself were advanced to
honor, and made a chief President of the whole State; yet he could not but
mourn, even till he fainted again with sorrow, and was sick, Dan. 8.27. and
9.3. and 10.2, 3. Thus honest-hearted Uriah denied himself in point of lawful
liberties, and cannot rest nor sleep at home in peace, when the Ark and Israel
are in danger, 2 Samuel 11.11. Jeremy was a man of large affections this way,
Ier. 9.1. and 13.17. and 30.7. and writes a whole Book of Lamentations for the
Church. David, though himself had many troubles, yet in the midst of them all
he desires the Lord to redeem Israel out of all its troubles, Psalm. 25. ult.
And desires an heavy imprecation against himself, if he prefer not Jerusalem to
his chiefest joy, Psalm. 137.5, 6. He owns Gods Church; and sides with her, and
prays for her, though she were in Babylon, verse. 1, 7. Paul had a care of all
the Churches, and wishes their prosperity in every place, and could be content
to be accursed, so they might be blessed, Romans 1.9, 10. 2 Cor. 11.26. We have
two notable instances for this purpose in Eli, and the wife of Phinehas, 1 Samuel
4.18. Israel is fled before the Philistims, that was one stab. 2. There is a
great slaughter amongst the people, that is a second. 3. Thy two sons are
slain, that is a third. But when he heard that the Ark of God was taken, it
broke his heart, and his neck together. So the wife of Phinehas, the death of
her Father-in-Law, and the death of her Husband, must needs affect her, but the
loss of the Ark affects her more nearly, and therefore she doubles that, The
glory is departed from Israel, and the Ark of God is taken; and she names her
child Ichabod, that is, there is no glory, seeing the ark, which was the glory
of Israel, and a sign of Gods special presence amongst his people, was gone,
she took pleasure in nothing, q. d. All the glory and excellency of Israel is
now taken away from us, since the Ark is gone, which brought such glory and
renown to Israel.

Christ himself, how tender was he over his Church and People? he comforts
them, he counsels them, and before he dies, he makes an excellent prayer for
them, Ioh. 14.15, 16, 17. Many will be companions with Gods People in their
Exaltation, but St. John was their companion and brother even in affliction,
Rev. 1.9.

Gods People are men of public spirits; they serve not themselves, but God and
his Church in their Generation, Act. 13.3, 6. Paul spent himself for the People
of God. They can pass through honor and dishonor, profit and disprofit, be any
thing or nothing, so God may be glorified, and his People edified. They are
living members of Christ's mystical body; now it is natural for the members of
the body to seek the good of each other, and if one member suffer, all the rest
sympathize.

Besides, the Church is near and dear to God, and therefore ought to be
precious in our eyes; it is his Benjamin, Joseph loved all his Brethren, but he
loved Benjamin with a more intensive love, and provides a double Mess for him.
God loves all his Creatures, but his Church is his Spouse, his Love, his Glory,
the apple of his eye; he reproves Kings for their sakes, and plagues Nations
for opposing them, as Egypt, Moab, Ammon, Edom, Tire, etc. In all their
afflictions he is afflicted, and if the poorest Saint suffer, their head is
presently sensible of it. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Now as the
Church is dear to God, so it is to the People of God, who in their degree and
measure do imitate their heavenly Father, sympathizing with his people in
their distresses. We all prize excellent things, now the godly are the only
excellent ones of the earth, Psalm. 16.3. They are of the Blood Royal; Christ is
flesh of their flesh, he has made them Kings, and Priests: No Pedigree like
the Churches Pedigree, She is Jerusalem above, and is the Mother that nurseth
and feeds us all with the Bread of Life, Gal. 4.26. They are the pillars of
the earth, the stay and strength of Nations; as Sampsons strength lay in his
hair, so the strength of Kingdoms lies in these. Lot was a means to preserve
Sodom, and till he was gone out of it, it could not be destroyed, Genesis 19. The
world endures for their fakes, and fares the better for them every day. So long
as the Chaff is mixed with the Wheat, it is preserved from burning, but when the
Wheat is gone, the Tares are soon consumed. These are precious in Gods eye;
their Persons are precious, Mal. 3.17. their Prayers are precious, Cant. 2.14.
their Tears are precious, Psalm. 56.8. their Desires are precious, Psalm. 10.17.
their Names are precious, and their Death is precious, Psalm. 112.6. and 116.15.

Now if we must pray for all men, even for Pagans, then much more for these
precious ones; if we must pray for our enemies, Matthew. 5.44. and must be
affected with their miseries, Psalm. 35.13, 14. then much more for our friends.
If the Prophet wept for Moab, and Babylon, what should we do for Zion^ Esaias
16.11. and if Abraham were so importunate for wicked Sodom, and all the people
must lament for Nadab, and Abihu, two notorious wicked men, who perished for
their Sin, Levit. 10.6. how tender should we be of Sion? and if we must
sympathize, and be sensible of the sorrows of a particular good man, Job 2.13.
how much more when a community of good men suffers? And if Gods Servants have
been affected with Impendent Judgments, that were but in the Clouds, and
afar off, how should we be affected with the present miseries of Gods
people? When Elisha foresaw the evil that Hazael would do to Israel, some
years after, he wept; and Daniel, chapter 8.11, 12, 13. foreseeing the misery
which would come upon Jerusalem two hundred years after his death: he was even
sick with sorrow, verse. 27. How would those Saints have wept in our days, to
have seen these present, real evils, which press, and oppress the people of
God.

To encourage us, let us know that this work never goes unrewarded. God takes
the kindness we show to his people as done to himself, he is fed, when they are
fed, Matthew. 25.35, 36. The Kenites kindness unto Israel was rewarded four
hundred years after, 1 Samuel 15.6. We never please God better, than when we
seek the good of his people; though we forget such labor of love, yet he will
not, Heb. 6 10. Laban was blessed for Jacobs sake, and Pharaoh for Joseph's; Rahab
that hid the Spies, was hid her self; Obadiah, that sheltred the Prophets of
the Lord, was himself sheltred by God. Ebedmelech for the kindness which he
showed to Jeremy, had his life for a prey. God has a Book of remembrance,
wherein he records all that we do for him, or his, Mal. 3.16.

How sad then is the condition of those that are senseless, Against such, see
six Reasons in Mr. Gatalers Sermon on Amos 6.6. p. 59, etc. 2 Part, folio. And M.
Pringle his Ser. on Psa. 125.4. p. 21, etc.
and regardless of Sions miseries? So themselves can but live in wealth and
ease, they never regard the afflictions of Joseph; like Gallio, they care for
no such matters. Christ looks upon such Lukewarm Newters as his professed
enemies, he that is not with him is against him, Matthew 12.30. and Meroz was
cursed, not for hurting, but for not helping Gods people in their troubles,
Judge. 5.23. and so was Edom, Obad. 11, 12, 13, etc.

But most sad is the condition of those, that instead of praying for Gods
people, they persecute them, and add affliction to the afflictions of those
whom he has wounded. These may forget their own cruelty, but God will not; he
has not only said, but sworn it, that he will not forget their cruelty, Amos
8.7. He punished Amaleck four hundred years after, for his inhumanity toward
Israel, See my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.12. p. 218, etc.
1 Samuel 15.2, 3. In all Ages God has showed himself terrible to such, he will
spoil the spoylers of his People. If Pharaoh pursue Israel, God will pursue
him. If Edom shed Isreal's blood, God will have Edoms blood, Ezekiel. 35.

Let us then every one sympathize with Sion, and give the Lord no rest, till he
make our Jerusalem the praise of the earth, Isa. 62.1. Every one in his place
must help, and do something for Gods afflicted Joseph. Those that can pray,
must pray; those that are in Power and Authority, and have parts, must assist
in their places; Soldiers that can fight, must fight for Gods Church. At the
building of the Tabernacle every one did something. In the body Natural, each
part is serviceable to the head. The Church of Christ throughout the Christian
World is in deep distress, and cries as the men of Macedonia did, Come, and
help us. Let us therefore by our Prayers, and Tears, come forth to the help of
the Lord against the mighty. See four Duties which God requires of us in his
peoples troubles. Gataker on Amos 6.6. p. 63, 64.
Inquire how it fares with Sion (as Eli and Nenemiah did, 1 Samuel 4.13. Neh.
1.2.) and then pray for them accordingly, Psalm. 122.6. Isa. 45.11. Ier. 51.50.
Get affectionate desires, Psalm. 14. ult. Isa. 64.1. Affectionate prayers, Psalm.
25. ult. and 51.18. and Affectionate endeavors in your places, as Magistrates,
Ministers, etc. for the good of Sion here, and then you shall rejoice with Sion
hereafter.

VERSE 7.
Therefore shall they go Captive with the first that go Captive, and the
banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed.
WE have before seen the Sin of the Rulers of Israel, we are now come to the
several branches of their Punishment, whereof the first is Captivity, and
deportation out of their own Land. The Lord had borne long with them, and
waited many years for their return, but they abused his Patience, and turned
his grace into wantonness, and therefore now he is resolved to put an end to
all their Pastimes and pleasures.

In this Verse we have, 1. A Judgment threatened, and that is Captivity, Ye
shall go into captivity.

2 Here are the Persons which must go into Captivity, and those are the secure
Grandees, and Voluptuous Rulers of Israel, They shall go Captive with the
first that go Captive, of the Inhabitants of those Cities, for the Country was
spoiled, and many of them captivated before. But the Rulers who were the prime
offenders, and had been first in sin, should now be first in punishment. They
shall have the primacy amongst the Captives, they shall go in the front of
them, and lead them the way into Captivity. As in Dignity and Luxury they went
before others, so now they shall have precedence in Punishment; as you may see,
2 King. 17. Before they were all for the head of the Ointments, and now they
should have the head in Punishment. They must have the head and chief delights,
and now they shall have the head and chief of sorrows.

3 Here is the Time when they should go into Captivity, and that is suddenly.
Now shall they go, i. e. it shall not be long, Gnattah, propediem brevi,
opportune q. d. propter peccatae nunc imminet paena.
but the Assyrian shall carry them out of their own Land into Captivity; in
Gods due time it shall come to pass. It was about sixty years after that the
Captivity came, which was but a short time comparatively, it is said even now
to come upon them, because Gods decrees are sure, and what he determines to
do, is as sure as if it were already done. Thus to show the certainty of
Babylons downfall, V. Schools Guard, Rule 16.
it is said, Babylon is fallen, Revel. 14.8. that is, It shall as certainly be
destroyed, as if it were already done. Her fall is decreed by God, and is
already begun in the hearts of Gods people, and shall from henceforth be more
and more advanced, till it be utterly destroyed. So the Lord had decreed the
Captivity of this People, and exercised them with variety of Afflictions, by
the Syrians, and Assyrians, till at last they were carried out of their own
Land.

4 Here is an Exegesis, or further illustration of their misery, and the
banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed. The Prophet alludes
to those before, verse. 4 th. who wantonly stretched themselves upon their beds
of Ivory, q. d. Those luxurious, lazy wantons, that gave themselves up to
feasting and banqueting, to riot and lasciviousness, shall have their mirth
turned into mourning, and their Organs into the voice of them that weep.

Their Banquet shall be removed. It is a Meiosis, i. e. all their jollity,
pride, and pleasure shall be taken from them, and instead thereof destruction
and misery shall pursue them; so that they shall have neither mind, nor Money
to make Feasts, who were wont to spend all upon their backs and bellies.

The words are rendered by some, thus, And the sorrow of them that stretched
themselves is at hand. This comes from the various rendering of two words in the
Original, the first is the word Mirzach, which the Vulgar render Faction, but
without any ground at all; others, Sorrow; but the word properly signifies a
Funeral-feast, for in those days they had feasts at Burials, as well as at
Bridals, Ier. 16.7. The word is used but in one place more in all the
Scripture, Mirzach, est convivium funebre in exequiis mortuorum, ad consolandum
propinquos mortui parari solitum, a Lap. V. Leigh. Crit. sac. Heb. in V.
Razach. p. 228. folio. Sur, accedere, recedere, removere.
and that is, Ierem. 16.5. Enter not into the house of mourning; or as the
Margin renders it, go not to the Mourning-feasts, or Banquets which where wont
to be kept with abundance of riot, pomp, and jollity. These Funeral-Feasts were
first ordained for the comforting of such as grieved for the loss of their
friends by death, but these here abused them to wantonness, and excess.

The other word which causes this diversity, is the word Sur, which signifies
to approach, or to depart, it is here taken in the latter sense, according to
our Translation; The banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed,
q. d. all your mirth and merriment shall cease, and ye shall be carried
Captive into a strange Land.

5. Here is the ground of all their sorrow, and suffering, included in the
Illative Particle, Therefore, therefore shall they go Captive with the first,
viz. for their security, oppression, luxury, and inhumanity.

The words being thus cleared, the Observations follow.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Security, Luxury, and Inhumanity, do bring a People into Captivity and
misery.

These sins ruined the Old World, Sodom and Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 16.49, 50. and
22.3, to 13. Luke 17.26, 27. And if they be found reigning in England, they
will ruin it too. If we abuse our good Land in dishonouring God, he will cast
us out of it into captivity.

2 Those that are Leaders in sin, many times are Leaders in suffering.

When such as excel others in gifts, and dignity do go before them in iniquity,
it is just they should lead them the way into captivity. God is no respecter of
persons, be they Princes or Peasants, Sovereigns or Servants that sin against
him, they shall not escape; if Kings offend, they have a King above them that
will not spare them, Psalm. 62.14. and 76.12. and 110.5. Isa. 30.33. Hence the
Apostle would have Masters to know, that if they wrong their servants, yet they
have a Master in Heaven that will right them, Ingentia beneficia, ingentia
vitia, ingentia supplicia.
Ephesians. 6.9. Great men that abuse great blessings, shall have great punishment.
Many Great men think, that their greatness should privilege them in their
wickedness; when it is an aggravation of their sin, and hastens Judgment, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And therefore we many times find the poor spared,
when the richer sort are plundered and slain, 2 King, 24.12, 13. and 25.20, 21,
22. Ier. 39.10. when those that should be patterns of Piety, become Patrons of
impiety, profaneness, and luxury, going before them in sin, it is just with
God that they should be punished before others; as we see in Saul, Ahab,
Zedekiah, and many Heathen Emperors, whom Justice cut off for their luxury and
cruelty.

3. God turns the mirth of wicked men into mourning.

Their feasting into fasting, and their banquets into funeral-feasts, where
there is, or at leastwise ought to be, weeping and mourning.

Many men drive away sorrow and trouble of mind, and cannot endure the thoughts
of mourning; but though they fly sorrow, yet sorrow will not fly them, but will
suddenly surprise them, and damp their pleasures, Dan. 5.45. Luke 12.20 It will
be our wisdom therefore Actively, and freely to afflict our selves, to weep
and mourn for our sins, James 4.8, 9. Else we shall be humbled Passively,
against our wills, and God will bring some plague upon us, till he have either
bended or broken us. We should therefore fear to displease him in whose hands
are all our times, Dan. 5.23. Both of mirth and mourning, of rising and
ruining, of plenty and poverty, of honor and dishonor, of advancement and
abasement, of health and sickness, See Doct. Sibbs Beams of Light, on Acts
13.36. p. 175, 176. etc
of living and dying; All our times are in Gods hand, Psalm. 31.15. And it is
well for us they are so, for if they were in other hands we were undone. We
see Jobs times were but a little space in the Devils hands, and how sad was it
with him. He that sat to day like a King, how suddenly is he on the Dunghill?
His Cattle are taken from him, his Children slain, his Body full of boyls, and
his Soul full of terrors. And thus it would be with us all, and worse, if we
lay at the mercy of Satan, who rages more now than ever, because his time is
but short, Revel. 12.12. 2 It would be sad with us, if our Times were in men's
hands, whose mercies are cruelties, they would deal with us as Pharaoh did with
Israel, or Herod with John Baptist.

3 It would be ill with us, if our times were in our own hands, it is ten
thousand times better that they are in Gods hand. For. 1. Now they are in the
hands of a most wise God, who knows what is better for us than we do for our
selves. 2. They are in the hands of a merciful God, who turns all to good to
his people, and has promised to pity and spare us, as a man spares his Son
that serves him, Psalm. 103.13. all his ways are mercy in making promises, and
truth in keeping them, Psalm. 25.10. 3. They are in Powerful hands, he is able
to keep what we have committed to his trust, Ioh. 10.28, 29. 4. They are in
faithful and trusty hands, friends may deceive us, Micah 7.5. but he is truth
it self, he cannot deceive, nor be deceived.

2 It may comfort us in afflictive times, that all our afflictions are in Gods
hand, for matter, manner, time, and measure, Revel. 2.10. he shall cast some of
you, not all. 2. He shall cast you into Prison, not into the grave.

3 It is but for ten days, not ten years. God sets them their bounds, and
says to these Metaphorical waves, as he does to the Natural, Hitherto shall
ye come and no further. He measures out the days and nights, and months and
years, that our trials shall continue, Job 7.3. As we came into the world by
Providence, so we go out of the world by Providence, God has set us our
bounds which we cannot pass, Job 7.1. and 14.5. neither men nor Devils can
take away our lives from us till our work be done, Ioh. 7.30. we should
therefore be courageous in duty, and run hazards for God, in whose hand is our
life, and not be afraid of man who must dye, Isa. 51.12. we have our day and to
morrow to work, and till we have finished our course none can hurt us, Luke
13.32. to God the Lord belong the issues from death, Psalm. 68.20. we should
therefore submit our wills to Gods will, be willing to live so long as he
would have us live, and to dye when he shall call for us.

3 We should bless God, who has brought us forth, into the best times that
ever the Nation saw, our Lot is fallen in pleasant seasons; they are happy
times in respect of means, though we have made them unhappy for want of hearts
to improve them. We should not therefore quarrel at the Providence, and
various dispensations of the times, but rather admire and adore the wisdom and
goodness of God in them, so did Daniel, chapter 2.20, 21.

4 We should improve the time which we have from God, unto his praise. Who
plants a Vineyard and does not eat the fruit of it? Our time is Gods, and
therefore great reason we should spend it to his praise, Acts 13.36. It was the
great commendation of the men of Issachar, that they understood the times, and
knew what Israel ought to do in them, 1 Chro. 12.32. It is the greatest
wisdom in the world, to observe the opportunities and seasons of grace, Ephesians.
5.15, 16. Hence our Savior charge it as a great sin upon Iezabel, in that
he gave her space to repent, but she repented not, Revel. 2.20. most live as
if time were at their own dispose, they are very liberal of another right,
promising themselves many days and years, when they have not assurance of one
day, Isa. 56. ult. Luke 12.20. As we cannot add one cubit to our stature, so
we cannot add a day to our days. How sad then is the condition of wicked men,
who daily dishonor that God in whose hand is their life? Consider, your times
are in the hands of that God to whom you are professed enemies, and with whom he
is angry every day, Psalm. 7.12, 13. though he bear long, yet he will not
always bear, for their feet shall slide in due time, Deuteronomy. 32.35.

VERSE. 8.
The Lord God has sworn by himself, says the Lord of Hosts, I abhor the
excellency of Jacob, and hate his Palaces, therefore will I deliver up the
City, with all that is therein.
IN this Verse we have a Prolepsis, or preventing of a Plea which Israel might
make for themselves, saying, We are the people of God, in Covenant with him,
and have received Circumcision, the seal of the Covenant, and at this day we
do enjoy many glorious privileges, and signal favors from him, and therefore
it is not like that he will destroy us, whom he has loved so long, and made
the head of the Tribes, and the glory of the world. To this the Prophet
answers, Deceive not your selves with any vain confidence in your pomp, and
privileges, as if your glory and excellency could secure you from divine
Justice; for I must tell you from the Lord, that since you have abused his
blessings, he abhors your Excellency, hates your Palaces, and will destroy
your Cities wherein you trust, verse. 1. and the better to assure you to the
truth of all this, he has sworn it, The Lord has sworn, that he abhors the
excellency of Jacob.

In this Verse we have, 1. A Commination, I will deliver up the City, with all
that is therein; q. d. you glory in your two fortified Cities, viz. Samaria and
Jerusalem, you trust in the riches, strength, and fullness of them, but though
they be never so full of men, Quae implent eam, i. e. plenitudinem ejus. Heb.
money, and all manner of store; yet for your sins I will deliver them, and all
their riches, with all the inhabitants into the hands of the Assyrians, and
Chaldeans for a prey. Though in their own conceit they seem invincible, by
reason of the multitude of men and ammunition, yet I will empty them, Sagar,
claufit, occlusit, conclusit, coercuit, ut nullum esset effugium Gair, civitas,
i. e. civitates. En^l numeri, and Met. Sub.
and will send an enemy to besiege them, into whose hands I will deliver them.

By City here is meant, the Citizens and their substance, all should become a
prey to the merciless enemy, both in Samaria and Jerusalem, for by a
Synechdoche both are here threatened; both had sinned, and therefore now both
shall suffer; Samaria shall be sacked by the Assyrians, and Jerusalem by the
Chaldeans. It is true, that in this Chapter, and in the whole Prophecy, the
Prophet speaks primarily, and principally to the ten Tribes; but secondarily,
and concomitantly to Jerusalem, and the other two Tribes, as I have showed,
verse. ^.

2. Here is the ground of this destruction, and that is, Gods detestation of
them for their sins, I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and therefore I will
deliver their Cities into the hands of their enemies. Some render the words
thus, I abhor the Pride of Jacob, that is true, for as the Lord abhors Pride in
all, so especially in his Israel, a people near unto him. The word signifies
both Pride and Excellency, but because this people confided in their
Privileges, and boasted of their Dignity, therefore the word is most properly
rendered excellency. Gaon, excellentia, gloria, superbia Iacobi, i. e.
Israelitarum. Met. effi^.
The word is sometimes taken in evil part, for pride, and arrogance, Exodus
15.7. and sometimes in good part, for magnificence and excellency, so here; for
the Prophet in this Verse does not enveigh against their pride, (he had done
that before) but he labors to remove their carnal confidence which they
placed, Gloriosum Dei Templum hic gloria Iacobi nominatur. Rivet.
1. In the Temple, which is called in Scripture by the name of Excellency and
Glory, because it was that wherein they gloried, Psalm. 47.4. Ezekiel. 24.21.

2 In their Riches, Dignities, Privileges, and Prerogatives, wherewith that
Nation was adorned above all the people of the world, Romans 3.1, 2. and 9.4, 5.
they thought that the bare having of these would shelter them from punishment,
but the Lord tells them, that he abhorred both them and their privileges, and
since they had abused them, and so forfeited them all, they were now so much
the more hateful and abominable to God; q. d. You look upon your selves as the
only high and holy ones of the World, but I tell you (says God) since you
abuse my blessings to my dishonor, I look upon you as a pack of profane,
ungodly men, and will deal with you accordingly; and therefore tell not me of
your Temple, Sacrifices, dignity, and riches, for I tell you to your faces,
that I detest both you and your excellencies, Armenoth, i. e. Palatia, and
arces basilieas. Taab, desideravit, and per Antiphrasin abominatus fuit; in
Cal^est desiderare, in Piel contrarium significat, ut aversari, abhorrere; sic
plerique verba Hebraea in diversis conjugationibus contrarias babon^
significationes. Mer^er.
and abhor your stately Palaces, which you have built by oppression and
cruelty, and have abused to my dishonor.

3 Here is the confirmation of this Commination, The Lord has sworn it, even
the Lord of Hosts, who is Omnipotent, and has all power in his hand to execute
his purposes. The Lord does not only say it, but swear it; the Jews were hard
of belief, and slighted the threatenings of the Prophets, therefore the Lord
confirms it with an Oath, saying, I have sworn by my self, or as the words are
in the fountain, I have sworn ( Benaphsho, in anima sua) by my Soul, or Life,
the Lord swears by himself, because there is none greater than he. The soul is
the man, and he that swears by his soul swears by himself, and therefore the
soul (according to the Hebrew Idiom) is often put for a man's self, as Psalm. 3.2.
Ier. 51.6. Matthew. 25.26. It is an Anthropopathy frequent in Scripture, Genesis
22.16. Ier. 51.14. it is spoken of God after the manner of men, Per animam vita
Dei intelligitur, i. e. ipsamet Dei essentia, se^ ipse Deus. Polanus Syntag. ^.
2. c. 35.
as an Hand, an Eye, a Face, a Foot, is often ascribed to God; so here and
elsewhere, a Soul is ascribed to God, Isa. 1.14. Ier. 5.9, 29. which is God
himself, for whatsoever is in God, is God.

Q. d. If we believe men who swear by their soul, or life, (which yet is as
nothing) how weighty ought my Oaths to be with you (says the Lord) when I
put my self to pledge; and if ye will not believe my Prophets, yet believe me,
whose Decrees are immutable, whose Judgments are intolerable, who cannot
deceive, Iuravit i. e. immutabiliter decrevit.
nor be deceived; who am Omnipotent, and able to put all my Threatenings in
execution against you, since I am the Lord of Hosts, whom all Creatures do
obey as their supreme Commander.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Swearing in it self is lawful.

God himself who cannot sin, yet swears by himself, Isa 45. 23. and. 62.8. Heb.
6.13. See my Com. o^ 2 Timothy 4.1. p. 305.
The Lord to strengthen our faith in the truth of his Promises, sometimes
swears, Genesis 22.16. Psalm. 132.11. Heb. 6.17. and sometimes he confirms the
truth of his Threatenings with an Oath, to make us fear, Psalm. 95.11. Heb. 3.11.
thrice happy they for whose sake the Lord swears, and most unhappy they that
believe him not when he swears; since he that believes not God makes him a
Liar, 1 Ioh. 5.10. not by any transmutation of God, but because he esteems
his Word and Promises as a false thing.

2 Wicked men are hardly brought to believe the Threatenings of God.

The Lord must swear here to awaken them out of their stupidity, so sottish are
men by nature, especially when hardened in a way of sin; and if Gods own people
in whom there is a Principle of Grace, be slow of heart to believe the Doctrine
of the Gospel, See Dr. Bolton in his Sermon. in folio on Joh. 1.50. p. 190.
Luke 24.25, 26. how hard is it to work those truths upon those who have
neither eyes to see, nor ears to hear, 1 Cor. 2.9.

3 God is the Lord of Hosts.

He has all Power in his hands, and all Creatures at his command, See more in
my Comment. on Amos 4.13.
ready to execute his wrath upon wicked men. This Title is given to God above
two hundred times in the Old Testament, and but once in the New, Iam. 5.4. the
reason is, because this is a name of Majesty and Terror, suitable to Old
Testament times; but in the New Testament he has more sweet and mild Titles,
as Father of Mercies, God of all consolation, the Savior of all men, etc. We
should therefore fear to displease him, who has the higher Host of Heaven,
Myriads of Angels, and the lower Host of Creatures on earth, V. Mendoza in 1
Reg. 1.3. A^not. 5. p. 134.
all ready at the least beck of their Lord and Master to destroy his enemies.

4 No Privil^dges can preserve a sinful people from ruin.

Let them be exalted to Heaven in excellency and glory, and be loaded with
riches, See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.15. Obs. 4. p. 50.
nobility, dignity, and pre-eminence, yet if they abuse those Privileges they
shall be thrown down to Hell, Matthew. 11.23. God is no respecter of Persons, but
in every Nation such as work righteousness are accepted of him, and such as
work unrighteousness, be they Jews or Gentiles, are rejected of him. When God
shall choose a people to be an holy people to himself, and they shall walk
unholily, and live like the profane of the world, it is just with God that
they should perish with them. Many boast that they are Christians, they are
Baptized, they hear the Word, and receive the Sacrament, Aye, but do you walk
up to those Privileges, and answer them with obedience; if not, you are but
baptized Heathens; yea a drunken Turk is nearer Heaven than a drunken and
dissolute Christian. Mere Titular Christians, are no Christians. As he is not a
Jew that is one outwardly, so he is not a Christian that is one only nominally;
we must be internal ones in spirit and in truth, answering our Gospel.
Privileges with Gospel-Practises, and then we shall be happy, Romans 2.25, 28,
29.

5 Sin makes God to hate our very dwellings and Palaces.

He loathes the habitations of wicked men, and looks upon them as so many
Swine-styes, and sinks of sin. The habitations of the wicked are cursed of God,
Job 12.6. and 15.34. Zach. 5.4. As we should keep our bodies pure, as becomes
the Temples of the Holy Ghost, so we should keep our Houses pure from sin, and
put away iniquity far from our Tabernacles, that they may be Bethels, houses
of God, and not Beth^avens, houses of vanity and iniquity, Job 11.14. and
22.23. this is the way to keep our houses in peace, Job 5.24. Prove. 1. ult. and
8.6. and to make our Families flourish, Prove. 14.11.

We should rather desire with those holy Patriarcks, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
to live in Tents, and mean houses, where we may serve God (remembering that we
are but Strangers and Pilgrims here, but Citizens of Heaven) than to live (as
these Epicures in the Text) in stately Palaces, abounding with sensual luxury,
and all manner of riot, till they be destroyed.

6 When men will not believe the Threatenings, they shall feel the punishment.

The righteous do hear and fear, but the wicked never fear, till they feel the
Sword and Pestilence upon them. When no warnings can mend a People, then
Judgments end them; as we see in the old World, Jerusalem, and others; Lots
Sons in Law would not believe till they were burnt, Genesis 19.14. nor Pharaoh
till he was drowned.

7 It is Sin that ruins Cities.

See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. Obs. 6. and M. Crag his 8th. Ser. p. 132.
Israel sinned, and now City and all is taken. It is this, that has brought
fire and sword, desolation and destruction upon the most glorious Cities. Many
complain of Instruments that have betrayed them, but it is our sins that have
betrayed us into their hands; and therefore Magistrates, Ministers, and
Governors should improve their interest for the stopping of sin, that so they
may prevent the ruin of those places where they dwell.

VERSE 9.
And it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one house, that they
shall dye.
WE have heard of Isreal's Captivity before, but since that could do no good,
now comes the Pestilence, and that no ordinary one, which usually leaves some
untoucht; But such a terrible, destructive Pestilence, that should sweep away
all before it; insomuch that if ten men remain alive, they shall all dye, and
they shall be buried not in an ordinary way, but they shall be burnt, and that
by the nearest relations, which was used by the people of Israel, only in cases
of extreme necessity, 1 Samuel 31.12.

In this Verse we have, 1 A Judgment threatened, viz. death, Ye shall dye, i.
e. by the Pestilence. Those that escaped the Sword, and were not killed, or
carried away by the enemy, the Pestilence, or some other Judgment shall slay
them, as appears by the next verse.

2 Here is the fierceness of this Pestilence, it shall sweep all before it,
this is more than the Pestilence usually does; God had corrected them before
with lighter rods, yet he left some alive; but now if ten men remain in some
very numerous Family, they shall all dye together. This sets forth the
dreadfulness of Gods wrath against this people, for when the Plague rages very
fiercely, yet it usually spares some, if there be four or five in an house,
usually one is spared, or if eight in a Family, it may be two are spared; but
when there are ten in a Family, and they must all dye, this is dreadful indeed.
By Ten the Prophet signifies many, because ten is the utmost of single number;
See Caryl on Job 19.3.
It is a certain and distinct number put for an uncertain, the like we find,
Numb. 14.22. Levit. 26.26. 1 Samuel 1.8. Job 19.3. Psalm. 91.7. Eccles. 7.19. Isa.
5.10. Zach. 8.23. Mat. 25.1.

3 Here is the certainty of this dreadful destruction, Hajah, erit, fiet.
Ehjeh, the name of God, which denotes his immutability, comes from hence.
It shall come to pass; that is, it shall certainly come to pass, for God has
so decreed it, and there is no resisting.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Judgments seldom go alone.

See more on Amos 4.8. Obs. 2.
When God begins to correct a people he takes them up for all together, and
spends one rod upon them after another, till he has either mended or ended
them. God wants not variety of ways to cut off rebellious sinners, if they
escape one Judgment, yet he has another to arrest them, Amos 5.19. and 9.1,
2, 3. Mat. 24.7. he has moths, thieves, rust, and cankers to rob us of our
comforts, Iam. 5.2, 3.

2 Desperate Diseases must have desperate Cures.

See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 68.
When gentler corrections will not work on a people, then come direful plagues
and end them. Those sinners were become desperate and incurable, and now the
Lord sets upon them with direful judgments and consumes them that so all the
Nations round about might hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly.

3 Incorrigible sinners are cut off by the Pestilence.

God had used all means to reclaim this People, but all in vain, therefore
now they must dye for it. So true is that of the Apostle, The wages of sin is
death, Romans 1.31. and 6.23. Sin and Death came into the world together, Genesis
2.17. Dan. 9.11. Romans 5.12. How blind then are the Socinians, that can find no
place in Scripture where it is said, that death is the punishment of sin.

4 What God has decreed shall certainly be effected.

Though we cannot bring it to pass, yet he can and will, whether it be for the
overthrow of the wicked, as here; or for the comfort of the godly. The counsel
of the Lord shall stand, and the thoughts of his heart unto all generations.
Men may plot, and contrive ways to overthrow the Doctrine and Discipline of
Christ, but these devices and counsels of men shall not stand, it is the
counsels of the Lord only that shall abide, Psalm. 33.10, 11.

VER 10.
And a man's Uncle shall take him up, and he that burns him, to bring out the
bones out of the house, and shall say unto him that is by the sides of the
house, Is there yet any with thee? and he shall say, No; then shall he say,
Hold thy tongue, for we may not make mention of the name of the Lord.
WHat the Prophet had expressed somewhat obscurely in the precedent Verse, he
sets down more fully and clearly in this, viz. That the Pestilence should be so
dreadful, that it should destroy whole Families, insomuch that there should not
be living men enough to bury the dead. There should neither be Father nor
Mother, Brother nor Sister, Son nor Daughter left alive to do the last office
of Burial for them; but a man's Uncle, or Kinsman must do it for him, Dod,
amator, amicus, pro pinquus, Patruus, significat generatim quemvis amicum
dilectum, and per Synec. Spe. Patruum.
else he may lie and rot above ground.

This shows what great desolation the Pestilence had made amongst them, that
the Uncle, or nearest Kinsman (to whom the right of succession to the
Inheritance belongs) must be constrained to burn the Body, that so he might
carry the bones out of the house with more ease. This was servile work, and
belonged to mercenary men appointed for that purpose, Ezekiel. 39.14. but for want
of such ordinary Officers to do it, the Kinsman must do it.

So that in this Verse we have, 1. An Amplification of that great desolation
which the Pestilence should make amongst them, it should be so terrible that it
should destroy whole Families, and cut off those ordinary Officers which were
appointed to bury the dead, insomuch that the next Kinsman. must be forced to
do it; neither shall he do it in an ordinary way, Vmesarepho, and comburous
eum, i. e. and comburet eum ad tollendum ossa e domo, Calvin.
but he must burn his bones. Calvin and others make the Uncle alone to be both
the burner of the dead, and the burier of his bones; they read the words thus,
His Uncle shall take him up and burn him, that he may carry the bones out of
the house. This reading seems to be most genuine and agreeable to the Text and
context, setting forth the dreadful hand of God upon them, in that the
Pestilence should be so fierce, that they should want ordinary Officers to bury
the dead.

Q. But how are they said to burn their dead, when it appears both by the Old
and New Testament that the Jews did bury their dead? Genesis 23.4 and 49.31 and
50.5, 25, 26. Mat. 8.21, 22. Joh. 19.41, 42.

A. It is true, usually they did bury their dead in times of Peace, but in
times of War they sometimes did burn their dead, as they did Saul, and his
Sons, to prevent further abuse which might be offered to their bodies by the
Philistims, 1 Samuel 31.12, 13. so in times of great contagion to prevent stench,
and further infection, they burnt their dead, as in the text; They might also
burn them to cleanse the house (which was fallen to the Kinsman) from legal
uncleanness by the dead, Numb. 19.14. Hence we read of their Vespillones, and
Pol^inctores, their buriers and their burners of the dead, Vespillo curabat
cadavera, and more geniis comburebat.
and so had the Gentiles, and the Romans, they burnt their dead to ashes, and
put their ashes into Urns (as appears by Ossaque lecta cado texit Corinaeus
aheno, Vir. Aeneid. 6. V. Godwins Roman Antiq. l. 2. cap. 21. S. 3. p. 76. and
Jewish Antiq. l. 6. c. 5.
Virgil, Ovid, and others) and Pitchers of Gold, Silver, Brass, or Marble, with
great care and ceremoniousness. These Jews being themselves Idolaters, did
symbolize too much with Heathens and Idolaters in this thing.

2 Here is the reason why they burn the dead, and that is, that they might the
easier carry the bones out of the house, when the flesh was burnt off before.

3 Here is a Conference between the Kinsman and him that lies in the house, and
he shall say unto him that is by the sides of the house; that is, to him that
is within the house, as Jonah was said to descend into the sides of the Ship,
Jonah 1.5. so these for fear did run into some corner of the house, to hide
themselves from the infection.

The Question which he asks is this, Is there any yet with thee? viz. left
alive in the family, or dead, that I may burn them, and bury their bones.

2 Here is the Parties answer in the Negative, No, there is an end of all,
there is not Ephesians, non nihil, nemo, finis, consumptio; ab Apas, destit,
de^ceit.
one left, they are all dead and gone, according to that, verse nine, If ten
men be in one house, they shall all dye.

The Prophet inlargeth himself in this discourse, about Gods Judgments, the
better to awaken these sottish, sensual, secure sinners.

3 Here is the inference upon this answer, then shall he say, Hold thy tongue,
be silent, be patient, do not fret, nor fume, do not mutter nor murmr
against God, as if he had wronged you, because he kills you; but acquiesce in
his just Judgments, and silently submit unto his will, for it is his work,
Amos 5.13. As for us, our sins are so great, and grievous, that we dare not
once call on the Name of the Lord, for a release, or mitigation of his
Judgments.

4 Here is the reason why they must keep silence, viz. Because the Lord was
just in all that he did unto them, and therefore they might not once make
mention of the Name of the Lord by way of complaint, thus some. Interpreters
sweat, and are much perplexed with the various Versions of this Text, insomuch
that there are almost as many Interpretations of it as there be Interpreters.

1 Say some, See more to this Point, in Hutchinson on the place.
It seems to point at these two, who agree to be silent in what they had done,
lest they should be sequestered as unclean by the Law, being legally polluted
by touching the dead, Numb. 19.14.

2 Others give this gloss, Hold thy tongue, for we may not make mention of the
name of the Lord, Tace, quia non erant commemoraturi nomen Iehovae. Piscat.
q. d. Be silent, lament not for them: for they are not worthy lamentation,
they are so wicked, that they will not once remember God: nor cry to him,
though he bind them with the cords of affliction.

3 Others make it the voice of desperate persons (according to the Margin of
our Bibles) We have not, Desperatam illorum malitiam notat, qui nec
intermedias calamitates Dei manum agnituri, and illius opem imploraturi sint.
Gualter in locum.
or we will not make mention of the name of the Lord, q. d. it is bootless to
pray, for God is set to plague us, and will not be pacified; let us therefore
eat and drink, since to morrow we must dye. Never tell us of Gods name, for he
is our enemy, and we cannot endure to hear of him, for neither he nor his
Ministers do ever Prophecy good unto us. If we should call upon him we may
mind him of us, and so bring new plagues upon our selves. This agrees best with
verse eleven, which follows immediately.

4 Others thus; These Hypocritical ones, that formerly gloried that they were
Gods people, his peculiar, his inheritance, his holy ones, etc. Gods wrath
shall lie so heavy upon them, that they shall boast no more of this, for they
shall be dumb when they hear Gods name, and abhor it as desperate reprobates
use to do. He will not suffer them any longer to take his name in vain, his
wrath shall burn so fiercely against them, that they shall not dare once to
make mention of his name, or to come near him who is a consuming fire.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Decent burial is a mercy.

It is reckoned as a Judgment here, that these wicked men should want the
honor and solemnity of ordinary burial. It is a mercy to have a Grave, and
therefore when the Kings of Judah are recorded, their burials are also
mentioned; and those of highest merit were buried in the upper part of the
Sepulchers of the Sons of David, 2 Chronicles. 32.33. Asa a good King was honorably
buried, with great solemnity, 2 Chronicles. 16.14. and so was King Zedekiah, Jer.
24.5. But so was not wicked Iehoram, 2 Chronicles. 21.19. and it was a curse upon
Iehojakim, that he should be buried with the burial of an Ass, and be
contemptibly cast into a ditch, Ier. 22.18, 19. It is reckoned as a Judgment,
when men have no burial, Psalm. 79.3. Deuteronomy. 28.26. 1 King. 21.23, 24. Ier.
14.16. and 16.4. and therefore David commends the burial of Saul, he blesses
and rewards the men of Iabesh for it, 2 Samuel 2.5.

The Body is a piece of Gods Workmanship, curiously wrought, Job 10.8. and
33.4. Psalm. 139.5. and therefore must not be carelessly thrown away, it was
redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, and is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. and 6.15, 29. and shall be raised up at the last day,
and be made like to Christ's glorious Body, Job 19.25. Phil. 3.21.

It is one of the last offices that we can do for our Relations, we should
therefore decently commit their bodies to the grave, as to a bed of rest, Isa.
57.2. there to remain till the general Resurrection of us all. So they did by
Steven, Act. 8.2. and the Patriarchs, Acts 7.15, 16.

Caution. Yet we must beware, 1 Of the fopperies of the Papists, who keep the
bones of Saints (supposed Saints most of them) unburied, that they may worship
them, kiss them, and offer to them. 1 Bones are a part of men's bodies, and
ought to be buried decently as well as the body, Exodus 13.19. Josh. 24.32. it
is reckoned as a punishment to have the bones lie unburied, Isa. 14.19. Ier.
8.1, 2.

2 There is no Precept nor President in all the Word of God, that commands such
Worship; yea the Lord himself hid the body of Moses, that it might not be
Idolized, Iud. 9.

3 Those Relics have proved to be the bones of Asses, Asinorum and canum ossa
pro Martyrum ossibus amplexi sunt. Calvin Opusc. de Reliquiis.

V. Perkins Problem, p. 523. Vol. 2. and Mulins Buckler of faith, Art. 28. p.
333. and Sharpii Loc. com. de Eccles. triumph. Contra. 3. P. 2. P. 34.


Stags, Thieves, and Murderers.

4 It is injurious to Christ, and derogates from his Merits; yea it is
injurious to the Saints, who are kept from their graves, where they rest in
peace till the Day of the Lord. Besides you may see the folly of Superstition,
when they should be imitating the Graces of the Saints, they are gathering
their bones and breeches, their caps and girdles, their hairs and habits. At
Rome, who lists may see St. Martins Boots, St. George his Sword, S. Crispins
Cutting-knife, Joseph's Breeches, Mary's Smock, Thomas his Shoe, the Milk of
Mary, the Swadling-clouts of Christ, and the Asses Head that he rode on. So
that Rome is a Church where Relics and Images are worshipped, God Almighty
pictured, Vows violated, Profaneness countenanced, half Communions
administered, Humane Traditions equalized with Scripture, and Ceremonies
multiplied.

2 Caut. Yet our greatest care should be for our Souls, See my Com. on 2 Timothy
4.6. p. 373.
what will it avayl us to have the body perfumed, spiced, and embalmed, when
the Soul which is the noblest part shall rot, and perish? Look to your Souls,
and then God will provide for your bodies; when the Mid-wives feared the Lord,
he made them houses.

3 Caut. Yet we should not be dismayed, Vel ipsi Philosophi contempsere
sepulturam. V. Aug. De Civit. Dei, l. 1. cap. 12.
when the bodies of Gods Saints be given to the Beasts of the Field, and the
Fowls of Heaven, Psalm. 79.2, 3. faith fears not such things. He that numbers
the hairs of our heads, will not lose our bones; he that is so careful of our
excrementitious parts, will not suffer our essential and integral parts to
perish. Solemn burial adds to the comfort of the living, but not of the dead.
Lazarus had no Funeral solemnities, nor Marble Monument, yet was he carried
into Abraham's bosom: -- Facilis jactura Sepulchri,
Coele tegitur qui non babet Urnam.
Lucan. l. 16.


2 Obs. Gods people must be patiently silent in calamitous times.

They must not be stupidly silent, for Grace does not raze, but raise, and
rectify the affections. We may spread our distress before God, and in an
humble manner expostulate with him; as Job, Jeremy, and other Saints have done.
It is an holy silence, and not a sinful silence, which is here enjoined us.
When Gods hand lies heavy upon us, not only our Tongues must be silent, Levit.
10.2, 3. 1 Samuel 3.18. Isa. 36.6, 7, 8. Amos 5.13. Zeph. 1.7. but our Souls must
keep silence to Jehovah, Anima mea dumijah, silens, tacita, quieta est.
Psalm. 62.1. My soul waits upon God, so we read it, but others according to
the Original, thus, My soul is silent, quiet, submiss, and subject to God, my
affections are subdued to him. Many men's Tongues are silent, but their hearts
are full of rage and fury; yea many men's words are smooth as oil, when their
hearts are like drawn swords. But a gracious soul in all humility adores the
just Judgments of God upon himself, and others, without any murmuring or
contradiction. He does not impatiently fly in Gods face, nor charge God
follishly, Job 1. ult. but he peaceably resigns himself, and all he has unto
Gods dispose; God is the Potter, and he is the Clay, ready to be formed and
framed, raised or ruined, made or marred, as he shall please. He gives the
Lord a blank as it were, and bids him write what please himself, and it shall
please him. Murmuring does but double our strokes, it is a slandering of God,
and a charging of him with folly, which he will not bear at our hands; and
therefore when ever Israel fell to murmuring, a Judgment presently followed;
other sins he can bear withal, but not with this. Untamed Heifers may gall
their necks, but they cannot break the yoke. Wild Bulls in a Net, by tosfing
and tumbling do but entangle themselves the more, Isa. 51.20. it is Prayer and
Patience that will mend all; fret not then at Gods dispensations, neither
quarrel with his Providence; See Mr. Burgess on Self-judging, on 1 Cor. 11.31.
but judge your selves, and justify him, so shall you have peace, Levit.
26.40. 41, 42. Judge. 10.15. 2 Chronicles. 12.6. Ezra 9.13. Neh. 9.33. Psalm. 51.4.
and 119.137. Dan. 9.7. 1 Cor. 11.31. Let us not like Sons of Adam justify our
selves, and lay the fault upon God, but let us kiss the hand that smites us,
and say, Righteous art thou Lord, and just are thy judgments.

3 Obs. Hypocritical shows and shadows of Religion will stand a man in no stead
in a day of wrath.

These sensual Idolaters cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord;
they boasted that God was their Father, and they his people, that they knew
him, and were known of him above all the people of the earth, Hos. 8.2. But now
the day of wrath is come, they dare not once make mention of the name of God,
they are so oppressed with the guilt of their sins. It is not crying Lord, Lord,
but doing Gods will sincerely, that will yield us comfort in calamitous times,
Matthew. 7.21, 22. 2 Cor. 1.12. A dead Beast can do us no service, and dead
Graces will stand us in no stead. Let us not then cheat our selves with shows
instead of substance, and with counters instead of gold; let us not be almost,
but altogether Christians, not having a name only to live, but let us live
indeed; that we may be Nathaniels, Israelites indeed, in whom there is no
reigning guile, Ioh. 1.47.

4 Wicked men in calamitous times are f^ll of despondency and despair.

Though in times of Peace they may boast how God loves them, yet when God
awakens their Consciences by his Judgments, the very name of God is terrible
to them, and they could wish he were not: Then either they hide themselves with
Adam, or run from him as Cain, Genesis 4.13. or hang themselves with Judas, or cry
with those wicked ones, Job 21. 14. Depart from us. Or, they blaspheme because
of their pain, and like Serpents fly in the face of him that touches them,
Rev. 16. ult. and like Heathens, who in their calamities curse their gods, and
beat them, as the Authors of all their misery; and at last they shall cry to
the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them and hide them, Luke 23.30. Rev. 6.16.

These cry, See Mr. Burgess his Spi. Refining, 1 Part, p. 469. Lect. 78
There is no hope, Jer. 18.12. and therefore they banish the thoughts of God
out of their hearts, Psalm. 10.4. and will not once make mention of him in their
troubles. These are beaten, but not bettered; corrected, but not amended; and
in some respect worse than Heathens, Diligentius Dii irati coluntur. Sen.
of whom Seneca observes, That they were most busy in worshipping their gods,
when they were most displeased. But we have those that fly from God when he
draws nigh to them, thoughts of God are never more pleasing to a gracious soul,
nor never more displeasing to wicked men than when they are in trouble.

VERSE 11.
For behold the Lord commands, and he will smite the great house with
breaches, and the little house with clefts.
IN this Verse we have an Amplification, and Confirmation of the precedent
commination, verse. 8. The Prophet tells them, that the destruction shall be
general, high and low, rich and poor, great and small, none should escape, but
as all had sinned, so all should suffer; a foreign enemy like a violent flood
should overrun the Land, so that there should be no escaping.

These Sinners were secure, and carnally-confident, trusting in their two
victorious and successful Kings, Jeroboam the second King of Israel, and Uzziah
King of Judah; they slighted the words of the Prophet, and therefore the Lord
resolves to preach to them in another manner viz. by the Sword of the Assyrian,
and Chaldean, who should make them feel, what they would not believe.

In the words we have,

1 The causal Particle, For, which has relation to the eighth and ninth
Verses, where the Lord threatens to destroy the City with its fullness,
Metzavveh, mandavit, ordinavit, decrevit, and sicut decrevit, sic and exequetur.
and to add the Pestilence to the Sword, and gives you the reason of it in
this verse, Mandavit Dominus, the Lord has commanded and decreed it, and none
shall be able to reverse it.

2 Here is an ecce, behold, to incite both our Attention and Intention, it
calls for our ears and eyes.

3 Here is the matter to be marked, and that is the command and charge of God
to destroy his people for their provocations, The Lord commands, and he will
smite the City, q. d. you have not to do with an impotent man, but with an
Omnipotent God, who as he has made all things, so he has them all at his
beck, to help or hurt us as pleases him. He needs not Armies, he needs not
Instruments to confound his adversaries, it is but speaking and it is done,
Psalm. 44.4. and 148.5.

Q. How does the Lord smite the City, when he only commands that it should be
done?

A. It is a Rule, Quod quis per alium facit, per sell facere videtur. In that
the Lord commands the Assyrians and Chaldeans to destroy, verse. 14. he is said
to do it himself, because they were but his rods, and the instruments in his
hand to chastise his people; whoever be the Actor, yet God is the Author.

4 Here is the Universality of this destruction, he will bring down great and
small, he will cause the Assyrians and Babylonians to smite the great house
with breaches, and the little house with clefts. Resisim, rupturis,
confractionibus, vel distillationibus, cant. 5.2. Hic vero idem valet quod
Ratsim, i. e. fragmina.
The word which we render Breaches, signifies also droppings, which by little
and little rot the house, and so make breaches and ruptures in it; but in this
place it properly signifies ruptures, and breaches.

They were all incorrigible, and incurable, both great and small, and therefore
now they shall be punished, and perish together, both houses and inhabitants.
Their Palaces and great Houses in Sion, and Samaria, should have a great
downfall; and the lesser houses should chop, and chink, and moulder away. By
these expressions the Prophet intimates, that both noble and ignoble should
perish together; as they had overthrown the Law, and all equity, verse. 12. so
now God overthrows them.

Some conceive, that the Prophet here alludes to some Earthquake, which should
make breaches and clefts in their houses, but the Prophet confutes these, and
tells us* that it shall be done by the hand of an enemy, verse. 14. Others
Allegorize, and apply this to the two Kingdoms of Israel and Judah, which are
called two houses, Isa. 8.14. By the great house (say they) is meant the Ten
Tribes, which did excel in wealth and dignity. By the lesser house is meant
the Kingdom of Judah, Peroutiet regnum percussione forti, regnum vero minus
plaga remissio^e. Chald. Para.
which was little, compared with Israel; the Kingdom of Israel should be so
ruined by the Assyrians, that it should never be repaired; but the Kingdom of
Judah should only have some clefts and chawns made by the Babylonians, which
were in part made up again, after the seventy years Captivity in Babylon, by
Ezra and Nehemiah.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Matters of moment must especially be marked.

Great Judgments were coming upon this People, and the Lord by an Ecce,
Behold, labors to awaken them to the consideration of them. The birth of
Christ is a matter of great moment, and therefore the Angels come with a
Behold, Luke 2.10. the seasons of grace are matters of great moment, and
therefore a double Behold is set upon them, 2 Cor. 6.2. Our Original Sin is a
matter deeply to be thought on, and therefore it has an Ecce setupon it, See
move in Robinson on Ephesians. 6.13. Lect. 1. p. 3.
Psa. 51.5. and so on the Day of Judgment, Jude 7. Revel. 22.7.

2 War and Pestilence are Gods Servants, which come and go at his beck and
commandment.

As all Creatures are his Servants, Winds, and Seas, and Sun obey him, Job 9.7.
so all Armies are his, he is Lord of Hosts, and if he but stamp or hiss for an
Enemy, or call for a Pestilence on the Land, they readily obey, Isa. 7.18, 19.
Levit. 26.25. Ier. 47.6, 7. he can destroy the most potent enemy by the most
impotent and contemptible means, as Froggs, Flies, Lice, Psalm. 105.31.

If he say to such and such Diseases, Go, seize on such a man, or such a woman,
they go; if he bid them cease, they cease. We should not therefore bribe the
Sergeant, but compound with the Creditor. Run not in your sickness and distress
to Physic or Friends, but make peace with God in the first place, and then all
shall be at peace with you.

We should also be patient under all Dispensations, looking at Gods hand in
all, seeing him ordering and disposing all for the good of his. This will make
you dumb and silent, when you see it is the Lord that does it, 2 Samuel 16.10.
Psalm. 39.9. Ioh. 18.11.

See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 209.
3 Obs. Universality in sin brings universality in suffering.

The generality of this people were corrupt, and now they are generally ruined.
As rich and poor were Idolaters, Apostates, and Profane; so now they should be
ransackt and ruined together.

4 Obs. Sin brings a curse on our dwellings, and lays famous fabrics in the
dust, as I have showed before on verse eight.

VER. 12.
Shall Horses run upon the Rock? Will one plow there with Oxen? for ye have
turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock.
IN the precedent Verse the Lord threatened a general Judgment against these
general Sinners, but they trusting to their own strength and glory, feared no
Judgments, but conceited that the Lord who had taken them into Covenant with
himself, and adopted them for his own peculiar people, and adorned them with
many Privileges above the rest of the Nations round about them, would not deal
so sharply with them as the Prophet threatened; but would take some gentler
course, plowing them still by his Prophets, and laboring to reclaim them by
their Ministry.

To this the Lord answers in this Verse, by a Prolepsis, he prevents this
evasion and vain conceit, telling them, that it was to no purpose to take any
more pains with them, or to correct them with gentler rods, for they remained
still obstinate and perverse, falling away more and more, growing worse and
worse; so that he did but plow the rocks, and so break his Plows without any
increase; and sow the sands, losing his labor on them; and therefore he is now
resolved, that his Spirit should no longer contend with such rockey rebellious
Sinners nor his patience wait any more upon them. The Interrogation is a strong
Negation* Shall Horses run upon the rock, or Oxen plow there? No, they will
not, they are not fit places for such purposes; and do you think that I will
always sing to deaf men, and bestow my cost and care upon such rockey and
hardened Sinners, that will bring forth no fruit?

It is a Proverbial speech, Sicut frustra laboraret, siquis vellet incitare
equos ad cursum in Petra, au^ siquis bobus came vellet arare; sie ego frustra
laboro, dum vos hortor ad faciendum recta, quia pla^e perversi effis. Piscator.
and signifies lost labor, and therefore we use to say of such as labor in
vain, They go about to plow the rocks, and sow the sands.

Interpreters vary much in their Exposition of this first branch of the verse.
See five various senses in a Lapid^, and six in our large Annotations; that
which I have given (with submission to better judgments) I conceive to be most
genuine and best agreeing with the context; which is the surest and foundest
way of expounding Scripture, and is of more weight than an hundred sic dixits
of this and that man.

So that in this Verse we have, 1 The Lords resolution to plow these rocks no
longer.

2 Here is the Reason and ground of this Resolution, viz. for their Injustice,
Oppression, Tyranny, and all kind of cruelty toward the poor. There was no
righteousness to be found amongst them, they had turned Judgment into Gall, or
Poison, (as the word also signifies) because poison is the bitterest part of
poisonous beasts, Rosh, significat toxicum and tale venenum quod serpents in
capite gestant. Lagnanab, absyathium, in gratissimi saporis herba; Metaphorice
res ingrata, molesta, noxia.
to wit, the gall. The word also signifies the Head, and is put for Poison,
because the Poison of Dragons lies in their head, Deuteronomy. 32.33.

And righteousness into hemlock, o^ wormwood, so the word properly signifies,
and it is so rendered in other places, as Ier. 9.15. Lam. 3.15. Amos 5.7. They
absolved the nocent, and condemned the innocent; they acquitted the wicked, and
condemned the just; they favored the rich, who could bribe well, and oppressed
the poor who had nothing to give, Amos 4.1. so that their Courts of Justice
were as sweet as Honey to the wicked, but as baneful and bitter as gall to the
godly.

Fructum justitiae vocat pacem publicam, quae sub iniquis Magistratibus in
absynthium degenerat. Gual.
Justice in it self is a most sweet and pleasant thing, it is the very asylum
and sanctuary of the poor, and the oppressed; but these luxurious ones had
turned this sovereign Medicine into a deadly Poison, and made that which is in
it self sweet as h^^ney, to become bitter as gall unto the oppressed, and as
hemlock to the poor, which is a dangerous venomous weed, killing him that tastes
of it.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 The patience of the Lord will not always, wait upon impe^itent sinners.

See my Com. on Hos. 13.12. p. 4, 5.
He will not always plow the rocks, and sow the sands, not take pains with such
ground as brings forth nothing but Briars and Thorns, such barren ground is
nigh to cursing, Heb. 6.8. Isa. 5.1. to 8. The Lord had planted his Vineyard in
an Horn of Oil, i. e. in a very fruitful soil, from whence he might justly
expect the generous fruit of sincere obedience; he fenced it about with his
gracious Protection and good Laws; he removed all impediments of growth and
fruitfulness; but when he came to look for grapes of obedience, behold the
wild grapes of cruelty, injustice, and disobedience; he therefore resolves to
take away the hedge, break down the wall, lay it wast, and expose it to the
fury of every wild beast. See M. Nathan. Rogers on that Parable.
Barren trees are good for nothing but fuel, Matthew. 3.10. Mark 11.12. Luke 13.
6. to 10. When the Lord by his Word and Spirit has long striven with men,
laboring to bring them to Repentance, but they will not be wrought upon, but
are like the Cypress tree, the more it is watered, the more it withers; the
Lord at last resolves to make a final end with them, See Mr. Love on Genesis 6.3.
and Mr. Fenner, p. 377. folio. V. B. Babington on Numb. 21.26. p. 91, folio.
and utterly to destroy. them, Genesis 6.3. Isa. 1.5.

2 Proverbial speeches are commendable.

The Lord himself uses them in Scripture. All Proverbs are commendable,
especially sacred ones. They are short, witty, pithy, concise speeches, like
jewels that contain much worth in a little room.
They prove themselves, and will have no nay, they save many words, and help
the memory, a man cannot tell how well to forget them, or gainsay them. Hence
Solomon abounded with them, and Christ a greater than Solomon occasionally used
them; Inter bonos authors ut quisque fuit eruditissimus, ita quamplurimum
adagiorum suis libris aspersit. Quid divino illo Platone (...) Aristoteles suis
disputationibus Paroemias crebras sero gemmulas intertexuit, (...).
as, No man can serve two Masters. A tree is known by his fruits. He that
humbles himself shall be exalted. It is better to give than to receive, etc.
And it is observed, that the more learned any men are, the more pithy,
sententious, and Proverbial they are; as we see in Plato, Plutarch, Seneca,
Aristotle, etc.

3 Obs. Perverting of Justice is a Land destroying sin.

There is not a more infallible forerunner of a Nation ruin, than when Courts
of Justice are turned into Courts of injustice; and Courts of Equity become
Courts of iniquity. This turning of Justice into Gall, brings gall and sorrow
with it to a Land, Ier. 8.14. and 9.15. Hos. 10.4, 5. it caused Ierusalems day
to draw near, Ezekiel. 22.6, 7. A corrupt Judge is a cold Fire, a dark Sun, a dry
Sea. A false Teacher that poisons Souls, an unskilful Physician that destroys
Bodies and a corrupt Judge that perverts Justice, are three great Evils; the
one destroys the fountain of Piety, the other destroys the fountain of
Sanity, and the third destroys the fountain of Civil Policy. If a man be
oppressed, he flies to Courts of Justice for refuge, and if they shall give him
a draught of poison, or hemlock to kill him, this cries aloud for justice
against such, Isa. 5.7. Ier. 5.28, 29. Execution of Justice is a most sweet and
pleasant thing to God, no Honey so delightful to us, Corruption optimi est
corruptissima. See my Com* on Psalm. 8^.2.
as this is to him. How great then is their sin, who turn righteousness into
wrong, sweet into sower, and make poisons of medicines? See what God faith to
such, Amos 4.1.

VERSE. 13.
Ye which rejoice in a thing of naught, which say, Have we not taken to us
horns by our own strength?
IN the first Verse of this Chapter, the Prophet upbraids the Israelites with
their carnal confidence; and in this Verse he amplifies that exprobration; Ye
are they (says he) which rejoice in things of naught, and glory in your own
strength, to your own confusion, as it follows, verse. 14.

In this verse we have this Peoples sin, They rejoice in a thing of naught. And
in the next verse we have their punishment.

Q. The Question will be, what is meant by a thing of naught, or of no moment,
here?

A. By a thing of naught, 1. Some conceive an Idol is meant, which is called a
thing of naught, or nothing, an Idol is nothing, 1 Cor* 8.4* materially it may
be wood or stone, but formally it is nothing. Though it may be something in
respect of men's vain conceits, yet it is nothing in respect of any Divine power
or virtue, for it can neither hurt nor help. These people worshipped the Calves,
and worshipped Baal, and other Idols, and so might be said to rejoice in things
of naught. But,

2. Others conceive they rejoiced in Creature Comforts and Privileges, such as
Riches, Honor, Power, Success, the Covenants, Circumcision, Le^o^abar; in non
verbo, vercum idem est quod res; in non verbo, i. e. in non re, in nibilo, in
re nullius momenti, i. e. in potentia ves^ra.
Adoption, etc. all these they boasted and br^gged of, as if they could have
sheltred them from Gods Wrath, but since they were rebellious and disobedient,
the Prophet tells them they should do them no good in the day of Gods Wrath,
for they were but things of naught; ^and mere nothing compared with God; and in
no wise to be rested in.

3 And most genuinely, To rejoice in a thing of naught, is to rejoice in an arm
of flesh, to rejoice in Armies, Strength, Victories, and Successes;
Hassemachim, Latantes, vel qui laetantur, Participia ha^ extensa sunt, ideoque
actus continuos denotant.
for so it follows in the latter part of the verse, which is exegetical, and
illustrates the former, Ye rejoice in a thing of naught. What Is that? Why ye
say, Have we not taken to us Horns by our own strength? it was their constant
practice to rejoice in a thing of naught, and to trust in their own strength.

By Horns here is meant the power, Micah 7.18. Joh. 1.29. V. Schools-guard,
Rule 56.
dominion, glory, and excellency of a people. It is a Metaphor taken from
horned Beasts, whose strength and beauty lies in their horns. So Deuteronomy. 33.17.1.
Sam. 2.1.10 Job 16.15. Psa. 92.10. and 112.9 and 132.17. and 148.14. Scimus
cornua Hebraeis accipi pro excellentia, robore, altitudine, and quolibet
praesedio. Calvin.


Thus they said, viz. in their hearts, and thoughts at least, for what words
are to us, that thoughts are to God, his Word and Spirit search the inward
parts of the Soul, Ier. 17.10. 1 Cor. 2.10. they thought they had made
themselves strong and impregnable by their own power. The Prophet seems to
allude to the power and success which Jeroboam the second, one of the Kings of
Israel had, in whose reign Amos Prophesied. This King was very succesful and
prosperous, he enlarged the borders of the Kingdom, and took diverse Cities from
the Syrians, 2 King. 14.25, 27, 28. So Judah was very succesful under King
Uzziah, as appears, 2 Chronicles. 26.1 to 17. these Victories and Successes made
them proud, and lift up their horns, as if by their own power and policy they
had got the victory. Thus they rejoiced in a thing of naught, as if by their
own strength they had enlarged their borders, and could now defend themselves
against foreign envasions.

The Interrogation is a strong Affirmation, V. Schools-Guard, rule 30.
Have we not taken to our selves horns by our own strength? See what impious
Arrogance, and Vam-glorious boasting here is, every word gives a crake, Have
not we taken, Have not we taken to us, have not we taken to us Horns, yet more,
Have not we taken to us Horns by our own strength? They did all, God did
nothing, he is not in any of their thoughts. I have read of Pope Adrian, who
having built a stately College at Lovaine, caused this to be written in golden
letters over the gate, Utretch planted him, there was he born; Lovaine watered
him, there he got Learning; and Caesar gave the increase, for he made him a
Cardinal: one wittily comes after and subscribes, Hic Deus nihil fecit, God had
nothing to do here.So these men ascribed all to themselves, and shut out God.
Though the Lord by an Almighty hand had brought them out of Egypt into the
Land of Canaan, and drove out the Canaanites before them, and by a strong hand
preserved them in that good Land; yet so proud, ungrateful, and dis-ingenious
were they grown, that they sacrificed to their own Net, and assumed all to
themselves, saying, Have we not gotten these Victories by our own strength?
The Lord can now no longer bear with this Sacrilegious robbing him, of the
honor which was due to his Name: and therefore in the next Verse he tells
them, That he will raise up a Nation against them, that shall utterly destroy
them.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 The Creatures excellency is all but vanity.

Take the Quintessence of all the Riches, Power, Pomp, Beauty, Morality, and
delights of the World, and put them in one scale, and put Vanity in the other,
and they will prove lighter than vanity; In my Com. on Psalm. 73.20. a Lapide in
Amos 6.13. and Mendoza, in 1 Reg. 2. Numb. 36. Annot. 25. p. 555.
and therefore they may well be called, things of naught. But of this at large
elsewhere.

2 Obs. Such is man's corruption and madness, that he rejoices in things of
naught.

He dislikes what is truly good, and delights in vanity, Psalm. 4.6, 7. Hence
Solomon spends the whole Book of Ecclesiastes in dissuading men from this folly
and madness. St. Chrysostom tells us, that if he had a voice like Thunder, and
a mighty Mountain for his Pulpit, and all the Men and Women in the World for
his Auditory, he would choose that Text to preach on, Psalm. 4.2. O ye sons of
men, how long will ye love vanity?

3 Gods Word is a critical word.

V. Traps True Treasure, chapter 3. Sect. 3. p. 86. and Glassii Philolog. lib. 1.
Tr. 3. S. 3. mihi. p. 201.
It discovers the thoughts and intents of men's hearts, and lays their inside
open, so great is its power and efficacy. Gods Word resembles God, as he is the
only Heart-searching God, so his Word is the only Heart-searching Word. It
pierces to the very Marrow, and discovers to us our most secret thoughts and
affections, Heb. 4.12. and can tell us, whether we delight in things of naught.

4. Wicked men ascribe that to their own power and policy, which is due to
Gods Power, and Grace.

If they have success and victory, they presently lift up their Horns and push
at God, that they may the better Sacrifice to their own Net, and burn incense
to their drag. Hab. 1.15, 16. Thus Senacherib King of Assyria boasted of his
power and success, as if he could conquer not only Jerusalem, but its God also,
Isa. 36. Thus that Heathen that went forth to Battle, being admonished to call
upon the Gods, answered, that it was for cowards to pray, as for himself, he
was resolved to try his own strength in Battle, he did so, and was slain. Let
others kiss their own hands, Job 31.27. and ascribe all to Idols and
themselves; but let us, with all the Servants of God, ascribe the glory of all
we are, or have, to God alone, See my Com. on 2 Timothy 4.8. p. 410.
for what have we that we have not received from him? 1 King. 8.24. Psalm. 20.7.
and 44.5, 6, 7, 8. and 89.9, 10.17, 18. it is by the grace of God that we are
what we are, 1 Cor. 15.10.

VER. 14.
But behold, I will raise up against you a Nation, O house of Israel, says the
Lord the God of Hosts; and they shall afflict you from the entering in of
Hemath, unto the river of the Wilderness.
THese words contain the Conclusion of the fifth Sermon, which Amos made to
this People. We have seen their Sin before, we are now come to their Suffering.
This people gloried in things of naught, and would not believe the Prophets
words, but now they should be taught by blows, and be made to feel what they
would not fear, and therefore the Prophet begins with a but, But behold, q. d.
you think by your own strength and power to subdue your enemies, but I will
raise up against you the Assyrian, a mighty Nation, that shall chase you from
one end of the Land to another.

The Lord had told them before of Judgments in general that should come upon
them for their sins, now he comes to particularize the Judgment; he tells them
who shall inflict it, on whom, and how far. They had forsaken God, and cast
him off, and now he forsook them, they trusted to their own strength but God
sends against them a stronger than they, that should subdue them. But I will
raise up against you a Nation, etc.

In the words we have, 1. The Adversative Particle, But.

2 The Note of Attention, Behold.

3 The matter to be attended, I will raise up against you a Nation, viz. the
Assyrian against Israel, and the Babylonian against Judah; for the bounds here
set for the promised Land, do imply both Kingdoms, primarily Israel and
Samaria, and secondarily, Judah and Jerusalem, as I have showed on Verse. 1.

The Kingdom of Israel was overthrown by Salmaneser King of Assyria, and the
City and Temple of Jerusalem, by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon; these God
raised up to cool their courage, and abate their pride.

4 The Lord tells them what this Nation shall do to Israe^, They shall afflict
them, they shall press and oppress, them by violence and Tyranny; Lachetz,
coarctavit, pressit, oppressit, afflixit, ut videre est, Judge. 4.3. 1 Samuel
10.18. Psalm. 106.42
they shall hem them in, and so straiten them, that none shall escape.

5 Here is the extent of this affliction, and how far it shall go, and that
is from Hemath, which was situate in the North border of Canaan, looking
Eastward, verse. 2. Unto the river of the Wilderness; that is, to Sichor, a
river of Egypt in the South, looking Westward, and parting the Land of Israel
from the Land of Egypt, Numb. 34, 5, 8. Josh. 13.3, 5. and 15.47. 1 Chronicles.
13.5 it is called the river of the Desert, because it came out of the Desert;
some think it was the river Nilus, but the bounds of Canaan never extended so
far. Jeroboam had re-gained those bounds to Israel, they were proud of the
Prize; but about thirty years after Tiglath-Pileser re-gained it all from
Israel, and laid it to the Assyrians; and not long after comes Salmanesar the
King of Assyria, and takes Samaria, and subdues the whole Kingdom of Israel.
About one hundred years after, Judah was carried captive into Babylon,
according to that woe denounced against them, ver. 1. When Wars arise yet some
use to escape, but here the Lord threatens, that they shall be oppressed from one
end of the Land to another* Though the Country were large and spacious, and
there were many ways to escape, yet the enemy should befet them so strictly
that there should be no escaping, but all should go into Captivity. As all had
sinned, so all should now suffer for sin. So that this verse seems to be a kind
of Antithesis, and check to their Carnal confidence in their own strength and
success, q. d. it is true, your King Jeroboam has recovered your borders, but
I will send one that shall recover all from you again. He restored all from
Hemath to the Sea of the Plain; and I will send the Assyrian who shall wast
Israel from Hemath to the Sea, i. e. from North to South, and from East to
West; and then shall you see how infirm your firmness was; when your Valor
shall be turned into weakness, your Glory into shame, and your Mirth into
mourning.

6 Who is it that says all this? why it is one that can and will perform it,
It is the Lord, the God of Hosts; who has the Army of the Assyrians, and all
other Armies at his beck and command, verse. 8.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Pride goes before destruction. In the precedent verse we read of Isreal's
Pride and Carnal-confidence, and now see their fall. When pride is in the
faddle, destruction is on the crupper, Dan 4.30. we read of Nebuchadnezzars
pride, and ver. 31. we read of his fall. Children that hold by their own coats
pull themselves down; by his own strength shall no man prevail, 1 Samuel 2.9. Ezekiel
28.9.

2 The Lord is true in all his Threatenings. Not one word shall fail of all that
he has spoken against a rebellious people. He threatened to send the Assyrian
against Israel here, and he did it. He threatened to send the Babylonian against
Judah, and they came at last.

3 When people are rejoicing and most secure, then usually Judgments are
nearest. In the precedent verse they were rejoicing, and in this verse comes
their ruin. When the old World was buying, selling, marrying, and
merry-making, then came the Flood and swept them all away, Mat. 24.38, 39. When
Bellsring, Canons roar, Fires flame, and there is nothing but mirth and
jollity, then may destruction be at the door. When men cry Peace, peace, then
comes sudden and swift destruction, 1 These. 5.3. 2 Pet. 2.1.

4 It is God who raises up enemies against a rebellious people. I will raise
up a Nation against you. See more on Amos 4.10.
War is one of Gods sore Judgments which he sends against a people of his
wrath, Ezekiel. 14.21. when men will not serve God with gladness and sincerity in
abundance, then he makes them serve their enemies in want and misery, Deuteronomy.
28.47, 48. Isa. 42.24, 25. The Assyrian is but Gods ^tod, his Staff, his Axe,
his Saw, to scourge, beat, hew, and divide; they are but Instruments, it is God
that is the Agent.

5 Universality in sin brings universality in suffering. As the Land had been
^ilted from corner to corner with uncleaneness, See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p.
109. See an excellent Ser. of Mr. Bacon on Exodus 23.2. p. 14. at the end of his
Exposition of Mr. Perkins Cathech.
so now it should be answerably filled with punishment. National Sins bring
National Plagues, Ezra 9.10, 11. When all the old World was corrupt, then came
the Flood and swept them all away. When all Sodom, and all Jerusalem were given
to wickedness, then came Judgments and destroyed them. Multitudes in sin are
so far from Patronizing the sinners, that it hastens wrath.

6 Sin brings a people into a desperate condition. It brings them into such
straits, that they know not which way to turn themselves. The Land of Canaan was
spacious, and there were many ways of escaping, but their sins had brought
things to that pass, that they were surrounded with enemies, and there was none
to deliver them.

7 As Kingdoms have their times of flourishing, so they have their times of
fading too. Israel flourisht, and was succesful under Jeroboam, but they fade
and fall in the reign of King Hoshea. See Greenhil on Ezekiel. 26.17. Obs. 3. p.
442.
The Gr^cian, Babylonian, and Persian Monarchies which were sometimes famous
through the world, are now mouldred away, and come to nothing, and so shall the
Roman.

8 God usually retaliates Sinners, and pays them in their own coin. This people
had for a long time pressed the Lord with their sins, V. Caryl on Job 15.25.
Obs. 1. p. 131. Greenhil on Ezekiel. 7.18. p. 75.
Amos 2.13. and now themselves are pressed and oppressed with Judgments. Sodom, and
Gomorah, that burnt in lust, were burnt with fire. Nadab, and Abihu, that
offered strange fire, perished by strange fire from the Lord. There was one
Martin a vile man, that threatened to slit a godly Ministers nose in Piedmount,
that was assaulted by a Woolf, which bit off his nose, so that he dyed thereof
mad. Fox Book of Martyrs, 2 Vol. p. 202.
Asa, that set the Prophet in the Stocks, had a disease in his feet. Babylon,
that shed the blood of Saints, has blood given her to drink. He that on earth
denied a crumb of Bread, in Hell shall not have a drop of water, Luke 16.24, 25.
They that delight in left hand blessings, Prove. 3.16. shall be placed with the
Goats on the left hand, Mat. 25.33. and those that delight in darkness, shall be
sent to darkness, 2 Pet. 2.17. They that say unto God, Depart now, he will say
unto them, Depart at the last Day. He that will not own Christ's truth now,
shall not be owned by him then. They that trample upon the Saints here, the
Saints shall tread them under their feet hereafter, Micha 4.11, 12, 13. and
7.10. so that all the wicked at last shall be compelled to say with Adonibezek,
Judge. 1. As I have done, so has the Lord rewarded me. The Egyptians that
worshipped creeping things, were punished with Froggs, and other creeping
things. Demosthenes and Tully, that were proud of their Eloquence, perished by
it. Milo, that gloried in his strength, was ruined by it. Absalom, that was
proud of his Hair, it helped to hang him, 2 Samuel 18.9. Let every one then take
notice of his sin by the suffering, and silence murmuring.

We have now seen the Sins that ruined Israel, viz. Idolarry, Superstition,
Apostasy, Oppression, Luxury, Tyranny, Injustice, and Carnal-confidence, etc.
If these Sins reign in England, what can we expect but that the Lord should
send some Assyrian upon us, to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant on us? etc.

FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION, WITH Practical OBSERVATIONS UPON The Seventh Chapter of Amos.
VERSE 1, 2, 3. Thus has the Lord God showed unto me, and behold, he formed
Grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth; and lo
it was the latter growth after the Kings mowings.

And it came to pass after they had made an end of eating the grass of the
Land, then I said, O Lord forgive I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise?
for he is small.

The Lord repented for this, it shall not be, says the Lord.


THis Chapter contains the Sixth Sermon of Amos, wherein are three Visions, to
which are annexed the issue and operation of them, verse. 10, 11, 12.

The Prophet had before plainly and clearly set down Gods Judgments against
this People, that none might complain of obscurity; yet now he comes to speak
more mystically, in five Types and Visions, if by any means he might work upon
them. Two Visions we^ have, Chap. 8.1, etc. and 9.1, etc. and three in the nine
first Verses of this Chapter, setting forth the patience and long-suffering of
God toward this rebellious People.

The three Types or Similies are of Grasshoppers, Which adumbrare three
Judgments, Famine, War, and utter destruction. Fire, Which adumbrare three
Judgments, Famine, War, and utter destruction. A Plumb-line, Which adumbrare
three Judgments, Famine, War, and utter destruction.


The first Judgment which Amos saw was an army of Grasshoppers, Locusts, or
Green-worms, which should devour the Grass and Corn, and this shadowe^ out the
want of all things, verse. 1, 2.

2 That of Fire, devouring the great deep, denotes War, with the miseries
that attend it, verse. 4. Both these had ruined Israel, but that at the
mediation and intercession of the Prophet they were kept off for a time, verse.
2, 3, 5, 6. the duty of a faithful Pastor is to Pray and Preach, Amos does both
these: he shows them their Sins, and Gods Judgments due unto them for them,
yet withal he prays for the averting of them, and was heard for that time,
till at last the malady was past cure.

3 That of a Plumb-line in the hand of God, signified the utter overthrow both
of the Oeconomical, Political, and Ecclesiastical estate of the Kingdom. God
had measured out a time for them to repent in, but they were become incurable,
and therefore the Lord here threatens to spare them no longer, and to pass by
them no more, verse. 8. nor yet to accept of any more mediation for them; and
therefore we do not read that ever the Prophet interceded for the averting of
this Judgment, as he had done for the former; so long as there was hope he
prayed for them, but since they were incorrigible he forbears.

4 We have the slanderous accusation of Amaziah the Priest of Bethel (who being
netled with the Prophecy, and freedom of speech used by this blunt and
downright Prophet against both King and Kingdom) stirs up King Jeroboam the
second against Amos, under pretense of being a seditious, turbulent person, and
one that had conspired against the King, verse. 10, 11. Amos has conspired
against the King.

2 The more to incense the King against him, he aggravates his Crimes, as
first, that he acted this Treason, not secretly, but openly* He has conspired
against thee in the midst of the house of Israel.

2 That the People were much troubled at his Doctrine, to the hazard of the
Kingdom: The Kingdom is not able to bear his words.

3 Here is Amaziahs fraudulent advice, under pretense of love and kindness, he
would nor have Amos come any more to Bethel, lest he should run himself into
danger; and therefore he advises him to pack out of the Kingdom with all
speed, and to get into Iudeah his own Country, and to Prophecy there. Verse.
12.

4 We have Amos his bold reply to this false Prophets calumniations, verse. 14,
15. where he asserts and justifies his calling, showing, 1 Negatively, that he
was no Prophet, nor Prophets Son. 2 Affirmatively, That he was an Herdsman. 3
How he was called to be a Prophet, he came not of his own accord to the work,
but the Lord said to me, Go Prophecy, verse. 15. 4 Here is Amos his Charge, to
which he was primarily sent, and that was to the ten Tribes, verse. 15. Go
Prophecy to Israel; he durst not therefore forsake his Charge assigned him by
God, and flee into Judea, (as Amaziah would have had him) but he resolved to
stand his ground, and keep to his Commission, and preach to Israel though he
dyed for it, as he did, being slain (say some) by Amaziahs Son. 5 Here is a
five-fold Judgment threatened by Amos against this Persecuting Prelate, verse.
17. he should suffer in his Wife, in his Children, in his Possessions, in his
own Person, and in the whole Kingdom, which he should see go into Captivity.


VER. 1.
Thus has the Lord God showed unto me, and behold he formed Grasshoppers in the
beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth; and lo it was the latter
growth after the Kings mowings.
IN this Chapter we have three Visions, the first whereof is that of devouring
Locusts, which left little or nothing behind them. Where we have,

1 The Person revealing the Vision to the Prophet, and that is, the Lord, Thus
has the Lord God showed me, in a Prophetical Vision, See Dr. Thomas Tailor on
Amos 8.11. p. 215.216. fol.
the Judgments which he is about to bring upon Israel. This he mentions to
procure the more authority to what he spoke, that they might see they were not
figments, or dreams of his own inventing.

2 Here is the Vision it self, or what the Lord showed him, and that is
Grasshoppers, and behold he formed Grasshoppers. He did not call out Grasshoppers
already made, Iotser, fictor, a Iatsar, finxit, formavit, Isa. 43.1. Zach. 12.1.
but he saw the Lord forming and framing a new Army of Grasshoppers out of the
dust of the earth, or the like; which to Gods Omnipotency was as easy, as to
bring out an Army of Grasshoppers already made.

Obj. But most call these Grasshoppers Locusts, and so the very same word is
rendered, Isa. 33.4. so that what shall we call them, Grasshoppers, or Locusts?

I answer, both; that is, they are Grashopper-Locusts. To clear this, you must
know that there were several sorts of Locusts mentioned in the Scripture, some
were silent, and some vocal; some good, and for food, Mat. 3.4. Others were
obnoxiou^ and hurtful, as here in the text, and of these there were three
sorts: See Ainsworth on Levit. 11.22
1 Locust-Solhem, Levit. 11.22. 2 Locust-Horgel, Levit. 11.22. Gob, Gobe,
Loenstae, bruchi, a radice Gabah, exaltavit, quia ^levant and exal. ant pedes.
3 Locust-Hagab. Levit. 11.22.
And this last is the Locust-Grashopper in the text. It was a devouring Insect,
that went in great multitudes together, eating up all before them, and so
bringing a Famine on the places where they came, Joel 1.4, 6. and 2.11. they
are called a Nation, and an Army of Vermin for their swarms and multitudes.

Q. A second Quere is, Whether these Locusts must be taken Literally, or
Metaphorically, properly or symbolically?

Ans. 1. They may be taken literally for an Army of Insects, which devour the
fruits of the earth, and so cause a famine; this is most genuine here, and it
was one of those rods with which God chastned Israel, Amos 4.9. as for War, he
speaks of that, verse. 4. but this especially relates to famine, and some
Judgments begun before the time of Jeroboam the second.

2 Others take them Metaphorically, for any kind of devastation or wasting
whatsoever; or else for the Assyrians, which like so many Locusts should
overrun the Land of Israel, and devour all before them. Hence the Assyrian is
compared to a Razor, which should shave them even to the skin, Isa. 7.20.

3 Here is the Time these Locusts were formed, and that is, 1. Generally, in
the beginning of the shooting up of ^he latter growth. 2. More particularly, It
was the latter growth after the Kings mowings. After the first fleece was mowed
off for the use of the Kings horses, which was wont to be sooner than the
common mowth. Locusts love not to feed on ripe and hard things: their delight
is in young and tender things; and therefore they are very destructive to
Immanths, and new-sowen fields. These hurtful Vermin God sent in abundance
amongst them.

And here again Interpreters differ, 1 Some take this mowing or shearing of
the Grass for the grazing with the Kings sheep, Ter centum niveitond^nt dumeta
juvenci. Virg. Georg. l. 1. Achar gizze hammalech, post tonsionem regis, non
gregis.
whose feeding is called a cropping of the grass. But this has no rooting in
the text; for though the word do signify shearings, yet it is used for mowen
grass, Psalm. 72.6.

2 Others take it, for the mowing not only of Grass, but of Corn also in the
Fields; for Husbandmen (especially in those fruitful regions) used to mow their
luxuriant Corn, that it might thicken and stand the better; and if this latter
blade were eaten by Insects or Locusts, the Harvest was lost, and Famine
ensued. The vulgar Latin mistaking the Original, render it, Serotinus imber,
the latter rain, but the word is, Lekesh, herba serotina, sive cordum) the
latter mowth, and not the latter rain; and here again some fly to Metaphors,
and conceive that this mowing adumbrates the devastation of Israel by the
Assyrian; as ^^elds when they are mowen, and their fleece is gone, are naked
and deformed, so God would raise up the Assyrian that should rob them of their
riches, and fleece them for their sins.

The flourishing Grass notes the flourishing condition of Israel, but they
abusing that condition, the Lord mowed them. 1. More lightly and overtly, by
Pull King of Assyria, 1 Chro. 5.26. 2. More severely, by Benhadad King of Syria,
who afflicted them very sore, and gained much of their Land and riches from
them.

3 There was a latter growth in the days of Jeroboam the second, when Israel
began to flourish, and recover its losses, 2 King. 14.25. but after this they
grew worse and worse, till the Lord swept them out of the Land, and would hear
no more prayers for them.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Formerly God revealed his mind to the Prophets ( as he did here to Amos) by
Types and Visions, Jer. 1.11. and 24.1. Ezekiel. 1. Heb. 1.1. See more of this,
Amos 8.1. Obs. 3.

2 All our afflictions come from God.

See D. Thomas Tailor on Amos 8.11, 12. p. 224. folio.
It is he that forms the Locusts, sends Fire, metes out the very Time, Quantity,
Quality, and Duration of all our sufferings; whatever it be, it is he that
forms it, Ier. 18.11. there is no evil of this kind in the City, but the Lord
does it, Amos 3.6. This must make us patient and silent, since it is the Lord
that does it, Psalm. 39.9.

3 God has Armies of Insects, and little contemptible Creatures wherewith to
punish disobedient people.

He needs not men to destroy us, he has Froggs and Flies, Lice and Locusts,
and these shall do it, Exodus 10.14. Deuteronomy. 28.38, 42.2 Chron. 7.13. Psalm.
78.46. Joel 1.4. much of Gods might is seen in these little Armies, Nec in ulla
magis quam in his tota natura est Pliny Not. Hist. l. 1^. c. 1.
they all fulfill the word of Gods command. Let none then murmr at second
causes, but still look up to the first, lest by fretting at our troubles, we
double them.

4 Naturally we are very stupid and sens^lesse under Gods hand.

Though he smite us, yet we grieve not, Isa. 9.12, 13. Ier. 5.3. and though his
hand be lifted up against us, yet we will not see, Isa. 26.11. The Judgment it
self here was visible, and yet they had not eyes to see it: yea though the
Prophet held it forth to them by a sensible Type, and uses a double Ecce,
(Behold, ^oe) to excite them and quicken attention. No wonder that our Savior
cried, O hard and slow of heart, not to believe what God has spoken by his
Words and Works, Luke 24.25,

5 When People are most prosperous, many times they are nearest a fall.

Israel had success and victories but a little before, there was a shooting up
of the latter growth, they lived in peace and plenty forty one years, they were
grown rich, proud, and secure, and then comes the Locust and devoures them; no
sooner had they gotten a little greenness, but the Assyrian devours it. As
Herbs when they come to flower, begin to wither; or as the Sun when it comes to
the Ze^ith, then it declines; so man in his best estate is altogether vanity,
Psalm. 39.5. not only in his worst estate, when Old age has seized on him, but
in his flourishing and most prosperous condition, man is but a vain thing. Be
jealous then over your selves when you abound with those Creature comforts, be
like Pigeons, when they fare best they are most fearful. It is good to think of
War in times of Peace, and of Famine in times of Plenty, we know not what
changes may come in the world, it is good to fear the worst, as Job did, Job
3.25.

6 Gods Judgments usually are gradual.

As men sin gradually, and grow from one degree of wickedness to another; so
God is gradual in his punishments. First, he begins with lesser rods, and they
being slighted he brings forth greater, and plagues men seven times more
according to their sins. 1. He begins here with Locusts, and destroys the
fruits of the earth. 2. He takes away part of their Land from them. 3. He
takes away the whole Kingdom, and sends away the people into captivity.

VERSE 2.
And it came to pass, that when they had made an end of eating the Grass of
the Land, then I said, O Lord forgive I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob
arise, for he is small?
THe Prophet understanding the Mystery of the Vision, and seeing how things
grew to extremity, and observing that all the fruits of the earth both Corn and
Grass were like to be suddenly consumed by the devouring Locusts, and so a
fearful Famine would come upon the Land; he betakes himself to his Prayers, as
the best remedy against such a malady, 1 King. 8.37. he deprecates the
Judgment, and prevails. So that here is, 1 The Judgment threatened, and that
is the Famine, one of Gods sore Judgments, Ezekiel. 14.21. 2 Here is the means
that was used for the stopping of the execution of it, and that was the prayers
of the Prophet, and other good people. This Prayer is Argumentative, it is
short, but sweet* little in words, but full of matter; little for quantity, but
full of faith, as appears by the speedy answer, and the good effect which it
had. God delights not in babbling, or multiplicity of words, Eccles. 5.2. it is
the faith and fervor of the Person praying, and not the bare words which God
regards.


The Prophet uses two Arguments, to move the Lord to show mercy to them. The
first is drawn from the Covenant of Free Grace, which God made with his people,
it is Jacob that is in distress, by whom shall Jacob arise? q. d. I plead not
for Babylonians, Egyptians, Assyrians, or any barbarous Nation, that know thee
not; but my suit is to thee in the behalf of thine own Church and chosen, it
is for Jacob thine inheritance, which is near and dear to thee, that has made
thy servant thus bold to speak unto thee, Psa. 105.6. and 135.4. Isa. 19. ult.
Ier. 2.14. Remember O Lord thy Covenant made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
spare thy people, pity thine inheritance; there is nothing works more upon God
than the remembrance of the Covenant of Free Grace which he has made with his
people; he delights in that, Deuteronomy. 7.9, 12. and therefore the Saints so often
urge it, Exodus 32.13. Psalm. 74.20.

By Jacob here is primarily meant the ten Tribes, or the Israelites which were
the posterity of Jacob; though Judah be not totally excluded, for Amos often
glanceth at them also, Amos 2.5. and 6.1.

A second Argument is drawn from the shattered, sad condition which this People
were in, they were little, very little and low. Katon, parvulus, the word is
used for small things, Zach. 4.10.
O Lord forgive I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small; He
is small and low in Men, in Spirituals and Temporals, in Church and State.
Money, in Spirituals and Temporals, in Church and State. Strength, in
Spirituals and Temporals, in Church and State.


1 They were little and low in Temporals, both in Number, Riches, and Power,
they were much impaired and wasted, by various calamities of Sword, Famine, and
Pestilence, as appears by chap. 4. and 2 King. 14.26. when Jeroboam the second
came to the Throne, the Lord saw that the affliction of Israel was very bitter,
for there was none shut up or left, nor any helper in Israel.

2 They were low in Spirituals, in Ahabs time the Worship of God was generally
corrupted, his Truths despised, his Ministers persecuted, 1 King. 18.4. and
such a general face of Idolatry had overspread the Land, that Elijah complains
he was left alone, 1 King. 19.10. and in the ninth verse of this Chapter, the
Lord threatens to lay their Sanctuaries wast, and that they should have a
famine not of Bread, but of the Word of God, chap. 8.11, 12.

Thus the Prophet pleads, not Jacobs merit, but Gods mercy and free grace, so
much the original word imports, to be favorable, Salach, pepercit, propitius
fuit, condonavit.
and propitious, to spare and pardon. The word is often used in the Law for
forgiveness, upon oblation and intercession made by the Priest, Numb. 14.19.
Levit. 4.20, 26, etc. Psalm. 25.11. He first beggs for pardon of their sin, for
he knew right well, if the cause were removed the effect would quickly cease.
Neither does he plead Jacobs excellency, but his misery, to move the Lord to
show him mercy.

q. d. Consider O Lord the low and sad estate of thy people, they are low in
Temporals, and low in Spirituals, and few in number, and if thou still go on
thus with thy Judgments, all must perish, and there will be none left to
praise thee; if thou should enter into judgment with thy Servants, there
were no abiding. B^ut as* it is the glory of a man to pass by an offense, so it
will make much for thy glory to pardon and pass by the sins and transgressions
of thy poor afflicted people. It makes not for thine honor, nor does it suit
with thy nature to afflict the afflicted, nor to oppress the oppressed; Hold
then thy hand, spare thy People, and pity thy distressed flock.

Thus this good Prophet did commiserate their condition, and intercedes for the
life of those who sought his death; it is true, he had plainly and powerfully
reproved them for their sins, according to his place and calling, yet that they
might see he did nothing out of hatred, but by office and command from God, not
out of passion, but out of compassion to them; he now prays for them, and
prevails.

By whom shall Jacob arise? Or, who shall raise Jacob? or how should he
subsist, if thou still pursue him with thy Judgments? The Original word Kum
has many significations, which has caused these various lections; it
signifies to arise, to stand, to establish, and abide. Some render the word
Transitively, for to raise, Who shall raise Jacob? i. e. who shall raise and
restore him, and make him happy in the enjoyment both of Temporals and
Spirituals? Thus the sense is the same, take it which way you will.

By whom shall he arise? The Prophet could not see who should effect this, and
therefore he asks the question, By whom shall he arise? he could discern no
visible means how the weakness of Jacob should be strengthened, and the lowness
of Jacob be exalted, and therefore he goes unto God by Prayer. As when the
enemy is high we are apt to question, who shall bring down these Giants, these
sons of Anak, these great Zanzummims of the world, for they are high and
mighty? So when the Church is low, and lies in the dust, our unbelief is apt to
question its arising, By whom shall Jacob arise, for he is low?

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Afflictions are a means to bring us to God.

When all the fruit of the Land was almost devoured, now comes Praying, Spare
Lord. We are all too like Ioab in this, Absalom sent twice for him, but he
would not come, at last he set fire on his Corn fields, and then Joab arose and
came, 2 Samuel 14.30, 31. Hence the Lord takes it for granted, that in our
affliction we will seek him diligently, Hos. 5. ult. and so they did, Hos. 6.1.
and so did the Woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.22. and the Prodigal, Luke 15. and
Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. and David, Psalm. 120.1. and Paul, 2 Cor. 12.9.

2 In Gods Ministers there must be a due temperature of sharpness and
sweetness, of severity and mercy.

They must have a holy anger against sin, yet mourn withal for the hardness of
men's hearts; so did our Savior, Mar. 3.5. so Lot reproved the Sodomites, yet
calls them brethren, Genesis 19.7. and Moses in his zeal was angry at the people
for their Idolatry, yet prays for them, Psalm. 106. So Amos here sharply
inveighs against the sins of this People, yet takes up a Lamentation for them,
Amos 5.1. and here intercedes for them. Our zeal must be mixed with love, though
we may and must sometimes reprove men sharply, Titus 1.13. yet must we not
forbear praying for them, 1 Samuel 12.23. so did the Vinitor intercede for the
barren Fig Tree, Luke 13.6, 7, 8, 9. every Minister must be Adamas and magnes,
he must harden his face like a flint, and have brows of brass to oppose the
wicked; yet must he withal be a Lodestone, by his amiable, tender, and
compassionate carriage to win them to Christ, lying in the breach for them, and
running hazards to save them from destruction, Ezekiel. 22.30.

3 As it is the duty of all the godly, so especially of Gods Ministers to
sympathize with Gods People in their misery, and to intercede for them at the
Throne of grace.

We must not only preach, but also pray for our people; as it is their duty to
pray for us, 2 These. 3.2, 3. so it is our duty to pray for them, especially in
their troubles; it is both commanded, Joel 1.13. and 2.17. Ephesians. 6.18. and
commended to us by the examples of the Saints. Abraham intercedes for Sodom,
Moses for Israel, Exodus 32.31, 32. Jeremy for the Jews, Jer. 18.20. yea so
zealous was he in praying for them, that the Lord is feign to bid him hold,
Ier. 7.16. How earnestly did Paul pray for the Jews, though they were his
deadly enemies, Romans 10.1. Phil. 1.4, 9. Colos. 1.3, 9. 1 These. 1.2. As Natural
fathers, so Spiritual ones (in a spiritual sense) should lay up a stock of
prayers for their People. Thus the living are commanded to pray for the living,
Iam. 5.16. but we have neither Precept nor President of any that ever prayed
for the dead, now whatsoever is not of faith is sin; but such Prayers have no
foundation in the Word of God, therefore they cannot be of faith. Willets
Synops. Papism. controv. 9. Q. 2. p. 415. and Sharpius loc. com. de Purgatorio,
p. 272, etc.
Such prayers do neither avayl the Saints in Heaven, nor the Damned in Hell,
because both have an irrecoverable doom past upon them, as is fully proved by
a Learned Pen.

4 Our Prayers must be Argumentative Prayers.

We must stir up our selves that we may lay hold on God; using Arguments to
move the Lord to pity us. So does Amos here, and so did Abraham, Genesis 18.2, 3,
etc. and Jacob, Genesis 32.11, 12. and Moses, Exodus 32.11, 12, 13. and Ezra 9.9.
and Neh. 9. and Dan. 9. and David, See my Com. on Psalm. 82.8. p. 178.
Psalm. 79.6, 7. and 88.9. to 13. and 90.13, 14. and 130.3, 4. especially we
should press the Covenant; so does Amos here, and David, Psalm. 74.20.

5 In our Prayers we must plead mercy, and not merit.

The Prophet here beggs for pardon and forgiveness because they were low, so
does David, Psalm. 79, 8, 9. our Merit is Gods Mercy; it must needs be so, since
all our righteousness is as filthy rags. Hence Nehemiah when he had done great
things for God, yet being conscious to himself of many infirmities, he
beseeches the Lord to spare him, according to the greatness of his mercy, Neh.
13.22. So Daniel, a man highly beloved, yet beggs for mercy and for pardon,
Dan. 9.18, 23.

6 We must be earnest with God for the pardon of our sin.

So is the Prophet here, O Lord I beseech thee, pardon the sin of this People.
He knew right well that sin was the cause of all their sorrow, and when this
peccant humor was once removed, the effect would cease; and therefore the
Church prays, Take away our iniquity and receive us graciously, Hos. 14.2. the
godly can bear any suffering, but not sin. When the Plague lay upon the people,
David cries, Take away the sin of thy Servant, and then the Plague will cease.

7 Gods own people by profession may be brought to a very low condition, both
in Temporals and Spirituals.

So it was with Israel here, which made the Prophet question, By whom shall he
arise? He was brought so low that thee could neither raise himself, neither was
there any other that could help him up; their strength was so exhausted that
there was no visible effectual means of their restoration. We may say of all
Creature Comforts as Job said of Wisdom, Job 28.12, 13, 14. Where shall
Wisdom be found? the Earth says, it is not in me; and the Depth says, it is
not in me, etc. so, where shall aid in troublous times be found? The Earth
says, It is not in me; Friends say, It is not in us; and Riches say, It is not
in us, etc. It is only to be found in the Almighty; we are never so little or
low but he can help us, there is nothing too high or too hard for him; though
Salvation be not in our Hills, yet it is in Gods hand, Ier. 3.23. he is the
Lord of Hosts, and has all power at command; and therefore the Prophet betakes
himself to his Prayers as his best refuge, See more in M. Good his Fast Ser. on
Amos 7.5. preached 1646. See more in my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.9. p. 182, 456, 459.
O Lord I beseech thee spare thy people. This is one reason why the Lord lets
things run to extremity, that he may drive us to our Prayers, as we may see in
Hesters case. Now if ever we would raise a Land out of the du^t,

1 We must raise our Prayers, be servent in them, it is none but wrestling
Jacobs that shall become prevailing Isreal's, Hos. 12.4.

2 Raise your Faith, this lays hold on God, and ingageth him in the Quarrel,
whilst Creatures oppose Creatures they may make some resistance, but when
Omnipotency comes against impotency, there is no abiding. See what great things
faith has done, Heb. 11.

3 Raise your Holiness, grow therein, be holy in all manner of conversation;
God never yet destroyed an holy, obedient people, such holy ones are the glory
of a Land, and upon all this glory there shall be a defense, Isa. 4.5.

VERSE 3.
The Lord repented for this, It shall not be says the Lord.
Hic opponit se murum Propheta, ut avertat iram Dei, ne perdat, nec fuit
frustra oration ejus. Luther.
HEre we have the success and good effect of the Prophets Prayer, he prays in
faith and is heard, the Lord holds his hand, and says it shall not be; so
willing is the Lord to be entreated for to spare his Church and People! The
Lord repented for this. He changed not his eternal Decree, but suspended the
full and final execution of it, according to his eternal Decree. When God is
said to repent, it is an usual Anthropopathy, and speaking after the manner of
men according to our capacity, Genesis 6.6. Exodus 32.14. Ier. 26.19. for God is
not as man that he should repent, 1 Samuel 15.29. and therefore it is added
exegetically, This shall not be, it was no change in God, but only a stopping
of the execution of the Judgment threatened, Fuit mutatio rei, non Dei; facti,
non consilii.
according to Gods Decree, such threatenings being conditional (as I have showed
before) what in justice he might have done, and have done them no wrong, yet
such is his Mercy and Clemency that he will not do it, but waits yet longer
for their return; It shall not be (says the Lord) whose word is good security,
the Locusts shall be recalled, they shall not devour Israel; I will at thy
intercession spare them yet a little longer.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 The Prayers of the faithful are very powerful and succesful.
The Prophet can but speak here, and he presently speeds. What is it that
Prayer has not done? Continet hic locus insignem consolationem, and illustre
exemplum, quam sit efficax, and quam multum possit oration fidelis. Luther.
It is a kind of Omnipotent engine that lays all flat before it; if any thing
can help at a dead lift, it is this or nothing. All things are possible to
faith, no Mountains of dangers, fears, or difficulties, but it removes them,
Mark 9.23. this binds as it were the hands of God, and commands the Commander
of all things, Isa. 45.11. The effectual fervent prayer of one righteous man
(how much more of many) avayls much, Iam. 5.16. to these the Promise runs,
Psalm. 34.17. Joel 2.17, 18. God never says to the seed of Jacob, Seek my face
in vain, Isa. 45.19. The Prayer of an holy Moses, Samuel, Daniel, etc. what
has it not done? If there had been but ten righteous persons in those five
Sodomitical Cities, that is but two in a City, they had been spared. We should
therefore love the godly, and value them according to their true worth, who can
do such great things by their prayers. It is the happiness of a Nation to have
such men in it; praying Saints are the Pillars and Supporters of the world, and
the blessings of a Land, Isa. 19.24. they are such a blessing as preserves all
other blessings amongst a people; they are the strength of a Land, Zach. 12.5.
the walls and bulwarks of a place; to save such praying holy ones, God will
destroy both Kings and Kingdoms, Isa. 43.3, 4. the Lord is always nigh to help
and to deliver them, Deuteronomy. 4.7. they advance Gods Name, and set the Crown upon
Gods head, giving the glory of all they have, or can do to him alone, and
therefore the Lord delights to make them glorious. So that the prayers of good
men are very precious things, Genesis 20.7. Job 42.8.

Obj. The Prayers of an holy Amos might prevail much, but we are no Prophets?

A. Amos was a man subject to infirmities as we are, and he was not heard as a
Prophet, but for the Promises which all believers have interest in, as well as
Prophets.

VERSE 4, 5, 6.
Thus has the Lord showed me, and behold the Lord God called to contend by
fire, and it devoured the great deep, and did eat up a part.

Then said I, O Lord God, cease I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise, for
he is small?

The Lord repented for this, This also shall not be, says the Lord God.


WE are now come to the second Vision, and that is of Fire, denoting a greater
Judgment than the former; Locusts devour but the blade and blossoms, but fire
consumes both roots and fruits. The Lord had wasted many Rods in vain upon
them, he now casts them into the fire, to see whether that will melt or mend
them. These three Visions are a kind of Gradation; that of the Locusts was sad,
that of Fire was worse, and that of a Plumb-line was worst of all. This Vision
though it differ in matter, yet for method it is alike.

1 Here is the Preamble, or Preface to the Vision, Thus has the Lord God
showed me.

2 Here is the Vision it self, with an Ecce in the front of it, Behold, the
Lord God called to contend by fire; that is, by War, which the King of Assyria
a fierce enemy should bring upon them.

3 Here is the fruit and effect of this fire.

1 It devoured the great deep, or it devoured a great abyss, and depth of
waters. T^hom rabba, multiplicity of waters, o^ the deep Sea, Exo. 25.5. Is^.
51.10. i. e. Populi, domo^um and opum imm^nsitatem. A Lapide.
This fire devoured not only wood and waters above the earth, but also the
waters enclosed in the hollow parts of the earth, from whence fountains and
rivers do issue, Genesis 7.11.

By this devouring fire most understand the Kingdom of Syria, which was laid
waft and totally devoured by Tiglath-pileser King of Assyria, 2 King. 16.9. and
by the abyss of waters is here meant multitudes of people, as Ezekiel. 31.4.
Revel. 17.1. the Whore sits upon many waters; that is, she has rule and power
over many people.

Chelech, Pars, Portio, Possessio, Josh. 15.13. Psalm. 16.5.
2 After this, it did eat up a part, and had devoured all but that the Prophet
interceded for them; or it consumed a piece of the Land, or a part of the
portion and possession of Gods people. By this is understood some part of
Israel, viz. two Tribes and a half, which Tiglath-Pileser carried away Captive
into Assyria, and thereupon is said to eat up a part of Israel, 2 King. 15.29.
2 Chronicles. 5.26. Isa. 9.1, 2.

3 Here is the Prophets sympathy, and sense of this Judgment, verse. 5. it put
him upon Prayer, and made him deprecate the averting of it. Then said I, O Lord
God cease I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small? It is the
very same Prayer, and the same Arguments that he used before, verse. 2. only in
the place of forgiving, he puts ceasing, Cease Lord this thine anger against
thy people, and the sheep of thy pasture; hold thy hand, for if thou thus go
on to affict thy people, who shall remain of Jacob? surely none at all. This
^orbearing being a visible effect of pardon, he desires that God would manifest
it; and so it is the same Prayer in effect with the former.

1 Obs. Hence note, that it is lawful (as occasion requires) to pray the same
Prayer, and use the same Arguments as formerly we have done.

Amos does so here, and speeds. So did Christ, Mat. 27.44. he prayed the third
time, saying the same words, this he did out of fervency of spirit.

2 Obs. We must persevere in Prayer for the people of God.

As their misery does renew, so must our Prayers for them be renewed. Thus did
Amos, God threatens a second Judgment, and Amos by a second Prayer averts that
also. The work is good, See more in my Com on Psalm. 82.8 p. 182.
and no difficulties should discourage us. The Church is near and dear to God,
it is his Beulah and Hephzibah, Isa. 62.4. his beloved Spouse, and we never
please him better than when we are importunate with him for Sions good. Hence
he so often commands us to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and promises that
they shall prosper who love it; yea he bids us command him when it is for the
good o^ his Sons and Daughters, Isa. 45.11.

4 Here is the good success and happy issue of his Prayer, he obtains his
request, since it is for Israel that he prays, it is but ask and have. By his
Prayers and Tears he extinguisheth this fire when nothing else could do it,
and gets the Judgment suspended for a time, to see if their hard hearts would
at length relent and return. This may encourage us much in this duty of Prayer.

The Lord repented also for this: this also shall not be, verse. 6. I will hold
my hand (says God) the fire which I threatened shall not yet come, the Land
shall not be de^troyed at this time. So gracious is the Lord, and ready to
forgive, and so quickly he repents him of the evil which he intends against his
people, especially when his Ministers intercede for them, Joel 2.13. he
afflicts not willingly, Judgment is his strange work, and Fury is not in him,
Isa. 27.4.

But though the Lord at the intercession of his Servants may suspend his fiery
Judgments here (though oft-times he pleads with them here by Fire, Sword,
Famine, etc. Isa. 66.15, 16. Ezekiel. 38.22.) yet without repentance the fire of
the last Day will certainly devour them; God will then contend with fire, and
execute the fierceness of his fury upon the workers of iniquity.

Brevitas orationis Pathos habet. Aretius.
3 Obs. Hence note, That short Prayers full of faith and fervency, may prevail
very much with God for a People.

It is not the loudness, or the length, or the neat expressions which take with
God, 1 King. 18.26. Eccles. 5.2. Mat. 6.7. and 7.21. But it is the faith and
sincerity of him that prays; poor broken Prayers coming from a broken heart
are of great worth in the sight of God, Matthew, 15.25. Eli^ahs Prayer was short
and pithy, and prevailed, 1 King. 18.36. so Psalm. 6.3. My soul is sore vexed,
but thou O Lord how long, viz. will thou delay to help me? It is an abrupt
broken speech, but God can pick sense out of our nonsense.

Prayer is a work of the Heart, and not of the Tongue, words are but the
outside of Prayer, it is the Hearts desire which God eyes and respects, and if
thy affections fly aloft, though thy words do but creep, yet thy faith shall
get what thy words cannot; yea if thou can not speak, yet if thou can weep,
God will hear the voice of thy weeping; Tears have a voice, Psalm. 6.8. as well
as words.

The Lord called to contend with fire. Kara, vocavit, promulgavit, clamavit,
Prove. 12.13. Zach. 7.1
Or, the Lord proclaimed that he would contend with fire, or plead, that is,
punish them with fire. Thus Hos. 4.1. The Lord has a Controversy, that is, a
Plea or Process, not only verbal, but real; that is, he had Judgments ready to
execute on them. Deus juridice citavit, and in jus ad suum tribunal vocavit
terram Israel, provocans ad ignem, and litem illi intendens, ut ageret eam ream
ignis. Mariana. Larib baesh, ad litigandum in i. e. cum igne. Rib significat in
judicio litigare, contendere, and causam agere, Isa. 1.18. and 3.13.
This contending notes Isreal's obstinacy; we use not to contend, or go to
suit, till we have tried all other means to get our right, yet cannot get it,
then we are constrained to contend. As War, so Law, is, or ought to be our last
refuge. God had used all means to win this People, but in vain, and therefore
he is now constrained to contend with Fire and Sword against them.

Q. But what is meant by Fire here?

A. Interpreters vary. 1. Some take it Literally, for some extraordinary fire
which should fall from Heaven and consume them, as it did Sodom and Gomorrah,
and Aarons Sons, Levit. 10.2. and Jobs Sheep and Servants, Job 1.16. So (say
some) God called his Angels to execute judgment on these wicked men, and to
contend or plead for him by fire in their destruction.

2 By fire others understand a great Drought, when the violent heat of the
Sunbeams should pierce the deepest parts of the earth, below the roots of the
Corn and Trees, and so should make a perfect famine. This extreme heat and
scorching of the Sun is called a Fire, Joel 1.19, 20. A fire has consumed the
Pastures of the Wilderness, and a flame has burnt up all the trees of the
field; that is, the great heat of the Sun like to a fire has consumed all.

3 By Fire may be meant the Wrath of God, which was now inflamed against this
stubborn People, and this is the kindler of all Penal fires, and is often in
Scripture called Fire, Job 31.12. Isa. 26.11. Amos 5.6. Heb. 12. ult.

4 And most genuinely: Fire is here taken Metaphorically for some direful and
dreadful Judgment (for Fire of all the Elements is most terrible) which should
consume their men, money, health, strength, Job 15.31, 34* More especially,
here it adumbrates War, which should be managed by some fiery, furious enemy,
who like fire should wast and consume all before it. So Ezekiel. 20.48. Behold, I
will kindle a fire in thee, which shall devour every green tree, and every dry
tree; that is, all sorts of people, both old and young, rich and poor; the fire
of War shall consume them all. So Numb. 21.28. Isa. 66.15, 16. Ier. 48.45 Lam.
2.3. Amos 1.4, 7, 10. and 2.5.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 When lesser Judgments will not mend a People, God usually comes with
greater.

The devouring Locusts could not stir this people, God will now see what the
Fire will do. Great impenitency calls for great punishment, See my Com. on
Hos. 13.16. Obs. 4. p. 68.
Levit. 26.18. But of this elsewhere.

2 Sin is the great makebate between God and his people.

It breeds contention and dissension between them, God has a Suit and an
Action against such, Hos. 4.1. God had a Controversy against Israel, and cites
them to answer the Plea which he had against them for their ignorance, cruelty,
swearing, lying, etc. God loves his Creature, as it is his Creature, but when
it becomes a sinful, rebellious Creature, he abhors it, and delights in its
destruction, Prove. 1.26. This bred the Quarrel between God and the Old world,
Genesis 6.2, 3. and between him and Jerusalem, Jer. 30.15. Hos. 12.2. Micha 6.2,
3. Sin bred the first Controversy and Quarrel between God and the Angels, and
between God and Adam. This turns him who is sweetness it self, and mercy it
self, into wrath and fury, Isa. 64.5. it is sin that wars against God, and
therefore no wonder if he war against it; it is directly opposite to his holy
Nature, Psalm. 5.5. and dishonours him in all his Attributes. Sinners deny his
Omniscience, as if he did not see what they do; See Dr. Goodwins aggravat. of
Sin, on Romans 7.13. p. 9, etc.
and his Omnipotence, as if he were unable to punish; and his Justice, as if he
would never call them to an account, etc. no wonder then if God have a quarrel
with such.

Sin wars against the Laws of God, against the Spirit of God, Isa. 7.13.
Ephesians. 4.30. against the Saints of God, against the ways and Worship of God,
yea against all that is Gods. No wonder then if he contend by Fire, against
that which so fiercely contends, and fights against him and his.

3 War is a dreadful Judgment.

It is one of Gods last and sore Rods, Ezekiel. 14.21. hence it is compared here
to fire, See more on Amos 4.10.
which is one of the most terrible elements that are. If the Lord should
contend with Water, and send a flood upon the world, that were sad, but Fire,
Fire is far more terrible to the nature of man. As Peace is one of the
choycest Mercies, so War is the saddest Judgment. Peace sweetens our
blessings, and makes them blessings indeed. To have Houses, Goods, Lands, and
be in continual danger of losing by enemies, imbitters all to us. Hence when
the Lord would promise a choice Mercy, he tells his People that he will break
the Bow and the Sword, and make them to lie down in safety, Hos. 2.18. Levit.
26.5, 6. Job 11.19. Isa. 2.4. and 33.20. Hence the Psalmist calls upon Gods
People to praise him for this mercy of mercies, in making our bars strong,
and settling peace in our borders, Psalm. 147.12, 13, 14. It is in times of
Peace, that Fields are tilled, the Gospel spreads, Learning increases, and the
Church is edified, Ezekiel. 37.26. Acts 9.31.

[See more for Peace, Sibel. 1 Tom. p. 576, etc. D. Tuckney, Good day well
improved, Mr. Harvey his Olive Branch, D. Stoughtons Ser. on Psalm. 144.15. D.
Tho. Tailors Ser. fol. on Heb. 12.14. p. 418. and D. Gauden on the same text.
Church his Treasury, p. 309. Barlow on 2 Timothy 2.22. p. 160.]

VERSE 7, 8.
Thus he showed me, and behold, the Lord stood upon a wall made by a
Plumb-line, with a Plumb-line in his hand.

And the Lord said unto me, Amos what see thou? and I said a Plumb-line. Then
said the Lord, behold I will set up a Plumb-line in the midst of my People
Israel, I will not again pass by them any more.


WE are now come to the Third Vision, wherein the Lord sets forth the utter
destruction of Israel, God had born long with their provocations, and waited
long for their return, but since they were incorrigible and incurable, he
resolves now to make a final end with them, and to pass by and pardon them no
more, but to destroy them by the Sword of Salmaneser King of Assyria; which is
here typified by a Plumb-line. Where we have, 1. The Vision it self, verse. 7.
2. The explication of it, verse. 8, 9.

Thus he showed me. This is the usual Preface as before, verse. 1, 4.

And behold, Gnal ehomat anach, super murum perpendiculi.
the Lord stood upon a wall made by a Plumb-line, or on the wall of a
Plumb-line (it is an usual Hebraism) that is, the Lord stood on a perpendicular
wall, such a one as was curiously made, and exactly squared by the Plummer.

The word Anach which signifies a Plumb-line, is variously rendered.

1 Some call it a Masons Truel (so the vulgar Latin) with which they build and
parget walls, Trulla camentar^^.
for strength and elegancy; so God had been the strength and glory of Israel.

Stabat super murum adamantinum.
2 The Septuagint, the Syriack, and the Arabic render it thus, I saw the Lord
standing on an Adamantine wall, with an Adamant Stone in his hand; implying
that God had been the firm defender of his people, and a wall of Adamant to
them which no Hammer could break. Both these are truths, but they have no
foundation in the text.

3 The word Anach (which is used only in this text) genuinely signifies a
Plumb-line, which Masons and Carpenters use for the keeping of their work
straight and even. Thus Zerubbabel when he was to build the Temple, is said to
have a Plummer, or Tin-stone in his hand, that is a Measuring-line, to which a
weight of Tin, Stone, or Lead was tied, Zach. 4.10. hence it is called Lead,
Metonymically, because a Plummet of Lead is usually tied to a Cord, or lines
end to keep it straight. We read of a double use of the Plummet in Scripture: 1
For Building, and Rearing. 2 For Ruining, and Demolishing.


1 The Plummet is used in building, to make the Work proportionable to the
Model; thus Metaphorically God himself is said to work by Rule and Line, Job
38.5. Isa. 44.13. Ier. 31.39. Ezekiel. 47.3. Zach. 10.16, 21. by this the Mason
and the Carpenter try the rectitude of the Structure, and what upon trial he
finds to be right and regular, that he preserves; and what is irregular and
exorbitant, inclining either too much to the right hand, or to the left, that
he pulls down.

2 The Plummet is used in levelling and demolishing. When the Mason lays the
Line to the Work, and finds upon trial any place to swell and belch out, that
he demolisheth and pulls down; thus when the Lord threatened to ruin Edoms
Country, he tells us, That he will stretch upon it the line of confusion; and
the stone of emptiness, Isa. 34.11. that is, the Lord will measure it out for
utter destruction, and perpetual ruin, so that it shall never be built, or be
inhabited more. The like expression we find, Isa. 28.17. Lam. 2.8. and
especially in the 2 King. 27.13. where the Lord threatening to destroy
Jerusalem, tells them, That he will stretch over Jerusalem the Line of Samaria,
and the Plummet of the house of Ahab; that is, I will deal with Jerusalem as I
have dealt with Samaria, and with the house of Manasseh as with the house of
Ahab; as I destroyed those for their sins, so will I destroy these. Thus the
Lord stood upon the Wall with a Plumb-line in his hand, as ready to execute his
just and righteous judgments upon Israel. This is an Emblem of Gods Mercy and
Justice, who is the Master Builder of his Church.

1 It denotes his Mercy, in that he made this Church right and firm like a
perpendicular wall, made exactly by Line and Rule, he had curiously built it,
and as carefully defended it.

2 It is an Emblem of his Justice, Ni^z^zab, stans, ad indicandum firm am
stantis resolutionem.
he stands upon the wall of his Church, continually trying and examining
whether it continue right or not, bearing with its defects, until like a wall
quite bending and belching out, it can no more be mended, or set upright as it
was at the first, for then he resolves to throw down all, Isa. 30.13.

This wall (by some) is made a Type of all the people of Israel, whom the Lord
of old had built for a peculiar people to himself. These resembled a wall. For,
1 Walls cannot raise themselves, but are built by some skilful Architect; so
this people of Israel did not raise themselves, but God of his own free love
and grace chose them for his own peculiar, and exalted them above all the
Nations of the world. 2 Walls have foundations; and so had this people many
gracious Promises to build upon, which the Lord made to Abraham and his Seed,
which they contemning came to ruin. 3 An Architect builds the walls by Line
and Rule; so God did all for this People with the greatest judgment and
exactness imaginable. They had all of the best, the best Church, the best
Sat, the best Laws, the best Rulers, and the most successful Judges and
Kings. The Lord himself was for walls and bulwarks to them, he was Salvation
round about them, and their glory in the midst of them; so great was his care
and tenderness over them, Isa. 26.1. and 60.18. Zach. 2.5. But since neither
Mercies nor Judgments could mend them, the Lord resolves to forbear them no
longer, but as he had built them up in mercy, so now he would ruin them in
justice, and punish them exactly according to their demerits.


OBSERVATIONS.
1 Though the Lord bear long with the Sins of a People, yet he will not always
bear.

Though the Prayers of his People may keep off Judgments for a time, yet the
Sins of a People may be so great, that the Lord will hear no more prayers for
them, Ier. 15.1. Ezekiel. 14.16, 18, 20. and therefore the Prophet here seeing
this People were incurable, and Gods determination fully set to destroy them
for their Idolatry and Apostasy, he forbears any further interceding for them,
quietly acquiescing in the righteous Judgments of God upon them. There is a
time when the Lord will show a People no more favor, Ier. 16.13. an evil day,
an only and extreme evil day, in which the Lord forbids Prayer, Ier. 7.11, 14.
and restraines a spirit of prayer, and relenting from his people, Ezekiel. 24.23.
Dan: 9.13.

2 Gods Judgments upon wicked men are just and righteous.

They are all exactly framed as it were by line and measure, Dan. 5.27. Justice
is essential to God, he may as soon cease to be God, as cease to be just; hence
he is called, the righteous Judge, Genesis 18.25. and the just Lord, who will do
no iniquity, Zeph. 3.5. he is just in and of himself, and just in his Laws,
just in his Decrees, just in the execution of those Decrees, just in the
Government of the World, just in his Rewards, and just in his Judgments; he is
not only righteous in some, but in all his ways, Psalm. 145.17.

Do not then fret or murmr at his Dispensations toward thee or thine, his
Judgments may be secret, but they are always just; whatever therefore God
does to thee or thine, yet say with David, Righteous is the Lord, and just are
his Judgments, Psa. 119.117. and with Hezekiah, when he was told that he must
lose all, Good is the Word of the Lord which thou have spoken, Isa. 39.8.

We should then imitate God, as he is just and righteous in all his ways, so
should we be also in our degree; doing all exactly, according to the square and
rule of Gods Word. As we must be merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful;
so we must be just, as he is just; though we cannot be so by way of Equality,
yet by way of Analogy and Similitude we must be so. Let us be just in our
rewards, just in our punishments, just in our weights, words, and works, etc.
that so God may delight in us; for the righteous Lord loves righteousness,
Psalm 11.7.

VERSE 8.
And the Lord said unto me, Amos what see them? and I said, a Plumb-line.
Then said the Lord, behold I will set a Plumb-line in the midst of my people
Israel, I will not again pass by them any more.
THe Lord comes now to threaten not a punishment, (as formerly) but a total
destruction of this impenitent People; and therefore this Vision is not barely
propounded, but by a Dialogue is so clearly expounded, that he who runs may
read it. The better to quicken both Prophet and People to attention, the Lord
begins with a question, Amos what see thou? The Prophet could more easily
discern the meaning of the two former Visions, viz. that of the Locusts, and
of the Fire; but God standing upon a wall with a Plumb-line in his hand, was
harder to understand, and therefore the Lord goes on to explain it to the
Prophet.

I will set a Plumb-line in the midst of my people Israel; that is, I will now
actually execute my Justice on them, which I have hitherto suspended in passing
by their misdeeds; as I have formerly built them up by Line and Level, so will
I now make an utter destruction of them, and will lay them in the dust. I have
examined their works and ways by the Rule and square of my Word, and I find
them so exceeding irregular, that I can no longer forbear them, neither will I
pass by them, or pardon them any more. This latter clause is exegetical, and
expounds the former; I have spared them twice already, but now I will make a
final end with them; I will spend no more admonitions or corrections in vain
upon them, but I will deal with them as men use to do with ruinous houses,
whose breaches grow wider and worse every day than other, they pull them down,
and lay them in the duft.

Lo o^iph gnod gnabor lo, non adjiciam ultra Praeterire eum.
I will not again pass by them any more. That is, I will show them no more
mercy, I will pardon them no longer; I have long winkt at their Sins, and let
them go unpunisht; but I will do so no longer, I will surely and severely
punish them for all together, as it follows in the next verse. The like
expression we have, Amos 8.2. and Prove. 19.11. It is the glory of a man to
pass by an offense; See Amos 8.2.
that is, to spare a man that has offended, and not to punish him, or take
revenge on him. So Micah 7.18.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Our rising and our ruining comes from God.

He builds us by Rule, and if we swerve from the Rule, he will set up the
Plumb-line and ruin us by Rule. All our times both of rising and falling are
in Gods hands, Psalm. 31.15. our adversity and prosperity is not casual, but
providential. As the Lord gives, so it is he that takes too, Job 1.21. it is he
that sent the Locusts and the Fire, and now the Plumb-line of utter destruction
upon this people.

2 Gods Judgments usually are gradual.

As men's sins are gradual, and rise to their maximum quod sic, to the highest
ascent by degrees, so do Gods Judgments. The judgment of the Locusts was
sad, that of Fire was worse, but now comes the fatal Plumb-line and ends them.
God does not presently punish men so soon as ever they sin, but his patience
waits, and allots men space to repent, Romans 2.4, 5. and Revel. 2.21. which they
abusing, God at last reckons with Sinners for all together; as we see in the
Amorites, the old World, Sodom, and Jerusalem.

VERSE 9.
And the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, and the Sanctuaries of Israel
shall be laid wast; and I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the
sword.
WE have in this Verse a fuller explication of the Vision of the Plumb-line,
and what it typified, viz. a total subversion both of the Ecclesiastical and
Civil state of Israel.

They were wont to boast much of their forefathers: when our Savior talked
with the Woman of Samaria, she presently tells him, Our Fathers worshipped in
this Mountain, John 4.20. so here, our forefathers worshipped in Bethel,
Beersheba, Gilgal, etc. and therefore they conclude that they must needs please
God by following their examples. Thus they flattered themselves as the Papists
do at this day, preferring the fallible Fathers before the infallible Word of
God. But the Prophet plainly tells them, that the high places of Isaac (where
they committed their Idolatry) should be desolate. By Isaac here is meant the
house of Israel, who were descended from Isaac and Jacob. So Verse. 16. the
Septuagint, the Syriac, and the Arabic Versions, make the word Isaac an
Appellation, and not a proper name, Arae risus, vel fana ridicula.
they render it, Laughter, or Joy; the High places of Laughter, or the
ridiculous High places, and the Altars of Derision (for what is more ridiculous
than for men to worship a Stock, or a Stone which themselves have carved?)
shall be desolate. But this is a ridiculous version of this text, for though
there be a change of one Letter in the name of Isaac, Bamot Isaac, i. e.
excelsa Isaaci, it is not excelsa Idoli, as the Vulg.
Scin instead of Tsade, yet the Learned in that Language observe, that these
Letters are used promiscuously, the one for the other, and it is the same Isaac
here spoken of, which is mentioned, Genesis 17.19. and Psalm. 105.9.

By high places here, are meant Temples and Altars, erected on Mountains and
Hills for the honor of their Idols, Amos 4. ult. What these High places were,
see Mr. Greenhil on Ezekiel. 6.3. p. 4, 5.
Though God had confined them by a strict command to worship at Jerusalem, yet
they must have somewhat of their own inventing, they must be sacrificing on
their own high Hills, high Altars, and high Places, though they dye for it.

These are called the High Places of Isaac, say some; 1 Because as Abraham was
ready to offer Isaac in Sacrifice at Gods command; so these offered their Sons
and Daughters (in imitation of Abraham) to Moloch, and Baal, but there is no
ground for this in the text. 2 They garnisht their Idolatry with the names and
examples of Isaac and Jacob, because in their times they had set up secret
Altars, and offered Sacrifices there to the God of Heaven. Thus did Isaac at
Beersheba, Genesis 26.25. and Jacob at Bethel, Genesis 35.7.


And the Sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid wast. That is, the Idolatrous
Temples, Altars, and Groves in Dan and Bethel, and other Cities, consecrated to
the golden Calves shall be destroyed by the Ass^rian.

Mi^deshe, sanctuaria.
These places are called Sanctuaries, and Holy places (not that they are so
indeed) but the Scripture speaks according to men's opinions of them, as here it
calls these Idols Temples, Sanctuaries, when indeed they were dens of Devils,
and great provocations of Gods wrath against this people.

And I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the Sword. This Jeroboam
was not Jeroboam the Son of Nebat which made Israel to sin, the first Author of
Schism and Idolatry in the Kingdom of Israel; but this is Jeroboam the second,
one of the same name, and of the same religion, a chip of the old block, he was
Son of Ioash, Nephew to Iehu, and Father to Zachariah; in his days the Kingdom
flourisht, they recovered many Cities, and enlarged their borders, but they
abusing these Mercies, God threatens to destroy both the Kingdom and the Kings
posterity; as he did when Zachariah the Son of Jeroboam was slain openly in
the sight of the people, by Shallum (after he had reigned six months) who
translated the Kingdom to his own family, 2 King. 15.10. and this put an end
to Iehu's Stock, according to the threatening, 2 King. 10.30. Two vain props
this People rested on. 1. In their external, Idolatrous services, 2. In the
power of their Kings. Both these the Lord tells them should fail them; for
their Sanctuaries should be laid wast, and the house of the King cut off, and
this made way for their utter ruin by the Assyrian.

Q. But why does the Lord threaten the house of Jeroboam rather than any other
family?

A. Because the Leaders of People (especially if they be wicked) lead them into
Sin with themselves, and so have the Peoples sins to answer for, as well as
their own. The twenty Kings of Israel were all of them Idolaters, and drew the
people into Idolatry with them, and therefore the Lord threatens to begin with
the house of Jeroboam first; both Princes, Priests, and People had sinned
together, and now the Lord tells them they shall perish together. So Samuel
told the people, that if they persevered in their wickedness, both they and
their King should perish, 1 Samuel 12. ult.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Corruptions in the Church usually ruin the State.

For Church and Commonwealth are like the Vine and the Elm, or like those
twins which are said to weep and laugh together; so long as purity in religion
is preserved, the State prospers, and has peace, 2 Chronicles. 17.5, 10. Isa.
60.12, 13, 18. God will preserve that people which preserves his truth, Revel.
2.10. but he will depart from those that depart from the purity of his ways;
and when God departs, peace, plenty, comfort, glory, etc. all goes with him,
and all misery comes in like a flood, Deuteronomy. 31.17. Ier. 6.8. Hos. 9.12.

2 God will destroy Idolatrous places.

The Sanctuaries and high places of Idolators shall be ruined; if Magistrates
will not destroy them, See more in Mr. Greenhil, Ezekiel. 6.3. Obs. 2.
God will, Levit. 26.30. Deuteronomy. 12.23. Ezekiel. 6.3. Amos 4. ult. and 5.5

3 Sin, (especially the Sin of Idolatry) ruins great men as well as others.

God is no respecter of persons, but if great men be great offenders, they must
look for great punishment. God is terrible not only to inferior wicked men,
but even to the Kings of the earth; if Jeroboam will worship golden Calves,
those Calves shall be his ruin. Idolatry is a God-provoking, and a
Land-destroying sin, Psalm. 106.39 Amos 2.4, 5.

4 Gods Ministers must denounce Judgments against great men when they sin,
Magnum hoc ^st zeli Prophetici argumentum, quod Jeroboam regem, potentia r^gni
and victoriis illustrem, Amos diserte nominat. Gualter.
as well as against inferior persons.

Yea, rather against them, because by their example they do more hurt. This
makes Amos as it were threaten the house of the King. Thus Elijah reproves
Ahab, Nathan, David, and John Baptist Herod. [See more in my Com. on Psalm.
82.2. Obs. 1. p. 96, 97.

5 God transferres Kingdoms from one family to another, as pleases him.

He pulls down one and sets up another in the Throne, and none may say to him,
what do thou? After the division of the Kingdom of Israel from Judah, they
had twenty Kings of ten several Stocks, whereof one destroyed another.
Ieroboams Stock was cut off by Baasha, and Baashaes by Zimri, and Tibni by
Omri, and Omries by Iehu, and Iehu's by Shallum, and Shallum's by Menahems, and
Menahems by Pekah, and Pekah's by Hoshea. All these Kings were Idolaters, and
the most of them cruel Tyrants, and Persecutors; and therefore God cut them
off, that they did not live out half their days.

VER. 10, 11.
Then Amaziah the Priest of Bethel, sent to Jeroboam King of Israel, saying,
Amos ^ath conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel, the Land
is not able to bear all his words.

For thus Amos says, Jeroboam shall dye by the Sword, and Israel shall surely
be led away Captive out of their own Land.


WE have seen Amos his fidelity and love to this People, in the faithful
discharge of his duty to them. We are now come to the issue and event of his
Sermons, and to see how he is required for his pains, and this makes the second
part of this Chapter, where we have a notable History of the Persecution and
treachery of Amaziah the Idolatrous Priest of Bethel; and the constancy of Amos
in asserting the truth, maugre the malice of all adverse power whatsoever.

This profane Priest being netled with the plain and powerful preaching of
Amos at Bethel, fearing lest the people should see the truth, and be wrought
upon by Amos his Sermons to cast away their Idols, and return to the Worship of
God at Jerusalem, and so his gains which he had by the Sacrifices and
Oblations at Bethel might be lost; yea if Amos and his Party should prevail, he
might fear not only the loss of his Priesthood and authority, but the loss of
his life also, as a false Prophet; he therefore resolves to do all he can,
both by force and fraud to rid the Land of this turbulent and ^editious Amos.
The Urchin (we say) has but one shift, but the Fox has many; and so has
Amaziah here.

1 He gets on the Lions skin, and accuses Amos to the King for a traiterous
Conspirator against him, and a seditious Disturber of the peace of the
Kingdom* Thus he pretends great kindness to the King, and tells him the cause
was his, when in truth self was in the bottom of the design; for he knew if
Amos prevailed, he should lose his fat morsels at Bethel, both he and his Idols
might starve together; Jerusalem would have all the custom from him.

2 Since this way did not take, he now gets on the Foxes skin, and as a seeming
friend, counsels him to leave the Kingdom of Israel, and go to Judea, his
own Country, and Prophecy there, where he might avoid the Kings fury. q. d. It
is not safe for thee, O Amos, to Prophecy here against the King and Kingdom,
but go to Judea, and tell them of the downfall of Israel, there thou will be
safe and welcome; but this is Bethel, and it is no discretion for thee to
preach against the King and Kingdom here.

To this Charge and crafty counsel of Amaziah, Amos piously, prudently, and
peaceably answers with much courage and constancy, Verse. 14, 15. proving his
extraordinary call to the work, denouncing Gods Judgments against Amaziah, and
Israel, verse. 16, 17.

In this Verse we have an Accusation, or Charge drawn up against Amos, where we
have, 1. The Party accusing, and that is Amaziah the Idolatrous Priest of
Bethel, so called to distinguish him from Amaziah King of Judah, 2 King. 12.
ult. he was Successor to those Idolatrous Priests which Jeroboam had set up at
Bethel; some great man he was at Court in all probability, and near to the
King, which made him send so boldly to him, Amazias fuit Pontifex Idolorum, i.
e. vitulorum aureoram in Betheli. a Lapide. Fuit illius loci praefectus regius.
Tarnovius. Cum sacerdotem nominat, non vulgarem neque infimum videtur
intelligere, sed inter alios insignem, velut sacrificulorum Bethel principem.
Paraeus.
to incense him against Amos; the Jesuit calls him the High Priest of the Idols
at Bethel, there Jeroboam had placed a College of Priests, 1 King 12.33.
Amaziah might be the Prefect, or Governor of it.

The word Chohen, is used promiscuously for a Priest or a Prince, for an
Ecclesiastical or a Civil Governor. In those days (except it were in Judea)
many persons were both Priests and Princes, and ruled in Church and State.
Hence the word is used for a Counselor of State, or a great man, Job 12.19 for
a Priest, See Mr. Caryl On Job 12.19.
Levit. 1.12. and for Idolatrous Priests, as here, and Genesis 41.45. and 47.22.

2 Here is the Party accused, and that is Amos, a poor, plain, pious, harmless
Prophet.

3 Here is the Person to whom he is accused, and that is the King, Amaziah sent
to the King, he could not well suppress him himself, and therefore he sends to
the Secular Power for aid, desiring he may be either silenced, or banished, or
put to death.

4 Here is the Matter for which he is accused, viz. for Sedition, Rebellion,
Conspiracy, and Treason; this he speaks to exasperate the King against him: the
good Prophet did only discharge his duty faithfully, and perform that office
which God had called him to, yet this is called Sedition, and conspiracy.

5 He aggravates the Crime from the Place where all this treason was acted, and
that was not privily in a corner, or in another Kingdom, but openly in thy
Kingdom, and in the midst of thy people Israel, even at Bethel, where was the
Court and greatest confluence of all the subjects; so that thou had best look
to it, O King, for intestine commotions are very dangerous.

6 Here is the Peoples ill resentment of all this, The Land is not able to bear
all his words. Amos signifies a grievous burden, and he had not his name for
naught, for he came loaded with many sad burdens and comminations against
Israel, which made this stubborn people so unable to bear his words, q. d. Such
a seditious, dangerous fellow is this Newfound Amos, that if thou, O King, do
not suppress him, the people will; for the Land, that is, the people of the
Land cannot brook, nor bear his blunt and downright preaching, for they hate
him that reproves them in the Gate, and abhor him that speaks uprightly, Amos
5.10. Thus they complain of Amos (without a cause) for conspiring against the
King, when themselves conspired and combined together against the King of Kings
without control.

The Land cannot bear his words, much less can I, or any one that is devoted to
the service of the King. His Prophesies are intolerable, for he disheartens the
people by making them despair of their own safety, so that he is no longer to
be endured, O King, by thee, or thine, for the Land will never be quiet till
it be rid of him, either by banishment or death; there will be nothing but
tumults and factions so long as he is tolerated to seduce the people.

Thus we see how this malicious false Prophet lays on load, thinking that
somewhat would stick; every word has its weight, Quot verba, tot verbera, so
many words, so many daggers to stab this good Prophet. Had the charge been
true, as it was notoriously false, Amos had been a man of death indeed.

To clear up all, let us look into the Charge more exactly.

Then Amaziah Priest of Bethel, sent to Jeroboam King of Israel.

Then, when the Prophet had made known to the people the Visions of God,
concerning the ruin of the Kings house, and of the Kingdom, Carnalibus verbum
Dei sine cruce non potest nuntiari, comes veritatis cr^x. Merter.
then Amaziah the Priest can hold no longer, but he must persecute and
prosecute the Prophet. Thus persecution ever attends the faithful dispensing of
the truth; flattery (we say) finds friends, but truth hatred.

He sent to King Jeroboam; that is, he sent Letters or Messengers to the King,
to incense him against Amos, and that clancularly and unknown to Amos, that so
he might be condemned, unheard. No doubt but this High Priest had his Spies and
Intelligencers about him, to observe what Amos preached, and now having got
matter enough (as he conceived) against him, to root him out, he spit his
poison, saying, Amos has conspired against thee.

The word which we render to conspire, Kaskar, ligavit, colligavit, and per
Metaphoram, conspiravit, conjuravit, rebellavit.
properly signifies to bind, or to be compactly bound together in a body; but
Metaphorically it signifies to conspire, to rebel, to conjure and band together
against one, so the word is used, 1 Samuel 22.8, 13. 1 King. 15.27. and 16.9. and
2 King. 10.9. and. 21.23. so that this conspiring implies that Amos had some
confederates with him, that helped to carry on this conspiracy against the
King; when alas, Amos was so far from conspiring, that he was now considering
how he might prevent the ruin both of King and Kingdom, and avert the
approaching judgments. By his Prayers he had prevented two judgments, and now
counsels them to prevent the third; yet Amos is a Conspirator and troubler of
Israel, when it was their own Idolatry and Apostasy, and not Amos, that
troubled them.

2 Amos did not vent his Passion, or speak his own private opinion; but he
tells them the mind and Message of God which he had showed him in a Vision, and
commanded him, to publish, touching the destruction (not of the King himself,
for we read not that Jeroboam dyed by the sword) but of the Kings Posterity,
verse. 9. I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword. But Amaziah
conceiving that the King would be more enraged against Amos for Prophesying
against him, than for Prophesying against his Children, thereupon forgets this
accusation, and says, Amos has conspired against thee, and has said, the
King shall dye by the Sword. Not a word of truth, Amos non in Regem, sed in
Amaziae mendacia, and abominationes rebellavit. Mer^er.
for Amos did not conspire against the King, neither did he say that he should
dye by the Sword, yet this has been the lot of all Gods faithful Ministers, to
be counted Seditious, and the troublers of a State, solely for discharging the
duty of their places faithfully.

Now by this high Charge we may see, that this false Prophet sought the life of
the true one, as will appear if we frame his Accusation into an Argument, thus,

He that has conspired the ruin both of King and Kingdom ought to dye; But
Amos has done so. Ergo. But it pleased the Lord (in whose hand is the heart of
the King) to make the King so far to favor the Prophet, as that he
slighted this Priests accusation, and therefore Amaziah pretends friendship to
ths Prophet, as we shall see hereafter.

A great man counseled B. Latimer when he came first to Court, that he should
in no wise contradict the King, but let him have his sayings, follow him, go
with him. Latimer Ser. 7. p. 83. b.
Now let us view the Transactions of this High Priest, and we shall find a
complete Character of a false Prophet, or the perfect picture of a Politician.

1 They use to flatter and delude great ones, making them to believe that none
are their friends but such as say as they say, and do whatever they would have
them do, and humor them in their sins; and that they are their foes that like
Amos here, deal faithfully and plainly with them, and this is no small part of
great men's misery, that they have few about them that dare, or will deal
faithfully with them. They may use the Letany (in this sense) with that
alteration which the poor Curate used, when he saw his Lord come into the
Church, O God the Father of Heaven have mercy upon us Right Honorable Sinners.
Their state (in this respect) is far worse than that of inferior persons,
See Mr. Baxter, Fools prosperity, p. 293, etc.
who are plainly and truly told of their sins, when these are soothed up to
their destruction.

2 They calumniate and belie the true Prophets, they observe Machiavels rule,
Calumniare audacter, saltem aliquid adhaerebit, Lie lustily, somewhat will
stick though it be never so false. So it was with Amos here.

3 They labor with might and maine to suppress and silence the true Prophets,
they know that their Kingdom cannot long stand, if once the faithful Ministers
of Christ be countenanced, Cogitant de se actum, si apud plebem sit locus
veritati, coram veritate potentissima non potest stare mendacium, ne momento
quidem. Mercer in locum.
Light and Darkness, the Ark and Dagon, Christ and Belial can never subsist
together. This made Amaziah here to use both force and fraud to rid the Land of
Amos.

4 They labor to suppress good men before they can be heard. They must not
speak, nor dispute the case. Thus Amaziah here clancularly accuses Amos to the
King, when he could make no defense for himself.

5 They usually mingle some truth with their lies; As Fowlers do mix some
Wheat with their Chaff, to catch the Birds the sooner. So did Amaziah here, he
mixed some truth with his lies. Amos has said, Jeroboam shall dye by the
Sword, [that was false] and Israel shall surely go into Captivity, [that was
true.]

OBSERVATIONS.
1 In all ages there have been false Prophets to oppose the true.

There was a Iannes and a Iambres to resist Moses, See more in my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.8. Obs. 1.
2 Timothy 3.8. and four hundred false Prophets against one good Micaiah; a Pashur
and an Hananiah against the Prophet Jeremy; and here Amaziah against Amos. So
in the New Testament, how bitter were the High Priests against Christ, Ioh.
11.47, 48. accusing him as an enemy to the State, and no friend to Caesar. How
did the Stribes and Pharisees oppose the Apostles, and since Antichrists
Kingdom has been set up, how have Gods faithful witnesses been persecuted and
slain? Persecution has ever been the lot, especially of Gods zealous
Messengers, Acts 7.51. let a man faithfully discharge the duties of his place,
and then let him look for some Idolatrous Amaziah to oppose him. When we have
opportunities of doing any good, we must look for many adversaries, 1 Cor.
16.9. Let us not then be offended, Ne offend^mur, si hodie etiam summi;
Pontifices, Cardinales, Episcopi, etc. Evangelicae doctrinae prae aliis
reluctantur. Gualter.
when we meet with the like usage from the world.

2 It is the porperty of Persecutors to undermine Gods Servants clancularly.

Amaziah sends to the King privily, unknown to Amos, and accuses him for a
Traitor, that so he might be condemned without hearing, or answering for
himself. Thus they deal with Jeremy, when they could find nothing justly
against him, then they secretly devise devices against him, Ier. 11.19. and
12.6. and 18.18. where we may observe the vile ingratitude of men; this Prophet
had by his Prayers averted two Judgments from Israel, yet now they seek his
death, who saved their life; and accuse him of Rebellion, who saved them from
destruction.

Valiant men charge their adversaries in the face, it is for Cowards to creep
behind. Truth seeks no shifts nor corners, it loves the light, as true gold
fears neither the Touchstone, nor the balance; but falsehood being a work of
darkness, loves darkness, and is not able to stand barefaced before truth;
and therefore it makes lies and falsehood its refuge.

3 Wicked men what ever they pretend, yet intend Self.

Haman pretended the Kings profit, when his own ambition, envy, Curavit
Amazias Proprium commodum, sicut hodie videmus Cardinales and cornutos
Episcopos, qui Principum aulas occupant, non prefer qu^d habent in animo;
vident enim non posse stare suam tyrannidem nisi aboleatur Evangelium. Vident
doctrinam nostram minari frigus, vel potius glaciem suis culonis, deinde vident
se nullos fore in mundo nisi nos oppresserint. Calvin in locum.
and revenge was that he really sought, Hest. 3.8. So this Idolatrous Priest
here pretended great love and service to the King, when Self was in the bottom
of the design. He was the Priest of Bethel, and got much profit by the place,
and therefore he hated Amos heartily, who forbad the people to come any more at
Bethel, but to shun it as a place infected with Superstition and Idolatry, Amos
5.5. and so all the fat of this self-seeking Priest of Bethel ran into the
fire. This he could not bear, for it struck at his dignity and livelihood. Such
men make their bellies their gods, and little regard what becomes of truth,
modo hic sit been, (as the Monk said) when he stroked his fat paunch. We read
of low and ordinary Priests that were obedient to the faith, Acts 6.7. when the
High-ones were enemies to the Gospel. The Apostle complains that all men seek
their own ease, See an acute Ser. of Mr. Edw. Symonds, on Phil. 2.21. printed
1642.
profit, praise, but few or none seek the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.21.
How many plead for the Papacy and Prelacy for their bellies sake, rather than
out of conviction, or in good earnest.

4 It is an old trick of Satan and his agents, falsely to accuse the servants of
God of Sedition, Treason, and Rebellion.

Amos that was the glory and Savior of Israel, that by his Prayers kept off
many Judgments from them, yet now is called, the Troubler of Israel, and
commanded to pack out of the Land, See Bu^roughs Moses Choice, cha. 1. p. 17.
Solenne est ut Christianis crimina Seditionis, and laesae Majestatis a
persecutoribus affingantur, quibus tamen non sint obnoxii. Centur. Magdeb. 2
Col. 420.
which he not hasting to do, he was knocked in the head with a Club by Amaziahs
Son, as Epiphanius, Ierom and others affirm. Thus Elijah, who was called, the
Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, is called by wicked Ahab the Troubler of
Israel, 1 King. 18.17, 18. Haman accused the Jews for a People that kept not
the Kings Laws, and that it was not for his profit to suffer them to live in
the Land, Hest. 3.8. Thus Jeremy that wept in secret for the sins of the Land,
and by his Prayers did keep off many Judgments, yet is called a man of
contention, and one that weakened the hearts and hands of the People, and that
sided with the Chaldeans against his own Countrymen, Ier. 15.10. and 37.13,
14, 15, 18. and 38.4. Moses one of the meekest men in the world, yet is accused
of ambition, and one that takes too much upon him, Numb. 16.

Yea Christ himself was called and counted an enemy to Caesar, a Fanatic, a
Madman and one that had a Devil. The Apostles were counted troublers of the
Land, O^tendunt nostram Doctrinam non posse recipi quin totus orbis mutetur,
quia totus ordo politicus pereat, quin reges spolientur sua p^t^^tia,
conciliant sibi favorem his obliquis artibus. Calvin in locum.
and the Pests of the places where they came, walking contrary to the Decrees
of Caesar, and setting the world on a flame, Acts 16.20, 21. and 17.6, 7. So
Paul was counted a pestilent incendiary, Acts 21.28, 30, 31. and 24.5. and B.
Latimer in his Sermons often tells us, See Latimers ser. p. 43. b. p. 71. b. p.
106. b. Edit. ult.
that when his enemies could find no just exceptions against his matter, yet
they would accuse him for a Seditious and turbulent fellow. Truly (says he)
the Preaching of Gods Word is the cause of Sedition and Rebellion, as
Tonterton-Steeple was the cause that Sandwich-Haven was stopped up with Goodwins
Sands.

The Devil began his Kingdom with a Lie, and by Lies he still upholds it; he
was a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning, but first a Liar, and then a
Murderer; he cannot handsomely murder until he slander first; he must put a
Bear-skin upon our backs before he can well bait us. So they did in the
Primitive times, Si Tiberis non ascendit ad maenia, Si Nilus non ascendit i^
arva, statim Christianos ad leones. Tertul. Apolog. c. 40. Aug. de Ci vit. Dei.
l. 2. c. 3. See Mr. Bolton, Comfort afflict. Consciences, Part 1. chapter 2. Sect.
2. p. 155, 156. and D. Sand so^ his second Ser. Ad clerum, p. 56, etc.
and if any calamity befell the Land, they presently cried, Away with the
Christians to the Lions, as if they had been the cause of it; whereas the world
was full of miseries before they were born, and will be when they are dead and
gone. The Pagans in those times gave out, that the Christians did worship an
Asses Head, used promiscuous Lusts, and drunk the blood of Infants, etc. These
and many more Slanders they invented, merely to make them odious, that they
might murder them the better. As a man that will hang his Neighbors Dog,
must first give out that he is mad. This made so many Learned men to Apologize
for the Christians, and to wipe off those calumnies which malice had cast upon
them. Thus did Justin Martyr, Apolog. ad Sanct. Romanum, p. 41. edit.
Graecolat. and 2 Apolog. ad Anton. Pium, p. 53. Tertullian Apologet. Minutius
Felix, p. 102. 116, etc. Origin Lib. 3. contra Celsum, Tom. 3. p. 681. Cyprian
contra Demetrianum, p. 163. Arnobius lib. 1. adversus gentes. August de Civit.
Dei per totum. He writ those twenty two Books to clear the Christian Religion
from vile aspersions.

The wicked like Athaliah cry Treason, Treason, when she her self was the
Traitor. The wicked complain of the godly for troubling Israel, when it is
themselves that are the true Reshagnims and troublers both of Church and State.
As they have no peace in themselves, so they hinder it in others. It is the
covetous Achan, the Idolater, Judge. 5.8. the Swearer, Ier. 23.10. the
Sabbath-prophaner, Ezekiel. 20.13. the Covenant-breaker, Levit. 26.23. the
debaucht Drunkard, the unclean Zimri and Cozbi, these, these are they that
trouble Israel.

Touching the turbulency of Jesuits and Mass-priests, King James calls them the
Devils Brood, Ubi cunque Iesuita, ibi est regum proditor, scelerum machinator.
and what Incendiaries they are, and touching their seditious Doctrine, leading
to disobedience and rebellion, what a Catalogue of about forty Kings and
Princes destroyed, or vexed by the Pope and his Clergy, see this clearly proved
by Mr. John White, in his Way to the true Church, chap. 6. p. 25. and Mr.
Baxter, his Key to Catholics, chap. 48. p. 348. and 356. See Watsons
Quodlibets, p. 69, etc. 75, etc. 112, etc. Dr. Abbot Antilogia, p. 1. p. 36. p.
115. they teach King-killing, Bolton Comfort Afflict. Consc. Preface, p. 3, 4,
5. D. Morton, De potest. Regia, S. 3. and Mr. Pryn, The Treachery and
Disloyalty of Papists to their Sovereigns, printed 1643. and Romes
Masterpiece. Yet to come nearer our times, what notorious slanders and lies
have the Papists raised against our Reformers? to instance but in three:
Luther, Calvin, Beza.


1 Luther was loaded with Papistical Lies, See Whites way to the true Church
Di^ gres. 54. p. 429, etc. and Mr. Clark in the life of Luther.
he was accustomed to them, saying, Mihi maxim pro sunt, qui de me pessime
loquuntur, Lutherus pascitur convitiis. They gave out, that going merry to bed
and drunk, he was found next morning dead in his bed, etc. when Luther was
alive, and testified the falsehood of this Fiction under his own hand. The like
they did by Calvin, and Beza.

2 Calvin, See Rivet. Cathol. Orthodox. Q. 1. p. 12, 13, 14, etc. and Mr.
Baxters Key to Catholics, chap. 31. p. 189, etc.
they were not behind hand with him, they accused him of Ambition,
Covetousness, Incontinency, etc. that he was a branded Sodomite, consumed of
Lice, and dyed blaspheming, all which calumnies are fet off by the Writers of
his life. His enemies find it far more easy to calumniate him, than to
imitate him. Most of our Modern Writers do but descant upon Calvin's
Plain-song; yea the Jesuits themselves are very Plagiaries, who do first rob
him, and then rail at him.

3 Beza, They gave out that he was dead, and had recanted, and turned Papist,
when he was alive, and did confute the slander.

It were easy to tire the Reader with such instances, but these may suffice.

This may serve, 1 For Comfort. 2 For Caution*


To comfort us against Slanders. See my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.3. p. 88. See Watsons
Ch^^^^ chapter 15.
1 For Comfort, if the like befall us, remember the Disciple is not above his
Master, nor the Servant above his Lord. Let us be patient till the coming of
the Lord, for then there will be a Resurrection of Names, as well as of Bodies,
and Christ himself will be our Compurgator.

2 For Caution, It must make us wary and cautious what reports we receive
against the godly; and not to believe every Idolatrous bloodthirsty Amaziah,
when they rev^le and calumniate Gods faithful Ministers and People; if bare
accusations were sufficient to condemn men, Christ himself had not been
innocent.

As for the godly, they are of those who are peaceable in Israel, they are
endued with the wisdom which is from above, which is first Pure, and then
Peaceable, Jam. 3.17. they are peaceable in themselves, and are Peacemakers,
and Peace-preservers; they are for Peace Ecclesiastical, Political, Domestical;
they are for all manner of Peace, Pax cum hominibus, sed cum vitiis cominus and
eminus pugnandum est.
save peace with sin. Peace and Piety, Peace and Truth is their hearts desire,
Zach. 8.19. Heb. 12.14. the Gospel like a Sword divides between men and their
sins, and so breaks worldly wicked peace, Mat. 10.34, 35. but establishes
internal, real, solid peace; I came not to send Peace, but a Sword, Christ
speaks not of the effect, but of the event of the Gospel; not what the Gospel
procures properly Et per se, but Accidentally, when it meets with wicked men's
corruptions; not what it works in the faithful, but in the unfaithful. The
Gospel in it self brings that peace which passes all understanding, to such as
submit unto it, but wicked men opposing it make the tumult and division, and
therefore it is they, and not the Gospel that must be blamed. Real godly men
that walk up to their Principles and Privileges, See Caryl on Jo^ 9.13. p. 244.
are the Blessings of a Land, the Pillars of a Nation, the Beauty and Bulwarks
of the places where they live. They keep Islands from destruction, Job 22. ult.
and therefore they cannot truly be called the destroyers of them. As Sampsons
strength lay in his hair, so the Governors of the Nation shall say, that in
the inhabitants of Jerusalem is our strength, Zach. 12.5.

It is ignorance and profaneness which makes a people rude and rebellious, but
where Religion comes in the power of it, and men obey not for fear, but for
conscience sake, there are no better Servants and Subjects in the world; none
more faithful to their trust, none pray more for their Governors, nor pay
their dues more freely and fully to them. These are they that will venture
their Lives and Estates for their honor, when such as serve them for their
own ends, will leave them and forsake them.

Yet lest any should think me singular take the testimony of one (that as the
times go) may pass for many. Doctor Ganden in a Sermon Preached at Court,
1642. on Heb 12.14. p. 35, etc.
Be tender over good men ( says Doctor Gauden) these are those that shall see
Gods face in glory, and so are more fit to enjoy the favor of Kings on earth.
These are they that best know the duty, honor, and fidelity they owe to
Majesty, and make a conscience to pay it; because it is a point of holiness so
to do. These are the Propugnacula and munimenta regni and Ecclesiae ( as was
said of St. Ambrose) the strength, honor, and security of Church and State
under God, and his Majesty's care and pious providence, these are in some sort
the (Tutelares genii) Protectors of his Majesty's Person, health, wealth, life,
Queen, Crown, and Posterity; whilst they daily lift up pure hands, and holy
hearts to the God of Heaven, for his Majesty's safety and happiness. These are
like Moses and Elias, the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel. These have power
with God, by their Prayers, counsel, and good examples they lie in the gap, and
hinder the inundation of Sin and Judgment. To these we owe under God, the
enjoyment of our peace, plenty, safety, and religion, and of the blessing of
blessings temporal, a pious and gracious Prince. Thus fully and truly the
Doctor; so that it appears on all hands that Gods people are not the Troublers,
but the Pillars and peaceable ones in Israel; this will yet further appear, if
we consider these four things: 1 Their Principles. 2 Their Titles. 3 Their
Prayers. 4 Their Practices.


1 Sedition and conspiracy is against their Principles, they are taught to fear
God first, and then to honor the King as his Vicegerent on earth. They obey
not for fear (as wicked men do) but for conscience sake; as they give unto God
what is Gods, so they give unto Caesar what is Caesar's. It is the want of good
Preachers ( says Bishop Latimer) that is the cause of Rebellion, Bishop
Latimers Ser. p. 114. b.
if there were good Bishops (says he) there would be no rebellion, it is
ignorance that breeds rudeness and rebellion, as we have seen in the Welsh,
Irish, etc. Light and Grace take away that ferity, cruelty, and turbulency that
is in our natures, it makes the Lion and the Lamb to dwell together in peace,
Isa. 11.6, 7, 8. Inordinate love of the World is the great makebate of the
World; now Grace loosens men's hearts from the world, and makes Abraham to part
with his own right to Lot, though he were superior to him in age and place,
yet he yields to him for peace sake, Genesis 13.8, 9. and Christ himself lest he
should give offense to others, paid tribute to Caesar, though he could have
pleaded immunity, Mat. 17.27. Besides, their God is the God of peace, Romans
15.33. 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. Christ their Savior is the Prince of peace, Isa. 9.6.
the Spirit that dwells in them is a Dove, the emblem of peace; the Gospel which
they believe is the Gospel of peace; See more in Mr. Buroughs Gracious Spi.
chapter 6. p. 137, etc. and his Irenicum, chapter 31, 32, 33. and the interest of
England in three Queries, p. 41, and 48, etc.
they are endued with the wisdom which is from above, which is pure and
peaceable; the peace of God rules in their hearts, and moderates their
passions, Col. 3.15. so that we need not fear their offending, who are so
strictly bound against offending.

2 The Titles which are given them in Scripture, show that they are men of
peace, David's Motto is theirs, I am for peace, Psalm. 120.7. hence they are
called Doves, not Kites; Lambs, not Lions; Sheep, not Wolves; and the Church is
compared to a Vine, not to a Thorn; to a Virgin, to a Widow, to a Worm, Isa.
41.14. all which are harmless, innocent, inoffensive creatures; subject to
wrong, but do none, and this the Churches enemies know right well, which makes
them so ready to abuse them. The Crow will pull wool off a Sheeps back, it
dares not be so bold with a Wolf, or a Fox.

3 It is against their Prayers to be turbulent, they pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, and for the peace of the places where they dwell, Ier. 29.7. whilst
others are drinking Healths, and breaking the Kings Laws by their debauchery,
these are praying for Kings, and for all in authority under them, that by their
means we may live in godliness and peace, yea so far are they from creating
troubles, that by their Prayers, counsel, and good example, they keep many
troubles and disorders out of a Land.

4 It is against their Practices. Their practice is to bless them that curse
them; to pray for them that persecute them; to do good to them that hate them,
and to preserve their lives, who seek their deaths, as Bradford did by Bourn.
If their enemy be hungry, they feed him; if naked, they cloth him, and so heap
coals of fire upon his head Romans 12.20.

Besides, in the places where they dwell, they labor to suppress Sin, and to
promote Piety, and this conduces very much to the peace and prosperity of a
Nation. Where the salt of Grace is, there is peace, Mark 9. ult. It was
Prophesied, that in Gospel Times they should not hurt in all Gods holy
Mountain, and why so? for the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the
Lord, and that will make men pious and peaceable, Isa. 11.9. Ignorant men are
brutish merciless men, See Mr. Pryn his Treatise of the Treachery and
Disloyalty of Papists to their Sovereign printed 1643.
the dark places of the earth are habitations of cruelty, None so bloody as
blind Idolaters.

VERSE II.
For thus says Amos, Jeroboam shall dye by the sword, and Israel shall surely
be led away captive out of their own Land:
IN this Verse Amaziah the Priest labors to make good his Charge against Amos,
to this end he produces a double accusation against him.

1 He charge him as an enemy to the King, and that he had conspired against
him, saying, Jeroboam shall dye by the sword; this was a manifest untruth, for
Amos never said, the King shall dye by the sword, but that God would rise
against the house of Jeroboam with the sword, verse. 9. and so he did, for
though we do not read that Jeroboam himself dyed by the sword, yet Zachariah
his Son was slain by Shallum in the sight of the people, which put an end to
the Stock of Iehu, according to what the Lord had threatened against the house
of Iehu, viz. that in the fourth generation his Stock should cease; so that
Amaziah reports Amos his Doctrine to the King, not fully, but fraudulently,
applying that to the Father, which Amos spoke against the Posterity. Thus
wicked men, like their Father the Devil, add and detract from Gods Word, and
men's words, so as may best suit with their own designs.

2 He charge him with disheartning the people, in saying, that Israel shall
surely be led away captive out of their own Land. This was true, but so far
from being a Crime, that it was Amos his glory, that he faithfully and freely
delivered the Message that God commanded him to deliver to his people; and here
we may observe, that when this false Prophet recites Amos his words to the
King, there he alters the words, and makes things worse; but when he comes to
speak of the people, then he can speak truth.

He had used all his Oratory to persuade the King to punish Amos, but Jeroboam
knew that he was a Man of God, and therefore durst not do his Prophet any
harm; and the rather, because he had observed that God had sharply punished
Jeroboam the first with a withered arm, and Ahab, and other his Predecessors
that had opposed his Prophets; their harms made him wise. The context shows
that the King was cold in the cause, for we read of no answer that the King
gave to Amaziah, peradventure he might discern his falsehood and his flattery,
and so slight him; this is very probable by that which follows in the next
verse, where Amaziah falls to flattering Amos, since by force he could not hurt
him.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 It is an old trick of the Devil and his agents, to wrest and mis^recite the
words of Gods servants.

When they can find nothing justly against them, then they fall to belying
them, and to devise devices against them. See more in my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.3.
The Devil is termed Diabolus, he has this name given him because he is a
violent, and virulent Calumniator, and belyer of the Saints, and so are his
followers, and therefore they also are called ((...), Calumniatores) by their
Fathers name, false-accusers. So Job 1.9. Acts 6.11, 13. Romans 3.8.

2 It is the property of false Prophets to mingle some truth with their lies,
the better to deceive the simple.

So does this Priest of Bethel here, and so do Mass Priests. As the Fowler
mixeth some Wheat with his Chaff, and sticks some Corn upon his Lime-twiggs to
catch the sooner: so Satan puts a fine gloss upon his false wares that they may
sell the better. He and his can produce Scripture for a need, they can
transform themselves into Angels of Light, Epicurus aut Deos fi^git otiosos,
aut nullos, Minut. Faelix, who lived in the third Century.
and can cite Scripture to draw you from Scripture, and tempt you to irreligion
by religious Arguments mis-applied. Epicurus that was licentious in his Life,
and lewd in his Opinions, holding that there were no Gods, or else that they
were idle, and cared not for governing the World, V. Ross his Confut. of Browns
vulgar errors, chapter 16. p. 255.
yet sometimes he commends the pleasures of the mind, that so he might vend his
Epicurean pleasures the better.

3 That Princes usually are more indulgent to Gods Prophets than Idolaetrous
Priests.

Amaziah the Priest would have Amos put to death for a Traitor, Figulus invidet
figulo, and faber fabro.
but the King spares him. It is observed, that the greatest hatred is usually
amongst men of the same profession; it is not the King, but the Priest of
Bethel that prosecutes Amos. Thus it was with Jeremy, when the Priests were
enraged against him, and sought his life, then the Princes plead for him, and
save him, Ier. 26.8, 16. and after when the Princes cast him into the Dungeon,
then the King released him, Ier. 38.10. So our King Edward the Third preserved
Wickliffe from the fury of Simon Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury, and after
the Duke of Lancaster became his great Patron against the persecuting Prelates
of those times.

VER. 12, 13.
Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou Seer, go flee thee away into the Land of
Judah, and there eat bread, and Prophecy there;

But Prophecy not again at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the
Kings Court.


THis false Prophet seeing he could not remove Amos by force, sets upon him now
by fraud; the King not being moved with his Message, Utinam Ieroboamum imita
rentur nostri seculi principes, qui Amaziae calumnias non magni fecit, nec
quicquam in Prophetam durius statuit. Gualter.
and refusing to meddle with Amos, either for fear of the people, who knew Amos
to be an holy and eminent Prophet, and so must needs have great influence upon
them, or else for some other politic respects, the King spared him.

But since the Lions skin will not do, this Promotor will try what the Fox can
do; to this end he gives Amos, 1. An honorable title. 2. Friendly counsel,
one would think, persuading him by any means to leave Israel, and go to Judah,
where he might be safe and free.

q. d. I am the High Priest of Bethel, and have my preferment and profits in
Israel; but thou art of Judah, and came from Tekoa; prithee go to thy
Tekoits again, and trouble not my Bethelians; come not in my Diocese, I promise
thee, I will not come in thine; hinder not my gain, and take thine and spare
not.

In this Verse this subtle Sophister packs up much in a little room, and uses
almost as many Arguments as words.

1 He gives him an honorable Compellation, O Seer, it is not, O unlearned
Herdsman, or, O seditious Seeds-man, as before; but he gives him a title of
honor, the better to hide his malicious designs, and to insinuate himself
into Amos. See how quickly wicked men can change their Language, and bless
those whom but lately they cursed; before it was Amos the Conspirator, but now
it is Amos the Servant of God, and the Seer. The Prophets of old were called
Seers, 1 Samuel 9.9. Isa. 30.10. God enlightened them by his Spirit, and made
known to them his secrets by Visions, hence they were called Seers, Numb.
6.12.6. Ezekiel. 1.1. Some make Amaziah here to call the Prophet Seer, Ironically,
by way of scorn and contempt, as if the Prophet had been some Fanatic, and his
Visions vanities. But the contexture of the Discourse is against this; for
Amaziah gives the Prophet his due title, but in a flattering way, the better to
effect his design upon him.

2 Lest this Priest should seem to be mad without reason, he now produces
Arguments to persuade Amos to be gone. Man being a Rational Creature, may
sooner be drawn by reason than driven by force; Amaziah will try what this will
do.

Go, flee thee away into the Land of Judah, there eat bread, and Prophecy
there.

q. d. Be gone with all speed, thou have yet liberty so to do, thou have now
an opportunity of escaping, and may freely pass without any stopping, let
it not slip, lest it repent thee when it is too late. So that this is an
Argument a facili.

2 Flee, with all speed be gone from amongst us, for there is no staying long
in safety here; thou art encompassed here with snares and dangers, and
therefore if thou love thy life, pack up and be gone, Cito, citius,
citissime, lest thou be caught and killed. So that this was an Argument a
necessario.

3 Into the Land of Judah. The better to persuade him to flee, this Priest has
found out another Topic, viz. a convenient place to flee to, and that was his
own Country; thou came from Tekoah, Amos 1.1. and no man can blame thee for
going home again, especially since thou art so hated here. There thou will
dwell amongst thine own kindred and acquaintance in peace and plenty, in love
and safety; whereas here thou art a Stranger, and a blunt Prophet, and can
expect none of these things from us. As a friend therefore I counsel thee with
all speed to be gone, for both King and Kingdom are resolved to keep their
Calves; and if thou come any more to preach here against them, beware lest they
catch thee, and kill thee. But Amos fears no such Scar-crows, God sent him not
to Judah, but to Israel, and there he must and will abide. It was Ionahs sin to
fly to Tarshish, when he should have gone to Niniveh. A Minister is not sui
juris, but must preach when and where his Lord and Master commands him.

4 There eat bread; that is, Get thy living there, Genesis 3.19 for if thou
stayest here thou may starve, here is no body will succor of support thee;
for thou art a burden both to Prince and people. Here is nothing for thee to
eat, here is no profit to be had, and by thy preaching so openly at Bethel,
against the Calves of Bethel, thou marrest our markets too. But go to Judah,
there thou will be maintained like a Prophet indeed: there thou will live more
securely, and be maintained more plentifully; there is King Vzziah, alias
Azariah, that loves such precise ones as thou art, 2 King. 15.1, 3. and a
people that prize men of thy strain, and will not suffer thee to want. Thus
this mercenary false Prophet measures Amos by himself, thinking that gain
would entice him away, as if Amos had been one of those who Prophesied for a
little Lucre, for a handful of Barley, or a mouthful of Bread, Ezekiel. 13.19.
Micha 3.11. so that this is an Argument ab utili.

5 Prophecy there. Here this subtle Priest Proleptically prevents an
Objection; whereas Amos might have said, what? would you have me idle, and
leave that employment to which God so signally, and extraordinarily called me?
Not so, (says Amaziah) I do not bid thee flee, that thou may be idle or
silent (for if he had done so, his fraud had been too apparent) but I bid thee
go to Judah, and Prophecy there, where thou will have double honor; that is,
both countenance and maintenance, both which thou want here. Thou love to
be plain and free against sin, why get thee to Judah, there they will be glad
of thee, and there thou may declaime freely against the sins of Israel, and
threaten us without fear. Here thou art molested with Altars and Calves, with
Idols and Images, Amos 3.14. but get thee to Jerusalem, and there thou will be
free from these superstitious fopperies, and lying vanities. There exercise thy
gift of preaching, and get thy living by it, as I do by my Priesthoood at
Bethel, where I live peaceably, and plentifully with my Oblations and
Sacrifices; I shall not envy thee (get what thou can at Judah) do not thou
envy me my Morsels at Bethel.

6 He argues adamno, and tells him that it was dangerous for him to preach any
more at Bethel, as for what is past that is pardoned, provided thou come no
more amongst us at Bethel, for it is the Kings Court, and the Kings Chapel,
and he will not endure to be affronted there.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 That wicked men are very sedulous in opposing the faithful Ministers of God.

What industry and activity does this Priest of Bethel use to root Amos out of
Israel. He sends to the King, and accuses Amos for a Traitor; and when force
will not do, he plays the Fox, and under pretense of friendship prswades him
to leave his station, and to flee the Land. So Pharaoh, how industrious was he
to destroy Israel; how active was Haman to have the Jews destroyed, and what a
great sum does he promise to the King to effect it, no less than ten thousand
talents of silver, Hest. 4.9. So Nehemiahs enemies, what force and fraud did
they use to hinder his repairing of the Temple, how feign would they have had
him flee; as Amaziah would have had Amos here, that so he might have reproached
him for a Fugitive, and one that was conscious to himself of his own guilt, and
therefore he fled for it.

Q. The Question then will be, whether it be lawful to flee in time of
persecution?

A. In some Cases it may, as, 1 If a man be but a young beginner, and find not
strength to bear the brunt and heat of the day, he may withdraw for a time.

2 If the Persecution be personal, against a particular man, or Minister, and
not against the whole Church, he may use his liberty. So did Moses, Elijah,
David, Christ, Paul.

But when Gods time is come, that he calls us to seal to his truth even with
our dearest lives, we must not love them to the death, Revel. 12.11. but
rejoice that we have any thing of worth to lay down for Christ; like the
valiant Horse, we must go forth to meet the armed man, Job 39.21. so did that
accomplished, courageous Martyr, Mr. Fryth, when some that loved him had
contrived his escape, he told them it must not be; for (says he) if you should
leave me here and go to Croydon, declaring to the Bishop that you had lost
Fryth, I would surely follow after as fast as I could, See Mr. Clarks Lives, 1
Vol. in the Life of Mr. Fryth.
and bring them news that I had found and brought Fryth again.

[See this Case more fully handled in Mr. Perkins C. Cons. lib. 2. chapter 11. Q.
3. and on Heb. 11.35. p. 191. and D. Geo. Abbot, Thesis 5. p. 169. and in my
Com. on 2 Timothy 3.11. Obs. 5. p. 202. Doct. Tho. Tailor on Self-denial, p. 23.
folio, in fine.]

2 Wicked men many times are subtle men.

The Devil chooses Serpents for his Instruments, Cupit ab his ornari Diabolus,
he thinks it an ornament to his Cause and Kingdom to get wits about him, how
subtly here does this Priest act his part; his words are smoother than oil,
and yet are they very swords, Psalm. 55.23. Satan's Instruments (like their
Father the Devil) can transform themselves into Angels of Light, Incaute
creduli facile circumveniuntur ab his, quos bonos putaverunt Minut, Faelix, p.
39.
2 Cor. 11.13, 14. when such speak fair, believe them not, for there are seven
abominations in their hearts, Prove. 26.25. we had need then to be wise as
Serpents, and to watch not only against a raging, but against a fawning enemy;
not only against the Lion Rampant, but also against the Lion Couchant. The
worlds flatteries are more to be feared than its frowns, its courtesies, than
its injuries. Many that have stood it out manfully against open hostility, yet
have been ensnared by flattery. Take heed of those Ioabs and Iudasses that kiss
and kill, 2 Samuel 20.9, 10. watch not only against open, but also against secret
insinuating enemies, which under pretense of friendship seek thy ruin; the
Devil gains thousands, and ten thousands this way. We should observe his
depths, and not be ignorant of his methods and devices, but stop our ears
against his Sirens, when they seek to undermine us.

See my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.17. Obs. 2. p. 269.
3 That titles of honor may be given to Gods Ministers.

O thou Seer, it is not, O thou Liar, thou Viper, thou Wolf, thou Robber, thou
Murderer, thou Conjurer, thou Juggler, Devil, etc. as those black blasphemous
Devils the Quakers call us. Amaziah (though an Idolatrous Priest) yet had
learnt better language than so.

4 The Ministers of God should be Seers.

They must not be blind Guides, nor Seers that can see nothing but what tends
to their own gain; nor Seers of Lies and Vanities, (as it is said of false
Prophets) Ezekiel. 13.7, 8, 9, 23. and 22.28. but they must be men of knowledge,
Mal. 2.7. and have the Tongue of the Learned, to speak a word in season to him
that is weary. Look what the eye is to the body, that are (or at leastwise
that should be) Pastors to the Church, to watch over the Flock for good, and to
direct it in paths of Piety. Hence Ministers are called the Eye, 1 Cor. 12.17.
Stars, and the Light of the World, Mat. 5.14. burning and shining Lights, John
5.35. which help to inlighten the World with the light of sound Doctrine. Hence
it is that the Prophets of old were so often called Seers, Sadoc was called a
Seer, 2 Samuel 15.27. and Gad, 2 Samuel 24.11. and Heman, 1 Chronicles. 25.5, etc.

VER. 13.
But Prophecy not again any more at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chapel, and
the Kings Court.
WE have seen this Bethelian Priests counsel, Thetically and Positively set
down. verse. 12. In this verse we have his advice Antithetically set down, But
Prophecy no more at Bethel, come not within my Diocese and Jurisdiction where
I and others are bound to attend, and officiate by the Kings Mandamus. In the
words we have, 1 A Prohibition, Prophecy no more at Bethel, q. d. Thou have
preached six Sermons already against the State, the King has pardoned thee for
them all, and passed an Act of Oblivion, provided thou preach no more so; but
if thou be like to new Wine, which must have vent (for silence is painful to a
real Prophet) yet come not to Bethel, but rather go to Judah thine own
Country, for I am resolved to suspend and silence thee from preaching here, and
that for two Reason.

1 Because it is the Kings Sanctuary, Vide quibus argumentis pugnant, qui
veritati adver santur, astute quidem aliquot rations, and interdum Scripturis
agunt, sed maxima fiducia illis in regum ac principum authoritate reposita est.
Gualter in locum.
and the Courtiers will not believe thee, nor abide thee. 2 The Kings Court is
there, and they cannot have while to attend thee; it is in vain therefore for
thee to abide in such a place, where thou can have neither Credence, nor
Audience.
We may add a third Reason, which was the real ground of this Highpriests
prohibition, and that was because Amaziahs gain lay there, Ibi urgente Propheta
and dura fulminante vaticinia contra illum locum, spes nulla relinquebatur
copiosi lucri. Sanctius. See Amos 4.4.
q. d. Come not here with thy New-light, declaime not here against our
Idolatry, lest thou mar our markets, and hinder the sale of our false wares.
This was the truth of the business, though somewhat else was pretended, and the
King and Kingdoms interest pleaded.

Bethel was a City in the Kingdom of Israel, though properly it belonged to
the Tribe of Benjamin; but Jeroboam the first setting up one of the golden
Calves there, 1 King. 12.29. turned this Bethel (which was sometimes the House
of God) into Beth-aven, the house of vanity and iniquity; Samaria was the more
populous place, but the Calves were in most request at Bethel, and therefore
the Prophet testifies against the Idolatry of that place especially.

Mikdash melech, Sactuarium vel Sacrarium regis. The word is always used for a
Sanctuary, Exo. 15.17.and 25.8. Isa, 8.14. and 16.1^. Ezeck. 5.11.

Periculosum est scribere in eum, qui potest Procribere.


It is the Kings Chapel, or as the word most genuinely signifies, it is the
Kings Sanctuary; i. e. it is a place consecrated by the Kings Predecessors for
the worship of the Calves, to the which he bears a singular devotion, and where
he often keeps his Royal residence, and does celebrate his solemn Worship, and
Divine Service. It is therefore dangerous for thee, O Amos, to preach against
the Kings religion in the Kings Chapel, in the face of the Court, and the
flower of the Land. To do so in any part of the Land is not tolerable, but to
preach thus at Bethel is most intolerable. Jeroboam the first set up a Calf at
Dan as well as at Bethel, but this at Bethel was most frequented both by King
and People. 1. Because it was nearer to Samaria than Dan, which was situate in
the North part of the Land. 2. For its Antiquity, because it was the place
where Jacob of old did Worship God. It was of greater Antiquity than the Temple
at Jerusalem, In Dei cultu non spe^iosae rations sequendae, sed Dei verbum.
Mercer.
yet for all these specious reasons they sinned in forsaking the Rule, and not
Worshipping at Jerusalem as God had appointed. So that whereas this Priest
cries out, this is Bethel the Kings Chapel, we say so too, yet that is no
prejudice to Gods Prerogative.

It is the Kings Court, or, it is the Kings House, for his Palace was there.
Though the Kings prime Palace was in Samaria, yet he had other Palaces in other
places, as at Iezreel and Bethel, where he used to reside for a time, that he
might be a Pattern of Worship to the people. Or, it is the House of the
Kingdom (as it is in the Fountain) that is, Both mamlachah, Domus regni.
the Royal Court, or the Sovereign Court of Judicature for the Kingdom is at
Bethel, whither come a great confluence of people, and where Civil affairs, and
matters of State are debated, and therefore it is not safe nor seemly for thy
rude rusticity, which knows no Royalty, to abide there. The King has
Chaplains enough of his own (that are complete Courtiers) to preach before
him; he needs no such rustical Prophets, and blunt Anti-Courtiers as thou art;
he has Natives enough, but thou art a Stranger, and come from another
Country: He has Prelates and Priests of eminent parts, every way accomplished
for the work; whereas thou art a poor obscure Prophet, that came ab hara, non
ab ara, from the Herds, not from the Schools, and so art altogether unfit for
the Court. Would thou but Prophecy smooth and pleasant things, thou
might abide here still, but thou art so rough and rugged, so plain and
downright, that our Courtiers ears cannot abide thy words; so that there is no
staying for thee here but with abundance of danger. Thus this grand Impostor
would have frighted the true Prophet from his duty, that so he might keep up
the reputation of his Idolatrous Priests at Bethel, who for filthy Lucre, that
they might rob the true Prophets of their Tithes and Offerings, did by their
preaching foment both Rebellion in the State, and Schism in the Church, for the
Sanctuary at Bethel robbed the Temple at Jerusalem.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Wicked men do their utmost to silence faithful Ministers.

They prohibit them Preaching, Prophecy not. The like complaint we have, Amos
2.12. Micha 2.6. they say to the Prophets, Prophecy not; they silence them
that they may sin without control, and go to Hell without any hindrance. Thus
the Rulers of the Jews forbid Peter and John to preach any more in the name of
Jesus, Acts 4, 17, 18. and 5.40. what is this but to fight against God, and to
countermand his commands? he bids his Amoses preach, the Amaziahs of the World
say no. Did ever any man thus harden himself against God, and prosper? if he
that withholds Corn from the people, him shall the people curse, Prove. 11.26.
what a sad curse will light upon those that withold Spiritual corn from them,
and deprive them of their faithful Pastors which are the light of the World,
the Guides, the Fathers, the Physicians, the Pillars of the Church; such as
forbid men to Preach, please neither God nor man, 1. These. 2.15, 16. Herod was
a wicked man, yet this was his sinning sin, and is said to surmount all the
rest, that he put John in Prison, Luke 3.20. he added this above all, that he
shut up John in prison; and see what befell Amaziah here for opposing Amos,
ver. ult.

Obj. But the Minister denounces Judgments against us, which we cannot bear.

A. Let him preach Mercies or Menaces, if God have sent him we may not silence
him, but must thankfully receive Threatenings as well as Promises, Judgments as
well as Mercies; they are both necessary for us.

Quid est praedicare, nisi furorem mundi in se derivare? Luther.
2 The great ones of the world cannot brook plain Preachers.

These Gallants look upon such blunt and bold Amoses as a pack of Fanatics, a
company of rude, indiscreet Persons, that dare venture to reprove such as them
for their sins. God calls his Ministers Salt, Matthew. 5.13. but these would have
them Honey, to preach only pleasing and humerous things unto them. Such were
those, Isa. 30.10. They say to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets,
Prophecy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, Prophecy
deceits. Great men many times have great corruptions, which they cannot endure
should be touched, their tender ears cannot away with sound Doctrine, they must
have smooth and pleasant things, or nothing, Courtiers love Verba byssina, soft
and silken words. Though we approve of Prudence in Preaching before great ones,
Multi favent Majestati, magis quam veritati. Bern.
yet flattery we abhor. We may not betray the truth to please men; we are sent
to profit, not to please; to edify the heart, not to gratify the ear. Had
Amos preached high-flowen Notions, or Doctrine without application, he might
have been a Priest for Bethel; he might preach in generals, but he must not
Prophecy of Gods Judgments against them, Prophecy not. Men can bear with
Physicians, and suffer them to tell them of the Diseases of their Bodies; and
the Lawyer, to tell them of the flawes in their estates; only the Minister, who
is for the Soul, he must not speak a word. Prophecy not, whereas great men
have most need of faithful Prophets, because they are encompassed with so many
flatterers.

3 Wicked men put fair names upon foul places and practices.

Bethel here was become Beth-aven, yet they call it a Sanctuary; when indeed it
was the Devils Brothel-house, polluted with vi^e Idolatry and iniquity. So
Papists put fine titles upon their foul wares, to vent them the better. The
Pope calls himself the Servant of the Servants of God, yet makes himself King
of Kings, and is a professed enemy to Gods Servants. The Quakers call themselves
the Saints of the most high, when they are professed enemies to God, his Worship,
ways, etc. The Arminians seem to magnify Free Grace as much as any of the
Orthodox, but descend to particulars and their errors will soon appear. It is
often professed by Arminius (says a Reverend Divine) that he attributes as
much to Grace as any other; D. Preston in his Position of the irresistibleness
of converting Grace. p. 1, etc.
that there is nothing said by others concerning the efficacy of Grace, which
is not also affirmed by himself, yea that he acknowledges whatsoever may be
thought or imagined for the opening and setting forth of the power of grace,
and that he is mis-reported by those that render him injurious to the grace of
God, and one that attributes too much to Free Will. We find in Augustine, that
Pelagius professes as much concerning himself, and yet in the mean time this
is true, that if Arminius his Opinion stand good, all this efficacy of grace
which he so magnifies, and amplifies in words, depends on the will of man, in
regard that by virtue of its native liberty, it may receive or reject this
grace; use it or not use it; render it effectual or vain, etc. Thus he.

VER. 14, 15.
Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no Prophet, neither was I a
Prophets Son, but I was an Herd-man, and a gatherer of Sycomore fruit.

And the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go
Prophecy unto my people Israel.


WE have seen Amaziahs design, by force and fraud to suppress Amos; we are now
come to Amos his Answer, which consists of two parts; 1 An Apology for what he
did, grounded upon Gods extraordinary calling him to the work. 2. His
Prophecy, which is twofold.

1 Particular, containing those particular Judgments which should befall
Amaziah. His Wife. His Children.


2 General, containing the utter destruction of Israel, verse. ult.

In these two Verses we have Amos his answer, wherein he constantly and
courageously maintains what he had done; and is so far from desisting or
forsaking of his Station, that by an holy Antiperistasis he grows more bold
and resolute, confirming what he had spoken against Israel, and adding moreover
a dreadful Commination against this Archpriest for opposing him in the Work of
the Lord. He feared not his imperious Injunctions, and Lordly Prohibition, but
boldly asserts his Calling, and goes on in the exercise of it, maugre the
malice of all opposition whatsoever.

So that here we have an Implicit reason, why Amos durst not desist from
Prophesying to Israel, viz. because he was called extraordinarily by God to
Prophecy unto them. He was no intruder, but a truly called qualified Officer;
he did nothing rashly or seditiously, but he seriously and soberly discharged
the duties of that place to which God had so signally called him.

Now the better to clear his Call (which was the foundation of his comfort and
confidence) he first tells us Negatively, what he was not, I was no Prophet,
nor Prophets Son, q. d. I was no Prophet either by birth or breeding, either by
Original or Succession. Some were chosen to be Prophets before they were bred
or born, as Ier. 1.5. others among the Israelites were Prophets by succession;
others by preparation, were trained up betimes in the knowledge and study of
the Scripture; in Colleges and Seminaries of Learning, to supply the wants of
the Church. The Prophets that taught them, were called their Fathers, and the
Scholars were called, the Sons of the Prophets, 2 King. 2.3, 7, 15. and 4.38.
and 6.1. Mar. 10.24. Amos ingenuously confesses, that he was none of these;
he was neither Nabi, nor ^en Nabi, neither Prophet, nor Prophets Son; he was
not brought up at Bethel, 2 King. 2.3. or Jericho, verse. 5. or Gilgal, 2 King.
4.38. nor at the feet of any learned Gamaliel.

2 Positively, he tells us plainly what he was, viz. an illiterate Herdman of
the Tribe of Judah, dwelling at Tekoa, a City in Judah, but extraordinarily
called by God, from his Country-calling, of feeding Cattle, to feed his people
Israel with the Bread of Life, Amos 1.1.

This he mentions not to make his Message contemptible, but to procure the more
respect and authority to his Prophecy, since he was not called and qualified
in an ordinary way, but immediately, and extraordinarily by God himself.

I was an Herdman; Such were useful in their kind, they had many of them in
those days, because their riches lay much in cattle. Their lesser cattle were
tended by Shepherds, and their greater by Herdmen, Boker, bubulcus, quasi
Bakar, bos, quia fuit custos boum.
Genesis 13.5. and 24.35. and 26.14. Job 1.3. Saul himself before he was made
King, was an Herdman, 1 Samuel 11.5. q. d. Behold the wonderful Works of God,
that I who was never bred to this employment should yet be able to Prophecy,
and to confound such learned Rabbis as you take your selves to be.

And a gatherer of Sycamore Fruit. Yet more to magnify Gods Free Grace, he
sets forth his mean condition from which the Lord had called him. He lived a
solitary, country life, he was not bred up in Cities, or Academies, but amongst
Herds and Stalls, contenting himself with such wild diet as the Sycamores did
afford. Sycamorous est arbor media inter ficum and morum, unde nomen ejus, a
(...) ficus; and (...), morus. Minshaw. Amos non victus causa Prophetabat, nam
didicerat vitam Sycamoris and agrestibus aliis rebus tolerare. Iunius.
Most take the word Sycamore strictly, for a kind of wild Figgs, called
Egyptian Figgs, or Bastard-mulberries, which the poorer sort of Ru^ticks in
those times fed upon.

But it may be taken Synecdochically, and Proverbially for any kind of course
diet or fare. I was a gatherer of Sycamore fruit; that is, I was a poor man, of
a low condition, even of the same rank with those that use to feed upon wild
Figgs; I did not then turn Prophet for my belly, for I had learned to fare
hardly, which thou O Amaziah, and thy Court-Priests can hardly do, and
therefore you sooth up the Rulers in their Idolatry, that you may serve your
own turns, but Sycamore fruit will serve my turn.

V. A Lapide in locum, ubi plura.
Of Sycamore-trees there were great abundance in the Land of Canaan, as appears,
1 King. 10.27. Isa. 9.10. Luke 19.4. and in Egypt, Psalm. 78.47. they were very
fruitful, they bare fruit three or four times in the year, says Dioscorides,
lib. 1. c. 143. This fruit Amos might gather for himself, or for his family, or
for to sell.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 As the Devil has his Amaziahs to oppose the truth, so God his Amoses to
defend it.

The same day that Pelagius was born in Britain, the same day was Saint Austine
born in Africa to oppose him, In my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.8. Obs. 2. p. 155.
as I have showed elsewhere.

2 God often chooses the weak things of the world to confound the mighty, and
the things that are not (of any esteem in the world) to confound the things
that are of great esteem amongst them, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.

He usually hangs the greatest weights upon the weakest wyres, that so his name
may have all the praise; if the Lord should always work by excellent
Instruments, we should Idolize the Instruments and forget God. Hence the Lord
often passes by the eloquent Orator, and the learned Scribe, and chooses an
illiterate Amos, sending him from the Crib to the Court, to witness against the
Idolatry of Princes, Priests, and People.

Thus in the Civil State he often chooses persons of low degree to rule his
people, as Moses, Saul, David, all three called from their Flocks and Herds to
rule his people, Exo. 3.1. 1 Samuel 9.21. and 2 Samuel 7.8. Psalm. 113.7.8. Thus in
the Ecclesiastical estate he called Elisha from the Plow, 1 King. 19.19.
Matthew from the receipt of Custom; all the Apostles were illiterate men till
Christ gifted them extraordinarily; and fitted them for their work, See more in
my Com. on 2 Timothy 4.21. Obs. 3.1.479.
Acts 4.13. God loves to show his power in weakness that the glory may be his,
2 Cor. 12.9. Psalm. 8.3. we have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7.

Obj. From hence the Anabaptists would cry down Universities, and Schools of
Learnings, the Lord took Amos from the Stall, and Elisha from the Plow, and
qualified them without study, what need then this studying and Schooling? etc.

Ans. These were called extraordinarily, as appears by their extraordinary
gifts; now extraordinary Cases cannot make an ordinary rule; because the Lord
fed the Israelites with Mannah, it does not therefore follow that we must sit
still, and think to be so fed.

It is true, the Anabaptists, and fanatic frantic Quakers, do all pretend to
an extraordinary and immediate Call; when upon trial they are found not to have
ordinary gifts, they can hardly write or read.

2 Examples in Scripture are not always Argumentative, neither are we bound to
follow them unless there be a like call, In my Pulpit-Guard p. 55, 59.
causes, and other concurrent circumstances, as I have showed elsewhere.

3 Grace makes men constant and courageous.

How roundly and undauntedly does Amos here deal with Amaziah, notwithstanding
all his threats and flatteries, yet he stands like a Rock, justifies his
Calling, and denounces Judgments against the false Prophet himself, and
confirms what he had spoken before against Israel. Thus the righteous are an
everlasting foundation, Prove. 10.25. The wicked fear where there is no ground
of fear, and fly when none pursues them, but the righteous are bold as Lions,
Prove. 28.1. Mark 6.18. Acts 23.1.

VERSE 15.
And the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go,
Prophecy unto my people Israel.
AMaziah counseled Amos to go back to Judah from whence he came; to this Amos
replies, I cannot, I dare not; for as I care from thence by Divine command, so
till I have the like command from him that sent me, I dare not return.

Amos comforts himself much with the sweet resent of that Call which he had
from God, and therefore he tells us, how the Lord took him as he was feeding
and following the Flocks, Because Amos speaks of a flock here, therefore some
would gather that Amos was a Shepherd, but the word Hatson is general, and
relates to a flock of great Cattle, as well as small.
and the Lord said to him (when he little thought of any such employment) Go,
prophecy to my people Israel. I did not thrust my self into the work, but it
pleased the Lord to take me from that homely employment, and to enjoin me this
task of Prophesying.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 We must obey God rather than men. Acts 4.19. and 5.29.

Si aliud jube^ imperator, aliud Deus, quid judicatur? Major potestas Deus.
Aug. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 6.
Amaziah bids Amos be gone, but Amos says, the Lord sent him to Israel and he
will not stir. Thus he opposes Gods Commandment to Amaziahs prohibition. We
may obey no man but in and for the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. Hence the Midwives are
commended for disobeying the wicked commands of Pharaoh, who would have had all
the male Children killed, Exodus 1.17.

2 God loves to appear to us when we are in our Callings.

Thus God appeared to Moses when he was keeping Sheep, Exodus 3.1. to David,
when he was following the Ewes; to Saul, when he was seeking Asses; to Amos
here, when he was following the Herd; and to the Woman of Samaria, when she was
drawing water, Ioh. 4.7.

3 When God calls us to forsake all we must readily do it. God commands Amos
to leave his Herds, the Apostles to forsake their Nets, Abraham to forsake his
own Country and Kindred, Zacheus to come down and follow Christ, and they
immediately did so, Mat. 4.19, 26. Luke 19.6. Genesis 12.1, 4. True grace makes
men willing to do or suffer whatever God commands.

4 None may take upon them the Ministry without a Call.

Amos stirs not till God says, Go; no man may assume this Office till he be
called, Heb. 5.4. should an Angel from Heaven come and preach, he must show his
Call, he may not violate the order which God has set in his Church, Gal. 1.8.
Hence the Lord so often complains of false Prophets, that they ran and he sent
them not, Ier. 14.14. many run from their Callings without a Call, Zach. 13.5.
let such never look either for protection, or success; let them preach never so
loud, or so long, they shall never profit people because God is against them,
Ier. 23.32. I am against them that Prophecy false Dreams, and cause my people
to err by their Lies and lightness, yet I sent them not, mark what follows,
therefore they shall not profit this people; that is, they shall do them much
hurt and mischief, it is a Meiosis.

Be sure then to have a Call for what you do, this will support you under your
burdens, and comfort you in the midst of all tentations and trials, Dan. 3.16,
17, 18. Acts 4.19, 20. if the Lord have called us he will keep us, Isa. 42.6.
this is as a brazen wall to secure us; this made Amos so resolute and confident
against Amaziah, and Nathan so free with David, Elijah with Ahab, See more in
my Pulpit-Guard. Arg. 2. p. 11, 12, 17.
John Baptist with Herod, and the Apostles with the world; it was the warrant
of their Calling, that they had it from God, and not from man.

This will make our Ministry successful, one Elijah sent by God, shall be too
hard for two hundred and fifty false Prophets, though King Ahab and Queen
Iezabel join with them, and own them.

VER. 16.
Now therefore hear the Word of the Lord, thou say, Prophecy not against
Israel, and drop not thy word against the house of Isaac.
AMos comes now to direct his speech to Amaziah, who had forbidden him to
Prophecy, Thou say, Prophecy not against Israel. To this Prohibition Amos
opposes Gods Injunction, and is so far from desisting, that he denounces
Gods Judgments against him, and bids him attend to what he had to say from the
Lord against him. q. d. Who art thou O vain and vile man, that dare thus
affront and contradict the Almighty; So that when he says, Go, Prophecy to
Israel, yet thou say, Go not to Israel, neither Prophecy there, but go to
Judah, and prophecy there. Hear therefore what the Lord has determined
against thee, Thy Wife shall be an Harlot in the City, thy Children shall fall
by the sword, etc.

In these two last Verses we have a fourfold Judgment denounced against this
Persecuting Priest, verse. 17.

2 Here is the Procatarctical cause of these Judgments, and that was his
opposing Amos in the Work of the Lord, using all means to silence him.

3 Here is a confirmation of the former Commination against Israel, ver. 11.
Hear the Word of the Lord. We have heard thee speak, now do thou hear God
speak, for his Word is not like thine, a vain, empty, ineffectual word; but a
mighty, powerful, efficacious word, bringing down dreadful things upon the
heads of malicious Persecutors, 2 Cor. 10.6. God is ready to revenge the
disobedience done to his commands. Gods Word lays hold on wicked men, Zach.
1.6. and that which they accounted wind, becomes like fire to devour them, Ier.
5.13, 14.

Thou say, Prophecy not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the
house of Isaac; that is, Prophecy not of Gods Judgments against the ten
Tribes, who were descended from Abraham by Isaac the Son of the Promise, Genesis
21.12. see before verse. 9.

This dropping here is Metaphorical, and denotes those dreadful Judgments
which should fall upon the heads of wicked men like a storm of rain, Ezekiel.
20.46. and 21.2, 3.

2 Dropping in Scripture is frequently taken in the sweetest sense, for gentle
and sweet speaking, Deuteronomy. 32.2. Job 29.22. My doctrine shall drop as the rain,
and distill as the dew; that is, it shall be as useful and refreshing to men,
as the dew and rain is to the grass; as these soften the ground, and so make
the fruits to grow up sweetly and abundantly; so the Word of God falling into
an honest and good heart becomes effectual, making it more soft and fruitful in
every good work, Isa. 55.10. Luke 8.15.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Wicked ^e^ are Antipodes to God.

They go directly contrary to his commands. God bids Amos Prophecy against
Israel, Amaziah forbids him. God bids Amos drop and denounce Judgments against
Israel, no says Amaziah, if thou will drop, go drop at Judah, for we will
none of thy dropping here. So true is that of Luther, Homo est inversus
decalogus, Man is a cross grained-peece, directly opposite to all Gods
commands. There is in our Nature a deadly enmity to God, his Ways, his
Worship, his Word, his Ordinance, his Prophets, his People, and to all that is
good, Romans 8.7. Col. 1.21.

VER. 17.
Therefore thus says the Lord, thy Wife shall be an Harlot in the City, and
thy Sons and Daughters shall fall by the Sword, and thy Land shall be divided
by Line, and thou shall dye in a polluted Land, and Israel shall surely go
into Captivity forth of his own Land.
IN this Verse we have a dreadful Judgment denounced against this High Priest
of Bethel, consisting of many Branches.

1 Constupration of his Wife, and that openly. 2 Loss of his Children. 3 Loss
of his Lands. 4 Loss of his Liberty, and 5 Loss of Israel.
Lo, this is the fruit of silencing Preachers, and forbidding Gods Ministers
to Prophecy.

2 Here is the confirmation, or ratification of all this, Dixit Dominus, the
Lord has said it, who will certainly do it.

Thy Wife shall be an Harlot in the City. Interpreters are divided about the
meaning of these words; Zanah, fornicatus, scortatus fuit. It implies a
voluntary act. So Genesis 38.24. Judge. 19.2. Ezekiel. 13.34. Hos. 4.13, 14.
some take them Actively, and the Original seems to favor it, viz. that his
Wife should be an open Harlot, and a common Strumpet, not so much forced by
Soldiers, as voluntarily addicted to it.

Others take the words Passively, that she should be violently forced and
ravished by the Assyrians when they should take the City, according to that
threatening against disobedient ones, Deuteronomy. 28.30. So Job 31.10. Isa 13.16.
Lament. 5.11.

But if it were violent and involuntary, where were the Harlotry? Thy Wife
shall be an Harlot, and to show her impudency, Grandis dolor incredibilisque
ignominia quando maritus in media civitate u^oris injuriam prohibere non
potist; non est tanius dolor in filia construpata, quantus in uxore polluta;
maritus enim libentius audit uxorem interfici, quam pollut. Hieron.
she should act it not in the house, or in the fields, or in a foreign Land,
but openly in the City.

This is the first Punishment, the second follows.

2 Thy Sons and thy Daughters shall fall by the sword. Wicked Parents bring a
Curse upon their Children, not only their Cattle, but all their Relations fare
the worse for them.

3 Yet this is not all, Thy Land shall be divided by Line. Conquerours were
wont to divide every one his Lot and portion by Lines and Cords; Chebel, funis,
Metonymyc^s capitur pro part seu tractu terrae funiculis mensurato.
for of old they used Cords instead of Measuring-Rods, to divide their Land.
Hence the Lines in Scripture are put for the Inheritance, or portion allotted
to every one by Line, Deuteronomy. 32.9. 2 Samuel 8.2. Psalm. 16.6. Micha 2.5. Thus he
should not only lose his Heirs, but his Inheritance also.

And thou shall dye in a polluted Land. This is the fourth Punishment, Thou
shall dye a Captive in Assyria, which was polluted with Heathenism and Idolatry.

This is reckoned as a Judgment, Levit. 26.38. against Pashur, Jer. 20.6. and
Coniah, Jer. 22.25, 26. The Land of Promise was called the Holy Land, and in
comparison of it all other Nations were called and counted unclean, and they
looked upon it as a misery to be buried in a strange Land, and not in Canaan.

And Israel shall go into Captivity. Not only thou, but all Israel whom thou
have helped to deceive, and have hardened in their Idolatry and Sin, shall go
into Captivity with thee; and this men get by following Idolaters and
Impostors, when the blind lead the blind both fall into the ditch.

Israel shall surely go into captivity. God will no longer bear with them,
since King and Kingdom are settled upon their Lees, and had so long sinned
together, now the Lord tells them that they should suffer together, and go
Captives into Assyria as we see 2 King. 15.29. and 17.6, 18, 23, 24. and 18.11.
since they had abused that good Land which the Lord had given them, now it
should spew them out for their Idolatry.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 God uses to retaliate Sinners, and to pay them in their own coin.

This we see here excellently exemplified in Amaziah.

1 He enticed Israel to Idolatry, which is Spiritual Harlotry, therefore his
Wife shall be an Harlot.

2 He had destroyed those that were Gods Children by external profession,
therefore his Children were destroyed.

3 He made his Goods his God, and was all for gain, therefore now he shall lose
all.

4 He that had polluted Gods People, shall now dye in a polluted Land. He that
would not follow the true God to his Salvation, shall follow false ones to his
own destruction.

2 Silencing and persecuting of Gods faithful Ministers is a God-provoking Sin.

Thou say, Prophecy not, what follows? therefore thy Wife, thy Children,
thy State, thy Self, and the Land of thy Nativity shall smart for it. Now, if
Amaziah paid so dear for endeavoring to silence one faithful Amos, what may
they expect who do actually blow out many burning and shining Lights? etc. let
such remember Pashur, Jer. 20.2, 3, 4. and the men of Anathoth, See more on
ver. 13. Obs. 1.
Ier. 11.21, 22, 23. and Jeroboam the first with his withered hand, which was
smitten for stretching it forth against the Prophet, 1 King. 13. and Elimas the
Sorcerer, who was smitten blind for opposing the truth, Acts 13.10, 11. never
any man hardened himself against God, especially in this kind that ever
prospered, Job 9.4. Amaziah had many other sins, as Idolatry, Superstition,
Covetousness, etc. but this Persecuting of Amos was his fatal sin, and ruined
both him and his.

3 Wicked Parents bring a Curse upon their Posterity.

God often punishes the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, to the third and
fourth Generation of them that hate him, See more in Caryl on Job 5.5. p. 200.
and on Heb. 11.28.
Exodus 20.5. and 34.7. Deuteronomy. 28.18, 32, 41. Ier. 29.32. Hieron. on Exodus 34.7.
and in my Com. on Hos. 13. ult. p. 80. and Dr. Gorge Lam. 5.7. the seed of
evildoers shall never be renowned, Isa. 14.20.

4 Goods ill gotten seldom prosper.

Male parta male dilabuntur.
Treasures of wickedness profit not, Prove. 10.2. Amaziah had scraped much
wealth together, but his enemies became his heirs. And so it is with many
Usurers, and oppressing Cormorants, who treasure up riches for their enemies.

5 Marriage is lawful in Ministers as well as others.

The Apostle tells us, that Marriage is honorable not only in some, but in all
sorts and degrees of men, Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honorable (...) in all men,
and God himself has appointed it for the comfort of all degrees, Genesis 1.28.
and 2.18. and bids him that cannot contain, marry, 1 Cor. 7.2, 9. none can vow
that which is not in his own power; but continency is the gift of God, Matthew.
19.11. all cannot receive this saying, and therefore not only Amaziah here, but
the Priests and Prophets in the Old Testament had Wives; Zachariah the Priest
has an Elizabeth to his Wife, and she descended of the Daughters of Aaron,
Luke 1.5. Jeremiah was the Son of a Priest, Ier. 1.1. and Hophni and Phineas
the Sons of Eli the Priest, 1 Samuel 1.3. and John Baptist the Son of Zachariah
the Priest; yea many of the Apostles had Wives, as Peter, Philip, James, and
Barnabas, Mat. 8.14. Acts 13.2. Saint Ambrose affirms, that all the Apostles
were married save John and Paul, See th^s Point la^gely and learnedly debated.
Pro and con, by Mr Bell in his surv^y of Popery Part 3. Char. 3. p. 218, etc.
Gravius peccat Sac^^dos si uxo^em ducat, quam si domi concubinam foveat.
Coster. Enchirid. cap. 17. propos. 9.
and the Apostle expressly says, that he had power to marry as well as Cephas,
1 Cor. 9.5. and he allows a Bishop to have one wife, Titus 1.6. It is one mark
of Antichrist to maintain that Doctrine of Devils, in forbidding the marriage
of Ministers, 1 Timothy 4.1, 3.

This Prohibition of Marriage has filled the World with Whoredom, Sodomy,
Bestiality and Incest, and therefore Paphnutius a famous Primitive Confessor,
Hist. Tripart. lib 2. c. 14. R^ffin. Hist. Eccles. l. 10. c 4.
though himself were unmarried, yet mightily persuaded and prevailed with the
Nicene Council, that they should not decree any thing against Priests Marriage.

The moderate sort of Papists have allowed of Priests Marriages, as Gratian,
Panormitan, and others, even Bellarmine himself confesses, Copula
sacerdotalis, nec legali, nec Evangelica, nec Apostolica authoritate prohibetur
Gratian. Q. 26. S. 2. Bellar. de Clericis, l. 1. c. 18. See Mr. Chancy his Ser.
on Amos 2.11. printed 1655.
that there is no Precept in the Old or new Testament against Ministers
marriage; and we in England are bound to bless God for the married Clergy. How
many Dods, Dykes, Wheatlies, Whitakers, Rogerses, Byfields, etc. and other
eminent Lights is this Church furnished withal, from the pious and reverend
Clergymen of this Land. It is a choice Mercy to a Land, when the Lord shall
raise up from amongst our selves Nazarites to serve in the Sanctuary, Amos 2.11.

Caut. Yet as all persons, so young Ministers especially should not be rash and
hasty in their Marriages, but should get a competent Library first, and some
gravity and solidity, that they may be able to walk exemplarily before their
Flocks, and that they may not dishonor this honorable Ordinance of God, with
any levity or vanity.

[For the lawfulness of Ministers Marriage, See B. Hall, Epis. 3. Dec. 2. and
his Treatise styled, The Honor of the Married Clerg. Zegedin loc. com. p. 444.
Davenant. Determ. Quest. 43. Perkins 2. Vol. Demonstr. of the Problem, p. 574.
Mornay de Missa. l. 2. c. 8. Erasmus Tom. 5. p. 513. D. Willet. Synops. Papis.
Error 83. p. 291, etc. and Mr. Fox Martyrolog. Vol. 2. p. 464, etc. See more in
the Index of the Book of Martyrs, in the word Marriage. B. Morton Protest.
Appeal, lib. 1. c. 2. Sect. 32. p. 38. ad 46. An^es. Bellarm. enervat. Tom. 2.
l. 3. p. 131. Osiand. Enchirid. Controv. contra Pap. Q. 21. p. 417. ad 456.
Paraeus in 1 Cor. 7. Q. 3. col. 448, Gerard. Loc. Com. Tom. 6. col. 369. ad 434.

CORONIS.

Hic praesentis Historiae sit usus, ut Amasias, qui hodie sibi in Ecclesia
dominium vendicant, caveamus, and constanter retineamus verae fidei
confessionem, quam ex Dei verbo didicimus. Gualter.

The end of the Seventh Chapter.
AN EXPOSITION, WITH Practical OBSERVATIONS UPON The Eighth Chapter of Amos.
VERSE 1, 2, 3. Thus has the Lord God showed unto me, and behold a basket of
Summer fruit.

And he said, Amos, what see thou? and I said, a basket of Summer fruit. Then
said the Lord unto me, The end is come upon my people of Israel; I will not
again pass by them any more.

And the Songs of the Temples shall be howlings in that day, says the Lord
God, there shall be many dead bodies in every place, they shall cast them forth
with silence.


THe Lord having tried many conclusions upon this people, and used all means to
reclaim them, but in vain; he therefore sends the Prophet to them, to declare
their final ruin, which he does in this Chapter by the vision of a basket of
Summer fruit, noting thereby the ripeness of their sins, and their neerness to
ruin.

The Prophet had before set forth the Judgments which were coming upon this
people, by three Types and Visions. 1. By the Type of Grasshoppers and Locusts,
he did shadow out the famine, chap 7.2. By fire, devouring the great deep, is
set forth War, chap. 7.4, 5, 6.3. By a Plumb line, is set forth the overthrow
of the Kingdom, and the Kings house, chap. 7.7.4. We have here a fourth
Vision, where by a basket of Summer fruit, is set forth the final destruction
of the ten Tribes. So that in this chapter we have the sum of Amos his sixth
Sermon, wherein is a Type propounded and expounded, Or 1. A Commination of the
total overthrow of the Kingdom of Israel, set forth under the type of a basket
of Summer fruit, verse. 1, 2, 3.

2. Here is an Amplification of this Commination, the better to awaken these
secure sinners, set forth by a particular enumeration of those dreadful
Judgments, both corporal and spiritual, which were coming on them, and that in
so dreadful a manner, that the Sun should be darkened, and no light of
consolation appear. The Land should tremble, and every one mourn bitterly, as
for the loss of an only Son, verse. 7. Desolation like an overflowing flood
should run over all, Verse. 3.

Their feasting should be turned into fasting, and their prosperity into
deplorable misery. This is set forth, 1. Metaphorically, verse. 9. I will cause
the Sun to go down at noon.

2. Plainly, verse. 3, to 13. I will turn your feasts into weeping, and your
beautiful Virgins and strong young men shall perish.

3. Their Pastors should be taken from them, and they should have a spiritual
famine of the preaching of the Word, it should be so scarce, that it was not to
be found, verse. 11, 12. They had loathed this Mannah, and now they should be
made to know the worth of it, by the wanting of it.

4. Utter destruction, verse. 14. They shall fall and never rise up again.

3. Here is the ground of this Commination, or the Impulsive and meritorious
cause of all this sorrow, viz. the sins of Israel, as 1. Their oppression of
the poor, verse. 4.

2. Their covetousness and greediness after gain, counting all time lost that
was spent in the service of God, because it brought no present profit,
therefore they say, When will the New Mood be gone? verse 5.

3. Their deceitful dealing, in falsifying weights and measures, verse. 5.

4. Their Idolatry, verse. 14.

VERSE 1.
Thus has the Lord God showed unto me, and behold a basket of Summer fruit.
THe Prophet begins with a Vision or Parable, which contains the substance of
the whole Sermon, by a lively type he sets forth Isreal's utter ruin; and to
procure the more authority to what he spoke, he begins with his usual preface,
which he prefixed before his former Visions, chap. 7.1.4.7. Thus has the Lord
showed me. The Lord the God of Israel, whose name is Jehovah, the only true
God, who cannot deceive, nor be deceived; he is the Author of this Vision, I am
but the Penman and rustic Instrument to declare it to you, 2 Pet. 1.21.

In the Verse it self, we have, 1. An Exordium or Preface, Thus has the Lord
showed me, q. d. I bring you no Vision of mine own brain, but what I tell you
I have received from the Lord, the Vision I had from him, and therefore in his
name do I require attention.

2. Here is a note of Attention, Of this see more on Amos 4. ult. and 6.11.
Behold, which is here an Eye-Ecee, though often in Scripture it be an Ear-Ecce,
calling upon men to hearken; yet here it is an Eye- Ecce, and calls upon them to
see a Vision, so it is used, John 1.29, 47. This word Behold, like the hand in
the Margent of a Book, points to some notable thing, and is like the sounding
of a Trumpet before some famous proclamation, or the ringing of a Bell before
an excellent Sermon.

3. Here is the Vision to be attended and observed, and that is, Kajitz,
aestatis, i. e. rest vorum fructuum, qui aestate maturuerunt, and jam
decerpendi sunt. Met. Adjuncti, Tempus pro iis quae sunt in tempore ut videre
est, 2 Samuel 16.1. Isa. 16.9.
A basket of Summer fruit. Amos saw a basket of Summer fruit. After all the
Visions means and menaces which the Lord had given them, he adds yet this, Of a
basket of Summer fruit, if at last he might work upon their hard hearts. By
this sacred Hieroglyphick, the Lord typifies the manner of Isreal's end, and
shows it to the Prophet in Vision, the better to affect both Prophet and
People. A basket of Summer fruit is quickly ripe; as the great heat of the Sun
does more speedily ripen fruit, so the great means and mercies which this
people did enjoy, hastened the maturity of their sin, and made them as the Rod
of an Almond-tree. which blossometh before other trees, Ier. 1.11, 12.

When fruit is ripe and gathered, it is a sign that Summer is past, and Winter
is at hand; so this Vision did show that the Winter of a final overthrow was
nigh to the ten Tribes.

The word which we render Basket, the Vulgar render it, Uncinus, an Hook,
wherewith we get the fruits which are past our reach, from the tops of trees.
It Is true, the word is Homonymous, in the Original, Kelab, canistrum, Uncinus,
cavea,
and admits of diverse significations, as a Basket, a Hook, a Cage; but most
properly it signifies a Basket; though there is a truth in all these, for as
the Hook, pulls down those Apples which are ripe, with ease, and brings the
boughs to our hands; and as ripe fruit in a Basket, or birds in a Cage, Ier.
5.27. are easily carried whithersoever the owner pleases; so the Israelites
which were ripe for ruin, should be easily and suddenly carried away out of
their own Land by the Assyrians, as appears, 2 King. 17.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. The Servants of God must persevere in their Ministry, notwithstanding
peoples obstinacy.

The Prophet had preached five Sermons before, and though he were affronted by
Amaziah the Priest, We must press the same thing again and again Hardy, 1 John
2.9. p. 163, 164.
and accused of sedition, and advised to fly and be gone, that so the Kingdom
might be shut of him; yet he goes on in his duty still, and adds a sixth Sermon
to the rest, and publishes another Vision to his former Visions, if by any
means he might reclaim them. The barrenness and baseness of a people must not
make us barren, Ezekiel. 2.3, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 9.16. but by an holy Antiperistasis;
the more vile our people are, the more zealous must we be for God; as Elijah
was in the midst of an Idolatrous Generation. If men be hardened in their sins,
and oppose the truth, we must harden our foreheads against their oppositions,
and set our faces as a flint against them, as our Savior did, Isa. 50.7. and
Ier. 1.18. Yielding to the wicked in their wickedness, makes them more
Tyrannical and violent. We must therefore add Sermon to Sermon, and Precept to
precept, Isa. 28.13. If one blow, or one woe will not awaken sinners, we must
add seven more, Mat. 23.13. to 29.

2. It Is lawful in weighty cases to use a Preface before we speak.

The Prophet here begins with a Thus has the Lord showed me, V. Psalm. 82.2.
Obs. 1. p. 9.
to quicken their Attention. But of this elsewhere.

3. Ministers must preach plainly to their people. See more in my Com. on Hos.
13.15. Obs. ^. p. 46, 47.


Hence the Lord so often uses similitudes by his servants the Prophets, Isa.
5.1, etc. Ier. 2.21. Ezekiel. 17.6. Mat. 13. 3, etc. and condescends to our
capacities by setting forth Visions, signs and sights before his Prophets, for
the better instruction of his people, Numb. 12.6. and 24.4. Isa. 6.1. Ier.
24.1, 2, 3. Ezekiel. 1.1. etc 8.3. Dan. 1.17. and 2.19. Amos 1.1. and 7.1, 4, 7.
Zach. 3.1. In those Visions the Lord revealed himself in an extraordinary
manner to his Prophets, yet so clearly and certainly, as if they had seen the
things presently fulfilled, which they foretold; hence they were called Seers,
1 Samuel 9.9. And though these Visions and Revelations be ceased in our days,
yet in these Gospel-daies he has spoken to us by his Son, Heb. 1.1, 2. and
has given to us a more sure word of Prophecy, both for perspicuity and
certainty, because it is both written and sealed, 2 Pet. 1.19.

4. Ministers must preach nothing to their people but what they have received
from the Lord. Of this see before, Amos 4.1. Obs. 3.

5. Matters of moment must be marked.

Therefore the Lord sets a Behold here upon this Vision, and questions with
Amos about it, the better to excite him and his hearers to the due observation
of it. We are all dull and slow of heart to believe the holy things of God,
and had great need of quickening.

VERSE 2.
And he said, Amos, what see thou? and I said, A basket of summer fruit, then
said the Lord unto me, the end is come upon my people Israel, I will not again
pass by them any more.
IN the precedent Verse we had the Type propounded, in this Verse it is
expounded.

The better to awaken both Prophet and People, and to quicken their attention,
1 The Lord questions with the Prophet, Amos, what see thou? Questions and
Colloquies are more lively, and make a deeper impression than plain positive
assertions; hence the Lord so often uses them, Amos 7.8. Zach. 4.2. and 5.1. 2
Here is the Prophets answer, And I said, a basket of summer fruit. This was the
Vision which the Lord showed him, what these ripe fruits were, whether
Cherries, as some affirm, or Figgs, as others; or Pears, Plumbs, Grapes, as
others; or Apples, as A Lapide labors more subtly, than solidly to prove by
eight Analogies, it is not material for us to know; it is sufficient that they
were summer fruits, gathered toward the end of summer, when fruits ripen, and
even fall into the hands of the gatherer. 3 Here is the Lords explanation of
this Vision, Then said the Lord unto me, the end is come upon my people of
Israel. There is an elegant Paranomasy between the two Hebrew words, Kajitz,
aestas; Ketz, finis.
viz. that which signifies summer fruits, and that which signifies an end; they
both sound much alike, so that the one may easily put us in mind of the other;
the ripeness of their sins, of the nearness of their ruin.


The Lord had tried all means and medicines, both as a Father, and a Physician
to cure this people, but since they were incorrigible and incurable, he now
resolves to trouble himself and his Prophets no more with them, for now he
intends utterly to destroy them, The end is come. Hypocrites and presumptuous
sinners are wont to promise themselves a longer time still, No (says the Lord)
you are ripe for ruin, and therefore now you shall reap the fruit of your own
ways, I will bear no longer with you; but as ripe fruit falls of its own akind
with ease, so shall this people drop into the mouth of the Assyrian, now that
the term and time decreed by God for their final overthrow is come. As men
gather ripe fruits into their Baskets, and then eat them, so shall the cruel
and greedy Assyrian devour and destroy those rebellious Sinners who are ripe
and ready for destruction, and therefore the Lord adds, I will not again pass
by them any more.

The like expression we have, Nolo ad eorum impietates ultra connivere, nec
impunitas praeterire. Merce^.
Amos 7.8. q. d. I will not spare them, nor pass by their sins any more, as I
have done. So Micah 7.18. the Lord is said to pardon and pass by the sins of
his people; but these had so provoked him, that he would no longer defer the
punishment of their iniquity. They had enjoyed a long summer of peace and
prosperity, which instead of ripening their Graces, had ripened their Vices,
and therefore now the Lord resolves to make a final end with them, and utterly
to consume them from the face of the earth.

As if the Lord had said, The cry of their sins is so great, that I can no
longer forbear them, but I will execute my Justice upon them without any
inclination to mercy, which they have so greatly abused; it is true, I have
fo^merly plucked off some of their fruits, and have destroyed some of their
people; but now I will come with a basket, and gather all that grows upon
Israel; and will make such an end of this gathering, that there shall be no
more of this kind left for hereafter.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Sacred and Majestic Rhetoric becomes the Ministers of Christ.

A vain, See more, Amos 6.1. Obs. 1. and Camero in Mat. 18.8. p. 114, 115, 116.
folio.
light, frothy, flourish of words is below the Ministers of Christ, but a
grave, solid, serious finding out of acceptable words, the better to work upon
the affections of people, becomes our calling. Hence the Lord himself here
uses an Erotesis, a Paranomasie etc. Metaphors, etc.

2 When the Sins of a People are ripe and full, God will no longer spare them.

He lets the wicked fill up the measure of their iniquity before he destroys
them, Genesis 15.16. Joel 3. Nah. 3.12, 13. Revel. 14.18. Though he bear long yet
he will not always bear, but when sin is come to maturity, he will cut it down
with the sickle of his wrath, and will recompense his patience with the
fierceness of his fury; and then though Noah, Job, and Daniel should stand
before him for such a people, yet they could not prevail, Ezekiel. 14.14, 20. nor
preserve them from ruin, Ier. 16.5. Lam. 4.18. Ezekiel. 5.11. and 7.5, 6. Nah.
1.8, 9.

Q. But when are a people ripe for ruin?

A. I have showed at large elsewhere, viz. when the multitude, magnitude, In my
Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 109, 110.
strength, growth, impudency, and obstinacy of peoples sins are come to the
height, then is a peoples downfall near; when no Preaching, no Praying, no
Judgments, no Mercies can better a People, but they fall away more and more,
and grow worse and worse, it is a most certain sign that sin is ripe, and that
people nigh to ruin.

3 God will not spare his own people when they rebel against him.

Though Israel be his People, and in Covenant with him, yet if they walk not up
to the terms of the Covenant, God will cast them off, and bring an end even
upon Israel, for so says the text, The end is come upon my people of Israel.
People are apt to sooth themselves up in their Privileges, and to think that
their Prerogatives should save them from wrath, but in vain, as I have showed
elsewhere.

In my Com. on Hos. 13.4. Obs. 3. and 4.
VERSE 3.
And the Songs of the Temples shall be howlings in that day, says the Lord
God, there shall be many dead bodies in every place, they shall cast them forth
with silence.
THe Prophet goes on to amplify the greatness of the approaching Judgments,
the better to awaken them; to this end he tells them, 1. That the Songs of the
Temples used at their sacred Solemnities, and Divine Service should cease, and
be turned to howling and lamentation for the miseries that should come upon
them. This Howling notes the greatness of the grief, and the height of horror
which should surprise them; they should not only weep for the calamities which
should come upon them, but they should weep till they howl again for anguish of
spirit. Hence when sore Judgments light upon a people, we read of howling,
wayling, and weeping joined together, Isa. 15.3. Ier. 4.8. Ezekiel. 21.12. Hos.
7.14. Micah. 2.8.

Q. But what is meant by the Temple here?

A. The word signifies both a Palace, and a Temple; and therefore some render
it, Ululabunt cantica Palatii. Vatabl. and Montan.
The Songs of the Palace shall be howlings, q. d. those Palaces and great
Houses of the great ones, which have been hitherto filled with Mirth and
Music, shall be now filled with weeping and howling. The Septuagint and the
Vulgar mistaking the word Scirot, cantica, render it, Cardines and laquearia
Templi stridebunt, but the word signifies a Temple, as well as a Palace; and by
it here is meant not so much the Temple at Jerusalem, (which was not destroyed
till a considerable time after) but the Idolatrous Temple of Bethel, where the
golden Calves were, and other high places where they had set up Idols; for
though this Prophet does sometimes glance at Judah and Jerusalem, yet the
primary bent of his Prophecy is against Samaria, and the ten Tribes, as
appears, verse. 14. I will punish those that swear by the sin of Samaria, which
was not far from Bethel, against whose Idolatry Amos so much inveighed, Amos
7.13.

2 There should be so great a Mortality of all sorts and Sexes, that many
should dye by the Sword, Plague, Famine, Captivity, and other Judgments every
word has its weight. There shall be dead Bodies, many dead Bodies, many dead
Bodies in all places, Rab happeger, multiplex, cadaver, i. e. multa erunt
cadavera, multi occidentur. It is a kind of Aposiopesis, when men are angry and
troubled, so that they curtail their words: many dead bodies in every place, i.
e. there shall be many dead bodies in every place. See my Schools-Guard on that
figure.
and these shall be cast out with silence, i. e. they shall cast them into
common pits, and bury them without lamentation, or any funeral solemnity. The
word Has, Tace, Sile, is the same with Amos 6.10. Be silent. Some give the same
sense of the word as they do, Amos 6.10. he that buries the dead shall say to
him that helps him, Be silent, not a word, for God is just in all that he has
brought upon us for our Apostasy and Idolatry. So the word is used, Amos 5.13.
and 6.10. Hab. 2.20* Zeph. 1.7. Zach. 2.13. or else thus, Throw these dead
bodies into pits and say nothing, lest we be sequestered as unclean by the Law.

3. Here is the time when all this misery should fall upon them, viz. In that
day, i. e. in the day of Isreal's final overthrow.

4 Here is the certainty of all this, Dixit Dominus, The Lord, who cannot lie,
has spoken it.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 The joy of Idolatrous worshippers shall end in sorrow.

They may feast, and fiddle, and sing for a time, and walk in the light of
those sparks which themselves have kindled, but this they shall have at Gods
hands, they shall lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50. ult. God hates both them and
their singing, and will turn their songs into howling, Amos 5.23. Superstitious
persons are apt to think that God is delighted as they are, with Music,
Singing, and a little formal sacrificing in the Temple, but the Prophet tells
them, such carnal joy shall end in howling. The Lord had given them a little
success, and they conceited presently that they were highly in Gods favor (for
wicked men are apt to measure Gods favor to them by present enjoyments and
outward prosperity) and therefore they go to singing (as Papists now use to
do) in their Temples, yet with self-respects; hence the Prophet thunders out
wrath and Judgment against them; for those that will not sincerely sing to God
in a time of grace, shall be forced to howl in a time of wrath. Those that will
not serve God with gladness of heart in the abundance of all things, shall
serve him in sadness of heart in the want of all things, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48. In
Nehemiahs time neither Princes, Priests, nor people would serve: God in that
fat Land which he had given them, therefore they were made Slaves to their
enemies, Neh. 9.34, 35, 36, 37. So Psalm. 106.39, 40, 41, 42. when they fell
from God to Idols, he sold them into their enemies hands for a prey. When the
Gospel comes with tenders of grace to a people, and they re^ect them, such
shall be slain, Luke 19.14, 27.

See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.12. Obs. 1. and 13.13. Obs. 8. and 13.16. Obs.
6.
2 Sin brings Gods sore Judgments upon a people.

It brings Sword Plague, Famine, Ezekiel. 14.21. which lay heaps upon heaps, and
sweep away thousands in a short space; so that there are many dead bodies in
all places. Sin makes men fall and fly before Gods Judgments, as leaves before
a mighty wind, Isa. 64.6. See more before on Amos 4.10. and 6.9.

3. Want of decent burial is reckoned as a temporal Judgment upon the wicked.

They shall cast them out with silence, and none shall make lamentation for
them, as they usually did in those days. But of this at large, on Amos 6.10.

VERSE 4, 5.
Hear this ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the Land to
fail,

Saying, when will the New Mood be gone, that we may sell Corn? etc.


THe prophet having set forth the calamities which were coming upon Israel, he
now comes to set forth the ground and cause of these calamities, and that was,
1. Their oppression, cruelty, covetousness, and unrighteousness toward men,
verse. 4, 5, 6. 2. Irreligion and Idolatry toward God, verse. 5, 14. They had
broken both Tables, both high and low, and that with an high hand, against
great light and love, and therefore the Lord resolves now to root them out. And
because secure sinners, (especially great men) are apt to flatter themselves,
and to think themselves privileged, and that God loves them because he does
not presently punish them, therefore the Prophet by an Apostrophe turns his
speech unto them, and that he might the better awaken them, he begins, as often
before, with an Audite hoc, Hear this, O ye brutish men that swallow up the
poor and needy. Hear and fear those threatenings which I denounce against you
from the Lord, verse. 2, 3. Awaken at last, and see what dreadful destruction is
at your doors, that by unfeigned repentance ye may prevent it.


In this Verse we have 1. The Prophets Alarm to drowsy sinners, Hear this.

2. Here are the parties alarumed, and these are primarily, the tyrannical,
oppressing Rulers of Israel. 2. The inferior sort, who sinned in their degree,
and had their peculiar sins as well as others; These covetous Cormorants are
here set forth Paraphrastically, by their greedy devouring of the poor. O ye
that swallow up the needy, that pant and gape as almost windless after them,
Amos 2.7. getting their goods, eating their flesh, drinking their blood, and
making them live so slavishly, that their life was but a lingering death; and
this they did by laying heavy burdens upon them, partly by Bribery and Usury,
partly by racking their Rents, and by inhauncing the rate of food and other
necessary things which they had engrossed into their own hands; and so made
the poor to spend what they had, and for mere necessity to become their slaves.

Shaaph, absorbere, deglutire, anhelare, ardenter cupere.
The word in the fountain signifies to soop up, to devour, and earnestly to pant
after a thing; As a thirsty man swallows down drink with abundance of eagerness
and delight; or as the Whale and great beasts swallow the little ones up at a
bit, Genesis 37.20. and 41.21. So did these cruel, covetous Harpys devour the poor
without any pity or compassion, Job 5.5. and 7.2. Hashshaphim ebion,
absorbentes egenum.
Psalm. 56.2. and 57.4. The participle of the Present Tense, notes the constancy
of their cruelty, they were always devouring, it was their very Trade to press
upon the poor.

3. Here is the height of their cruelty, they so oppressed the poor, that they
were not able to subsist. They make the poor of the Land to fail. Ad abolendum
mansuetos terrae. Montan.
They used all means to dispatch and destroy them out of the Land, that so they
might live alone in the Earth.

Object. But sure they were some wicked men whom they used thus.

Gnanave, mansuetos, modestes, pauperes.
Answ. No, they were the afflicted, meek and lowly of the Land. The meek and
modest poor are exposed to many miseries and injuries of mighty men, thsee
cannot resist, and so become a prey to them, James 2.6. and 5.6. as little fish
do to the great ones. Unreasonable creatures know whom they may be bold
withal, and so do oppressors; A Crow will stand on a Sheeps back, and pull off
wool, they durst not be so bold with a Woolf or Mastiff.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Men are very deaf and hard of hearing, especially when they are told of
their sins.

And therefore the Prophet begins with an Emphatical Hear ye this. They were
deaf, and loath to attend, because they had no desire to amend. Sinners have so
many shifts, and their deceitful hearts find out so many evasions, that the
Lord is fain to bid his Prophet cry, and cry aloud, that all may hear and be
awakened out of their deep sleep. So Isa. 58.1. Micah 6.9.

2. Ministers must not stick to reprove great men when they are great sinners.

They must cry with the Prophet, Hear this O ye Rulers. They do more mischief
by their evil example, See more in my Com. on Amos 4.1. Obs. 4.
and therefore the Prophet begins with them; besides, they set their hearts as
the heart of God, Ezekiel. 28.6. and think themselves above reproof, and above
control, and therefore the Lord will have his Prophets reprove them, that they
may know they be but men.

3. Oppressing of the poor is a crying sin.

It provokes the Lord to a controversy with a Land, See more against
oppression, in Mr. Dents Pathway. p. 197, to 215.

See my Com. on Psalm. 82.4. Obs. 6. p. 121, 122.


Hos. 4.1, 2, 3. and makes him swear their ruin, as here, verse. 14. It Is an
eating up and devouring of men, Psalm. 14.4. Micah 3.2, 3. and therefore
oppressors are called, Dogs, Wolves, Bears, Lions, etc. (as I have showed
elsewhere) It Is a death far more merciless than present slaying, as hanging in
chains alive is worse than beheading.

4. Wicked men are all for themselves.

They devour the poor, they swallow up the needy, they destroy their
habitations, they enclose all, that they may dwell alone in the earth. Against
Enclosures, see Mr. Rob. Bolton on Self-examination: p. 237, etc.
A woe is set upon the head of such, Isa. 5.8. such covetous Cormorants destroy
all; In the body natural, if some members should draw all the nourishment to
themselves, the whole body must needs perish. Piety makes men publick-spirited,
and to seek the good of others as well as of themselves, Act. 13.36. Philip.
2.4, 29, 30. but Impiety is all for self, Phil. 2.21.

5. Poor men many times are meek and humble men.

The word Gnani, which we render afflicted and poor, signifies also humble and
meek, Zach. 9.9. As riches usually make men cruel and proud, so afflictions
make men humble and meek. It Is not sufficient that men are humbled passively,
against their wills, but they must be humble, actively; nor low, but lowly. Our
poverty and affliction should drive us out of our selves to God, Psalm. 12.5. 1
Pet. ^.23. Happy are those that are not only corrected, but thus taught by
them, Psalm. 94.12.

VERSE 5.
Saying, when will the New Mood be gone, that we may sell Corn? and the
Sabbath, that we may set forth Wheat, making the Ephah small, and the Shekel
great, and falsifying the balances by deceit?
IN the two subsequent verses the Prophet shows how they devoured the poor,
viz. by their unrighteousness and covetousness, which appeared in that they
were so greedy of gain, that they thought all time lost which was spent in Gods
worship, because it brought no present, visible profit with it; and therefore
they angrily cry, Interrogatio indignantis and optantis, q. d. nimium diu
durant feriae. Piscat.
When will the New Mood be gone, that we may sell Corn? etc. God had set
apart many festivals in the time of the Law for his own worship, but especially
the weekly Sabbath, and the New Mons; hence we find them so often joined
together in Scripture, Isa. 1.13. and 66.23. Hos. 2.11. Col. 2.16. Though they
had many other solemnities, yet those came about but seldom, as once a year,
or the like, and therefore they did not so often molest them as these did; hence
they exclaim principally, and by name against these frequent feasts. V.
Hospinian. de Orig. Festor. c. 4. mihi p. 15.
The New Mood was the Calends or first day, and beginning of every month, and
was consecrated to the Lord. It signified that all the seasons and months of
the year are made holy and good unto us. See more in Weemse on the Ceremon Law,
chap. 22. p. 100.
On these New Mons the Priests called the people together by sound of Trumpet
to the holy Assemblies, Numb. 10.10. Psalm. 81.4. and spent the time religiously
in Prayer, Hearing Gods Word, and other holy exercises, 2 King. 4.23. 2 Chronicles.
2.4. and 8.12, 13. Neh. 10.33. Ezra. 3.5. Ezekiel. 45.17. At this solemnity was
offered in sacrifice, two young Bullocks, one Ram, seven Lambs, three tenth
deals of flower, Numb. 28.11, to 16.

In this verse we have the covetous man's character set forth to the life, where
we may see 1. His Irreligion toward God; He is a violator of Gods Sabbaths, at
least in his affection, which denominates the man. The duties of Gods Sabbath
are a burden to him, he longs to have them over, he thinks such days come too
thick, and that they hinder his profit, and therefore he profanely cries, When
will they be gone?

2. Here is their oppression and unrighteousness set forth four ways; 1. They
corrupted the measures, they sold by a small measure, yet made the price great.
They diminish the Ephah, and made it small, contrary to the Law, Levit. 19.35,
36. It should have been a just measure, neither too big, nor too small, Ezekiel.
45.10. The Ephah was the tenth part of an Homer, containing about an English
Bushel, Levit. 5.11. and 19.36. 1 Samuel 1.24. and 17.17. Isa. 5.20. Ezekiel. 45.10,
11. 'Twas an usual known measure of dry things amongst the Jews; as the Bath
was of liquid things, under it by a Synecdoche all other measures are
comprehended; for as St. James says of the Commandments, he that breaks one,
breaks all habitually and dispositively; so he that makes no conscience of
corrupting one measure, will make no conscience of corrupting them all when a
temptation comes. He that will falsify an Ephah, I will not trust him with an
Homer, which was the greatest measure of dry things, which the Jews had,
containing about ten Bushels, Ezekiel. 45.11.

2. A second branch of their Oppression was, Their making of the Shekel great,
before they curtailed the measure, and now they heightened the price; thus they
ground the Poor as it were between milstones, the upper was the small Ephah,
and the lower was the great Shekel; they used great weights, to weigh the money
which they received for payment; for the Shekel was partly a piece of money,
Siclus apud Hebrae^s fuit genas nummi simulque ponderis. Ravanel; in V. Siclus,
ubi plura.
and partly a weight, By the Shekel here is meant the weight of the Shekel, the
common, ordinary Shekel was in value about fifteen pence, and the Shekel of the
Sanctuary two shillings six pence, as you may see, Genesis 23.15. Josh. 7.21. 1 Samuel 17.5, 7. and 2 Samuel 21.16. 2 Chronicles. 3.9. As under the Ephaph was
comprehended all kind of measures, so under the Shekel is comprehended all
kind of weights by the like Synecdoche; Siclus suit moneta certi ponderis, and
omnium ponderum regula. 'Twas the weight of all things ponderous, and commonly
weighable amongst them. See Weemse Vol. 1. page 142. in fine lib.
for he that is unfaithful in that which is much. In those days they did not
count their money, but they weighed it. Now, although the measure was little,
yet the price of the Corn was great; they gave light measure, but heavy
weights, when they came to pay their money, contrary to Gods express
commandment, Deuteronomy. 25.13, 14, 15. Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse
weights, a great and a small, etc.

3. Yet more, They falsify the balances by deceit, Either in weighing money,
Gnivvet, pervertit, curvitatem quandam and perversitatem deviantem a recto
denotat.
or other commodities, or as the Original runs, they pervert the balances of
deceit, viz. by making those which were right deceitful. They falsified the
weights, the better to defraud others. They raised themselves out of other men's
ruins, and got profit by their disprofit. Thus they gained, whether by right
or by wrong, they cared not. Rem, Rem, quocunque modo rem. They must have money,
it is no matter how.

4. They were not only deceitful, but cruel too, verse. 6. they bought the poor
for things of naught, and made slaves of them; before they got their Money,
Lands and Estates (for in time of famine men will part with all for bread) and
now they get the men too; and (which aggravates their sin to the height) they
did not only corrupt their measures, and falsify their weights, but their
wares too. They sold the refuse of the Wheat; They sold the chaff, refuse and
base commodities, yet made them pay for good ones. No wonder if the Lord swear
their destruction, verse. 7.

The sum of all is this, When shall we have done with these solemn Feasts,
and times allotted for public worship, wherein we are forbidden to buy or
sell? would to God these New Mons and Sabbaths were once over, that we might
sell our Corn at an high rate, making the measure of the Wheat small, and the
weights (wherewith the silver is weighed) great and heavy, thus falsifying the
sail by deceitful weights.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Worldly men are weary of Gods worship.

They think every hour ten, and every day a year, which hinders them in the
pursuit of their worldly profits and pleasures. Their wealth is their treasure,
See more in Mr. Trapps Com. on Amos 8.5.
and their money their God; and therefore Sabbaths to them are tiresome,
tedious things, because they savor not the things of God, but the things of
the world. These snuff at Gods service, and cry, What a weariness is this?
Mal. 1.13. their bodies may be in the Temple, but their souls be in the Stable,
or Barn, plodding on their gain and increase. They are somewhat a kin to that
Heathen, which complained of the Christians for losing a seventh part of their
time in keeping Gods Sabbaths. This shows the woeful depravation of our
natures, that can sit at a Play, or the like profane meeting, a whole day
without weariness; when Gods Worship, which should be our joy, is tedious and
irksome, and we can hardly sit out an hour without sleeping; which shows our
gross insensiblenesse of those Spiritual blessings revealed in the Gospel. But
a gracious soul, who knows what it is to enjoy communion with God. in his
Ordinances, calls the Sabbath his delight, and looks upon it as the best day in
the Week, and esteems it an honorable day, Isa. 58.13. because it brings him
in great treasure. Those times which bring a man in great profit, are valued
most. Rich men think not the time lost in which they are counting money; so a
gracious soul so long as it has incomes from God is greatly delighted, and
longs to meet with God again, and therefore cries with David, Oh when shall I
come and appear before the Lord in Sion? Psalm. 4^. and 84.

2 Greedy worldlings are never at rest.

These Muck-worms are always seeking after gain, Amos 2.7. Hab. 2.13. so
eagerly are they set upon it, that if they lose but an hour they think it ten.
They are never well but when they are fingering of Money, serving Mammon, and
laying up Treasure, Luke 12.17, 18, 19. and this brings them into temptations
and snares, and many hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9,
10. Lust is a furious thing, like Iehu it drives fiercely and furiously, Ier.
2.23, 24, 25. 1 Cor. 12.2. it will not let men rest worke-day nor Holy Day; all
is one with these greedy Mammonists, their Money is their god, and whatever
hinders them in the pursuit of it, is a great burden to them. This makes them
cry here, When will the New Mood be gone that we may sell corn? and this greedy
lust puts them likewise upon Lying, swearing, Usury, Bribery, Perjury, Forgery,
and what not? so sad it is to be in thraldom to a lust; there is no rest nor
peace to such wicked ones, says the Lord.

3 We must not confine the Worship of God only to the Sabbath Day.

God enjoined the Jews New Mons, and other Feastivals wherein to Worship him,
as well as on the Sabbath. At those seasons they resorted to the Prophets to be
instructed in the ways of God, See more in my Com. on 2 Timothy 4^ 2. p. 326.
2 King 4.23. Ezekiel. 46.1. especially when the Priests were dumb and idle. The
Sabbath Day is the chief time to seek after knowledge, yet he appoints other
seasons also; and if Ministers must preach in season and out of season on the
Lords Day, and the Week day, as occasion requires; then surely people ought to
hear at such seasons: and therefore it was Prophesied of Gospel Times, that
Gods people should then be willing in that day of Christ's power, Psalm. 110.3.
and shall be constant and frequent in his Worship, Isa. 66.23.

4 Unrighteous dealing in our civil Commerce is very displeasing unto God.

He loves righteousness, but hates unrighteousness, Psalm. 11. ult. and
therefore so often forbids it, Levit. 19.11.35, 36. Deuteronomy. 25.13, 14, 15, 16. Ezekiel
45.10, 11. and tells us, that false weights and false balances are an
abomination to him, Prove. 11.^. and 20.10. and 23.11. Amos 8.7. Hos. 12.7. See
more in my Com^on 2 Timothy 3 3. p. 81, 82. Mr. Loves Directory, on 1 Cor. 7.30.
Ser. 8.9. p. 65. Perkins on Mat. 7.2, p. 199.
and that he will be avenged on such as defraud others, 1 These. 4.6. They shall
not reign long here. Ezekiel. 22.27, 32. Micah 2.2, 3. nor come into Gods kingdom
hereafter, Psalm. 15.1, 2. 1 Cor. 6.8, 9.

VERSE 6.
That ye may buy the poor for Silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes; and
sell the refuse of the wheat.
THe Prophet goes on, and sets forth another kind of cruelty used by these
deceitful men; and that was, buying of the poor. This was the end of their
foregoing fraud and unrighteous practices. viz. that they might drive the poor
into those straits, that they should be forced to sell themselves as Slaves and
Bondmen for a little silver and support. Those greedy ones had got their
Purses before, and now have at their Persons, they will make Drudges of them.

In this Verse we have, 1. The object of these Cormorants cruelty, See the
words, Dal, and Ebion, tenuis and egenus, opened at large, in my Com. on Psalm.
82 3. p. 106, 108.
and that is the Poor. It is not the Rich, for the Famine seldom pincheth
them. Neither is their aim at the poor man's Goods and Cattle (for these they
had got before) but now their aim is at their persons; though they were their
brethren, and fellow Citi^ens, yet having them at a bay now Corn was dear, they
resolve to make Merchandise of them, and to buy and sell them at very low rates.

2 It is not simply the Poor, Humilem pro calceamentis Versto Arabic*
but the Righteous, humble, honest, innocent poor which they thus oppress, Amos
2.6. They sell the righteous for silver.

3 Here is the price which they give for these poor, and that is base and
contemptible, it is a little Silver, or a pair of shoes. So mo^ 2.6. there
they sell the righteous (as here they bought them) and his righteous cause for
money, and the poor that could not bribe them for a pair of shoes. The Lord
permitted the Jews in some cases of casual poverty to buy their poor brethren,
but they most cruelly abused the Law, to the oppressing and grinding of the
poor and needy, Levit. 25.39, 40. whereas the Lord commanded, that though their
poor Brethren were sold to them or had sold themselves, yet they should not
deal harshly or rigorously with them, as they did with Slaves, Pro ^ari
calceo^um, i. e. pro rebus vilissimis; 1. Q^ia vili aestimaniur. 2. Quia sine
ulso f^^e impe^dio ^omparantur; 3. Quia ^bjecta, utpore quae c^l^antur perpetuo
ped^bus, neque unquam elevantur e Pulvere and fimo. El^eron. in locum.
but civilly and tenderly as with brethren. This buying and selling of the poor
for a pair of Shoes, notes the base estimation that worldlings have of poor
righteous men, in that they buy and sell them at such mean, low, and sordid
rates, even for the basest necessaries, for worthless things of little price.

4 To their former fraud they now add another, that so they might fill up the
measure of their sin. They sell the refuse of the Wheat. Mappal bar, deciduum
tritici, i. e. purgamenta and quisquilias, quae e cribro dum concutitur,
decidunt. Sanctius.
Before they ^^^rupted and falsified their Weights, and now they corrupt (...)
Wares. They sell the Chaff or falling off of the Wheat (as it is in the
fountain) that is, they sell to the poor in their great necessity that which is
Horse-meat, and Hoggs-meat, rather than Mans-meat, even the refuse, off all,
and rayl-end (as we say) which is mixed with Chaff, Cockle, light-corn,
litte-stones, and dust.

This refuse which is not marketable, and is seldom sold, but is usually given
to Beasts or Birds, yet these Muckworms sell this Muck for pure Grain to the
Poor, who were necessitated to buy this, or starve, and make them pay as if it
were good corn.

This accumulated cruelty, makes the Lord to swear their ruin in the next
verse.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Worldly men are very industrious for Mammon, and riches.

They move every stone for the attaining of it, and care not how they come by
it, whether by right or by wrong; on the Lords Day (though their hands be tied,
yet) their hearts are on it, and on the weekdays: 1. They get false Weights.
2. False Wares. 3. They inhance the price of those Wares. 4. They get not only
the poor man's Purse, but his Person too. Thus they that will be rich fall into
many snares and temptations of the Devil, which drown men in perdition, 1 Timothy
6. 9, 10. and if men be so violent for earth, what should we be for Heaven?

2 Life is a precious thing.

Men will sell their Cattle, their Clothes, their Children, yea themselves for
food to preserve life, See more in M. Caryl on Job ^.4.
Genesis 47.20, 23.25. Nehem. 5.2, 3, 5. so true is that, Job 2.4. Skin for skin,
and all that a man has, will he give for his life. It is a Proverbial speech,
some by skin understand a man's clothing, which at first was made of Skins,
Genesis 3.21. q. d. a man will part with his Clothes rather than with his Life,
for the body is more than raiment, Mat. 6.26.2. Others by Skin for skin
understand riches, goods, and all the outward estate, which are like a Skin to
cover and ^ence us from poverty and misery; but life is better than all these,
and hat^^^en greatly prized by good men, Genesis 32.11. Hest. 7.3. and bad men,
Genesis 25.32. Hest. 7.7. Eccles. 9.4.

3 Covetous men are cruel men.

They buy and sell not only Cattle, but men, Neh. 9.37. yea righteous men, they
sell the righteous for silver, and condemn the just for a reward, Iam. 5.6.
anything for money. Sell a Boy for a Lust, and a Girl for a cup of Wine, Joel
3.3. Some men will transgress for an handful of Barley, or a morsel of Bread,
Ezekiel. 13.19. Thus the poor always pay for it, especially the meek and modest
poor; men are apt to go over the Hedge where it is lowest, and to catch the
poor by drawing them into their Nets, Psalm. 10.9. that is, into their
Debt-books, that they may morgage all unto them, and at last become their
slaves and bondmen. As the good man considers the case of the poor and needy
that he may be the fitter to releeve him, Psalm. 41.1. so these merciless men
consider the poor, that they may devour him.

4 Men may not debase a Commodity, depriving it of its primitive goodness, and
then sell it for the best, at a full value.

Corn-masters may not cull out the best Grain, nor mingle their Grain with
refuse, and then sell it (as they did here) for the best. We may not mingle
Wine with Water, nor Dross with Silver, but whatever we would that men should
do to us (in equity and justice) even so must we do unto them.

5 The world has a very mean esteem of the godly.

They value them no more than their old Shoes, and therefore they sell the
righteous for a pair of Shoes; as if any contemptible rate were good enough
for them. See how different the judgment of this wicked world is from the
Judgment of God. See my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.3. p. 113, etc. and Mr. Buroughs on
Psalm. 16.3. See Mr. Fenners Ser. on Heb. 11.38.
The world esteem the godly as the dross and dung, the filth and offscouring
of the world, 1 Cor. 4.13. but God esteems them as the glory of the world,
Isa. 4.5. the only excellent ones of the earth, Psalm. 16.3. he thinks them
too good to live in this wicked ungrateful world, Heb. 11, 38.

6 Cruelty ends in misery.

God threatens these Men-sellers, and Men-devourers with dreadful Judgments,
See more before on ver. 4. Obs. 3.
Amos 2.6. and 8.7. Luke 16.24. James 2.13. Though the poor bear it, yet God
will not always bear it at their hands, but swears he will be avenged on them,
for so it follows.

VER. 7.
The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, surely I will never forget any
of their works.
WE are now come to the Third Part of this Chapter, where the Judgments of
God both Corporal and Spiritual are more fully set forth unto us.

1 The Prophet shows the certainty of these Judgments, in that the Lord does
not only say, but swear that he will be avenged on them.

2 As they had been great Sinners, so he sets forth the greatness of their
Punishment, It shall overflow the Land like a mighty flood, verse. 8.

3 As he had showed the certainty, so he sets forth the suddenness of their
sorrows, Their light shall be turned into darkness, and that at noonday; their
mirth into mourning* and their high prosperity into the lowest misery, verse. 9,
10.

4 As if all this were not sufficient: he yet goes higher, and threatens them
with a Famine, not of bread but which is worse, of the Word of God As Spiritual
Mercies are the choyceest Mercies, so Spiritual Judgments are the farest
Judgments.

5 Which strikes all dead, He tells them that this their loss should be
irreparable. They shall fall, and shall never rise any more, verse. 14. We have
heard of Isreal's Sin, now follows his Suffering; and lest any should flatter
themselves, and think that these Threatenings were but Scar-crows, therefore the
Prophet the better to awaken these secure Sinners, brings in the Lord swearing
their destruction, q. d. So sure as I live, (says the Lord) so sure shall ye
dye. This Oath of God no^es both the certainty and immutability of Gods
Counsel, and Decree to punish Israel; where we have,

1 The certainty of Isreal's ruin, The Lord has not only said, but sworn it;
that is, he has most certainly decreed it, for Gods Oath is nothing else but
Gods immutable Decree, severely to punish these cruel Caytiffs, and Oppressors
of the poor.

2 By whom does the Lord swear? why it is by the excellency and eminency of
Jacob; that is, by himself, who is the glory and excellency of Israel; and by
whose favor and free-election they excelled all the Nations of the world.
Other Nations had dead Idol-gods, but it was Isreal's glory above all the
Nations of the World, that they had the Lord for their God, and were in
Covenant with him. The Lord hereby tacitly upbraids them for their ingratitude,
that having such glorious privileges from him, they should yet rebel against
him.

Some by the excellency of Jacob, understand the Ark, and others the Temple; it
is true, these are called, The glory of Israel; but since the Lord has no
greater to swear by, therefore he swears by himself, who is here called, The
Excellency of Jacob, i. e. of his people Israel.

The Vulgar leaving the Fountain, and following the corrupt streams of the
Septuagint, render it thus, The Lord has sworn against the pride of Jacob. But
the Original is express against it, for though the word Gaon signify Pride,
as well as Excellency, yet the prefix Be^h, notes that form of swearing which
is usual with the Hebrews, Bigeon, per excellentiam, celsitudinem, gloriam. V.
Leigh Crit. Hebr. p. 33. Ubi plura. Si, est nota jurantis, and signum juramenti
execratorii apud Hebraeos.
as appears Amos 4.2. and 6.8. and it signifies not contra, but per, and
therefore is fitly rendered, By the excellency of Jacob, and not against the
pride of Israel.

3 What does the Lord swear? why he swears he will forget none of their wicked
works; the words in the Original run thus, If I forget any of their works for
ever, q. d. let me not live, or let me not be God, or let me not be accounted
true, but repute me for a Liar, if ever I forget to punish this great
wickedness of Israel, they shall surely pay for it according to their demerits.
See the like expression, Deuteronomy. 1.35. 1 Samuel 3.14. and 14.45. Psalm. 89.36. Isa.
14.24. and 62.8. Ezekiel. 34.8. The Prophet by an Euphemismus omits that open form
of swearing, As I live, or as sure as I am God, etc. because of the horror and
dreadfulnesse of it, and to make us render of using Imprecations, therefore the
Holy Ghost often times conceals the Imprecation in swearing.

This abrupt manner of speaking is usual in Oaths; Relicentia est plena
affectus and terroris.
it is a kind of Aposiopesis usual in Scripture, when we cut off some word, or
part of a sentence which yet is understood; such Oaths cum reticentia are very
dreadful, and set forth Gods greatest Wrath against a People; as Psalm. 95.11.
To whom I swear in my wrath, if they enter into my rest, q. d. They shall never
enter into my rest; if ever they come there let me not be God, or let me not be
true. It is a very strong Negation, a stronger cannot be expressed. I will
never forget any of their works. Lan asach, in finem, in aeternum, in porpetuum.
It is an Antropopathy, God speaks to men after the manner of men; he is said
to remember those sins which he punishes, and to forget those sins which he
pardons.

Any of their works; i. e. None of their works, not one shall be forgotten by
me to all eternity, but they shall certainly and suddenly pay for all their
crying Crimes committed against me.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Sin and sorrow are inseparable companions.

Flagitium and flagellum, are like the Needle and the Thread, the one goes
before, and the other follows, Isa. 63.10. 1 Cor. 10.8.9.10. we read before of
Isreal's Sin, and now we read of his Suffering; and to assure them of it, The
Lord swears it. If men will sin against the Lord, let them be sure at first or
last their sin will find them out, Numb. 32.23. Gods Word had been sufficient
to assure us of this, but because we are incredulous, he confirms it with an
Oath, that none might doubt of it. Ask Men and Angels, Houses, Cities,
Kingdoms, and they will all tell you, that it was sin that laid them in the
dust.

2 A People may so far incense the Lord to wrath by their sins, that he may
swear their ruin.

When Israel had long hardened their hearts against God, at last he swears they
should never enter into his rest, Psalm. 95.11. Patience abused turns into fury,
and makes the Lord to swear men's utter rejection, 1 Samuel 15.28, 29. this people
had highly provoked the Lord, and therefore this is the third time which the
Lord swears against them, Amos 4.2. and 6.8.

3 The favor and presence of God with a People, is the glory and excellenc^ of
a people.

It is not Corn, Wine, Women, Health, Wealth, or multitudes of people that make
a Nation happy, for then Turks, and Tartars, Barbarians, and Indians should
excel Gods People* for they abound with these external comforts; but happy is
that people whose God is the Lord, See my Con^. on Psalm. 73.25.
Psalm. 144. ult. Hence the Lord is called, The excellency of Jacob, and the
Glory of Israel. He was their inestimable Treasure, and true Honor, who made
them truly glorious, Psalm. 106.20. and 148.14. Ier. 2.11. Luke 2.32. Hence
Moses glories in this above all other Privileges, That there was no people
that had the Lord their God so nigh unto them in all that they called upon him
for, as the Lord our God has been to them, Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8. The Wife shines with
the rays of her Husband, Ezekiel. 16.14. the fruition and enjoyment of Gods
favor is the life of our lives, and the honor of our honors, without this we
may write Ichabod upon all that we have, There is no glory. The greater is
their sin then who dishonor him by their sin, who is their real excellency,
and turn the glory which he has put upon them into shame. This makes the Lord
to swear that he will strip them of their Privileges, and make them naked, as
in the day when they were born. He will take away not only his Corn and Wine
but his Sabbaths, and Sacraments, which are the real glory of a people, and
give them to a people which shall yield him better obedience.

4 Cathes are tremendous and dreadful things.

They must be taken with abundance of fear and reverence. Hence it is that the
Holy Ghost here conceals the Imprecation, implying thereby, that men should
tremble at the very thoughts of what will follow if they swear falsely.

5 God records and remembers all the wickedness of the wicked.

He forgets none, no not one of their works, though they themselves do. As he
has a book of remembrance for all the good which his people have done, which
shall at the last Day be published to their everlasting praise* Mal. 3.16. Mat.
25.34, 35. so he has a book of remembrance for all the wicked works of the
ungodly, which shall be opened at the last Day, and set in order before them to
their everlasting shame, Psalm. 50.21. Mat. 25.41, 42. then shall they give an
account of their Stewardship, and must be no longer Stewards, Luke 16.2.
nothing can pass his All-seeing-Eye; he records not some, but All their works;
and though he may seem for a time to connive and take no notice of their sins
but lets them prosper in their wickedness; See my Com. on Hos. 13.12. Obs 1.
yet at last he will make them know that he has not forgot any of their works,
when he shall execute his Justice fully upon them.

VERSE 8.
Shall not the Land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwells
therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a flood, and it shall be cast out, and
drowned as by the flood of Egypt.
THe Prophet having in the precedent Verse showed the certainty of Isreal's
punishment, in this Verse he comes to show the greatness and grievousness of
that misery which like a flood was rushing in upon them. They had been
extraordinary ^inners, and now he tells them of extraordinary sufferings. They
had their floods of sin, and now follow floods of sorrow. The Prophet the
better to awaken them begins, 1. With an Emphatical Interrogation, which is
equivalent to a strong Affirmation, as Amos 5.20. Shall not the Land tremble
for this? viz. for this cruelty, cozening, Idolatty, and Apostasy? q. d. I
appeal to your Consciences, how can it be oath ^ise? it is impossible that such
men as have thus perverted all equity and order, have brought in confusion, and
exercised all manner of Tyranny and cruelty upon the poor, should ever escape
unpunished; Tirgaz, a. Ragaz contremuit, commotus est.
when the very earth trembles and groans under such lewd and rebellious
inhabitants.

1 Some make it a Prosopopeical speech, thus, so great is the sin, and so great
shall be the sorrow of Israel, that the very insensible earth cannot but
tremble and be moved at it; for all Creatures by a Natural instinct are
sensible of the Voice and beck of their Creator, how much more of his anger.

2 Here is an Exegesis, or explanation of the precedent Clause, the earth
should so tremble, and there should be such trouble and fears there, that every
one that dwells in it should mourn. As all had sinned, so all without exception
should suffer for sin.

3 He illustrates their Calamity yet further, by the similitude of an
overflowing flood, which carries down all before it, and it shall rise up
wholly as a flood. The earth shall rise up as a flood, for, the flood should
rise up over it; it is an Hypallage frequent in Scripture, q. d. As waters rise
up and cover the Land that it does not appear; so shall the Assyrians arise and
overspread the whole Land of Israel, and carry away both them and their riches.

And it shall be cast out; As the Sea and Floods do cast out mire and dirt,
which they raise, Isa. 57.20. so should the Land spue out these; Niseu,
demergetur, in prosundum, They shall be swallowed up as in a gulf.
yet more, and be drowned as by the flood of Egypt; that is, by the River
Nilus, which by way of eminency is called, The River, i. e. that noted and
famous River which watered the Land of Egypt, making it fat and fruitful.

Isreal's Captivity is here compared to an overflowing River, which no banks
nor bounds can hold. It is usual in Scripture to set forth great Calamities by
the name of great Waters; so Psalm. 18.16. and 32.6. and 69.2, 15. and 124.4, 5.
and 144.7. Ier. 46.7, 8. Amos 9.5. So the Lord here, the better to express the
great Calamities which were coming upon Israel, V. Pliny, Not. Hist. l. 5. c. 9.
^e^cheth a Similitude from the River Nilus, which was wont yearly to overflow
the Plains of Egypt; there was no rain ordinarily in Egypt, but the
overflowing of Nilus supplied that want, and covered the Plains for about two
months space. Now as the River Nilus over-flowed all the Land of Egypt, and
made it like a Sea, so the Land of Israel should be swiftly and suddenly
overrun with the Army of the Assyrians, which like a sweeping flood should
carry away all before them; as they did in the reign of Hoshea, the last King
of Israel, when they were carried into Captivity out of their own Land, 2
King. 17.

OBSERVATIONS.
1* The very earth trembles and groans under the sins of wicked men.

Wicked men are a burden to the whole Creation, V. Fenners Ser. on Romans 8.22.
p. 296. folio.
Psalm. 60.1, 2. Romans 8.22. and could they speak (as they do tacitly, and in
their kind) they would say, Lord let us not be Servants to those that will not
be Servants to thee. The earth cries, let me devour them, as I did Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16.31, 32. The Sea cries, Let me drown them; the Air
says, Let me choke them, etc. Thus all creatures are ready to testify their
indignation against sin and sinners, and therefore the Lord calls so often upon
the inanimate creatures to be ashamed and astonished at the rebellion of his
people, Isa. 1.2. Ier. 2.12. As a man, whose stomach is surcharged, is sick
till he has vomited up that which burdens his stomach; so the creature is even
sick again till it have spued out those wicked inhabitants that burden it,
Levit. 18.25. and 20.22. Now, shall the insensible creatures groan for our sin,
and shall not we groan for our selves? shall they be affected with our
wickedness, and we be insensible? God forbid.

2. Wicked men are the troublers of Israel.

The world is apt to charge Gods people with rebellion and troubling of Israel.
As Ahab did Elijah, and Amaziah the Priest did Amos, chap. 7.10. and the Jews
the Apostles, Acts 17.6. See my Beauty of Holiness, chapter 7. Obj. 11.
But it is the wicked that are the true Reshagnims and troublers of the places
where they dwell, Ier. 4.28. and 9.12, 13. Hos. 4.3. It Is the Idolater, the
Oppressor, the Cheater, etc. that are the true troublers of Israel, and make
the Land to tremble under them.

3. Floods of sin bring floods of sorrow.

Where floods of Idolatry, Atheism, Security, and Unrighteousness go before,
there floods of misery ever follow. In the old world there was a deluge of sin,
which brought upon them a deluge of water, which swept them all away. God has
variety of floods to sweep-away impenitent sinners from the earth.

4. When Judgments come, they seize on rich men as well as on others.

When the flood of Gods judgments comes, every man shall mourn, without
exception. Not one of these covetous Cormorants shall escape; their silver and
their gold shall not avail them in the day of Gods wrath, Prove. 11.4. Ezekiel.
7.19, 27. Zeph. 1. ult. The sin of such Oppressors, cries, and rests no^ till
it has brought plagues upon the heads of such sinners, Ezekiel. 16.49. and 22.7,
13. James 5.4. Thus as they had sinned universally, so now God brings upon them
universal destruction.

VERSE 9.
And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord, that I will cause the
Sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear day.
WE have seen Isreal's sin and sorrow in part, here we have it more fully
amplified. 1. Their prosperity shall be turned into misery, and their mirth
into mourning, verse. 9, 10.

2. They shall lose their Pastors and their Preaching and shall have a famine
of spiritual food sent amongst them, verse. 11, 12.

3. Then follows utter destruction, verse. 13, 14.

The Prophet Allegorically sets forth under elegant Metaphors, the greatness of
that sorrow which was falling upon Israel; Their light should be turned into
darkness, their joy into sorrow, their prosperity into adversity, their feasts
into mourning, and their songs into lamentation, as for an only Son.

Israel had enjoyed a little gleam of prosperity which they thought would
always last, they thought this Sun would never set, nor this light ever be
darkened, but the Lord tells them, he would suddenly send the Army of the
Assyrians upon them, when they little dreamed of it* so that their Sun should
set at noon, and the light be turned into sudden darkness.

Some take the words literally, that the natural Sun should set at noon, but
the Prophet speaks not of natural, but metaphorical darkness viz. of the night
of adversity, as appears by that which follows, I will darken the earth in the
clear day, what is that? why I will turn your feasts into mourning, etc. verse.
10.

Others apply this Text to the Passion of Christ, when the Sun was eclipsed,
and darkness covered the face of the whole earth. But this is quite against the
Text and Context, which speaks of the destruction of the Kingdom of Israel,
and not of the sufferings of Christ.

In the verse it self we have 1. A dreadful judgment threatened in metaphorical
terms, I will cause your Sun to go down at noon, and will darken the earth in
the clear day. The same thing is set forth in various terms, the better to
affect them. By Light and the Sun at noon, is meant great prosperity and
gladness, as 2 Samuel 23.4. Hest. 8.16. Job 18.5, 6. and 38.15. Psalm. 97.11. and
112.4. By darkness is meant, great sorrow, terror, captivity, and fear. So Job
22.10, 11. Isa. 59.9, 10. Ier. 15.9. Amos 5.18. Micah 3.6. Psalm. 107.10. Lam.
3.2. Hence the doleful condition of the damned in Hell is called by the name of
darkness, Matthew. 22.13.

2. Here is the time when this shall be, and that is, in that day, viz. when
the Lord shall come to execute judgment upon Israel, for all their
provocations, and bring the Army of their enemies upon them.

3. Here is the certainty of all this misery, Dixit Dominus, The Lord, who
cannot lie, has spoken it. Let the wicked have never so much light of
prosperity, let him shine as bright as Lucifer, yea as the Sun it self, which
is the fountain of light, yet his light shall be put out in obscurity, and down
he shall, Ier. 14.13. The higher men are in their own conceits without God, the
more suddenly and surely shall they fall.

The sum of all is this, q. d. It Is true O ye people of Israel, that ye are
now at the height of your peace, and at the high-noone of your prosperity, now
you are secure and flourishing by reason of those victories which you obtained
under Jeroboam the second, See my Com. on Hos. 13.16 p. 148.
who restored what was lost to Israel: now you trust in your Riches, Success,
and Armies, and never once think of a fall, or that your Sun will set; but
since I have spared you for a time, therefore you conclude that your judgments
will never come, but I will bring sudden calamities upon you (says the Lord)
and such as you looked not for, so that your midday of prosperity shall be
turned into the midnight of adversity; your peace into war, your plenty into
penury, and your liberty into restraint: you shall be stripped of all by the
merciless Assyrian; and you that were but now the head, shall suddenly be made
the heel: The Sun of your prosperity shall set in obscurity, without the least
glimmering of light, or hope of deliverarance.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. All our afflictions come from God.

It Is he that makes our Sun to set at noon, when we are most careless and
secure, and little think of night. It Is I, I, I, that create light and
darkness, Isa. 45.7. There is no evil of affliction in the City but the Lord
does it, See Mr. Brinsly in his Treatise of Passive Obedience.
Amos 3.6. Hence they are called His Judgments by a special propriety, Isa.
26.8, 9. and he is said to bring spoilers and sudden terrors upon his people at
noonday, Ier. 15.8, 9.

2. The wicked may enjoy for a time a great light of prosperity.

It may be noon and clear day with them; See my Com. on Psalm. 73.18, etc.
They may prosper even to envy, Psalm. 73.2, 3, 4. Ier. 12.1. Hab. 1. But of
this at large elsewhere.

3. When the wicked are in highest prosperity, the Lord can suddenly bring upon
them a night of adversity.

When people are drunk with prosperity, See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. Obs. 1.
and think their mountain so strong, that it can never be moved, then God
usually hides his face, and we are presently in trouble, Psalm. 30.7. In our own
days we have seen those that have been upon the highest pinnacle of temporal
felicity, suddenly brought into an Abyss of misery. Before the day of
judgment, when men are most secure, crying, Peace, Peace, then comes sudden
and swift destruction. Be not then puffed up with success, or prosperity, nor yet
envy the triumphs of the wicked, for they shall soon come down, and wither as
the grass, Psalm. 37.1, 2 Rev. 18.7, 8. Walk humbly and thankfully in the midst
of all enjoyments, do not fight against God with his own favors, nor abuse his
blessings to his dishonor; if you do, you must know, that he who raised you,
can as easily ruin you; and he that makes it noon with you, can as easily make
it night. Let us therefore with holy Job, cap. 3.25. in our highest prosperity,
fear and foresee a day of adversity. See Mr. Bellars his Sermon on Isa. 60.20.
Let us become as an obedient people, and then our Sun shall never set, but we
shall enjoy Gods favor without interruption, Isa. 60.20.

VERSE 10.
And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your Songs into
Lamentation, and I will bring up Sackcloath upon all loins, and baldness upon
every head; and I will make it as the mourning of an only Son, and the end
thereof as a bitter day.
WHat the Prophet had spoken metaphorically and darkly in the precedent verse,
he comes and explains it in this. He had told them before that their Sun should
set at noon; what is that, may some one say? why in plain English, Your feasts
shall be turned into mourning, and all your songs into lamentation.

The Prophet goes on still in setting forth that sudden and sad distress which
should surprise Israel, and because wicked men are slow of heart to believe
Gods threatenings, therefore he multiplies words, and expresses the same thing
in various terms, the better to awaken them, and work upon them.

In the two foregoing verses we had six Ands, and in this verse we have six
more, which serve as so many links to fasten the chain of Gods judgments
together. Where we have 1. A further explication of the judgment threatened,
viz. a turning of their feasts into mourning, and their songs into lamentation.

Quest. But the Question will be, what songs and feasts does the Prophet here
speak of, whether be they sacred or profane?

Answ. Both, 1. The Lord would turn their common feasts where they had profane
singing and music, into weeping and wailing, Amos 6.5, 6, 7.

2. Their holy Feasts and Temple Songs, and Music, in which they so much
delighted, and thought that with such Ceremonious, external worship God was
well pleased, these did but increase Gods wrath, and blow up the fire of his
displeasure against them, and therefore the Lord threatens that these songs
especially should be turned into howling, verse. 3.

The Jews had many festivals, and in them God commanded them to rejoice, Deuteronomy.
12.18. They had also holy Music, and holy songs at those festivals appointed
by David, for the praising of God, 1 Chronicles. 25. But they being Idolaters,
Superstitious, and hypocritical, resting in a bare external performance of
these Ceremonial Rites, and placing all holiness in them, though themselves
lived lewdly and licentiously, Ier. 7.8, 9, 10, 11. Sacrificing to the Calves,
and not to God, therefore the Lord threatens to turn even those religious
feasts and songs (for of these the Prophet seems more especially to speak) into
mourning and lamentation, q. d. Hitherto you have lived secure and careless,
feasting and singing without any fear of God, or thoughts of his judgments;
but now (says the Lord) I will turn your feasting into fasting, and your songs
into lamentation.

2. Here is the greatness of their sorrow, set forth by two Ceremonial Rites,
which were used in those Eastern Countries, viz. Sackcloth and Baldness.

1. Sackcloth was a course mourning garment, made of black Goats hair, bound
with a girdle about their loins. 'Twas a sign and symbol of misery and
mourning, See more in Mr. Greenhill on Ezekiel. 7.18.
as appears, Genesis 37.34. 2 King. 6.30. Psalm. 30.11. Isa. 3.24. and 25.3. and
22.12. Ier. 4.8. and 48.37. Lam. 2.10. Ezekiel. 7.18. Joel. 1.8. At Abners funeral
David commanded them to put on Sackcloth, and weep, 2 Samuel 3.31. And Ahab
hearing of Gods judgments coming on him, he humbled himself in Sackcloth, 1
King. 21.27. The two witnesses were clothed in Sackcloth, mourning to see so
many fall away to Popery, Rev. 11.3. The Lord threatens to make them put off
their ornaments and gorgeous attire, Exodus 33.4, 5. and put on sackcloth and
mourning weeds, as most suitable to such mournful times. They would not humble
themselves nor mourn in their prosperity, now they should be humbled, and made
to mourn in their adversity.

2. Baldness also was a sign of the greatest mourning among the Jews, and
therefore the Lord threatens here that he would bring baldness upon every head,
that is, their miseries should be so great, that they should pluck off the very
hair of their heads for anguish and sorrow: for the Jews, when they were in
deep distress, did testify their sorrow, as by sackcloth and renting their
garments; so by Baldness also, either pulling the hair off their heads for very
anguish and indignation, as Ezra did Ezra 9.3. or else shaving their heads and
beards, as Job did when he heard that his children were dead; this he did, not
out of impatience, but according to the custom of those times and Countries,
to express the greatness of his sorrow, Job 1.20. So Isa. 3.24. and 15.2. Ier.
7.29. and 16.6. and 47.5. and 48.37. Ezekiel. 7.18. and 27.31. Micah 1.16. The
hair of the head and beard is counted an Ornament, and the cutting it off was a
debasement, and therefore it was used only in cases of very great sorrow.
Though they might not conform themselves to the Heathen, who shaved their
heads, and then dedicated their locks to Idols, Levit. 19.27, 28. Deuteronomy. 14.1.
yet in sorrow for sin, and deep distress, it was commanded, Isa. 22.12. Micah
1.16.

3. Here is the universality of this calamity, it shall seize upon all loins
and every head, none shall escape, but as all had sinned, so all should now
suffer for sin.

4. Here is a further Amplification of their sorrow, drawn from the Example of
one that mourns for the death of an only Son, which is wont to be very bitter
and great. The Prophet seems to be at a stand, as here, whence to borrow
comparisons, to set forth the greatness of their sorrow. A Father which has
many children, disperseth his love among them all, but he that has but one
only Son, his love is united, and is more vehemently set upon him: hence Unice
amare est vehementer amare, and the Philosopher says, the strongest love is
between two, not twenty; for if it be divided amongst many, it is, lessened and
weakened; as a River that is cut into many channels. When Parents lose one of
many, it troubles them, but yet they comfort themselves that they have others
left still, but if they have but one only Son, and he dye, to bury all their
hopes in one only hopeful child, is very bitter, and causes great
lamentation. Hence great sorrow in Scripture is thrice compared to the
sorrowing for an only Son. 1. In the Text, then Ier. 6.26. where the Prophet
calling upon the people, to make most bitter lamentation for the great
calamities which were coming on them* he calls on them to mourn as for an
only Son.

So Zach. 12.10. When the Jews shall be converted and called, it is said, They
shall look upon him whom they have pierced, by an eye of Faith, and thou shall
mourn for him as for an only Son, that is, in an high degree and measure. It Is
a kind of Proverbial speech used by the Heathen. Cicero pro Rescio, Amerino.
Hence that of Tully, I mourn (said he) for the misery of the Commonwealth, as
a Mother does for her only Son.

4 Here is the duration of this misery, it shall endure to the end of the
Kingdom of Israel, and extend itself to their posterity. The end thereof, viz.
of the Land, which is put for the inhabitants of the Land, by a frequent
Me^onymy, shall be as a bitter day; that is, as a funeral, mournful day,
because they shall be destitute of all true comfort from the Word of God,
which alone can keep us from perishing in our troubles, Psalm 119.92.

The Prophet seems to prevent an evasion, and stop a gap at which impenitent
sinners are wont to creep out; oh (say they) though these troubles be sharp,
yet they will be but short, they are clouds that will soon vanish; but deceive
not your selves (says the Prophet) for the Wrath of God shall abide upon you,
and upon your Posterity even to the end; and when one wave is over, another
shall come, till it have swept you all out of your own Land.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Plain preaching is the best teaching.

The Prophet in this Verse expounds his Metaphors and allusions, and makes them
plain for the meanest capacity. See my Com. on Hos. 13.15. Obs. 2.
But of this elsewhere.

2 What is dark in one place, the Scripture makes plain in another.

What was spoken mystically, Schools-Guard Rule 5.
verse. 9. is explained ver. 10. But of this elsewhere.

3 Carnal joy ends in sorrow.

As they that sow in godly sorrow shall reap in joy; so they that sow in carnal
joy shall reap in sorrow. When men abuse their feasts and lawful liberties, God
will turn them into fasts and mourning, Hos. 2.11. Amos 5.16, 17. and 6.5, 6,
7. and 8.3.

How sad then is our condition, for if the Lord turn the feasts of his own
appointment into lamentation to a backsliding people; what may we expect who
are mad upon the Saturnalia, Bacchanalia, and Floralia of the Heathen,
Festivals, which God never once instituted or ordained, wherein men drink,
dance, dally, and give themselves up to all manner of debauchery and
profaneness, and that in days of such glorious light, as the Nation never
enjoyed the like since it was a Nation; shall not the Lord visit for these
things? he will suddenly and certainly send some Assyrian or other to avenge
the dishonours done to his name. If the Lord will turn holy Feasts and Songs
into lamentation, what will he do to those that use profane and filthy Songs,
to the corrupting both of themselves and others?

4 When all sin, all must look to suffer for sin.

When all sin* then all loins, and all heads must be made bald; National Sins
bring National Judgments. When All the Old World, All Sodom, All Jerusalem
had corrupted their ways, then All must perish. But of this before.

5 In calamitous times we may and must express our inward sorrow by outward
Vestures and Gestures.

When Gods hand lies heavy upon a people, they must not be stupid and stoical,
but they must hear the Rod, and who has appointed it, Micah 6.9. They must
humble themselves under Gods mighty hand, laying aside their costly attire, and
put themselves in mourning weeds. It is not sufficient that we grieve inwardly
for our sins, and Gods Judgments upon us for sin; but we must also express
our sorrow by external signs. David wept and put on Sackcloth, Psalm. 38.11. and
so did, Ier. chapter 9.1. and Nehem. chapter 1.4. Job abhorred himself, and repented in
dust and ashes. Job 42.6.

Caut. Yet a Caveat must be here entered, we must not rest in bare external
weeping, See Buroughs on Mat. 11.29. p. 652. and M. Pools Ser. on. Joh. 4.24.
or wearing of mournful Vestures; but our outward humiliation must express our
inward humiliation of the heart, else hypocritical outside service is odious
to God, Isa. 1.11, 12, 13. and 66.3. Matthew 6.2. Luke 16.15.

6 Sin is a bitter thing.

See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. Obs. 8.
It is bitter in it self, and brings forth bitter effects. It brings bitter
days, and bitter calamities upon a people; Sin, like Satan its Father makes
large promises, but sorry performances. See Brooks his remedy against Satan's
Devices, p. 13, 14.
It promises pleasure, but yields pain; it promises liberty, but brings men
into prisons; it promises peace, but brings war. Take heed then of the
deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13.

7 When a Nation is ripe for ruin, God will utterly destroy them.

His patience will no longer wait upon them, but they and theirs shall perish
in their iniquity, and the end shall be a bitter day. The wicked use to promise
themselves light, but they shall find darkness; they promise themselves
deliverance and joy, but they shall find bitterness and sorrow even to the
end of their days.

VERSE 11, 12.
Behold, the days come says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the
Land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words
of the Lord.

And they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North even to the East,
they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not find it.


THe Prophet had before set forth those sad Calamities, and external Miseries
which should seize upon the ten Tribes; be now proceeds, and fore-tells them of
far greater evils which should come upon them, viz. not a famine of bodily
bread (for of that he had spoken before, Amos 4.6.) but a Spiritual famine of
the Word of God, which should feed their souls to eternal life: This is the
Judgment of Judgments, usually the last and sorest. As the giving of Gods
Word to a People is the choysest Blessing, so the taking of it away is the
heaviest Curse; as having all other Curses attending it. It is a sign of Gods
rejecting and reprobating of a people, when he will not vouchsafe to speak unto
them by his Ministers. As it is a sign that God has some people in that place
to which he sends his Messengers, Acts 18.9, 10, 11. so their departure from a
place and people is an evident sign of his displeasure against them, Acts 13.46
Mat. 10.14.15.

In this Verse we have, 1. A note of Attention, Behold, q. d. I shall now tell
you of a more direful and dreadful Judgment than ever, and therefore it
concerns you diligently to attend.

2 Here is the Judgment threatened, and that is a Famine, which is amplified
and illustrated by an Antithesis, it is not an external, corporal famine, it is
not a famine of material bread, but which is far worse, it is a spiritual
famine, a loss of heavenly food, a want of the bread of life; this famine
should be so great, that they should run from Sea to Sea, and from one part of
the Land to another, and yet should not enjoy it. The Lord in great mercy had
sent his Prophets amongst them, to call them to repentance, but they like
ungrateful and rebellious sinners contemned Gods Ordinances, profaned his holy
things, and persecuted his Messengers, till the wrath of the Lord broke forth,
and there was no remedy.

They loathed Gods Mannah, and longed to be at their Garlic and Onions in
Egypt again. They were dead under lively Oracles, and barren under fruitful
means of grace, and therefore the Lord was now resolved no longer to plow such
Rocks, nor sow such sands; but since they would not serve him with gladness of
heart in the abundance of all things, therefore they should now be made to
serve their enemies in the want of all things. They that would not hear and
obey the Prophets of God in their own Land, should now be ca^t out of all, and
be made to serve strange gods in a strange Land. As God had before exalted them
to Heaven in the use of means, and given them many excellent Prophets that did
fully and faithfully dispense his Word unto them; so now, their Prophets should
be taken from them, and they should have a spiritual famine, and be made to
know the price of Gods mercies by the wanting of them. The word Famine, implies
two things, 1. It sets forth the nature of Gods Word, it is the food of the
soul. Look what bread and water is to the body, that, and much more is the Word
of God unto the soul.

2. It imports the greatness of the judgment, it should be a Famine, not a
famine of bread, that is but a petty-judgement, a flea-biting, as nothing
comparatively to this; though the bodily famine simply considered in it self,
be one of Gods sore judgments, as I have showed before, on Amos 4.6. yet that
pincheth but the outside, the carcass, and may be sent in mercy to the soul:
but this famine of the Word is a spiritual judgment that destroies the soul,
and is a sign of Gods greatest wrath against a people, and is usually
accompanied with many other judgments.

3. Here is the Author of this famine, and that is God, I will send, Shalach,
misit, emisit, immisit.
or I will let it loose, I have hitherto chained it up like a wild beast, that
it might not hurt you, but now it shall out amongst you and destroy you.

4. Here is the time when this should be, and that is suddenly, The days come,
q. d. The time will come, and is now at hand, when your Sun shall set at noon,
and a spiritual famine shall surprise you.

5. Here is the certainty of all this, It Is not man, but the Lord that says
it, who will fulfill every threatening upon the heads of these sinners.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. The preaching of the Word is the spiritual food of the soul, and therefore
the want of it is here rightly styled a famine.

Man consists of two parts, of Soul and Body, and both these must be fed; The
body has its al^mentum natural, the soul its al^mentum spirituale.
the body which has its Original from the earth, is maintained by earthly
nourishment; but the soul which is spiritual, must be fed with the spiritual
food of Gods Word; for as bread is the stay and staff of man's body, and the
body cannot live without it, so Gods Word is the support of the soul, and it
cannot live without that, See Mr. Will. Bartons third sermon on Jer. 3.15. p.
260.
hence it is called Food, Ier. 3.15. and 15.16. John 21.15, 17. Act. 20.28.
It Is here, and here only that Christ the bread of life is revealed unto us,
John 6.35. Prove. 9.1. to 7. It Is in the Gospel that we have a feast full
fraught with spiritual delicates, Psalm. 65.4. Isa. ^5.6. and 55.1, 2. Hence
David makes such bitter lamentation for want of it, Psalm. 42.2, 3. and 84. and
it is made one note of Gods people, that they mourn for want of the holy
Assemblies, Zeph. 3.18. Lam. 1.4, 7. and 2.6, 7. and 4.1. and 5.18. I^^
esteemed the word of the Lord above his necessary food, Job 23.12. He did not
only esteem it above Lands and livings, above gold and silver, but even above
his appointed food, without which he could not live. He did more earnestly
desire it, more heartily delight in it, and more highly prize it, than he did
his necessary food, without which he could not ^ubsist. He had rather lose his
usual meals, than lose his opportunities of meditation on the Word of God.
Hence it is that Gods Ministers are called Stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. Titus 1.7.
which must dispense this Bread of Life according to the capacity of their
Hearers. They must give Milk to Babes, and strong meat to strong men; for Gods
Word is both Semen and Pabulum, it is the seed by which we are newborn, Iam.
1.18. 1. Pet. 1.23. and the food by which we are nourisht after, 1 Pet. 2.2. by
this the dead are inlivened, Ioh. 5.25. the dark enlightened, Psalm. 19.8. and
the sorrowful comforted, Isa. 40.1, 2. This shows the great necessity and
benefit of the preaching of Gods Word, and should make us prefer it unto our
chiefest joy. But to this point I have spoken at large in a set Treatise. Sal
Terrae.


2 Contempt of Gods Word brings a famine of the Word.

The Lord here suites his Judgments to his Peoples sins. He had in great mercy
raised up for this people of their own Sons for Prophets, and taught them (not
by strangers) but by Children that came from their own loins, yet they
ungratefully said to the Prophets, Prophecy not, Amos 2.11, 12. and commanded
this our plain-dealing Prophet to preach no more at Bethel, but to go see some
other Countries, Amos 7.12, 13, 16.

Hinc illae Lachrymae! This brought the famine amongst them. When God shall
bestow the preaching of the Word upon a people, which is the choycest gift
which he can bestow on the Sons of men, and they shall loathe this Mannah, and
vilify those that bring it; See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 89, 90. and
Deuts Plain man's Pathway, p. 135. to 154.
it is time the Lord should cease giving when such gifts are scorned, and cease
loving, when his love is contemned. The Jews that stoned the Prophets, killed
the Apostles, and crucified Christ; for this great contempt, they have been a
people of Gods Curse this sixteen hundred years. When men grow weary of truth,
it is just with God that they should be left to error, and when they are weary
of a faithful Amos, that they should have a flattering Amaziah; When men will
not receive the truth in love, God will give them over to strong delusions,
that they shall believe lies. A dreadful Curse! 2 These. 2.11. q. d. Since I
have given them Light, and showed them my Truth, and the way to Heaven, but
they have rejected it; therefore there shall come false Prophets, and shall cry
down Ordinances, Sabbaths, etc. and you shall believe them that shall set up
humane inventions, and you shall follow them. When Children abuse their Bread
and play with it, and trample it under feet, it is time for Parents to take it
from them. To bring these things a Thesi ad Hypothesin, and to apply this
contempt of the Word to our se^ves* it may make us tremble to think whither we
are fallen; Since the Apostles times the Gospel never shone so brightly as it
does at this day, and never was it and the Ministers of it more openly
vilified, and that by many old Professors (who are turned blasphemers) than at
this day; and therefore we may justly fear that the Lord will punish our abuse
of Light with the darkness of Popery; and take his Gospel from us, and give it
to a people that shall yield him better fruits of it than we have done. Sad
tidings always follow the contempt of the glad tidings of the Gospel; and they
that think they have too much Preaching, shall at last have none at all. When
Jerusalem began to abuse the Prophets, they were quickly made a desolation.

3 The loss of the Word of God is the sorest loss.

No famine like this famine, no judgment like this judgment, Lam. 1.4. it is
the heaviest that can befall a people on this side Hell; which made Luther say,
I would not live in Paradise without the Word, but with it I could make a shift
in Hell it self. David knew this full well, and therefore in the midst of all
his wants, he was most sensible of this, and begs it as that one thing
necessary, that he might dwell in the House of the Lord, Psalm. 27.4. It is
true, Corporal famine is very terrible, and brings people into sad
perplexities, See more before, on Amos 4.6.
and extremities, as you may see, Lam. 1.11.19. and 2.12, 20. and 4.4, 9. and
5.16. but this Spiritual famine is far worse. For, 1 That and other
Judgments pinch but the body, Ubi non est verbum Dei, quid nisi ruina and
mors, etsi in speciem omnia florere vid^antur? Mercer.
but this pines the soul; now as the soul is more noble and excellent than the
body, so its Judgments are far more dreadful, because Spiritual. It is sad
when men shall cry for bread, and they have a Stone given them* for meat, and
they have a Serpent; for drink, and their Pastors (or Impostors rather) give
them Poison. 2 That may be a means to bring a man home to God, but this
increases, and confirms the separation between God and the soul. 3 That kills
but the body at worst, but this destroys both body and soul. So that as our
Savior said in another case, about fearing of men, so may I say, about fearing
of ^amines; fear not that famine which can but kill the body, but I will
foretell you what you should fear; Fear that Famine which can destroy both
body and soul, yea I say unto you, fear that. 4 Here is a Thirst added to the
famine, a thirst of water. Though God sometimes punishes Cities with famine,
yet they may have water to drink; but if they want both bread, and especially
water, the distress lies very heavy; for Thirst if it be in extremity, See
Hildersham on Joh. 4.13. Lect. 9. p. 39, 40.
is one of the most painful and intolerable Passions that is in this life; now
the Prophet applies this to the Spiritual famine and want of Gods Word, q. d.
if it be a great Judgment to be tormented with bodily famine and thirst; how
great is the Judgment then that I denounce against you, who shall have both
famine and thirst, and that not of bodily bread or water, but of the Word of
God, which is the Bread and Water of Life, and as far excells all Corporal
bread, as the Soul excells the body? And as it is sad to have children cry for
bodily bread, and there is none to give them; so it is much more sad when men
shall cry for Spiritual bread, and there is none that can or will give it them.


2 As the giving of Preachers to dispen^e the Word unto us is reckoned as the
choycest mercy, Job 33.23, 24. Isa. 30.20, 21. Jer. 3.15. Ephesians. 4.11. because
it brings light in darkness, joy in sorrow, See Mr. Will. Burton on Jer. 3.15.
Ser. 3.
life in death, health in sickness, strength in weakness, and brings us to an
interest in God, and having him we have the Mine, the Fountain, All. So on the
contrary, the removal of the Word from a people, is reckoned amongst the sorest
Judgments, 1 Samuel 28.6. Psalm. 74.9. Prove. 29.18. Lam. 2.9. Ezekiel. 3.26. Hos.
4.17. Micah 2.6. Mat. 15.14. dry Breasts are reckoned as a Curse, V. Sal Terrae
cap. 3. p. 45.
Hos. 9.14. for when the Word goes, the greatest Mercies and Privileges of a
People go with it. Rev. 2.5.

That Gods presence in his Ordinances is a Peoples greatest glory. See Mr.
Marshals Fast Sermon. on ^ Chron. 15.2. p. 5, 6. printed 1642.
As I When the Word goes, God goes too, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. and woe to a people
when God goes, Hos. 9.12. then men may persecute us, and there is none to
deliver us, Psalm. 71.11. when he is gone, the glory of a People is gone, Isa.
4.^. As the Ark, that was a Symbol and sign of Gods presence amongst his
People, was called the Glory of Israel, 1 Samuel 4. ult. So the Preaching of the
Gospel amongst us is our glory, Hag. 2.9. and if it depart, we may write
Ichabod upon all our other enjoyments, that is, There is no glory; for the
glory is departed from Israel since the Ark of God is taken. It is said of
Constantinople, that it is fortified with three Bulwarks* 1. With Wood, i. e.
with Shipping. 2. With Stones, i. e. with high VValls, 3. With Bones, i. e.
with valiant men. But it wants a fourth, vi^. The presence of God in his
Ordinances, without which all other Fortifications are but vain, Isa. 22.8, 9,
10, 11, 12. Nahum 3.12, 13. Christ is called a King, Psalm. 2.6. and 110.3.
Zach. 9.9. now the presence of a King is the glory of a place; and where he is
truly preached, there he is truly present; though the place and people be never
so mean. Vilissimus pagus est eburneum Palatium, ubi est sincerus Pastor, and
fideles aliqui. Luther.

2 The Protection of a people goes. Where there is no Vision, there a people
lie naked, and exposed to Divine displeasure, and all Gods sore Judgments
break in upon them Prove. 29.18. the contempt of the Word laid this potent and
flourishing Kingdom of Israel in the dust.

3 Peace, Plenty, Comfort, Riches, all go when the Gospel goes. As the Gospel
comes not empty handed to a People, but brings Peace, Plenty, Renown, and Glory
with it, Exodus 20.24. ( Isa. 60. that whole Chapter) so when ever the Gospel
goes, these concomitants go along with it. As we see in Jerusalem which lies
now in the dust, and the seven Churches of Asia.

4 Salvation goes, for the Preaching of the Word is the ordinary means of
Salvation. Those that sin away the ordinary means must never look for
extraordinary; whom God saves now, he saves by Preaching, Romans 1.16. 1 Cor.
1.21.

5 Without the Word we cannot grow in Grace, it is not sufficient that we
have the truth of Grace, but God looks that we should show it by our growth in
grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. and 1 Pet. 2.2.

6 Without the Word no comfort, we shall perish in our afflictions unless
Gods Law be our delight, Psalm. 119.92. It is through comfort of the Scriptures
that we have hope, Romans 15.4.

7 Without the Word we are naked, and cannot defend our selves; it is with
this sword of the Spirit that we defend our selves against the assaults of our
Spiritual adversaries, Ephesians. 6.17.

8. If the Word be gone, we have no Rule to walk by, no Star to direct us, and
so shall run into the boggs of unwritten Traditions, Revelations, New-lights,
and a thousand old errors. If once we forsake the Law and the Testimony, to
walk in the light of our own fire, following our own corrupt reason, we are
sure at last to lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50.11.

9. When the Word departs and goes out, then all miseries crowd in. Non datur
vacuum, holds true in Divinity, as well as in Philosophy.

1. Then the Devil sets up his Throne, Rev. 2.13. and wickedness abounds.
When Christ's Kingdom goes down, then Satan's comes up; when the Sun sets,
night follows.

2. Your children will be Idolaters, and you will bring forth children to the
murderer; when people have not the true God, they will have a false one.

3. Many temporal plagues will follow, as appears by the two following verses,
verse. 13, 14. Where the famine of the Word goes before, there Sword, Plague,
Famine, and other Judgments usually follow. In Queen Mary's time, when we lost
the Word, we had losses by Sea, and losses by Land, and had such a terrible
famine, that the people were forced to make bread of Acorns. When Truth and
Gods Ordinances are gone, Vines and Fig Trees will not be long after, See Mr.
Buroughs on the place. p. 459, etc.
Hos. 2.11, 12. When the Lord would make way for his extremest wrath, to come
upon a people, he first takes away his faithful Ministers, that should lie in
the breach to intercede for them, that so his wrath may come upon them to the
utmost, Psalm. 74.8, 9. Lam. 2.7, 8.

Let us then use all means to prevent this Land-destroying Judgment; to this
end, 1. Be humbled for the sins of the times, which call for the removing of
our Candlestick out of its place. 2. Besiege Heaven with your prayers, Mat.
9.36. this is an Omnipotent Engine, Est quaedam p^ecum omnipotentia. Luther.
whereby we conquer God. To quicken your prayers, consider what a sad loss the
loss of the Word is, as you have seen in nine particulars before. 3. Walk as
becomes the Gospel; See twelve sins that help to remove the Gospel Sangar.
Morn. Lect 9. p. 93, 94, etc.
if any thing remove the Gospel from amongst us, it is our profane, impure,
ungospel-like, loose conversation that will do it.

4. As corporal, so spiritual famine comes from God.

As all evil of affliction, so this amongst the rest comes from him.

1. He sometimes sends it immediately, when he charge the Prophets to
prophecy no more in his name. As he commands the clouds to withold their
Rain, and so brings a corporal famine; so when sinners grow obstinate, he
commands his Ministers to withold their spiritual showers, and to let them
alone, that they may perish in their iniquity, Hos. 4.17. Mat. 15.14.

2. When by death he takes away his Ministers, when people cast dirt upon them,
the Lord casts dust upon them, and hides them in their graves from the
revilings of men.

2. Mediately, 1. By a corrupt Magistracy. Thus Ahab and Iesabel persecuted the
true Prophets, and made them hide themselves in caves. So Herod that Tyrant cut
off John Baptists head.

2. By a corrupt Ministry; false Prophets in all ages have been the greatest
persecutors of the true. Thus Amos here has Amaziah the high Priest of Bethel
against him, Amos 7.10. His punishment you may read, verse. 17. Thus Pashur the
Priest smote Jeremiah, and put him in the stocks, Ier. 20.7. My Lord Annas and
Caiphas the High Priest, with the Scribes and Pharisees were the greatest
enemies to Christ and his Apostles.

3. When men are given up in judgment to their own hearts lusts, so that they
stop their ears against the Word, and will not hear, Zach. 7.12.

4. When men muzzle the mouths of these laborious Oxen, V. Salterrae. cap. 8.
p. 122.
and ungratefully change their wages, and withdraw the Oil from the Lamp, and
pick the tallow from the weik. It Is just with God to starve such souls, as
would starve his Ministers bodies; you must therefore buy the Truth, and with
the wise men, part with your gold and silver for Christ, Mat. 2.11. You may buy
gold too dear, but you cannot buy Christ and his Truth too dear; though you
part with all your temporals for the Gospel, you have made a wise bargain,
Matthew. 13.44.

5. Spiritual curiosity and niceness, when men have itching ears, so that they
cannot endure sound Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.4. When nothing will down but quails,
and picking-meat, they are all for flourishes, and Rhetorical strains, and
smoothe things, Isa. 30.^0. The doctrine of Mortification and Self-denial will
not down with them.

6. Barrenness under the means of grace, when we do not answer Gods cost and
care, then he pulls up the hedge, and lays all waste, Isa. 5.1, 2, 3. Mat.
21.43. Rev. 2.3. They that will not work in the day, shall lamen^ their folly
in the night; See more on Amos 8 11, 12. in Dr. Thomas Tailors Sermon. on that
Text, in his Sermons, in folio p. 207, etc.
they that will not serve God in the enjoyment of Ordinances, shall serve their
lusts in the want of them. Let us therefore walk in the light, whilst we have
the light, when the night comes no man can work.

VERSE 12.
And they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North even to the East,
they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not find it.
IN this verse we have a further aggravation of this peoples misery, viz. that
they should seek what they had despised, and withal they should have a
frustration of their expectation. They had contemned the Word of the Lord, and
now God in his just judgment will make them know the worth of his Word by the
wanting of it. They shall wander from Sea to Sea. They shall trouble themselves
without any profit. They hated the light, and therefore now they shall sit in
darkness; they contemned Gods Prophets, and now they shall not be troubled with
them; formerly God sent in his Prophets, rising early to seek them, but now
since by their sins they had driven both God and his Prophets from them, they
should run from Sea to Sea, that is, from the Red Sea Southward, to the
Mediterranean Sea VVestward (which were the bounds of the Land of Canaan, Numb.
34.3. Josh. 1.4. Joel 2.20. Zach. 9.10.) Yea they should run from North acrosse
unto the East, Ab Aquilone ad ortum, i. e. longissime dif^ita loca, and veli^t
e diametro oppos^^a, petent. Mercer.
that is, in plain English, they should run all the Land over, and seek the
word of the Lord in every corner and quarter of it, and yet they should miss
of it. If the famine be but in one part of a land, a man may run to another
part of it for aid, but when they shall cry for bread in all the parts of the
land, and there is none to give them, that is doleful indeed.

Q. Here a Question will arise, Has not the Lord promised, that those that ask
shall have, and they that seek shall find, and such as hunger and thirst shall
be blessed, how comes it then to pass, that this people seek the Word of the
Lord, and yet cannot find it?

A. The Answer is easy, there is a twofold seeking and thirsting.

1 A seasonable, serious, and sincere seeking after God in his Worship, and to
such the Promise runs, that they shall find, Prove. 8.17. God never says to
the genuine seed of Jacob, Seek my face in vain, Isa. 45.19. This Spiritual
hungring and thirsting after the sincere milk of the Word, that we may grow
thereby, is an infallible evidence of grace.

2 There is a formal, feigned, late seeking of Gods Word, Luke 13.24. only in
the time of trouble, when pain oppresses them; such may seek, but they shall
never find: and thus it was with Israel here, they sought not the Word out of
any love to it, nor yet to be converted by it, but being in trouble, and seeing
(when it was too late) what a blessing they had lost, they now howl after it,
as those did for bodily food, Rep obi ubi se spoliatos esse vident Dei
beneficiis, non vere afficiantur ut resipiscant, sed tantum sentiunt caecos
cruciatus, ut seipsos torqueant sine aliquo effectu. Calvin.
Hos. 7.14. and as Esau did for the Birthright, when it was too late, Heb.
12.17. So these in a blind, erroneous, distracted manner desired to hear the
Word of the Lord from the mouth of the Prophets, not to be instructed by it
(for they hated to be reformed) but to get some ease and comfort from them in
their distress; for the Prophets were wont to mingle comfort with their
Threatenings, and to tell the people of God how long their troubles should
endure, and when they should end, Psalm. 74.9. But since the Lord spoke to them
by his Prophets in their prosperity, and they would not believe, that so they
might fly from the wrath to come; now they should sink under their burden, and
run to and fro for a Prophet of the Lord to comfort them, but they should not
have it; for as the Lord called and they would not answer, so they should now
cry, and should not be heard, Prove. 1.24 25, 26, 27. so that it is a fallacy to
argue thus, All that seek shall find, and all that hunger and thirst are blessed.

But these did seek, therefore they shall find; and these did hunger and thirst
after the word, therefore they shall be blessed.

The Major must be limited, thus:

All that seek aright, and all that do truly hunger and thirst after the Word
shall be blessed. But these did seek aright, and did truly hunger and thirst
after the Word.

That is false, for by hunger and thirst here is not meant their hungring after
the Word, but it implies a want of the Word; as a man that is pined wants
food, so in Israel there should be a great want of the Prophets to preach the
Word unto them.

Some take the words in an Allegorical, Mystical sense, and apply it to the
Jews after they had Crucified Christ, and stoned the Prophets, they should run
from place to place to seek the Word of the Lord, and should not find it. But
this is too lax and general, and is against the context, which applies it to
the ten Tribes, verse. 14.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Those that will find the Lord when they seek him, must seek him whilst he
may be found, Isa. 55.6. Psalm. 32.6. 2 Cor 6.2.

We must walk in the light whilst we have the light, the night comes when no
man can work, See twenty Motives to press this duty in my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.15.
p. 253.
Ioh. 12.35, 36. This people here lost all for want of seeking in a right
manner and season, they sought the Word, but it was when it was too late.

2 The scarcity of the Word (many times) makes it to be more highly prized by
us.

When this Mannah fell thick about this people they regarded it not, but now
they have lost their Prophets they can run from Sea to Sea to seek them. Those
Sermons and Ordinances which people vilify now, when God removes them, they
will magnify and praise them. Virtutem praesentem odimus, sublatam ex oculis
colimus invidi. Horat. Carendo potius quam fruendo. Sen.
It is with those good ways of God, as it is with good men, whilst they be
alive amongst us we are ready to stone them, but when they are dead we are
ready to Idolize them. Usually Gods blessings are more esteemed and valued by
us when they are Rare, and we want them, than when we surfeit and abound with
them. Things that are very rare are very precious, Isa. 4.1. and 13.12. Hence
we read of days wherein the Word of the Lord was rare, and then it was
precious in those days, and why? because there was no open Vision; there was
not a known Prophet in those days to teach the people, and this made the
Ordinances so precious then, 1 Samuel 3.1.

The Commonness of the Sun, See Mr. Case on Afflictions, p. 13, 14, 15.
of Water, Food, Raiment, Health, Wealth, Peace, Liberty, Sleep, Senses, etc.
make them little esteemed; whereas if the Lord should deprive us of any one of
them, we should quickly know the worth of them.

Lament this thy folly, and beseech the Lord to make thee know the worth of his
blessings by the enjoying, rather than by the wanting of them.

3 When people want the Word of God they should go from place to place, yea
from Land to Land, rather than pine and perish for want of instruction.

In times of Dearth we see how far people will travel for food for their
Bodies (as Jacobs Sons did from Canaan to Egypt) and shall not we take more
pains for our immortal Souls? If the Queen of Sheba (a person of great wealth
and worth) went above a thousand miles to hear the VVisdome of Solomon, how
far should we go to hear a greater than Solomon? Luke 11.31. How far will
men ride and run for the profits and pleasures of their bodies, See my Com. on
2 Timothy, 4.2. p. 326.
and shall not we be at more pains to save our Souls? In the days of Christ
the people followed him from City to City on the Week-dayes to hear him, and he
never reproved them for it, but fed their souls and bodies, Luke 6.17.

VER. 13.
In that day shall the fair Virgins, and the young men, faint for thirst.
IN the two precedent Verses the Prophet threatens a Spiritual famine, now
follows a Corporal famine and destruction, from which none should escape;
neither the Young man's strength, nor the Virgins Beauty should any whit avayl
them in that day.

In this Verse we have, 1 A Judgment threatened, and that is Thirst, they
should faint for thirst. The question will be, what is meant by Thirst here? 1.
Some take it literally for corporal thirst, which in those hot Countries where
they wanted water, was a very grievous thing. Poor that want bread, yet have
water many times to refresh them, but when a people have neither bread nor
water, it must needs go hard with them.

2. This Thirst sets forth the great poverty, and extreme want of all things
which this people should be brought into, (so the word is used, Deuteronomy. 28.48.
Isa. 44.3. for great afflictions) and the terror of that final judgment which
was coming upon them. They should not have so much as a little water to quench
their thirst, but they should faint for thirst, (as men use to do in such
cases) Psalm. 107.5. Isa. 51.19, 20. This sense I take to be the most genuine.

3. Yet others take Thirst Metaphorically; for Spiritual Thirst, Gods wrath
should burn them, and burden them, and yet they should have none to refresh and
comfort them in their trouble. We have a Comment on this Text, in Hos. 2.3, 4.
where the Lord threatens to strip these Idolatrous Israelites naked, as in the
day when they were born, and to make them a wilderness, and set them in a dry
Land, and stay them with thirst; that is, he would destroy them with the
scorching heat of his wrath, not tempered with any grace or comfort. So great
should their misery be, that they should want both corporal and spiritual
refreshing.

2. Here are the persons which should perish, and those are the prime and
flower of the Land, the very hope of posterity. The beautiful Virgins, and the
Young Men. These usually sin with an high hand, in open contempt of God and his
word, they sin with more height and violence of affection, than elder persons
use to do, and therefore the Lord threatens them especially.

Virgins use to be spared by men for their tenderness and beauty, but God is no
respecter of persons, and young men are strong, and can better shift for
themselves, yet these, even these, for all their beauty, vigor and strength,
shall faint and dye, Operientur maerore.
sorrow and perplexity shall cover and overwhelm them, as the word signifies;
and if these cannot hold out, what shall become of children and old persons?
This shows the generality of the Judgment, and that none shall escape.

3. Here is the time when all this shall come upon them, It Is in that day, See
more in Dr. Thomas Tailor, on Amos 8.13, 14. in folio p. 263, etc.
viz. when Israel shall go into captivity, and be carried out of his own Land
by the cruel Assyrians; when Samaria should be taken, and Gods Prophets
scattered, then shall they faint for thirst.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. Where spiritual Judgments go before, there corporal Judgments follow
after.

Such as contemn spiritual bread, shall want corporal. Before we read of a
spiritual famine, now follows corporal distress of the choicest and fairest of
both sexes. So true is that of Solomon, Prove. 13.13, 18. Whosoever despises the
Word, shall be destroyed, yea poverty and shame shall be to him that refuses
instruction.

2. Beauty is vanity, Prove. 31.30. Isa. 3.24. and 40.6, 7.

It Is a brittle thing, what disease almost does not make ^t fade and wither?
however it may take with vain man, yet it moves not God. If beautiful Virgins
will sin against God, even the fair Virgins shall faint. Many have beauty that
have not piety, Prove. 6.25. and 11.22. Saul and Absalom were goodly personages,
yet wicked men. Of the two, better have Piety without Beauty, Felix nigredo
quae mentis candorem habet. V. A Lapide in Eccles. 11.2 and Sphinx Theolog.
cap. 15. Ingenio poller, cui vim natura negavit. Cato.
than Beauty without Piety. An upright, pure soul, in a black decrepit body, is
excellent. God many times makes up outward deformities with inward
excellencies. Socrates and Esop were deformed in body, yet who more wise and
witty?

3. Sin sweeps all before it.

It deprives us not only of bread, but also of water too, yea it deprives us
not only of corporal, but also of spiritual bread. It robs us of all our
comforts, great reason then we have to hate it. It Is like that weed which we
call Bishopsweed, which frets away all the corn and good grain that grows near
it.

4. The sins of young persons provoke the Lord to cut them off.

Their sins are committed with more wilfulnes, heat and violence, and so are
more displeasing unto God, As I have showed before, on Amos 4.10. Obs. 6.

5. It Is the great misery of wicked man, that they have no comfort in their
misery.

When they be scorched with the wrath of God, yet they faint for thirst. See
this spiritual thirst set forth in seven particulars, by Mr Obad. Sedgwick, on
Isa. 55.1. p. 5, 6. and Mr. Hildersham on John 4.13. Lect. 9.
The godly that thirst in a right spiritual manner, have Gods Spirit and
Ministers to comfort them, and pronounce them blessed, Mat. 5.6. But the wicked
faint and sink under their burdens, and have not so much as one shower of Rain
from Heaven, to quench and allay the flaming fire of Gods indignation, Ezekiel.
22.24.

VERSE 14.
They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, Thy God, O Dan, lives, and
the manner of Beersheba lives, even they shall fall, and never rise up again.
THe Prophet having reproved them before for their oppression and
unrighteousness toward men, comes now to denounce Gods Judgments against
them, for their Superstition and Idolatry toward God.

In the words we have 1. A Commination, or a Judgment threatened, and that is,
the irreparable ruin of the Ten Tribes, They shall fall, and never rise up
again. They shall so fall (for their cruelty and Idolatry) that they shall rise
no more. If a man fall, and yet has hope of rising again, it upholds and
comforts him; but these Israelites felt into captivity, and never were
restored. Judah, which was the better of the two, after the seventy years
captivity, returned again into their own Land; but the Ten Tribes were carried
out of their own Land by Salmaneser King of Assyria, and never returned any
more, Amos 5.2. The Lord had tried all gentle means to cure them, but all in
vain, and therefore now he resolves to make a final end with them, and to smite
them so as they shall fall irrecoverably, and never rise up again, nor return
more to their own Land, as appears, 2 King. 17. To fall, and never rise to dye,
and not live, to be set below, and not above, to sit in darkness, and have no
light; such amplifications in Scripture are vehement asseverations, and are not
used in vain by God.

2. Here is the ground or reason of this Commination, and that is, their
Superstition and Idolatry,

They swear 1. By the sin of Samaria. 2. By the God of Dan. 3. By the manner of
Beersheba.


That is, They swear by the Molten Images, and Golden Calves, which Jeroboam
the King of Samaria had set up at Dan and Bethel. These Idols are called, The
sin of Samaria, Asham, peccatum, del^ctum, a verbo Asham, inique fecit,
deliquit. Syn. Genesis
because Samaria was the Metropolis, and chief seat of their Kings, and they
setting up Idolatry at Bethel, which was not far from Samaria, Dicitur delictum
Samariae, quia gravissimi sane delicti regis and populi tum effectus, tum
objectum fuit. Estius in loca diffic^l.
drew Samaria and all the people of the Land with them, and therefore this sin
is properly laid at their doors. When the people of Israel in Moses his time
did worship the golden Calf, it is called their Sin, Deuteronomy. 9.21. I took your
Sin, that is, I took the Molten Calf, wherewith you had committed that
abominable sin of Idolatry, and burnt it with fire, and the Scripture
frequently calls Idols by the name of sin, 1 King. 12.29, 30. Isa. 27.9 and
31.7. Hos. 10.8. Zach. 5.8. They thought they had done God an high piece of
service, in sacrificing and swearing by the Calves, but the Lord plainly tells
them, that 'twas their great sin so to do.

3. He goes on to prove their Idolatry, by their forms of swearing then in use,
for our oaths are a kind of confession of our Faith, whereby we testify, that
he whom we swear by knows our hearts, and is able to punish us if we swear
falsely; hence swearing is frequently put for religious worship. This swearing
by Idols, and fictitious Gods (as Idolaters use to do) as if they had no other
God to swear by, could not but highly provoke the Lord to cast them off, who
thus ungratefully and dis-ingenuously forsook him, the fountain of all their
happiness.

They say, Thy God O Dan live or they swear by the life of Dan, which yet was a
dead Idol, and had no life in it. This was the usual form of swearing in those
days, as you may see, Genesis 42.15. Judge. 8.19. Ruth 3.13. Ier. 12.16. They used
the same form of swearing by their Idols, as the godly did by the true God.
Iurant, ita ut vivit Deus qui in Dan colitur. Grotius.
Thy God O Dan lives, (i. e.) Let thy Calf live O Dan, or as sure as thy Calf
lives, O Dan. They swear by this Idol, as if there were some Deity and Divinity
in it, when 'twas a mere abomination, and Idol of their own inventing, Hos.
8.5, 6. Jeroboam when he came first to the Crown, set up two Golden Calves, as
tutelar Gods, the one at Bethel, not far from Samaria; the other in Dan, which
was in the North part of Canaan, it being one of the utmost coasts thereof, 1
King. 12.29, 30. Ier. 4.15.

4. Yet more, They swear by the manner of Beersheba. Beersheba was a City of
Canaan, Josh. 19.2. being the utmost bound of the holy Land toward the South,
as Dan was toward the North* hence from Dan to Beersheba are often put for the
whole Land of Israel, from one end to the other, they being the utmost borders
of the whole Land, Judge. 20.1. 1 Samuel 3.20. 2 Samuel 3.10. 1 Chronicles. 8.2. `Twas a
famous City, where the Judges used to sit, 1. Sam. 8.2. yet, this place was
infected with Idolatry, as well as Bethel and Gilgal, and therefore they are
commanded to pass by it, Amos 5.5. and yet they swear, that the manner of
Beersheba lives. Derech Via.
Or the way of Beersheba lives (as it is in the fountain) that is, they swear by
a strange God, whose way, Rites, Ceremonies, and manner of Worship they had set
up at Beersheba: for by way in Scripture is meant the manner of divine worship
and serving of God. It Is here taken in a bad sense. See Ier. 32.39. Act. 9.2.
and 18.25. and 24.14. Thus we see how the whole Land was infected with
Idolatry, from one side to another, there was no sound part in it, which serves
to justify Gods Justice in their universal ruin.

OBSERVATIONS.
1* Idolatry, it is a sinning sin.

It is the Sin with an Emphasis, and by way of eminency, which destroys a Land,
Deuteronomy. 9.21. it is a great sin in it self, and the root of many other
abominations; In my Com. on Hos. 13.16. Obs. 12. p. 88, 133, 139, 158, 160.
whatever Sin God bears withal, yet he cannot, he will not bear with this (as
I have showed at large elsewhere) other sins were Causae adjuvantes, they helped
to ruin Israel, but their Idolatry was the primary cause of that fatal blow,
and of their final overthrow.

2. The Judgment of men, and the Judgment of God differ much.

That which man calls here by way of honor, a god, that God calls by way of
dishonor and detestation, A Sin, and abominable, Ier. 16.18. and 44.4. Thus
the world calls Riches, Substance, Goods, Happiness, Psalm. 4.6. but the Holy
Ghost calls them Vanities, Thorns, Husks, unrighteous Mammon: the world calls
Pride, Decency, but God calls it an abomination. The world calls Covetousness,
Good-husbandry, but God calls it the root of all evil. The Mass, with all its
Superstitious rites, Antichrist calls it Divine Service, but God says, In vain
do ye worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Precepts of men. See Brooks his
remedies against Sat. Dev. p. 18. to 27.
Satan loves not to have Sin go barefaced, and therefore he usually puts a
fair Glove upon a foul hand, and calls Vice by the name of Virtue. But God has
cursed those that call evil good, Isa. 5.20. many think they highly please God,
and do him abundance of service by their Superstitious, Self-conceited
worship, but he tells them here, it is their sin and shame so to do; So true
is that of our Savior, Luke 16.15. That which is highly esteemed in the sight
of carnal, superstitious men, is an abomination in the sight of God.

3 Mixture in Gods Worship is a God-provoking Sin.

When we are partly for God, See Crook against Hypocrisy. P. 1. chapter 11. p. 107.
and partly for Baal, partly for Christ, and partly for Calves at Dan and
Beersheba, this mingle-mangle, and Linsi-woolsie-religion is very displeasing
unto God, and ruined Israel here. They pretended that they Worshipped the true
God, in and by those Idols which they swear by, but because God had commanded
them no such way of Worship, he utterly disclaims it, and severely punishes
them for their pains, 2 King. 17.33, 34. those that are said to fear the Lord,
and yet serve their own gods, in the very next verse are said, Not to fear the
Lord.

4 We may not swear by Idols.

It is a Deifying of them; V. Danaei Ethie. Christ. l. 2. cap. 9. p. 113. folio.
hence the Lord threatens to punish those that swear by them that are no gods,
Ier. 5.7. Zeph. 1.5. we may not swear by Creatures, Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36. Iam.
5.12, nor by any fictitious gods at Dan and Bethel, as many Popish, ignorant
persons amongst us do; when they swear Ber Lady, Ber Lakins, by St. Anthony,
by S. Gys, by the Mass, by Cock, by my Fay, by my Feiks, by my Feikins, by my
Truly, etc. All these are Oaths, by Idols and by Creatures, which our jealous
God will not brook at our hands; you may mock men with them, See Mr. Clerks
Mirror, chapter 129. and Dents Path -- way, p. 154. to 166.
but God will not be mocked; his Curse will seize upon the houses where such
swearers dwell, Zach. 5.3.

We all profess our selves to be worshippers of the true God, yet our swearing
by them that are no gods is a kind of renouncing the true God, by whom only we
should swear, as him only we should serve. God is very tender of his own
Glory, and will not suffer it to be given to others. Hence we are so often
commanded when we swear, to swear only by the name of the true and living God,
Deuteronomy. 9.13. and 10.20. Psa. 63. ult. Isa. 45.23. and 65.16. Ier. 12.16.

Oaths are one special part of Divine Worship, wherein God is glorified in his
Attributes of Omnisciency, Omni-presence, Omnipotence, etc. We believe that he
knows our hearts, and is able to punish us if we perform not our Oaths, or
swear falsely; and to this end we call upon him when we swear. Hence Isaiah
Prophe^ying of the calling of the Egyptians to the faith tells us, that in
that day five Cities in Egypt shall speak the Language of Canaan, and shall
swear by the Lord of Hosts; that is, they shall show that he is their God, by
their swearing by his name, Isa. 19.18.

5 Superstition is a toylsome thing.

See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 119, 120, and Clerks Mirror, chap. 128.
They go here to Dan and Beersheba, from the North to the South, all the Land
over after Idols, 1 King. 12.30. what pains and Peregrinations do the Papists
take in Journies, Whippings, and other kinds of Will Worship, yet many amongst
us will scarce go out of their doors to hear the Gospel of Salvation. Blind
Idolaters shall rise in Judgment against the men of this Generation, who take
more pains in going to Hell, than many do for Heaven.

6 Great Cities many times are the Seminaries of great Sins.

The Idolatry which overspread all Israel is laid here at Samarias door, which
was the chief City of the Land, and the place of the Kings residence, from
hence as from a fountain all the streams of Profaneness, Superstition, and
Idolatry overspread the Land, here it was practiced, maintained, and upheld;
and therefore Princes and Rulers should have a special care to keep the great
Cities of the Land pure, that they may be patterns of Piety, and
Looking-glasses by which the Country round about them may dress themselves;
for such as the Mother, such usually are the Daughters.

7 Idolaters shall be utterly ruined.

They shall be at last so broken, that they shall never rise more. A good man
may fall into afflictions and trouble seven times in a day, yet he rises
again, but the wicked shall fall into mischief irrecoverably, See Mr. Trapp on
Prove. 24.16.
and never rise more, as the Antithesis implies, Prove. 24.16. Job fell into
deep distress, yet at last he rose again, and his latter end was better than
his beginning, Job 42.12. but the wicked are broken as with an Iron Rod, and
dashed in pieces like a Potters Vessel, which can never be sodred together
again, Psalm. 2.9. God strikes them through the gall, so that all the Physicians
in the world cannot heal them, Job 20.25.

AN EXPOSITION, WITH Practical OBSERVATIONS UPON The Ninth Chapter of Amos.
VERSE 1. I saw the Lord standing upon the Altar, and he said Smite the lintel
of the door, that the posts may shake: and cut them in the head all of them,
and I will slay the last of them with the sword: he that flees of them shall
not flee away, and he that escapes of them, shall not be delivered.


IN this last Chapter, which contains the last Vision and Prophecy of the
destruction of Judah and Jerusalem, we have the sum and substance of the
seventh Sermon of the Prophet Amos, which consists of three parts.

1. A Commination. 2. A confirmation of that Commination. 3. A Mitigation or
Qualification of this Commination with Evangelical promises of consolation and
restoration. So that this Chapter consists both of Law and Gospel, of
judgment and mercy; which is the best mixture that a Prophet of God can use,
because all ingenuous natures are wrought upon, either by judgments or
mercies, and those that neither of these can work upon, are desperate.
1. Here is a continuation of Gods Commination by way of Type or Vision,
wherein we have, 1. The Vision propounded, viz. the smiting of the lintel of
the Temple door, that the posts might shake. Denoting thereby the certainty of
their ruin and transportation, without any possibility of escaping.

2. The Vision is expounded, verse. 1. where we have 1. The persons that shall
be cut off, and those are the body of the people, the generality of the Land,
both great and small; as all had sinned, so all must now suffer for sin. 1. He
commands, Smite them in the head, that is, cut off Kings, Princes and Priests,
both in Israel and Judah. 2. Rest not there, but slay the rest of them with the
sword, that is, cut off the inferior sort. 3. Here is the certainty and
inevitableness of their suffering confirmed by Arguments drawn, first from the
Omnipresence of God, no place what ever can protect a sinful people from his
revenging hand, and this is set forth 1. Generally, verse. 1. He that flies,
shall not flee away, and he that escapes, shall not be delivered. There is
no escaping when God pursues.

2. By a notable enumeration of some particular places, showing that they
should not escape though they hid themselves 1. In Hell, verse. 2. 2. In Heaven.
3. In the tops of inaccessible mountains, verse. 3. 4. In the bottom of the
Sea. 5. In Captivity. Though they went into banishment out of their own Land,
yet there the Lord would command the sword, and it should slay them, verse. 4.
So that they were safe neither at home nor abroad, neither in their own Land,
nor in strange Countries.


4. Their total overthrow is further confirmed by Arguments drawn 1. From the
anger of God, verse. 4, 8. I will set mine eyes upon them for evil. It Is a
Metaphor from men in whom the anger of the heart, discovers it self in the eyes
and face.

2. From the might and majesty of God, who has power to punish them; and this
power is set forth, 1. By his Titles* He is the Lord God of hosts, verse. 5. 2.
By the effects of his power.

1. If he but touch the Land, it shall melt, verse. 5. with a touch he can
destroy a Land, and turn it into us first Chaos.

2. He can bring an overflowing flood upon it, that shall quickly overrun all,
verse. 5.

3. By his work of Creation, 1. In Heaven, it is he that builds the stories of
Heaven. By his power and wisdom he created the Heavens, and the several
spears and regions of the Air, as so many stories one above another, verse. 6.

2. In the earth, he has founded his Troops in the earth, verse. 6. He has
variety of creatures, as so many Troops on earth ready pressed to serve him, and
execute his commands, they are all his servants, Psalm. 119.91.

3. In the Sea. He calls for the waters of the Sea, and they presently cover
the face of the earth, verse. 6. By all which he proves himself to be, The Great
Jehovah of all the world.

5. He confirms the certainty of their destruction from the sinfulness of their
condition. As first, They were dis-ingenuous and ungrateful, whereas he had
brought them up out of the Land of Egypt, and made them his Israel, yet they
behaved themselves more like Ethiopians, than Israelite^; and therefore as they
had been like to Heathens in sinning, so now they should be like them in
suffering, verse. 7.

2. They were very secure and regardless of Gods threatenings, contemning the
warnings of Gods Prophets, and therefore the Lord threatens, that they should
fall by the sword, verse. 10.

3. The Prophet having before used Driving Motives, drawn from the Judgments
of God; comes now to Drawing Motives, taken from the mercies and comfortable
promises of God. Before he had brought them to Mount Ebal, the Mount of
cursing; but now he brings them to Mount Gerizim, the Mount of Blessing. Before
he tried them with legal Menaces, and dreadful Comminations, now he closes his
Prophecy with Gospel-mercies, and Evangelical consolations.

1. He tells them that an elect remnant should be saved in the midst of these
calamities, till better days should come under the Gospel. Though the Lord
were resolved to punish the body of that rebellious Nation, yet he would not
utterly destroy them all, but would preserve some because of his Covenant; and
though they might be fifted, tossed and tried with many afflictions, and go
into captivity as well as others; yet not one grain should fall to the ground,
nor any one of Gods elect perish eternally, verse. 8, 9.

2. Here is the happy Restoration of the Church in Gospel Times set forth 1.
Under the type of raising up the Tabernacle of David which is fallen, verse. 11.
Though the house of David, and the men of Judah and Israel were sorely
shattered, and sunk very low by reason of their captivity, and other miseries,
which lay upon them; so that they were like a Tabernacle fallen down, or a
Garden laid open, the fence being broken down; yet in Christ the true heir of
David, it should in Gospel Times be restored and repaired.

3. According to the custom of the Prophets in Old Testament times, he
prophesies of the glory and happiness of the Church, which he sets forth by
the magnificence and affluence of outward blessings; typifying thereby those
spiritual mercies which God would give to the elect remnant after their
sufferings.

1. He promises that the Nations should be subdued under them, and their
bounds should be enlarged by taking in the Gentiles in these Gospel Times into
communion with them, verse. 12.

2. Great plenty in their fields and Vineyards, verse. 13, 14.

3. Re-edifying of their ruined Cities, verse. 14.

4. Returning from captivity and banishment, and re-establisment in their own
Land, in despite of all their enemies, verse. 15.

Object. But it is impossible, that ever such things should be effected.

Answ. To men who are led by sense and carnal reason, these things may seem
impossible; but to the Almighty all things are possible. Now it is he that
undertakes the work, and it is he that will effect it in his due time. It Is I
that will bring them again, and I will plant them in the Land that I have given
them, even I will do this, says the Lord Almighty, who am Thy God in covenant
with thee.

VERSE 1.
I saw the Lord standing upon the Altar, etc.
THe destruction of this people was shadowed out before, by four visions; This
is the fifth and last, by which the Prophet confirms that Commination which he
had published in the precedent chapters.

The better to confirm the truth and authority of what he should speak, he
begins first with his usual Preface, Amos 1.1. and 8.1. I saw the Lord, the
King of Kings, and supreme Monarch of all the world, whom Israel and Judah have
provoked to wrath with their Idolatry; him, I say, I saw in a trance or
Prophetical vision, standing, which implies two things, 1. That he was ready to
depart from this rebellious people, See Patrick, Jewish Hypoc. chapter 9. ss. 8. p.
^28.
his gracious presence should now no longer abide amongst them. 2. Stat ut
vindex, he stands ready to pronounce the final sentence against them, and to
execute his righteous judgment on them, so Amos 7.7. So that here is the Lords
posture, He stands.

2. Here is the place where he stands, viz. upon the Altar. Here two great
Questions will arise. 1. How could Amos see God, when it is said, No man has
seen God at any time, and none can see him and live, Exodus 33.20. John 1.18.
yet Amos is said to see God and live?

Answ. The Answer is easy, There is a twofold seeing of God. 1. As he is in
himself in his transcendent glory and essence, and thus no mortal man clothed
with flesh and blood, and clogged with humane infirmities, See this point
excellently cleared by Dr. Arrow smith on John 1.18.
can see God and live; it would overwhelm him, and he could not bear it, 1 Timothy
6.16. 1 Ioh 4.12. but in the life to come we shall see him clearly as he is, 1
Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2.

2. There is a seeing of him in this life darkly, in his word and works, and
visionarily, by visions, external apparitions, signs and sights; such as our
infirmities will bear; and thus he appeared to Amos, to Abraham, to Isaiah,
chap. 6.1. Ezekiel. 1.1. and 43.3, 4. Daniel and others. These saw the Lord in
Visions, but not in his Essence.

A second Quere is, What is meant by the Altar here?

Ans. Here Interpreters are divided. Some conceive that Amos living at Bethel,
and being sent to preach principally to the ten Tribes, saw the Lord standing
upon some Idolatrous Altar, at Dan or Bethel (not by way of approbation, but
intending its destruction) as ready to do execution there, throwing down the
Altar, and its worshippers. But it is probable, that the Lord would not so far
countenance those Idolatrous places, as to show any vision, or utter any Oracle
there, where the Devil was worshipped, 2 Chronicles. 11.15.

Others upon better grounds, do interpret it of Gods standing on the Brazen
Altar, which was in Solomon's Temple in Jerusalem, which being without the
Temple in the Inner Court, may intimate Gods beginning to forsake his Temple
and people; and that there was no hope of pardon left, seeing the place of
propitiation was by God converted into a sear of Justice, he standing upon the
Altar of burnt-offerings, as it were to slay the men of those times, whose
provocations he could no longer bear; and albeit the Prophet was principally
sent to Israel, yet he many times takes in Judah with them (as I have showed on
Amos 6.1.) As both had sinned, so both must suffer, and be laid in the dust;
neither should their Temple in which Judah so much gloried, any whit avail them
in the day of Gods wrath; much less should those Idol and profane Temples of
Dan and Bethel any whit avail Israel, which God never commanded to be built,
but always abhorred as dens of Devils, 2 Chronicles. 11.15.

4. Here is the Vision it self, viz. the destruction of Judah and Israel set
forth by the smiting of the Lintel of the door, that the posts might shake; And
he said, Smite the lintel of the door, etc. The question will be, whom does the
Lord here speak to when he says, smite?

Answ. 1. Some conceive that he speaks to the Prophet, who was commanded to
denounce judgments against them, that all might quake for fear. Others
conceive that he means Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, who burnt the Temple,
and smo^e the Altar. Others apply it to Salmaneser the King of Assyria, who
executed Gods wrath upon Israel, carried them into captivity, and destroyed
their Idol-Temples. These are but conjectures.

Most conceive that it was some Angel which the Lord had appointed as the
executioner of this Judgment upon this people; hence we so often read in
Scripture that God made use of Angels for such ends.

5. Here is the work that this Angel must do. He must smite the lintel of the
door of the Temple; The gate of the Temple had a threshold and posts, and over
the threshold in the frontispeece was elegant work, 1 King. 6.33, 34, 35.

The G^eeks call it (...), ab (...) super and (...) janua.

The Hebrews call it Haccaphtor, superliminare, still. portae Templi.


By the Lintel here is meant the Transome, or Head-peece over the door, Exodus
12.22. The word also signifies an Apple or Pomegranate, that stood peradventure
on the top of the Temple or Porch, as is usual in magnificent structures, where
they set knops or balls on the frontispeece, and upper lintels of the doors,
adorned with artificial Flowers, Apples, Pomegranates, etc.

6. Here is the manner, how the Angel must smite the lintel, not faintly and
feebly, but with vehemence and courage, so that the posts and pillars may shake
again. By the lintel is meant the Superiors, and by the posts which supported
it, the Inferiors; all should be smitten, and made to quake again for fear;
for so it follows, Cut them in the head all of them; where we have the Persons
which the Angel must smite, and those are, 1. The Heads of Israel, that is, the
Rulers Eccsesiastical and Civil. Cut them in the head, or cut them which are
the head of all, viz. the chief and principal men in Church and State, both
Princes and Priest. A cut in the body may be cured, but a cut in the head is
dangerous and deadly, Psalm. 68.20. The Vulgar Latin mistaking the Original
word, render it thus, Smite, for Covetousness, the head of them all. But the
word Betsaam, coming from Batsa, properly signifies to wound or cut, and
Metaphorically to be covetous.

2. The Peasants and the Poor. I will slay the last of them. By the last or
hinmost here is meant the inferior sort or common people, Homines in^imae
classes, i. e. vilissimi and abjectissimi.
who are the last and lowest of the people. Before he threatened the Head, and
now he comes to the Heel. The Portal with the Pavement, all must be smitten.
Cut them down (says God to the Angel) cleave them from top to toe, Acharitam,
i. e. novissimum eorum, quod sequitur, posteritas.
from head to tail, from first to last, let none escape.

Some render it thus, I will slay the residue or posterity; Indeed the word is
homonymous, and admits of diverse significacations, sometimes it signifies the
last, or that which follows; and sometimes it is put for posterity and children;
and though it be true that God did destroy these wicked ones with their
posterity; yet most genuinly the word is rendered by our Translators here, The
last of them, as relating to the inferior sort, and then the sense runs clear,
I will slay both high and low, b^ohhead and heel.

3. Here is the means by which God will destroy them, and that is, by the last
and sorest of his judgments, it is by the sword. Israel shall fall by the sword
of the Assyrian, and Judah by the sword of the Babylonian.

Quest. But how are all said to be slain, when it is manifest that many escaped,
and went only into captivity into Assyria and Chaldea?

Answ. The word All, See Wilsons Diction. on the word All.
in Scripture is taken two ways 1. Collectively, for all the body of a people.
2. Distributively, for some of all sorts; some rich, some poor; some high, and
some low; and so the word is taken here for many, very many both in Samaria and
Jerusalem shall dye for it. So that when he says All, he speaks
Hyperbolically, and means all comparatively, that is, those that escape shall
be but few in comparison of those that dye. So Phil. 2.21. All men seek their
own, that is, the greatest part do so.

2. We must distinguish of slaying. 1. There is an actual slaying and killing
outright, and so all were not slain. 2. There is a slaying in a Civil Sense,
Servitus in ju^e aequiparatur mor^i, vocatur ^ more civilis.
when a man goes into captivity, and is banished from house and harbor, being
brought very low by affliction, and this is called slaying in Scripture, Psalm.
78 34. and thus all Israel and Judah were slain* that is, they were carried
into captivity, the one by the Assyrian, and the other by the Babylonian.

Obj. But what do you tell us of slaying, we will hide our selves, and flee for
it?

Answ. The Prophet by a Prolepsis stops this gap, and tells them that the
judgment is inevitable, flying will not avail; for he that flies shall not
flee away [but shall be overtaken] and he that escapes of them, shall not be
d^livered. They may attempt and endeavor an escape, but it shall be in vain,
for Gods Justice shall quickly overtake them, F^gions no^ eff^^iet nec evadet
evasor.
and his sentence be executed on them. This doubling of the words is very
emphatical, and is more than if he had simply said, They shall find no
hiding place.

It aggravates a man's misery, to fly, and then be taken, and when he thinks he
has escaped the danger, then to fall into it, or a worse, is very sad; yet so
'twas here, they thought to shift for themselves, as formerly they had done,
and to save themselves by flight, but now the day of their calamity was come,
and they should not escape; they were ripe for ruin, and therefore the Lord
tells them, that there was now no way nor hope of escaping, but they must into
their enemies hands; and if any should escape one trouble, yet he should fall
into another; though he escape one stroke at one time, yet he shall not be
delivered from another stroke at another time, but shall be like one that
flees from a Lion, and a Bear should meet him, Amos 5.19.

The sum of all is this. In a Vision I Amos saw the Lord (having left the
Temple) to stand upon the Altar without, and he commanded his Angel to smite
the Lintel, or Head-peece over the door of the Temple, so vehemently that the
posts thereof may shake* to signify that fatal st^oke which I will give the
Rulers, both Civil and Ecclesiastical in Israel and Judah: for I have decreed
to cleave them down the middle, and to smite them from top to toe, both Lintel
and Threshold both Superiors and Inferiou^s, all have sinned, and all shall
suffer. Israel shall suddenly fall by the hand of the Assyrian, and Judah not
long after shall go captive into Babylon. They are incorrigible, and therefore
I am become inexorable, and their judgments are inevitable; though they fly,
yet they shall not escape, no power, nor policy shall be able to deliver them
from my revenging hand.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. God formerly revealed his mind to his Prophets by Types and Visions.

I saw in a Vision (says Amos) but in the last days he has spoken to us
more plainly and fully by his Son, Heb. 1.1, 2. but of this before, on chap. 8.
Ver. 1. Obs. 3.

2. God will depart from those that depart from him.

He will forsake those that forsake him, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. When Jerusalem forsakes
God, then God forsakes Jerusalem, 2 King. 21.13, 14. These people had forsaken
God, and followed Idols, and now God stands upon the Altar ready to depart from
them, and leave them in the hands of their enemies. It Is true, the Lord is
loath to leave his people, and therefore he removes gradually, and by degrees
from them. When he departed from Jerusalem, he did it not in a moment, but
first he warns them by his Prophets, then he removes from the Cherub to the
Threshold, Ezekiel. 9.3. and 10.5. Such is Gods goodness and bowels of pity to his
people, that he is very unwilling to sell them into his enemies hands, if any
means might prevent it, Psalm. 81.13, 14. Isa. 48.18. Ezekiel. 18.30, 31, 32. Hos.
6.4. and 11.8, 9. but when a people are so desperately set, that they will none
of God, then he swears their ruin, Psalm. 95.11. This forsaking him is a great
evil, and a God-provoking-sin, Ier. 2.12, 13. Hence old David counselling young
Solomon to know and serve the Lord, uses this Motive amongst the rest; If thou
seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee
off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

3. Judgment usually begins at the house of God.

It begins at the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 9.6. 1 Pet. 4.17. the higher in privileges,
the nearer to judgment, Dan. 9.12. Amos 3.2. Mat. 11.23. The nearer to God,
the more do our sins dishonor him, and therefore he begins with such, 2 Samuel
12.7, 8. though he ends not with them. The famine began at Jacobs house, and
then to Egypt. The Israelites went first into captivity, and after the
Assyrians were destroyed by the Medes and Persians. So Ier. 15.17, 18, 28, 29.
The Lord gives the cup, first to Jerusalem and then to Egypt, Uz, Ekron, Edom,
Moab. The Posts and Pillas of the Temple door must first be smitten; and if
this be done to the green tree, what shall be done to the dry? if this be done
to Gods own Temple, See more in my Com. on Hos. 13.15. Obs. 3.
what shall become of Idol-Temples? If the Lord spare not Jerusalem, but show
his impartial justice in punishing them for their sins, what shall be done to
Babylon?

4. Political Rulers are the Heads of a people.

Cut them in the Head. They are often called so in Scripture, Exodus 6.14. and
18.25. Numb. 1.16. and 14.4. and 17.2. Judge. 11.8. 1 Samuel 15.17. Look what the
Head is to the Body natural, that Rulers are or ought to be to the body
Political. As the head is placed highest in the body, and sees, consults and
reasons for the preservation of the body, so this word implies both dignity and
duty, and should teach those who are set in place of pre-eminence above others,
to consult for the good of their people, that they may live peaceably and
piously under them, 1 Timothy 2.2. Many cry up the dignity of Princes, but they
should tell them of their duty also, and some cry them up as Head of the
Church, as well as of the State; Mr. Heart a Popish Priest upbraids us with it,
That we take the Supremacy from the Pope, and give it to the Prince, who is
less capable of it. But the learned Dr. replies well. The Supremacy (says he)
which we take from the Pope, See Dr. Reynolds against Heart, chap. 10. p. 669,
etc. Altar Damascenum cap. 1. p. 10, etc. Mr. Tombs his Tract. about the Oath
of Supremacy.
we give it to no mortal creature, Prince or other. But the Pope having seized
on part of Christ's right, and part of the Princes, etc. we have taken the
Princes power from him, and given it to him to whom it was due, according to
that of our Savior, Give to Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God what is Gods,
etc. The Supremacy therefore which we give our Prince in things Ecclesiastical,
is to deal therein as Hezekiah did, and not as Uzziah; no to preach, administer
Sacraments, or practice the Discipline of the Church, but to provide that these
things be done as they ought, by them whom God has called thereto. We give to
Caesar no more than is Caesar's, See more in Ius Divinum Regim. Eccles. p. 43,
44.
Thus he. Hence it is that our Princes do abstain from the title of being called
Heads of the Church, which is proper only to Christ, and content themselves
with the title of Supreme Governors. As for the Pope, he is so far from being
Head of the Church, that he is rather the Tail, being indeed not so much as a
sound member of it; but the Head of that Apostasy from the Faith, which was
foretold, 2 These. 2.3. 'Twould be sad with the Church if it had no better a
Head than the Popes have been, some of which have been Sodomites, Magicians,
Adulterers, and gave their souls to the Devil to get the Popedom; what are the
Members when the Heads are such?

5. These Heads of the people when they sin against God, shall be punished as
well as others.

Cut them in the Head, or cut them which are the Head of all. God is no
respecter of persons, but be they Head or Heel, if they sin against him, they
cannot escape. Tophet is prepared of old even for the King. If the proud King
of Assyria will oppress and oppose the people of God, He must know that God
has prepared a place of punishment for such cruel Tyrants, See more in my Com.
on Psalm. 82.1. p. 45.
Isa. 30.33. God is terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76. ult.

6. Universality in sin, brings universality in suffering.

When the head and the feet, See my Com. on Hos. 13.16. p. 109.
the highest and the lowest sin together, then slay them all with the sword.
But of this before.

7. The Angels of God oft-times are the executioners of his wrath upon wicked
men.

An Angel here must smite them in the head. The Sodomites that vexed Lot were
smitten blind by an Angel, Genesis 19.11. The firstborn of Egypt were s^ain by an
Angel, Exodus 12.23, 29. When Balaam was going to curse Gods people, an Angel
meets him and stops him, Numb. 22.22. If God will send a Pestilence on Israel,
he has an Angel ready to do it, 2 Samuel 24.16. If he will have the Army of the
Assyrians destroyed, an Angel shall do it, Isa. 37.36. Proud Herod was smitten
by an Angel, Act. 12.23. and at the last day they shall bring the wicked to
Christ's bar, there to receive their final doom, Mat. 13.41. Who would not then
fear to offend this great and mighty God; who has so many glorious Angels
ready at the least beck of their Lord, to destroy both us and ours. As the
Apostle would have women covered, and modest, because of the Angels so I would
have men good and gracious, because of the Angels, (who are grieved to see the
dishonours done to their Lord and Master) that we may not provoke the Lord to
send them against us for our destruction, See six good offices which the Angels
do for us, in Mr. Leighs Body of Divinity, l. 3. c. 7. p. 274. and Mr. Loves
Sermon on Heb. 1.14.
but rather to be our Guardians to salvation.

8. The judgments that be fall us, come from God.

I will slay them, I will bring them down, I will search them out, I will
command the Serpent to bite them, verse. 2, 3, 4. Whatever be the Instrument,
yet God is the prime Agent. Though there may be many executioners, yet there is
but one prime mover of them all. It Is he that kills, and he that makes alive, 1 Samuel 2.6. It Is he that gives, and he that takes, Job 1.21. and therefore they
are called His Judgments, by a special propriety, as coming more immediately
from him, Isa. 26.8, 9. The consideration of this will keep us from murmuring
and impatience, as it did Job, and David, we shall be dumb and silent when we
see it is the Lord that does it. How great then is their sin, that ascribe their
sicknesses, losses, crosses, etc. to second causes, never looking at Gods hand,
he is not in any of their thoughts.

9. Wicked men are cowardly, fearful men, Isa. 33.14. Ier. 4.9.

When troubles come they are all for flying, digging into Hell, climbing the
tops of mountains, getting into the depths of the Sea, hiding themselves in
chambers, King. 22.25. When troubles come, their spirit is gone, it is fallen
from their hearts into their heels; and they are going, yea flying from it,
which is the cowards pace. They fly not only when they are pursued, but when
none pursues them, but their own fancy, Prove. 28.1. they have guilty
consciences, which make them fly at the shaking of a leaf, Levit. 26.36. those
who are most fearless in sinning, are most fearful of suffering, Dan. 5. 4, 5,
6. whereas the righteous; like the valiant horse, that is prepared for the
battle, rejoices and goes forth to meet the armed man. Job 39.19. to 26. he
had rather dye than run, if duty bids him stay and stand. When troubles come
upon the wicked, their great care is how to be shut of them, and how to get out
of them, and outrun them; not how to have them sanctified, or how to be
bettered by them. But the good man desires rather to have the trouble
sanctified, than removed; and if he fly, it is to God, not from him, he is his
Tower and his hiding place, by Prayer and Faith he gets unto him, yea, into
him, and so is safe, Prove. 18.10.

10. all the shifts and evasions of wicked men, shall not avail them in the day
of wrath.

He that flees, shall not flee away, viz. so as to escape by his flight, for
he shall be overtaken, Or if he do escape one danger, yet he shall not be
delivered, but he shall fall into another, Amos 5.19. He that flees from a
Lion, shall fall into the mouth of a Bear, Isa. 30.16, 17. whilst they flee
from the noise of fear, they shall fall into a pit, and when they are in the
pit striving to get out, and hoping to find deliverance, then they fall into a
snare, which is a worse evil than the pit; he that falls into a pit, may make
some shift to get out again, but he that is in a snare, is bound fast, he can
get no further, Isa. 24.18. Thus the wicked man's cafe is worse and worse, all
his remedies prove remediless, and all his helpers are miserable comforters.
God is against them, and therefore salvation is far from them, Psalm. 119.155.
and if Jonah will flee from God, he shall fall into the Sea. There is no
escaping when God pursues, when he will destroy, none shall be able to deliver,
Psalm. 21.8. and 139.7. to 11. Ier. 4.16, 17. See Mr. Ienkins on Jude 14. Obs.
2. p. 204. folio.
Amos 2.14, 15, 16. Obad. 4. He has many under officers to arrest us, Ezekiel.
14.13. so that there is no escaping his hand, Job 10.7. No power nor policy can
save us from his wrath, Prove. 21.30. No place can hide us from his
All-seeing-eye, nor secure us from his All-mighty-hand, as appears in the next
verses.

VERSE 2.
Though they dig into Hell, thence shall mine hand take them, though they
climb up to Heaven, thence will I bring them down.
THese Apostatizing Israelites being puffed up with their Privileges, conceiting
that God loved them, because he had given them some success and victories;
hereupon they grew secure and impenitent, promising themselves impunity in
their sins, which makes the Prophet here to thunder out Gods dreadful
judgments against them with vehemence and variety of words, and to use very
lofty and hyperbolical expressions, the better to awaken them, and drive them
out of their vain conceits. In the end of the foregoing verse he had showed
them, that though they fled, yet they should not escape; and this he proves in
the three following verses, by a notable enumeration of five particular places,
thereby showing them that they should not escape, though they hid themselves 1.
In Hell. 2. In Heaven. 3. In the tops of inaccessible Mountains. 4. In the
bottom of the Sea. 5. In captivity and banishment out of their own Land, yet
there the Lord would command the sword, and it should slay them. They should be
safe neither at home, nor abroad, neither in their own Country, nor yet in a
strange Land: so sad it is for a people to have God for their enemy.


1. The first means whereby they thought to hide themselves from Gods revenging
hand, was by digging and taking great pains to hide themselves as low as Hell.
We have the same word used, Jonah 1.13. where the Mariners are said to row
hard, to save Jonah, the word is Iachteru, they dug in the Sea by rowing,
that is, they used the utmost means to save him.

Quest. The Question will be, What is here meant by Hell and Heaven?

Answ. 1. Some take the words literally, thus, If it were possible for these
incorrigible sinners to descend into Hell, or ascend up into Heaven, yet Gods
hand of Justice should find them out in the one, and cast them out of the
other.

2. Others take the words in an Hyperbolical sense, thus, By Hell, they
understand the most abstruse, deep, secret places of the earth. See the word
Sheol opened by Dr. Rivet, on Psalm. 16.10. and Caryl on Job 7.9. p 615. Sheol
hic pro centro terrae ponitur. Calvin.
The word Scheol, has many significations. 1. Sometimes it is put for the
grave, Genesis 37.35. Psalm. 16.10. 2. Sometimes it is put for Hell it self, as Job
11.8. and 26.6. 3. Here it signifies the lowest part of the earth, and nearest
to the center.

q. d. Though these wicked men should dig ditches or pits never so deep in the
earth to hide themselves, so that they should get ^lmost as low as Hell, yet
this digging and delving should not avail them, nor be able to shelter them
from Gods wrath; for even thence would God take them, and deliver them into
their enemies hands to be slain. Hell is naked before him, and destruction has
no covering, Job 26.6. Prove. 15.11. Let Adam hide himself amongst the trees,
and Jonah lie never so close to the sides of the ship, yet Gods Almighty hand
found out both the one and the other.

2. If this will not do, and Hell will afford no help, they will climb to Heaven,
and try what that will do, but all in vain; for thence will God cast them down,
that the Assyrian may slay them. The like Hyperbolical speeches of mounting up
to Heaven, we read of, Genesis 11.4. Deuteronomy. 1.28. Job 20.6. Ier. 49.16. and 51.53.
Obad. 4.

Some by Heaven understand high and lofty Refuges and Towers, whose tops seemed
to touch the Heavens, q. d. Let these wicked men seek for refuge in Heaven or
Hell, above or beneath, in Sea or Land, yet they shall not secure them in this
day of wrath; all their hearts, their holes, and hiding-places are naked before
the eyes of him with whom they have to do.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. When God is against a people, no place can shelter them from his wrath.

If men sin against the Lord, let them go whither they will, the punishment of
their sin will find them out, Numb. 32.23. Though insolent Edom make his nest
in the Stars, and think himself out of Gunshot, and free from danger, yet his
sins will bring him down, Obad. 4. God has a sharp eye, and a strong hand to
pull men out of their strong holds, or to destroy them in them. Zimri got into
Tirzah a fortified City, and then into the Kings Palace, and there he burnt
himself to death, 1 King. 16.8. Had we all the power and policy of all the
Kingdoms of the Earth for us, yet if God be against us, these cannot help us,
Amos 2.14, 15, 16. Though the wicked mount on high, yet at last he casts them
down to the ground, Psalm. 147.6. It Is not height nor depth, Sea or Land, Heaven
or Hell that can shelter us from Gods fury. If God be against us, all the
elements, and all the creatures are against us. As when God is for us, all are
for us, Romans 8.31. and we need not fear, Psalm. 27.1. and 56.4. Isa. 43.1, 2.

There is no flying from Gods Arrests, if a man have done wickedly in one
place, he may escape the Law by flying to another, he may get out of our
bounds, and then he is safe; but who can get out of Gods bounds? he has power
to arrest us where ever he finds us, and he can find us where ever we are. He
is higher than Heaven, and deeper than Hell, and therefore David cries out,
Whither shall I go from thy presence? Surely no whither. Neither men nor Devils
are able to go from the common and general presence of God, for he fills Heaven
and Earth. Psalm. 139.7. to 13. is a kind of Comment on this Text, and
therefore I shall briefly open it, verse. 7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit?
what is that? why he tells you in the next clause, Whither shall I flee from thy
presence? q. d. Thou art an infinite Spirit, and I can go no where to avoid or
escape thee, Verse. 8. If I ascend into Heaven, thou art there; By Heaven is
meant the upper Region of the world, and if I make my bed in Hell, and go down
to the lowest parts of the earth, he hold thou art there, q. d. Let me go
whither I will, thy presence will find me out.

Verse. 9. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the utmost parts of
the world, q. d. should I fly never so early or swiftly from East to West, as
the light of the morning does, verse. 10. Even there should thy hand lead me,
and thy right hand should hold me; q. d. I should still lie under thy divine
disposing and government, and find thee efficaciously present with me.

Verse. 11. If I say the darkness shall cover me, viz. so as thou shall not be
able to find me out, then is the night light about me, that is, I shall be
as little hid from thine eyes, as if 'twere noon day; why so? verse. 12. for the
darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day, darkness and
light are both alike to thee, Job 34.11, 12.

VERSE 3.
And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take
them out thence, and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the
Sea, thence will I command the Serpent, and he shall bite them.
THe men of Israel and Judah being sottish and sensual, and drowned in deep
security, resting upon their carnal confidences, and resolving to fly to them
instead of God: The holy Ghost (who knows our indurate frames better than we
our selves) multiplies words, and as Fishers when they would catch Fish, drive
them out of their holds; so the Lord here labors to drive them out of all
their strong holds, to himself. Having therefore showed them that Heaven and
Hell could afford them no security, he comes now to stop a third gap, by which
they might think to escape, viz. by flying to Rocks, and inaccessible
Mountains. But, though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search
and take them out thence, and deliver them into their enemies hands.

There were two Carmels. The one was in Judea, as appears, Josh. 15.55. 1 Samuel
25.2. the other in the Text was an high, pleasant, fruitful Mountain in Canaan,
good for Pasturage, and therefore is used in Sripture sometimes Largely, for
any fertile place; so Isa. 29.17. Ier. 2.7. Amos 1.2. I brought you into a
plentiful Country, or as it is in the fountain, I brought you into a Land of
Carmel. So Cant. 7.5.

2. It Is taken strictly, for that famous, fruitful Mountain, which is joined
with Bashan another fruitful hill, Isa. 33.9. This Carmel had a City on it, or
joining to it, and was situate by the Sea, jer. 46.18. Here Elijah vanquished
the worshippers of Baal, 1 King. 18.19. and Elisha dwelt here, 2 King. 4.25. By
Carmel here is meant Synecdochically, very high hills, and inaccessible Rocks
and Mountains, for in those times, and in those Countries, when they were in
great danger, they were wont to run and hide themselves in Mountains, in Caves,
in Rocks, in Pits, and high places, as appears, Judge. 6.2. 1 Samuel 13.6. Isa.
2.10, 19. Ier. 4.29. But in vain do men run to these hills and holds for
refuge, for if God be not our strong hold, they are but miserable shelters, and
we may say of them, as Job said of his friends, Miserable comforters are ye
all. We read of five Kings that hid themselves in a cave, yet were they all
taken and hanged, Josh. 10.16, 23. Titus and Vespatian besieging Jerusalem,
found many of the Jews hid in Vaults and Privy-houses, and other obscure
places, where they were slain. Those that sin against the Lord, let them go to
the very head and top of Carmel to hide themselves, yet there will the Lord
search for them, and bring them forth to Judgment. Mountains are Gods servants
as well as other creatures, yea they melt like wax at his presence, so that
although wicked men should beg of them to fall upon them, and hide them, they
cannot, they dare not do it, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17.

It Is true, David often made use of Mountains and Caves, but he never trusted in
them, but made the Lord his Rock and Refuge, Psalm. 18.2. and the best of Saints
have hid themselves as occassion required. But for impenitent sinners to think
to hide themselves from Gods hand and eye, is gross Atheism and madness.

Obj. But if we cannot hide our selves in Mountains, we will try what the
deeps will do.

Ans. You may do so, but it shall be in vain, for though they hide themselves
from my sight, in the bottom of the Sea, that is, though they think they have
hid themselves from my sight, so that I cannot see nor find them; for no man
can actually hide himself from God, who is omnipresent, but only opiniatively,
and in his own conceit.

It Is an Hyperbole, q. d. if it were possible for these wicked men to go to the
very bottom and Pavement of the Sea to hide themselves from mine eye and Ire;
Karka, Pavimentum, fundum, solum.
yet there mine eye would see them, and my hand should reach them, for I have
Serpents and Sergeants even there ready to arrest them, and fulfill my commands.

Thence will I command the Serpent and he shall bite them.

By Serpent here is not meant a Land Serpent, but a Sea-Serpent, Nachash,
Serpens. Syn. Genesis Mandabo monstro^alicui ma^ino, qualia Hebraei and Chaldaei
Serpentum and Draconum appellant nomine, per talia monstra reges crudeles
intelliguntur: Psalm. 74.14. Grotius.
as the Crocodile, or the Leviathan, that is, the Whale, or some such great
Sea Monster, for so we find the Whale in Job 26.13. called the crooked or
piercing-Serpent. God has many Serpents at command. He has Serpents Natural,
to bite and devour us, and Serpents Metaphorical, as the Devil and his Agents,
he has the Assyrian and Babylonian here to devour Israel and Judah.

q. d. Which way soever these wicked men go, death and destruction shall find
them out, all shall make against them both by Sea and Land, and the Assyrian my
Rod and Executioner shall find and ferret them out in all places where ever
they be.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. God has variety of Servants and Sergeants to arrest his enemies where ever
they be.

All the Elements, and all the Creatures are enemies to those that are enemies
to God. He has Armies at Sea and Land against them. He has not only Serpents
Metaphorical, the Devil and his Instrument, Rev. 12.9. but also natural
Serpents, and Sea Monsters innumerable, ready to execute his commands on his
enemies. God is the best friend, and the saddest foe. If he be against us, he
is an Omnipresent enemy, and can pursue us by Sea and Land; for he is every
where by his Essence, Presence and Power. He is God above all, through all, and
in us all, Job 11.8, 9. Ephesians. 4.6. He is over all by his Power, in all the
Saints by his Spirit, and through all the world by his providence. He is an
Omnipresent Essence and Being, Prove. 15.3. There is no hiding our selves in
secret from him, Ier. 23.23, 24. He is in Heaven by his glory and Majesty; in
Hell by his justice, wrath and power; in Sea and Land by his providence, Act.
17.27.

Take heed then of displeasing him, other enemies you may fly from, but there
is no flying from his presence. Walk therefore sincerely as in his eye, as
Enoch, Noah, and Abraham did. Seneca counseled his scholars to do all, tanquam
spectet Cato, as if some severe Cato did always behold them. But we should
rather do all, See this point excellently enlarged, by Mr. Caryl on Job 22.12.
p. 108. to 115. and Mr. Love on 2 Chro. 16.9.
tanquam spectet Deus, remembering his All-seeing eye is still upon us. This is
an excellent preservative against sin. This kept Joseph chaste, Genesis 39.9. and
Job and David, pure, Job 31.4. Psalm. 119.136. I have kept all thy precepts, why
so? because all my ways are before thee, Heb. 4.13.

It Is mere Atheism, and the want of consideration of that All-seeing eye of
God, which is the root of all the villainy that is acted in the world, Psalm.
94.5, 6, 8. Ezekiel. 9.9. As Nimrod was said to be a mighty hunter before the
Lord; so many may be said, to be mighty drunkards, mighty swearers, liars,
cheaters, dissemblers, etc. before the Lord. But let it always be our care to
lead a life worthy of such a presence, passing the time of our sojourning in
Gods fear. This may be 1. A spur to duty, 2. A motive to Sincerity, 3. A
corrosive to sin, 4. A cordial in afflictions. Remember in all thy distresses,
he is an Omnipresent friend. He was with Joseph in the prison, with Jeremy in
the dungeon, with Jonah in the Whales belly, with Daniel in the Lions den, with
Israel in Egypt, Exodus 3.9. and with Paul before Nero, 2 Timothy 4.17. He knows
our Tentations, our adversaries, our abilities, and will not suffer us to be
tempted above our strength, Rev. 2.3.

VERSE 4.
And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will I command
the sword, and it shall slay them, and I will set mine eye upon them for evil,
and not for good.
WE are now come to the fifth and last Evasion, whereby these incorrigible
sinners thought to escape Gods hands, and that was by yielding themselves up
into their enemies hands upon quarter for their lives, and so to escape the
edge of the sword.

To this the Lord answers by way of concession, though they should go into
cap^ivity before their enemies, or before the faces of their enem^es (as it is
in the Original) whose custom it was to drive their enemies like beasts before
them, young and old, naked and barefoot, Isa* 20.4. Lam. 1.5. yet thence will I
command and commission the sword of their enemies to slay them.

2. Here is an Aggravation of all this misery, viz. that it should fall upon
them in wrath. God promised to send Judah into the Land of Chaldea for good,
Ier. 24.5, 6. but Israel being more grossly wicked, Negatio illa, Et non in
bonum, Magnam habet auxe^sin, q. d. N^l boni, sed omne malum iis afferam and
infl gam. a Lapide.
the Lord threatens here, To watch over them for evil, and not for good. The
expression is emphatical, the denial of the contrary makes the speech more
weighty, so Jer. 21.10. and 39.16. and 44.27. q. d. I will bring upon them all
manner of evil, but no good. I will afflict them every where, but I will defend
them no where, but will utterly consume them. This was true of Israel, who went
into captivity, and never returned again; though many of Judah did return
again, as we read in the book of Ezra.

As Gods eye was formerly upon them for good, and he had made them the head of
the Nations, so now his eye should be upon them for evil, and he would make
them the Tail and contemptible amongst all. He would now deal with them as he
threatened to do with disobedient ones, Deuteronomy. 28.44, 63. Before he had been
their Guardian, and their Keeper, Psalm. 121.3, 4. He that keeps Israel neither
slumbers nor sleeps; but now he will be their Judge and Executioner. Though
formerly he seriously and intensively set himself to do them good, yet now with
as much seriousness and resolvedness he will set his eyes upon them, or against
them for evil.

By the Eye of God is meant the Providence of God, by an Anthropopathy frequent
in Scripture, Job 34.21. Prove. 15.3. Psalm. 33.18 and 34.15. 1 Pet. 3.12. which
as it watches over the good in mercy, so it watches over the wicked in
judgment, verse. 8.

I will set mine eye upon them for evil; that is, for punishment, and for
destruction, and not for good; that is, not to do them any good at all, nor to
bless them.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Submission to men is but vain, unless we submit unto God.

To yield our selves captives to men, and make peace with them, and yet to
rebel against God, is to fee the Sergeant, and to lie open to the fury of the
Creditor. Wicked men begin at the wrong end, they should first begin with God,
and humble themselves before him, and make peace with him and then all would be
at peace with them, Job 5.23. Hos. 2.18. When once our ways please God, he
makes our enemies to be at peace with us, Prove. 16.7. He can overruled their
hearts, so that although they hate us, yet they shall not hurt us; yea with
Esau, they shall kiss us, instead of killing us, Genesis 33.4.

2 The sword has its command and commission from God, Jer. 47.6. Ezekiel. 14.17.
I will command the sword, and it shall slay them.

War is one of Gods sore Judgments, it is the Arrow which he shoots at a
rebellious people. But of this at large before on Amos 4.10.

3. The Providence of God watches over the wicked for their hurt.

As the eyes of his Providence run to and fro through the whole world for the
good of his people (2 Chronicles. 16.9. Psalm. 33.18. and 34.15. 1 Pet. 3.12.) so
where ever the wicked go, his eye and his hand follow them for evil, Ier. 44.
16, 17.18, 22. and 24.9. As all works together for good to good men, so all
works for evil to evil men. The Lord does even study their ruin, and purposely
watch (as 'twere) all opportunities to do them a mischief.

As men do obstinately set their faces against Gods Commandments in a way of
rebellion; so he will set his face against them for evil in a way of
destruction, Ier. 44.11. Hence we read so often of Gods setting his face against
wicked men, Lev. 20.3. and 26.17. Ezekiel. 14.8. I will set my face against them,
that is, I am highly offended with them, and I will make it my work to execute
my vengeance on them.

VER. 5.
And the Lord God of Hosts is he that touches the Land and it shall melt, and
all that dwell therein shall mourn, and it shall rise up wholly like a flood,
and shall be drowned as by the flood of Egypt.
WE have done with the Commination, we are now come to the second general part
of the Chapter, and that is the confirmation of the Commination, which is drawn
from the Omnipotent Majesty and Power of God, who is Lord Paramount of all the
world, the glorious Creator and Governor of all. All depend upon him, and
observe his beck, what he says it is done ( ejus dicere est facere) and what
he threatens is as easily and speedily effected.

The better therefore to awaken these drousie sinners, and make them fear, the
Prophet here sets forth the Majesty and Power of God* that they might see there
was no contending with him, and that he was able, and would certainly bring to
pass what ever he had threatened against them. To this end we often find Moses
and the Prophets setting forth the Majesty of God by his Titles and Works, as
that he is the Mighty God, the Lord of Hosts, the King of Kings, etc. Sinners
are hardly drawn to consider the Glory and Majesty of that God with whom they
have to do, and therefore the Prophet so often touches on this string, Amos
3.6.8. and 4. ult. and 5.8, 9.

In this Verse, and the next, we have an elegant description of Gods Power and
Glory (where every word has its weight) And that 1 By his Names and Titles, He
is the Lord, Jehovah, the Creator and Preserver of all things; and therefore
his Threatenings ought not to be contemned.

2 He is the Lord of Hosts, he has the superior and inferior Armies of
Heaven and Earth, of Sea and Land, as it were horse and foot to march against
his enemies.

3 His Almighty Works set forth his Majesty and Power. 1 The Earth which is in
it self a most solid, firm, hard, immovable body, yet acknowledges the Power
and Dominion of its Almighty Lord and Creator; and therefore if he do but touch
it (at least with any of his rods, and in displeasure) it presently melts like
wax before the fire, Tamog, proprie significat liquescere, resolvi, ut cera ad
ignem.
or snow before the Sun. 2 If he be provoked to anger, he can make a sinful
land to mourn, by bringing upon them the punishment due to them for their sins;
he can make both things and persons melt. Therefore fear to offend him; this
must be annexed to every branch of this description of God, e. g. He is Jehovah
the Lord of Hosts, therefore fear him. He makes the earth to melt, and the
inhabitants thereof to tremble, therefore do you humble your selves before him.
3 If all this will not work upon you, yet consider he can drown you, and make
his floods to go over all the land, as he did in Noah's time, and as he does in
many Islands, and other places at this day. See before Chap. 8.8.

4 If ye will not fear him for his Majesty, and Power that appears on earth,
then look up to the heavens, verse. 6. and see his Wisdom and Power there, in
creating the several Regions of the air, as so many stories one above another,
besides the variety of creatures which he has on earth, as so many Troops
ready pressed to do him service; and his sending of the waters of the Sea upon
the earth, either by rain, or inundation to punish it. These all show the Power
and Glory of that God with whom we have to do, and therefore should make us
fear to offend him, and speedily to make our peace with him.

The sum of all is this, Hitherto ye have trusted in your own strength and
privileges, and have set light by Gods Threatenings, as if they had been but so
many scar-crows; but now consider, O ye infirm, and sinful dust and a^hes,
against whom do ye rebel, against whom do ye thus harden your selves? Is it not
against the great and mighty God, the Lord of Hoasts, the Creator of all
things, whose Almighty power appears in that with a touch he can make the
mighty and massy earth to melt and dissolve like wax before a mighty fire, and
fill it with such horror, that all the inhabitants thereof shall mourn, and
make it as inhabitable as if it were drowned with a flood?

OBSERVATIONS.
See Trap on Mal. 3.17.
1 God is the Lord of Hoasts. See before Amos 4. ult.

2 He is an Almighty God. See before Amos 4. ult. Obs. 1.

3 If God do but touch the earth, or its inhabitants in wrath, they melt, and
mourn, and fade away.

If he but touch Mountains Natural, or Mountains Metaphorical, there is no
abiding.

1 The earth Natural quakes at Gods displeasure, the Rocks and Hills melt at
his presence, 2 Samuel 22.8. Psalm. 18.7. and 144.5, 6, 7. The massy Mountains
which no art or wit of man can move, yet Gods bare presence, how much more his
wrathful presence makes them tremble as Mount Sinai did at the presence of the
Lord, See Caryl on Job 9.6. p. 184.
Exodus 19.18. Judge. 5.5. Job 9.6. Psalm 68.8. Hab. 3.10.

2 The earth Metaphorical; that is, wicked men that live in the earth, the
guilt of their sins does so daunt them that they are not able to stand in Gods
presence, Ezra 9. ult. Adam when he had sinned, hides himself from God, and
Cain runs from his presence. Especially at the day of Judgment they will not
be able to stand before Gods Tribunal, Psalm. 1.5. but will cry to Rocks and
Mountains to hide them, and shall be driven to utter desperation, when they
think of that dreadful sentence, Go ye cursed; yea when the Lord appears for
his people here, these Metaphorical Mountains shall be dissolved, and me^^ like
wax before the fire. The Churches enemies are often compared to Mountains Isa.
64.1. Zac. 4.7. 1 Because Mountains are higher than other parts of the earth,
See Caryl on Job 30.22. p. 208, 209.
so are the wicked puffed up with pride, and think themselves higher than God
himself, and therefore they set their mouths against the Heavens and blaspheme
him, Psalm. 73.9. 2 Mountains hinder us in our way. 3 They are barren, it is the
low Valleys that are fruitful.

The Church being troubled with these Mountains, seeks to remove them, by that
Omnipotent Engine of Prayer, Isa. 64. 1, 2. Oh that thou would rend the
Heavens and come down! what then? Montes sunt Principes and Potestates mundi,
qui Plusquam ferrei sunt cum sentiunt successum; at cum Deus visitat eos, sunt
molliores aqua; contemnunt Deum ut infirmum, quod ficut mus in antro, ita ille
in Templo lateat; sed age and oftende augustiorem sedem. Utinam discinderes
coelum, and descenderes, Luther in Isa. 64.1.
why the Mountains, that is, the Princes and Potentates of the world, that now
are puffed up with success, opposing and oppressing the people of God, should
melt at thy presence, and vanish to nothing.

When God arises, then the Dukes of Edom are amazed, and trembling takes hold
on the mighty ones, Exodus 15.15, 16. Hence it is that the Church desires that
God would arise, for then his enemies should be scattered, and those that hate
him should flee before him, and be driven away like smoke (which the higher it
rises, the more it is scattered) and melt like wax before the fire, Psalm. 68.1,
2. The Sons of Zerviah may be too strong for David, but not for the God of
David. If he do but touch these Mountains, they vanish. It Is no trouble to us
to breathe; why God can with as great facility overthrow the Churches enemies,
one blast, breath, word, or look from him, undoes them, Job 4.9, 10, 11. By the
blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils are they consumed.
And if the Earth melt and tremble when God is angry, how sad is the condition
of hard-hearted sinners, who are viler than the Earth, and more insensible than
the very senseless and inanimate creatures, yea worse than the very Devils
themselves, for they believe and tremble! James 2.19.

4. The Lord can turn our Land into a Sea, and make our arrable, sailable; so
that there shall be no dwelling in it; but it shall rise up wholly as a flood,
and shall be drowned as by the flood of Egypt. The water is naturally above the
earth, so that he can float it and flood it at his pleasure; and can easily
pull up his ^luces, and let in the Sea upon us, and bury us in one universal
grave of waters. Let us then fear to provoke him, who has Wind and Sea at
command against us. The Lord wonders that any should be so sottish, as not to
fear him upon this very account, Ier. 5.22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord,
who have placed the Sand for a bound to the Sea, that it cannot pass? q. d.
Whom will ye fear, if ye will not fear me? when the Sea it self, that terrible
and tumultuous creature fears and obeys; and who have made the weak sands
to bound the raging Sea. We are bound to bless God that has thus bounded that
unruly element, and says to it, Hitherto shall thou go, and no further, and
here shall thy proud waves be staid, Job 38.11, 12.

VERSE 6.
It is he that builds his stories in the Heavens, and has founded his troop
in the Earth; he that calls for the waters of the Sea, and pours them out
upon the face of the Earth; The Lord is his Name.
THe Prophet goes on in a magnificent description of the Wisdom, Power,
Majesty, and Glory of the great Jehovah, that so this stubborn people,
considering with whom they had to do, might tremble at his Threatenings, and
prepare to meet him in a way of humiliation, who was now marching against them
with his troops for their destruction.

Before he had set forth Gods All-mighty Power in ruling the Earth and the
Rivers, now he proceeds to set forth his Majesty in the creating of the
Heavens, of the inferior Armies and the Seas.

And since the bare naming of God is little regarded by most men, therefore
this blunt, rustic Prophet raises his style, grows Rhetorical and
Philosophical, setting forth Gods excellency with variety of words, the better
to affect his Hearers.

Quot tituli, tot simuli.
In this Ver. we have the glory of God set forth to us in his forming and
framing 1. The Stories of Heaven. 2. His Troops on Earth. 3. The Rain out of
the Sea. 4. By his tremendous Name, Jehovah.


The words are very Mystical and difficult, they have almost as many
Expositions as there be Expositors. I shall endeavor to clear the way, and lay
a good foundation, the building will stand the better.

He builds his stories in the Heavens. The first Query, will be, What is
meant here by the stories of Heaven?

Answ. By Heaven here is meant, the Air; hence the birds are called the fouls
of Heaven, and by Stories are meant, the heavenly Spears or Orbs, Magnolatau,
ascentiones suas; vel gradu^ suos, a Gnalah ascendit. The Spears being one
above another, are elegantly called Stories.
which are distinct ascents (as it is in the Original) and Stories one above
another. We read of three Heavens.

1. There is the Aerial Heaven, which reaches from us to the Stars, in which
there are three Regions. 2. There is the Starry Heaven, Mr. Leighs Body of
Divinity, l. 3. c. 3. p. 235, etc. Polan. Syntag. l. 5 c. 8.9.
which has eight Spears (which who lifts may find set down in a known
Author.) 3. There is the Heaven of Heavens, or the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2.
The first of these is for my Sustentation, I live and breathe in it. The second
is for my Contemplation, I see and admire it; and the third is my Expectation,
I long and wait for it.
By this most admirable and excellent work of God, in making the Heavens* which
consist of so many Spears, and have a certain order within themselves, and are
as it were so many steps and stairs by which we ascend gradatim, till we come
to the Heaven of Heavens, the Prophet labors to awaken these secure sinners.
This is the first Glass in which we may clearly see the Majesty of God, Job
37.18.

And has founded his Troop in the Earth. The word which we render Troop,
signifies not only a Troop, as appears by that parallel place, 2 Samuel 2.25.
The children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after Abner, and became,
Laaguddah (the very word in the Text) one Troop; Agudda, fasciculus,
conglobatio, turma, a Gudah, colligere.
or were gathered round together like a Globe. 2. The word also signifies a
little Bundle; So Isa. 58.6. Undo the heavy burdens, or undo the bundels or
fardels.

1. Some by a Troop understand the other three Elements of Fire, Air, Water;
which are all bound up as 'twere in one bundle, and founded upon the Earth,
which is the basis and center of them all. Hence the Geneva render it, He has
laid the foundation of his Globe of Elements in the Earth. Those three Elements
are opposite to the heavenly spears, q. d. as God has built the glorious
spears of Heaven, so he has founded the terrestrial Spears and Elements in
the Earth, out of which he has formed and framed all other things; uniting
them in a due series and order, and binding them up as it were in one bundle,
the Elements lying like globes or bundles, one upon, or over one another.

2. Others conceive, that by a Troop here, is meant all kinds of creatures,
which are as so many Troops on Earth to serve God; hence he is so often called,
The Lord of Hosts, and these are called His Troops, Hic designantur hominum and
rerum creatarum turmae a Domino Zebaoth ita comparatae, ut quocunque velit
promptissimi exequantur judicia Dei, ideoque dicuntur cuneus Dei super terram
fundatus, i. e. firmissime constitutus. Schindler.
because he is the Author and the Orderer of their Motion, q. d. As the Lord
has built the several Contignations of his Orbs in the Heavens, so he has
provided Armies of creatures to do his will on Earth.

3. Others conceive it to be the whole frame of the world, which compared with
Gods Immensity, is but a little Bundle or fardel, yea an empty nothing, Isa.
40.17.

Tam sublimi and magno opifici, totus orbis nil nisi fasciculus and res
minutula. Mercer.
2. As in a Bundle there are many things wrapped up together, so in this
terrestrial Globe, there are variety of creatures, of different kinds and
natures, all setting forth their creators praise.

He calls for the waters of the Sea, and pours them out on the face of the
Earth. Here is a third thing wherein the All-mighty Power of God appears, and
that is in the generating of rain. By the heat of the Sun he draws up vapors
out of the Salt-Sea, into the middle Region of the Air, where they condense
into clouds, and then dissolves them into showers of fresh water for the use
and service of man.

He calls for the waters of the Sea, either for Inundation, as (some conceive)
to overflow a Land, q. d. it is the Lord, that by his command lets loose the
waters of the Sea to destroy his enemies. But most genuinely it is applied to
the generating of the Rain. He calls for the waters out of the Sea into the
upper Region of the Air by the Sun beams, that he may power them down again
upon the face of the Earth. See the same expression before, Amos 5.8.

It Is true, the Rain is generated by Vapors that ascend out of the Earth, yet
because the Sea does concur with its Vapors also, therefore the generation of
the Rain is likewise ascribed to it; and herein also the All-mighty Power of
God is seen, that can at a beck call for the Rain, and suddenly the clouds
cover the face of the heavens over our heads; this shows the incomparable Power
of God, that can in a trice make such a change.

Lastly, If you desire to know who it is that does all those great and glorious
things, I will tell you in a word, It Is the great Jehovah, that is his Name.
This is the most proper Name of God (as I have showed before, Amos 4. ult.) and
notes his eternal essence, who gives being to all things, and to you, O
Israelites, amongst the rest, and therefore there is no hiding your selves from
him, nor dallying with him who is All-mighty, and has his Troops in Heaven, in
Earth, and in the Sea against you.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. The Omnipotence and Majesty of God does wonderfully appear in the Heavens,
the Sea, the Rain, etc.

As the Heavens, so all creatures do declare Gods glory, Psalm. 19.1. See before
Amos 4. ult.
We should therefore study the book of the creatures, that we may learn to
fear, See Mr. Patrick on Micah 6.8. p. 12, 13, etc.
serve, trust, love and admire the lord for his greatness and goodness.

We have but two books chiefly to study, The first is the Book of Nature,
Mundus est Dei patris ad genus humanum Epistola. Plato.
or the works of God, and this we have set forth, Psalm. 19.1. to 7.2. The Book
of God, the holy Scriptures, Psalm. 19.7. to 12. We should not lightly think of
Gods wondrous works, but seriously consider them, Psalm. 46.8. for this end he
has given us our judgments, and an understanding faculty that we might be
enabled to consider his works, and this is the great end why he made the world,
and adorned it with such variety of creatures, viz. that by beholding them we
might be quickened to praise the giver of them, Prove. 16. 4. God will destroy
such as consider not his works, Psalm. 28.5.

Much of God may be seen in the creature; Mundus universus nihil aliud est,
nisi Deus explicatus. V. Culverwell Spi. Optics. p. 516.
His Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Bounty are all written (as it were) in
Capital Letters, so that he who runs may read them, for the invisible things of
God may be seen in them, Romans 1.20. As the Rivers lead us to the Sea, so these
Rivers of Goodness and excellency which lie scattered in the creature, must
lead us to their Creator, in whom are all those Excellencies by way of eminency.

[See the Spiritual improvement of the creature, in D. Tho. Tailor at the end
of his Treatise of Repent. Church his Miscellan. p. 161, etc. Caryl on Job
14.8. Polany Syntag. lib. 5. cap. 4, 5, 7. Woodward Child's Portion, chap. 7. p.
90. Mr. Austin his Spiritual use of Orchards and Gardens, 2 Part.]

2 Obs. All creatures are Gods Troop.

If he do but call for Fire, Water, Hail, Frost, Snow, etc. they promptly obey
the word of his Command, Psalm. 147.15, 16, 17, 18. Isa. 40.26. and 48.13. Ezekiel.
36.29. Hag. 1.11.

3 Obs. All the world compared with God, is but a bundle.

Yea it is not fascis, but fasciculus, a very little bundle. This the Prophet
Isaiah, chapter 40.12, 15, 16, 17. sets forth in most lively, Rhetorical colors,
he speaks so fully to this point, that I shall not enlarge upon it. He proves
Gods Omnipotency by his Works, he names but three, verse. 12. viz. The Sea, The
Heavens, The Earth.


1 For the Sea, it is to the Lord but as an handful of water is to us, and
therefore he is said to measure or weigh the waters of the Sea in his fist, or
in the hollow of his hand.

2 For the Heavens, they are but a span with him, look how easily we span a
thing which we would measure, with far more ease does the Lord mete out the
height and latitude of the Heavens. He metes out the Heavens with a span, or
takes the measure of them with a span.

3 As for the Earth, he makes nothing of it. He comprehends its dust in a
measure; in a Tierce or Triental, that is, in some small Vessel, Triental, est
tertia pars me^surae duodecim cyathorum. Nos ^inutissimum intelligimus, quod
tribus digitis possit comprehendi. Sculteturs.
holding some proportion with the fist and the span. He does this great work
with three fingers as it were he puts not his whole hand to it, but as we weigh
some small matter with three fingers, so does he do this great work with great
ease.

He weighs the Mountains in scales, and the Hills in a balance. The greatest
Mountains are no more to him than an ordinary weight is to one of us. All this
bespeaks Gods Omnipotency that can form and proportion out such vast creatures
with so much facility and ease, as if he were but spanning, measuring, weighing
of them.

Yet he has not done, verse. 15. he goes on to set forth the transcendent Glory
and Majesty of God. Behold the Nations are but as the drop of a bucket, and are
counted as the small dust of the balance. All N^tions, all Asia, Africa,
Europe, and America, compared with the Almighty, are mere nothing, they are but
as a drop that falls from a full bucket, or as a small drop that tarrieth
behind in the bucket when the water is powered out, which does not diminish the
measure; or like the small dust of the balance, which remains in the balance
when powder or beaten spice has been weighed in it, which is easily blown away
with a little puff of wind, or such small dust as hangs on the scales, without
altering the weight.

Yet more, He takes up the Isles as a very little thing. They are to him but
as so many atoms or motes which fly up and down in the Sun, or as a little
thin beaten powder (as the word signifies) which is blown away with a blast.
Islanders are apt to be secure and insolent, because they have the Sea to
surround and secure them, but with God they are as a very little thing, which
is easily overthrown.

Verse. 16. Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient
for a burnt offering, q. d. so infinitely great is God, that if all the trees
in Lebanon were fallen for fire, and all the beasts there were slain for a
burnt offering, yet would it hold no proportion with the Dignity and Majesty of
the Lord.

Verse. 17. As if he could never magnify God, and nullify man sufficiently he
tells us yet more, That all Nations before him are nothing, less than nothing
and vanity. See what a heap of diminishing terms are here! Nations, all
Nations compared with God, See more in Mr. Caryl on Job 7 16. p. 644, 645, 646,
etc.
are purum nihil, nothing, less than nothing, vanity, yea lighter than vanity,
Psalm. 62.9. Before he had compared the Nations to a drop, and a little small
dust, but now he goes further, and tells us, that all Nations compared with
God, are less than nothing. Now if All Nations compared with God be thus
contemptible, what is one Nation, or one great man in a Nation, yea or all the
great Zanzummims of the world, compared with him? This may greatly comfort us
when we lie oppressed by the great ones of the world, that though they be great,
yet there is a greater than they; though they be mighty, yet God is Almighty,
and can with a word of his mouth confound them all.

4 Rain is the gift of God.

It is he that calls for the waters of the Sea, raises the vapors, condenseth
them into clouds, and then showers them down upon us. But of this at large
before, Amos 4.7.

5 If you take this calling for the waters of the Sea for an inundation and
drowning of a Land, then observe, That God can make our Land, to become a Sea,
he can bring a flood upon us as he did on the old world. But of this before,
verse. 5. Obs. 4.

6 God is Jehovah.

He only is the true and living God, who has his being in, and of himself,
See Mr. Trap on Hos. 5.12.
and gives being to all creatures. But of this before, Amos 4. ult. Obs. 7.

VERSE 7.
Are ye not as children of the Ethiopian to me, O ye children of Israel, says
the Lord? Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt, and the
Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir?
THe Prophet goes on to confirm the certainty of Isreal's destruction from the
sinfulness of their condition; to this end, first, He labors to convince them
of their Ingrat^tude and Apostasy; whereas the Lord had brought them in great
mercy out of the land of Egypt where they lay buried (as it were) in a grave of
misery, and made them his Israel, and peculiar people; yet they di^^
ingeniously behaved themselves more like Ethiopians and Heathens, than his
beloved Israel, and therefore as they had been like them in ^inning, so now
they should be like them in suffering.

In this Verse the Prophet by a Prolepsis prevents two Objections. 1 Whereas
they boasted that they were Gods people in Covenant, and descended of holy
Progenitors, and therefore God would not destroy them.

A. To this the Prophet answers, that in their ways and walking they were more
like to profane, Heathenish, Idolatrous Ethiopians, Scriptura cum gentes
remotas maxim and abjectas memora re velit, Aethiopes proponit. Mercer.
who were strangers from the Covenant of Grace, and aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, than Israelites, or the seed of Abraham since they did
not the works of Abraham, but of Infidels; and therefore since they had made
themselves thus vile by their sins, God regarded them no more than the most
contemptible Nations in the world, and was resolved to deal with them
accordingly. The Ethiopians were a vile, accursed Nation, the symbol of
servitude, Genesis 9.25. Cursed be Cham, a servant of servants, i. e. a most vile
slave let him be. Now from this Cham came Canaan and his brother Chus, who was
the father of the Ethiopians; hence they are called Chusiim (as in the Text)
from Cham and Chus, Genesis 10.6.

The Interrogation is a strong Affirmation, Are ye not as the children of the
Ethiopian to me? q. d. Ye are so, there is an emphasis in that word mihi, to
me, q. d. though ye excel other Nations in many privileges, and are honored
by men, yet when you come before me, what can you bring that is not mine? all
your feathers and favors are but borrowed, and when I have taken mine own from
you, wherein are you better to me than Ethiopians, or the most vile and
contemptible Nation in the world? In respect of Creation, and by nature we are
all alike, both Saints and Scythians, Israelites, and Ethiopians, we all come
out of the same corrupt mass, it is only free grace which makes the
difference; and therefore the more God had done for Israel, the more humble and
obedient they should have been. But since they forgot the God of their mercies,
despised the counsel of his Prophets, and hardened themselves in their sins,
the Lord tells them in plain terms, that now he esteemed them no more than the
most base and barbarous Nations in the world; and this the Lord does to abase
them, and make them know themselves who were stuffed with such high conceits of
themselves, and their privileges, though they walked clean contrary to them;
in which respect they were inferior to Heathens, who never sinned against such
light and love as they had done.

Obj. 2. A second Evasion was this, The Lord has chosen us for his own
peculiar people, above all the Nations of the world, and has delivered us from
Egypt, and brought us into Canaan, and therefore (though we do go on in our
sin, yet) we shall prosper, and no Judgment shall come upon us, as this
precise Prophet Amos threatens.

Ans. 1. It does not follow, that because you have been delivered out of Egypt,
that therefore you shall go unpunisht for your sin; but the contrary, since you
have received such great blessings, therefore you must yield answerable
obedience, remembering that they which have much, of them shall be much
required; and if they offend, they shall be sooner, and more severely punished,
Amos 3.2. Dan. 9.12. 2. The Prophet tells them, that they had no reason to be
puffed up with this deliverance, for the Lord had granted the like external
deliverances (though not alike in all circumstances to that of Egypt) to
Heathenish and Idolatrous people, whom they looked upon as Dogs and Swine. The
Prophet instanceth in two Examples.

The first is that of the Philistims, whom the Lord brought from their slavery
in Caphtor, See the Large Annot, on Jer. 47.4.
Jer. 47.4. The Philistims and Caphtorims are put amongst the posterity of
Mizraim, the Son of Cham, Genesis 10.6, 14. 1 Chronicles. 1.11, 12. they expelled the
Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, which belonged to the Philistines, and possessed
their Country, Deuteronomy. 2.23.

The second instance is that of the Syrians, whom the Lord brought from Kir,
where they served other Nations. These are called Aramites, from Aram the Son
of Shem, from whom they descended, Genesis 10.22. these were gross Idolaters, and
worshipped many Gods, Judge. 10 6. and especially that noted Idol Rimmon. 2
King. 5.18.

There was a double Kir, 1. There was Kir, a City of special note in the Land
of Moab, Isa. 15.1. 2. Kir another City situate in Media, of which we read, 2
King. 16.9. Isa. 22.6. Amos 1.5. This was under the dominion of the Assyrians,
and this is the Kir in the Text. Some make this Kir to be Cyrene, but there is
no ground for that, for Cyrene was situate in Lybia, but Kir in Media under the
Assyrians, which is far distant from Lybia. This deliverance of the Syrians
from Kir, is mentioned only in this place; this they had from the Histories of
those times which were then well known; In my Commen. on 2 Timothy 3.8. p. 15.
as they had many other things not mentioned in the Scripture, as I have showed
elsewhere.

Some give the sense thus, As the Philistines were ungrateful to God, who
brought them out of Caphtor, and the Syrians, when he brought them out of Kir;
so Israel has been ungrateful to God, who brought them out of the Land of
Egypt. But the genuine sense and sum of all is this. There is no reason, O ye
children of Israel, why I should respect you more than the very Ethiopians (
that accursed and contemptible posterity of Cham) yea why should I make any
difference between you and the uncircumcised Philistines, or Idolatrous
Syrians, whom you have equalized, yea exceeded in sin? If you say that I
brought you out of Egypt, did not I also bring the Philistines and Syrians out
of Caphtor and Kir? you have therefore no cause to be puffed up with these common
favors. It is true, I have out of mine own free love to you, exalted you above
the Nations, but since by your sins you have abused my favors, and abased your
selves, I do now no more value you than so many Blackmores and Heathens.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. To be born of pious Progenitors cannot preserve an impious people from
ruin.

It will not avail men to say with those Jews, We have Abraham to our Father,
unless we do the works of Abraham, John 8.39. Romans 9.7, 8. Let our Ancestors be
never so gracious, See Mr. Geering against Pride c. 9. ss 4. p. 78. Vossius
Rhet. lib. 1. sect. 13. p. 56. ad 67.4 to.
unless we follow their gracious example, and walk in their steps, we are no
better in Gods esteem, than Ethiopians and outcasts, yea the piety of
predecessors is so far from justifying any in their sins, that it aggravates
them, in that they had such good patterns set before them, and yet they would
not follow them.

A Noble Pedigree is little worth, Tota lice: veteres exornent undique cerae
Atria; nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus. Iuvenal. Satyr. 8.
where the line of well-doing continues not; and it is much more glory to begin
the honor of ones house, than either to end it, or not increase it. What did
it profit Ch^m that he was the Son of Noah? or hurt Abraham, that his Father
Terah worshipped Gods of Clay? or hurt Timothy, that he was born a Gentile:
Honesty (how mean soever the birth be) knows no disgrace. Stemmata quid
faciun^? qu^d prodest Pontice longo Sanguine censeri, pictosque oftendere
vultus majorum? Iuvenal. Satyr. 8.
The Prince of Satyrists (though a Heathen) yet has spent a whole Satyr to
very good purpose, against those that boast of their Noble Pedigree, when
themselves have nothing that is truly Noble in them.

2. Privileges abused increase wrath, Mat. 11.20, 21, 22, 23. Romans 2.9. 1 Cor.
10.2, 3, 4, 5. Heb. 2.1, 2, 3.

When men ungratefully abuse their mercies, and the God of their mercies, In my
Com. on Hos. 13.15. Obs. 3.
it is just with God to strip them of those mercies. But of this at large
elsewhere.

3. Sin debaseth a people, and makes glorious Nations like to unglorious and
contemptible Heathens.

Whilst Israel walked up to his privileges, he was exalted, but when he
offended in Baal, and fell to Idolatry, he died and lost his reputation with
God and Man, both at home and abroad, Hos. 13.1. Ezekiel. 16.3.

4. The changes in Nations, and translating of Kingdoms from one to another,
are not casual, but providential. There is the finger of God in them all. It Is
he that destroyed the Canaanites, and brought in Israel. It Is he that cast out
Israel, and brought in the Assyrian; he rooted up Judah, and brought in the
Chaldean; and rooted up the Chaldeans by the Medes and Persians, and brought
the Philistines and Syrians out of Caphtor and Kir. He puts down one, and
sets-up another in the Throne, and none may say unto him, What do thou? Deuteronomy.
2.21. and 4.21.

5. External favors and deliverances are no Arguments of Gods internal love
and favor to a people.

See Mr. Seeker on Mat. 5.47. p. 366, 367, etc.
Uncircumcised Philistines, and Idolatrous Syrians may be delivered from a
Caphtor and a Kir; and yet these preservations may be to them but reservations
to greater wrath. Pharaoh was delivered from many plagues, yet his heart being
hardened, at last he perished in the Sea. All things come alike to all, and
there is no judging of Gods favor by these external things, See Dyke on the
Heart. chap. 4. p. 51, etc. See six Observations more in Mr. Hutchinson on the
place. I study brevity.
Eccles. 9.1, 2. The Sun of prosperity shines as well on the barren
Wilderness, as upon the fruitful Pastures.

VERSE 8.
Behold the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful Kingdom, and I will
destroy it from off the face of the Earth; saving that I will not utterly
destroy the house of Jacob, says the Lord.
THe Prophet goes on in the confirmation of what he had denounced against
Israel, by an Argument drawn from the Justice of God, who is of purer eyes than
to behold iniquity with the least approbation, and who will not acquit persons
or Kingdoms that persevere in their wickedness.

Behold the eyes of the Lord are upon the sinful Kingdom to punish and destroy
it. In the words we have 1. A note of Attention, Behold. 2. The matter to be
attended, and that is, 1. A judgment threatened, Mehhal pene, A facie vel a
superficie terrae.
God will destroy Israel from the Superficies, on face of the earth; that is,
he will extinguish their memorial from amongst men, and root them out of the
world, so that they shall never have more the face of a Nation upon Earth. The
like expression we have, Exodus 32.12. Deuteronomy. 6.15. Warnings could not mend them,
now Judgments shall rid the world of them.

2. Here is the reason why the Lord will thus destroy them, and that is,
because they are a sinful Kingdom, or (as the words are in the fountain) they
are a sinning Kingdom, a Kingdom even composed of sin, and drowned in
iniquity. A Kingdom that sinned not through weakness, but wilfulness, whose
sins were not infirmities, but enormities. They fell not by the violence of
temptation, but 'twas their trade to be sinning, they were wholly given up to
it, both Superiors and Inferiors had for many years been a race of Idolaters,
persisting obstinately in their wicked ways; no wooing nor warning, no mercy
nor menaces could work upon them, they were incorrigible and incurable, and
therefore the Lord now resolves to ease himself of them.

Quest. But who is meant here by the sinful Kingdom?

A. Some conceive that by Kingdom here is meant any sinful Kingdom
indefinitely, but I conceive that Amos being sent more especially to prophecy
against the Idolatry of the Kingdom of Israel, does directly and primarily
speak against the Idolatry of the Kingdom of Israel, for Idolatry is called
The sin, by way of eminency (as I have showed before on Amos 8. ult.) now
Israel persevering as in other sins, so especially in this great sin of
Idolatry, is here called ( Mamlachah Hachattaah, Hoc regnum peccans) this
sinful Kingdom; the article Ha is emphatical, and the Text says not, Mine
eyes are upon a sinful Kingdom indefinitly, but upon This sinful Kingdom,
viz. of Israel; and then secondarily it includes the Kingdom of Judah, which
had deeply corrupted it self, and not long after they also were carried
Captives to Babylon.

3 Here is the certainty of the judgment, The Eyes of the Lord are intent upon
them for this purpose (see Verse. 4. before) he has set his face in anger
against them to destroy them.

4 Here is a mitigation or qualification of the Threatening, Yet he will not
utterly destroy the house of Jacob, but in the midst of judgment he will
remember mercy; and having purged out the dross, and destroyed the profane
body of the people, and rebellious rout, he will preserve the penitent as a
remnant for himself, according to his promise made of old to Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, Lev. 26.40, 41, 42. Though the Lord beat Heathenish Nations to dust, and
stock up the wicked root and branch; and though Israel deserved a total
destruction, yet for his own Name sake, he will not deal so with his Church and
chosen, he never utterly destroys them, but leaves some remnant to praise him,
and to shine like lights in the midst of a perverse people; and if he do bring
them into Captivity, yet a remnant both of Israel and Judah shall return again,
according to that precious promise, Ier. 30.3.10. ^o the days come that I will
bring again the Captivity of my people Israel and Judah, says the Lord, and
will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they
shall possess it. This was fulfilled when a remnant of Israel returned out of
Assyria, and joining themselves to Judah, came again into the holy Land after
the seventy years Captivity.

It was usual with the Prophets to mollify their Threatenings with the
intermixture of some Promises, the better to encourage them to return, by
giving them some glimpse of acceptance, and hope of mercy: for the Prophet
having before uttered hard things against this people, he comes now in the
close of all to end his Prophecy with promises of comfort to a remnant whom
God would hide in the midst of their Captivity, till better times should come
under the Gospel.

Some construe the words Ironically, and make them a confirmation of the
punishment, q. d. I have punished Nations that never had the teaching which you
have had, and do you think to go scot-free?

But this sense seems to be racked. It is better therefore to take the words as
they simply import a promise of mitigation, moderation and favor to a remnant,
because of the Covenant, and because of the Elect amongst them, and their Seed,
who were to be the Seminary of the Church.

This is most agreeable to the contexture, and suits best with the next Verse,
where the Prophet promises, that albeit God be resolved to sift the house of
Israel, yet the least grain should not fall to the ground; Ephesians chy, non
tamen, vel veruntamen non totali consumptione consumam domum Israelis Chald.
Paraph.
and therefore the Geneva translation renders it well, Nevertheless I will not
utterly destroy the house of Jacob. Destroying, I will not destroy it, that is,
I will not totally destroy the family and stock of Israel, but will preserve a
remnant for my self, though they be captives in Assyria and Chaldea, yet as I
have brought them in, so I will bring some of them out again, that they may
praise me.

5 Here is the confirmation both of the Commination, and the Consolation. Dixit
Dominus, the Lord who cannot lie, has said it, who both can, and will perform
what ever he has spoken.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 The eyes of the Lord are upon sinful Kingdoms to destroy them.

The Kingdoms that will not submit to Christ, and serve him (be they never so
many or mighty) must perish, Isa. 60.12. As his eye is upon the righteous to
preserve them, so his eye is upon the wicked to destroy them (as I have showed
before on verse. 4.) As he looks upon the righteous not with a bare look of
intuition, but with a look of approbation in order to their assistance to do
them good, and to exert his strength for them, so he looks upon the wicked with
an eye of indignation for evil, and not for good, 1 Pet. 3.12.

When men are given up to sin, and are become hardened and habituated in
iniquity (as these were) then judgment is near, Ier. 13.23, 24. especially
when Kingdoms are defiled with Idolatry, that wickedness with a witness, that
sin with an accent, which truly and properly denominates a Kingdom to be, The
sinful Kingdom. Where ever this sin goes before, destruction is at the heels
of it. It is a soul-damning, and a land-destroying sin, Judge. 5.8. Psalm. 78.58.
to 63. Ier. 22.7, 8, 9. one such a sinner in grain, destroys much good,
Eccles. 9.17. The Idolater is a grand Traitor to the state he lives in. He
helps to bring Sword, Plague, Famine, and all curses upon a Land, Ezekiel. 14.7,
8, 21. Gods eye is upon such to cut them off from the face of the earth.

2 Gods Ministers must wisely intermix Judgment and Mercy.

They must like the good Samaritan, have Wine and Oil, Wine to search and
cleanse men's wounds; and Oil to supple and heal them. The sharpness of the Law
must be allayed with the sweetness of the Gospel, Luke 10.34. Amos had often
threatened, now he comforts. Obstinate sinners must be certified, and pulled
with violence out of Satan's jaws; others that are humbled must be handled
gently, Jude 23. We must frame our reproofs according to the necessities of our
Auditors: All sores are not cured with one salve; that may be poison to one,
which is medicinal to another. The soul must be thoroughly purged from sin,
before it can be cured, or expect any health. It is in this case as it is in
sores, if any corruption be left unexpelled, the wound will wrankle, and may
become mortal: For sin is like Bishops-weed, if you leave but little spangs
unweeded, they will run over your garden, and suffer nothing that is good to
grow near it. Ministers then had need to have the Tongue of the Learned, to
know how to speak a word in season; for if we preach al mercy, we shall teach
men to presume; if all Judgment, to despond and despair. We must therefore
wisely sing both of Mercy and Judgment; hence the Prophets did usually give
some glimpses of comfort, and grounds of hope to Gods people in their
distress. They had some peradventure you may be hid and heard, Joel 2.14.
Jonah 3.9. Zeph. 2.3. Take away hope, and you take away endeavors;
impossibility of obtaining breaks the heart; and therefore it is that the Lord
usually gives people some crumbs of comfort in their deepest distress, that so
they might be encouraged to come in unto him.

3. In the midst of Judgment God usually spares a remnant, Isa. 1.9. and
37.32. Ier. 5.18. Romans 9.27. and 11.5.

Though God make a full and final end of other Nations, yet he makes not a full
end with his people, but corrects them in measure, and in mercy, Ier. 46. ult.
Though he punish some, yet he destroys not all, but moderates public
calamities, for the Elects sake, Mat. 24.22. In the Babylonish captivity the
Lord preserved Jeremy, Daniel, and others. When all the Old World was drowned,
yet a little remnant was spared, viz. Noah, In my Com. on Hos 13.14. Obs. 1.
and his family. God is ever mindful of his Covenant to his people, and in the
midst of all confusions he is a Tower to his. As I have showed elsewhere.

VER. 9.
For lo I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all Nations,
like as Corn is sifted in a sieve; yet shall not the least grain fall upon the
Earth.
THe Prophet having mentioned a mitigation of the punishmen in the cloze of the
precedent verse, he comes in this verse to confirm and illustrate this
mitigation and moderation, by a Metaphor or Allusion taken from Husbandmen, who
sift and winnow away the Chaff, but carefully preserve the Wheat.

For lo I will command the Ass^rians and Babylonians, and they shall seize on
Israel and Judah, and shall sift them; and if I command, who shall hinder it?
how Israel was sifted, we have seen, how Judah was sifted up and down, you may
see, Lam. 1.3. and 5.5, 6.

And I will sift them as corn is sifted in a sieve; which similitude implies
three things. 1. That the men of Israel and Judah should be tossed and
scattered among all Nations, as Corn is tossed to and fro in a sieve.

2. As the Corn and Wheat is preserved in the sieve, when the Chaff flies away,
and falls to the ground; so in the midst of all these tossings and troubles,
God would preserve his people that they should not perish eternally, though
they might perish temporally, as Josiah did, and the righteous do, Isa. 57.1.
Daniel and other good men went here into captivity, as well as others, only
they had Gods eye upon them for good, which the others wanted.

The word Corn or Wheat is not in the Original, but is necessarily understood,
and therefore all translations render it, like as Corn or Wheat is sifted in a
sieve.

3. This tossing to and fro in the sieve, separates the Wheat from the Chaff.
In cribratione duo sunt, 1. concussio, qua omnia sursum deorsum vertuntur. 2.
Segregatio and separatio. Camer. Praelect. de Eccles. mihi p. 230.
The Chaff falls through and is blown away, but the Wheat and little stones
which are weighty abide in the sieve, and fall not to the ground. So these
trials should blow wicked men out of their habitations, and out of the world to
their own places. The corrupt body of the Jewish Nation should be scattered up
and down, yet a remnant should be saved, The least grain of Gods corn shall not
fall to the ground. Some render it the least stone shall not fall to the
ground, and so give an Allegorical sense, thus, Gods Elect which are like
stones for solidity and stability, Viri boni quanquam communis mali sunt
participes, ab exitio servabuntur. Grotius.
and are called lively stones for their zeal and activity, 1 Pet. 2.5. shall
not perish, but abide for ever. But our Translation is most genuine and
agreeable to the sifting of corn in a sieve, and though the word Iseror have
diverse significations, sometimes it is rendered a bundle, Genesis 42.35. or a bag,
Prove. 7.20. and by a Metonymy that which is bound in the bag, Lapillus pro
grano pro^^er pondus, re^p^ctu paleae. Catachresis.
or bound in Bundles as corn is used to be; so it signifies a grain or little
stone, as in the Text.

q. d. Though the wicked shall perish from the Earth, yet not anything of any
weight or worth, not one grain or corn which is solid and heavy like a stone,
shall fall, nothing but the light, paltry chaff shall be blown away. I will so
order all your dispersions by my providence, that none of mine Elect shall
perish eternally, nor yet the remainder of the faithful be utterly
extinguished. Though the Corn may be beaten in the same floor with the chaff,
yet it shall not perish with the chaff.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. The Church of God in this life is subject to many siftings.

They must be sifted by Assyrians, sifted by Babylonians, ^ifted by false
Brethren, sifted in Body, in Soul, in Name, Estate, every way. God has many
sieves and serses to sift us withal, that so we may become pure mancher for
our Lord and Masters use.

God has many purgatory fires to bring his people through. 1. The fire of his
Word, Ier. 5.14. and 23.29. 2. The fire of afflictions and persecutions, Zach.
13. ult. 1 Pet. 4.12. and thus every man must be tried by fire, 1 Cor. 3.13. 3.
If none of these fires will mend men, then comes the fire of the last
Judgment, and consumes them, Isa. 30.33.

All that look for salvation, must look for sifting; through many tribulations,
we must come into Gods Kingdom, Act. 14.22. The better any man is, the more
trials he must look for. The more grace, the more sifting; as we see in
Abraham, Isaac, Job, David, Paul, Peter, Luke, 22.32. The Devil shoots his
Arrows at the whitest marks. This spiritual Pyrate sets upon the laden
Merchant. The Devil knows that the fall of one of these will more advantage his
Kingdom, than the fall of a thousand others; and therefore he says to his
Agents, as the King of Syria said to his Captains, Fight neither with small nor
great, but against these spiritual Kings. Men of eminent gifts and graces,
especially when called to eminent places, as Magistrates, Ministers,
Governors, etc. must look for eminent trials. These batter Satan's Kingdom,
and break his head; and therefore let them be sure he will bruise their heels.

2. As we must look for all manner of siftings, so from all manner of parties.

From God, Satan, and the World.


1. God will try us before he will trust us; so he dealt by Abraham, Genesis 22.1.
and Job 6.4. and 16.9. and the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 8.2. Christ tried the Ruler,
Luke 18.22. and the woman of Canaan. God tempts us to try us, but Satan to
destroy us. God betters us by tentations, he never draws us into sin by them,
as Satan does.

Non semper saeviunt Nerones, sed nunquam cessat Diabolus.
2. The Devil will sift you. He that tempted thy Savior, will not spare thee.
He that was so bold with the head, will not spare the heel. This is the Devils
great battery, by which he labors to destroy Gods graces in us; though the
Lord so orders it, that they improve them, Job 23.10. Sometimes he keeps us
from temptations, but he is always with us in them, Rev. 3.10. Yea when Satan
is most busy in tempting, then is Christ most busy in praying for us, Luke
22.32.

Now Satan sets upon men many ways; sometimes by evil suggestions,
persuasions, instigations, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. 1 These. 3.5. by blowing up the fire
of corruption which lies in our bosoms. The Devil is a great studier of men,
he is a great Naturalist, he has been trying conclusions on men almost six
thousand years. He suits his Temptations according to men's tempers: V. Dyke on
Mat. 4.1. p. 254
if he have an Esau to deal with, he has a mess of pottage for him; if a
covetous Achan, he has a wedge of gold for him, etc. The Devil cannot force
the will, he may persuade, but he cannot compel. There is a threefold liberty
of the will, 1 From sin; 2 From misery; 3 From Necessity. The two first we have
lost, but from necessity and coaction the will is free; so free, that if it
could be constrained, it were no will: and therefore in conversion the Lord
does not force the will, but sweetly inclines it. We should therefore blame our
selves for our folly, James 1.14. So did David, Psalm. 51.4. and when by Satan's
instigation he had numbered the people, yet he lays not the fault upon Satan,
but upon himself, I have done exceeding foolishly. Pray with that good man,
Lord deliver me from that evil man my self.

3* The World abounds with Temptations, we go upon snares, in our beds, at our
boards, at all times, in all places, among all persons temptations are laid for
us, in public and private, above us, beneath us, round about we are beset:
Prosperity and pleasures on the one hand destroy thousands, and persecution and
losses on the other hand. Had we not need then to be sober and watch? 1 Pet.
5.8. and to watch and pray, Matthew. 26.41. shunning all occasions of sin: Not
parling with temptations, diligent in our places, not trusting to our own
strength. Sit down and cast what it will co^t us if we be Christ's Disciples.
These things should not discourage, but quicken us to duty. We say of some
weeds they are ill things, but they are signs of rich ground. So these
siftings and tentations are irksome, Cribration^ Dei non perditur, sed ^u^gatur
frumen^um Dei, Zanchy.
but wholesome; the Torch burns the brighter for beating. The Vine is the
better for bleeding; The Orchard for pruning; The Garden for weeding, and the
Soul for sifting. It is a good sign of some great good doing, when we have many
adversaries, and much opposition, 1 Cor. 16.9. Standing pools gather mud. There
are many dregs in those Moabs that are at ease, and are not emptied from vessel
to vessel, Ier. 48.11. I never knew any man kept long from corruption and
putrefaction that was not (especially at his first setting out) salted and
seasoned with many temptations and afflictions. Be not therefore offended at
them; such Humiliations are the way to Exaltation, and such trials (if we
sincerely, patiently and perseveringly improve them) our great glory. Job was
more famous for his sufferings, than Alexander or Caesar were for their
Victories. His tentations brought more honor to him than all his riches. If
Job had been only the richest man in the East, in all probability we had never
heard of him, but that which honored him so much as to have a whole book
written in his praise, was his Tentations and Victories, his Conflicts and his
Conquests.

These are via ad Regnum, the very path way to piety and glory, Nisi tentatio,
nec corona; nisi certamina, nec praemia, nisi hyems, nec aestas, Chrysostom.
2 Cor. 4.17. 1 Pet. 1.7. Did the stone but know when it is hewn and squared
that it is to fit it for a Kings house and service; or did the timber but know
when its knots are hewn off, and it seasoned with wind and weather, that it
might become a Throne for some high and mighty Prince, would it not rejoice and
glory? And shall not we rejoice in those Tentations and Afflictions which fit
us for the service of the King of Kings? Quod ignis est auro, lima feiro,
scalp^um ^apidi, runcina ligno, lixivium panno, ventilabrum tritico, sal carni,
sornax pani, malleus saxo, hoc justo tentatio.


[See more about Tentation in that excellent Treatise of Mr. Bridge upon
Temptations, and upon Luke 22.32. Dr. Holdsworth on James 1.12. Mr. Bolton
Comfort of affl^cted Conscience, p. 564.591. B. Halls Balm of Gilead, p. 101.
D. Tailor on Contentment. Dyke on Matthew. 4.1. etc. Sibelius Tom. 1. p. 1. and
p. 139. Weemse 1 Vol. 1 Part. p. 297. etc. Mr. Capel on Tentat. per totum. Mr.
Meads Ser. on Ephesians. 5.15. Ward on Matthew. 4.1, etc.]

2 The captivity and banishment of a people comes from God.

As all other evils of punishment, so this amongst the rest comes from him. It
is he that commands Assyrians and Babylonians to lead us into Captivity. Israel
and Judah had been long in Captivity to sin and Satan, and therefore the Lord
sent them seven times into Captivity. See Mr. Greenhil on Ezekiel. 11.17. p. 389.
This may befall Gods dear Elijahs and Daniels, and such of whom the world is
not worthy, these may be driven from all, and be forced to wander in Deserts
and Mountains, in Dens and Caves of the earth, Heb. 11.37, 38. This must make
us dumb and silent, since it is the Lord (who is a God of judgment, and knows
what is better for us than we do for our selves, Isa. 30.18.) that does it.
Wicked men cannot lead us into Captivity till God give the word of Command, I
will command the house of Israel to be sifted amongst all Nations. This was in
part fulfilled then; but since their crucifying of Christ, and rejecting the
Lord of glory, all the twelve Tribes have been tossed and scattered over all
the world, being hated and contemned of all Nations.

3. The godly are Gods grain.

They are called his Wheat, Matthew. 3.12.13.30. The wicked are Chaff, Cockle,
Wilde-oats, Dross, Psalm. 119.119. Dregs, Scum, Filth, vain, light persons, that
have no weight, nor worth, no savouriness, nor solidity in them, and therefore
they are called Chaff, Psalm. 1.4. which is blown away with every wind as good
for nothing. But the godly are Gods Wheat, which is a substantial, precious
grain, bringing great gain to the owner, strengthening and delighting the hearts
of those that feed on it. Though it hang down the head, and make no great show
outwardly, yet within it is full of fine meal and flower, Psalm. 81. ult. So the
godly, though they make no great show outwardly, yet they are all glorious
within, their beauty is an internal beauty, which cannot be seen with bodily
eyes, Psalm. 45.13. and though they be contemned by the profane world, yet are
their persons, Prayers, and performances very precious in Gods eyes. See my
Com. on 2 Timothy 3.3. p. 113.


2 Wheat is solid, weighty, stable, and abides in the floor, it is not tossed
up and down with every wind as the Chaff is; so the godly are rooted, grounded,
and stablisht in the faith, Col. 2.7. they are not tossed to and fro with every
wind of doctrine, as those Paleares homines of our times are, but they are an
everlasting foundation, like stones that abide in the building, and cannot be
removed by any storms.

3 Wheat must be thresht, winnowed, and ground to meal, that it may be fit for
food. The godly are Gods Wheat in this sense also, they must be thresht,
sifted, and fanned with many tentations and afflictions, yea they must be
ground even to dust by the teeth of the wild beasts of the world, Dei frumentum
sum, and bestiarum dentibus molor, ut panis purus sincerusque reperia. Ignatius.
that they may become pure Manchet (as the Martyr said) for their Masters
service.

4 Wheat when it is ripe is cut down, and laid up safe in the barn and garner.
The chaff and refuse we cast out of doors, but our choice grain we house; so
when Gods people are fit for Heaven, God sends his Angels to gather his Wheat
into his garner, into heaven and happiness, Mat. 13.30.

4 Not one grain of Gods pure precious corn shall perish.

Chaff and Darnel; Tares and Hypocrites shall fall and perish, but not one corn
of right grain shall perish eternally; though they may go into captivity, and
be afflicted outwardly as well as others, as Jeremy, Ezekiel, Daniel, Ezra,
Nehemiah, Mordecai, Hester, Zerubbabel, etc. and others went all into
captivity: but the Lord was with them there, so that they kept their garments
pure, and did shine like lights in the midst of an Idolatrous and perverse
generation. They dye in peace, though ( Iosiah-like) they fall in battle, the
Lord is a sanctuary to them in their captivity, Ezekiel. 11.16, 17. and makes them
to be pitied of those that lead them captive, Psa. 106.46. and gives them
favor as he did Joseph in the Prison, Genesis 39.21. and Jeremy in Babylon, Jer.
39.11, 12. so that sifted and tempted they may and must be, but totally and
finally destroyed they can never be; for they have Gods Almighty power to keep
them, Ioh. 10.28. they have Christ to pray for them, his Spirit to seal them,
the seed of God abiding in them, so that nothing can separate them from Christ,
as I have proved at large elsewhere. In my Thesis de perseverantia Sancto^um.


VERSE 10.
All the sinners of my people shall dye by the sword, which say, the evil shall
not overtake nor prevent us.
THe Prophet having comforted Gods people against final perishing, returns
again to his Comminations against the obstinate, lest they should presume and
appropriate those Promises to themselves which belonged not to them; where we
have, 1 A Judgment threatened, viz. The Sword. They shall dye by the sword;
that is, some of them shall be actually slain, the rest shall go into
captivity and banishment, which is a civil death, or which is worse, they shall
dye Gladio Spirituali, (says Mercer) by the sword of the Spirit, being blinded
and rejected of God, so that they cannot repent. But this (though it be a
truth) yet not from this text. 2 Here are the Persons upon whom this Judgment
shall fall, and those are Sinners, all the sinners that are impenitent,
Idolatrous, presumptuous sinners, especially Idolaters, those sinners with a
witness, and such was the body and bulk of this people; All those be they high
or low, superiors or inferiors, first or last they shall fall by the sword;
since they will not believe Gods Word, they shall feel his Rod.


Obj. But we are the Lords People by external profession, by Covenant, and by
visible Adoption.

A. Be it so, yet all the sinners of my people by profession, since they
contemn the counsel of my Prophets, and persist in their loose conversation,
shall perish in their sin.

3 Here is a further Character of them, or another brand set upon them, whereby
they may be known, and that is, their security, and incredulity, in sleighting
and contemning both God and his threatenings.

They say, the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us. See how diametrically
opposite they are to God. The Lord says, the evil of punishment shall come
upon them. They say, the contrary; This evil and calamity shall not come upon
us, at least It shall not overtake us (or ant^cipate) and prevent us; Non
anticipabun^ n^^ mala.
that is, either it shall not come, or it shall not come in our days, but when
we are dead and gone; or if it do come yet it shall not come upon us, it shall
not come near us to surprise us. They thought themselves privileged from such
perils, and that they should never seize on them.

But what says the Lord to all this? why he cannot bear with such high and
horrid contempt of him and his Word, and therefore he tells them plainly, that
all those incorrigible and incurable Sinners should fall by the sword, since
they say, This evil shall not overtake us, therefore it shall overtake them,
and destroy them.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Carnal security ends in misery.

When once men begin to put the evil day far from them, and sing a Requiem to
their Souls, then comes sudden and swift destruction, Isa. 28.15, 17, 18. Ier.
2.35. and 5.11, 12, 13. there we have their security; and Verse. 14, 15, 16, 17.
the punishment follows. See more before on Amos 6.1.7.
So Mat. 24.48, 49. see their security; and verse. 50, 51. the punishment
follows. When people are secure and incredulous, and will not hear, they shall
be made to feel the truth of the Threatenings; as Lots Sons-in-law that would
not believe, were burnt to ashes, Genesis 19.14. yet the world abounds with such;
tell the Idolater, the Oppressor, the Fornicator, etc. of Judgments ready to
seize upon them, and they are ready to mock, and say, Let the day of the Lord
come that we may see it. Isa. 5.19. Ier. 17.15. so they shall to their sorrow,
Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. Amos 5.18.

2 No privilege can preserve an impenitent, Idolatrous people from ruin.

No, though they be my people, yet if my people will not walk in my ways, but
will rebel against me, even the sinners of my people shall dye by the sword.
But of this often before.

VERSE 11.
In that day I will raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close
up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins, and I will build it as
in the days of old.
WE are now come to the Third and last general part of this Chapter, and that
is consolatory, containing many precious Promises concerning the Kingdom of
Christ, and the restoration and enlargement of the Church in the days of the
Messiah.

The Prophet before had been Minatory, terrifying them with many dreadful
comminations of desolation and utter ruin, for their Apostasy and rebellion;
but now (that his Sun might not set in a Cloud) he concludes all with most
sweet Evangelical consolations, for the refreshing of the remnant of the Elect
under those sad Calamities which for many years they lay under. To this end he
assures them, that though all at present were in confusion, and the house of
David lay in the dust; yet the Lord who usually brings l^ght out of darkness,
and comfort out of discomfort, would in the conclusion restore the Kingdom unto
Israel, and make up all their losses in a better kind with spiritual blessings.

And this was the frequent practice of the Prophets, to intermixe comforts with
their Threatenings; the very first Judgment that was pronounced against fallen
man, was allayed with a Promise presently annexed.

1 They used to awaken and humble their Hearers with terrors and threatenings,
and then to raise them up again with consolations, especially with the promises
of the Messiah, who was the salvation and consolation of Israel, yea the joy
and desire of all Nations, Hag. 2.8. in whom all the Promises were ratified and
confirmed. 2 Cor. 1.20.

Both Israel and Judah were falling into a very forlorn, scattered, sad
condition; the Prophet therefore to keep the godly amongst them from sinking
into utter despair, comforts them with this, that in the midst of judgment God
would remember mercy, being ever mindful of his Covenant, and though he punished
them for their transgressions, yet in due time he would send the Messiah with
healing under his wings among them.

Some go about to confine this glorious Prophecy to Hezekiahs time, when
Senacherib and his Host was slain.

Others refer it to the times when Judah returned out of their Babylonish
Captivity, in the reign of Cyrus King of Persia, when they repaired the ruins
of Jerusalem. But the text is clear against this, for those were but poor,
slight, slender restaurations comparatively with this. For 1. but a remnant
came out of the Babylonish Captivity, and those poor and low, and far fewer
of Israel returned out of Assyria. But the restoration here spoken of is most
ample and glorious, as appears by those high and Hyperbolical expressions of
possessing all Nations, and the Mountains dropping wine, and the Hills running
with Milk and Honey, and all Israel returning out of Captivity.

It is therefore confessed by all (even by some of the Jews themselves) that
these Promises have relation to Christ, and should be fulfilled in
Gospel Times, according to that Apostolical allegation, and interpretation of
this very Text by Saint James in the Synod at Jerusalem, Acts 15.16, 17. After
this I will return, and build again the Tabernacle of David which is fallen
down; that is, the Church of God, in which Christ the Son of David should dwell
and reign, it should be repaired and restored by the Messiah, and I will build
again the ruins thereof, viz. by planting in it the believing Jews, and
bringing in the Gentiles as living stones, in the stead of the unbeleeving
Jews, That the residue of men may seek the Lord; that is not only the Jews,
but all other Nations. The Apostle James following the Septuagint speaks the
same sense, See Schools-Guard, Rule 20. and Glassius Philolog. Tract. 2. cap.
7. p. 14 72. For the reconciling the Prophet and the Apostle, see Mr.
H^tchinson on Amos 9.11.
though not the very same words. The Prophet says the Gentiles shall be
called, and he instanceth in the residue of Edom; but James here speaks more
generally, and says, all the Gentiles (which includes Edom) shall seek after
the Lord.

In these five last Verses of this Chapter, we have a notable Prophecy of
glorious things to come, and a cluster of precious Promises, no less than five.

1 Here is a Promise of the restoration of David's Kingdom.

2 Of the calling of the Gentiles.

3 Of the abundance of Spiritual gifts which should be in Christ's Kingdom,
typisied by the abundance of Corn and Wine.

4 Of the gathering of the Captives from banishment, into the Kingdom of Christ.

5 Of protection from their enemies, and perpetual habitation in their own Land.

VERSE 11.
In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, etc.
THis general Promise is pregnant, and contains many particular branches within
it.

Hoc omne Metaphorice de roguo Christi and Ecclesia e gentibus collecta,
intelligendum esse, testatur Iacobus, Act. 15.16. Glassius in Philolog.
1 The Lord promises, that he will build up the Tabernacle of David which is
fallen. 2 He will close up the breaches thereof. 3 He will raise up his ruins.
4 He will build it as in the days of old. 5 Here is the Time when all these
glorious things shall be accomplished, and that is, In illo die, In that day,
viz. in that glorious day of the Gospel, when Christ the Son of righteousness
should come into the world. In that day of Salvation, in that day of Light and
Grace, when the substance should come, and the shadows be gone, in those
glorious Gospel Times should this glorious restoration and reparation of the
house of David come by Christ; Or, in that day (say some) of Isreal's deep
distress and sad Captivity, will I arise, and raise them out of the dust.
That Christ should come in the flesh, the Prophets had assured them, but of
the punctual day, and year when he should come, they were uncertain; and
therefore the Prophets made diligent search as far as they might with
sobriety into this Mystery, 1 Pet. 1.11. this made them speak so modestly and
generally, In that day, or in that time (for it is an usual Hebraism to put a
day indefinitly for time, as Hos. 2.21. Joel 3.1.) which was foretold by the
Prophets, Genesis 49.10. Isa. 11.1. Dan. 9.24. and appointed by God when the
fullness of time should come, Gal. 4.4. then would the Lord raise up the
Tabernacle of David which was fallen, q. d. In the days of the Messiah I will
restore the Kingdom of David, and make that which was before a temporal and
mutable Kingdom, to become a Spiritual and eternal Kingdom; and let this Rule
be remembered once for all, Promissio liberationis spiritualis constat Allegoria
perpetua, qua liberatio illa significatur per beneficia corporalia. Piscator.
That these promises of temporal blessings must be understood Spiritually; they
must not be taken literally for the setting up of any earthly, external,
pompous Kingdom in the Posterity of David, such a one as the Jews look for,
Acts 1.6. and the Millenarians fancy to themselves, who take this Text in the
Letter for building of fine Houses, and plenty of Corn and Wine, and delighting
themselves with the Quintessence of the Creature; whereas it is usual with the
Prophets in the Old Testament, to shadow forth Spiritual blessings by Temporal
things; and this the Lord did the better to work upon the Jews, who were a
carnal, rude, rugged people, and not so easily wrought upon by Spiritual
blessings, as by Temporal and visible ones; so that as the Legal threatenings
were usually of Temporal Judgments (though they comprehended Spiritual ones
also) Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17, 18, etc. so the Promises under the Law were usually of
Temporal blessings, though they included Spiritual ones also. But the Gospel
proclaims Spiritual mercies, which are more noble and divine for though peace
and plenty are the Concomitants of the Gospel, yet these are poor uncertain
things, compared with Covenant-Mercies, which are called sure Mercies, Isa.
55.3. Besides, Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, his Kingdom is not meat
and drink, Romans 14.17. but it is a Spiritual kingdom, and so must be taken
here. This Kingdom Christ will restore when he shall gather his Church out of
Jews and Gentiles, in which Church there shall be greater glory, than ever
David or Solomon had, though in respect of outward splendour it be less, yet in
respect of inward glory, it shall excel, Hag. 2.9.

Let us take the Text in the Letter, and see what absurdities will follow.

1 If you take this building of the Tabernacle of David, for a restoring of the
Kingdom of Israel to its former pomp and power, and for the subduing of Edom,
and other Nations by the Sword, and that they should never be rooted out of
their own Land, etc. See how all these things are contradicted. For, 1 When
they returned out of Babylonish Captivity they had indeed a Kingdom, but it
was a poor, torn, contemptible one. 2 They were so far from reigning over
Edom, and the other Nations, that they were Tributary a long time to the Medes
and Persians, to the Egyptians and Syrians, and at last were brought under the
Roman yoke, Herod the Asclonite tyrannizing over them, even when Christ was
born, and at last for rejecting Christ, and Crucifying the Lord of Glory, their
City and Temple was destroyed, and themselves despersed like Vagabonds over the
whole World, and so have continued this sixteen hundred years; so that
literally this Text was never yet fulfilled, nor ever will be, whatever vain
men may fancy.


Loquitur de instauratione Spirituali, qua electi Israelitae per praedicationem
Evangelii Colligendi fuerent in ovile Christi. Piscat.
But let us take the words in a Spiritual sense, in reference to Christ, who
has indeed repaired the ruins of the House of David, by sending his Apostles
to preach the Gospel through the world, and to gather Jews and Gentiles into
the unity of his Church, and so erecting to himself an everlasting Kingdom,
according to that of the Angel Gabriel, Luke 1.32, 33. He shall be great, and
he shall be called the Son of the most high, and he shall sit upon the throne
of his father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever. These
words are an excellent Comment upon the text, The Lord shall give him the
throne of his father David; that is, Christ shall have a Spiritual Kingdom
over his Church, whereof David's worldly Kingdom was a Type; and he shall be a
Spiritual King over the spiritual house of Jacob for ever. Thus you see it is a
Spiritual raising up of the decayed Tabernacle of Jacob, and not any Temporal
one that is here spoken of; and this Spiritual sense St. James confirms in the
forementioned place, Acts 15.7, 13. to 17. where he proves the conversion of
the Gentiles by the preaching of the Gospel from this very text in Amos; and
this will better appear when we come to ver. 12. Now whether shall we believe
Saint James, who says that this text in Amos relates to Christ, and to the
conversion and vocation of the Gentiles, See him confuted in the end of the
Book.
unto the faith of Christ; or else the Jews and Millenarians, who dream (as
Dr. Homes does) of a Savior that shall reign in a Corporal, visible manner
here on earth, in external glory and felicity with the Saints a thousand years.

I will raise up the Tabernacle of David which is fallen. By the Tabernacle of
David is meant the House or Kingdom of David, Tabernaculum David regnum Messiae
and ecclesiae denotat, quo utut humile est pii proteguntur. Glassius. Sucea,
tegumentum, Tabernaculum, tentorium, a Sacach, Velavit, operuit, texit.
which was a Type of the Church, which is Christ's spiritual kingdom. It is here
called a Tent, or Tabernacle, because of that mean and low condition which
David's family was now in; it was not now a Palace, but a poor flitting Tent, or
Tabernacle, and that a fallen one too, full of ruptures and ruins; which
intimates the sad desolation which had been made in David's family. His Kingdom
which was sometimes potent and flourishing, now was become like a poor ruinous
Cottage, for all was out of order both in Church and State when Christ came.

1 The ten Tribes fell off from the house of David to Jeroboam, and from the
true Worship of God to worship Calves.

2 The Syrians and the Philistines made inrodes upon them.

3 The Assyrians made havoc of Israel, and carried the ten Tribes into
Captivity; and the Babylonians fell upon Judah, and carried them Captive into
Babylon, and the Romans fell upon them again after they came out of Babylon,
and scattered them over the whole world; Israel never returned again out of
the Assyrian Captivity, only some few gleanings joined themselves to Judah when
they returned out of Babylon and came to Jerusalem; and though Judah did return
after and seventy years were expired, yet Tyrants did so tear and shatter them
(as appears by the Books of the Maccabees) that there was no splendour, no
glory, nor scarce the face of a Kingdom amongst them, Amos 5.2. at last came
Herod the Tyrant, who rooted up David's stock, and settled the Crown upon his
own head. Besides, when Christ came, he found the Church pestered with false
Prophets, swarming with Scribes and Pharisees, and such as taught for Doctrines
the Precepts of men. Thus what with the cruelty of Tyrants on the one hand, and
the corruptions of false teachers on the other hand; the Tabernacle of David
was sadly fallen.

And thus the house of David say in its ruins (being shrunk from David the
King, to Joseph the Carpenter) till Christ the Son of David came who repaired
the breaches, and fulfilled the Prophesies. Then in that day, and at that time
when all seemed to be gone, and all Human help failed, the Lord who loves to be
seen in the Mount, sent the Messiah to raise up this Tabernacle of David which
was fallen, and make it more illustrious than ever; yet not in Temporals, but
which is more glorious and divine, in Spirituals; enlarging the Churches
dominion over all Nations, Matthew. 28.19. and changing that earthly Kingdom of
David, into a Spiritual and everlasting Kingdom, according to that promise; 2 Samuel 7.16.

Q. But why is this restoration of all by Christ called, the raising up of the
Tabernacle of David?

A. For two reasons; 1. Because the Kingdom of David was Typical, as David
himself was a Type of Christ, so his Temporal Kingdom typified and prefigured
Christ's Spiritual Kingdom. 2. Christ was the Son of David according to the
flesh, now the Kingdom was promised to David and his Seed for ever, Psalm.
72.17. hence Christ is so often called, David, Ier. 30.9. Ezekiel. 34.23. and 37.14.
Hos. 3.5.

And I will close up the Breaches thereof. ^adar, sepsit, so Job 19.8. Lam. 3.7.
I will make up the gaps of the Tabernacle of David, or hedge and wall up the
breaches of it, by causing the Gospel to be preached over all the World, which
will quickly close up all the ruptures, and make up all the ruins which Sin
and Satan has made; and chase away all those Traditions of men which false
Prophets had brought into the Church of God. This began to be accomplished when
Christ began to preach, and his Apostles after him, as when Paul and Barnabas
preaching to the Gentiles converted them, Acts 15.7, etc. and it is daily
accomplishing by the enlargement of the Church, but a more full accomplishment
hereof will be when the Jews and Gentiles shall be called, and united together
under Christ their Head.

And I will raise up his ruins. All its Batteries and Breakings, all its
Rubbish and Ruins shall be repaired by Christ still. We see (as has been
showed before) how low the house of David was sunk; it was like a poor Tent or
Cottage, ruinous and full of breaches, and to a carnal eye irrecoverable and
past hope.

And I will build it as in the days of old. When it was in its most
flourishing and prosperous condition, in those purer times of David, and the
beginning of Solomon's reign, when they were free from Superstition and
Idolatry, serving the Lord in simplicity and singleness of heart.

The sum of all is this; In that day of Jacobs deep distress, I will raise up
my Evangelical Church, which is the Tabernacle of the true and glorious Son of
David, the Messiah of the World, even upon the ruins of the Jewish Church,
which I will repair, and so make up the Spiritual breaches thereof, as that
both Jews and Gentiles shall make up one Church, which shall be made as
Spiritually complete as ever the Temple was materially of old.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Modesty and Sobriety becomes us, especially when we treat of divine
Mysteries.

We must not be wise above that which is written, Cum silet Scriptura, praestat
(...), quam temere quicquam statuere.
nor curiously pry into the secrets of the Almighty; and therefore great is the
folly of many in our times, that take upon them to tell the day, the year, and
almost the hour (so divinely inspired are they, at least in their own
conceits) when Babylon shall fall, and the Jews be called. One says,
Antichrist shall fall One thousand six hundred thirty nine, another One
thousand six hundred forty three, another One thousand six hundred and fifty,
another One thousand six hundred fifty five, so Clavis Apocalyptica, many One
thousand six hundred sixty six; only Sir Henry Vane wiser than all the rest (at
least opinionatively) tells us flatly, that the walls of this Jericho shall
fall flat before Jesus the true Joshua, four hundred and forty years hence,
viz. In the year Two thousand, then comes the seventh part of time which shall
be the true Sabbath. Wisely done Sir Henry, to set so long a time that you may
be dead and rotten before it come, when others that have set shorter times have
lived to be laughed at to their faces; the folly of these men has been made
known to all. It were well if men would learn of the Prophet here to keep to
generals. In that day, and at that time, and not point at particulars to their
own shame. Secret things belong to the Lord, there is enough revealed to
exercise our parts and studies, though we should live Methusalems days.

2 That the Church of God in this life may be brought to a very low condition.

It may seem like a poor little Tent, or tattered Cottage, full of breaches and
ruins, Isa. 1.8. so that it is scarcely visible, and yet be a true Church, 1
King. 19, 20. as the Moon is the Moon and in Heaven still, De visibilit Eccles.
cons^le Cameronem, in Mat. 18.19. p. 244.
though it lie hid for a time under the Clouds from our sight.

3 After deep humiliation comes great consolation.

Never any so deeply humbled as Christ, and never any more highly exalted,
Phil. 2.6. to 12. after this people had for many years been sifted, and tossed,
and captivated, and the family of David brought to the dust, and no Human help
appearing, but they lay like dry bones scatt^red up and down, yet now does the
Lord appear, and raise up the Tabernacle of David that was fallen, by sending
the Messiah that little Branch, or Sprig, out of the stock or contemptible
stump of Iesse, that was hewn down and cut off, Isa. 11.1. when man's help
fails, then God appears; our extremity is his opportunity, Cum duplicantur
lateres, venit Moses. In the Mount will the Lord be seen. Christ came not here
till all seemed to be lost and laid on heaps, he still reserves his holy hand
for a dead lift, and delights to help those that are forsaken of their hopes,
Deuteronomy. 32.36. Psalm. 10.14. and 22.11. when this goodly Family was sunk so low as
from David the King, to Joseph the Carpenter, so that there was neither King
nor Prince left, then Christ appears and raises it up; when the Scepter was
departed from Judah, See more in my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.9. p. 182. and p. 456.
then Shilo comes, Genesis 49.10. when all was here in confusion both in Church
and State, then comes the Messiah, that Horn of Salvation, and the glory of his
people Israel.

4 The Churches comforts are hid in Christ.

It is he that makes up our breaches, raises us out of our ruins, and
restores comfort to Sion, and to her Mourners. All our comforts, and all our
fresh Springs are in him; our Election, Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, Salvation, come all from this Fountain, Ephesians. 1.3. to 15. He
is Bread to strengthen us, Wine to comfort us, Water to wash us; a King to
defend us, a Prophet to teach us, a Priest to intercede for us. In my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.15. p. 270.
In a word, he is All in All unto us, as I have showed elsewhere.

5 The Old Testament is the Word of God, and abides in New Testament times.

James the Apostle when he would prove the calling of the Gentiles he goes to
the Old Testament, the written Word of God, In my Com. on 2 Timothy 3.15. p. 261,
etc.
and from thence proves it; now had it not been Authentical, the Apostles
allegation had been invalid. But of this at large elsewhere.

6 Gospel privileges are glorious privileges.

The Church was glorious of old in David's time, when men went by troops to the
House of God, and fled as the Clouds, and flockt as the Doves unto their
windows. But the Spiritual glory of the Church in the days of the Gospel is
far more glorious than in the days of Israel of old. They had but the
shadow, we have the substance; they saw Christ but darkly in Types and Figures,
but we see him with open face. Hence the glory of the latter Temple is said to
be greater than the glory of the former, Hag. 2.9. But how can that be, since
the glory of the first Temple was far more excellent for building than the
latter? insomuch that the ancient now wept to see how far short it came of
the former. I, but the glory of this latter House (though inferior for
structure) yet shall be greater than the glory of the former, because Christ
the Messiah should personally appear there; and from thence should the Gospel
of peace go forth into all the world, which should work a true and blessed
tranquillity in the hearts of all believers. Hence John the Baptist is
preferred before the Old Testament Prophets, both in dignity and doctrine; and
New Testament Ministers (who publish the whole Gospel) are preferred before
him, Mat. 11.11. Let us then bless the Lord for Gospel-priviledges, keeping
them in purity and simplicity, for though in Old Testament-times God allowed
them Music in public Services, with Altars, Holy Vestments, etc. yet Christ
their substance being come, these shadows are gone, and now Christ will
demand, Who required these things at your hands? See an excellent Ser. of Mr.
Pools, on John. 4.24.
In vain is all such Will Worship, the Worship that Christ calls for now, is a
worship in spirit and in truth.

VER. 12.
That they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the Heathen, which are
called by my name, says the Lord that does this.
THe Prophet goes on to comfort the remnant of the faithful in Israel and Judah
in their low condition, with the promises of better times under the Messiah;
then should David's Spiritual Kingdom be more glorious than ever, Israelitae
possidebunt gentes, non externa possessione (ut Iudaei somniant) sed
spiritualiter ^as adducentes ad Dei cognitionem and verum cultum in Christoper
Christum in unam cum Iudaeis Ecclesiam, ut ^x utroque populo una fiat Christi
ecclesia. Mercer.
and the bounds of it more ample than in the days of old; for when the Messiah
shall come, the Gentiles shall be called, and the very Edomites (which were
deadly enemies to Gods ways and people, Amos 1.9, 11. Obad. 10, 11, 12.) shall
submit their necks to Christ's yoke, and be brought into the communion of
Christ's Church, by the operation of the Spirit in the preaching of the Gospel;
yea and all the elect Heathen shall come in with them, according to that
Promise, Psalm. 2.8. Isa. 19. ult.

Formerly the Church was shut up within narrow bounds, and confined to the
Jews only, but now it shall spread it self over all Nations. The Prophet
begins and names Edom first, because they were near Neighbors, What these
Edomites were, see at large in the large Annotation Amos 1.11.
and though Brethren to the Jews, yet were they bitter enemies to them,
rejoicing in their calamity, and laughing at their downfall, Lam. 4.21. Obad.
22. Yet now these should be converted, and of foes become friends, and at unity
with Gods people. These Lions should be turned into Lambs, and these Wolves
into Sheep, and some remnants out of all Nations (though never so rude and
barbarous) should be brought unto Christ's Sheepfold.

God had plagued Edom very sore, Numb. 24.18. Isa. 63.1. especially by the
hands of Nebuchadnezzar, yet now he promises that a remnant of them shall be
joined with the Jews in one Church whereof Christ is the Head, Obad. 18, 19.
and therefore the Apostle James tells the Jews, that they ought not to wonder
that the Gentiles had received the Holy Ghost as well as they, since it was
foretold by the Prophets, and amongst the rest by our Prophet here, Acts
15.15, 16, 17.

2 Here is a further description of these Gospel-Converts, they are such as
upon whom my name is called; that is, they are such as are called by my name,
who are indeed my people. The like expression we have, Genesis 48.16. The Lord
bless the Lads, and let my name be called on them; that is, let them be
accounted my Progeny (says Jacob) and be called my children. The like parallel
expression we have, Isa. 4.1. and 63, ult. Let us be called by thy name;
Invocari nomen alicujus super alium, nihil aliud est quam aliquem esse alterius
imperio obsequentem and subditum, sicut super uxorem dicitur invocari mariti
nomen. Sanctius.
that is, let us be thine. So the People of Israel are called, The People which
are called by Gods name, Deuteronomy. 28.10. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. that is, the Church and
People of God who professed his name, acknowledging that he was their God, and
they his People. So those Gentile-Nations which were sometimes strangers from
the Covenant, and aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and were not Gods
People, shall now be called the People of the living God, they shall show
themselves unto Christ, and have his name put upon them, and shall be called
Christians, Acts 11.26.

Obj. It is impossible that ever such desperate Edomites, and old enemies
should ever be converted and brought in to Christ.

A. With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible; It is
the Lord that does it (says the text) and therefore do not doubt of the
performance, for he is both faithful and able who has promised. Neither be
offended that the Gentiles are called whom ye count unclean, for it is God
that does this, who does all things well.

Q. But when was this Promise ever fulfilled, say the Millenarian Jews?

A. It began to be fulfilled when the Gentiles were brought in with the remnant
of the Jews, who came in the room of the unbeleeving Jews in the Apostles
times, so that the Promise is fulfilled inchoativ^ already.

2 It is daily fulfilling* and shall be more and more fulfilled even to the end
of the world* especially when the Jews shall be called, and the (...) of ^he
^entiles shall come in, and they shall all become one Church, and make up one
Body, and one Sheepfold under Christ their head.

The sum is this, In Gospel Times both Jews and Gentiles shall be so united,
that they shall make up one Church, and the bounds thereof shall be extended
over all the earth, even to the remotest Heathen, which shall then be called by
my name, says the Lord that does this.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 The Election of God is free.

He does not choose men for any foreseen works or merits, or improvement of
Free Will, but all is Mercy and Free Grace. What did the Lord see in those
profane, Idolatrous Edomites, to move him to call a remnant of them? nay, what
did he not see in them why he should not reject them? and yet of his own
free-mercy, these cruel Edomites, and profane Gentiles which were not his
People, are here called his People. Away then with all those conceits of Merit,
Freewill, Universal Election (which is a gross contradiction) for if all be
chosen, then it is not an Election, but a Collection of all; for Election
implies a choosing of some, and a passing by of others.

Let us then who are Gentiles, remember our baseness and loathe our selves, and
let Free Grace in all the golden links of Election, See my Com. on 2 Timothy 4.8.
p. 408, 409.
Vocation, Justification, etc. be for ever magnified by us, that the Lord
should pass by his own People the Jews, and make them a People of his Curse
these sixteen hundred years, and should plant us poor Canaanites, and accursed
Gentiles in their stead, is no less an act of Mercy than of wonder, Psalm. 2.8.
Isa. 54.23. and 60.4, 5. Acts 2.39. Romans 9.25, 26. Ephesians. 3.6.

Yet let us not be high-minded but fear, for if God spared not the natural
branches, much less will he spare such wild branches as we are, if we walk in
unbelief as they did, Romans 11.20, 21.

2 Few are chosen.

It is not all Edom, it is but a remnant according to the Election of Grace
that shall be converted and saved. Hence the Scripture so often calls the Elect a
Remnant, multitudes perish, it is but a remnant, a little remnant that are
saved, Isa. 1.9. Joel 2. ult. Romans 11.5. Straight is the Gate, and narrow is
the way that leads unto life, and few there be that find it, Mat. 7.14. Christ's
flock is a little little flock, Luke 12.32. How few were saved of the Old
World, Sodom, Jerusalem?

The way to Heaven it is a difficult way, and calls for difficult things, and
hard lessons which the world cannot endure to hear of, much less to practice.

1 It calls for Universal Self-denial, all Self-conceit, Self Ends
Self-interest, etc. must be renounced if we will be Christ's Disciples. Here
most stick.

2 It calls for a saving, sanctifying, working, lively faith, and this is hard;
Presumption is easy, but to believe requires the exceeding greatness of Gods
Power to work it in us, Ephesians. 1.19. Coloss. 2.12.

3 It calls for sincere Conversion, and that is an exceeding hard thing; it is
no less than the change of Nature, it is the changing of a Lion into a Lamb,
of a Wolf into a Sheep, of Fire into Water, etc.

4 There are many hard things to be suffered as well as to be done, many
losses, crosses, tentations from the world, the Devil, and our own corruption:
all which laid together show the difficulty of Salvation, and by consequence
the paucity of such as shall be saved.

[See more at large on this Point, Mr. Ant. Burgess Spirit. Refining, 1 Part,
Ser. 222. p. 643. and on 1 Cor. 3.15. p. 192. Shepherd Sincere Convert, chap.
5. p. 92. to 117. Mr. Watsons Ser. on Philip. 2.12 to 23. Mr. Swinnock on
Philip. 1.21. p. 132. to 139. Mr. Rogers on 1 Pet. 3.19. p. 511. Mr. Sheffield
against Hypocrisy, chapter 11. p. 91* etc.]

3 Real and sound conversion is the peculiar and proper work of God.

If a remnant of Edom be called and converted, it is the Lord that does it. The
way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his
steps, Ier. 10.23. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but
in God that shows mercy, See Six Observations more in M. Hutchinson, in locum.
Romans 9.16. Noah may speak perswasively, but it is God only that can persuade
Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Shem.

VERSE 13.
Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that the Flow-man shall overtake the
Reaper, and the treader of Grapes him that sows seed, and the Mountains shall
drop sweet Wine, and all the Hills shall melt.
MAn by nature is a very froward, pettish, perverse Piece, especially when
under the cross, God has much ado to fasten any comfort on us. When Israel
lay in deep distress in Egyptian bondage, they hearkened not to Moses because
of the anguish of their spirits, Exodus 6.9. they were so oppressed with sorrow
that they could not mind what Moses said, nor believe any thing that was spoken
concerning their deliverance, as deeming their deliverance desperate and past
hope. So this People having lain long in Babylonish Captivity: and after that
tired out with many troubles, the Lord here heaps up Promise upon Promise, to
assure them of better times at hand. In this Verse we have a third Promise,
where the Holy Ghost by the abundance of external and corporal blessings, does
shadow forth unto us the great plenty of Spiritual gifts, which should be
poured out in Gospel Times; yet since Piety has the promise of the blessings
of this life as well as of that to come, and temporal blessings do often attend
the Gospel, and God has promised, that if we first seek his Kingdom, all other
things shall be cast upon us, Matthew. 6.33. we may take the words in the largest
sense, as a promise both of Temporal and Spiritual blessings, which should be
poured out upon the Church in Gospel Times.

1 Spiritual blessings are promised absolutely and primarily, they being
necessary per se; but Temporal blessings are promised as accessories only
conditionally, with exception of the Cross, and so far as they shall be good
for us. Things necessary we are sure of, and if more may do us good we shall
not want it.

Though both are promised here, yet Spiritual blessings are specially intended,
as will appear by these reasons.

1 If we look into those Primitive times, when these Spiritual gifts here
promised were poured out abundantly, the Church was low in Temporals, though
rich in Spirituals, they were Persecuted and Plundered of all, Heb. 10.34.
besides, the Gospel calls for Self-denial, and a contempt of all these low
enjoyments.

2 In Old Testament times the Church was in its Childhood, and therefore Moses
and the Prophets by such expressions did condescend to the capacity of the
rude, and infirm Jewish people, which were as Children under the rudiments of
the Law, and spoke to them as we use to do to our little children in their
own Language, when we make promises to them. Hence we read so frequently in
the Old Testament of heavenly things shadowed forth unto us by Feasts, and
other Temporal blessings, Isa. 25.6. and Earthly peace typifying Spiritual
peace, and plenty of Corn and Wine, plenty of Grace, as here in the text. By
all those Temporal things the Lord would raise up our hearts to the
contemplation of heavenly and eternal things.

In the words we have, 1. A Blessing promised, and that is, a glorious
affluence and abundance of all things, set forth in Hyperbolical terms, and
very lofty expressions. As, 1 The Plowman shall overtake the Reaper. 2 The
Treader of Grapes him that sows the feed. 3 The Mountains should drop Wine. 4
If this be not enough, all the Hills shall melt, and dissolve into Milk, Honey,
Oil.


All figurative promises of Spiritual Graces and Blessings in Gospel Times.

2 Here is the Time when all this shall be effected, and that is in
Gospel Times, set forth in those general terms, The days shall come, viz. when
the Tabernacle of David shall be built, and the Kingdom of Christ be raised up.

3 Here is the confirmation of all this, Dixit Dominus, The Lord has said it.

4 Here is an Ecee, to quicken our attention to these glorious Promises, Behold
the days come says the Lord.

So much for the Analysis, now for the explication of the terms.

The Plowman shall overtake the Reaper, q. d. The Harvest shall be so great
and plentiful, that before you can house it, Non erit vulgaris and usitata
copia, sed quae fidem superat, imo etiam or dinem naturae, quasi montes
diffluerent. Calvin.
the Plowman will be at your heels to prepare the ground for another crop.
Such plenty there should be, that they should scarce have time enough to gather
it in, for before the Harvest was in, it should be time to Plow, and the
Vintage should reach unto the seed time.

And the treader of Grapes him that sows the seed: Or draws forth the seed,
viz. out of his Sack to sow, q. d. The Vintage shall be so plentiful that it
shall last even till seed time; so that when you should be sowing, you shall be
gathering of grapes; yea such plenty shall there be of all things, that when
one kind of fruit is ripe, another shall follow, every one in his due course
and order.

A Parallel place we have, Levit. 26.5. to which the Prophet seems to allude,
where we have the same Blessings promised almost in express terms, Your
threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the
sowing time, q. d. you shall have such plentiful Harvests, that before you can
have threshed out your Corn, the Vintage shall come; and such rich Vintages,
that before they be ended, it shall be time to sow your seed; so that you
shall have one blessing in the neck of another, you shall always be getting
and gathering of fruit, there shall be no time wherein the earth shall not be
yielding you somewhat, either for necessity or delight.

And the Mountains shall d^op sweet wine, or Must, which is newly trodden, and
is called sweet, because new Wine is so. Mountains usually are hard, rockey,
wild, barren places, but now they shall be so cultivated, G^^is, suceus dulcis,
i. e. mustum Cant. 8.2. Isa. 49.26 Joel 1.5. Bacchus amat colles.
and made so fruitful, that they shall even run wine. The Prophet seems to
allude to Judea, which had Mountains beset with Vineyards, q. d. The Vines in
the Mountains shall abound with Grapes. The like expression we have almost in
terminis, Joel 3.18. and it shall come to pass in that day, that the Mountains
shall drop down new Wine, and the Hills shall flow with milk q. d. In
Gospel Times God shall give plenty of Spiritual nourishment unto his Church, so
as every part thereof shall abound with the means of Salvation; for as in the
text, so here, by figurative expressions is shadowed forth the blessed estate
of the Church under the Kingdom of Christ; and it is usual in the Old Testament
to set forth heavenly things by earthly Similitudes, as in the Book of the
Canticles.

And all the Hills shall melt; that is, they shall seem to do so, by reason
of the abundant increase of Milk, Oil, Honey, etc. as if they flowed with them.
The Hills shall flow with Milk (says Joel) that is, they shall so abound with
Cattle, Bees, Vines, and Olives, that Milk, Honey, Wine, and Oil, shall as it
were flow from the Hills, and though they be high and hard, yet now they shall
all dissolve into moisture, and be made fit for culture.

Some Allegorize thus; By Mountains they understand the Apostles and
Apostolical men, whose Evangelical Doctrine was as Wine to comfort disconsolate
souls. These plowed and sowed the world with the seed of heavenly Doctrine; and
by Hills are meant the ordinary Preachers, who had Milk for Babes. Or, the
Mountains are great men, and the Hills the inferior sort; all these both high
and low should in Gospel Times be inricht with gifts and graces. The multitudes
of Converts should be so great, that they should keep the Lords Spiritual
Husbandmen in continual employment, so that they should always be Plowing,
Sowing, Reaping, etc. always Praying, Preaching, Planting, etc.

The sum of all is this, That in Gospel Times there should be such abundance
of blessings, that one should overtake another in a perpetual succession; as it
is in a rich and fruitful soil, where the Harvest is no sooner in, but the
Plough is put into the ground for another crop; and the Vintage is no sooner
done, but the seed is sown for a new Harvest. Thus it shall be with the
Church, where one blessing ends, another shall begin, and even the driest and
barrenest hearts shall yield excellent fruits of grace in great abundance.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 Gospel Times are blessed times.

It is the truly Golden Age, when all runs Milk, and Wine, and Honey, and all
this without price and without money, See Mr. Obad. Sedgwick on Isa. 55.1, 2.
Isa. 55.1, 2. Of Christ's fullness we all receive grace for grace, John 1.16.
The weak are now made strong, the barren fruitful, the Hills are levelled, the
Valleys enricht, the Evangelical Plough makes all mellow and fruitful, and fit
for Christ.

We should therefore bless the Lord, who hath-cast our Lots in this pleasant
time of Spiritual riches, peace, joy, and abundant consolation. O Fortunatos
nimium, etc.
Happy we, if in this our day we know the things that concern our everlasting
peace, before they be hid from our eyes. How great then is the folly of those
that separate themselves, and forsake those fountains and mountains of Wine and
living water, and go to stinking Ponds and broken Cisterns of men's inventions,
that can yield them no comfort or refreshing in troublous times.

2 Piety brings plenty.

When men first seek Gods Kingdom (as in Gospel Times, it is prophesied they
should do, Isa. 2.2, 3.) then Wine, and Milk, and Honey, and all other
temporal blessings of peace and plenty shall be given in with the Gospel of
Peace. The Gospel comes not empty handed, especially to an obedient people; as
we see in Constantines days, and in Q. Elizabeth's days, when the Gospel
flourisht, the Nation flourisht with all temporal abundance. Piety has the
promise, and that vertually is every thing. See more in my Beauty of Holiness,
chapter 7. obj. 1. and Mr. Secker his Non -- such Professor, p. 269, etc.
If we be obedient, we shall eat the good of the Land, Levit. 26.3, 5. Isa.
1.19. Hos. 2.20, 21, 22, 23.

VERSE 14.
And I will bring again the Captivity of my people of Israel, and they shall
build the waste Cities, and inhabit them, and they shall plant Vineyards, and
drink the Wine thereof, they shall also make Gardens, and eat the fruit of
them.
THe Prophet having foretold this People of their misery, how their Cities
should be ransackt, their Land laid wast, the inhabitants captivated and
slain, comes now to comfort the remnant, multiplying words, and adding Promise
to Promise, assuring them of comfort in the end; though the body of the People
never returned out of the Assyrian Captivity, yet the elect remnant should be
brought out of this misery into an estate of joy and felicity.

To the former Promises the Prophet here adds a fourth, which brancheth it
self into four particulars.

1 They shall be delivered from Captivity and Banishment, I will bring again
the Captivity of my people. Veshabti ethshebuth, and convertam captivitatem.
There is a Paranomasy in the words which cannot be translated without loss;
such elegancies are frequent, as I have showed before.

This Promise was fulfilled when the Messiah came, and delivered them from
their Spiritual captivity to Sin and Satan, and brought them into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God.

And here the Jews and their followers are out again, taking these Promises
Literally, which are especially to be understood Spiritually, Mystically, and
Metaphorically. For this returning here is an Evangelical returning to Christ,
when the remnant of the Elect both of Judah and Israel should be converted,
which though it be very sparingly now, yet in Apostolical times they had many
Jewish Converts, we read of about three thousand of the House of Israel
converted at one Sermon, Acts 2.36, 37, 41. insomuch that St. James writes a
whole Epistle to the dispersed Jews, and Peter writes two.

2 They should have Peace, with sweet security and plenty of all things, which
appears by the fruit es and effects of it.

As 1. Plantation, They should build Cities. Plant Vine-yards. Make Gardens.


2 They should have fruition of all these, They should inhabit their Cities,
Drink the Wine of their Vine-yards, And eat the fruit of their Gardens.


The like Promise we have, Isa. 65.21, 22. My Servants shall build Houses and
inhabit them, and plant Vine-yards, and eat the fruit of them; that is, they
should peaceably enjoy the blessings of God, where still under Temporal
blessings are shadowed forth Spiritual and eternal ones. As when God was angry
with the Jews, he used to terrify them with legal Curses, as before, Amos.
5.11. They should build houses and not dwell in them, plant Vine-yards, but not
eat the fruit of them. So on the contrary here he promises, that they should
not labor in vain, as they did before when they served Idols, and provoked
him with their inventions. Speaking to the Jews, he tells them still of Legal
Blessings, which typified Evangelical and Spiritual mercies, as was usual with
the Prophets for to do, as Mr. Buroughs shows at large on Hos. 1.11. Lect.
7. p. 183, etc. his only fault there is, that he inclines too much to that
fancy of the Millenaries, as Mr. Baily shows, in his Disswasive from the
Errors of the Times, p. 224, etc.

And they shall build wast Cities; that is, they shall restore the pure Worship
of God, Vere urbes desertas instaurant, qui cul. tum verum restituunt, and
Ecclesias instaurant. Mercer in locum, ubi plura.
and build up the Elect in their most holy faith.

They shall plant Vine-yards and Gardens; that is, particular Churches, Hort^
and Vineae sunt Ecclesia Dei. Idem.
in which God delights to walk, and feed on the grapes of obedience which grow
there. And drink the Wine thereof; that is, they shall have comfort in their
labors, which they should see were not in vain in the Lord. The Church is
Gods Husbandry, Omnia sunt spiritualiter accipienda. Idem. How grossly then does
Dr. Homes abuse his Reader, that cites Mercer here for a Corporal reign.
and the Apostles with their Successors are Gods Husbandmen and Vinitors, that
must plant Churches and water them, and as much as in them lies, propagate them
all the world over, that Christ's truth may be known upon earth: and his saving
health among all Nations. So that this verse is a continued Metaphor taken from
such as returned out of Captivity into their own Country, for such are wont to
build Cities, plant Vine-yards, make Gardens, etc. now the rule must still be
remembered, that by these are set forth Spiritual blessings.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 When God is at peace with a People, then peace, plenty, prosperity internal,
and external follow.

When Gods face shines upon a People, then there is a new face set upon things;
and those that frowned before, now smile on us, Genesis 32.28. Hos. 2.20, 21, 22,
23. when God is at peace with us, he makes all at peace with us, 2 Chronicles.
15.15. and 17.7, to 12. Psalm. 81.12, 13, 14. Prove. 16.7. Acts 9.31.

2. Christ has redeemed his Elect from the Tyranny of sin and Satan, See Dr.
Boltons Bounds of Liberty, and Mr. Buroughs Saints Treasury, on John 8.36. p.
87, 88, etc.
and all the enemies of their salvation, Luke 1.74. Col. 1.13. and 2.14. Heb.
2.14, 15.

He that brought back the Captivity of his people here, has lead Captivity
Captive, and has received gifts for men, even for the Rebellious, Psalm. 68.18.

VERSE 15.
And I will plant them upon their Land, and they shall no more be pulled up,
out of their Land, which I have given them, says the Lord.
WE are now come to the fifth and last Promise, which brancheth it self into
two particulars. 1. A Promise of Plantation and Settlement. I will Plant them
in their own Land. They shall have a settled and sure habitation in the Church
Militant here, and in the Church Triumphant hereafter.

2 They shall have establishment, They shall be no more pulled up out of their
Land. This cannot be understood literally for the Jews did not abide in their
own Land for ever. 1. Before Christ's time, when they returned out of Babylon,
'twas but a small number that returned to their own Land, and those abode not
long there neither. 2. They were so far from ruling over all Nations, that they
were tributary to them. 3. Their bounds were much straightened. 4. When the Jews
shall be called, yet I think no sober man will say, they shall no more be
pulled up out of their own Land, but shall abide there for ever, as the letter
of the Text imports. I know that for ever, is often in Scripture put for an age,
or for a long time; but the Millenaries take it here in the letter, at least
for their thousand years reign, but without any ground.

But take the words spiritually, as alluding to Christ's Kingdom, in
Gospel Times, and then all these Promises are abundantly fulfilled, though not
specifically, in the same kind, yet Valor, in spirituals, which are of far
greater value than if they had been Lords of the East and West Indies; besides
the bounds of the Church are very much enlarged by the Gospel.

So that I shall (with the best Divines) take the words in a spiritual sense,
for the perseverance of the Saints; such as are true Members of Christ's Church
shall never fall away, none shall pull them from Christ, or separate them from
his love. Christ will so settle his Church upon earth, that it shall never be
rooted up by the violence of men, nor be prevailed against by the gates of Hell.

3. Here is the confirmation of all this, says the Lord thy God. He is Thy God
in Covenant, reconciled to thee in Christ, ready to give thee all things
needful for life and godliness. It Is he that has promised, who cannot lie, nor
deceive, and therefore thou may safely build upon his word.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. The Elect shall never totally and finally perish.

Christ will build his Church, and if he be the builder, who shall hinder him?
Mat. 16.18. and 24.24. The Elect are Trees well rooted, the planting of the
Lord, that he may be glorified in them, Isa. 61.3. Though they may fall foully,
yet never finally; they were never real Saints that fall away totally and
finally. Ecclesia concuti potest, expugnari non potest.
Such as go out from us, were never truly of us. They that are truly ingrafted
into Christ, no enemies visible or invisible shall ever prevail against them.

It Is true, the Potentates and Tyrants of the world, have been in all ages
heaving at this Stone, but it has crushed them all to pieces, Zach. 12.3.
Christ has always had a Church, a little Flock, In my Thesis de perseverantia
sanctorum.
a Remnant to serve him, and ever will have in despite of all opposition. As I
have showed at large elsewhere.

2. God will faith^ully perform what ever he has promised to his people.

As all the Threatenings shall certainly fall on the heads of the wicked; so all
the Promises shall first or last be made good to the righteous. It Is God who
cannot lie, that has said it, and therefore he will certainly do it.

Homesius denuo enervatus.
DR. Homes, Chiliastarum ille Achilles, that Sword and Buckler, -- Tandem fit
surculus arbor.
that great Millenarian Champion, which has printed a whole Book in folio of
ten shillings price (to my cost I speak it, for I never paid so dear for so
much wastepaper, and a great nothing in a Jugling-box) in defense of that
fancy. Amongst one and fifty Proofs taken out of the Old Testament for the
confirmation of his Tenet, he produces this of Amos, 9.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
for one; you see how directly he comes in my way, otherwise I had not stirred
one step, nor endeavored in the least any confutation of the Doctors Folio,
which does sufficiently show its own folly without a Confuter; It Is like a
Puppet stuffed with Bumbaste, Some men have their guts in their heads, and their
brains in their bellies Portentorum nidum gerunt in (...)ite. I may say of this
Dr. as one says of a finical empty Lawyer, he is homo in causis agendis been
Vestitus.
in which there is neither life nor spirit. I have read of one that wrote a
whole Sheet in the praise of a Louse; that indeed is an Ens, a living creature:
But I never read nor heard of any that ever spent so many Sheets in Folio about
this fancy and Chimaera Chimaerissima before. What Luther said of the Monks, is
true of the Millenaries. Sicut Monastica religio nihil videt in Scripturis nisi
cucullos: Ira Millenarii nihil vident in Scripturis nisi Phantasias. Corrupt
heads, and corrupt hearts pick corrupt notions, and impure senses out of the
pure word of God. Many in our days, instead of solid food; do fill and feed
themselves with golden dreams, and so resemble him that made the golden Legend,
who is said to be a man Plumbei oris, ferrei cordis, avei frontis. It Is said of
the Popish Priests, that they plead stoutly for Extreme Unction, Ut ipsi
evadant Unctiores, that they may the better lick their own fingers. I hope the
Doctor had no aspiring thoughts, when he writ those High-flown-notions, but
when I shall have showed you how unlike Dr. Homes in 1651. was to Dr. Homes in
1641. we may well say there was some what of self at the bottom.

Quest. But what does Dr. Homes think of such men?

A. He tells you in the year 1641. That for a man deliberately, and to please a
Party, to wrest the sacred Word of God, is indirect blasphemy; and St. Austin
calls it Heresy, Haereticus est, qui alicujus temporalis commodi causa,
August, de Utilit. credendi. c. 7
and maxim gloriae and principatus falsas opiniones aeut gignit aut sequitur.
I doubt we have too many such Augustinian Heretics still.

This of the Man, let us now to the Matter.

This text in Amos (says Dr. Homes) will prove (for to that end he cites it)
that all the Saints departed shall rise and reign with Christ a thousand years
here upon earth, See my Tract against the Millen. p. 4. etc
in a wonderful, visible, spiritual, glorious manner, drinking Wine, and
enjoying the Quintessence of the Creatures, etc. Now how this text should prove
such a Tenet, I must confess my dim eyes cannot discern. But the Doctor, who
can see as far into a Millstone as another man, will clear it up. But first,
lest we should think the Doctor to be singular in this opinion, he tells you,
that the great Mercer, and judicious Calvin on the place, concur with him (in
the main at least) in this point; which how true (besides what I have already
produced before in the Commentary) I come now to examine.

For Mercer on the place, of all Commentators, I find him most inclining, yea
peremptory for a Spiritual sense in all these five Verses. How often does he cry,
Haec non ad literam, non ad literam, sed Spiritualiter, spiritualiter,
spiritualiter sunt accipeanda? Where is now the Doctors corporal, pleasant,
external reigning? By his abusing this learned Author we may guess at the rest,
V. Calvin in Amos 9. ult.
for no better does he deal with Calvin. Hear how expressly he speaks against
the Doctors opinion, Quod hic dicitur de tritici et vini abundantia, debet
exponi pro natura regni Christi; ergo quia spirituale est regnum Christi.
sufficiat etiam nobis affluere spiritualibus bonis: Et Iudaei, quos Dominus
sibi residuos reservarit, contenti fuerunt illa spirituali abundantia Siquis
objiciat Prophetam hic non Allegorice loqui, responsio facilis est; ^empe hunc
morem passim receptum esse in Scriptura, ut faelicitas sub commodis praesentis
vitae, and terrenis benedictionibus quasi pingatur ante oculos nostros:
praesertim hoc observare in Prophetis licet, quia stylum accommodabant ad
captum rudis and infirmi populi. What could be spoken more (from this text)
against the Doctors opinion, See Dr. Homes for the Millen. p. 312 fol.
and yet the Doctor still tells us, that he mainly contends for a literal
sense, and for a Corporal bringing back of the ten Tribes into their own
country. But a greater than Doctor Homes is of another judgment, it is the
learned Doctor Rivet, V. Rivet, in Hos. 2.2^. p. 567.
glossing on Amos 9.13. thus he says, Harum promissionum minima pars ad
temporalia referri debet, ut ex iis assurgamus ad spiritualia; and plera* etiam
non impleri perfect in hac vita teneamus, sed coelestem beatitudinem
respicere, quomodo, quando excellentius est quod promittitur regni Christi
civibus praestandum, quam unquam temporaliter fuit praestitum, necessarium est
ut de bonis spiritualibus accipiatur per Christum donandis, etc. ubi plura.

But to put all out of controversy, St. James citing Amos 9.11, 12. interprets
them Spiritually, and proves the calling and conversion of the Gentiles in the
Apostolical times from them (as I have showed before) Acts 15.7. to 17. now
whether shall we believe the Apostle James that interprets these words
Spiritually, or Doctor Homes who mainly contends for a literal sense?

2 Da^^ non concesso, giving but not granting what the Doctor says, suppose
all these promises were to be taken literally, for temporal blessings, yet how
does it follow hence that Christ shall reign with the Saints on earth in a
visible manner a thousand years? Let any one read over all these five Verses,
and put to any one of them singly, or to all conjunctly, ergo Christ shall
reign with the Saints a thousand years here on earth, and see if he can forbear
smiling at such gross Non-sequiturs, which agree like Harp and Harrow.

Lastly, the Doctor in the close of all challenges all the Men, and Books in
the World, to show when ever these promises were yet fulfilled? When (says
this self-conceited Doctor) were all the wast Cities rebuilt, the breaches
made up, when was there ever yet all spiritual, and all outward prosperity in
the Church? When d^d the Mountains ever run Wine, or the Hills ever melt into
Oil, and Milk, and Honey, and when were all these enjoyments perpetuated?

Ans. If you take the Promises spiritually, St. James has told us they were
fulfilled in the Apostles days; if you take them literally they never were,
nor ever will be fulfilled; who ever looks for a sinless, sorrowless, deathless
condition, (as the Doctor dream of) in this world, when the Mountains shall run
Wine, etc. none but gross Fanatics will fancy such fables. I am even tired
with mentioning them.

Obj. But if this text in Amos will not prove the point, yet the Doctor has
one prime place which will prove it terminis terminantibus, and that is Revel.
20.4, 5, 6.

Answ. Doctor Homes shall confute Doctor Homes, Doctor Nathaniel Homes, 1641.
shall confute dreaming Dr. Homes, 1651. the greatest Antimillenarian could
hardly say more against them than he did then, when the opinion was not in
fashion. But he may say as a loose Bishop did sometimes, Nunc aliud tempus,
alii pro tempore mores.

But hear what he says (in his Set. on 2 Pet. 3.13. p. 4. to 7. preached before
the Parliament, 1641. where he strongly asserts the excellency of the
Presbyterian Government, p. 29.38, etc. He pleads for Geneva and Scotland,
saying, Omne bonum ab Aquilone.

Yet now himself is in this heavenly wide number.


I mention this only, lest he should face about again, but I think his Rump --
is broken, etc.) Our Divines (says he) commonly called Millenaries, would
understand this text of Peter, of the Martyrs reigning a thousand years on
earth, before they be taken up soul and body into heaven; but these are as wide
as earth from Heaven. Of innumerable particulars which might be alleged* let
us at this time be content with some touches on that leading place, Revel.
20.4, etc. 1. The text tells us (says he) that it is their Souls shall reign,
and not their Bodies, and by a thousand years is meant an eternity of felicity
and reigning in heaven. Then he cites Parcus on Rev. 20. against them, and
persuades his Reader to read that Learned man on that point. Then he takes off
their objections, and at last tells us, Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. cap. 35.
that Papias the first Author of this opinion was a credulous man, and apt to
receive fables for verities; I wish D. H. were not too like him. You see by
this time what little credence is to be given to this Weathercock, than can
turn, and turn, but never crow.

But what talk I of D. H. when I find learned Sir Henry Vane (in eadem haeresi)
in his vain piece of Learned Nonsense to favor this opinion, I may say of
that Cloudy Book with better reason what one said of Persius, Si non vis
intelligt, debes negligi. Truth loves not clouds and corners, it is error that
is lucifugus and fears the light.

Cyprian Praef. advers. Iudaeos
I shall be brief, remembering that of Cyprian, Brevitas controversiarum
legentibus plurimum prodest, dum non intellectum legentis, and seipsum liber
longior spargit; sed subtil'ore compendio (id quod legitur) tenax memoria
custodit.

Sir Henry Vane, in his Mystery of Godliness, chapter 25. tells us, that when this
thousand years are come, Magistracy, and Visible Worship, Good news for
Libertines.
and forms of Christian Religion, etc. shall be destroyed, etc. Those places
which point expressly at the Day of Judgment, he wracks and wrests to prove his
thousand years reign, as Acts 3.19, 20, 21. and 17.31. 1 These. 4.16. and 1 Cor.
6.2, 3.

Q. But when does Sir Henry say that this thousand years reign shall begin?

A. So far as I can gather from him, this thousand years reign of Christ on
earth shall begin in the seventh thousand year of the world, viz. about 440.
years hence. Wisely done S. H. to set a longer time than most of this way do,
that so he may not be laughed at for his vain calculation whilst he lives.

But that I may not wrong him (for he has wronged himself too much already)
take his own Words, chapter 26 p. 418, 428. The General assembly of the first born
are to continue and abide for a thousand years in the exercise of this
immortal, incorruptible, bod^ly life here in this world, keeping the true
Sabbath of rest unto the Lord, in that seventh part of the time of the worlds
duration. All worldly strength, w^sdome, power, shall then as the walls of
Jericho, fall flat before Jesus the true Joshua, and these true Israelites, as
having been by them compassed about six days, and now on the seventh a
thousand years being with the Lord as one day, 2 Pet. 3.8 making way for the
end mentioned, See all this folly confuted in my Tract against the Millenaries.
1 Cor. 15.24. so that now men may know when the Day of Judgment shall be,
viz. about four hundred and forty years hence.

But how does Sir H. prove all these high-flown Notions? why ipse dixit, he
that never erred says it, witness our self at W.

It will be the wisdom of those in authority, speedily to suppress such real
Fanatical opinions; else Hae nugae seria fient. These trifles may become
troubles.

If any shall take offense at my plaineness against these loose Principles, I
shall answer with Bernard, Malo in me murmur hominum quam in Deum, bonum est
mihi, si Deus me utatur pro clypeo.

FINIS.
A Table of the Principal things contained in this Commentary.
A.
Pages AFflictions come from God, 517, 518, 552, and lead to God 371 Angels,
their Office 517 Apathy condemned 327 Application necessary 108, 308 Assurance,
attainable 208 Alms how to be given, 43. Motives to it 31, 32. Gavils
answered, 37, etc.
B.
BEauty is vanity 499 Beggars, lusty not to be releeved 51, 52 Believe, we are
slow to it 337 Bethel, what it was 21 Bribery base 12. and 190 Burial decent a
mercy 344 Burnt-offerings, what they were 231
C.
Carmel, what it was 523 Carnal confidence vain 295 Carnal security dangerous
303, 304 Children fare the worse for wicked Parents 16, 17 Churches, how holy
25 Church Music a Novelty 314 Church must be dear to us, our love to it
rewarded 327 Cities ruined by Sin 100, 299 Come, every wicked man has his
come, 13. and good men should have their come ibid. Company of the wicked to
be shunned 24 Conversion the end of correction, 65 Consideration, how
necessary 298, 299 Covetous men are carnal 468, 469 Creature is vanity, 356.
How to improve it to Gods glory 536 Curiosity to be shunned 503
D.
DArkness, what it signifies, 217, 224 Decrees of God abide 340 Despair, the
wicked do so 347 Drinking put for feasting 8 Duties daily to be practiced 29
E.
ELection free 568 Englands Mercies 67 Epicurism vile 308 Evil, shun it 204,
205 Examples of Saints abused 317 Examples of great men when wicked, do much
hurt 10 Extremity, Gods people often brought to it 373
F.
FAmine a sad Judgment 61, 62. what Sins bring it, 62. famine of the Word most
sad 489 Feasting when unlawful, 322, 323 Family Duties to be set up, 30. false
Prophets, enemies to the true, Chap. 7.10. Obs. 1 Fear proper to wicked men 19
Few are saved 569 Flying will not avail the wicked 518, 521, 523 and 222, 223
Free Will, we have lost, 105, 153 Fruit, lost by sin 80
G.
GAtes, how used 179, 180 God is Omnipotent 125, 585, fear him, 125, 127. a fix
fold comfort in it, 126, 127 He is Omniscient, 11, 12, 189 He is just, 384. he
is most High, 135, 136. most Holy, 15. Good 204, Patient, 353, Lord of Hosts,
137, 337. He is the saddest enemy, 524, 525. if he be against us, all is
against us, 148. his special presence the glory of a place, 205. He is
merciful 100, 108 Gilgal, what it is 22, 26 Gods Worship wearisome to wicked
men 464, 465 Godly vilified, 469. they are Gods grain 552 Good things must be
often pressed 209 Good intentions no warrant for evil actions 27 Godly not
seditious, but peaceable, proved at large, Chap. 7. Verse. 10. Obs. 4.
H.
H^rdened Sinners are incurable, 65, 66, 100, 101 Heart searched by God 127,
128, 130 Holy Ghost is God 120 Hope upholds us 211 Humiliation goes before
consolation 564 Hypocrites are Ceremonious, their service no service, 57 67 347
I.
Idolatry brings Judgments, 74. it is a great Sin, 502. it is a flesh-pleasing
sin, 59. it is very dangerous 253, 254, 458 Jehovah, what it notes 136
Ingratitude, vile 295 Instruments, God wants not to do his work 8 Ironies
lawful 24 Mr. Jones his bounty 47 Judicial Astrology, vile 72, 73 Judgments
seldom go alone, 340. they usually begin at Gods house, 514. we are slow to
believe them, 15. God has variety of them 74, 75, 78, 79, 302. they are
gradual, chapter 7. v. 8 Judgments on others must make us fear 298, 299 The
Judgment of God differs from man's judgment 503 Justice, God delights in it,
239 how it must be performed, 240 when perverted it is a crying sin, 353, 354
Ivory much used by the Jews, 306, 307 Judge our selves we must 346
L.
LEven, how used 55 Legal Promises adumbrate Spiritual Blessings 559 Lesser
Judgments contemned make way for greater 107 Life Spiritual its excellency,
158, and 468 Luxury breeds cruelty 323
M.
MAtters of moment must be marked 350 Mercy to the poor our duty, 31, etc. at
large Mercies abused provoke wrath 26 Mercy and Judgment mixed 546 Mirth of the
wicked turned to mourning 331 Ministry is searching, 133, and 322 Ministers
must persevere in their Ministry, 452. they must preach plainly, 253. they
must be prudent 371 Mockers how vile 218, 219 Moloch, what it was 247, 248
Mountains melt when God is angry, 530. They are mercies to the world 118, 119
Music abused, unlawful, 235, and 310
O.
OBedience, qualifications of it 58, 59 Oppressors rich men many times are such
12 Oppressors of others shall be oppressed themselves 15, 16
P.
Patience in calamities necessary, 200, 201, and 346 Perseverance necessary,
553, 578 Parity of sin brings parity of suffering 83 Persecution dangerous 328
Pestilence comes from God, 84. what sins bring it, 84, 85. a sad Judgment, 86.
whether we may fly from it, 87, 88. Good men may dye of it 89 Piety brings
plenty 574 Places debased by sin, 25. shun Idolatrous places 160 Pleasures
carnal, costly 321 Plots, broken by God 128 Poverty, the causes of it to be
shunned 53 Plain Preachers disliked, c 7* 13 Prayer our daily practice, 29. it
is powerful, 109, 374. when Argumentative, 372. persevere in it, 377. short
prayer if fervent may prevail much 378 Praises due to God, 58. and 357 Preach
none may without a Call 8. Preaching to be preferned before Miracles, 97, 98.
it is the Souls food, 487. contempt of it brings a famine 488 Privileges
cannot keep off Judgments 294, 337 Presence of God the glory of a place 205
Progenitors though pious cannot avail an impious people 541 Providence governs
all 99, 100 Proverbial speeches commendable 353 Prudence threefold, 192. Pious
men are prudent, 196. which appears in eight particulars, 197, 198
Q.
QUakers, how vile 57, 58 131 Questions, how useful, 245
R.
Rain falls by appointment, 71. want of it a Judgment 70, 71 A Remnant saved
547 Relics of Saints vain 345 Repentance difficult, 75. its excellency 113,
116 Reproves belong to great men as well as others; 5, 9, 10. Reproof when
hated aggravates sin 181 Retaliation used by God, 16, 64, 65, 186, 360
Rhetoric in Scripture, 293 Righteousness to be practiced, 30 Ripe, when a
people are for ruin. 16 Rulers are the Head of a Land, 515, 516
S.
SAcrifices without obedience odious to God. 227, 229, 230, 234 Security brings
misery, 294, 555 Self-judging necessary 115 Seek God how that must be done,
155, 156 A Sensual life odious 307 Sifted, Gods Church is many ways, 549
Silence, when a point of prudence, 198, 199 Seven, how used 187 Silver avayls
not in a day of trouble 19 Singing of Psalms its excellency, 316. How to sing,
317 Sins of omission dangerous 214 Sin and punishment are inseparable, 15. It
makes war between God and a people, 379. It robs us of our comforts, 94. It
ruins places, 100. It is an evil thing, 210. Continuance in it dangerous, 190.
It must be hated, 210. When ripe it ruins men, 439, 440, 545. and ends in
sorrow, 472. It is bitter, 484. and makes the earth to groan 475 Smelling, what
it notes 228 Superstition to be avoided 29 Swearing, when lawful, 15. and 336
Sympathize we must with Gods people, 143, 314, 315, 371
T.
TEntations useful 552 Ten, how used 339 Our Times in Gods hand, 332. What use
to make of it, 333. Traveling, take heed of it, 160. Thoughts known to God,
122, 127, 131. Uses of it, 132. Comforts from it, 134 Tithes due 23
V.
UNiversality in sin brings universality in suffering 359 Unmercifulness a
great sin, 31, and 466 Unrighteous dealing sinful 466
W.
War, sent for sin, 90. See seventeen sins which bring it, 92. it is sad 380
Wheat, how the godly are like it, 553 Warning, God gives 108, 295 Will Worship
sinful, 29, 256, 503 Willing we must be in Gods Service 58 Wicked men are like
beasts, 10. they are the Pests of a place, 19. they grow worse and worse, 26,
27. they are fearful, 518. God records their wickedness, 473 Winds, a blessing,
119, 120, 121 Woe, what it signifies, 291. Ministers must sometimes denounce
woes 294 Word of God is Critical 356 Worldly men are industrious for the world
465, 468
Y.
YOung men cut off for sin, 93
A Table of the Texts explained.
Pages Genesis 7.19. 118 Deuteronomy. 24.19, 20. 388 Josh. 14.12. 208 Judge. 9.13 227 1 Samuel 4.18. 315 1 Chronicles. 22.8. 91 Job. 1. ult. 346 23.10. 134 23.12. 487 Psalm.
31.15. 332 62.1. 346 91.10. 89 106.7. 16 110.3. 58 139.7. to 13. 521, 222 Prove.
4.14. 25 24.16. 505 25.3. 129 Eccles. 11.1, 2. 49.50 Isa 1.5. 107 5.1. 353
9.17. 93 38.1. 224 40.15, 16, 17. 536, 537 46.6. 321 Ier. 5.1. 6, 7 5.22. 531
5.24. 71 16.5. 330 Ezekiel. 42. ult. 205 Dan. 9.23. 185 Micha 6.8. 45 Hag. 2.9.
565 Mat. 23.37. 106 Luke 6.30. 51 6.38. 34 16. ult. 97 19.8. 32 Romans 5.7. 34
12.9. 210 1 Cor. 9.19, 20. 6 2 Cor. 9.10. 36, 37 Gal. 1.6. 6 Colos. 3.12. 48 1 Timothy 6.19. 36 James 2.19. 66 Philem. 2. 29, 30 2 Pet. 1.19. 97 Revel. 14.8. 329
Questions Resolved.
1 IN what Cases a man may seek to please men? p. 6 2 Whether Churches be
holier than other places? p. 25 3 Whether good intentions be a sufficient
warrant for evil actions? p. 27, 28 4 Whether wandering Beggars may be releeved?
p. 52 5 Whether Judicial-Astrology be unlawful? p. 72, 73 6 Whether a man may
fly in time of Pestilence? p. 87 7 Whether a godly man may dye of the Plague?
p. 89 8 Whether we may use the name of Monday, Tuesday, etc. p. 168 9 Whether
costly Ointments may be used by any? p. 305, 306 10 When Music is unlawful? p.
310, 311, etc. 11 Whether Relics of Saints may be worshipped? p. 345 12
Whether we may rejoice in the destruction of the wicked? p. 142 13 Whether
Enclosures are lawful? p. 461 14 Whether VVeek-day Lectures be lawful? p. 466.
and 497 15 Whether men may swear by Idols? p. 503 16 Whether Rulers may be
called the Heads of a Land? p. 516
Courteous Reader, these Books are printed for, and sold by Henry Mortlock, at
the sign of the Phoenix in Paul's Churchyard, near the Little North-door.
Folioes.
A Commentary upon the whole Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, wherein the text
is learnedly and fruitfully opened, with a Logical Analysis, spiritual, and
holy Observations, Confutation of Arminianism and Popery. By Mr. Paul Bain.

A Commentary on the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, and the Major Prophets.
By John Trap, M. A.

Quariose.
An Exposition of the Prophecy of Ezekiel. By William Green-hil.

Some Sermons preached upon several occasions. By Peter Sterry.

A way to Zion, sought out and found for Believers to walk in. By Daniel King
Preacher of the Word near Coventry. Funebria Florae or The Downfall of
May-Games. By Tho. Hall, B. D. and Pastor of Kings-Norton in Worcestershire.

The loathsomness of long Hair, or, A Treatise wherein you have the Question
stated, many Arguments against it produced, and the most material arguments for
it refelled, and answered, with an Appendix against Painting, Spots, naked
Breasts, etc. by the same Author.

Samue in Sackcloth, or a Sermon assaying to restrain our bitter Animosities,
and commending a spirit of moderation and right constitution of Soul, and
behavior toward our Brethren, upon 1 Samuel 15.35.

Large Octavoes.
A Treatise of the Divine Promises, in five Books: In the first, A general
Description of their Nature, Kinds, Excellency, Right Use, Properties, and the
Persons to whom they belong: In the four last. A Declaration of the Covenant it
self, the bundle and body of all the Promises, and the special Promises
likewise which concern a man's self, or others, both temporal, spiritual, and
eternal. By Edw. Leigh. M. A. of Magdalen-Hall in Oxford.

The Hypocrites Ladder, or Looking-glass, or a Discourse of the dangerous and
destructive nature of Hypocrisy, the reigning and provoking sin of this age;
wherein is showed how far the Hypocrite, or formal Professor may go toward
Heaven, yet utterly perish, by three Ladders of sixty steps of his Ascending.
By John Sheffield, Minister of the Word at Swithins, London.

An Improvement of the Sea, upon the nine Nautical Verses* in the 107. Psalm,
wherein among other things you have a very full and delightful Description of
all those many various and multitudinous Objects, which they behold in their
Travels (through the Lords Creation) both on Sea, in Sea, and on Land, viz. All
sorts and kinds of Fish, Fowl, and Beasts, whether wild, or tame; all sorts of
Trees and Fruit; all sorts of People, Cities, Towns, and Countries. By Daniel
Pell, Preacher of the Word.

A Cavear against Seducers in a Sermon preached by Richard Stand-fast, Rector
of Christ-Church in Bristol. Together with the Blind man's Meditations, by the
same Author.

A Treatise of Divine Meditation, by that faithful Servant of Jesus Christ John
Ball, late Minister of the Gospel at Whitmore in Staffordshire, published by
Mr. Simeon Ash, preacher of the Gospel at Austins, London.


