THE REMEDY OF COFFEEHOUSE: OR, A TREATISE OF Contentation. in whatsoever
Condition. Fitted for sad and troubled Times.

By Jos. Hall D. D. and B. N.

The Fourth Edition.

Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be
content. 12. I know how to be abased, and I know how to abound; Every where,
and in all things, I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to
abound and to want. LONDON: Printed by G. Larkin for Obadiah Blagrave at the
Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1684.

Vera Effigies Reverendi Doni: Josephi Hall Norwici nuper Episco:



TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Grace and Peace.
WHat can be more seasonable, then at this time, when all the world is sick of
Coffeehouse, to give counsels and Receipts of Contentation: Perhaps the
Patient will think it a time ill chosen for Physic, in the midst of a Fit: But
in this case we must do as we may. I confess, I had rather have stayed till the
Paroxism were happily over; that so the humors being somewhat settled, I might
hope for the more kindly operation of this wholesome Medicine. But, partly my age
and weakness, despairing to outlive the public distemper; and partly my
judgment (crossing the vulgar opinion for the season of some kind of Receipts)
have now put me upon this safe and useful Prescription: God is my witness, that
I wrote this in the depth of mine own afflictions, (the particulars whereof, it
were unseasonable to trouble the world withal) as one that meant to make my
self my own Patient, by enjoining my self that course of remedies, that I
prescribe to others, and, as one, who by the powerful working of Gods Spirit
within me, labor to find my heart framed to those holy dispositions which I
wish and recommend to every Christian soul, If there be no remedy but the worst
of outward troubles must afflict us; it shall be happy yet, if we may find
inward peace in our bosoms: which shall be, if we can reconcile our selves to
our offended God; and calm our spirits to a meek undergoing of those
sufferings, which the divine Providence has thought fit to measure forth unto
us: This is the main drift of this ensuing labor. Now the same God, who has,
in these blustering times, put into my heart these quiet thoughts of holy
Contentation, bless them in every hand that shall receive them and make them
effectual to the good of every soul, that shall now, and hereafter entertain
them: that so their gracious proficiency may, in the day of the appearance of
our Lord Jesus, add to the joy of my account; Who am the unworthiest of the
servants of God, and his Church,

J. N.

THE CONTENTS OF the several Sections following.
Sect. I. THe excellency of Contentation; and how it is to be had. p. 1. II.
The contrariety of estates wherein it is to be exercised. 3 III. Who they are
that know not how to want, and be abased. 7 IV. Who they are that know how to
want. 14 V. Considerations leading to Contentation; and first the consideration
of the fickleness of life, and of all earthly commodities; Honor, Beauty,
Strength, etc. p. 17 VI. Considerations of the unsatisfying condition of these
worldly things. 28 VII. The danger of the too much estimation of these earthly
comforts. 33 VIII. The consideration of the divine Providence, ordering, and
overruling all events. 36 IX. The consideration of the worse condition of
others. 41 X. The consideration of the inconveniences of great estates; and
therein first their cares. 46 XI. The danger of the distempers, both bodily,
and spiritual, that follow great means; and the torment in parting with them.
p. 53 XII. Consideration of the benefits of Poverty. 59 XIII. Consideration of
how little will suffice Nature. 65 XIV. Consideration of the inconveniences
and miseries of coffeehouse. 70 XV. The gracious vicissitudes of Gods
favors and afflictions. 77 XVI. Consid. of the great examples of Contentation,
both without and within the Church of God. 85 XVII. Contentment in death it
self. 96 XVIII. The miseries and inconveniences of the continued conjunction
of the soul and body. 104 XIX. Holy dispositions fer contentment; the first
whereof, Humility. 111 XX. 2. Self-resignation. 119 XXI. 3. The true inward
riches. 126 XXII. Holy resolutions: and 1. That the present estate is best for
us. 131 XXIII. 2. Resolution, to abate our desires. 139 XXIV. 3. Resolution, to
inure our selves to digest smaller discontentments. 147 XXV. 4. Resolution, to
be frequent and fervent in Prayer. 155 XXVI. The difficulty of knowing how to
abound; and the ill consequences of the not knowing it. 158
THE REMEDY OF Coffeehouse.
SECT. I The excellency of Contentation; and how it is to be had.
IF there be any happiness to be found upon earth, it is in that which we call
Contentation: This is a flower that grows not in every Garden: The great Doctor
of the Gentiles tells us that he had it; I have learned (says he) in what
estate soever I am, Phil. 4. 11.
therewith to be content; I know how to be abased, and I know how to abound:
Lo, he could not have taken out this lesson if he had not learned it; and he
could not have learnt it of any other then his Master in heaven: What face
soever Philosophy may set upon it, all Morality can not reach it; neither could
his learned Gamaliel, at whose feet he sat, have put this skill into him; no,
he learned it since he was a Christian; and now professes it; So as it
appears, there is a divine art of Contentation to be attained in the School of
Christ; which whosoever has learnt, has taken a degree in heaven, and now
knows how to be happy both in want, and abundance.

SECT. II. The contrariety of Estates wherein Contentation is to be exercised.
THe nature of man is extremely querulous; we know not what we would have, and
when we have it, we know not how to like it: we would be happy, yet we would
not die; we would live long, yet we would not be old; we would be kept in
order, yet we would not be chastised with affliction; we are loath to work, yet
are weary of doing nothing; we have no list to stir, yet find long sitting
painful; Si sedeas requies est magna laboris; Si multum sedeas, labor est.
Tert. Carm.
we have no mind to leave our bed, yet find it a kind of sickness to lie long;
we would mary, but would not be trobled with household cares; when once we are
married, we wish we had kept single; If therefore grace have so mastered nature
in us, as to render us content with what ever condition, we have attained to no
small measure of perfection.

Which way soever the wind blows, the skilful Mariner knows how to turn his
sails to meet it; the contrariety of estates to which we lie open here, gives
us different occasions for the exercise of Contentation: I cannot blame their
choice, who desire a middle estate betwixt want and abundance, and to be free
from those inconveniences which attend both extremes: Wise Solomon was of this
diet; Pro. 30 8.
Give me neither poverty nor riches: feed me with the food of my meet
allowance; Lo, he that had all, desired rather to have but enough: and if any
estate can afford contentment in this life, Senec. de Tranquil.
surely this is it, in the judgment and experience of the wisest Heathen* But
forasmuch as this equal poise is hardly attainable by any man, and is more
proper for our wishes, and speculation, then for our hopes; true wisdom must
teach us so to compose our selves that we may be fit to entertain the
discontentments and dangers of those excesses, and defects, which we cannot but
meet with in the course of our mortal life: And surely we shall find that both
extremes are enemies to this good temper of the soul: prosperity may discompose
us, as well as an adverse condition. The Sunshine may be as troublesome to the
traveller as the wind or rain; neither know I whether is more hard to manage of
the two, a dejected estate, or a prosperous; whether we may be more incomodated
with a resty horse, or with a tired one: Let us begin with that which nature is
wont to think most difficult; that contrary to the practice of learners, we may
try to take out the hardest lesson first. Let us therefore learn in the first
place how to want.

SECT. III. How many do not know how to want.
COuld we teach men how not to want, we should have Disciples enough; every man
seeks to have, and hates to lack: could we give an Antidote against poverty, it
would be too precious: And why can we not teach men even this lesson too? Psalm.
23. 1.
The Lord is my shepherd, says David therefore can I lack nothing and most
sweetly elsewhere, O fear the Lord ye that be his Saints; Psalm. 34 9, 10.
for they that fear him, lack nothing; The Lions do lack and suffer hunger; but
they which seek the Lord shall want no manner of thing that is good; Let God be
true, and every man a liar, Certainly, if we were not wanting to God in our
fear of him, in our faithful reliance upon him, in our conscionable seeking of
him, he whose the earth is, and the fullness of it would not suffer our careful
endevors to go weeping away: But if it so fall out that his most wise
providence finds it better for us to be held short in our worldly estate, (as
it may be the great Physician sees it most for our health to be kept fasting)
it is no less worth our learning to know how to want; For there is many a one
that wants, but knows not how to want, and therefore his need makes him both
offensive and miserable.

There are those that are poor and proud; Eccles. 25. 2.
one of the wise man's 3 abominations; foolish Laodiceans that bear themselves
for rich, Rev. 3. 17.
increased with goods, and lacking nothing, when they are no other then
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; These men know not how
to want, their heart is too big for their purse; and surely pride, though every
where odious, yet does no where so ill as in rags.

There are those that are poor and envious; looking with an evil eye on the
better fare of others; as surely this vice dwells more commonly in Cottages then
Palaces. How displeasedly does the beggar look upon the larger alms of his
neighbor; grudging to another what ever falls besides himself, and misliking
his own dole, because the next has more; Mat. 20. 15.
whose eye with the discontented laborers, is evil, because his master is
good; Neither do these men know how to want.

There are those that want distrustfully; measuring the merciful provision of
the Almighty by the line of their own sense; as the Samaritan Peer, when in the
extremity of a present famine he heard the Prophet foretell a sudden plenty;
Behold, 2 Kings 7. 2.
if the Lord would make windows in heaven, might this thing be?

There are those that want impatiently; repining at Gods dealing with them, and
making their own impotent anger guilty of a further addition to their misery;
as the distressed King of Israel, in a desperate sense of that grievous dearth;
2 King. 6. 33.
Behold, this evil is of the Lord, what should I wait on the Lord any longer?
And those wretched ones, who when the fourth Angel had poured out his vial upon
the Sun, being scorched with the extremity of the heat, blasphemed the God of
heaven: Rev, 36. 9. 11.
In this kind was that sinful techiness of Jonah: when I see a poor worm that
has put it self out of the cool cell of the earth wherein it was lodged, and
now being beaten upon by the Sunbeams, lies wrigling upon the bare path,
turning it self every way in vain; and not finding so much as the shade of a
leaf to cover it; I cannot but think of that fretting Prophet; when wanting the
protection of his gourd he found himself scalded with that strong reflection;
and looking up wrathfully toward that Sun from whom he smarted, could say to
the God that made it, Jonah 4 9.
I do well to be angry, even to the death.

Lastly, there are those that are poor and dishonest even out of the very
suggestion of their want; It was the danger hereof that made Agur the Son of
Jakeh pray against penury; Lest I be poor, Pro. 30. 5.
and steal: and (by for swearing it) take the name of God in vain.

SECT. IV. Who they are that know how to want.
THese and perhaps others do and must want, but in the mean time they do that
which they know not how to do; there is a skill in wanting which they have not;
Those only know how to want, that have learnt to frame their mind to their
estate; like to a skilful Musician, that can let down his strings a peg lower
when the tune requires it; or like to some cunning Spagirick, that can intend
or remit the heat of his furnace according to occasion. Those, who when they
must be abased, can stoop submissly; like to a gentle reed, which when the wind
blows stiff, yields every way; those that in an humble obeisance can lay
themselves low at the foot of the Almighty, and put their mouth in the dust;
that can patiently put their necks under the yoke of the Highest; and can say
with the Prophet, Jer. 10. 19.
Truly this is my sorrow, and I must bear it; Those that can smile upon their
afflictions, rejoicing in tribulation, singing in the Jail with Paul and Silas
at midnight; Lastly, those that can improve misery to an advantage, being the
richer for their want, bettered with evils, strengthened with infirmities: and
can truly say to the Almighty I know that of very faithfulness thou have
afflicted me; Never could they have comne out so pure metal, if they had not
passed under the hand of the Refiner; never had they proved so toward children,
if they had not been beholden to the rod: These are they that know how to want,
and to be abased; and have effectually learned to be content with the meanest
condition: to which happy temper that we may attain, there will be use of 1.
Certain Considerations; 2. Certain Dispositions: 3. Certain Resolutions: These
three shall be as the grounds, and rules of this our Divine Art of Contentation.

SECT. V. The Consideration of the fickleness of life, and all earthly
Commodities.
THE first Consideration shall be of the just valuation of all these Earthly
things; which doubtless is such, as that the wise Christian cannot but set a
Low price upon them, in respect first, of their transitoriness; secondly, of
their insufficiency of satisfaction: thirdly, the danger of their fruition.

At the best, they are but glassy stuff, which the finer it is, is so much more
britle; yea, what other then those gay bubbles, which Children are wont to
raise from the mixed soap and spittle of their Walnutshell, which seems to
represent pleasing colors, but in their flying up instantly vanish? There is
no remedy; either they must leave us, or we must leave them. Well may we say
that of the Psalmist, which Campian was reported to have often in his mouth; My
soul is continually in my hands; and who knows whether it will not expire in
our next breathing? How many have shut their eyes in an healthful sleep, who
have waked in another World? We give too large scope to our account, whilst we
reckon seven years for a Life; a shorter time will serve; whilst we find the
revolution of less then half those years to have dispatched Galba Otho
Vitellius Ael, Pertinax Didius. Anno D. 1275. 1276. Gregor. 10 Innocent 5
Hadrian 5 Johan. 20 vel 21 Nicolaus 3*
five Caesar's, and five Popes; nay, who can assure himself of the next moment?
It is our great weakness, if we do not look upon every day, as our last; why
should we think our selves in a better condition, then the chosen vessel, 1
Cor. 15. 31.
who deeply protested to dye daily? What a poor complaint was that of the great
Conqueror of the Jews, Titus Vespasian, who putting his head out of his sick
litter, querulously accused Heaven, that he must dye, and had not deserved it;
when he might have found it guilt enough that he was a man; and therefore by
the very sentence of nature condemned I know not whether to live or dye.

Indeed, what can we cast our eyes upon, that does not put us in mind of our
frailty? All our fellow creatures dye for us, and by us: The day dies into
night; the trees and all other plants of the earth suffer a kind of Autumnal
mortality; the face of that common Mother of us all, does at the least in
Winter, resemble Death; But if the Angel of Death (as the Jews term him) shall
respite, and reprive us for the time; alas! how easily may we have over-lived
our comforts? If Death do not snatch us away from them, how many thousand means
of casualties, of enemies, may snatch them away from us? He that was the
greatest man of all the Sons of the East, within a few days became a spectacle
and proverb of penury, which still sticks by him, and so shall do to the worlds
end, As poor as Job, Gen 15. 10


The rich plain of Jordan, which overnight was as the Garden of the Lord, is
in the morning covered over with brimston, Deuteronomy. 29. 23.
and salt, and burning; Will thou cause thine eyes to fly upon that which is
not? says wise Solomou: Prove. 23. 5.
For Riches certainly make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward
Heaven: if we have wings of desire to fly after them, they are nimbler of
flight to outstrip us and leave us no less miserable in their loss, then we
were eager in their pursuit.

As for Honor, what a mere shadow it is? upon the least cloud interposed, it
is gone, and leaves no mention where it was: The same Sun sees Haman adored in
the Persian Court, like some earthly Deity; and like some base vermin waving
upon his Gibbet: Do we see the great, and glorious Cleopatra, shining in the
pompous Majesty of Egypt? stay but a while, and ye shall see her in the dust,
and her two Children, whom she proudly styled the Sun, and the Moon, driven
like miserable Captives, before the Chariot of their Conqueror: Psalm. 29. 4.
Man being in honor abides not, says the Psalmist, he perishes, but his
greatness (as more frail then he) is oftentimes dead and buried before him, and
leaves him the surviving executor of his own shame.

It was easy for the captive Prince, to observe in the Chariot-wheel of his
Victor, that when one spoak rose up, another went down and both these in so
quick a motion, that it was scarce distinguished by the Eye.

Well therefore may we say of Honor, as Ludovicus Vives said of Scholastical
Divinity: Ludo. Vives in 3. De Civit censura notatus Vellosillo.
Cui fumas est pro fundamento: It is built upon smoke, how can it be kept from
vanishing?

As for Beauty, what is it but a dash of Natures tincture laid upon the skin,
which is soon washed off with a little sickness? what but a fair blossom, that
drops off, so soon as the fruit offers to succeed it? what but a flower, which
with one hot Sun gleam weltreth and falls? He that had the choice of a thousand
Faces, Prove. ult. Penult.
could say, Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is Vanity

Lastly, for Strength, and vigor of Body, if it could be maintained till our
old age, alas, how soon is that upon us, ere we be aware! how does it then
shrivel our flesh and loosen our sinews, and cripple our joints! Milo, when he
looked upon his late brawny arms, and saw them now grown lanck and writhled,
lets fall tears, and bewraies more weakness of mind, then he had before bodily
strength: but how often does sickness prevent the debilitations of age; pulling
his strongest Man upon the knees, and making him fess, that youth, as well as
childhood, is Vanity.

As for Pleasure, it dies in the birth, Ecc. 11. 10.
and is not therefore worthy to come into this bill of Mortality.

Do we then upon sad consideration see and feel the manifest transitoriness of
Life, Riches, Honor, Beauty, Strength, Pleasure, and whatever else can be dear
and precious to us in this world, and can we dote upon them so, as to be too
much dejected with our parting from them? Mat. 6. 28.
Our Savior bids us consider the Lillies of the field? And he that made both
tells us, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these
Surely, full well are they worth our considering. But if those Beauties could
be as permanent, as they are glorious, how would they carry away our hearts
with them? Now, their fading condition justly abates of their value; would we
not smile at the weakness of that man, that should weep and howl, for the
falling of this Tulip, or that Rose, abandoning all comfort for the loss of
that, which he knows must flourish but his month? It is for Children to cry for
the falling of their house of Cards, or the miscariage of that painted gewgaw,
which the next shower would have defaced. Wise Christians know how to apprize
good things according to their continuance, and can therefore set their hearts
only upon the invisible Comforts of a better Life, as knowing that the things
which are not seen, are Eternal.

SECT VI. Consideration of the unsatisfying condition of all worldly things.
BUt were these earthly things exempted from that fickleness, which the God of
Nature has condemned them unto, were they (the very memory whereof perishes
with their satiety) as lasting, as they are brittle, yet what comfort could
they yield for the Soul to rest in? Alas! their efficacy is too short to reach
unto a true Contentation; yea, if the best of them were perpetuated unto us,
upon the fairest conditions, that this Earth can allow how intolerable
tedious would it prove in the fruition? Say that God were pleased to protract
my life to the length of the age of the first founders of Mankind, and should
(in this state of body) add hundreds of years to the days of my pilgrimage:
Woe is me, how weary should I be of my self, and of the World? I that now
complain of the load of seventy one years, how should I be tired out, ere I
could arrive at the age of Parre? but before I could climb up to the third
Century of Johannes de Temporihus, how often should I call for death, not to
take up, but to take off my burden, and with it, my self? But if any, or all
these earthly blessings could be freed from those grievances, wherewith they
are commonly tempered, yet how little satisfaction could the Soul find in them;
What are these outward things, but very luggage, which may load our backs, but
can not lighten our Hearts? Great, and wise Solomon, that had the full command
of them all, cries out, Vanity of Vanities, and a greater Monarch then he shuts
up the Scene with, I have been all things, and am never the better: All these
are of too narrow an extent, to fill the capacious soul of Man; the desires
whereof are enlarged with enjoying, so as the more it has, the less it is
satisfied, neither indeed can it be otherwise; The Eye, and the Ear are but the
Purveyors for the Heart, if therefore the Eye be not satisfied with seeing, nor
the ear with hearing, how shall the heart say, It is enough? Now, who would
suffer himself to be too much disquieted with the loss of that, which may vex
him, but cannot content him? We do justly smile at the folly of that vain Lord,
of whom Petrarch speaks, who when an Horse which he dearly loved, was sick,
laid that Steed of his, on a silken bed, with a wrought pillow under his head,
and caused himself (then afflicted with the Gout) to be carried on his servants
shoulders to visit that dear patient; and upon his decease, mourned solemnly
for him, as if it had been his Son. We have laughed at the fashion of the Girls
of Holland, who having made to themselves gay and large Babies, and laid them
in a curious cradle, fain them to sicken and dye, and celebrate their funeral
with much passion: So fond are we, if having med to our selves imaginary
Contentments here, in the World, we give way to immoderate grief in their
miscarriage.

SECT. VII. The danger of the love of these earthly comforts.
NEither are these earthly comforts more defective in yiedling full
satisfaction to the soul, then dangerous in their over-dear fruition: For too
much delight in them, robs us of more solid Contentments; The World is a
cheating gamester, suffering us to win at the first, that at last he may go
away with all, Our very Table may be made our snare; Psa. 69. 22
and those things which should have been for our wealth, may be unto us an
occasion of falling: Leo the fourth Emperor of Constantinople, delighted
extremely in precious stones, with these he imbellishes his Crown, which being
worn close to his Temples, strikes such a cold into his head, that causes his
bane yea, how many with the too much love of these outward things have lost,
not their lives only, but their Souls? No man can be at once the Favorite of
God and the World; as that Father said truly: or as our Savior in fuller
terms, No man can serve two Masters, GOD and Mammon: Shortly, the World may be
a dangerous enemy, a sure friend it cannot be.

If therefore we shall like wise men, value things at their due prizes, since
we are convinced in our selves, that all these earthly comforts are so
transitory in their Nature, so unsatisfying in their use, and so dangerous in
their enjoying, how little reason have we to be too much affected with
foregoing them? Our blood is dear to us, as that wherein our life is, yet if we
find that it is either infected, or distempered, we do willingly part with it
in hope of better health; How much more, with those things which are farther
from us, and less concerning us?

SECT. VIII. Consideration of the Divine Providence ordering all events.
THe second Consideration is of that All-wise Providence which orders all
events both in Heaven and Earth, allotting to every Creature his due
proportion* so overruling all things to the best, that we could not want, if
he knew it better for us to abound: This Station he has set us in, this
measure he has shared out to us whose will is the rule of good; what we have
therefore, cannot but be best for us. The World is a large Chess-board, every
man has his place assigned him: one is a King, another a Knight, another a
Pawn, and each has his several motion, without this variety, there could be no
game played; A skilful Player will not stir one of these Chips, but with
intention of an advantage; neither should any of his men either stand, or move,
if in any other part of that Checker, it might be in more hope to win.

There is no estate in this World which can be universally good for all, one
man's meat may be another man's medicine, and a third man's poison; A Turk finds
health and temper in that Opium, which wonld put one of us into our last sleep.
Should the Plowman be set to the Gentleman's fare, this Chicken, that
Partridge or Phesant, would (as overslight food) be too soon turned over, and
leave his empty stomach to quarrel for stronger provision: Beef is for his
diet; and if any sauce needs besides his hunger, Garlic: Every man has, as a
body so a mind of his own; what one loves is abhorred of another; the great
Housekeeper of the world knows how to sit every palate with that which either
is or should be agreeable to it, for salubrity, if not for pleasure: Lay before
a Child a Knife, and a Rod, and bid him take his choice, his hand will be
straight upon that edge tool, especially, if it be a little gilded and
glittering; but the Parent knows the Rod to be more safe sor him, and more
beneficial; We are ill carvers for our selves, he that made us, knows what is
fit for us, either for time, or measure, without his Providence not an hair can
fall from our heads; We would have bodily health, I cannot blame us; what is
the world to us without it? He whose we are, knows sickness to be for the
health of the Soul; whether should we in true judgment desire? we wish to live,
who can blame us? life is sweet, but if our Maker have ordained, that nothing
but Death can render us glorious, what madness is it to stick at the condition?
Oh our gross infidelity, if we do not believe that great Arbiter of the World,
infinitely wise to know what is best for us, infinitely merciful to will what
he knows best, infinitely powerful to do what he will! And if we be thus
persuaded, how can we, but in matter of good, say with blessed Mary: Behold thy
Servant, best unto me according to thy Word: And in matter of evil, with good
Eli: It is the Lord, let him do what he will?

SECT. IX. Consideration of the worse Condition of others.
IN the third place, it will be requisite for us to cast our eyes upon the
worse condition of others, perhaps better deserving then our selves for if we
shall whine and complain of that weight, which others do run away cheerfully
withal, the fault will appear to be not in the heaviness of the load, but in
the weakness of the bearer: If I be discontented with a mean dwelling, another
man lives merrily in a thatched Cottage; If I dislike my plain fare, Dan. 1,
12. 13.
the four captive children feed fair and fat with pulse and water. If I be
plundered of my rich suits, I see a more cheerful heart under a russet Coat,
then great Princes have under purple Robes, If I do gently languish upon my
sick bed, I see others patient under the torments of the Cholick, or Stone, or
Strangury: If I be clapped up within four walls, I hear Petronous profess, he had
rather be in Prison with Cato, then at liberty with Caesar: I hear Paul and
Silas sing like Nightingales in their cages: Am I sad, because I am childless?
I hear many a parent wish himself so: Am I banished from my home? I meet with
many of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11. 38.
wandering about in Sheepskins, in Goat Skins, in deserts, and in mountains,
and in dens, and caves of earth: What am I that I should speed better then the
miserablest of thee patients? What had they done, that they should fare worse
then I? If I have little, others have less; If I feel pain, some others,
torture: If their sufferings be just, my forbearances are merciful; my
provisions to theirs, liberal: It is no ill counsel therefore, and not a little
conducing to a contented want, that great persons should sometimes step aside
into the homely Cottages of the poor, and see their mean stuff, course fare,
hard lodgings, worthless utensils, miserable shifts; and to compare it with
their own delicate and nauseating superfluities: Our great and learned King
Alfred was the better all his life after, for his hidden retiredness in a poor
Neatheards Cabin, where he was sheltred, and sometimes also chidden by that
homely Dame: Neither was it an ill wish of that wise Man, that all great
Princes might first have had some little taste, what it is to want, that so
their own experience might render them more sensible of the complaints of
others.

Man, though he be absolute in himself, and stand upon his own botom, yet is he
not a little wrought upon by examples, and comparisons with others; for in them
he sees what he is, or may be, since no events are so confined to some special
subjects, as that they may not be incident to other men.

Merit is a poor plea for any man's exemption, whilst our sinful infirmities lay
us all open to the rod of divine Justice: and if these dispensations be merely
out of favor, why do I rather grudge at a lesser misery, then bless God for my
freedom from a greater judgment? Those therefore that suffer more then I, have
cause of more humbling, and I that suffer less then they, have cause of more
thankfulness; even mitigations of punishment are new mercies, so as others
torments do no other then heighten my obligations, let me not therefore repine
to be favorably miserable.

SECT. X. Consideration of the inconveniences of great estates: and first of
their cares, that they expose us to envy, and then macerate us with cares.
THe fourth Consideration shall be of the inconniences which do oftentimes
attend a fullness of estate; such, and so many as may well make us sit down
content with a little; whereof, let the first be envy: a mischief not to be
avoided of the great; This shadow follows that body inseparably; All the curs
in the street are ready to fall upon that dog that goes away with the bone;
and every man has a Cudgel to fling at a wel-loaded Tree; whereas a mean
condition is no eyesore to any beholder: Low shrubs are not wont to be
stricken with Lightning, but tall Oaks and Cedars feel their flames; Whiles
David kept his fathers sheep at home, he might sing sweetly to his Harp in the
fields, without any disturbance: But when he once comes to the Court, and finds
applause and greatness creep upon him, now emulation, despite and malice, dog
him close at the heels wheresoever he goes: Let him leave the Court, and flee
into the Wilderness, there these bloodhounds follow him in hot suit; Let him
run into the Land of the Philistines, there they find him out, and chase him to
Ziklag; and if at the last, he has climbed up to his just Throne, and there
hopes to breathe him after his tedious pursuit, even there he meets with more
unquietness then in his desert, and notwithstanding all his Royalty, Ps. 132. 1.
at last cries out, Lord remember David, and all his troubles: How many have we
known, whom their wealth has betrayed, and made innocent malefactors? who
might have slept securely upon a hard bolster, and in a poor estate outlived
both their Judges, and Accusers. Besides, on even ground a fall may be
harmless; but he that falls from on high, cannot escape bruising: He therefore
that can think the benefits of Eminence can countervail the dangers which haunt
greatness, let him affect to overtop others; for me, let me rather be safely
low, then high with peril: After others envy, the next attendant upon
greatness is our own cares; how do these disquiet the Beds, and sauce the
Tables of the wealthy? breaking their sleeps, galling their sides, embittering
their pleasure, shortning their days: How bitterly do we find the holiest men
complaining of those distractions, which have attended their earthly
promotions? Nazianzen cries out of them as no other then the bane of the Soul;
G. Naz. Carm. de calam. suis.
and that other Gregory, whom we are wont to call the last of the best Bishops
of Rome, and the first of the bad, passionately bewails this clogge of his high
preferment: I confess says he, Greg, l. 7.
that whiles I am outwardly advanced, Epi. 12. 7.
I am inwardly fallen lower: this burdensome honor depresses me, and
innumerable cares disquiet me on all sides; my mind (grown almost stupid with
those temporal cares which are ever barking in mine ears) is forced upon
earthly things; thus he: There are indeed cares which as they may be used, may
help us on toward Heaven; In vita Melanct.
such as Malancthon owns to his Camerarius; My cares, says he, send me to my
prayers, and my prayers dispel my cares; but those anxieties which commonly
wait upon greatness, distract the mind, and impare the body.

It is an observation of the Jewish Doctors, that Joseph the Patriarch was of a
shorter life then the rest of his brethren; and they render this reason of it,
for that his cares were as much greater, as his place was higher: It was not an
unfit comparison of him, Shicardus.
who resembled a Coronet upon the Temples, to a Paile upon the Head; We have
seen those who have carried full and heavy vessels on the top of their heads,
but then they have walked evenly, and erect under that load; we never saw any
that could dance under such a weight; if either they bend, or move vehemently,
all their carriage is spilled: Earthly greatness is a nice thing, and requires
so much chariness in the managing, as the contentment of it cannot requite; He
is worthy of honey, that desires to lick it off from thorns; for my part, I am
of the mind of him who professed, not to care for those favors, that compelled
him to lie waking.

SECT. XI. Danger of distemper, both bodily and spiritual, that commonly
follows great means: and torment in parting with them.
IN the next place, I see greatness not more pale, and worn with cares, then
swollen up, and sickly with excess; Too much oil poured in, puts out the Lamp;
Superfluity is guilty of a world of diseases, which the spare diet of poverty
is free from; How have we seen great men's eyes surfeited at that full Table,
whereof their palate could not taste, and they have risen discontentedly
glutted with the sight of that, which their stomach was incapable to receive;
and when, not giving so much law to nature, as to put over their gluttonous
meal, (their wanton appetite charging them with a new variety of curious
morsels, and lavish cups) they find themselves overtaken with feaverous
distempers, the Physician must succeed the Cook; and a second sickness must
cure the first: But alas, these bodily indispositions are nothing to those
spiritual evils, which are incident unto secular greatness. It is a true word
of S. Ambrose, Ambros. (...).
seconded by common experience, Epist. 29.
that an high pitch of honor is seldom held up without sin; And S. Jerome
tells us, Hieron.
it was a common Proverb in his time, Ep. ad Hedibium.
That a rich man either is wicked, or a wicked man's heir: Not, but that rich
Abraham may have a bosom for poor Lazarus to rest in, and many great Kings have
bin great Saints in Heaven, and there is still room for many more; but that
commonly great temptations follow great estates, and oftentimes overtake them;
neither is it for nothing, that riches are by our blessed Savior styled the
Mammon of Iniquity, and wealth is by the holy Apostle branded with
deceitfulness; 1. Tim. 6.
such as cheat many millions of their Souls.

Add unto these (if you please) the torment of parting with that pelf, and
honor, which has so grossly bewitched us; such as may well verify that which
Lucius long since wrote to the Bishops of France, Ep. Lucii ad Episc.
and Spain, Gall. and Hisp.
that one hours mischief makes us forget the pleasure of the greatest excess.
I marvel not at our English Jew, of whom our story speaks, that would rather
part with his teeth, then his bags: how many have we known that have poured out
their life together with their gold, as men that would not outlive their
earthen god; yea (woe is me) how many souls have been lost in the sin of
getting, and in the quarrel of losing this thick clay, as the Prophet terms it?
But lastly, that which is yet the sorest of all the inconveniences, is the
sadness of the reckoning, which must come in after these plentiful
entertainments; for there is none of all our cares here, but must be billed up;
and great Accounts must have long Audits: how hard a thing it is in this case,
to have an Omnia aeque? In the failing whereof, how is the Conscience affected?
I know not whether more tormented, or tormenting the miserable soul; so as the
great Owner is but (as witty Bromiard compares him) like a weary Jade, which
all the day long has been laboring under the load of a great treasure; and at
night lies down with a galled back.

By that time therefore we have summed up all, and find here envy, cares,
sicknesses both of body and soul, torment in parting with, and more torment in
reckoning for, these earthly greatnesses; we shall be convinced of sufficient
reason to be well apaid with their want.

SECT. XII. Consideration of the benefits of Poverty.
LEt the fifth Consideration be, the benefits of Poverty; such, and so great,
as are enough to make us in love with having nothing.

For first, what an advantage is it, to be free from those gnawing cares, which
(like Tityus his Vulture) feed upon the Heart of the Great? Here is a man that
sleeps (Aethiopian-like) with his doors open; no dangers threaten him, no
fears break his rest; he starts not out of his bed at midnight, and cries
Thieves, he feels no rack of ambitious thoughts, he frets not at the
disappointment of his false hopes, he cracks not his brain with hazardous
plots, he mis-doubts no undermining of emulous rivals, no traps of hollow
friendship, but lives securely in his homely Cottage, quietly enjoying such
provision, as Nature and honest Industry furnish him withal; for his drink,
the neighbor Spring saves him the charge of his Excise; and when his better
earnings have fraught his trencher with a warm and pleasing morsel, and his cup
with a stronger liquor, how cheerfully is he affected with that happy variety;
and in the strength of it digests many of his thinner meals?

Meals usually sawced with an healthful hunger, wherein no incocted Crudities
oppress Nature, and cherish disease: Here are no Gouts, no Dropsies, no
Hypochondriack passions, no Convulsive fits, no distempers of Surfets, but a
clear and wholesome vigor of body, and an easy putting over the light tasks of
digestion, to the constant advantage of health.

And as for outward dangers, what an happy immunity does commonly bless the
poor man? How can he fear to fall, that lies flat upon the ground? The great
Pope, Boniface the seventh, when he saw many stately Buildings ruined with
Earthquakes, is glad to raise him a little Cabin of boards in the midst of a
Meadow, and there finds it safest to shelter his triple Crown. When great men
hoist their Top-sail, and launch forth into the deep, having that large clew
which they spread, exposed to all winds, and weathers, the poor man sails
close by the Shore; and when he foresees a storm to threaten him, puts into the
next Creek; and wears out in a quiet security that Tempest, wherein he sees
prouder Vessels miserably tossed, and at last, fatally wrecked.

This man is free from the peril of spightful machinations; No man whets his
Axe to cut down a shrub, it is the large Timber of the world that has cause to
fear hewing: Neither is he less free inwardly from the galling strokes of a
self-accusing Conscience; here is no remurmuring of the heart for guilty
subornations, no checks for the secret contrivances of public villainies; no
heartbreaking for the failings of bloody designs; or late remorse for their
success; but quiet and harmless thoughts of seasonable frugality, of honest
recreation, with an un interrupted freedom of recourse to Heaven.

And if at any time, by either hostile, or casual means, he be bereft of his
little, he smiles in the face of a thief; and is no whit astonished to see his
thatch on a flame, as knowing how easy a supply will repair his loss.

And when he shall come to his last close, his heart is not so glewed to the
world, that he should be loath to part; his soul is not tied up in bags, but
flies out freely to her everlasting Rest. Oh the secret virtue and happiness of
Poverty! which none but the right disposed mind knows how to value! It was not
for nothing that so many great Saints have embraced it, rather then the rich
profers of the world; That so many great Princes have exchanged their Thrones
for quiet Cells; Who so cannot be thankful for a little, upon these
conditions, I wish he may be punished with abundance.

SECT. XIII. Considering how little will suffice Nature.
NEither will it a little avail to the furtherance of our Contentation, to
consider how little will suffice Nature, and that all the rest is but matter of
Opinion: It is the Apostles charge, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
Having food and raiment, let us be therewith content: Indeed what use is there
of more, then what may nourish us within, and cover us without? If that be
wholesome, and agreeable to our bodily disposition, whether it be fine, or
course, Nature passes not; it is merely Will that is guilty of this wanton,
and fastidious choice; It is fit that Civility should make difference of
clothings; and that weakness of body, or eminence of Estate should make
difference of diets; Else, why not Russet as well as Scarlet? Beef, as
Phesant? the Grasshopper feeds on dew, the Chameleon on air, what care they for
other Viands? Paulo primo Eremitae in spelunca viventi palma and cibum and
vestimentum praebebat; quod cum impossible videatur, Jesum testor and Angelos
vidisse me Monachos, de quibus unus per 30. annos clausus, herdeaceo pane and
lutulenta aqua vixit. Hieron. de vita Pauli. Revelatur Antonio nonagenario, de
Paulo agente jam 113. annum, esse alium se sanctiorem Monachum, ibid.
Our Books tell us, that those Anachorets of old, that went aside into
Wildernesses, and sustained themselves with the most spare diet, such as those
deserts could afford, out lived the date of other men's lives, in whom Nature is
commonly stifled with a gluttonous variety: How strong, and vigorous above
their neighbor Grecians, were the Lacedaemonians held of old? who by the
Ordinance of their Lawgiver, held themselves to their black broth, which when
Dionysius would needs taste of, his Cook truly told him, that if he would
relish that fare, he must exercise strongly, as they did, and wash in Eurotus:
Who knows not that our Island does not afford more able Bodies, then they that
eat, and drink Oats? And whom have we seen more healthful and active, then the
Children of poor men, trained up hardly in their Cottages with fare as little,
as course?

Do I see a poor Indian husbanding one tree to all his household uses; finding
in that one Plant; Timber, Thatch, Meat, Medicine, Wine, Honey, Oil, Sauce,
Drink, Utensils, Ships, Cables, Sayls? and do I rove over all the latitude of
Nature for contentment? Our appetite is truly unreasonable, neither will know
any bounds: We begin with necessaries, Plin. l. 26. c. 6.
as Pliny justly observes, and from thence we rise to excess, punishing our
selves with our own wild desires; whereas, if we were wise, we might find
mediocrity an ease.

Either extreme is a like deadly; he that over afflicts his body, kills a
Subject; Hugo. Instit. Mona. Reg. S. Columb.
he that pampers it, nourishes an Enemy. Too much abstinence turns vice, and
too much ingurgitation is one of the seven, and at once destroys both Nature
and Grace. Senec. Epist. 88.
The best measure of having or desiring, is not what we would, but what we
ought: Neither is he rich that has much; but he that desires not much: A
discreet frugality is fittest to moderate both our wishes, and expenses; which
if we want, we prove dangerously prodigal in both; if we have, we do happily
improve our stock to the advantage of our selves, and others.

SECT. XIV. Considering the inconveniences, and miseries of coffeehouse.
THe next inducement to Contentation, shall be the serious consideration of the
miserable inconveniences of the contrary disposition; Coffeehouse is a
mixture of anger, and of grief; both which are wont to raise up fearful
tempests in the Soul; He teareth himself in his anger, says Bildad, Job 18. 4.
concerning that mirror of patience; And the sorrow of the World works
death, says the chosen vessel: so as the Malcontent, whether he be angry or
sad, mischieves himself both ways; There cannot be a truer word then that of
wise Solomon, Eccles. 7. 9.
Anger rests in the bosom of fools; What can be more foolish then for a man,
because he thinks God has made him miserable by crosses, to make himself more
miserable by his own distempers; If the clay had sense, what a mad thing were
it for it to struggle with the Potter? and if a man will spurn against strong
Iron-pikes, what can he hope to carry away but wounds? How witless a thing it
is for a man to torment himself with the thoughts of those evils, that are past
all remedy? What wise beholder would not have smiled with pity and scorn, to
have seen great Augustus, after the defeat of some choice troops, to knock his
head against the Wall, and to hear him passionately cry out; O Varus, restore
me my lost Legions? Who would not have been angry with that choleric Prophet
to hear him so furiously contest with his maker for a withered Gourd? What an
affliction was it to good Jacob (more then the sterility of a beloved wife) to
hear Rachel say; Genesis 30. 1.
Give me Children, or else I dye? yea, how ill did it sound in the mouth of the
Father of the Faithful; Genesis 15. 2.
Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go Childless? Yet thus froward and
techy is nature in the best; if we may not have all we would have, all that we
have is nothing; if we be not perfectly humored, we are wilfully unthankful;
All Israel is nothing worth to Ahab, if he may not have one poor Vineyard: How
must this needs irritate a munificent God to see his bounty contemned out of a
childish pettishness? How can he forbear to take away from us his slighted
Mercies? How can he hold his hand from plaguing so ungrateful disrespects of
his Favors?

As for that other passion of grief, what woeful work does it make in ungoverned
minds? How many have we known, that out of thought for unrecoverable losses,
have lost themselves? how many have run from their wits? how many from their
lives? Yea, how many, that out of an impatience to stay the leisure of
vengeance, have made their own hands, their hasty Executioners? And even where
this extremity prevails not, look about, and ye shall see men that are not able
matches to their passions, woefully macerating themselves with their own
thoughts, wearing out their tedious days upon the rack of their own hearts; and
making good that observation of the wise man; Pro. 15. 13.
By the sorrow of the heart, the spirit is broken.

Now all these mischiefs might have been hapily prevented by a meek yieldance
of our selfs to the hands of an All-Wise, and an All-Merciful God, and by an
humble composure of our affections to a quiet suffering; It is the power of
patience to calm the heart in the most blustering trials; Ps. 37. 7.
and when the vessel is most tossed, Jam. 5. 7.
yet to secure the freight: This, if it do not abate of our burden, yet it
adds to our strength, and wins the Father of Mercies both to pity, and
retribution.

Whereas murmuring Israelites can never be free from judgments; and it is a
dreadful word that God speaks of that chosen Nation; Jer. 12. 8.
Mine heritage is unto me as a Lion in the forest, it, still, yelleth against
me, therefore have I hated it. A Child that struggles under the rod, justly
doubles his stripes, and an unruly Malefactor draws on, besides Death, tortures.

SECT. XV. Consider the vicissitudes of Favors and Afflictions.
FUrthermore, it is a main help toward Contentation, to consider the gracious
vicissitudes of Gods dealing with us: How he intermixes Favors with his
crosses; tempering our much honey, with some little gall; the best of us are but
shrewd Children, Ps. 103. 9.
yet he chides us not always, says the Psalmist: he smiles often, for one
frown; and why should we not take one with another? It was the answer wherewith
that admirable pattern of patience stopped the querulous mouth of his tempting
Wife; Job. 2. 10.
What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?

It was a memorable example which came lately to my knowledge of a worthy
Christian, who had lived to his middle age in much health, and prosperity, and
was now for his two last years miserably afflicted with the Strangury; who in
the midst of his torments could say, Oh my Lord God, how gracious have thou
been unto me! thou have given me eight and forty years of health, and now but
two years of pain; thou might have caused me to lie in this torture all the
days of my life; and now thou have carried me comfortably through the rest, and
have Mercifully taken up with this last parcel of my torment; blessed be thy
Name for thy Mercy in forbearing me, and for thy justice in afflicting me. To
be thankful for present blessings is but ordinary, but to be so thankful for
Mercies past, that the memory of them should be able to put over the sense of
present miseries, is an high improvement of Grace.

The very Heathens by the light of Nature and their own experience, could
observe this interchange of Gods proceedings; and made some kind of use of them
accordingly: Camillus, after he had upon ten years siege, Livius.
taken the rich City Veios, prayed that some mishap might befall himself and
Rome to temper so great an happiness; when one would have thought the prize
would not countervail the labor, and the loss of time and blood. And Alexander
the Great, when report was made to him of many notable Victories, achieved by
his Armies, could say; O Jupiter, mix some misfortune with these happy news:
Lo, these men could tell that it is neither fit, nor safe for great blessings
to walk alone, but that they must be attended with their Pages, afflictions why
should not we Christians expect them with patience, and thanks?

They say, Thunder and Lightning hurts not, if it be mixed with Rain. In those
hot Countries, which lie under the scalding Zone. When the first showers fall
after a long drought, it is held dangerous to walk suddenly abroad; for that
the earth so moistened sends up unwholesome steams; but in those parts where the
Rain and Sunshine are usually interchanged, it is most pleasant to take the
air of the earth newly refreshed with kindly showers; Neither is it otherwise
in the course of our lives; this medley of good and evil conduces not a little
to the health of our Souls: One of them must serve to temper the other; and
both of them to keep the heart in order.

Were our afflictions long, and our comforts rare and short, we had yet reason
to be thankful; the least is more then God owes us: but now, when if heaviness
endure for a night, joy comes in the morning, and dwells with us, so, that
some fits of sorrow are recompensed with many months of joy; how should our
hearts overflow with thankfulness, and easily digest small grievances, out of
the comfortable sense of larger blessings?

But if we shall cast up our eyes to Heaven, and there behold the glorious
remuneration of our sufferings, how shall we contemn the worst that earth can
do unto us? There, there is glory enough to make us a thousand times more then
amends for all that we are capable to endure; Yea, if this Earth were Hell, and
Men Devils, they could not inflict upon us those torments, which might hold any
equality with the glory which shall be revealed; and even of the worst of them
we must say with the blessed Apostle; Our light affliction which is but for a
moment, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
works for us a far more exceeding, eternal weight of glory: When the blessed
Proto-Martyr Stephen had steadfastly fixed his eyes on Heaven, and (that Curtain
being drawn) had seen the Heavens opened, and therein the glory of God, Acts 7.
and Jesus standing on the right hand of God; do we think he cared ought for
the sparkling eyes, and gnashed teeth, and killing stones of the enraged
multitude? Oh poor impotent Jews, how far was that divine Soul above the reach
of your malice? how did he triumph over your cruelty? how did he by his happy
evolation make all those stones precious?

SECT. XVI. Consider the Examples of Contentation, both without, and within the
Church of God.
LAstly, it cannot but be a powerful motive unto Contentation, that we lay
before us the notable Examples of men, whether worse, or better then our
selves, that have been eminent in the practice of this virtue; men, that out of
the mere strength of morality, have run away with losses, and Poverty as a
light burden; that out of their free choice have fallen upon those conditions,
which we are ready to fear, and shrink from: What a shame is it for Christians
to be out-stripped herein by very Pagans? If we look upon the ancient
Philosophers; their low valuation of these outward things, and their willing
abdication of those comforts, wherewith others were too much affected, made
them admired of the multitude; Here do I see a Cynick housed in his Tub,
scorning all wealth and state; and making still even with his Victuals and the
day; who, when he was invited to supper to one of Alexanders great Lords, could
say; I had rather lick salt at Athens, then feast with Craterus: Here I meet
with him, whom their Oracle styled the wisest of men, walking barefoot in a
patcht threadbare cloak, contemning honors, and all earthly things; and when
that garment would hang no longer on his back, I can hear him say, I would have
bought a Cloak, if I had had money; after which word, says Seneca, whosoever
offered to give, came too late; Apollodorus, amongst the rest, sends him a rich
mantle toward his end, and is refused; With what Patience does this man bear
the loud scoldings of his Xantippe? making no other of them, then the creaking
of a Cart-wheel: with what brave resolution does he repel the proffers of
Archelaus, telling him how cheap the Market afforded meal at Athens, and the
Fountains Water? Here I meet with a Zeno, formerly rich in his traffic for
purple, now impoverisht by an ill Sea-voyage, and can hear him say, I sailed
best when I Ship-wrackt: Here I see an Aristippus drowning his gold in the Sea,
that it might not drown him: Here I can hear a Democritus, or Cleanthes, when
he was asked how a man should be rich? Answer, If he be poor in desires.

What should I speak of those Indian Sophists, that took their name from their
nakedness; whom we hear to say, Inter opera Ambrosii D^moribus Brachmannorum.
The Sky is our House, and the Earth our Bed: we care not for Gold, we contemn
Death: One of them can tell Onesicritus: As the Mother is to the Child, so is
the Earth to me: The Mother gives Milk to her Infant, so does the Earth yield
all necessaries to me: And when gold was offered to him, by that great
Conqueror; Persuade (said he) if thou can these birds to take thy silver and
gold, that they may sing the sweeter; and if thou can not do that, would
thou have me worse then them? Adding moreover in a strong discourse; Natural
hunger, when we have taken food, cease; and if the mind of man did also
naturally desire gold, so soon as he has received that which he wished, the
desire and appetite of it would presently cease; but so far is it from this
satiety, that the more it has, the more it does, without any intermission,
long for more; because this desire proceeds not from any motion of Nature, but
only out of the wantonness of man's own will, to which no bounds can be set.
Blush, O Christian Soul, (whosoever thou art, that read these lines) to hear
such words falling from Heathen lips, when thou see those that profess
godliness, dote upon these worthless metals, and transported with the
affectation and cares of these earthly provisions.

If from these patterns of men that should be below our selves, we look up to
the more noble precedents of Prophets and Apostles; Lo, there we find Elijah
fed by Ravens; Elisha boarding with his poor Sareptan Hostess; 1 Kings 18. 13.
And an hundred Prophets fed by fifty in a Cave, with bread and water; The Sons
of the Prophets for the enlarging of their overstrait lodgings, 2 Kings 6. 2,
3, 4, 5,
hard at work; they are their own Carpenters, but their tools are borrowed;
There we shall find a few barley loaves, and little fishes, the household
provision of our Saviors train: Yea, there we find the most glorious Apostle,
the great Doctor of the Gentiles, employing his hands to feed his belly; Busily
stitching of skins for his Tent-work: Yea, what do we look at any or all of
these, when we see the Son of God, the God of all the World, in the form of a
Servant? Not a Cratch to cradle him in, not a Grave to bury him in, was his
own; and he that could command Heaven and Earth, can say, The Foxes have holes,
Mat. 8. 20.
the Birds have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head.

Who now can complain of want, when he hears his Lord and Savior but thus
Provided for? He could have brought down with him a Celestial House, and have
pitched it here below, too glorious for earthen eyes to have looked upon: He
could have commanded all the precious things that lie shrouded in the bowels of
the Earth, to have made up a Majestical Palace for him, to the dazzling of the
eyes of all beholders: He could have taken up the stateliest Court that any
Earthly Monarch possessed, for his peculiar habitation: But his greatness was
Spiritual and Heavenly: And he that owned all would have nothing, that he might
Sanctify want unto us; and that he might teach us by his blessed example, to
sit down contented with any thing, with nothing.

By that time therefore we have laid all these things together, and have
seriously considered of the mean valuation of all these earthly things, for
their transitoriness, Unsatisfaction, Danger; of the overruling Providence of
the Almighty, who most wisely, justly, Mercifully disposes of us and all
events that befall us; of the worse condition of many thousand others; of the
great inconveniences that attend great and full estates; of the secret benefits
of Poverty; of the smalness of that pittance that may suffice Nature; of the
miseries that wait upon coffeehouse; of the Merciful vicissitudes of
Favors, wherewith God pleases to interchange our sufferings; and lastly, the
great examples of those, as well without* as within the bosom of the Church,
that have gone before us, and led us the way to Contentation: our judgment
cannot choose but be sufficiently convinced, that there is abundant reason to
win our hearts to a quiet and contented entertainment of want, and all other
outward afflictions.

SECT. XVII. Of Contentment in Death it self.
BUt all these intervenient miseries are slight in comparison of the last, and
utmost of Evils, Death; Many a one grapples cheerfully with these trivial
afflictions, who yet looks Pale, and trembles at the King of Fear: His very
Name has Terror in it, but his looks more: The courageous Champion of Christ,
the blessed Apostle: And with him, every Faithful Soul, makes his challenge
universal, to whatsoever Estate he is in; to the Estate of Death, therefore no
less then the afflictive incidence of Life: When therefore this ghastly Giant
shall stalk forth, and bid defiance to the whole Host of Israel; and when the
timorous unbeleevers shall run away at the fight of him, and endeavor to hide
their Heads from his presence; the good Soul armed, not with the unmeet and
cumbersome Harness of Flesh and Blood, but with the sure (though invisible)
armor of God, dares comes forth to meet him, and in the name of the Lord of
Hosts, both bids him battle, and foils him in the Combat; and now having laid
him on the ground, can Triumphingly say, O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave,
where is thy Victory? Five smooth pebles there are, which if we carry in our
scrip, we shall be able to quel, not only the power of Death, but the terror
too.

Whereof the first is a sure apprehension of both the unavoidable necessity,
and certain benefit of death: A necessity, grounded upon the just and eternal
Decree of Heaven: Heb. 9. 27.
It is appointed to all men once to die; and what a madness were it, for a Man
to think of an exemption from the common condition of mankind? Mortality is, as
it were, essential to our Nature; neither could we have had our Souls but upon
the terms of a re-delivery, when they shall be called for; If the Holiest
Saints, or the greatest Monarchs sped otherwise, we might have some color of
repining: Now, grieve if thou will, that thou art a Man; grieve not, that being
Man, thou must die.

Neither is the benefit inferior to the necessity; Lo here the remedy of all
our cares, the Physic for all our maladies, the rescue from all our fears and
dangers, earnestly sued for by the painful, dearly welcome to the distressed:
Yea, lo here the Cherub that keeps the Gate of Paradise; there is no entrance,
but under his hand: In vain do we hope to pass to the Glory of Heaven, any
other way then through the Gates of Death,

The second is the Conscience of a well-led Life; Guiltinefs will make any Man
cowardly, unable to look danger in the face, much more Death; whereas the
innocent is bold as a Lion: What a difference therefore there is betwixt a
Martyr, and a Malefactor; this latter knows he has done ill, and therefore if
he can take his Death but patiently, it is well; the former knows he has done
well, and therefore takes his Death not patiently only, but cheerfully.

But because no mortal Man can have so innocently led his Life, but that he
shall have passed many offenses against his most Holy and Righteous God; here
must be, Thirdly, a final Peace firmly made betwixt God and the Soul. Two
Powerful Agents must mediate in it; a Lively Faith, and a serious Repentance;
for those Sins can never appear against us, that are washed off with our tears;
and being justified by Faith, Romans 5. 1.
we have Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Now, if we have made
the Judge our Friend, what can the Sergeant do?

The fourth is the Power, and efficacy of Christ's Death applied to the Soul:
Wherefore dyed he, but that we might Live? Wherefore would he, who is the Lord
of Life, die, but to sanctify, season, and sweeten death to us? Who would go
any other way then his Savior went before him? Who can fear that enemy, whom
his Redeemer has Conquered for him? Who can run away from that Serpent, whose
sting is pulled out? Oh Death! my Savior has been thy Death, and therefore
thou can not be mine.

The fifth, is the comfortable expectation, and assurance of a certain
resurrection, and an immediate Glory: I do but lay me down to my rest, I shall
sleep quietly, and rise gloriously: My Soul, in the mean time, no sooner leaves
my body, then it enjoys God; It did lately through my bodily Eyes see my sad
Friends, that bad me farewell with their Tears; now it has the blisse-making
Vision of God: I am no sooner lanched forth, then I am at the Haven, where I
would be; Here is that which were able to make amends for a thousand Deaths; a
Glory, Infinite, Eternal, Incomprehensible.

This Spiritual Ammunition shall sufficiently furnish the Soul for her
encounter with her last Enemy; so as she shall not only endure, but long for
this Combat; and say with the chosen Vessel, Phil. 1. 23.
I desire to depart, and to be with Christ.

SECT. XVIII. The miseries and inconveniences of the continued conjunction of
the Soul and Body.
NOw for that long conversation causes entireness, and the parting of Old
Friends and Partners (such the Soul and Body are) cannot but be grievous,
although there were no actual pain in the dissolution: It will be requisite for
us, seriously to consider the state of this conjunction; and to enquire what
good offices the one of them does to the other, in their continued union; for
which they should be so loath to part: And here we shall find that those two,
however united to make up one Person, yet (as it falls out in Cross matches)
they are in continual domestique jars one with the other, and entertain a
secret familiar kind of Hostility betwixt themselves; Gal. 5. 17.
For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh,
and these are contrary the one to the other. One says well, that if the Body
should implead the Soul, it might bring many foul impeachments against it; and
sue it for many great injuries done to that Earthly part: And the Soul again
has no fewer quarrels against the Body: Betwixt them both there are many
brawles, no Agreement. Our Schools have reckoned up therefore eight main
incommodities, which the Soul has cause to complain of in her conjunction with
the Body: whereof the first is the defilement of Original Sin, wherewith the
Soul is not tainted as it proceeds, alone, from the pure hands of its Creator,
but as it makes up a part of a Son of Adam, who brought this guilt upon Humane
nature; so as now this composition, which we call Man, is corrupt: Job. 14. 4.
Who can bring a clean thing out of that which is unclean? Says Job.

The second is a proneness to Sin, which, but by the meeting of these partners
had never been; the Soul, if single, would have been innocent; thus matched,
what Evil is it not apt to entertain? An ill consort is enough to poison the
best disposition.

The difficulty of doing well is the third; for how averse are we by this
conjunction from any thing that is good; This clog hinders us from walking
roundly in the ways of God: The good that I would do, Romans 7. 19.
I do not, says the chosen Vessel.

The fourth is the dullness of our understanding, and the dimness of our mental
Eyes, especially in the things pertaining unto God; which now we are forced to
behold through the vail of Flesh: If therefore we mis-know, the fault is in the
mean, through which we do imperfectly discover them.

The fifth is a perpetual impugnation, and self-conflict, either part laboring
to oppose and vanquish the other. This field is fought in every man's bosom,
without any possibility of peace, or truce, till the last moment of dissolution.

The sixth is the racking solicitude of cares, which continually distract the
Soul, not Suffering it to rest at ease, whiles it carries this Flesh about it.

The seventh is the multiplicity of passions which daily bluster within us, and
raise up continual Tempests in our Lives, disquieting our Peace, and threatening
our Ruin.

The eight is the retardation of our Glory; for Flesh, and Blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God; we must lay down our load if we would enter into Heaven: 2
Cor. 5. 4.
The seed cannot fructify unless it Die. I cannot blame Nature if it could
wish not to be unclothed, but to be clothed upon: But so has the Eternal
Wisdom Ordered, that we should first lay down, ere we can take up; and be
divested of Earth, ere we can partake of Heaven.

Now then, since so many and great discommodities do so unavoidably accompany
this match of Soul and Body, and all of them cease instantly in the act of
their dissolution; what reason have we to be too deeply affected with their
parting? Yea, how should we rather rejoice that the Hour is come, wherein we
shall be quit both of the Guilt, and Temptations of Sin; wherein the clogg
shall be taken away from our heels, and the vail from our Eyes; wherein no
intestine Wars shall threaten us, no cares shall disquiet us, no passions shall
torment us; and lastly, wherein we may take the free possession of that Glory,
which we have hitherto looked at only a far off from the top of our Pisgah?

SECT. XIX. Holy dispositions for Contentment: And first, Humility.
HItherto, we have dwelt in those Powerful considerations which may work us to
a quiet Contentment with whatsoever adverse estate, whether of Life or Death;
after which, we address our selves to those meet dispositions, which shall
render us fully capable of this blessed Contentation; and shall make all these
considerations effectual to that happy purpose. Whereof the first is true
Humility, under-valuing our selves, and setting an high rate upon every Mercy
that we receive; For, if a Man have attained unto this, that he thinks every
thing too good for him, and himself less then the least Blessing, and worthy of
the heaviest judgment; he can not but sit down thankful for small Favors, and
meekly content with mean afflictions: As contrarily, the proud Man stands upon
points with his Maker, makes God his debtor; looks disdainfully at small
Blessings; as if he said, What, no more? and looks angerly at the least
crosses; as if he said, Why thus much? The Father of the Faithful has
practically taught us this Lesson of humility, who comes to God with dust and
ashes in his mouth: Genesis 18. 27
And the Jewish Doctors tell us truly, that in every Disciple of Abraham, there
must be three things: a good eye, a meek spirit, and an humble soul; Pirke
Av^oth.
His Grandchild Jacob, the Father of every true Israelite, had well taken it
out; whiles he can say to his God, Genesis 32. 10.
I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth which
thou have showed unto thy servant: And indeed, in whomsoeever it be, the best
measure of Grace is Humility; for the more Grace still, the greater Humility;
and no Humility, Pro. 3. 34.
no Grace: Solomon observed of old; and Saint James took it from him. That God
resists the proud, Jam. 4. 6.
and gives Grace to the Humble; so as he that is not humble, is not so much as
capable of Grace; and he that is truly Humble, is a fit subject for all Graces,
and amongst the rest, for the Grace of Contentation: Give me a man therefore,
that is vile in his own Eyes, that is sensible of his own wretchedness, that
knows what it is to Sin, and what belongs to that Sin whereof he is guilty;
this Man shall think it a Mercy that he is any where out of Hell; shall account
all the evils that he is free from, so many new Favors; shall reckon easy
corrections amongst his blessings, and shall esteem any blessing infinitely
obliging. Whereas contrarily, the proud beggar is ready to throw Gods alms at
his Head, and swells at every lash, that he receives from the Divine Hand. Not
without great cause therefore does the Royal Preacher oppose the patient in
Spirit, to the proud in Spirit; for the proud Man can no more be patient, then
the patient can be discontent with whatsoever hand of his God. Every toy puts
the proud Man beside his Patience; If but a fly be found in Pharaohs cup, he
is straight in rage, (as the Jewish tradition lays the quarrel) and sends his
Butler into durance: And if the Emperor do but mistake the Stirrup of our
Countryman Pope Adrian, he shall dance attendance for his Crown: If a
Mardochee do but fail of a courtesy to Haman, all Jews must bleed to Death;
And how unquiet are our vain Dames, if this curle be not set right, or that Pin
be mis-placed? But the meek Spirit is incurious; and so thoroughly subacted,
that he takes his load from God (as the Camel from his Master) upon his knees:
And for Men, if they compel him to go one mile, Mat. 5. 39. 40.
he goes twain; if they smite him on the right cheek, he turns the other, if
they sue away his Coat, he parts with his Cloak also*

Heraclius the Emperor, when he was about to pass through the golden gate,
and to ride in Royal State through the streets of Jerusalem, being put in mind
by Zacharias the Bishop there, of the humble and dejected fashion wherein his
Savior walked through those streets, toward his passion, strips off his rich
robes, lays aside his Crown, and with bare head, and bare feet, submissly paces
the same way that his Redeemer had carried his Cross toward his Golgotha.
Every true Christian is ready to tread in the deep steps of his Savior, as
well knowing that if he should descend to the Gates of Death, of the Grave, of
Hell, he cannot be so humbled, as the Son of God was for him: And indeed, this,
and this alone, is the true way to Glory; He that is Truth it self, has told
us, that he who humbles himself shall be exalted; And wise Solomon, Pro. 85. 33.
Before Honor is Humility. The Fuller treads upon that cloth which he means to
whiten: And he that would see the Stars by day, must not climb up into some
high Mountain, but must descend to the lower Cells of the earth. Shortly,
whosoever would raise up a firm building of Contentation, must be sure to lay
the foundation in Humility.

SECT. XX. Of a Faithful Self-resignation.
SEcondly, to make up a true Contentment with the most adverse estate, there is
required a Faithful Self-resignation into the hands of that God, whose we are;
who, as he has more right in us, then our selves, so he best knows what to do
with us: How graciously has his mercy invited us to our own ease? Be careful
(says he) for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication, Phil 4.
6.
with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God: we are naturally
apt in our necessities to have recourse to greater powers then our own; even
where we have no engagement of their help; how much more should we cast our
selves upon the Almighty, when he not only allows, but solicits our reliance
upon him? It was a question that might have befitted the mouth of the best
Christian, which fell from Socrates, Since God himself is careful for thee, why
art thou solicitous for thy self? If evils were let loose upon us, so as it
were possible for us to suffer any thing that God were not aware of, we might
have just cause to sink under adversities; but now, that we know every dram of
our affliction is weighed out to us, by that all-wise, and all-merciful
Providence; Oh our infidelity, if we do make scruple of taking in the most
bitter dose! Here then is the right use of that main duty of Christianity, to
live by faith: Brute creatures live by sense, mere men by reason, Christians by
faith. Heb. 11. 1.
Now faith is the substance of things hoped for; the evidence of things not
seen; In our extremities we hope for Gods gracious deliverance, faith gives a
subsistence to that deliverance, before it be: The mercies that God has
reserved for us, do not yet show themselves; faith is the evidence of them,
though yet unseen: It was the Motto of the learned and godly Divine Mr.
Perkins, Fidei vita vera vita; The true life, is the life of faith; a word
which that worthy servant of God did both write and live; neither indeed is any
other life truly vital, but this; for hereby we enjoy God in all whatever
occurrences: Are we abridged of means? we seed upon the cordial Promises of our
God: Do we sigh and groan under varieties of grievous persecutions? out of the
worst of them we can pick out comforts; whiles we can hear our Savior say,
Mat. 5. 10.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake; for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven; Are we deserted, and abandoned of friends? we see him
by us, who has said, Heb. 13. 5.
I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: Do we droop under spiritual
desertions? we hear the God of truth say, Esa. 54. 7, 8.
For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercy will I gather
thee; In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, but with everlasting kindness
will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord, thy Redeemer: Are we driven from
home? If we take the wings of the morning, Psalm. 139. 8, 9.
and remain in the uttermost parts of the Sea; even there also shall thine hand
lead us, and thy right hand shall hold us: Are we dungeoned up from the sight
of the Sun? Peradventure the darkness shall cover us; but then shall our night
be turned into day; yea, ver. 10, 11
the darkness is no darkness with thee: Are we cast down upon the bed of
sickness? He that is our God, is the God of salvation; Ps. 68. 20.
and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death.

It cannot be spoken how injurious those men are to themselves, that will be
managing their own cares, and plotting the prevention of their fears; and
projecting their own, both indemnity, and advantages; for, as they lay an
unnecessary load upon their own shoulders, so they draw upon themselves the
miseries of an unremediable disappointment; Alas, how can their weakness make
good those events which they vainly promise to themselves, or avert those
judgments they would escape, or uphold them in those evils they must undergo?
Whereas if we put all this upon a gracious God, he contrives it with ease;
looking for nothing from us, but our trust, and thankfulness.

SECT. XXI. Of True inward Riches.
IN the third place, it will be most requisite to furnish the soul with true
inward riches; I mean not of mere moral virtues, (which yet are truly precious
when they are found in a good heart) but of a wealth as much above them, as
gold is above dross; Yea, as the thing which is most precious, is above
nothing: And this shall be done, if we bring Christ home to the soul; if we can
possess our selves of him, who is God all-sufficient; For such infinite
contentment there is in the Son of God made ours, that whosoever has tasted of
the sweetness of this comfort is indiffererent to all earthly things; and
insensible of those extreme differences of events, wherewith others are
perplexed; How can he be dejected with the want of any thing, who is possessed
of him that possesses all things? How can he be over-affected with trivial
profits, or pleasures, who is taken up with the God of all comfort? Is Christ
mine therefore? How can I fail of all contentment? How can he complain to want
light, that dwells in the midst of the Sun? How can he complain of thirst, out
of whose belly flow rivers of living water? Joh. 7. 38.
What can I wish, that my Christ is not to me? Would I have meat and drink?
Joh. 6. 55.
My flesh is meat indeed; and my blood is drink indeed: Would I have clothing?
But, Romans 13. 14.
put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, says the Apostle: Would I have medicine?
Rev. 22. 2.
He is the Tree of life, the leaves whereof are for the healing of the Nations:
Would I have safety, and protection? He truly is my strength, and my salvation;
Ps. 62. 6, 7.
he is my defense, so as I shall not fall; in God is my health and my glory;
the Rock of my might, and in God is my trust: Would I have direction? Phil. 1.
27.
I am the way, and the truth: Would I have life? Christ is to me to live; Joh.
11. 25.
I am the Resurrection and the Life: Would I have all spiritual good things? 1
Cor. 1. 30.
We are in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness,
and Sanctification, and Redemption.

Oh the happy condition of the man that is in Christ, and has Christ in him!
Shall I account him rich, that has store of Oxen, and Sheep, and Horses, and
Camels; that has heaps of metals, and some spots of ground? and shall I not
account him infinitely more rich, that owns and enjoyes him whose the earth is,
and the fullness of it; whose Heaven is, and the glory of it? Shall I justly
account that man great, whom the King will honor, and place near to himself;
and shall I not esteem that man more honorable, whom the King of Heaven is
pleased to admit unto such Partnership of glory, as to profess; To him that
overcommeth will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, Rev. 3. 23.
even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne?

It is a true word of Saint Augustine, that every soul is either Christ's
Spouse, or the Devils Harlot: Now if we be matched to Christ, the Lord of
glory; what a blessed union is here? What can he withhold from us, that has
given us himself? I could envy the devotion of that man (though otherwise
mis-placed) whom S. Bernard heard to spend the night in no other words then,
Deus meus and omnia; My God, and all things; Certainly, he who has that God,
has more then all things; he that wants him (whatever else he seems to
possess) has less then nothing.

SECT. XXII. Romans 7. 19.
Holy resolutions: 1. That our present estate is best for us*
AFter these serious considerations, and meet dispositions, shall in the last
follow certain firm resolutions for the full actuating our contentment: And
first, we must resolve (out of the infallible grounds of divine Providence,
formerly spoken of) that the present estate wherein wear, is certainly the
best for us; and therefore we must herein absolutely captivate our
understanding, and will, to that of the highest: How unmeet Judges are flesh
and blood of the best fitness of a condition for us? As some palates (which are
none of the wholsomest) like nothing but sweet meats, so our nature would be
fed up with the only delicacies of pleasures; and prosperity; according to the
false principle of Arristippus, that he only is Happy, which is delighted; but
the All-wise God knows another diet more fit for our Health, and therefore
graciously tempers our dishes with the tart sauces of affliction: The Mother of
the two Sons of Zebedee, and her ambitious Children, are all for the chief
Peerage in the Temporal Kingdom of Christ; but he calls them to a bitter Cup,
and a bloody Baptism rather; and this was a far greater Honor then that they
sued for: There is no Earthly Estate absolutely good for all Persons; like as
no gale can serve for all Passengers. In Africa, they say, the North wind
brings Clouds, and the South wind clears up: That plant which was starved in
one Soil, in another prospers; Yea, that which in some climate is poison,
proves wholesome in another: Some one Man if he had another blessings, would
run wild; and if he had some other Man's Crosses, would be desperate; The
infinite wisdom of the great Governor of the World allots every one his due
proportion; Esa. 28. 27.
The fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument; neither is a
Cart-wheel turned about upon the Cummin; but the fitches are beaten out with a
staff, and the Cummin with a rod, says Esaias. And no otherwise in matter of
prosperity; Joseph's Coat may be party-colored, and Benjamins mess may be five
times so much as any of his Brethren. Genesis 43. 34.
It is marvel if they who did so much envy Joseph for his dream of Superiority,
did not also envy Benjamin for so large a service, and so Rich gifts at his
parting; this it seems gave occasion for the good Patriarchs fear, when he
charged them, Genesis 45. 24.
See that you fall not out by the way; But there had been no reason for so
impotent an envy; whiles the gift is free, and each speeds above his desert,
who can have cause to repine? It is enough that Joseph knew a just reason of so
unequal a distribution, though it were hidden from themselves. The Elder
Brother may grudge the fat Calf, and the prime Robe to the returned Unthrift,
but the Father knows reason to make that difference. God is Infinitely just,
and Infinitely Merciful in dispensing both his Favors and Punishment. In both
kinds every Man has that which is fittest for him, because it is that which
Gods will has designed to him; and that will is the most absolute rule of
justice: Now if we can so frame our will to his, as to think so too, how can we
be other then Contented? Do we Suffer? There is more intended to us then our
smart: It was a good speech of Seneca, though a Heathen, (what pity it is that
he was so?) I give thanks to my infirmity, which forces me not to be able to do
that, which I ought not will to do; If we lose without, 2 Cor. 4. 16.
so as we gain within; if in the perishing of the outward Man, the inward Man
be renewed, we have no cause to complain, much to rejoice: Do I Live in a mean
Estate? If it were better, I should be worse; more proud, more careless; and
what a woeful improvement were this? What a strange Creature would Man be, if he
were what he would wish himself? Surely, he would be wickedly pleasant,
carelessly Profane, vainly proud, proudly oppressive, dissolutely wanton,
impetuously self-willed; and shortly, his own Idol, and his own Idolater; His
Maker knows how to frame him better; it is our ignorance and unthankfulness, if
we submit not to his good pleasure: To conclude, we Pray every day, Thy will be
done; What Hypocrites are we, if we Pray one thing, and Act another? If we
murmur at what we wish? All is well between Heaven and us, if we can think our
selves Happy to be what God will have us.

SECT. XXIII. Two Resolutions to abate of our desires.
SEcondly, we must resolve to abate of our desires; for it is the illimitedness
of our ambitious, and covetous thoughts, that is guilty of our unquietness;
Every Man would be, and have more then he is; and is therefore Sick of what he
is not. It was a True word of Democritus, If we desire not much, we shall think
a little much: And it is suitable to one of the rules of S. Augustine; It is
better to need less, then to have more: Paul, the richest Poor man, (as Ambrose
well) could say, Ambros. de vitiorum and virtutum conflictu.
As having all things, yet possessing nothing: It is not for a Christian to be
of the Dragons temper, which they say is so ever thirsty, that no water will
quench his drought; and therefore never has his mouth shut; nor, with the
daughters of the Horseleach to cry always, Pro. 30. 15.
Give, Give; He must confine his desires; and that, to no over large compass;
and must say to them, Job. 38. 11.
as God does to the Sea, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further; and here
shall thy proud Waves be stayed.

What a cumber it is for a Man to have too much? to be in the case of Surena
the Parthian Lord* that could never remove his Family with less then a thousand
Camels? What is this, but Tortoise-like, to be clogged with a weighty shel,
which we cannot drag after us, but with pain? Or like the Ostrich, to be so
held down with an heavy body, that we can have no use of our Wings? Whereas the
nimble Lark rises, and mounts with ease, and Sings cheerfully in her flight.
How many have we known, that have found too much flesh a burden? And when they
have found their Blood too rank, have been glad to pay for the letting it out?
It was the word of that old and famous Lord Keeper Bacon, the eminent Head of a
noble, and witty family, Mediocria firma: There is neither safety, nor true
pleasure in excess: It was a wise and just answer of Zeno the Philosopher, who
reproving the superfluity of a Feast, and hearing by way of defense that the
Maker of it was a great Rich Man, and might well spare it, said; If thy Cook
shall over-salt thy broth, and when he is chid for it, shall say, I have store
enough of Salt lying by me, would thou take this for a fair answer?

My Son, Pro. 24. 13.
eat thou honey, says Solomon; because it is good: But, to be sure, for the
preventing all immoderation, he adds soon after; Have thou found Honey? Pro. 25.
16.
Eat so much as is sufficient for thee, Pro. 25. 16.
lest thou be filled therewith: If our appetite carry us too far, we may easily
surfeit; this (which is the emblem of Pleasure) must be tasted (as Dionysius the
Sophist said of old) on the tip of the Finger; not be sup't up in the hollow of
the hand; It is with our desires, as it is with weak Stomachs, the quantity
offends, even where the Food is not unwholesome; and if heed be not taken, one
bit draws on another, till Nature be overlaid; Both Pleasures and profits (if
way be given to them) have too much power to debauch the mind, and to work it
to a kind of insatiableness; there is a thirst that is caused with drunkenness;
and the wanton appetite, like as they said of Messalina, may be wearied, but
cannot be satisfied; It is good therefore to give austere repulses to the first
overtures of inordinate desires, and to give strong denials to the first unruly
motions of our Hearts; For, S. Chrysostom well; Pleasure is like a Dog, which
being coyed, and stroaked, follows us at the Heels, but if rated, and beaten
off, is driven away from us with ease.

It is for the Christian Heart to be taken up with other desires such as
wherein there can be no danger of immoderateness: These are the Holy longings
after grace and goodness; This only Covetousness, this ambition is pleasing to
God, and Infinitely beneficial to the Soul. Mat. 5. 6.
Blessed are they which Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, for they shall
be filled: Spiritual Blessings are the true Riches, whereof we can never have
enough. S. Ambrose said truly, No Man is indeed wealthy, that cannot carry away
what he has with him: What is left behind, Ambros.
is not ours, Epist. 27.
but other Men's; Contemn thou whiles thou art alive, that which thou can not
enjoy when thou art Dead.

As for this Earthly trash, and the vain delights of the flesh, which we have
so fondly doted on; we cannot carry them indeed away with us, but the sting of
the guilty mis-enjoying of them will be sure to stick by us; and, to our
sorrow, attend us both in Death and Judgment: In sum therefore, if we would be
truly Contented, and Happy, our Hearts can never be enough enlarged in our
desires of Spiritual and Heavenly things, never too much contracted in our
desires of Earthly.

SECT. XXIV. 3. A Resolution to inure our selves to digest smaller
discontentments.
OUr Third Resolution must be to inure our selves to digest smaller
Discontentments; and by the exercise thereof, to enable our selves for greater:
As those that drink Medicinal Waters, begin First with smaller quantities, and
by degrees arise, at last, to the highest of their prescribed measure; or as
the wise Lacedaemonians, by early scourgings of their Boys, inured them in their
riper Years to more painful Sufferings: A strong Milo takes up his Calf at
first, and by continual practice is now able to carry it when it is grown a Bull.

Such is our self-love, that we affect ever to be served of the best; and that
we are apt to take great exceptions at small failings: We would walk always in
smooth and even Paths, and would have no hindrances in our passage; but, there
is no remedy, we must meet with rubs; and perhaps cross shinnes, and take falls
too in our way: Every one is willing and desirous to enjoy (as they say the
City of Rhodes does) a perpetual Sunshine; but we cannot (if we be Wise) but
know, that we must meet with change of weather; with rainy days, and sometimes
storms and tempests; it must be our wisdom to make Provision accordingly: And
some whiles to abide a wetting; that, if need be, we may endure a drenching
also. It was the policy of Jacob, Genesis 32. 26. and 33. 5, 6. etc.
when he was to meet with his Brother Esau (whom he feared an Enemy, but found
a Friend) to send the droves first, then his Handmaids, and their Children;
then Leah, with her Children, and at last, came Joseph and Rachel; as one that
would adventure the less dear in the first place, and (if it must be) to
prepare himself for his dearest loss. Act. 27. 18, 19.
S. Paul's companions in his perilous Seavoyage, first lighten the Ship of less
necessaries, then they cast out the tackling, then the Wheat; and in the last
place, themselves. It is the use that wise Socrates made of the sharp Tongues
of his cross and unquiet Wives, to prepare his patience for public
Sufferings. Surely, he that cannot endure a frown, will hardly take a blow; and
he that doubles under a light Cross, will sink under a heavier; and contrarily,
that good Martyr prepares his whole Body for the Faggot, with burning his Hand
in the Candle. I remember Seneca, in one of his Epistles, rejoices much to tell
with what patient temper he took it, that coming inexpectedly to his
Countrey-House, he found all things so discomposed, that no provision was ready
for him; finding more contentment in his own quiet apprehension of these wants,
then trouble in that unreadiness: And thus, should we be affected upon all
occasions; Those that promised me help, have disappointed me: That Friend, on
whom I relied, has failed my trust: The sum that I expected, comes not in at
the day: My Servant slackens the business enjoined him: The Beast that I
esteemed highly, is lost: The Vessel in which I shipped some commodities, is
wrackt: My diet and attendance must be abated; I must be dislodged of my former
habitation; how do I put over these occurrences? If I can make light work of
these lesser Crosses, I am in a good posture to entertain greater.

To this purpose, it will be not a little expedient, to thwart our appetite in
those things wherein we placed much delight; and to torture our curiosity in
the delay of those Contentments, which we too eagerly affected: It was a noble
and exemplary Government of these passions, which we find in King David, who
being extremely thirsty, and longing for a speedy refreshment, could say; Oh
that one would give me drink of the water of the Well of Bethlehem! 2 Samuel 23.
15, 16, 17.
but when he saw that Water purchased with the hazard of the lives of three of
his Worthies, when it was brought to him, he would not drink it, but poured it
out unto the Lord.

Have I a mind to some one curious dish above the rest? I will put my knife to
my Throat, and not humor my Palate so far as to taste of it: Do I receive a
Letter of News from a far Country, overnight? It shall keep my pillow warm
till the morning: Do my importunate recreations call me away? They shall,
against the hair, be forcibly adjourned till a further leisure: Out of this
ground it was, that the ancient Votaries observed such austerity, and rigor in
their Diet, Clothes, Lodging; as those that knew how requisite it is that
Nature should be held short of her demands; and continually exercised with
denials* lest she grow too wanton, and impetuous in her desires: That which
was of old given as a rule to Monastic Persons, is fit to be extended to all
Christians; They may not have a Will of their own, but must frame themselves to
such a condition, and carriage, as seems best to their Superior; If therefore
it please my God to send me some little Comfort, I shall take that as an
earnest of more; and if he exercise me with lesser Crosses, I shall take them
as preparatives to greater; and endeavor to be thankful for the one, and
patient in the other; and contented with Gods hand in both.

SECT. XXV. 4. A Resolution to be frequent and fervent in Prayer.
OUr last Resolution must be, to be frequent and fervent in our Prayers to the
Father of all Mercies, that he will be pleased to Work our Hearts by the Power
of his Spirit, to this constant state of Contentation; without which we can
neither consider the things that belong to our inward Peace, nor dispose our
selves toward it, nor resolve ought for the effecting it; without which, all
our Considerations, all our Dispositions, all our Resolutions, are vain and
fruitless. Justly therefore does the blessed Apostle, Phil. 4. 6.
after his charge of avoiding all Carefulness for these earthly things, enforce
the necessity of our Prayers and Supplications, and making our requests known
unto God; who both knows our need, and puts these requests into our Mouths:
When we have all done, they are the requests of our Hearts, that must free them
from cares, and frame them to a perfect Contentment: There may be a kind of
dull and stupid neglect, which possessing the Soul may make it insensible of
Evil Events, in some natural dispositions; but a true temper of a quiet and
peaceable estate of the Soul upon good grounds can never be attained without
the inoperation of that Holy Spirit, Jam. 1. 17.
from whom every good gift, and every perfect giving proceeds: It is here
contrary to these Earthly Occasions: With Men, he that is ever craving, is
never contented; but with God, he cannot want Contentment that prays always. If
we be not unacquainted with our selves, we are so conscious of our own
weakness, that we know every puff of Temptation is able to blow us over; they
are only our Prayers that must stay us from being carried away with the violent
assaults of Coffeehouse; under which, a Praying Soul can no more miscarry,
then an Indevout Soul can enjoy safety.

SECT. XXVI. The difficulty of knowing how to abound; and the ill consequences
of not knowing it.
LEt this be enough for the Remedy of those distempers which arise from an
adverse Condition; As for Prosperity, every man thinks himself wise and able
enough to know how to govern it, and himself in it; an happy estate (we
imagine) will easily manage it self without too much care; Give me but
Sea-Room, faith the confident Mariner, and let me alone, what ever tempest
arise: Surely, the great Doctor of the Gentiles had never made this holy boast
of his divine skill, [I know how to abound] if it had been so easy a matter as
the World conceives it: Mere Ignorance, and want of Self-experience, is Guilty
of this Error.

Many a one abounds in Wealth and Honor, who a no less in miseries and
vexation: Many a one is carried away with an unruly greatness, to the
destruction of Body, Soul, Estate; The World abounds every where with Men that
do abound, and yet do not know how to abound: And those especially in three
ranks; The Proud, the Covetous, the Prodigal; The Proud is thereby transported
to forget God; the Covetous, his Neighbor; the Prodigal, Himself.

Both Wealth and Honor are of a swelling Nature; raising a Man up not above
others, but above himself; equalling him to the Powers Immortal; yea, exalting
him above all that is called God; Oh that vile dust and ashes should be raised
to that height of Insolence as to hold contestation with its Maker! Exodus 5. 2.
Who is the Lord? Says the King of Egypt: I shall be like to the Highest; Esa.
14. 14.
I am, and there is none besides me, says the King of Babylon; The Voice of
God, Act. 12. 22
and not of Man, goes down with Herod: And how will that Spirit trample upon
Men, that dare vie with the Almighty? Hence are all the heavy oppressions,
Bloody Tyrannies, imperious domineerings, scornful insultations, merciless
outrages, that are so rife amongst Men, even from hence, that they know not how
to abound.

The Covetous Man abounds with bags, and no less with sorrows; verifying the
experience of Wise Solomon; Eccl. 5. 13.
There is a fore evil which I have seen under the Sun, Riches kept for the
owners thereof, to their hurt; what he has got with unjustice, he keeps with
care, leaves with grief, and reckons for with torment; I cannot better compare
these Money-mongers then to Bees; they are busy gatherers, but it is for
themselves; their Masters can have no part of their Honey till it be taken from
them; and they have a sting ready for every one that approaches their Hive; and
their lot at the last is burning. What maceration is there here with fears and
jealousies* what cruel extortion and oppression exercised upon other? And all
from no other ground then this, that they know not how to abound?

The Prodigal feasts and sports like an Athenian, spends like an Emperor; and
is ready to say as Heliogabalus did of Old, Aelius Lamprid.
Those Cates are best, that cost dearest; caring more for an empty reputation
of a short gallantry, then for the comfortable subsistence of himself, his
Family, his Posterity: Like Cleopes the Vain Egyptian King, which was fain to
prostitute his Daughter for the finishing of his Pyramid: This Man lavisheth
out not his own means alone, but his poor neighbors; running upon the score
with all Trades that concern back or belly; undoing more with his debts, then
he can pleasure with his entertainments; none of all which should be done, if
he knew how to abound.

Great skill therefore is required to the Governing of a plentiful and
prosperous Estate, so as it may be safe and comfortable to the owner, and
beneficial unto others; Every Corporal may know how to Order some few Files,
but to marshal many Troops in a Regiment, many Regiments in a whole Body of an
Army, quires the skill of an experienced General. But the rules and limits of
Christian moderation, in the use of our Honors, Pleasures, Profits, I have at
large laid forth in a former Discourse; thither I must crave leave to send the
benevolent Reader; beseeching God to bless unto him these and all other
Labors, to the Happy furtherance of his Grace and Salvation. Amen. *

FINIS.

