A MODEST CONFUTATION OF A Slanderous and Scurrilous LIBELL, ENTITVLED,
ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE REMONSTRANTS DEFENSE AGAINST SMECTYMNUUS.

(...). Diog. apud Lucian. de Hist. conser. Printed in the year M.DC.XLII.

TO THE READER.
READER,
IF thou have any general or particular concernment in the affairs of these
times, or but natural curiosity, thou art acquainted with the late and hot
bickerings between the Prelates and Smectvmnuans: To make up the breaches of
whose solemn Scenes, (it were too ominous to say Tragical) there is thrust
forth upon the Stage, as also to take the ear of the less intelligent, a
scurrilous Mime, a personated, and (as himself thinks) a grim, lowering, bitter
fool.

I have no further notice of him, than he has been pleased, in his immodest
and injurious Libell to give of himself: and therefore, as our industrious
Critics for want of clearer evidence concerning the life and manners of some
revived Authors, must fetch his character from some scattered passages in his
own writings. It seems he has been initiated in the Arts by Jacke Seaton, and
by Bishop Downam confirmed a Logician: and as he says his companions did, Page
10.
it is like he spent his youth, in loytering, bezelling, and harlotting. Thus
being grown to an Impostume in the breast of the University, Page 13.
he was at length vomited out thence into a Suburb sink about London; which,
since his coming up, has groaned under two ills, Him, and the Plague. Where
his morning haunts are I wist not; but he that would find him after dinner,
must search the Play Houses, or the Bordelli, for there I have traced him; Post
pra^ dia callirboendo. Pers Sat 1. Page 8.
[among old Cloaks, false Beards, Tyres, Cases, Periwigs, Modona Vizzards,
nightwalking-Cudgellers, and Salt Lotion.] Many of late, since he was out of
Wit and Clothes, as Stilpo merrily jeered the poor Starveling * Crates, (...)
La e ^ lib. 2. in vita Stilp^n.
he is new clothed in Serge, and confined to a Parlour; where he blasphemes
God and the King, as ordinarily as erewhile he drank Sack or swore. Hear him
speak: [Our Liturgy runs up and down like an English gallopping Nun, Page
16. While she prankes her self in the weeds of Popish Mass, she provokes the
jelousie of God, no otherwise than a Wife affecting Whorish attire, Page 22.
Liturgy a bait for them ( Papists) to bite at, Page 23. A Pharisaicall and
vainglorious project, Ibid. God has taught them ( the People) to detest your
Liturgy and Prelacy, Page 24. Is Liturgy good or evil? Evil? Bish. Has
Occa^. Med^.
Page 26. A * Meditation of yours observed at Lambeth from the Archiepiscopall
Kittens, Page 29. The Prelates would have Saint Paul's words In^u^ vices
sub^unt, and (...) test moventur. Iuv. Sat. 6.
ramp one over another, Page 40. ^et not those wretched Fathers think they
shall impoverish the Church of willing and able supply, though they keep back
their sordid sperm, begotten in the lustiness of their avarice, Page 57. Lest
thinking to offer them as a Present to God, they dish them out for the Devil,
Page 58. Your Confutation has achieved nothing against it, ( The Reply by
SMECTYMNUUS) left nothing upon it, but a soul taste of your Skillet foot; and
a more perfect and distinguishable odor of your Socks than of your Nightcap,
Page 67.] Christian, do thou like these passages? or does thy heart rise
against such unseemly beastliness? Nay, but take heed: [This is nothing
disagreeing from Christian meekness, Page 2. Not unauthorised from the Moral
precept of Solomon, -- Nor from the example of Christ, and all his Followers,
in all ages, Ibid.] Horrid blasphemy! You that love Christ, and know this
miscreant wretch, stone him to death, lest your selves smart for his impunity.

This is my adversary; to encounter whom at his own weapons (which he
voluntarily chose page 4. as Goliath his Sword and Spear, to defy the God and
the Host of Israel) I am much too weak; and must despair of victory, unless
it may be gotten by the strength of a good cause, and a modest defense of it. I
dare not say but there may be hid in my nature, as much venomous Atheism and
profanation as has broken out at his lips; (Every one that is infected with
the Sickness, has not the Sores running upon him:) Of which should I be as
lavish as he has been, it might be said of us, that we encountered one the
other like a Toad and a Spider, and each dyed of the others poison: or whiles
we would seem to fall out about some petty matters in Religion* we well enough
agreed together to be eminently wicked. It is my Prayer to God, that all those
and the like scandals, with which He has, and I may grieve the Church, may be
forgiven to him, and prevented in me: And that in his good time himself would
undertake the Curing of his Churches wounds, which by the ignorance of some,
and malice of others, are like to be but the worse for the Plaster.

Faerwell.
THE PREFACE
. I.
IS apologeticall; and well may it be so. Satisfaction to tender Consciences,
is that which we look for, and that which you ought to give; as having done
violence through all your book to the person of an holy and religious Prelate,
the ears of all good Christians within our Church, the established Laws of the
Kingdom, the precious and dear name of our common Master and Savior Christ
Jesus.

We must suppose you have undertaken a religious cause: that is your pretended
subject; we shall examine the truth of it by and by; we must now look to your
manner of handling it: a suspicious way you think; and so do I. Here we agree.
Your defense is, In such a cause, it is nothing disagreeing from Christian
meekness, the moral precept of Solomon, the example of Christ. What? to weary
God and man, with lewd profanations, scurrilous jests, slanderous and
reproachful calumni^s? What moral precept in Solomon countenances such
language as this See more of ^he same hotchp^tch in the Episile.
[ Scum, Lad^es, Kitchen-Physick. Brawn, Beef, Kickeshaw and Crambe-Prayers,
Motley and patcht incoherences. With hey pass, repasse, and the mystical men
of Sturbridge: Your Barber leading in Balaams Ass. Christ and his Apostles,
Capon and white-broath in the same leaf. Esaus red pottage, and a spur-galled
Galloway. Bastards and Centaurs of spiritual fornications. A Christian
Ministers Surplice, and an Egyptian Priests frock in the same suds: your
Primero of piety, Cogging of Dice into heaven. Gleeking and Bacchanalia, and
Flanks, and Brickets, etc.] Such language you should scarce hear from the
mouths of canting beggars, at an heathen (...), (...). Arist. Eth. ^ 4. c. 8.
(...) Latinis Scurra dicitur, sumta metaphora a mendicantibus, qui ad aras and
templa Deum sedebant and jacebant, and a sacrificantibus stipem mendicabant.
Inter^a autem seipsos multis jocis and scommatis vexabant, and interdum
praetereunte^ conviti^s pr^scquebantur. a (...) ara, and (...) jaceo seu
accubo. Vid. Mag. Co^^^ Eth. Arist.
altar; much less was it looked for in a treatise of controversall Theology,
as yours might have been thought, had you not thus prevented it. As for Christ's
example, which you blasphemously urge, surely that holy mouth was never so
foul, but then when it was spit upon: Yet neither was that indignity so bad as
this.

Well, but what if the benefit of this kind of writing will make amends for the
fault of it? Shall we do evil that good may come thereof? God forbid: not if
the good which followed were far better than it is like to prove: for let us
see, what does it promise? [ Even this vein of laughter, as I could produce out
of grave Authors, has often times a strong and sinewy force in teaching -- ]
doubtless you mean Atheism. For what else it can teach I am as far to seek, as
you are of those grave Authors that defend it. I care not to know what your
reading has been; and mine own is confessed small: Yet Sir Fr. Bacon.
One I have met withal, who (till you confute him with a graver) shall speak
home to the purpose. To leave all reverend compassion toward evils, all
religious indignation toward faults, to turn Religion into a Comedy or Satyr,
to rip up wounds with a laughing countenance, to intermixe Scripture and
scurrility sometimes in one sentence, is a thing far from the devout reverence
of a Christian, and scant beseeming the honest regard of a sober man. Is this
your noble jealousy, your dear love to the souls of weak Christians! this your
well-heated fervency! for shame render not that holy fire of zeal, which burned
as bright in our forefathers breasts, (...). Vid. Mer. Casaub. in Praesat ad
Med. Mar. Aur. Anton.
as it lies dead in ours, any further suspected to the world; lest anon, men
think it nothing but a name, an ignis fatuus, or the lying and false brag of
some vainglorious fools.

Again, it must be believed, you have done this not without a sad and unwilling
anger, not without many hazzards: and therefore we must pardon your endeavors!
Who put you upon the task? who forced an unwilling, relenting man, to commit
such insolences? Little charity does he deserve, who will choose to ask
forgiveness, rather than not to Nae tu, Aule, nimium nugatores, cum maluisti
culpam deprecari quam culpa carere: -- te oro, qu^t perpulit ut id committeres,
quod priusquam faceres, peteres uti ignosceretur. Cato apud Macrob i^ Pr^fat*
ad Saturn.
offend.

. II.
NOt to tarry longer in your Preface; the intent of it was, as of other
passages in your book, rather to maintain and defend libelling, than to give
any pretended satisfaction: yet at the same time you condemn it too: condemn it
on the Bishops side, defend it on your own. If any of their party (for indeed
thus the matter stands now) do chance to write, then their writings are
defaming * Invectives; Ask your Lysimachus Nicanor what d^faming inve^tives
etc. p. 7.
if any of yours, then it is liberty of speaking, permission of free-writing:
nothing more injurious, nothing more pinching, than the restraint of them to
freeborn spirits, p. 8. For my own part, I dislike them equally in both;
unless in you somewhat worse, than in all that in this kind have wrote
before, because you stand up to justify it. That Lysimachus Nicanor, which you
instance in, (is but one, and truly to my remembrance I have seen no more; one
of theirs to an hundred of yours is odds:) I misliked and censured as much as
any that I have read. But what have all the Bishops, on whom you so hotly
charge it, to do with that? nay what he, in whose dish you so enviously and
maliciously lay it? no more than you had sure with News from Hell, or the
Protestation protested. Before I answer your Justification of these libels, I
must tell you, you have wronged the noble ingenuity and fair memory of that
wonder of our age, Sir Francis Bacon, whom you here bring in as a witness
against the Bishops, He complains (you say) of the Bishops uneven hand over
these kind of Pamphlets. Page 7.
You say so: Hear him. [ And here I do much esteem the wisdom and religion of
that Bishop, which replied to the first Pamphlet in this kind; who remembered
that a fool was to be answered, but not by becoming like unto him; and
considered the matter he handled, and not the person with whom he dealt.]

You will say perhaps, this was but one Bishop: Hear him again in the name of
them all. [I hope assuredly that my Lords of the Clergy have no intelligence
with these other Libellours, but do altogether disallow, that their dealing
should be thus defended: For though I observe in him many glo^es, whereby the
man would insinuate himself into their favor, yet I find too ordinary, that
many pressing and fawning persons do misconjecture of men in authority; and
many times Veneri immolant suem, they seek to gratify them with that they most
dislike.] -- [For I have great reason to satisfy my self touching the judgment
of my Lords the Bishops in this matter, by that which was written by one of
them, whom I mentioned before with honor.] Whom have you wronged most now?
your Author, your Reader, or the Bishops? Believe me, who ever you are, such
collusion as this is unchristian.

I return to you again. This permission of free-writing ( so you are pleased to
style the most bitter and Atheistical libels) were there no good else in it,
yet at some time thus licenced, is such an unripping, etc.

Let the good be what it will, I am sure it is the most unworthy way of
procuring it that may be. What General, Militum virtute non hostium
imbecillite, potentia quaeri debet. Them^st. apud Just. Spec. Europae p. ^4.
Land. 1632.
in whose breast there lived but one spark of noble valor, would first disarm
the enemy, and then fight! The just arms that they have who defend a good
cause, is innocence, integrity, and repute; which when they are deprived of,
lays them open to such impotent nakedness, as inevitably brings their ruin.
[ These courses (says Master Sandys) are base and beggarly, even when
singleness of mind and truth do concur with them, and far unworthy of an
ingenuous and noble spirit, which soareth up to the highest and purest paths
of Verity, disdaining to stand raking in these puddles of obscoenity, etc.]
When singleness of mind and verity concur; both which are wanting here in
your cause: no singleness of mind, because these corruptions in manners are
urged by you as arguments to disprove a clear and divine truth, (which Sir
Francis Bacon will tell you, is as well now a policy of the Devils, as formerly
pretended holiness was to raise errors.) No truth, because though some
corruptions, and those grievous ones, are confessed and lamented, yet not on
his hand to whose person you lay them. Hear then my forecited Author: Sandys
Spec. E^rop.
[ But if to this baseness of discoveries, other baseness be also added; if
malice prefer them, if slight increase them, if falsehood and slander taint
them, then do they not only abase men from the dignity of their nature, but
even associate them with the foul enemy and calumniator thereof, whose name is
the slanderous accuser of his brethren.

The good that arises of these libels, Match. discourses upon Livie, lib. 1. c.
8.
(as the Florentine informs me) is, to incite the people of fury and tumult, to
breed hatred, findings, factions, ruin. [ And yet it is somewhat pinching
among freeborn sprits, if this liberty be denied.] Yea, Some Citizens have
served themselves of these calumnies, and made them steps and helps to their
ambitious ends. How? By confirming the people in an ill opinion of them that do
oppose, thereby to get their votes and partage. And as it depresseth that scale
wherein you put all the Prelates, so it raises that as much, wherein you put
your selves. Vide Hooker Eccl. Pol. in Praefat.
The ripping up with exceeding severity the faults of higher callings,
begets a great good opinion of integrity, of zeal and holiness, to such
constant reprovers of sin, as by likelihood would never be so much offended at
that which is evil, were they not singularly good themselves. And further (as
you have used the matter, imputing personal faults to the government in
general, of which I shall say somewhat anon) It gets you the opinion of wise
men too, that can see farther into Ecclesiastical affairs, than either the
Founders or Conservers of this established Polity. Thus much of libels in
general. I come now to yours.

. III.
NOr would I have done you the injury to have called it so, were it not too too
manifest. For that which even you professedly disavow (private and personal
spleen, p. 3. lin. 18.) is the greatest matter in your book; the other
business being handled but by the by, or not at all: and where it is, in such
a wretched, loathsome manner, as once I did almost doubt me, whether or no you
did not jeer at both sides, at Religion, and God, and all. I shall first answer
to those personal injuries, and then to the cause. Only first let me satisfy
you concerning my engagements and dependencie, which perhaps you may possibly
think might have wrought me to this vindication. I am free, as you, or any true
subject may or need be: I have a fortune therefore good, because I am content
with it: and therefore content with it, because it neither goes before, nor
comes behind my merit. God has given me a soul, eager in the search of truth;
and affections so equally tempered, that they neither too hastily adhere to the
truth, before it be fully examined, nor too lazily afterward. Such excess
fills the world with furious, hot-braind Heretics, Schismatics, etc. the
defect, with cold speculative Atheists. I have always resolved that neither
person nor cause shall improper me, further than they are good; and so far it
is my duty to give evidence.

. IV.
HE that shall weed a field of corn, bind the weeds up in sheaves, and present
them at once to the eye of a stranger, that is ignorant how much good wheat the
field bears, beside those weeds, may very well be deceived in censuring that
field; especially if he which presents them has put into the heap such weeds
as came from elsewhere. Thus it fares with men, when the evil actions of the
best are picked and culled out from their virtues, and all presented in gross
together to the eye or ear of him who is otherwise ignorant of the persons
whose vices or faults they are; what monsters do they seem! This and more have
you done to our Prelate: This, in pinning upon his sleeve the faults of others:
More, in that those which you pretend faults are indeed virtues. Foxian.
Confess. p. 14.
What has the Remonstrant to answer for the * scorn that is by some thrown
upon our Martyrs; while it is known to all, that will not be ignorant, that he
does both honor their memories, and tread in their steps; and that he does
not, as they did, in an holy zeal sacrifice his blood to his God, is not that
he is backward to it, but that it is not yet required at his hands. God is my
witness, I do not, neither can I flatter him: He that so patiently has
offered up his fame, his civil life, to be torn by the teeth and phangs of
calumny, how shall I think he will love his blood better than that? I know what
it is that has rendered many Martyrs and their stories so suspected as they
are, Vide Donnes Pseudom.
to wary and uncredulous men: Sometime a * wrong cause; when Traitors shall
engage God in a conspiracy, and then being detected and brought to execution,
dye for it no less undauntedly than if it were for the dearest truth;
unhappily priding themselves in that, for which they ought rather to have
repented. What glory is it, 1 Pet. 2. 20.
if when ye are buffeted for your faults ye take it patiently? Sometimes the
seeking their own deaths in a good cause, out of ambition of obtaining that
honor, which those first times of the Church had set upon Martyrdom. Whence I
should think it as discommendable for men to seek thus over-eagerly their own
deaths, banishments, confiscations of goods, stigmatizings, as the Philosopher
did the seeking of * preferments: (...). Arist. Pol. 2. c. 7.
Neither shall I ever esteem either their names or memories who shall thus
gather sticks for their own several piles; and as if God knew not what honor
was sit for them, be their own Carvers: so may the same thorns which Christ
wore as the Crown of Humility, be upon their heads the Crown of Pride.
Otherwhiles the ignorant or malicious unfaithfulness of the Martyrologers, in
transmitting to us those Church-stories, big-swoln with untrue Legends, as so
many invincible arguments of the truth of that cause, which those Martyrs
sealed with their blood. I have seen beyond sea what the Jesuits of our own
nation have carped at Master Fox his History; which made me think, though I
durst not say, that they injured them no less now than formerly: and if any
one of ours shall do the like, I shall think he wishes no better to the
Protestant cause than they do.

. V.
AFter you have born the people in hand, that our Remonstrant has defamed the
old ones, it is an easy thing to persuade them that he has made new. So you
do; [ haled some into the Gehenna at Lambeth, Page 12.
strappado'd others with an oath ex officio -- ] If that Court has been
illegal, either in the constitution of it, or in its proceedings, it is more
than I know: but if so, the Remonstrant is as guiltless of such illegalities,
as I am ignorant: And a fault committed there can no more prejudice Him, than
the Divine right of Episcopacy. Though your Bow-men here were quick in the
delivery of their arrows, yet they were wide of the mark.

. VI.
IF you missed before, now you will be sure to hit him, [ You love toothlesse
Satyrs; Let me inform you, a toothlesse Satyr is as improper as atoothed
sleek-stone, and as Bullish.] I wonder you go no lower; perhaps his cradle
might have yielded you some worthy observation: It was reckoned amongst Saint
Augustines faults, Ger. M^ringus in vita Sancti August.
faults, that in his infancy he did morosius flere. Such a note had not been
amiss here; but vixit is enough for that; an happy time, that you cannot
invent a slander to fix upon. You begin therefore with his youth; the sport
and leisure of his youth, even that must be raked up out of the dust, and cited
to witness against him, as it were to disparage the holiness of his Age and
Calling. [ When my early sins are done away as a morning cloud, they shall
never obscure or darken my setting Sun: God will never impute them to me, man
may] has been the comfort of many a dying Saint, in the day of evil, when the
iniquity of their heels have encompassed them; many, whose first years have
been as famous for * debauchednesse, Primam (...) it is par^em ^e quaera^, in coe
no perdidit. ^ T^es. de S. Aug.
as their latter for devotion: whiles this Remonstrant no sooner came to be
capable of the more violent impressions of sin, but his nature and it fell
foul; and because he had overcome vices in himself, he took liberty to whip
them in others. Which timely zeal, as it did not mis-become his youth, so can
it not disparage his Non corrumpuntur in deterius quae aliquando etiam a malis,
s^d hon^sta ma^e^t. quae saepius a bonis fiunt. P^in. l. 5. ep. 3. Arist.
apolog. pro suis l^dic. i^.
Prelacy; no, not as Poesic, not as Satyr: The first you cannot condemn; and
the latter I will maintain, against greater Critics than you would dare boast
to have been conversant with: only if I appeal to such, my fear is, I shall
have no adversary.

To let pass therefore your simile of the sleek-stone (which shows that you
can be as bold with a Prelate, as familiar with your Laundresse,) why, in the
name of Philology, is a toothlesse Satyr improper? why Bullish?

Euge novam Satyram, Satyrum sine cornibus euge!
Monstra, novt monstri, haec; and Satyri and Satyrae!
The Author himself furnished you with the exception: Epig. ad suas Satyras.
and had you had but so much life or quickness in your pallade, as to have
tasted an Epigram, you might have understood he speaks there in the person of
such carping Poetasters as you, and your now-despised Tribe, are: They say,
they are Monsters; you, that they are Bulls: you mean, I suppose, Chymaera's;
absurd and ridiculous compositions of words, inconsistible with sense. Let us
therefore, if you will, take them in pieces, and see where the incongruity
lies. Satyra signified anciently any kind of miscellaneous writing, which we
now term * Essays; Farrage libelli Iuv. Sat. 1. I^^ge ^ell. Mosellanus ad
Gell. ^. 1. c. 17.
whence Varro entitled many of his books of diverse subjects, * Satyras suas:
Whence there was also a Law called metaphorically * Lex Satyra, when by one and
the same Vote, diverse things were enacted. Last of all, it came to be
restrained to such kind of writings, as contained the vices of the times,
whether in verse or prose; more commonly now of later times in verse. Dens or
dentatus you cannot think should come here into composition with a Satyr, in
the primitive or proper signification of it, so as to make Satyra dentata as we
say it of a child, after its teeth are grown, or before, that he has teeth, or
is toothlesse: we must seek then some other sense for it; where I find teeth
and horns to signify strength, used to defense or injury. Nothing is more
familiar in Scripture, than horn for strength: (...), Luke 1. 69. Hebraeis
familiare est ( Keren) id est cornu, pro vi and ^obore usurpare, sumpta
metaphora ab animalibus cornupetis. Beza ad ^oc.
He has raised up an horn of salvation; a strong salvation. So also for
injurious strength, foenum habet in cornu is a common Proverb. The word, Matthew.
10. 16. which we translate simple, or harmless, is (...), ab (...) cornu. Thus
Martial lib. 13. ep. 91.

Dente timentur apri, defendunt cornua tauros:
Imbelles damae, nil nisi praeda sumus.
So vinum edentulum was used by the Ancients for small wines, such as we say in
plain English, will do a man no hurt: Vinum edentulum, hoc est nullarum virium,
vel saltem perexiguarum. Salmuth. ex Gualth. Tit. 25. p. 84. In the same sense
Horace speaks of the effects of strong wines: Tu spem reducis mentibus anxiis,
Viresque, and addis cornua pauperi.
makes a man bold or injurious: and in this sense (unless these Authors are
improper, it is no Bull to say a toothlesse Satyr, i. e. an harmless Poem,
that does Parcere personis, dicere de vitiis; spare the person, but strike the
vice: For such should a true Satyrist be,

-- asper
Incolumi gravitate.
Horat. de Art. Poet. Satyrae incolumes are harmless (more elegantly)
toothlesse Satyrs; in opposition to Satyrae mordaces, biting or toothed Satyrs;
such as for their loose insolences were by Law forbidden to the Ancients.

Quid refert dictis ignoscat Quis il^^ Mut^^s? is qui damnavit eum qui carmine
lusisset nomine expresso, L. Dorleans Nov. Cogit. (...) ^^rnel. Tacit.
Mutius annon? To which decorum our Author professes himself to have had
respect, Virgidem. lib. 3. in Prol.

For look how far the Ancients Comedy
Past former Satyrs in her liberty,
So far must mine yield unto them of old,
It Is better to be bad than to be bold.
And Sir David Lindsey in his Satyr in Prol.

Prudent peopill I pray ow all
Take na man grief in special,
For we sall speik in general
For pastime and for play:
Thairfoir till all our rimis be rung, etc. Though what was, and is denied the
stage, is got up into the Pulpit: much as the manner was with Chaucers Pardoner.

Then woll I sting hem with my tongue smert
In preaching, so that he shall not assert
To been diffamed falsely, if that he
Has trespassed to my brethren or me:
For though I tell not his proper name,
Men shall weil know it is the same
By signs or by other circumstances,
Thus quite I folk that does us displeasances,
Thus put I out my venym under hiew
Of holiness, to semen holy and true.
As you have censured the Remonstrants Poesy, so in like manner you have
justified a slip in the Smectymnuans Philology; I mean, so weakly, not so
maliciously, they mistook a Bench for a Judge; or rather the place for the men:
Areopagi for Areopagitae; and you make it good: How? [ If in page 6.
dealing with an outlandish name they thought it best not to screw the English
mouth to an harsh foreign termination, they did no more than the elegantest
Authors among the Greeks, Romans, Italians, etc.] Every Country, I know,
takes and gives that leave in the use of foreign words, to fit them to their
own easiest pronunciation and best liking: sometimes out of necessity,
sometimes of choice and pleasure only. The Greeks when they met with words
terminated in any of these letters, (...), because such terminations were
unknown to them, usually changed them. As Polybius for (...) writes (...). And
Suetonius (as some will have it) tells us how the Romans used the old Germane
word ( Nam parum abfuit cuin a Bructero quod^m occideretur. Suet in T^b. Some
readings for ^ruct^ro have Ructe^o: ^orrentius his manuscript has Rut^ro.
Rutters) which they still use to signify horsemen in war. And so perhaps our
English word ( Meat) is but Mattya fashioned to our Dialect: Dives and ex omni
posita est extructa macello
Coena tibi; sed te Mattyae seu macteae sunt bellaria, Graecis (...), omne
mensae secundae genus.
Mattya sola juvat.
Mart. lib. 10. Ep. 59.

So the Italian Inciostro from the Latin word Ex purpura atramenti genus
conficiebatur, qu^d Encaustum nominabatur: h^c soli Imperatores privil giis and
literis subscribendis ^^ebantur. -- unde and Inchiostro postea derivatum credo,
Guido Pancirollus rerum memorab tit Encaust p 10.
Encaustum, as likewise our English word ( Ink.)

Encaustes (...). ab (...) uro. Lege Cl. Salmas. in Pl^v. Vopisc. p. 393.
Phaeton tabula tibi pictus in hac est,
Quid tibi vis, dypyron qui Phaetonta facis?
Mart lib. 4. Epig. 47.

[Our learned Chaucer did not stick to do so.]

True.

-- There was a King
That hight Ceys, and had a wife,
The best tha might bear life,
And this Queen hight Alcione.
Fol. 267. Semiramus, Candace and Hercules,
Byblys, Dido, Tyshe and Piramu^.
Fol. 275. Ne like the pytte of Pegace
Under Pernaso where the Poet^ slept.
(Fol. 301. What is all this to the purpose? Ceys for Ceyx.
Chaucer has mollifyed a termination, (...) quod valet (...) in (...): he has
not metamorphosed the name of a place into the name of a man: or if he had, Sir
Ph. Sidney Defense of Poes.
it were one of those faults which ought to be forgiven (not imitated) in so
reverend antiquity. The old Latins wrote im for eum, joure for jure, nox and
noctu for nocte, diequinte for die quinto: Would you do so now? Yes, yes, any
thing, rather than acknowledge the least error: For either you are as
dis-ingenuous in matters of Grammar as of Religion; in both, purposing
therefore to maintain a thing, because you have said it; or else perhaps you
have a design to innovate as well upon our language as upon our
Church Government. If you be remembered, you set Afranius in Lucian to laugh at
the Bishops; to return you an innocent jest, I will set Demonax upon you.
(...). Luc. Demo^ax.
This Demonax asked one a question, who answered him in old obsolete affected
words; Prithee fellow (says he) where are thy wits? I ask thee a question now,
and thou answerest 400. years ago. I ask in the sixteenth of King Charles, and
you answer in the first of King John. For your Aula and Olla, that you say is
the same in old Latin, I could clap you on the shoulder with a Greek Proverb
as old, (...), Children and ^ools, etc.

Senex avarus vix sibi credens Euclio,
Domi suae defossam multis cum opibus
Aulam invenit.
Plaut. Aulular. But for your application of it in plain English [ Aula and
Hall] I must tell you it was an observation as unchristian and flanderous in
that particular, Page 66.
as in the general Omina quaedam occultiora sumpta sunt ex rebus, locis,
nominibus, vestibus. Vide Isa. Pont. in Collectan. ad Macrobium. Ex nominibus,
Roma quasi (...), robur. Roma, non Romula, ne male ominaretur diminutivum. Ne
mihi damn^m in Epidamn^ duas. Plaut. in Me^^ chapter omen, non a loci aliqua
incommoditate, sed a nomine tantum. Item, S^te emem, Lucridem fore confido
(...) in Pers. Vnde a d^s plerunque auspieata nomina: A love, Diocles,
Diogenes, Diom^des: A Iunone, Heraclides, Heraclitus: A Sole, Helius,
H^^od^rus, etc. Hugo Grotius in Februis ad Mart. Capell. Sa yricon.
superstitious.

. VII.
NExt you impugn his Logic: The Remonstrant had said, Da- Civil Polity in
general notion is variable and arbitrary; you subsume, But ri- The Polity of
our Kingdom is Civil Polity: Ergo, i. The Polity of our Kingdom is variable,
etc.
And thereupon you cry, Treason! and want of Logic! In the first you are
uncharitable; in the last, irrational, only guilty of that failing which you
impute to the Remonstrant. For look upon your syllogism; there is in the major
proposition, fallacia ad plures interrogationes: For either we ask, what is
possible only; or what is possible and lawful. The Remonstrant answers; It is
possible Civil Polity may vary; or, It is in the general notion left of God
to a various administration; subject to diverse forms, Monarchy, Aristocracy,
Democracy. You answer; It may be lawfully done at any time, or by any what ever
undertakers: For so much is inferred in your conclusion.

Civil Polity is at any time, or by any undertakers variable and subject to a
lawful alteration: But the Polity of England, etc Ergo, It is at any time, by
any undertakers, etc.
This makes the Treason, this you must and do infer, or else you charge him
with Treason unjustly. In this sense, as lawful, and, at any time, and, by any
undertakers, the Remonstrant denies the particular to be inferred upon his
general. But in his own he grants it, viz. That it is possible, subject to a
condition of variation, though it be Treason against the highest Majesty of
heaven, whose substitute the King is, in him or them who do attempt a change.
And in this saying he says no more, than all Statesmen of the general, and
Sir Francis Bacon of our particular, Considerations touching the Church of
England.
had said before him. [ All civil governments are restrained from God unto the
general grounds of justice and manners, but the Policies and forms of them are
left free;] free, and to the arbitrament of a people, met together and
consenting by the secret impression and instinct of God, (...), Arist. lib. 3.
Pol. cap. 6. to take what form of government they please: which being settled
according to the general rules of justice, and particular rules of the best
advancement of public good, is so immediately ratified by God, by his infusion
of sovereignty into him or them, who by the joint consent of all is advanced to
the helm; as also (to us Christians) by laying so many injunctions upon the
people, Romans 3. 5.
to obey and honor all those in authority, not for wrath, but for conscience
sake; that it is a ^inne of the highest degree, only but in thought to
meditate an alteration.

The Apostles distinction, (...), shows us what is the Kings hold, and what is
our duty. The Kings hold is divine; he has a deputed sovereignty, which works
upon the conscience, either willing or refusing to submit, in just lawful and
indifferent things: our duty is, in these things, willingly to obey: and in
case of substraction of our obedience, to know that he has (...), a compulsory
power, without which God had put the sword into his hands in vain; that is,
made him like a George on horseback, with his hand and sword lift up, but not
able to strike.

In this point I suppose both they that labor for and against Episcopacy, do
agree jointly.

. VIII.
Envy is a makebate, always doing ill offices: if it cannot compass its own
ends one way, it will another. You, not having any thing to accuse the
Remonstrant to the King, do it to the Parliament. [ Gladly you say, Page 6.
we believe you, as gladly as your faction wished for the assembling of this
Parliament. Page 13.
-- Whether this reflect not with ^cont^^ely upon the Parliament. -- ] Let the
thief or murderer dread the Judge; Let fear dwell where it ought, in guilty
bosoms. Doubtless the Remonstrant; and those which you esteem hi^ faction,
are as glad of, and wish as well to this Honorable Assembly, as you and yours
do. It is not the Parliament they make head against, but you and your furious
accomplices, who between soft flattery toward some of that House, and rough
violence to others (witness your Libels against so many of them, as their
consciences made Vote contrary to some proceedings) are like to over-turn all.
They know, and so do I, That the Sun looks not upon a braver, nobler
Convocation, than is that of King, Peers, and Commons; whose equal Justice,
and wise moderation, shall eternally triumph, in that they have hitherto
deferred to do, what the sour exorbitancies on one hand, and eager
solicitations on the other, not permitting them to consult with reason, would
have prompted them to: who know how to ponder wise and grave Numerantur
sententiae, non pondera^tur: nihil est tam inaequale, quam aequalitas ip^a: nam
c^m sit impar prudentia, par omnium jus est. P^in. l. 3. epist. 12.
sentences, not from the number, but the worth of them that propound them.
Among whom, even the youngest and unskilfullest may stand a pattern and example
to future times, teaching State-Novices, rather to inform their judgments to
the good of the next Assembly, than to use them to the Rudes nos and imperitos
reducta libertas deprehendit, cujus duleedine accensi, cogimur quaedam sac^re
antequam nosse. Idem l. 3. ep. 14.
prejudice of this present. The gravest and most experienced, to be what they
are thought, and to deserve all that praise, with which the people Senatus,
humano g^ne ireverendus, O^bis terrae consilium, Asylum mundi, Fid^m and al^um
reipublicae pectus. Vide Fil^sac^m l. 3. s^lect. T. t. Sen^otus Ven. Sen.. 4,
5, etc.
load them. So to satisfy their desires as they are just, not as they are Non
considerandem est quid vir opt^mus in praesent a (...), sed quid semper sit
probaturus. Plin. l. b. ^. ep. 7. Sunt quae non dare, sed nega^e, beneficium
est. Poscit aeger frigidam, ira^us serrum, etc. exorari in pernitiem rega^tium,
saeva est (...). Sen. de B^nef.
vehement: considering that the multitude crave only out of the sense of evils;
of which so long they will have a sense, as they are willing to obey. All
conspiring unanimously, so to advance the pure Religion of our dearest Savior,
that it be not dispirited on one hand by gaudy ceremonious Formalists; nor lost
on the other amids a Crowd of sullen and ignorant Sectaries: and after that (to
which it is an honor for him to submit) the divine sovereignty and royal
Immunities of our most Gracious Master.

. IX.
WE must go higher yet* and if we will, may believe the Remonstrant to be [ a
notorious enemy to truth, page 2. a false Prophet, page 3. a belly-god, proud
and covetous, page 5 squeezed to a wretched, cold, and hollow-hearted
confession of some Prelaticall ryots, page 15. whose understanding nothing will
cure but Kitchin-physick, page 17. a Laodicean, page 24. a dissembling Joab,
page 28. a dawber with untempered mortar, page, 62.] Good God! thou that have
promised to direct the steps of the humble, and to be with those that are of a
meek heart, instruct me how to choose some other path to walk in toward my
Eternity; for this my soul hates! Let me for ever be shut out of that heaven,
that is the reward of such black calumny, such malicious and divellish
slanders! And, O you my dear brethren, who are disaffected toward the Prelate,
look upon and give evidence to the man! How is he an enemy to the truth,
unless the Gospel of Christ be a lie! How is he a false Prophet, unless your
selves who profess the same faith be impostors? View well that heap of age and
reverence, and say whether that clear and healthful constitution, those fresh
cheeks and quick eyes, that round tongue, agile hand, nimble invention, s^ay'd
delivery, quiet calm and happy bosom, be the effects of threescore years
surfeits and Apponitur coena non minus (...) q^am frugi, (...) dele^ratur,
(...) afficitur; and (...) post ^7 (...), (...) ^^rumque vigor integer,
ind^agile and vi^idum cor^us, ^olaque ex^e^ecture prudentia. Pl n. l b 3. epist
1.
gluttony. What time could he steal to bestow upon Mammon, the God of this
world, who has given us so large an account of his idlest Occasio^all Medit.
minutes? whose whole life has been nothing but a laborious search after
humane and divine truths, which having picked out, (as that little miracle of
nature does honey) from weeds and flowers, he did not improper to himself, but
liberally dealt them to the Non ^ibi, sed operi bibunt. Quint decla. 13. Apes
paupe is.
good of the public; his toil being impleasanted to himself, in that he loved
the work he went about; and accepted of the world, because they knew he dished
out nothing to them, but what he tasted of himself; penned nothing but what
first he practiced. How could he be lazy and idle, whose volumes are so many,
whose preaching so frequent, whose studies so early and late; so that it is
only questionable whether his lips did drink in more grace than they
distilled? I commend not, but vindicate. Must he be therefore lukewarm, See
Shepherds sincere Conver^. Christ an M^der. 1 Ex (...). p. 70.
because his zeal burns not as hot as hell? must his conscience be therefore
cauterized and seared, because he brands not every Christian out of the Church
of England with the marks of reprobation? writes not the dreadful doom of God
in the forehead of all Popishly given, in France, Spain, Italy, Germany? Sends
not all Russian, Abassine, Grecian, Armenian, Ethiopick Churches, which all the
day have flown different ways, and laboriously culled (with the Be) such
sweets as they could light upon, in the evening swarming to hell; or presently
sets not fire on their hives? Alas! how long has this been the doctrine of the
Church of England? and I cannot yet believe it. Shall I ever think, with that
foolish Anchorite, that the Sun shines no where but into my Cell? Or can I not
enough enjoy and bless God for the warmth of his great light, unless I
confidently affirm, that at no time, in no measure it shines beyond our
Tropic. Let who will confine the mercies of God in Christ to so narrow limits;
I dare not.

Brethren, has he forsaken the faith, that is so far an enemy to the Pope,
Page 18.
as the Pope is an enemy to Christ? Is it come to this now, that he must be bid
part from the rest of his brethren, that holds not Episcopacie to be
Antichristian; All forms of Prayers and Liturgies to be quenching of the
Spirit, evil ( quatenus ipsum;) An equality of Ministers, living upon niggard
contributions; demolishing of Churches and all kind of Sacrilege lawful? That
calls not the royal, noble, and devout munificence of our Ancestors, who
received, cherished, and transmitted our Religion to us, the price of their
damnation? Does that good Spirit of God dwell no where but in dry or marishy
constitutions? Will Grace mix with nothing but adust choler, or lowering morose
peevishness? Cannot Grace and Nature consist? When we deny our selves, must we
deny humanity? Does Gods Spirit now inspire Christians, as the Devil did his
Priests of old, by putting them out of their wits? Is conversion nothing but a
turning about to this man's opinion, or that man's novelties? a slavish imitation
of some foreign Church abroad, or doting upon some great Masters at home? Why
else cannot a sober, modest, humble, orthodox Prelate go for a Christian among
us? Why are we weary of him, if we be not so of our Religion? him, who had been
as holy, wise, learned, temperate, bountiful, sincere a Protestant, as any
this day in our Church, had he but been of your opinion in matters of
discipline? How almost a Saint, how altogether a Devil? No preaching, no care
of the peace of the Church, no learned Volumes writ, no hospitality, no poor
fed, no holiness of life, no Church, no salvation, but in the Presbytery?
Worthy you of your chains and fagots, O ye Martyrs, that commended this
government unto us; perish and rot the memories of those famous Assemblies,
that confirmed it, and bound us to the maintenance of superstition and
Antichristianisme! And now that I find them so ungrateful to the dead, it
lessens my wonder, though not their impiety, that they are so to the living.
Away with those cheap as numerous leaves, that image forth to us his ravished
and devout thoughts; away with the clear and bright mirror of a dispassioned
soul, a rectified understanding, a liberal and Christian charity; with that
sweet and heavenly Vellem mihi, etsi non qualis in Marco Tullio fuit, aliquam
tamen proximam ^loquentiae contingere facultatem. Lactan. l. 3. div. Inst c. 1.
Veri^as licet possit sine eloquenti^ defendi, tamen claritate and nitore
sermonis illustranda est, ut potentius in animos influat. Idem. Quid igitur?
annon adfuit Paulo sua (...)? certe adfuit, quanta nulli unquam obtigit; sed
coelestis, non humana. Beza ad 1. Cor. 1. 17. -- (...). Naz. 1. in lul. --
(...). Idem Orat. 20. in funere Basil.
eloquence that prepares a way for the Spirit of God; that opens our ears, the
gates of our souls, that the King of glory may enter in, and dwell there; that
awakens our understandings to arise and be ready to entertain that (...), the
engrafted Word, which is able to save our souls; yea and away with it from the
earth, lest it upbraid to future ages, the tyrannous malice and affected
barbarisms of these present times. Blind men! that will not see our own good;
that shut our eyes, and then complain that we want the Sun! If you will not
look upon his works, which testify of him, ask his great Master, or his noble
retinue at Court, whether this confession of the riots and disorders of Courts,
Officers, Palaces, City, Country, were now squeezed from him? Whether it came
not then from his lips as freely as now? Whether his reproofs seemed cold,
wretched, or heartlesse? Or if there lurked hidden evils which he saw not, or
those which he saw were not reformed, why does he suffer as a countenancer, as
a contriver? It was a word fell from the boldest and most undaunted spirit that
Rome ever saw, Animus mihi certe nunquam defuit, tempora defuerunt. ul 4.
Philip. Non prosequi, non fugere.
I would, but the times would not. Zeal must have discretion as well as
knowledge. He that pressed too hard upon the enemy and lost himself, was in the
old discipline of war accounted as infamous as he that fled. He that
regulates his actions by a good conscience, rather than popular fame, however
they hear abroad, finds ever the content and reward of them at home.

But in good earnest, What should he do to please you? what way, besides
abjuring his Prelacy, or being as wicked as you would make him, is there left
for him to content you? If he write controversies, then he is a Swash-buckler
against the Pope; then he careers with spear in rest, and thunders upon the
steel cap of Bellarmine: If he preaches, then he sermonizes and dawbes with
untempered mortar: If he contemplates or meditates, then he plays with ^ambeth
Kittens: If at Court, he is crowding for preferme^t, or accusing the people to
the King: If at home, he is a belly-God, etc. O the love, and charity, and
reverence of these times, to so holy, so deserving a Bishop! May ye stay for
such another glorious light of the Church, till ye can deserve him! and never
enjoy the benefit of this, till ye have made him amends for these injuries! At
si intereos quos nunquam vidimus floruisset, non solum (...) e^us, orum etiam
imagines conqui^eremus: ejusdom nunc honor praesentis and gr^tia quasi
satietate langues^it: at hoc pravum malig^umq^e est, ^on admirari homine^
admira ione dignissimum, quia videre, audire, alloqui, c^mplecti, n^^ (...)
verum etiam amare contingit. Plin. lib. 1 epist. 16.
Had former times shown him, or foreign Churches nourished him, he that is
now your scorn had been your wonder: Happy had that man been that could have
dressed a Sermon in his grave and weighty Sentences, or his Study with his
Picture: only now we wanton at the full breast, and because we are at
springhead, rather puddle the clear stream with our foot, than slake our
thirst. Froward spite, that makes us therefore hate, because we cannot love
enough; therefore revile, because we cannot sufficiently praise. But go on,
revile, slander, belie holy men; your selves can give us the best and truest
character of what ye are: Neither in this point would I ever have condemned ye,
had I not heard it from your own mouths. And you, Reverend Sir, stand up; the
disadvantage of your old age, your spent and decayed strength, that would
naturally shrink under such pressures, makes but Grace more eminent in you: We
can never better see how the foundation bears the weight of the building, than
when the props be removed. How can any one say, Lo this man leans to an arm of
flesh, ^ccl 12. 1^
when he sees it withered? The evil days of a man are the best of a
Christian: Now may Grace borrow her Masters Chariot, Esa 63. 3.
and triumph, saying, I have ^rod the Wine Press alone, and of the people
(fear, hope, boldness, glory) there was none with me. And to thee, O God, be
the praise of this exercise of his Christian fortitude; it is thou that have
shown (as the last and most glorious blaze of this dying light) That he that
could deserve all praise, could suffer all injury.

. X.
THe scraps and offall that remain of your Libell, concern Liturgy and
Episcopacie; both which you have handled, as you esteem of them, unworthily and
basely. Forsooth you would give the world to know these two things; First, that
you are no Bishop: Secondly, that you can pray ex tempore. Surely a man of
strong parts, and a mortified ambition! It was thought of old, that the
Philosophers did therefore contemn and speak ill of riches and pleasures and
high places, because they were never born to them; as the Fox cursed the Grapes
that were out of his reach. But we will not think so uncharitably of you; A
rich Widow, or a Lecture, or both, contents you.

To the first you make way, by a long, tedious, theatricall, big-mouthed,
astounding Prayer, put up in the name of the three Kingdoms; not so much
either to please God, or benefit the weal-publike by it, as to intimate your
own good abilities to her that is your rich hopes.

Petit Gemellus nuptias Maronillae,
Et cupit, and instat, and Precatur.
Because you shall never say I am envions, and go about to disgrace you, I will
give this testimony of your Oraisons, That there wanted but one petition to
make them complete, which was, That God would forgive you the profanation of
the rest of your book.

To the second you make way (a very compendious way in this age, if as honest
as compendious) by flattery and railing: at both which you are old excellent,
or as your own expression is, sufficiently tried. How you can perform the
first has been already heard; now let us hear the second. Speak out, the
Parish is big. [ Our great Clerks think these men, because they have a Trade,
as Christ himself and S. Paul had, cannot therefore attain to some measure of
knowledge, and to a reason of their actions, p. 13.] As Christ had; Christ
preached, Ergo Sam. How may. Take heed friend, you border upon blasphemy. Our
great Clerks think, etc. Truly, small Clerk, you know but little of those men's
minds: I will insure you they do not think so. But why should you plead this?
Methinks it were much better for you, and more conducible to your ends if it
were so: For could they not attain to a reason of their actions, there were
great hopes they would choose you to be their Minister. But I know not how
unluckily you have spoiled your own market; if that be true which you elsewhere
affirm of them [ That they are competent Judges of a Ministers abilities, as it
will not be denied that he may be the competent Judge of a neat picture or
elegant Poem, that cannot limne the like,] unless in your simile you recover
your self and abuse them: For who ever accounted an ignorant Gull a sufficient
and competent Judge of a terse Poem?

-- Versus reprehend^t inertes?
Culpabit duros? Incomptis allinet atrum
Transverso calamo signum? Ambitiosa recidet
Ornamenta? Parum claris lucem dare coget?
Arguit ambigue dictum? Mutanda notabit?
Fiet Aristarchus? --
All which is the office of a Critic. Who but you thinks an inspired Cobbler
may judge of Apelles his workmanship? (...), Synes Epist. 1. (...), Arist. Pol.
8. c. 3. Vt de pictore, fictore, sculptore, nisi artifex judicare, ita nisi
sapiens non potest perspicere sapientem, Plin. lib 1. epist. 10. (These
Authors testimonies, I hope Sir, may be considerable against your insolent
affirmation.) Who but you, against the command of God himself, dare bring not
the Congregation only, but the very beasts of the people, within the borders
of the Mount? Sober and wise Christians, I doubt not but they know where to
stay; neither will they follow such Ringleaders as you, to their own
destruction: Such men will acquit our great Clerks well enough, of any or all
your pretended slanders; and besides tell you, (that though against all sense
and reason they make them not Judges of their abilities, and against all
antiquity and custom of the Church, above what ever is written or practiced in
Scripture, they receive not their ordination from them;) yet they both
encourage them in, and bless God for their safe knowledge, and becoming
actions. Go you then to your mutinous rabble, and if you can appease their
furies, enthrone their sage wisdoms upon some stall or bench, and cite before
them the Clerks of either University: those competent Judges, I guess, will do
like themselves, reject one as unsufficient (so as they the Horse which
Polygnotus had exquisitely painted, Fr. I^n^us de P^ct. vet l. 3
damned the whole piece, because contrary to the nature of that beast, he had
made him with hairs on his nether eyelids,) only for that he has too little
hair on his upper lip, or too much upon his forehead; because he uses not to
wear wrought night-caps, or mastick patches. In the mean while another (as the
Good-wife in Plutarch judged of Philopoemen) shall be thought fitter to ^leave
blocks than divide a Text, because he has a sour or crabbed countenance;
because either his learning is too much, or that little he has lodges, as
their Prentices do, Ingenium Galbae mal^ habitat.
in an ugly Garret: Whiles a third shall be deeply suspected of Arminianism,
because he has a squint-eye, or is of the Archbishops College. Briefly all
those glorious lights, and bright stars of eminence and luster in either
Horizon, shall be no better esteemed of, than Tyro in Gellius observes the
Hyades were, which by his Clownish Ancestors were taken for so many
sucking-pigs; (...) Suculae dictae. A. Gell. l 13. c. 9.
and perhaps under that name shall be driven to Hogs-Norton to pipe upon the
Organs (if they be yet standing.) But I leave these grave Censors, these
Areopagi, if you will, to their own discretion; lest while I am busied in
observing of theirs, I forfeit mine: and this Paragraph be taxed for that fault
of your whole discourse, which in the easiest Censurers mouth is but Levity and
Digression.

. XI.
OF Liturgy first. 1 Cor. 10. 23. a Re ringend^m est (...) (...) ^gtur, sc.
indiff.
Into which that distinction of Saint Paul's shall lead the way: All things are
lawful, but all things are not expedient. A thing in its own nature
indifferent, and so lawful, does sometimes (...) become inexpedient, and so
unlawful. By this rule we will examine the point in hand. For that set forms
of Prayer are in themselves at least indifferent, the precept and practice of
Christ confirms, Lord Viscoun^ Say and Seal in his answer to the Archbishop.
and no man in his right wits ever denied. [ Some set forms of Prayer, by some
men, in some cases may be lawfully used.] The question is therefore of the
expediency, not of the lawfulness of such prayers, viz. Whether a set form of
Prayers, this in particular to which the Church of England has been, and is
laudibly as piously accustomed, may (...), expediently be used, and enjoined by
all to be used, in a national Church, as ours is.

To the clearing of which point, there are two things of necessity to be done:
1. The conveniences and inconveniences of such prayers in the general, must
be weighed. 2. The blemishes with which this of ours in particular is charged
must be examined
According as we find which, for or against, our conclusion must be made.

1. It suits to, and agrees best with Gods own proceedings in the government of
his Church. In which it has pleased his divine wisdom so to order the matter,
that (since all men are not alike capable of knowledge, nor have the same
abilities,) his providence should as it were conform it self to this unequal
condition of men: whence it is, he has made choice of some to teach others,
and pray for others; chose some to be Apostles, some Ministers, Pastors,
Teachers; whereas had he not had respect to this, and purposed to go along with
this weakness of man's nature, he could as well have infused abilities (I mean
supernatural) into the breast and brain of the most ignorant despicable member
of the Church, sufficient without other teachings or helps, to have raised him
to converse with God here, and possess God hereafter, as ever he did into the
ablest of the Apostles.

And now having thus ordered the matter; (for thus it is, was, and ever will
be, let men dream never so long, torture and rack Scripture, to make it roar
out an imaginary lying perfection) God looks that those some which he has
chose, endued, set apart to teaching and praying, and all other offices of
ministerial function, as they are public men, so should have a public care
of that Church wherein they are: So drive, as the Church may go like a flock
together, a due respect had to the Lambs and Ewes big with young, to the weary,
faint, and lame: -- Hanc aegram vix Tytere duco: which always are the most
considerable number.

Yea, come we to the Shepherds themselves: How many laborious, painful,
conscionable men are there, that if these helps may not be allowed them, must
either tempt God, fail in the performance of their duties, or give them quite
up, ^ Cor. 2. 16.
as not sufficient for these things? And if it come to this once, how many
souls, (every one, for ought we can say of this or that particular, being to
God alike precious,) will here be desperately, irrecoverably lost! For what
help? will our Land afford enough such ex tempore men? no nor the much magnified
Amsterdam, with Geneva and New England to boot. Hope is a brave, heroic,
sublimed Christian virtue, (...). Romans 5. 5.
but it is of things which make us not ashamed.

2. Such Liturgies and set forms are most expedient, if we look to the nature
of Prayers (public Prayers.)

Prayer in it self considered, Is the proper act of the soul, of the will and
understanding, and may be completely and perfectly offered up to God, without
those subsidiary helps of invention, disposition, memory, language; these, when
we speak of private Prayer, are but the vain pomp of it: when of public, the
necessary adjuncts.

I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with understanding, 1 Cor. 14.
15. This often mis-applyed Text is to be understood of public Prayer, as you
may see by comparing it with the second verse, He that speaks or prays in
an unknown tongue, speaks or prays not unto men, but unto God. By Spirit is
meant (not as our vain humourists would have it) an extemporall faculty of
wording it, but that gift of the Spirit which Saint Paul mentions verse. 5, 6,
etc. viz. the miraculous gift of tongues, or faculty of speaking diverse
languages: by understanding is meant the understanding of the people; for he
that prays in an unknown tongue, prays not unto men, that is, not to their
understanding. That which I gather from hence is this; That those public
Prayers are most expedient to be used, which are most accommodated to the
capacity of the people. Herein I known you will agree with me. I go on. But a
set form is most accommodate, Ergo. This proposition is easily proved: I make
it good thus.

1. The understanding is prae-acquainted with, and the subject otherwise
difficult is thus made obvious and easy. 2. The matter is the same, not at the
will, or passion, or ignorance, or negligence of him that prays to be varied:
by reason of which, sometime the people cannot, sometime dare not go along with
their Minister. 3. Though the language be not in it self unknown, yet the
harshnesse of it in some, the length and ediousnesse of style in others, the
affected height of forced Allegories and Tropes, not to say the nonsense and
ridiculously absurd variations of many pretenders to the faculty, render^ it
altogether as unintelligible, as it were Latin or Greek. If were to make good
this assertion by a particular in ^ance, I would go no farther than your prayer
you have given us, page* 6, 37, 38. which infinite of honest and simple
Christians would no more know how to understand, than they would do a Scene
out of Iohnsons Cataline.

But what command in Scripture is there for it? Where is conceived prayer
mentioned! what such virtue is there in the extemporall wording of a Prayer,
that for the giving it such undoubted liberty we must run all these hazzards?
The soul may be as much inflamed that prays in a set form, as that which does
not: and that may be as cold that prays extempore. Will you say, that every
one that has the gift, has also affections answerable? you dare not. That
then may be belyed, and we shall admire the spirit where it is not: what is
this, but to warm our selves at a painted fire? For indeed it is not the
volubility or roundnesse of tongue, that is the work of Gods Spirit primarily
in him that has this gift of Prayer, but the enkindling of the affections: I
say primarily; for where the Spirit of Grace, which is as fire in the heart,
finds such abilities, such natural abilities, either actual or potentiall,
it does catch hold of them, and make fuel as it were of them, whereby the soul
burns the more ardently: But where it finds them not, God never infuseth them,
(this is mere Anabaptisme) otherwise no such abilities, See Perkins cases of
Consc. of set forms of Prayer.
no grace, no extemporall expressions, no Prayer. And this being thus, does it
make a Prayer ever the more acceptable to God, that it is extemporall? Does it
make a Prayer unacceptable, that it is not so? In truth, no: But this is it,
there is more of the man in the extemporall Prayer, and that makes us dote so
much upon it; as the fond mother commonly loves that child best, whose face is
most like her, though perhaps of worst conditions. You cannot but know, that
there are of the holiest men, and most able Ministers about London, and
elsewhere, that both use our Liturgy, and accustom themselves to a set form of
their own; wisely considering as I said before, that they are public men, and
are bound to do not what they could more to their own benefit, but what they
must, to the peoples. Yea, those that do use extemporall expressions, I would
ask them, how far they are from a set form: Is not yesterdayes, to days, to
morrows, and every days Prayer alike, in the frame, economy, or disposition
of the matter? Is not the matter the same? do they not preface, petition,
conclude always alike? Not in the same words, you will say. Well, but S. Paul
did so in all his Epistles in the very same words; and it is more than probable
did so in all his Prayers. If there be new emergent occasions, do not those men
insert into their own? does not the Church insert into the Common Prayer book
such petitions as are needful for those occasions? Consider then in what
things their Prayers come near yours, and yours come near theirs, and where is
the difference? why is the world distracted about nothing? either you are
exorbitant, or both may agree.

3. Most expedient to attain the end such worship drives at; Order, Unity,
Piety, and the best advancement of Gods glory: Whereas an unbounded liberty in
extemporall and fanaticall Prayers, brings forth the quite contrary; disorder,
disunion of affections between man and man, impiety, atheism, and anarchy. Ex
ungue leonem. What lewd demeanours, what insolent and irreligious behaviors,
both toward the Book of Common Prayers, and the men that use them, has this
lawless time shown? now, while the laws are still in force that authorize them.
The King and Parliament devoutly use them, religious people morning and evening
frequent them; now some to spurn and tear them, others spit at them, you to
call them superstitious, evil, a Crambe, a Kickshoe, an Hotch-potch, a Drench,
etc. If this be not the highest degree of profanation, nothing is. Surely, if
we do not repent for this, our posterity will; and besides that, blush when
ever they shall be upbraided by such prodigiously Atheistical Ancestors. But
to proceed: What order can ever be expected? what uniformity looked for? what
consent and harmony betwixt Church and Church, when every one shall differ in
that which should make them truly one? a Communion of Saints, even their
community of Prayers? How, while some are starved, shall others be pampered?
and then what likeness? Tell me not, that they that will shall use the
Churches set forms; for either they will be wholly neglected, where others
cannot be had, being so discountenanced, if left arbitrary; discountenanced, I
say, by public authority, and depraved, condemned, damned, by private persons;
or else, whiles both are in use, it will nourish a continual enmity betwixt
the users of each. It is a requisite in the Church of Christ, that the
particular Congregations which are the members of that mystical body, be of
one heart and one mind, especially in their Prayers to, and Praises of God;
more especially in public meetings, at public deliverances, in public
dangers: how shall we be so, when we shall not know what one another hearts
and minds are? No, but the design of your dear friend, the Author of The
Protestation protested, and some since him, is, to have the Church at length
sifted and winnowed, and the grain laid apart by it self, that is your faction;
and for the chafe, all else, let them do or be what they will, it matters not.
If the Kings State will maintain the faith of Christ, well and good, they shall
have your fair leave: if not, they shall have your leave too; so you may enjoy
your consciences you are indifferent. This is the Common good that is cried up,
though indeed the Public woe: and thus you tread a fair way to it: you shall
have the hold of the hearts of the people, the surest hold that may be, of
their consciences, of all their religiousest actions, their Prayers,
Supplications etc. and the State shall have none of you: not command you to
pray for the King, that you say is time spent in flattery; not for Bishops,
they are Antichristian; not for his subjects, that they may live godly and
peaceable lives under him, they are dogs, shut out of the gate of the new City*
howling.

Immortale odium, and nunquam sanabile vulnus
Ardet adhuc Ombos and Tentyra --
What can the end of these proceedings be, but an irreconcilable distance
between party and party; then jealousies, then provocations, then wars, then
ruin! I doubt not, but if Christ had been pleased to have converted to his
faith but one King and his whole State, and for to have ordered a national
Church, and have given over to us that order as a pattern, surely it should not
have been any such independent anarchicall Government as your platform is, nay
will be if we can tell when; for as yet the Whelp is not licked into any
fashion. You say that set forms of Prayers are quenching the Spirit; whether it
be so or no, I am sure your Extemporall will set such a fire on your Spirits,
that they will need quenching, or the whole Kingdom will burn with them. Weigh
these circumstances, and you will see that there is an expediency of set forms
in a national Church.

2. Of set forms some of ye will grant, but not of these that are. Your reason?

[The form of your Liturgy is fantastic and superstitious, and the end
sinister, the imposition violent, page 2^.]

Fantastic? Like enough they might think so, that saw or heard you read them;
Sed male dum recitas, etc. But then the fault was not in the Prayers, but your
officiating. If ever you were present at a Synagogue in Amsterdam, and saw how
the Jews with voice and ge^ure read a Section of the Law, or one of David's
Psalms, you might justly say the men were fantastic, yet the matter was good.

But the Form is so. Wherein I pray? I suppose you mean the same thing, with
those importunate triflers in Queen Elizabeth's days, who were offended at the
short cuts or shreddings, at the intermingling of praying and reading in it, in
such manner, as if supplicants should use the same to a mortal Prince in
proposing their suits, all the world would think them mad. If thus, the answer
is, where you had the objection; Hooker Eccl. Pol. p. 241.
I have turned down the leaf, pray save me the labor of transcribing, and look
it your self: Only the close is this; Our case were miserable, if that
wherewith we most endeavor to please God, were in his sight so vile and
despicable, as men's disdainful speeches would make it.

Though you borrow your arrows (your objections) from their quiver, yet what
with being new feathered with the peoples discontents, perhaps flying with the
wind; and lastly, their heads being poisoned with the gall of Aspes, they
pierce deeper now than formerly: then our Prayers were but ridiculous, now
superstitious. Were they always so? Yes. Belike it was beyond the skill of
those holy men to refine a Scorpion into a Fish, page 14. Where then was their
error in transmitting over this superstition to us? Was it malice, or
ignorance, or both? that when we asked them Bread, would give us a Stone; when
we asked a Fish, would give us a Serpent? [It bribed their judgments with
worldly engagements, page 16.] O the inconsiderateness of eager and headlong
ambition! that men, who but now were, some returned from banishment, others
drawn out of prison, should in an instant be so turned about, that they would
forfeit their Religion, their Wisdoms, their Credits, yea their Souls, in
obtruding upon a Church superstitious and damnable Rules for Devotion; and all
this to get a narrow incompetent Bishopric. If they had minded preferment, why
looked they not abroad, where sacrilege and misdevotion had not so straightened
their walks, nor demolished their goodly prospects, nor washed out their
gilded titles? they could not have been worse there, if they were superstitious
at home. I wonder not now to hear them so traduced by the Papists, when our
selves do thus uncharitably misreport them. Martin Mar-prelate (as Master
Sandys can tell you) is in the disgrace of our Clergy cited by the Papists,
^pee. Europ.
as a grave unquestionable Author: and what place your Animadversions may once
have in the Vaticane, is yet dubious; though it be certain that those Spiders
of Rome cannot have a fitter subject from whence to draw poison. But is it
certain they are superstitious now? Will your Smectymnuans affirm so much?
Truly then they are as deeply concerned in it, as any of the rest of their
brethren, who before the unhappy distaste of the late Convocation, could alike
swallow so much Popery. However; where is the superstition? In this, this, or
this Prayer, or any of the rest? If not in any of the parts, not in the whole.
O but [ it symbolizeth with the Mass, and pranks it self in Popish weeds, and
goes too garish upon holy days, p. 22.] They have Anthems, and Organs, and
Copes, and Surplices in the Church of Rome: True; and when all this is away,
still they have Prayers: and if you will wholly abolish them because
symbolicall, Antichrist will symbolize with ye (...), in his Creed in spite of
your teeths, unless you mean to have no other but The Christian Belief
concerning Bishops. That soul that can soar aloft upon the strength of his own
wings, or has its flagging Pinions completely ymped with feathers from the
Dove, the Spirit of God, shall little need such advantages as are these things
which we speak of; (for advantages they are, and but advantages;) only take
you heed you do not, Icarus-like, over-dare, and give all the Christian world
else leave to acknowledge and remedy as they may, their almost irremediable
weaknesses. This outward State and glory (says my forecited Author) being
well disposed, does engender, quicken, increase and nourish the inward
reverence and respectfull devotion, due to so sovereign, so awful a power:
which, those whom the use thereof cannot persuade so, would easily by the want
of it be caused to confess.

Next, [ the end is sinister: a bait for Papists to bite at.] Saving your scorn
Sir, such baits are laid by his direction, that made his Apostles fishers of
men. But what would that do? bring them to our Churches? Yes, and did: Alas,
what was that you will say? I will tell you; It was a shame to such Recusant
Protestants as you are, that will not only not bite, but not so much as nibble.
But you have answered your self: It was [ a greedy desire of winning of
Proselytes, by conforming to them unlawfully.] I will confess with you, that
there was a greedy desire of winning Proselytes, and is still; but no unlawful
means used, till you have proved that those things, with which our Church and
the Church of Rome do symbolize, are either in their own nature, or due use,
superstitious. If you know what is the meaning of that passionate entreaty of
S. Paul, Romans 14. 15
Destory not him with thy meat for whom Christ dyed: or of that which he
alleges as his own example; 1 Cor. 9. 22.
To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak; I am made all things
to all men, that I might by all means save some:] you would not call it, as you
do, a vainglorious and Pha^isaicall project; unless you think that a Papist
cannot have a tender conscience; or if he has, that he ought not for his
satisfaction to be yielded unto in things indifferent. Neither is this end (a
respect indeed it is, that was and is had in having such forms, though not the
main and ultimate) frustrate if they do not come; for it keeps as many
Protestants at Church now, as it did Papists at first (till they were upon
other reasons diverted;) many of which by so unsufferable a scandal, would
either abstain from the worship of God altogether, or go where they might have
it nearest to their ancient manner.

In the last place, you say the imposition is violent: you mean this in respect
to your selves, who have resolved never but by force to submit to any thing,
how just soever: otherwise I s^e not how you can possibly call it so, since the
authority is lawful and just; the thing in it self indifferent, and in the
circumstances expedient, the extent of the imposition no farther than as it may
stand together with Prayers of our own framing, whether as private m^n or as
public. To conclude thi^ Section, you and I might have b^n far better busied
in using those pious forms, than ^n thus d^sputing them either of the one side
o^ the other.

. XII.
I Was glad at my heart when I heard you cry out [ s^t the grave Councels upon
their shelves, Page 19.
string them hard,] for from such your slighting of them, I conjectured your
ignorance in that ki^d of learning to be, though not so ingenuously confessed,
yet altogether as much and great as mine. And see, my conjecture proves true;
where my fear was most, I find lea^ cause why to fear: you have shown that
Episcopacy, as it cannot be upheld but by well-grounded reason, and diligently
searched antiquity, (the Scripture in this, as in a less material point,
being less clear:) yet it may be beaten down both by the clubs of the base
rabble, and the rude fist of your false Logic. For what is all your
conf^tation of that holy Order, but insinuative and cheating inconsequences, or
spiteful and malicious railing; as if you intended so only to triumph over the
cause, (as lately ye did over the person of a Prelate) by throwing dirt in his
face? Though your bright and new-varnisht Modona vizard (under which you so
hansome^y play the hypocrite) have deceived the people, yet ( Non omnes fallis
--) others there be will know it to be but a vizard, especially when I shall
have rendered it more ugly, by scraping off the paint. In doing which I must
follow you some what more close than formerly.

Animad. It had been hapty for this Land, if your Priests had been but only
wooden; all England knows they have been to this Island not wood but wormwood,
that have infected the third part of our waters, like that Apostate. etc page
53.

Confut. It is an unhappy, though necessary misery, that does accompany the
Church of Christ; that not only the people, but the guides of those people are
subject to corruptions and depravations, as well in manners as doctrine: and it
i^ yet a more unhappy misery, that those corruptions have a farther mischief,
viz. that too too often advantage is taken by and upon them, to discountenance,
yea to ruin many truths. As here; a Bishop is incestuous or bestiall,
ambitious, or tyrannical, or heretical, or ps^udodoxe, Therefore the Calling
is Antichristian: One is so: therefore all are so. What could make rational
men swallow such absurdities, but offense taken at those personal faults and
misdemeanors? confess with you, that there is nothing more intolerable, more
justly abominable in the eyes of God and man, than a lewd, vicious, or lying
Prophet; that there is nor higher nor lower among them, nor Priest nor Prelate,
but some of them has been and is so: What, shall we therefore have no more
Ministers? Is it the office, or the man, that bears this cursed fruit? you say
the office. I ask of Prelacy only: why is it then that the inferior Clergy is
most faulty? how can they be so lewd, if no Prelates? or if lewd, why is not
their order abolished? Has Prelacy some ill quality in it, that makes good men
bad? why are not all the Prelates alike vicious? why are there so many good men
amongst them? Or look again; Were not they which have misbehaved themselves in
that office, bad men before they were in it? or those that were good before,
did they not continue so? It is the man then, the sinful corrupt nature of
man, that yields these bitter fruits, not Episcopacy.

Animad. What should I te^ you how the Universities (that men look should be
fountains of learning and knowledge) have been poisoned and choked under your
governance, etc.

Confut. Fair and pure may those living streams ever flow, both Isis and Chame!
but who, Iwis, has troubled them? yea, who goes about to dry them up? if
either they fail, or be pudled, you cannot blame Episcopacy for either. If some
Bishops be Arminians, and some Scholars at either University, that infection
came from beyond sea, though not in the same ship with your Presbytery. Was
Arminius a Bishop? surely no more than Mr Calvin: Why then should that be
objected to them or the cause? Or pray tell me, do you think if you have pulled
down! piscopacy that those opinions will dye? Alas, never till you can kill
depraved and curious reason, which has the start of Grace in these two things;
namely, that it is sooner ^p at, and better cherished and heartned in its
operations than she commonly is; it being as natural to man to love the one,
as to hate the other. What other choking you should mean, i^ not this, I can
no more conceive, than I can how it concerns the business in hand.

Animad. And if to be wooden be to be base, where could there be found among
all the reformed Churches, nay in the Church of Rome it self, a baser brood of
flattering or time-serving Priests? etc

Confut. To recriminate is so poor a way of justification, that I should think
he wants all other excuses that flies to that; therefore though you and your
saction lie open no where more than on this part, I purposely spare you; yet
so, as I will show you the advantage I had you at. For observe me; What is that
which you call flattery? standing up by the King. Is it not their duty? and
yours too, were ye not so great Patrons of popularity? If the Kings Sovereignty
be inviolable, may it not lawfully be published? may not a Minister dare preach
it? yea, and if your Parlour Orators have defamed, may not the Pulpit
vindicate? There is difference, I hope, between a Libell clapped upon
Whitehallgates, and a Panygirick at Paul's: In my opinion those flatterers shall
do very ill to be silent, till either their Prince be less virtuous, or you
less malicious.

Animad. And as for your young Scholars, that petition for Bishoprics and
Deanaries to encourage them in their Studies, and that many Gentlemen else will
not put their sons to learning, etc. That which they allege for their
encouragement, should be cut away forthwith, as the very bait of pride and
ambition, the very garbage that draws together all the fowls of prey, etc.

Confut. It is one of those young Scholars that asks your Eldership, whether
there were not birds and beasts of prey, that did devour the flock, before ere
the Church were so much beholding to the bounty of Princes and Nobles as now
she is? Whether the Devil can allure never a Cobbler from his awl and last
under a fat Prebendary? Whether a Widows house be not as tempting as a Bishops
Palace? or there be not of those degenerate sort of men, who will desire the
Priesthood for a morsel of bread? If so, how are we, or shall we be then more
safe than now? Poor soul! how envy and anger befools thee! Bethink your self
better; are not Parsonages, Vicarages, and Lectures prey too? and do we not see
halt and dumb too often possess the former, and crazed men the latter? away
with them then by any means. No, but away with those fowls and beasts rather,
and then that prey will be meat for honest and able Preachers; or I doubt not
else but sacriledg Hook and his neighbor Gentlemen will make many a pleasant
meal on it. But in good earnest Sir, for Bishoprics and Denaries, they are in
too wise a Dispencers hands to be given to Vultures; had it been otherwise,
perhaps yours and your fellows mouths ere this had been stopped.

Anim The heathen Philosophers thought, virtue was for its own sake
inestimable, and the greatest gain of a Teacher to make a soul virtuous. Was
moral virtue so lovely or so alluring, and heathen men so inamoured of her, as
to teach and study her, with greatest neglect and contempt of worldly profit
and advancement: and is Christian Piety so homely and unpleasant, and Christian
men so cloyed with her, as that none will study and teach her but for lucre and
preferment! O stale-grown Piety! O Gospel rated as cheap as thy Master! etc.
page 54.

Confut. Now I see you know somewhat: and were I not assured that other
passions distracted you, I could easily be inclined to think that this volley
of expressions proceeded from a love of goodness: indeed so much the more
easily inclined, by how much I would fain have it so. For were there no guile
in them, as I do continually nourish such thoughts, so would I never desire to
have them better clothed: if at any time a flood of eloquence becomes us, it
is when we express such a love, or such an indignation! But it is one thing
that you say, and another thing that you prove: the means is often times rested
and taken up in stead of the end; therefore the means is not the means; or
therefore the means cannot be looked at as the means: illogicall and absurd! A
Philosopher loves virtue; and a Christian loves him that is the fountain of
that virtue; What then? The Philosopher, you say, loved virtue for it self; So
does a Christian love God much more. But he did it with neglect of others
things, wealth, honors, etc. He came then so much short of his own
Philosophical perfection: They that stood a begging in the streets, might (if
it had pleased them) have been as liberal as their best Masters; And that
Philosopher that flung his gold into the sea, might have been perhaps less an
Infidel, if he had provided for himself and his family with it; I am sure
might have been more magnificent. But that offends you, that our Church should
use the same means to entice men to the pure service of God, that were used to
tempt our Savior to the service of the D^vill. Those means were neither in
themselves* nor as enticemen^s, any way dangerous; but so far as they were
tendered by him, from whom it was a sin to receive them to him, who could make
no use of them; for such an e^d, as it had been a sin to accept them O^herwise
how could God entice the children of Israel with the promise of Canaan; or
Solomon, with riches and honors and all kind of abundance? But these desires
mix. Heb. 11. 29
As subordinate they may: The holy Ghost witnesses of Mose^ that he had an eye
to the reward; I ask whether in that Moses sinned yea, God himself hearteneth
on the Church of Smy^na, Rev. 2 10.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. Du
Moulin whose Tractates you would seem to be acquainted with) in a discourse Of
the love of God, tells us, the most imperfect and incomplete degree of this
love is, to love God for the good we receive from him: Thus children (says he)
say Grace, that they may go to breakfast. Indeed a childish love. The
perfectest is, to love him and nothing else; a love only the glorified Saints
are capable of: betwixt which two he places a third, a mixed love; which is,
when we love God with other things; yet so, as that we love those things for
Gods sake; that is, as helps and furtherances of our own piety and his glory.
Either you wilfully oversee much truth, or are very ignorant.

Animad. A true Pastor of Christ's sending has this especial mark, that for
greatest labors and greate^ merits in the Church, he requires either nothing,
if he could so subsist; or a very common and reasonable supply of humane
necessaries. We cannot do better therefore than to leave this care of ours to
God; he can easily send Laborers into his harvest. -- He can stir up rich
fathers to bestow exquisite education upon their children and so dedicate them
to the service of the Gospel, he can make the sons of Nobles his Ministers, etc
page 56. Animad. No man doubts of what God can do; but we may well doubt he
will not do what we would have him, while we are thus froward and unthankful;
while we are under persecution, poor, wretched, and despicable, fed but from
hand to mouth, (as we say) whiles God leads his Church through a desert or
wilderness: If we expect our drink to drop out of a flint, or from the shivers
of a barren and dry rock; if we spread our table to a miracle, or every morning
and evening look out for a Raven to feed us, it becomes our condition, and
therefore God answers our expectation: but if when he has brought his Church
into a land that flows with milk and honey; when he has made Kings our nursing
Fathers, and Queens our nursing Mothers, we will then overlook all that
bounty, and say God can do thus and thus, can raise out of these stone^
children unto Abraham, and bring up those children to his own work, at his own
miraculous expenses; this is but to tempt his providence. God can do this and
more, but his ways are his own. He can rain Manna into our mouths, as well as
dew upon the earth. Shall we be angry, because we have our Corn at the second
hand? he could have sent us into the world with our clothes on; is it not as
well that he sets the worm to the wheel to spin it for us? does he not show a
work of providence in preparing both for us, as well as in giving them to us?
so no doubt he could have immediately from himself supplied the necessities of
his Ministers; is it not as well that he does it by others? does he not make a
virtue out of what we have, in their hands through which it passes? is it not
liberality, is it not munificence in them that give it? why should we envy
good men their piety? or are these virtues out of date, were they only
ceremonial? has God impropriated all the riches of the earth for the use of
the Laymen only? are not Glergy-men members of the body of Christ, why should
not each member thrive alike? if these must be poor and naked, Vide Hooker in
praes^t. Eccl. P^l.
so let the rest be; and though there be in this but little wisdom, yet will
there be some indifferency.

But you will say, It is too much, and ill placed* Any thing is so that is ill
used: Single out the man, and if you can make better use of it than he, I wish
you had the preferment. But for Church livings in general, B^cons consi^.
a judicious Surveyor once said, (and I dare say they have not been much
bettered since) that they were insufficient for the Churchmen: and that all
the Parliaments since 27. H. 8. who gave away Impropriations from the Church,
seemed to him to stand in some sort obnoxious and obliged to God in conscience
to do somewhat for the Church (he did not mean to rob it) to reduce the
patrimony thereof to a competency.

Animad. Can a man thus employed (in preaching, etc.) find himself
discontented or dishonored, for want of admittance to have a pragmaticall vote
at Sessions, -- or be discouraged though me^ call him not Lord: -- would he
tugge for a Barony, to sit and vote in Parliament? page 57.

Confut. Yes marry, what else? That man that was and could have still been
content without those honors, will be very loath now to let them go; yet not
so much that he loves the honors or means that accompany them, as that he
would not have his country made guilty of so shameful a depriving him of
them. Why should sacrilege and injustice triumph over Gods cause, whiles he
has tongue or pen to defend it? yea, why should he or any the rest of that
sacred function forsake their Great Master in it? Me thinks if all other
arguments failed, it were sufficient proof of the goodness of it, that it has
him to be its Defender that is Defender of the Faith: A Prince, who if for
nothing else, will therefore keep the munificence of his Predecessors
inviolate, that he may teach succeeding ages a reverence to his Own: which
indeed is so much the more estimable, in that it is exercised in so perverse an
age of the world, as is so far from giving it its just value, that it searce
allows it As (...) the Kings gift, regal bounty may be excusable in giving. p.
59.
pardonable. Alas! what an heap of disorder and ruins had this Church even now
been, had not God sent it So Gracious a Governor! But if, notwithstanding what
divine and humane laws, what the King and all Good men vote to the contrary,
such a desolation must come, may the curse which has always been wont ^o
accompany such Desperate Robbery, be to this land turned into a blessing; and
may it never fall any whit below that Happiness, which in Gods extraordinary
supply of New Means is and may be Imagined.

FINIS.

