FVNEBRIA FLORAE, THE Downfall of May-Games: WHEREIN Is set forth the rudeness,
profaneness, stealing, drinking, fighting, dancing, whoring, mis-rule,
mis-spence of precious time, contempt of God, and godly Magistrates, Ministers
and People, which oppose the Rascality and rout, in this their open
profaneness, and Heathenish Customs. Occasioned by the general complaint of
the rudeness of people in this kind, in this Interval of settlement. Here you
have Twenty Arguments against these profane Sports, and all the Cavills made
by the Belialists of the Time refelled and Answered. Together with an Addition
of some Verses in the cloze, for the delight of the ingenious Reader. By THO.
HALL, B. D. and Pastor of Kings-norton. The Third Edition Corrected.

Ye shall keep mine Ordinances, that ye commit not any of those abominable
Customs, which were committed before you, and that ye defile not your selves
therein; I am the Lord, Levit. 18. 30. The Customs of the people are vain, Jer.
10. 3. Populi plaudunt non consultoribus utilitatum suarum, sed largitoribus
Voluptatum, Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 2. c. 20. Bona conscientia prodire vult and
conspici, ipsas nequitia tenebras timet, Seneca Epist. 98. LONDON, Printed for
Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the Little
North-door. 1661.

An unknown Friend, to the known, and knowing Author, upon his judicial
proceedings against the MAY POLE.
NOw six times two impannell'd are to pass
[Alas poor Flora!] upon one An old Roman Strumpet the Goddess of May-Games.
Goddess.
Flora complains, against her there is greater odds,
Than when one Una dolo Divum, etc. Aeneid. lib. 4.
Girl assaulted by two gods,
And challenges your Jury; the whole List,
She says, was packed by a Misogynist.
Bold The Flesh.
Caro pleads her cause, and speaks her fears,
Because you do not try her by her Peers,
That you are unjust, and quotes our Old Laws for it,
The Curtizan excepts against the Court:
No jurisdiction of Pres-ter-John
Ere reached the skirts of this our Curtizan.
Hold then, cries Adultery.
Maechus, Fornication.
Porneius is another,
Who with Lasciviousness.
Aselges, their lascivious brother,
Pretend to guard their Deity, and do
With zeal, as you the Schools and Pulpit too.
Whilst Drunkenness.
Methos marching with the May Pole rout,
In rescue of the Prisoner, does not doubt
T'protect th'Protectrix of their fruit and flowers,
By watring weeds, with most intemperate showers.
Adjourn your Court then, lest it prove your fate,
To pull the May Pole down upon your pate.
A tree once danger'd Carm. lib. 2. Ode 13.
Horace by its fall,
As he escaped then, so now I wish may Hall.
Nor for these Ranters is my option worse,
Than that they may mount Hamans wooden horse;
That who with Flora sin under the green tree,
May suffer for her upon that that is dry.
Tuus Antifloralis.

To the ingenious Author upon his Judicial Proceedings against Dame Flora.
INstead of Directory Satues, when
I found Poles raised so high, as if they would been
To entertain the Cuckoo, or to vye
The clouds that in the Heavens lowest fly;
I'gan to thing whither at length I should come,
To reformed London, or to Popish Rome.
Aron I found my self in London, and
Unsatisfi'd as yet, began to demand
The original of May-poles, where I found
Their Author Flora was, and Rome their ground.
A Declaration there was entered by
A pert Divine, showing the Idolatry
Of such Erections: h' does a Jury call,
That his proceedings might be legal all.
It is the speech of those who chose each light
A fresh god, whom to worship until night,
This thing this day my Deity shall be, Hodie mihi

To morrow, Juppiter esto, cras mihi truncus eris, ficulnus inutile lignum.
as 'twas yesterday a tree.
We shall invert the words: a tree to day,
To morrow we shall to it worship pay.
A bush to day, to morrow will begin
To have the respect of him that dwelt therein.
But lo Jerubbaal comes in his might,
(With open zeal, not Gideon-like, in the night)
Attended, not with ten men of his own,
But a full Jury of the great'st renown,
And fells the Grove. Go on brave spirit, until
Idolatrous Midian understand thy skill,
And all the superstitious crew do feel
The mortal fruits of thy enraged steel.
This is no Frog-fight, but the Eunuch's zeal,
Grapling with proud and painted Jezabel.
Beriah Antistorali.

THE DOVVNFALL OF MAY-GAMES.
THe times we live in of late have been very Tropical, and full of turnings,
and too many, like Weathercocks, have turned with them. Lately men were
exorbitant, and did run out into extreme opinions; now they are exorbitant, and
run out into extreme practices: Before men were fanatic and wild in their
Principles; now men are fanatic and frantic in Practicals; Cantants fremunt,
perstrepunt, tumultuantur, and fu^entibus similes insanire videntur.
they rant, they roar, they sing, they swear, they drink, they dance, they
whore, they lie, they scoff; yea, some there are (I hope they are not many)
that put their own blood into their drink, and then drink a health to the King,
and to the confusion of Sion and its King; this is reported to me by persons
of good repute; Nicol. de Clemangis, de novis celebritatibus non instituendis.
if this be true, as sure as God is just and true, he will be avenged on the
actors of such horrid blasphemy.

Lately we were troubled with White Devils, who under pretense of
extraordinary sanctity, published open Heresy and Blasphemy against God, his
Word, his Works, and Ordinances; now we run madding on the other hand, and are
like to be troubled with Black Devils, viz. blasphemous Drunkards, blasphemons
Health-drinkers, blasphemous Persecutors, scorners of Piety,
Sabbath-prophaners, observers of superstitious and heathenish customs, Vetus
fabula, novi histriones.
etc. These old Beelzebubs begin to put out their horns again; I doubt not but
the Lord in his due time will raise up the Honorable Houses of Parliament,
Quid tristes queremoniae, si non supplicio culpa reciditur, quid leges sine
moribus vanae proficiunt? Horat. Carm. l. 3. Ode 24.
as Carpenters to saw off these horns, Zach. 2. 19, 20, 21. else those that
have power in their hands to cut off these horns of the wicked, and yet will
not, they must wear them. Qui non vetat peccare cum potest, jubet. 'Twas the
sin of Israel that when the Lord by a signal hand of providence had delivered
them from their Egy^tian bondage, yet they returned in their hearts, and
desires into Egypt again, Act. 7. 39. and longed to be at their Garlic and
Onions, and Fleshpots there, Numb. 11. 4, 5. and this brought a very great
plague upon them, verse. 33. The Lord commanded Moses to bid the people go
forward, Exodus 14. 15. he loves to have his people go on in ways of piety and
obedience, but if they once go backward, he will destroy them, Isa. 1. 4. They
have forsaken the Lord, and are gone away backward. See what follows, verse. 7.
Their Country is desolate, their Cities are burnt with fire, and strangers
devour their Land in their presence. And what can Englaud expect, if it go on
in Apostasy (as it has done of late) both in doctrine and manners, but the
sword, pestilence and famine, and all other fearful judgments; that as we
have been notorious for sin, so now we should be notorious for suffering?
Could we but once keep the narrow way of life, without turning to the right
hand or the left, we might yet be an happy people, Josh. 1. 8. The way to
Heaven, is like the way over a narrow bridge, under which is a great gulf, into
which a man may fall by going too much on the right hand, or too much on the
left hand; and to say truth, the Devil cares not much on which hand men fall
into Hell, so he can but get them thither. We all condemn profane
principles, but a man may go to Hell sooner for profane practices, for these
generate profane principles; when men lead lewd lives, then they invent lewd
and licentious Tenants to defend their lewd and loose practices; as we see in
Popery and Quakerism, and this brings men at last to love and desire profane
Preachers, and such as will sing placentia, and claw their sensual itch, and
then they perish without remedy, Prove. 29. 18. Isa. 30. 9, 10.

The Prophet Jeremy complains of some in his time, Against Healths. See my
Comment, on 2 Timothy 3. 3. p 94.
that were mad on Idols, Jer. 50. 38. and we have those in our times that are
mad on May-poles, Morrice-dancing, Drinking Healths on their knees, yea in
their Hats (as in the University by Scholars, etc.) doting on old,
superstitious, I have this from an eyewitness, and cannot but mourn to think,
that those who should be teachers of others, have learnt no better themselves,
Surgunt indocti and rapiunt coelum, etc.
profane customs, returning with the dogs of the world to lick up that filth
which seemingly they had long since vomited up. And all this acted
presumptuously with an high hand, against much light and love, Yea in some
places Maids drink Healths upon their knees; It Is vile in men, but abominable
in women.
against many wooings and warnings, against many prayers and vows to the
contrary, what could the Lord do more for England than he has done, and what
could we do more against him, There were two persons of quality, that some
years since drank this Kings Health upon their knees, and not long after sought
to betray him; this I have from an eyewitness of good quality.
than we have done? had he been our deadly enemy, we could not have acted
more vilely and villanously against him, both in our principles, and in our
practices, than many of us have done; and if after all Gods cost and care,
instead of the grapes of obedience, we bring forth the wild grapes of
disobedience and rebellion, we shall provoke the Lord to pull up the hedge, to
let in the wild beasts, and to consume us after he has done us good, and to
repent of all the mercies which he has bestowed upon us. He will take away
his Gospel, with all those blessings which accompany it, and then woe unto us
when the Lord departs from us, Hos. 9. 12. When God goes from a people, peace
goes, protection goes, comfort goes, health, wealth, and glory goes. I do
verily believe there has been a greater flood of open profaneness in ten
weeks past, than in ten years before. Do we thus requite the Lord O foolish
and unwise! Is this the thanks we give him for an hundred years preaching of
the Gospel, and for those signal mercies in bringing down blasphemers, and
Anarchical ones without blood shed, or almost a blow struck. As King Achish
said sometimes, Have I need of Madmen? So may I say, Shall we have Madmen
still? shall we never come to our wits again, living soberly, righteously and
religiously? When shall we once be sound in judgment, sincere in affection,
and unspotted in our conversations, answering our Gospel light with Gospel
lives; and our Gospel-principles, with Gospel-practices, that all our teaching
may rise at the last day for our justification, and not for our confusion. This
open profaneness is a great heartbreaking to the faithful Ministers of
Christ, and makes them cry in the bitterness of their spirits, Who has
believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? We have
labored in vain, and spent our strength in vain. If Moses were angry when he
saw the people dance about a Goldencalf, well may we be angry to see people
dancing the Morris about a post, in honor of a whore, as you shall see anon.

The world begins to loathe Gods Mannah, they are weary of preaching, and sick
of Sermons; and therefore it is just with God to ease them of such burdens, and
to lay upon them the heavy yoke of cruel and tyrannical men, that they may know
the difference between Gods service, and the service of the Nations. Omne
tempus Clod or, non omnes (atones feret. Sen. Epist, 98.
Men begin to cry out. Isaiah is too bold, Jeremy too harsh, Amos is too plain,
he must go further off. It Is these precise Lots that will not let the people
go quietly to Hell, that are the troublers of Israel; if once they could but
be shut of them then they might sing, and swear, and rant and roar, and be as
safe as Sodom was when Lot was gone out of it. Let such profane ones know,
that if the Lord should in judgment once remove his faithful Ministers from an
ungrateful world, woes and sorrows would soon surprise them. The glory would
soon depart from England, if once the Ark of God were taken. It Is Liberty,
Liberty, Liberty, that wicked men long for. As many men were lately for
Liberty, and tolleration of all opinions, so many are now for liberty, for all
licentious practices and if these be not restrained by the Magistrate, who must
not bear the sword in vain, especially toward such sons of Belial, God will
take the sword into his own hand, and will proclaim a Liberty for such
Libertines, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine, and as he has
wonderfully brought down those that were for all evil opinions; so he will (in
his due time) bring down those that are for all evil practices, -- Deus dabit
his quoque finem, and funem.

It has cost me some pains to find out the Original of these profane
revels, when people shall understand the sinful rise and tendency of them; I
believe there is no sober man but will abhor them. The Lacedaemonians the
better to deter their children from drunkenness, would bring forth a Drunkard,
and lay him before them, that so they seeing his beastly condition, might learn
to loathe that sinning sin of Drunkenness; I have presented these ^e^e^^icious
practices naked to thy view, that thou may be brought to an utter
detestation of them; for the very rehearsal of them is a good part of their
confutation, Haec recitasse est re^^tasse. It would be a work well beseeming
the Parliament, to improve the power which providence has put into their
hands, for the stopping of that general profaneness which has overspread the
Land; and to encourage Religion in the power of it, especially considering that
noble and princely expression of the King (in his Letter to the House of
Commons) That nothing shall be proposed by them to manifest his zeal and
affection for the advancement of the Protestant Religion, to which he will not
readily consent. The good Lord at last unite the hearts of King, Lords, and
Commons, for the promoting of this work of works, without which we can never
expect to prosper.

Had this rudeness been acted only in some ignorant and obscure parts of the
Land, I had been silent; but when I perceived that the complaints were general
from all parts of the Land, and that even in Cheap side it self, the rude
rabble had set up this ensign of profaneness, and had put the Lord Mayor to
the trouble of seeing it pulled down* I could not out of my dearest respects,
and tender compassion to the Land of my Nativity, and for the prevention of the
like disorders (if possible) for the future, but put pen to paper, and discover
the sinful rise, and vile profaneness that attends such mis-rule; that so
their madness being made known to all, they might proceed no further; and the
eyes of Gods jealousy might see nothing amongst us to displease him, but that
we walking as becomes his people, he may rejoice in us, and rejoyce-over us
to do us good for ever.

My record is on high, that I have no sinister end in this work, but desire to
be found in the number of those that study the real peace and welfare of the
Land: I have therefore exposed the work to the censure of the learned and
severest Critics that I could gain. I have added some Poetry, and made it as
inoffensively pleasant as might be, that it might take with all, and exasperate
none.

The experience which I have had of Gods blessing on my labors against
Libertines in opinion, has emboldened me to go forth in his name against
Libertines in practice; These mountains, as well as those, shall become a plain
before Gods people.

I shall not trouble you with a crambe his cocta, for I know not of any one
that has in a set Treatise (not scarcely by the by) handled this subject,
which somewhat encouraged me to set upon the work.

I shall be concise and argumentative, because I would not tire my self nor my
Reader, with any tedious discourse in this kind.

Arguments against May-Games.
The first Argument is this,

That, whose Rise, Root, and Original is evil, that thing cannot be good:

But the Rise, Root, and Original of May-Games is evil, Ergo, they cannot be
good.

The Major is clear, and like a Mathematical Principle, shines so bright with
its own light, that it needs no demonstration: for if the fountain be bitter,
the streams cannot be sweet; if the root be naught, so is the fruit.

The Minor I prove thus, as the Revels and disorders of Christians sprung from
the Pagans Saturnalia, and from them came to the Papists, and so to us (as is
abundantly proved by Mr. (...)) so these Floralian May-Games had their Original
from the Floralian Feasts, V. De Croy. Conformities chap. 19. Conform. 1. p. 44.
and enterludes of the Pagan-Romans which were solemnized about the first of
May, then they came to Rome Antichristian, as a prop to uphold their
supersticious and profane Kingdom, and so to us.

Their Rise briefly was thus, V. Hospinian de Orig. Festorum p. 99. Polydor.
one Flora a notable Harlot, which had got much riches by whoring, at her death
bequeathed her substance to the people of Rome, about the year of the World,
Virgil. lib. 4. cap. 14. and lib. 5. cap. 2.
3760, and before Christ 242. (says Calvisius) she appointed a great sum of
money to lie in stock with the usury of which they should yearly keep certain
Plays called Floralia or May-Games, Godwin Antiq. lib. 1. sect. 2. c. 9. p. 7,
8. and l. 2. sect. 3. cap. 3. p. 87.
in singing, dancing, drinking, whoring, and all manner of lasciviousness, in
remembrance of her. By sound of Trumpet all the whores were called to these
sports where they danced naked about the streets, Floralia in honorem Florae; e
meret^ice Deae factae, agebantur a meretricibus exutis, omni cum verborum
licentia, motu^mque obscaenitate. Farnab. in Martial. Epig lib. 1. p. 2.
with Trumpets blown before them. Hence that of Juvenal speaking of a lewd
woman, he calls her a Floralian Curtesan.

-- Dignissima prorsus.
Floralia matrona tuba.
Juven. Sat. 60. After some time the Senate of Rome being ashamed of the
Original of these Floralia, invented this fig-leaf for a cover. V. Aug. de
Civit. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 8
They told the people that Flora was a Goddess, which had the tuition of
Flowers (for Pagans and Papists have Gods and Goddesses almost for every thing,
The Heathens had thirty thousand gods. Weemse on 2d. Command.
as St. Loy for their Horses, St. Anthony for their Piggs, St. George for their
Wars, St. Roch for the Pestilence, St. Apollonia for the Teeth, St. John for
the Day, chap 5. p. 97. Vol. 2.
St. Stephen for the Night, and St. Flora for their Flowers) and therefore she
must be worshipped (according to the custom of the Heath^^nish and Idolatrous
Festivals) with lascivious sports and pastimes in May, Hi ludi celebrantur cum
omni laseivia, convenientes memoria meretricis. Nauclerus Chronogra. Volat.
Gener. 24. p. 48. Cui calculum adjecit Munster in Cosmographi. and Rosinus de
Antiquit, Romans lib. 5. cap. 15.
that she might the more carefully see to their flowers, fruits, and herbs.

These Floralian-sports were very ancient, for I find they were practiced in
Cato the Censors time, who flourished about the year of the world, Val. Maximus
lib. 2. c. 20. sect. 8. and Seneca Epist. 98.
3750. His gravity (says the Historian) deterred the people from acting those
obscenities in his fight.

Plutarch in the life of Pompey, makes mention of one Flora, that was Pompey's
Curtezan, though she were one ejusdem farinae, Flora by name, and Flora in
deed, yet she was younger than the former by a hundred years; for the Flora
we speak of, lived about two hundred years before Christ, when this lived
about one hundred years before him.

A second Argument is this,

All Idolatry is unlawful.
But this is Idolatry. It Is a forsaking of God, who is the Fountain of living
waters, to go to a broken Cistern. It Is a robbing God of his honor, and giving
it to a whore. They keep a feast to her, set up a Pole adorned with flowery
Garlands, Ribbons, and other ornaments, to the end that she may preserve their
fruits and flowers. Like the worshippers of Baal, who danced round about the
Altar in honor of that Idol, and to procure the more speedy audience from it.
1 King. 18. 26. Neither will this excuse you, to say, that you intend no such
thing; for this is finis operis, though not finis operantis. The action must be
judged of by the end of the work, and not by the end of him that works; now
the chief end for which this feast was at first ordained, is Idolatrous. The
Israelites had no intent to worship the Calf, yet that was finis operis, and
therefore God charge them with worshipping of it, Ps. 106. 6. How unseemly is
it then for Christians, when they should be praying to God, and praising him
for the fruits of the earth, and for his crowning the year with his goodness,
and making his clouds to drop down fatness on us, to be ranting, and abusing
his good creatures to riot and excess, giving the glory which is due to him,
unto an Harlot? This is the very way to lose all, Hos. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Other sins stir up Gods anger, but this provokes him to jealousy and rage, and
puts him into a flame against us, when we shall thus give his glory unto
creatures. These men's actions do virtually and interpretatively thus speak, O
Goddess, Flora, be thou our helper, the earth is now adorned with fruits and
flowers, O do thou keep them from barrenness, and blasting; make them fruitful,
that we may be the fitter for thy service, then will we sing, and dance, and
drink, and set up a pole to thy praise; hear us therefore, O good Goddess
Flora, for our flowers and fruits, for on thee we do depend, and thine honor
do we celebrate at this season of the year; hear us therefore we beseech
thee, and grant these our Requests.

This and much more is the language of such actions; I believe, there is not
one of a thousand that knows or considers this, it will be their wisdom, now
their folly is discovered, to say with repenting Ephraim, What have I to do any
more with Idols? Hos. 14. 8. And according to Gods Commandment, we must not
only cast away the Idols themselves, but also the rellicks and appurtenances
of Idolatry, saying to them with indignation, Get you hence, Isa. 30. 22.

Arg. 2. To fear men more than God is Idolatry (Timor tuus, Deus tuus.)

But here is a fearing of men more than God; for diverse years past whilst the
sword of men was over our heads, here was none of this open profaneness, but
now that is removed, men fall to their old vomit again, not once considering
that God beholds all their doings, and will bring them to judgment for all
these things, Eccles. 11. 9.

Arg. 3. That which drives Gods fear out of men's hearts, may in no wise he
tolerated: But these sinful, sensual sports and pastimes drive the sear of God
out of men's hearts; when the Taber and the Timbrel, the wine and lewd women are
in men's feasts, they regard not the works of the Lord, but they say unto God,
depart, Job 21, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Isa. 5. 12.

Arg. 4. That which debaseth and debaucheth youth (which is the flower and best
of our days, Quid de effoeminata dicam juventute, quae iuxu illis temporibus
ac petualantia dissoluta, cunctis flagitiorum generibus implicatur? Clemangis
de novis celebritat. non instit. p. 144.
and therefore ought in all reason and equity to be given to God, who is the
best of beings) ought not to be tolerated: But these sinful, sensual pastimes
debase and debauch youth. How many thousands of young persons have by this
means got habits of drinking, whoring, profaneness, contempt of Gods ways,
etc. so that all their friends, with all their counsel, prayers and tears, have
not been able to reform them? Evil customs are not easily broken, Jer. 13. 23.
Young Devils usually prove old Beelzebubs.

Arg. 5. All lying, stealing, and fighting must be abandoned:

But here is lying, stealing, and fighting.

The most of these May-poles are stolen, yet they give out, Our latras? furem
video, Philip. dixit.
that the Poles are given them, when upon through examination 'twill be found,
that the most of them are stolen. There were two May-poles set up in my Parish,
the one was stolen, and the other was given by a professed Papist. That which was
stolen, was said to be given, when 'twas proved to their faces that 'twas
stolen, and they were made to acknowledge their offense. This Pole that was
stolen was rated at five shillings; if all the Poles one with another were so
rated, which were stolen this May, what a considerable sum would it amount to?
Fightings and bloodshed is usual at such meetings, insomuch that it is a common
saying, That it is no festival unless there be some fightings.

Arg. 6. All ungrateful and dis-ingenuous requiting of God for his blessings
must be abandoned:

But these profane practices are a most ungrateful and disingenuous requtting
of God for his blessings.

Now in the Spring, when he is loading us with his mercies, for us to load him
with our rebellions and provocations; and as he renews his blessings with the
year, so for us to renew our disobedience against him, and to fight against him
with his own favors, is such gross ingratitude, that the Lord calls even upon
the inanimate creatures to be astonished at it, Isa. 1. 2, 3, 4.

Arg. 7. That which brings no profit or comfort to soul or body, may not be
practiced:

But these sensual, profane sports, bring no profit to soul or body.

When the Romans were converted to the Faith, the Apostle asks them, what fruit
they had of their former loose, licentious practices, whereof they were now
ashamed, for the end of those things is death, Romans 6. 21. The Interrogation is
a strong Negation, q. d. there was no true comfort or benefit to be found in
them; where he uses three strong Arguments to deter them from such sinful
practices. 1. They are unfruitful, there is no true profit comes by them. 2.
They are shameful. 3. They are pernicious and deadly, they bring not only
temporal, but eternal death upon men. None are gainers by them but the Devil;
God is dishonored, his Ordinances profaned, his Ministers contemned, the Land
defiled, the Modesty, Chastity, and Reputation of people is blasted, and their
souls debauched with idleness, effeminacy, incontinency, and luxury.

Arg. 8. That profaneness which is committed against great Light, great Loves,
great Patience and Forbearance, is abominable:

But this profaneness is such.

In the times of Ignorance God winked (as it were) at such practices, he took
not so much notice of them as he does now in these days of light. This is the
condemnation, it is that damning sin with a witness, that when light is come
into the world, yet men will love darkness, and works of darkness more than
light. Though Israel play the harlot, yet Judah should not sin, Hos. 4. 15.
Though Pagans, Papists, and Infidels, that know not God, live in such kind of
lewdness and licentiousness, yet England that has been better taught, should
abhor such folly; for us that have had such famous preaching, praying,
printing, signal victories, and deliverances continued to us, even to this day;
for us to rant and roar, drink Healths, be drunk and whore, and with the dog
to return to our vomit, which for many years we had left; this is such an high
aggravation of our sin, that God will not brook it at our hands. When men sin
presumptuously against great light, and with an high hand, they must dye for
it, Exodus 21. 14. Numb. 15. 30, 31. We should think it too much that in the
days of our ignorance we went astray; these bodies and souls of ours which
sometimes were servants to unrighteousness and fin, should now become servants
of righteousness and holiness, being wholly devoted to the service of God. It
should be as natural and delightful to us now to serve God, as ever it has
been to sin against him.

Arg. 9. All occasions of sin must be avoided:

But at these profane meetings there are many occasions of sin; ergo, They
must be avoided.

For the Major it is clear, we are often commanded to shun the appearance of
evil. 1 These. 5. 22. to hate the garment spotted with the flesh, Jude 23. and
to keep our selves free, not only from the gross blots, but also from the
spots of the world, James 1. 27. We must not so much as taste of the Devils
broth, lest at last he bring us to eat of his beef; Isa, 65. 4. He that will
no evil do, must do nothing that belongs thereto. He that says Yea to the
Devil in a little, shall not say Nay when he pleases. It Is true in
practicals, as well as in polemicals, that one absurdity being granted, makes
way for many more to follow. When men once begin to fall in this kind, they
know not where they shall rest. Our corrupt nature like tinder or gunpowder, is
ready to be fired with every sinful temptation, and therefore we should
carefully shun them, else we contradict our prayers, when we pray that we
be not led into temptation; if we run into them, we mock God, and ruin our
selves; for he will not preserve us from the sin, if we do not carefully shun
the occasions of sin.

For the Minor, that at these profane meetings there are many occasions of
sin, is too apparent. Who sees not what drunkenness, swearing, cursing,
fighting, stealing, lying, mixt-dancing, Morrice-dancing, Ribaldry, Debauchery,
scoffing at piety, opposing of zealous Magistrates, Ministers and people,
profanation of Sabbaths, mis-spence of precious time, complying with Heathens
and Idolaters in their sinful and superstitious customs, perverting of that
order which God has set, turning night into day, and day into night? God has
ordained the night for man to rest in, and not to ramble and go stealing
May-poles in.

So that as in one Caesar there were many Marii, so in this one sin there is a
confluence of many sins. Physicians say, that morbi complicati sunt
periculosissimi, where there is a complication of diseases, there the cure is
very difficult and dangerous. How perilous is it then to tolerate those
profane pastimes, which open the floodgates to so much sin and wickedness, as
the sad experience of all ages does testify? So that if I would debauch a
people, and draw them from God and his worship to superstition and Idolatry, I
would take this course; I would open this gap to them, they should have
Floralia and Saturnalia, they should have feast upon feast (as it is in Popery)
they should have Wakes to profane the Lords day, they should have May-Games,
and Christmas-revels, with dancing, drinking, whoring, potting, piping, gaming,
till they were made dissolute, and fit to receive any superstition, and easily
drawn to be of any, or of no Religion: And this was the practice of the late
Prelates, when they were bringing in Popery by the head and shoulders (as is
made apparent to the world out of their V. The Canterburian Selfconviction.
own writings) they first caused the book of sports to be read in all Churches
for the profaning of the Sabbath (a lesson that people can learn too fast Ad
deteriora faciles sumus, quia nec dux, nec comes deesse potest; and res ipsa
sine duce, sine comite procedit, non pronum est iter tantum ad vitia, sed
praceps. Seneca Epist. 98.
without a book) that so they might fit the people the better for the
swallowing of those superstitious innovations, which shortly after followed.

When Balaam would draw Israel to Idolatry, he first draws them to whoredom,
and by this means destroyed them, which all his cursing could not do, Numb. 32.
16. So when Israel fell to Idolatry, then they fell to feasting, singing,
dancing, according to the custom of Idolatrous festivals, Exodus 37. 6. 19. but
see what follows such mad mirth, verse. 27. the sword and slaughter follows it
at the heels. God is the same to the same sinners, and if we be like them in
sin, we shall be like them in suffering.

Arg. 10. That which is of evil report amongst the godly, may not be
practiced, Phil. 4. 8.

But these profane pastimes are of evil report amongst the godly.

I never yet knew any godly man, or any that had but a taste of godliness, that
ever approved, either by speech, or by his presence of such profane meetings.
Sure that must needs be very bad, which all good men do shun and abhor.

Arg. 11. That which incourageth the rout and raskality of a people to behave
themselves insolently and irreverently toward the ancient and the honorable,
and all superiors, that may not be tolerated (for it is reckoned as a great
judgment, Isa. 3. 5.)

But these profane meetings do encourage the rout in their insolency against
the ancient and the honorable.

This makes the servant contemn his Master, the people their Pastor, the
subject his Sovereign, the child his Father, and teaches young people
impudency and rebe^^^on.

Arg. 12. That which is a m^nifest violation of our Baptismal Vow, must be
abandoned.

But these profane pastimes are a manifest Violation of our Baptismal Vows.

Then we promised to forsake the Devil and all his works, the Pomp and Vanities
of the world, and that we would not be led by the lusts of the flesh. Now at
these profane meetings there is a sad Violation of this sacred Vow; for if the
Devil himself should come and live in a bodily shape upon earth, he would
drink, and dance, and swear, and whore, and fulfill the lusts of the flesh, as
these devils incarnate do.

Arg. 13. If Christ has redeemed us from the sinful customs, Paganish
pleasures, and vain conversation of the world, then we may in no wise follow
them.

But Christ has redeemed us from the sinful customs, Paganish pastimes, and
vain conversation of the wicked, Luke 1. 74, 75. Gal. 1. 4. Tit. 2. 12, 13, 14.
1 Pet. 2. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. and 1. 4. 2, 3, 4.

Arg. 14. All inticements to Idolatry must be avoided:

But the observation of these Heathenish and Idolatrous Feasts is a great
enticement to Idolatry.

Hence it is that Papists, and Popish persons are so forward to give people
May-poles, and the Popes Holiness with might and main keeps up his
superstitious Festivals, as a prime prop of his tottering Kingdom. By these
sensual sports, and carnal-flesh-pleasing-waies of wine, women, dancing,
revelling, etc. he has gained more souls, than by all the tortures, and cruel
persecutions that he could invent. Hence the Whore of Babylon is said to have
her wine of abomination and fornication in a golden cup, Rev. 17. 4. the better
to entice men to her, as Whores were wont to give enchanted Potions to work
amorous affections; so does the Whore of Rome allure men to her self by the
specious baits of riches, liberty, pastimes, and carnal pleasures; hence the
Lord, who knows our frame better than we our selves, has so often forbidden us
following the customs, feasts, and fashions of Idol^^^rs and Heathens, for
fear lest they should be drawn thereby to Idolatry, Levit. 18. 30. Deuteronomy. 12.
29, 30. These do insensibly steal away the heart from God and his Truth, they
are the Devils bellows to blow up the fire of lust and uncleanness in the soul.

Arg. 15. That which is the joy and delight only of superstitious, popish,
profane persons, must needs be some vile and profane thing; for like will
delight in like, wicked men delight in those things which suit with their
wicked lusts.

But these sinful and rude pastimes are the joy only of wicked men.

Who are they that delight in the fools filthy speeches, lascivious gestures,
and the man's wearing of the woman's apparel, contrary to Gods express command,
Deuteronomy. 22. 5. but the profane of the world? I never knew any good man that ever
delighted in them; yea I have known some good men, that in their youth
delighted in those sensual pastimes, which have abhorred themselves for it in
their old age; and make the Observation when you please, and you shall find
that they are the idle, effeminate, graceless ones that are the upholders and
frequenters of these dissolute meetings. So that as Solomon knew the true
Mother of the child, by her tender affection to it; so we may know, that the
Popish and profane sort are the Parents and Patrons of these abominations, by
their pleading for them, Non nisi grande aliquod bonum quod a Nerone damnatum
Tertul. advers. Gentes, cap. 5.
and promoting of them. And as it was some signal good thing which Nero (that
monster of men) hated; so it must needs be some notorious vile thing which
such vile men love and plead for.

Arg. 16. All mis-spence of precious time must be avoided: But in these
licentious pastimes there is much mis-spence of precious time.

What a sad account will these Libertines have to make, when the Lord shall
demand of them, where wast thou such a night? why my Lord, I was with the
profane rabble stealing May-poles; and where wast thou such a day? why my
Lord, See Reasons to move us to redeem time, in Mr. Ambrose his Sermon on Ephesians.
5. 16.
I was drinking, dancing, dallying, ranting, whoring, carousing, etc. If for
every idle hour men must give an account, what account will men be able to
give for all those sinful days, nights, Sabbaths, etc. which they have
misspent in sensuality and luxury.

Arg. 17. That which deprives us of Gods Fatherly care and protection, must be
avoided:

But this frequenting of such profane meetings deprives us of Gods Fatherly
care and protection.

He has promised to keep us no longer than we keep his ways, Psalm, 91. 11.
which are the ways either of our general calling, as we are Christians, viz.
praying, reading, meditation, good conference, etc. or else the ways of our
particular calling, as we are superiors or inferiors, we must walk with God
in those stations in which he has set us. If we go beyond Gods bounds, we
cannot expect either his immediate protection, or the protection of his Angels.

Arg. 18. That which breeds in men's hearts an hatred of the power of godliness,
must be abandoned:

But such profane meetings breed in men's hearts an hatred of the power of
godliness.

When men do evil, they hate the light of Piety in others; as the Thief hates
the light that discovers him, and the Judge that condemns him; so do these hate
the godly, because their light condemns their darkness, their piety the wicked
man's impiety, their strictness condemns the worlds dissoluteness, and their
self denying the worlds self pleasing. Wicked men love their lusts as their
lives, and cannot endure such as hinder them in the pursuit of them; hence it is
that the profane rout raise so many lies, slanders, and reproachful nicknames
against the godly, and all because they run not with them into the same excess
of riot.

Arg. 19. That which hardens wicked men in their sins, corrupts their minds and
manners, and indisposeth them for the service of God, that ought to be totally
abandoned:

But these profane sports do so.

They infatuate and besot men, they darken the understanding, and cloze up the
eye of the soul, so that it takes no notice of Gods judgments; See the danger
of carnal pleasures, in my Comment. on 2 Timothy 3. 4. P. 119, etc.
either imminent or present; These sensual pleasures stupifie and cauterize the
conscience, so that it cannot repent. They expel the fear of God, and all godly
sorrow for sin out of the soul. They estrange the heart from God, and his
worship, and make it burdensome and wearisome to them, Mal. 1. 13. and 3. 14.

Arg. 20. Those profane practices, which are condemned by Scriptures, Fathers,
Councils, and other pious men, ought in no wise to be tolerated:

But these profane practices are such.

The Major is undeniable; the Minor I shall prove by its parts; and because a
bare recital of testimonies, would be too flat and frigid, I shall therefore
(to quicken and delight the Reader) indict and arraign this Floralian Harlot,
and impannel a Jury against her. This way of clearing things cannot justly be
offensive to any, since it is but a kind of Dialogue, and Dialogues have been
ever accounted the most lively and delightful, the most facile and fruitful^est
way of teaching. Allusions and similies sink deep, Bis dicitur, quod per
similitudinem dicitur.
and make a better impression upon the spirit: A pleasant allusion may do that
which a solid Argument sometimes cannot do. As in some cases Iron may do that
which Gold cannot do, -- Ridiculum acri,
Fort^us and melius magnas pl^rumque secut res.
Horat. Sermon. l. 1. Sat. 20. and Quintil. Instit. l. 6. c. 34.

The Indictment of Flora.
Flora, hold up thy hand,

Thou art here indicted by the name of Flora, of the City of Rome, in the
County of Babylon, for that thou, contrary to the peace of our Sovereign Lord,
his Crown and Dignity, have brought in a pack of practical Fanatics, viz.
Ignorants, Atheists, Papists, Drunkards, Swearers, Swashbucklers,
Maid-marrions, Morrice-dancers, Maskers, Mummers, May pole-stealers,
Health-drinkers, together with a rascalian rout of Fiddlers, Fools, Fighters,
Gamesters, Whoremasters, Lewd-men, Light-women, Contemners of Magistracy,
affronters of Ministry, rebellious to Masters, disobedient to Parents,
mis-spenders of time, abusers of the creature, etc.

Judge. What say thou, guilty, or not guilty?

Prisoner. Not guilty, My Lord.

Judge. By whom will thou be tried?

Pris. By the Popes-holiness, my Lord.

Judge. He is thy Patron and Protector, and so unfit to be a Judge in this
case.

Pris. Then I appeal to the Prelates, and Lord-Bishops, my Lord.

Judge. This is but a tiffany put off, for though some of that rank did let
loose the reigns to such profaneness, in causing the book of Sports, for the
profaning of Gods Holy Day to be read in Churches (for which God has spewed
them out) yet it is well known that the gravest and most pious of that order,
have abhorred such profaneness and mis-rule, as B. Babington, both the Abbats,
B. King, B. Hall, D. Davenant, etc.


Pris. Then I appeal to the rout and rabble of the world.

Judge. These are thy followers, and thy favorites, and so unfit to be Judges
in their own case.

Pris. My Lord, if there be no remedy, I am content to be tried by a Jury.

Judge. Thou have well said, thou shall have a full, a fair, and a free hearing.

Crier, Make an O yes, and call the Jury.

Crier, O yes, All manner of persons that can give in evidence against the
prisoner at the Bar, let them come into the Court, and they shall be freely
heard.


Judge. Crier, call in Holy-Scriptures.

Holy-Scriptures, My Lord, I cannot get in.

Judge. Who keeps you out?

Holy-Scriptures, My Lord, here is a company of ignorant, rude, profane,
superstitious, Atheistical persons, that will not suffer me to come in.


Judge. Crier, knock those profane persons, and make room for the
Holy-Scriptures to come in.

Crier, Vouz avez, Holy-Scriptures.

Judge. What can you say against the prisoner at the Bar?

Holy-Scriptures, Very much, my Lord, I have often told them, that the night of
ignorance is now past, and the light of the Gospel is come, and therefore they
must walk as children of the light, denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts,
living soberly, righteously, and religiously in this present world. I have
often told them, that they must shun all the appearance of evil, and have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, nor conform themselves like
to the wicked of the world: But they must think the time past of their lives
too much to have lived according to the lusts of men in the days of their
ignorance, but now they must live according to the will of God, making his
glory the ultimate end of all their actions and recreations. I have often told
them, that our God is a jealous God, and one that will not endure to have his
glory given to Idols or Harlots.


Jud. This is full, and to the purpose indeed, but is there no more evidence to
come in?

Crier, Yes, my Lord, here is Pliny, an ancient Writer, who lived about ninety
years after Christ, and is famous for his Natural history.


Judge. What can you say against the prisoner at the Bar?

Pliny, My Lord, I have long since told them, if they would believe me, Plin
Not. Hist. l. 18 c. 29.
that these were not Christian, but Pagan-feasts; they were Heathens, and such
as knew not God, who first instituted these Floralia and May-Games. I have told
them that they were instituted according to the advice of Sibylls-books in the
516th. year after the foundation of the City of Rome was laid, to prevent the
blasting and barrenness of the trees, and fruits of the earth.


Judge. Sir, you have given us good light in this dark case; for first we see
that the rise of these Feasts was from Pagans, and that they were ordained by
the advice of Sibylls-books, and not of Gods book; and for a superstitious and
Idolatrous end, viz. that hereby Flora, not God might be pleased, and so bless
their fruits and flowers. This is clear, but have you no more evidence?


Crier, Yes, Lactant. de falsa Relig. l. 1. c. 20.
my Lord, here is Coelius Lactantius Firmianus, who lived about three hundred
years after Christ, who will plainly tell you the rise of these profane sports.


Judge. I have heard very well of this celestial, Fluvius quidam eloquent: a
Tulliana Lactantius.
sweet, and firm defender of the Faith, and that he was a second Cicero for
eloquence in his time. Sir, what can you say against the prisoner at the Bar?


Lactan. My Lord, I have long since declared my judgment against this Harlot
Flora in my first book of false Religion: where I have told the world, that
this Flora was a common-whore and one that got much money by her harlotry; at
her death she made the people of Rome her heir, and left a certain sum of money
for the yearly celebration of these Floralian sports. The Senate after some
time, the better to cover this foul business, make her the Goddess of Flowers,
and tell the people that they ought to celebrate this lascivious Feast of this
lascivious Harlot, with all manner of lasciviousness, that so she being
pleased, might prosper their fruits and vines.


Judge. This is plain and full, I now see that Lactantius is Firmianus, not only
sweet, but firm and constant against the Whore. But have you no more evidence?


Crier, Yes, my Lord, here is Synodus Francica, which was called in Pope
Zachary's time, Anno Dom 742.

Judge. What can you say against the Prisoner at the Bar?

Counc. My Lord, I have long since decreed, that the people of God shall have
no Pagan-Feasts, or Enterludes, but that they reject and abominate all the
uncleanness of Gentilism, and that they forbear all sacrilegious fires which
they call Bonefires, and all other observations of the Pagans whatsoever.


Judge. This is clear against all Heathenish Feasts and Customs, of which this
is one. But have you no evidence nearer home?


Crier, Yes, my Lord, here is one that may go for many, it is one that will
conquer them all, and with the Sword of justice will suddenly suppress them.


Judge. Who is that I pray you? let me see such a man.

Crier, Why my Lord, it is Charles the Second, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith.


Judge. Truly he deserves that Title, if he shall now appear in defense of the
Truth, against that profane rout which lately threatened the extirpation both
of sound doctrine, and good life. I hear that the King is a sober and temperate
person, and one that hates Debauchery, I pray you let us hear what he says.


Crier, My Lord, the King came into London, May 29. and the 30th. of May he
published a Proclamation against profaneness, to the great rejoicing of all
the good people of the Land. When all was running into profaneness and
confusion, the Parliament sat still, and we poor Ministers had nothing left
but our prayers and tears; then, even then it pleased the Most High (in whose
hand is the heart of Kings) to put it into the heart of our Sovereign Lord the
King, eminently to appear in the cause of that God, who has so eminently
appeared for him, and has brought him through so many dangers and difficulties
to the Throne, and made so many mountains a plain before him, to testify
against the debauchery and gross profaneness, which like a torrent had
suddenly overspread the Land. The sum and substance of the Kings Proclamation
is this, That it is the duty of all to take notice of Gods transcendent
goodness to us, and to walk with such circumspection, integrity, and
reformation in our lives, that we may not drive away the mercy which is coming
to us, by making our selves unworthy of it; and in order hereto, we think it
high time to show our dislike of those (against whom we have been ever enough
offended, though we could not in this manner declare it) who under pretense of
affection to us and our service, assume to themselves the liberty of reviling,
threatening, and reproaching others, and as much as in them lies, endeavor to
stifle and divert their good inclinations to our service, and so to prevent
that Reconciliation and Union of hearts and affections, which can only with
Gods blessing make us rejoice in each other, and keep our enemies from
rejoicing.

There are likewise another sort of men, of whom we have heard much, and are
sufficiently ashamed, who spend their time in Taverns, Tipling-houses, and
Debauches, giving no other evidence of affection to us, but in drinking our
Health, and inveighing against all others, who are not of their own dissolute
temper; and who in truth have more discredited our cause by the license of
their manners and lives, than they could ever advance it by their affection and
courage. We hope that this extraordinary way of delivering us all, from all
we feared, and almost bringing us to all we can reasonably hope, has, and
will work upon the hearts even of those men to that degree, that they will
cordially renounce all that licentiousness, profaneness and impiety, with
which they have been corrupted, and endeavored to corrupt others; and that
they will hereafter become examples of sobriety and virtue, and make it appear,
that what was past, was rather the vice of the times, than of the persons, and
so the fitter to be forgotten together.

And because the fear of punishment, or apprehension of our displeasure, may
have influence upon many, who will not be restrained by the conscience of
their duty; We do declare, That we will not exercise just severity against
any Malefactors sooner, than against men of dissolute, debauched, and profane
lives, with what parts soever they may be otherwise qualified and endowed, and
we hope that all persons of honor, or in place and authority, will so far
assist us in discountenancing such men, that their discretion and shame will
persuade them to reform what their conscience would not; and that the
displeasure of good men toward them, may supply what the Laws have not, and it
may be cannot well provide against, there being in the license and corruption
of the times, and the depraved nature of men, many enormities, scandals, and
impieties in practice, and manners, which Laws cannot well describe, and
consequently not enough provide against, which may by example and severity of
virtuous men be easily discountenanced, and by degrees suppressed.

However, for the more effectual reforming these men, who are a discredit to
the Nation, and unto any cause they pretend to favor and wish well to; we
require all Mayors, Sheriffs, and Justices of the Peace, to be very vigilant
and strict in the discovery and prosecution of all dissolute and profane
persons, and such as blaspheme the name of God, by profane swearing and
cursing, or revile, or disturb Ministers, and despise the public worship of
God; that being first bound to the good behavior, they may be further
proceeded against, and exposed to shame, in such a manner, as the Laws of the
Land, and the just and necessary Rules of Government shall direct or permit.


Judge. Now blessed be the Lord, the King of Kings, who has put such a thing
as this into the heart of the King, and blessed be his Anointed, and blessed
be his Counsel, the good Lord recompense it sevenfold into his bosom; and
let all the sons of Belial fly before him, as the dust before the wind, and
let the Angel of the Lord scatter them.


Prison. My Lord, I, and all my retinew are very much deceived in this Charles
the Second, we all conceited that he was for us. My Drunkards cried, a Health
to the King. The Swearers swore, a Health to the King, so long, till they swore
themselves out of Health. The Papist, the Atheist, the Roarer and the Ranter,
they all concluded that now their day was come, but alas how are we deceived!


Judge. I wish that you, and all such as you are may for ever be deceived in
this kind, and that your eyes may rot in your heads before ever you see
Idolatry, Superstition and Profaneness countenanced in the Land. Such
trulypious-frauds are pleasing to God, delightful to his people, and grievous
to none but such as should be grieved for their villainy and licentiousness.


Judge. But have you no more evidence to produce against these profane
practices?

Cry. Yes, my Lord, here is an Ordinance of Parliament ready mounted against
them.

Pris. My Lord, I except against this witness above all the rest, for it was
not made by a full and a free Parliament of Lords and Commons, but by some Rump
and relick of a Parliament, and so is invalid.


Judge. Toto erras coelo, you are quite deceived, for this Ordinance was made by
Lords and Commons, when the house was full and free; and those the best that
ever England had, for Piety toward God, and loyalty to their Sovereign, for
they were secluded and imprisoned for their loyaly and fidelity. Let us hear
what they say.


Ordinan. of Parl. My Lord, V. Ord. of Parliament for the Lords day, 1644.
I have plainly told them, that since the profanation of the Lords day, has
been heretofore greatly occasioned by May-poles (a Heathenish vanity, generally
abused to superstition and wickedness) the Lords and Commons do therefore
ordain, that all and singular May-poles shall be taken down and removed by the
Constables, Borsholders, Tything-men, Petty-Constables, and Churchwardens of
the places and parishes where the same be; and that no May Pole shall be
hereafter set up, erected, or suffered to be within this Kingdom of England,
or the Dominion of Wales; and if any of the said Officers shall neglect to do
their office in the Premises, every of them, for such neglect, shall forfeit
five shillings, and so from week to week, five shillings weekly, till the said
May Pole shall be taken down.


Judge. This is to the purpose, and may pass instead of many Arguments, for a
Parliament of Lords and Commons, so pious, so prudent, so loyal and faithful to
God and the King, to condemn these sports as a vanity, a Heathenish vanity,
abused to superstition and wickedness, and to be suppressed under a penalty; This
may clearly convince any sober man of the sinfulness of such practices, and
make them to abhor them, for what is forbidden by the Laws of men (especially
when those Laws are consonant to the Laws of God) may not be practiced by any
person; but these profane sports are forbidden by the Laws of men, and are
herein consonant to the Laws of God, which condemn such sinful pastimes. But
have you no more evidence besides this Ordinance to batter these Babylonish
Towers?


Cry. Yes, my Lord, here is one that may go for many; It Is the solemn League
and Covenant, taken in a solemn manner, The King took it at his Coronation in
Scotland, Jan. 1. 1651. as appears by an excellent Sermon preached by Mr.
Robert Douglas, p. 28.
by King, Lords, and Commons, the Assembly of Divines, the Renowned City of
London, the Kingdom of Scotland, and by many thousands of Ministers and people
throughout this Nation. In the second branch of it we vowed the extirpation of
Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever
shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness.


Pris. My Lord, these things are out of date, and do not bind now our troubles
be over.

Judge. The sixth branch of the Covenant will tell you, That we are bound all
the days of our lives to observe these things zealously, and constantly
against all opposition; and I suppose every good man thinks himself bound to
preserve the purity of Religion, to extirpate Popery, and Heresy, Superstition
and Profaneness, not only in times of trouble, but these are duties to be
practiced in our places and callings all our days. Besides, the Royalists do
plead the Covenant at this day, V. Dr. Griffiths Sermon. on Prove. 24. ^^. p. 12.
preached at Mercers Chap. 1660.
for the preservation of the King; and if it be in force as to that
particular, as indeed it is, then much more does it bind us still to the
observation of those things which do more immediately appertain to the worship
of God. Since Gods honor is to be preferred before the honor of any man
whatsoever. Now if our May-Games and mis-rules do favor of superstition and
profaneness (as it is apparent they do) if they be contrary to sound doctrine,
and the power of godliness (as to all unprejudiced men they are) then by this
solemn League and sacred Covenant we are bound to root them up. This is
sufficient, if there were no more; but because men are loath to leave what they
dearly love, let us see whether you have any further evidence.


Cry. Yes, my Lord, here is an excellent Order from the Council of State, made
this present May, wherein they take notice of a spirit of profaneness and
impiety that has overspread the Land, to the dishonor of God, and the
grieving of his Ministers and people; they do therefore order, that the
Justices of the Peace, and Commissioners for the Militia, do use their utmost
endeavors to prevent all licentiousness and disorder, all profanation of the
Sabbath, all interrupting or discouraging of Ministers in the work of their
Ministry; that they suppress all Alehouses, and all ungodly meetings; that
they own and protect all such as have adhered to the Parliaments cause and
interest, and all good men in their sober and pious walking, against all that
are turbulent, malignant or disaffected, and upon just cause to secure them.
The Council does likewise command them to have a special care to prevent
profaneness, and disorders of people about May-poles, and meetings of that
nature, and their rude and disorderly carriages toward people, in molesting
them to get moneys from them to spend vainly at such meetings.


Ju. This is full, and to the point indeed, blessed be God, and blessed be
their counsel. But have you yet no more evidence?


Cry. Yes, my Lord, here is Mr. Elton, a man eminent for Piety, and of known
integrity in his time, he has long since told us (in his Exposition of the
second Commandment) that such filthy company, where there is such filthy
speeches, and lascivious behavior, with mixed dancing at their merry meetingss,
are great provocations to lust, and inducements to uncleanness, and therefore
to be abhorred of all sober Christians. Ames C^s. Cons. l. 5. 6. 39.
To him assents that great School-Divines Dr. Ames, who tells us, that those
who will shun incontinency, and live chastely, must shun such profane meetings,
and take heed of mixed dancing, stage plays, and such incentives to lust, where
wickedness is presented to the eye and ear, and the man puts on the woman's
apparel, which is an abomination to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 22. 5.


Pris. My Lord, these were old Puritans and Precisians, who were more precise
than wise.

Cry. I will produce men of another strain, here are Bishops against you.
Babington on the 7th Commandment.
B. Babington has long since told us, that these sinful pastimes are epulum
Diaboli, the Devils festival, the inticements to whoredom, and the occasions
of much uncleanness, being condemned by Councils, and forbidden by Scripture,
which commands us to shun all appearance of evil.


Judge. This is good, but have you no more?

Cry. Yes, my Lord, here is one more, it is B. Andrews, a man of great note for
his learning (who in his Exposition on the seventh Commandment) tells us, that
we must not only refrain from evil, but also from the show of evil; and must
do things honest not only before God, but also before men; to this end we
must shun wanton dancings, stage plays, etc. because our eyes thereby behold
much vanity and a man cannot go on these hot coals, and not be burnt, nor
touch such pitch, and not be defiled, nor see such wanton actions, and not be
moved; Besides, there is much loss, and mis-spence of precious time, at such
profane meetings.


Judge. This is pious, and to purpose, here is evidence sufficient, I shall now
proceed to sentence.

Cry. My Lord, I desire your Patience to hear one witness more, and then I have
done.

Judge. Who is that which comes so late into the Court?

Cry. My Lord, it is acute and accomplished Ovid.

Pris. My Lord, he is a Heathen Poet, who lived about twenty years before
Christ.

Judge. His Testimony will be the stronger against your Heathenish vanities.
Publius Ovidius Naso, what can you say against Mistress Flora?


Ovid. My Lord, I have long since told the world, that the Senatorian Fathers
at Rome did order the celebration of these Floralian sports to be yearly
observed about the beginning of May, Floralia cum maxima lascivia, ludis, atque
jocis obscaenis, conviviis luxuriosis, coronis, saltationibus, cultu
versicolore and luminibus, celebrati fuere, Christianorum cujusmodi sunt hodie
Floralia eodem mense Maio, Stuckii Antiquit.
in honor of Flora, that our fruits and flowers might the better prosper. At
this feast there was drinking, dancing, and all manner of lasciviousness, by a
harlotry company, suitable to the memorial of such an Harlot, who was light her
self, and therefore delighted in Jokes and pleasant Comedies, but not in sad
and direful Tragedies.


Pris. Sir, you wrong the Poet, and may, for ought I know, wrong me, by
wrapping up his ingenious narrative in so little room.


Judge. Grata brevitas, I love those whose writings are like Jewels, which
contain much worth in a little compass, yet since the learned and ingenious
Reader may desire to hear the Author speaking in his own language (since he
speaks so fully and clearly to this purpose) you shall for once have your
desire.


Dic Dea, Ovid. Fastorum lib. 5.
responde, ludorum quae sit origo, etc.
Convenere patres, and si been floreat annus,
Numinibus nostris annua festa vovent.
Matter ades florum, ludis celebranda jocosis,
Distuleram parts mense priore tuas.
Incipis Aprili, transis in tempora Maii,
Alter te fugiens, cum venit, alter habet.
Cum tua fint, cedantque tibi confinia mensum,
Convenit in lauds ille vel ille tuas.
Circus in hunc exit, Ludi florales in circo sive theatro, celebrati.
clamataque palma theatris, etc.
Quaerere conabar, quare lascivia major
His foret in ludis, liberiorque jocus.
Sed mihi succurrit numen non esse severum,
Aptaque deliciis munera far Deam.
Ebrius incinctis phylira conviva capillis
Saltat, and imprudens utitur art meri,
Ebrius ad durum formosae limen amicae
Cantat, habens unctae mollia serta comae.
Nulla coronata peraguntur seria front,
Nec liquidae vinctis flore bibuntur aquae. Corona cinctis.

Scena lenis decet hanc, non est mihi credit, non est,
Illa Cothurnatas inter habenda Deas.
Turba quidem cur hos celebret meretricia ludos,
Non ex difficili cognita causa fuit.
Non est detetricis, non est de magna professis,
Vult sua Plebeio sacra patere Choro, etc.
Cry. Now my Lord, and please you, we will call over the Jury, that the
prisoner may see we have done her no wrong.


Judge. Do so.

Cry. Answer to your names. Holy Scriptures one, Pliny two, Lactantius three,
Synodus Francica four, Charles the Second five, Ordinance of Parliament six,
Solemn League and Covenant seven, Order of the Council of State eight, Elton
nine, B. Babington ten, B. Andrews eleven, Ovid. twelve.

These, with all the godly in the Land, do call for Justice against this
turbulent Malefactor.


Judge. Since it is so, I shall proceed to sentence. Flora, thou have here been
indicted by the name of Flora, for bringing in abundance of mis-rule and
disorder into Church and State, thou have been found guilty, and art condemned
both by God and man, by Scriptures, Fathers, Councils, by learned and pious
Divines, both old and new, and therefore I adjudge thee to perpetual
banishment, that thou no more disturb this Church and State, lest Justice do
arrest thee.


An Answer to all the Cavils which are of any weight or worth which are brought
in defense of May-Games.
Vice seldom goes barefaced, Nemo malum odit, nisi qui distinct videt.
Barlow Exercit. Metaphys. p. 28.
it usually, like Harlots, paints, or puts on the vizzard of profit, pleasure,
frugality, good neighborhood, etc. the better to deceive such careless
sinners as devour the bait, but forget the hook. The naked discovery of the
danger which attends such licentious practices, Nullum vitium sine patrocinio.
is half the cure, for no man that is well in his wits, will run on in such
paths, when he plainly sees the mischief and misery that attends them.

Object. 1. Young people must have some Recreations.

Answ. Quae major voluptas quam fastidium talis voluptatis? Tertul. de spectac.
c. 29. ubi plura.
It Is true, modest, moderate, manly Recreations are fit for them, but sinful,
sensual, sordid Recreations, such as drinking, fighting, dancing, whoring,
gaming and debauchery, these emasculate men's spirits, and make men deboist, and
unfit for the service of God or man, these must be abolished and abandoned in
a Christian Commonwealth; such Recreations are mere destructions, and such
mirth is madness, Eccles. 2. 2.

'Twas a good resolution of a good man, B. Halls Meditations and Vows, cent. 3.
med. 47.
I will choose such Recreations as are of best example, and best use, seeking
those by which I may not only be merrier, but better. What Recreations be
unlawful, Perkins Cas. Cons. l. 3. s. 4. Q. 1. p. 141.
you may see at large in others.

Object. 2. These are Customs of great Antiquity, of above eighteen hundred
years standing.

Answ. Boltons Directions for walking. p. 154, etc.
Antiquity without verity is of no validity. Christ is Truth, not Custom. Old
Customs, if they be evil Customs, are better broken than kept, and the older
they be, the worse; the more Editions, the more Additions. The customs of the
people are vain, and to be abhorred, not to be followed by us, Levit. 18. 30.
Jer. 10. 3.

The Heathenish Olympick-Games, and the Pagans Saturnalia, where they invented
sports for the honor of their gods, and gave license to all to be as lewd as
they pleased at those seasons, V Mr. Pryn, in several Treatises against
Episcopacy.
these were ancient, it does not therefore follow that they were good. So
Episcopacy is ancient, but Apostolical simplicity is more ancient, and the
Church flourished most without it.

Object. 3. These May-poles are set up to show the season of the year, this was
the plea lately of a fantastic and real fanatic.

Answ. I should think that a green and living tree should mind us of the
season of the year, better than a dead bush; and a living man better set forth
the excellency of a man, than a dead man. It Is not without cause that the
Apostle calls wicked men, absurd and unreasonable men, (...), absurd fellows, a
compact of mere incongruities, solecising continually in opinion, speech,
action, and whole life, Dr. Slatyr.
2 These. 3. 2.

Object. 4. Our Forefathers practiced such things.

Answ. Our Forefathers were Idolaters, it does not follow that therefore we
must be so too. They lived in times of ignorance, but we live in days of
light, and therefore must walk like children of the light, renouncing the works
of darkness. We must live by Rule, not by Example, and follow our Forefathers
no further than they followed Christ, hence the Lord so often forbids us to
follow our Forefathers, Psalm. 78. 8. Ezekiel. 20. 18, 19, 20. Zach. 7. 4.

Object. 5. If men be not thus employed on Festivals, they will be idle, and
be worse employed, and we have no ill intentions in what we do.

Answ. There is no necessity that people should be idle on holy days, for by
the Law of our Land, if men will keep holy days, they must keep them holily,
spending them only and wholly (says the Statute of 5, and 6. of Edw. 6. chap.
4.) in praising God, and praying to him, hearing his word, and meditating on
his works, etc. So that the Statute, by those two words, Only and Wholly,
excludes all May-Games, revels, dancing, drinking, rioting, and misrule.

2. They cannot likely be worse employed, than in such loose, lascivious,
licentious practices, amongst rude and deboist company, where they shall hear,
see, and learn all manner of vice and villainy, to the corrupting both of their
minds and manners, and the undoing of themselves, both here and hereafter.

3. Whereas you say, you have no ill intentions in so doing, who can believe
that you will join your self with such profane company out of a good
intention? can a man touch pitch, and not be defiled with it?

2. Admit your Intentions were good, yet that will not warrant you to do evil.
In my Com. on Amos 4. 4, 5.
That which is evil per se, can never be made good by any good intentions, as
I have proved at large elsewhere.

Object. 6. I can see no hurt in May-Games, they are none but a pack of precise
fools, who are enemies to the King, that cry them down.

Answ. Who so blind as those that will not see? Can thou see no hurt in
drunkenness, fighting, whoring, stealing, profanation of the Sabbaths,
contempt of Religion? etc. The Devil, who is the god of this world, has
blinded thine eyes, and as blind men are not fit to judge of colors, so thou
art unfit to judge in such cases. The Devil deals with thee, as Elisha did with
his enemies, he first smit them with blindness, and then brings them into
Samaria into the midst of their enemies; but as he prayed for them, so shall I
for thee; Lord open their eyes, that they may see; and the Lord opened their
eyes, and behold they were in the midst of Samaria, 2 King. 6. 18, 19, 20. So
say I, Lord open the eyes, and awaken the consciences of these blind, secure
sinners, that they may see, and if the Lord shall vouchsafe you this mercy,
then will you see your selves in the Devils camp, on the brink of destruction,
and thou will abhor thy self for thy vile presumption in this kind, if thou
doubt of the truth of this, ask any gracious, awakened, enlightened soul, that
knows the terrors of the Lord, and the bitterness of sin, and he will tell
you, that he durst not practice such profaneness to win a world.

2. There may be great sin in that which the blind world counts a small
matter. The great danger that is in little sins, you may see in an accurate
little Tract. of Mr. Peck, on that Subject.
To eat an Apple, to bow to an Image, to pick a few sticks on the Sabbath, etc.
These, and many such, to a carnal eye seem small things, and yet we know God
has sadly punished such as acted them. I have before proved that these
practices are sinful; now there is no sin simply considered in it self, that is
small, as appears, 1. In that there is no small God that we offend by it. 2.
No small price was paid for it. 3. No small punishment is prepared for it. This
is a complicated sin (as I have proved before) and therefore is not to be so
lightly esteemed of.


3. Whereas thou say that none but a few precise fools oppose this
profaneness, thou art much deceived. Was David a foolish precisian, who would
have no familiarity with the wicked, but bids them depart from him? and prayed
the Lord to turn away his eyes from beholding vanity; and poured out rivers of
tears, because men transgressed Gods Laws. Was Paul a foolish precisian, who
commands us to walk precisely, and circumspectly, to shun the appearance of
evil, to have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove
them rather; and to live soberly, righteously, and religiously in the world?
Were the Ancient Fathers fools, who do unanimously enveigh against such
profane practices? Were Perkins, Babington, Dod, Andrews, Elton, etc. precise
fools, who do condemn these profane practices in their Expositions of the
seventh Commandment? Sure thou art some singular conceitedfool, that thus
censurest all the grave and pious sages of former and latter times for fools,
and all because they oppose thy folly, which will be bitterness in the end.

4. Whereas thou accusest them as enemies to the King, which oppose such
profaneness, let me tell thee, the King has not better friends in the Land,
than such as oppose those profane practices; nor more deadly foes, than such
as do promote them; these set open the floodgates to all rudeness, disloyalty,
debauchery, and effeminacy, whereby people are made unfit, either for the
service of God, or the King. Those that are suffered to rebel against God, will
not stick (when a temptation comes) to rebel against the King. It Is the dark
and ignorant places of the earth, which are habitations of cruelty and
rebellion. Should a man debauch your children and servants, and take them to
such profane meetings, where they should learn to swear and swagger, to rant
and roar; I know no wise Parents that would count such for their friends. These
licentious exercises are the very nurseries of villainy, the bane of piety and
peace, and the overthrow of those Kingdoms that tolerate them. The Romans,
when they grew idle and luxurious, became effeminate, and lost all. When people
grow exorbitant, and transgress Gods Law, and change his Ordinances, then comes
a curse upon a Land, Isa. 24. 5, 6.

So that this is but an old trick of the Devil and his Agents, when they would
destroy Gods people, to put ugly titles on them, and call them troublers of
Israel, trumpets of rebellion, enemies to Caesar, raisers of sedition, the
Pests of a Nation, etc. Thus, as the Heathen Persecutors did put Bear-skins on
the backs of the Christians, and then bait them like Bears; so the limbs of
Satan, when crossed in their lusts, put ugly titles upon Gods people, that so
they may take occasion thereby to destroy them. Thus Elijah was called the
troubler of Israel, when indeed he was the chariots and horsemen, the stay and
strength of Israel. Jeremiah was counted a common Barretor, a man compounded of
nothing but contention. Amos must come no more to Bethel, it is the Kings Court,
and he that comes there must bring silken, not sharp and plain language. Holy
Daniel is accused for a factious man, and one that would not observe the Kings
Laws, Dan. 6. 12. Christ himself, in whom was no sin, yet underwent the
revilings and contradictions of sinners; he was called a madman, an enemy to
Caesar, a glutton, a wine-bibber, and one that had a Devil, Joh. 10. 20. and
troubled the world, John 19. 12. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the
Servant above his Lord, and if they have called the Master of the house
Beelzebub, what may the servants look for? Gravissima quaeque persecutio semper
suit sub praetextu aliquo honestissimo, queque major erat crudelitas, co semper
fuit Praetextus speciosior. Rolloc. in Johan.
Thus Paul was counted a pestilent fellow, a troubler of the State, a babbler, a
madman, a seditious, factious fellow, and yet who freer from these crimes than
he? He commanded all men to pray for Kings, and those in authority, and
commands every soul to be subject to the higher powers, and commanded Titus,
cap. 3. v. 1. to teach people subjection to principalities and powers.

Thus they dealt with the Primitive Christians, if any calamity fell on the
Land, they presently cried, Away with these Christians to the Lions, it is they
that are the cause of all our misery. When Nero had set Rome on fire, he laid
it upon the Christians. The Martyrs in Queen Mary's time were accused as
seditious, factious, turbulent persons, that so they might be made odious both
to Prince and people. Thus Cochlaeus the Papist gave out, that Luther was
begotten by an Incubus, and strangled by the Devil. Thus Bolsec tells us, that
Calvin was a branded Sodomite, and consumed with lice. Putean says, that Beza
died a Catholic, with a thousand such like. For Popery has three figures
which uphold it; the first is Auxesis, the extolling and advancing of her
Parafites. 2. Meiosis, a debasing of her opposites. 3. Pseudologia, lying
lustily, for lying and murder are the two props of Popery, which plainly shows
that it is a devilish Religion, John 8. 44. There are some that in Print do
charge Gods people as enemies to Peace and Truth. Dr. Griffith in his Samaritan
revived, p. 65. and in his sermon on Prove. 24. 21. p. 40, 41 Quis tulerit
Gracchos de seditione querentes? Juven.
The Church and State (says one) ever since the Reformation, has found the
Old Puritan faction to be inveterate and irreconcilable enemies to Peace and
Truth. Whither will not malice, and hopes of preferment carry men! The same
Author yokes Presbytery and Popery together, Popery and Presbytery (says he)
both in opinion and practice differ in many things, only in Terms. This is as
true as many other things which he has published in that Invective. Doctors
in Divinity, should defend the Discipline of Christ, and his people, and not
raise slanders on them. But let such know, that it is not Piety, but the want
of it which breeds tumults and sedition in a Nation. It Is not the godly, but
the ungodly; it is the swearer that makes the Land to mourn, it is the Atheist,
the Papist, the Blasphemer, the Fornicator, the Drunkard, etc. that trouble
Israel, and bring calamities upon King and Kingdom, 1 Samuel 12. ult. A V. Dr.
Davenant, Determ. Quest. 17. p. 81
Jesuited Papist (standing to his own Principles) cannot be a good Subject.
None can be an absolute Papist, but he must needs be an absolute Traitor,
says a learned Dr. Prideaux, Higgaion Selah sect 7, 8. p. 17, 18, 19. V. Mr.
Pryn, The Treachery and Disloyalty of Papists to their Sovereigns.
Professor.

As for the godly, they are of those that are peaceable in Israel, they are
endued with the wisdom which is from above, which is pure and peaceable. They
are peaceable in themselves, and labor to make and preserve Peace amongst
others. They are the strength and glory of a Land. As Sampsons strength lay in
his hair, so the Governors of Judah shall one day say, That in the inhabitants
of Jerusalem lies our strength, Zach. 12. 5. They are the blessings of a
Nation, and by their prayers they keep off many a judgment. By a Letter from
Breda (May 10. 1660.) I find that his Majesty has often been heard to say, That
the prayers of his subjects will most advantage his cause, and that those who
do endeavor to express their affection by debauchery, may ruin themselves, or
at least stain his reputation, his Majesty desiring no such attendants. An
excellent saying, and well becoming a Prince.

Religion makes the best subjects, the best servants, and the best relations.
Where Religion comes in the power of it, there men obey, not for fear (as
wicked ones do) but for conscience sake. There are no better Subjects in the
world than these, none more faithful to their trust, none pray more for their
Governors, none pay their dues more freely to them, These are they that will
venture their lives and estates for their good, when such as serve them for
their own ends, will leave them and forsake them; and though for the present
the righteous may be condemned as Traitors, and the wicked be exalted to
honor, yet in Gods due time he will clear the innocence of his servants, as
the light, when the names of the wicked shall rot. Especially at that great day
of Revelation, then shall we clearly discern betwixt the righteous and the
wicked, between him that fears the Lord, and him that fears him not. This
may comfort us who are fallen into the last days, which are called perilous
times, Ille est publicus inimicus cui haec voluptas displicet. Aug. de civit.
Dei, l. 2. c. 21.
wherein he that refrains from evil, makes himself a prey. It Is criminous now
adays amongst many men to be sober and pious. If a man will not drink
Healths, or give money to those that will, if he will not rant and roar, and
run with others into all excess of riot, this is enough (with some men) to make
a man an enemy to the State.

I have a little experience in this kind my self; This last May opposing some
Floralians in their profane practices (whom I thought after above twenty years
preaching should have learnt better things) they gave out that I was little
better than a Quaker, a Preacher of false Doctrine, and an enemy to the King,
and should be thrown out of my place; and why so? why because I hindered
practical Fanatics in their frantic practices, Grande nefas! See how these
people who never studied Machiavel, yet are natural Machiavelists, one of whose
Principles is, Calumniare audacter, saltem aliquid adhaerebit. Lie lustily,
some filth will stick. I see sying is coming in fashion apace, I shall
therefore (having this opportunity) clear my self and my brethren in the
Ministry (who are or may be aspersed in this kind.)

1. For Quakerism, I have preached, prayed, practiced, and printed against it,
and openly (as occasion required) opposed them and their blasphemous
principles, and satanical practices; and thus has every faithful Minister done
(according to the measure of grace received) and therefore for shame forbear
such gross slanders.

2. For my Doctrine; it is sufficiently known to the world, the sum and
substance of it is in great part published to the world.

3. That I am an enemy to the King, is as true as all the rest. I preach for
him, I pray for him, I print for him, I pay to him, and command men so to do,
and am ready to sacrifize my life for him in an honorable way, and when I
cannot yield Active, yet I shall readily yield Passive obedience, and shall say
with Bradford the Martyr, If the Queen will banish me, I will thank her; if
she will imprison me, I will thank her; if she will burn me, I will thank
her.

Or as Chrysostom (before him) said to the Empress Eudoxia, If the Queen
will, let her banish me, the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; if
she will, let her saw me asunder, Esaias suffered the same. If she will, let
her cast me into the Sea, I will remember Jonah. If she will, let her cast
me into a burning fiery furnace, or amongst wild beasts, I will remember
Daniel, and the three children. If she will, let her stone me, or cut off my
head, I have St. Stephen and the Baptist my blessed companions. If she will, let
her take away all my goods, Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked
shall I return thither again. Thus heroickly he. For my fidelity to the King,
in refusing the Engagement, I lost two hundred pound, and ran the hazard of my
whole livelihood; for I had no Law to recover a penny. At two public
Disputations against Sectaries, I ran great hazards, at the first 1650. there
was a great rabble of Sectaries met together, who gave out untoward speeches
against me.

In August 1651. About a week before the King came into Worcester, I was called
to assist in a Disputation against some Sectaries, this falling out at that
juncture of time, I was looked upon as an enemy to the Commonwealth, and
therefore the Constable was commanded to bring me in prisoner to Worcester, to
be there secured amongst the Royalists; and lately have I been threatened (from
another coast) with an Arrest, for opposing the Millenarians and
Fifth-Monarchy-men. I mention these things, not for any sinister ends of fear
or favor, but to prevent, or at lest to blunt the edge of those vile
aspersions, which are cast upon the Presbyterians, as if they were enemies to
Caesar; when I dare be bold to say, and it were easy to make it good, that God
has not better servants, nor the King better subjects, than those of this
Judgment. Who were it that God made Instruments to bring about the great
change which is now wrought in the Land? were it not our brethren of Scotland?
Who were they that petitioned in Print for the life of the late King? were they
not the Presbyterian Ministers of London, one of them losing his head not long
after upon a Royal account! Who where they that opposed the Engagement with
invincible Arguments in Print, were they not the Presbyterians of Lancashire?
who are those that strenuously opposed debauchery and profaneness on the one
hand, and Sects and Heresies on the other, when others were dumb, and did
tolerate them? were they not the men of this judgment? Now those that help to
keep sin and error out of a Land, those are the best friends to a Land, and
the Kings best subjects.

If any shall ob^ect that we were for King and Parliament, I freely confess
it, so we were, and so we are still; and so I think is every honest
hearted-subject, who understands any thing of the frame of this Government. To
this we are bound by the Protestation, Covenant, and other Obligations. I look
upon him as an enemy to the Land of his Nativity, who goes about to separate
the King from the Parliament, or the Parliament from the King. As for the
lawfulness of the Parliaments war against those that withdrew the King from the
Parliament (for there was not the lea^t intent in them to hurt the person of
the King, and therefore they were imprisoned by the Army) that case is very
learnedly and modestly cleared by Dr. Austin in his Allegiance not impeached,
by the Parliaments taking up of Arms (though against the Kings personal
commands) for the just defense of the Kings person the Laws of the Land, and
Liberties of the Subject; yea they are bound by the Oath of Allegiance, so to
do, proved from the words of the Oath, from Principles of Law and Nature, and
other Testimonies; Bilson. Philand. par. 3. p. 179. Grotius de Jure belli, l.
1. c. 4.
of this Judgment is Mr. Pryn, Mr. Rutherford in his Lex Rex, Yea B. Bilson (a
man far enough from faction or sedition) concurs with them, yea so does Grotius
and Barclay.

Obj. 7. They are many and mighty that approve of such profane practices, and
it is wisdom to go with the tide of the times, and the current of the world.

Answ. Indeed, if you mean to perish with the world, you may do so, but if you
will be the Lords people, you must not fashion your selves like to the world,
for the world like a great beast, lies tumbling in its own filth, 1 John 5. 19.
The way to Hell is a broad way, and has many passengers, Matthew. 7. 13. Even
Seneca that wise Moralist could say, Argumentum pessimum est turba. Sen.
that it is one of the worst Arguments that a man can use, to say that the
multitude does so and so, and therefore we will do so too. We are expressly
forbidden to follow a multitude in evil, Exodus 23. 2. The more join together in
sin, the nearer to judgment; generality in sinning brings generality in
suffering. See fifteen reasons against following the world. Buroughs on Mat.
11. 29. chap. 48. p. 204.
When all the old world was corrupted, then came the flood. When all Sodom
burnt with lust, then came fire from Heaven and consumed them. When the mean
man boweth down to Idols, and the great man humbles himself before them, God
will not pardon, Isa. 2. 8, 9.

2 Few great men are good men, 1 Cor. 1. 26. and therefore follow not any be
he never so great or good, any further than he follows Christ; yea should any
command you to break the Laws of God, yet you must choose rather to obey God
than man. It Is no dishonor to the Kings on earth to see the King of Kings
obeyed before them, and therefore St. Peter bids us first Fear God, and then
honor the King.

Obj. 8. If God were displeased with such profane practices, he would never
have born so long with the wicked, nor suffer them to prosper as they do.

Answ. 1. You are much deceived in thinking they are not punished, for this
prospering in wickedness is the sorest punishment, Deus tunc magis irascitur,
cum non irascitur, God is never more angry, than when he seems not to be
angry, but lets the wicked prosper in his way, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. Hos. 4. 14, 17.

2. Though he be slow to wrath, yet is he great in power, and will by no
means acquit the wicked, Nahum 1. 3. Though he bear long, Recte fecisse
praemium est. Sen.
he will not always bear, but as men sin against the Lord, so first or last
let them be sure their sin will find them out; for as Piety* has the
Promises, and though no man should reward it, yet it is a reward it self; Maxima
peccantium poena, est peccasse.
So Impiety has the Threatenings annexed unto it, and though no man should
punish it, yet it is its own Tormentor. Gods forbearance is no acquittance, Nec
ullum scelus licet fortuna illud exornet muneribus suis, licet tueatur ac
vindicet, impunitum est, quoniam sceleris in scelere supplicium est. Senec.
Epist. 98.
but the longer he forbears, the heavier will his wrath be when it comes, and
he will recompense his patience with the fierceness of his fury (as I have
showed at large elsewhere.) I shall conclude all with that sweet and seasonable
counsel of Samuel, In my Com. on Hos. 13. 12. p. 6, 7.
1 Samuel 12* 24, 25. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all your
heart; for consider how great things he has done for you.

But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both you* and your
King.

As a Mantissa, and little over-weight, I shall give you a Copy of Verses,
which have lain long by me, they will give some light* and some delight to
ingenious and ingenuous Readers.
HO Passenger! know thou not me?
Where is thy cap, where is thy knee?
Thy betters do me honor give,
And swear they will do it while they live:
Both high and low give me respect,
I can command them at my beck:
I think thou art some Puritan,
Or censuring Precisian,
That loves not May-poles, Mirth and Plays,
But cries, alas, these wretched days!
That stop their ears; and shut their eyes,
Lest they behold our vanities.
But Goodman-Goosecap, let them know,
I do disdain their holy show,
Their peevish humors I do scorn,
And hold them wretches all forlorn:
Their Censures all I do shake off,
And at their zeal I freely scoff,
I will stand here in spite of such,
And joy to hear that they do grutch.
But prithee fellow learn of me,
My Birth, my Worth, my Pedigree*
My name, my fame, my power, and praise,
My state my acts, my honored days.
I am Sir May Pole, That Is my name:
Men, May, and Mirth, give me the same,
Dame Flora once Romes famous whore,
Did give to Rome in days of yore
By her last Will great Legacies,
Her yearly Feasts to solemnize
In May-times sportful pleasantness
In lust procuring wantonness,
In shows and sights of such delight,
As men's affections ravished quite.
In Bowers of May-sprigs gaily built
With Flowers and Garlands all bedilt,
In tuffs of trees, in shady groves,
In rounds of sounds, and wanton loves,
And thus has Flora, May, and Mirth,
Begun, and cherished my birth,
Till time and means so favored me,
That of a twig, I waxt a tree:
Then all the people less and more,
My height and tallness did adore;
Romes Idol-gods made much of me,
For favoring their Idolatry;
When thus enlarged was my Fame,
Then into other Lands I came,
And found my pomp and bravery
Increased much by Popery;
Since their will worship I advanced,
I was most highly countenanced:
All Townships had me in request,
Where ere I came, that place was blessed,
And to say sooth, I Am near of kin
Unto that Romish man of Sin,
And why? 'cause under Heavens Cope,
There Is none I say so near the Pope.
Wherefore the Papists give to me,
Next Papal, second Dignity.
Has holy Father much adoc
When he is chosen: so have I too:
Does he upon men's shoulders ride?
That honor does to me betide;
There Is joy at my plantation,
As is at his Coronation.
Men women, children, on an heap,
Do sing and dance, and frisk and leap;
Yea drums and drunkards on a rout,
Before me make a hideous shout;
Whose loud alarms, and bellowing cries
Do fright the earth, and pierce the skies.
Has holy Pope his noble guard?
So have I too, that watch and ward:
For where it is noised that I am come,
My followers summoned are by drum.
I have a mighty retinue,
The scum of all the rascal crew
Of Fiddlers, Pedlers, Jayi-scap't-slaves,
Of Tinkers, Turn-coats, Tospot-knaves,
Of Thieves, and Scape-thrifts many a one,
With bouncing Besse, and jolly Jone,
With idle Boys, and Journey-men,
And Vagrants, that their Country run:
Yea, Hobbyhorse does hither prance,
Maid-marrian, and the Morrice-dance.
My summons fetches far and near
All that can swagger, roar and swear,
All that can dance, and drab, and drink,
They run to me, as to a sink.
These, me for their Commander take,
And I do them my black-guard make.
The Pope does keep his Jubilee,
A time of mirth, and merry glee:
On such as unto Rome will go,
Great benefits he does bestow;
For sins past, yea, and sins to come,
He says he can free them from doom:
He brings men to transgression,
With hope of absolution:
And if they will in him believe,
Do what they list, he will them forgive.
I dare avouch in doing this,
My power is as great as his.
My yearly Jubilee keep I,
Which great concourse does dignifie,
And to all such as it frequent,
I procure mirth and great content,
I do enlarge their conscience,
And qualify each great offense:
I take away all fear of evil,
Of sin and hell, of death and devil:
I tell them it is a time to laugh,
To give themselves free leave to quaff,
To drink their healths upon their knee,
To mix their talk with ribaldry,
To reel and spue, to brawl and fight,
To scoff and rail with all their might:
I bid men cast off gravity,
And women eke their modesty:
Old crones that scarce have tooth or eye,
But crooked back, and lamed thigh
Must have a frisk, and shake their heel,
As if no stitch, nor ache they feel.
I bid the servant disobey,
The child to say his Parents nay.
The poorer sort that have no coin,
I can command them to purloin:
All this, and more, I warrant good,
For it is to maintain neighborhood.
The Pope's a friend to Letchery,
Witness his Stews for Venery.
In this I come not far behind,
I give them leave to take their kind,
I have allurements for the same,
As they do know that love the game:
First, mirth does make their passions warm,
Then liquor strong their lust does charm,
Then dancing gestures, looks, and words,
More fuel to their fire affords,
And 'cause their works do hate the light,
We take the advantage of the night,
Which covers with dark Canopy,
The means producing bastardy.
The Pope does challenge power divine,
I next to him may say it is mine.
I can command more countenance
Than can the Lords own Ordinance:
They do to me their love convert,
That from the Church withdraw their heart;
I can command from them great cost,
Who on the poor would think it lost:
For me they will adventure life,
They fly the Gospels threatened strife*
The honor of the Sabbath day,
My dancing-greens have taken away.
Let Preachers prate till they grow wood,
Where I am, they can do no good.
The Pope does every where beat down
The haters of his triple Crown:
Bell, Book, and Candle do defy
Such as will not on him rely;
And to effect his dear intent,
New Locusts still from Hell are sent,
That fill the world with villainies,
And act each where their Tragedies;
Sometimes men's lands, sometimes their state
Must pay for it, 'cause they do him hate.
And have not I as powerful wrath,
To work the world as great a scath?
Have not I vassals like the Devil,
To pay such with all kind of evil,
That against me spoke, or dare to frown,
Much more that say, they will pull me down?
These brave my foes unto their face,
And glad this office to embrace.
In color that they plead for me,
They Will fight against all honesty:
To make their foes seem odious,
They Will first proclaim them factious:
They Will term them Rebels to the State,
And say they seek to innovate,
And breed disorder in each thing,
Yea, that they hate their Sovereign King:
And if they be not purged, the Land,
Nor Church, nor Commonwealth can stand.
Then Libels foul are cast abroad
When filthy slanders lay on load.
Incarnate Devils we them call,
Of men most vile, the worst of all.
Rogues, Thieves and Drunkards, says our pen,
Compared with these, are honest men:
And as for Papists, oh! they are
Subjects more true than these by far:
Yea, Puritans we do them prove,
All such as do not May-poles love;
And if some matter there be found,
That wants good proof to make it sound,
We have whole dozens pressed to swear,
And freely false witness to bear:
Yea, when my Rogues do victuals want,
When money, cloths, and all grow scant,
Then forth a forraging they go,
And fall upon our common foe.
No pillage seems half so good,
As what is stolen from the brotherhood.
Thus do we joy our foes to grieve,
And it is our death that they do live.
And lest you think my stately port,
Maintained alone by the baser sort:
I have some of a better note,
That jet it in a silken coat;
I cannot boast much of their grace,
But this I Will say, they are men of place,
Whose Country-worship has great praise
For May-polizing now adays;
Though cold enough in better things,
In this they reign like Parish-Kings;
Though bit to th'bare by Usury,
Yet prodigal to maintain me:
Yea, Gentiles of the Female kind,
To me devoted have their mind,
They keep my Festivals with joy,
And fence me from my foes annoy.
Themselves sometimes will lead the dance*
And Tomboy-like, will leap and prance:
And though they seem (O fatal hap)
As light as feathers in their Cap,
Yet how much bound to them am I,
To grace me with their levity!
And more than these, some learned men,
Perhaps Divines, what say you then?
That have disputed often in Schools,
I hope these are no simple fools:
These stiffly do maintain my cause,
To be according to Gods Laws;
They say, I benefit the poor,
And help to increase the Churches store,
They Will make them good, were it not for me,
All love would perish speedily.
They Champion-like, dare to maintain,
That Papists to the Church I gain,
Where neither fear of God nor man,
Can make them come, These say, I can.
O leap for joy, ye Papists all,
Since these do you my Converts call,
And cleave no more to Popish Rites:
You are Sir May-poles Proselites.
Now Traveller learn more grace to show;
And see that thou thy betters know.
Thou hear'st what I say for my self,
I am no Ape, I am no Elf,
I am no base ones Parasite,
I am this great worlds Favorite,
And since thou must now part me fro,
Let this my blessing with thee go.
There Is not a Knave in all the Town,
Nor swearing Courtier, nor base Clown,
Nor dancing Lob, nor mincing Queen,
Nor Popist Clerk* be it Priest or Dean,
Nor Knight debaucht, nor Gentleman,
That follows Drabs, or Cup or Can,
That will give thee a friendly look,
If thou a May Pole can not brook.
FINIS.

