THE SACRED METHOD OF Saving Humane Souls BY JESUS CHRIST. By Henry Hallywell
Minister of the Gospel at Ifeild in Sussex.

1 Cor. II. vii. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden
wisdom which God ordained before the World unto our Glory. LONDON, Printed for
Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1677.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THere are very few Books of what quality soever, though it be but an ordinary
Pamphlet that passes the Press, without some fair bespeaking the Reader;
wherefore in conformity to the Custom, I am to advertise Thee that the Design
of these following Papers is to show the excellency of the frame and
constitution of the Gospel, or that Sacred Method by which God brings Men to
Heaven by his Son Jesus Christ; which very thing to the considering and
judicious, is a testimony sufficient of the Divinity of it, there being such
abundant evidence of the choicest Attributes of the Deity, his Goodness,
Wisdom and Power in the contexture of it. For when I consider (who is the
Author of the Evangelical Economy, namely, the Blessed Son of God, that
Eternal Logos, who has expressed such an Infinite Wisdom in the frame of
Heaven and Earth, I cannot but think, that what is there so largely diffused
and spread abroad, is, as it were, summed up and contracted into a living
Image, and beautiful Representation in the frame of the Gospel. And certainly
the Introduction of the Christian Religion, and the regenerating the World by
it, being set off in the Scriptures by the glorious Appellative of Creation,
and Jesus the Blessed Author and Finisher of it, stiling himself the beginning
of the Creation of God, i. e. Rev. 3.14.
of the Evangelical Dispensation, the spirit of God does clearly intimate to
us, that the Goodness, Wisdom and Power of the Divinity, are more eminently
and transcendently displayed in the Recovery of Mankind by the Gospel, than in
their first Production. So that if it be a Piece of our Duty (as certainly it
is) to think the most honorably and magnificently of the works of God's hands,
it were a sinful debasing that sacred Project and Contrivance, which was laid
before the Foundation of the World, to let our conceptions of it dwindle into
some poor and trifling Design, and make such a pitiful Representation of it, as
shall be unworthy that Eternal Wisdom, the Creatress of all things, to
interess it self withal. For nothing is more sure, than that the Gospel is so
contrived, as may most of all do honor to God, and promote the welfare and
happiness of Mankind. And upon this Ground and Foundation, I have built the
following Discourse, which whoever will take the pains to peruse, I desire him
to lay aside his Prejudices, and not to charge every thing that he shall find
disagreeing with his present sentiments and persuasions, with the opprobrious
and invidious term of Heresy: For by this means, it comes to pass, that
Religion is made only to serve an Interest, and wait upon a Faction, and the
grand Interest of Christianity is indeed hugely disserved by such oblique Arts
and unwarrantable Insinuations. It shows Men indeed to be affected with a
mighty Zeal, but it is that (...), that bitter zeal, which the Apostle tells
us, is an effect of that wisdom that descends not from above, Jam. 3.14, 15.
but is earthly, sensual, devilish. But I am very incurious of the censures of
angry and peevish Men, being secure in the sense of having endeavored to do
honor to God, by begetting in Men right Apprehensions of his Nature, and
according to my mean Ability, promoted the Offices and Duties of a Virtuous
life, by showing the necessity of them, in order to our everlasting Happiness.
And with this Advertisement, I remit the Reader to the Discourse it self.

Farewell.
IMPRIMATUR Hic Liber (cui Titulus, The Sacred Method of, etc.)

GEO. HOOPER Rmo Dno Arch. Cant. a Sac. Dom.
21. Nov. 1676.
THE SACRED METHOD OF Saving Humane Souls BY JESUS CHRIST.
THE Christian Religion is frequently called by Saint Paul a Mystery, wherein
it is very probable he might allude to the Mysterious Rites of the Gentile
Superstition, as the Eleusynia, or some such secret and mysterious Actions of
the Pagan Religion. And in opposition to these, the Apostle declares to the
World a higher Mystery, and teaches us that Christianity in all respects
exceeds the most sacred and venerable Actions of Paganism. For although the
Heathen Mystagogi pretended a high and noble design, and boasted the end of
their Sacred Mysteries to be the leading and conducting the Initiati to the
Presence and Fruition of the worshipped Deity, or in plainer terms, the
everlasting Blessedness of Men's Immortal Souls (the sole privilege and
prerogative of the Christian Mystery, the Gospel of the Son of God) yet they
failed infinitely in the way and means of accomplishing this so excellent a
purpose, the whole procedure being bottomed upon an uncertain Foundation and
doubtful evidence, and no better than an Histrionical Representation brought on
by those delusive Spirits, who affected a Divine Honor, whereby instead of
perfecting and bettering, they really vitiated and debauched the minds of Men,
and made their most recondite and sacred Rites little better than practices of
Filthiness and Uncleanness. In which regard the Christian Economy is justly
styled by the Apostle a Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.
whose end is not only the highest perfection of Humane Souls, but every where
in all its parts breathes the exactest holiness and purity of Body and Soul, as
the only way to attain an Immortal Blessedness and Felicity.

By this Mystery then of the Gospel, we are not to understand a dark and
intricate Riddle, contrived only to amuze and dazzle the minds of Men, and which
when explicated and unfolded, has no greater likelihood of benefiting the
knower, than Samson's Riddle of feeding the Philistines: but we are to conceive
by it a sacred and recondite Method of saving Humane Souls, that is, of
purifying their minds to such degrees and measures, as may render them capable
of an entrance into the highest Heavens.

Great is the Mystery of Godliness, i. e. the Way and Method of saving Mankind
by the Gospel, is indeed wonderful and admirable. For the sacred plot of the
Gospel was not then framed or laid, when it was promulgated and manifested to
the World, but lay hid in the bosom of an Infinite Understanding, Col. 1.26.
from ages and generations, and is expressly called by the same Apostle, the
mysterious and recondite wisdom of God, which he ordained before the World, 1
Cor. 2.7.
whose projection and contrivance was from the outgoings of Eternity. So that
in this Affair of the Gospel, we are not to look for any thing mean, low and
shallow, but for something which may be worthy of God, an (...), a design which
may evidently and clearly display the highest Perfections of God its Author.

For the better illustration of which, we may consider, that in the
contrivance, conduct and management of the Gospel, there is a clear and
manifest demonstration of the Infinite Goodness, Wisdom and Power of God.

I. A manifestation of Infinite Goodness.

The Heavens and the Earth, and all the capacities of Immense space, declare an
Infinite Goodness, but the clearest and most sensible demonstration of it, is
in this Mystery of the Gospel, wherein that boundless love which has dispersed
it self through all the orders and degrees of life, shines forth with a full
and perfect luster and glory. Here it is that we behold that Love, which
liberally fills and sustains all things, more powerfully exerting its Blessed
Nature, in cementing the Ruins, and rearing up the Foundations of a new World;
for as in the first Creation, an Eternal and Energetical love diffused it self
in the Production of whatever was made, so the same Goodness moves, as it were,
a second time in the stupendous renovation of lapsed Souls, in the Evangelical
Mystery and Economy.

Which Truth may yet receive a further Evidence by these Gradations.

1. The more perfect any life is, the more it desires to diffuse and
communicate it self. God is love, says St. John, 1 John 4.8.
and he is the highest and most perfect life; now love is the most diffusive
and communicative Principle in all the World, and the firmer any being is
radicated in love, the nearer approaches it makes to that most excellent life
and nature of God, whose beneficence and kindness the whole Creation tastes of
Self-love, or the love of the Carcass, the Bodily life restrains and contracts
the free Exertions of the Mind, (...) and (...) 2 Timothy 3.2, 4.
and therefore the Apostle sets it as a note of degeneracy, narrowness and
anxiety, when Men shall be lovers of themselves and corporeal pleasures, in
opposition to that Universal and Intellectual love, which is the great Law of
Rational Beings, and by which our Minds are made wide as the World, and carried
forth in Benignity and Kindness to all the Creatures, as they more or less
partake of the Divine Life and Nature. God is infinite Goodness, and all the
Creatures are but the issues and emanations of his exuberant Fecundity and
Life, and do more intimately depend upon him, than Faculties and Actions upon
the Principles from whence they flow. It was not necessity or need, nor any
greedy and thirsty desire of receiving praise and glory from them, that was the
cause of the production of Men and Angels, but only the Fullness of God's own
Goodness, which alone moved him to that cheerful Approbation of the Works of
his Hands, when he saw his own life diffused in such variety of Beings. And if
we will do honor to God, and speak according to our own faculties, we may add
life to this Demonstration, from the inward sense and experience of every good
Man, who never finds a more inward joy and satisfaction of spirit, than when he
is carried out in desires, and aspirations of Benignity and Kindness toward
the whole Creation. Nor does he look upon this, as any Argument of
Righteousness, that he is at any time, in a more happy state and condition than
others, for he could be willing that all the World were as happy as himself,
did he not see strong and evident Reasons in the wise Administration of
Providence, why it should not be so. Something of this excellent Temper, we
find in those Passionate Eruptions of Spirit, recorded in the Scriptures of
Holy men, who seem to be altogether transformed into love: Blot me out of thy
Book, (says Moses:) and I could be content to be accursed from Christ (says St.
Paul) for my Brethrens sake: Nay, I am verily persuaded, that he who is once
thoroughly baptized into this spirit of Universal love, would be contented to be
eternally separated from the Presence of God, so that he might be without sin,
if by that means the whole Intellectual Creation might be made happy. Now if we
can reason any thing of God from those Perfections we find in our selves, we
must needs conclude the highest and most perfect life to be most diffusive and
communicative of it self.

2. Goodness is so much the more excellent, as the Objects are more noble,
about which it is conversant. All things feel the effects of Divine Goodness,
according to their different Measures and Proportions, and by how much the
Rational life has more objective reality than the sensitive, by so much are
the Emanations of Goodness of more worth and excellency communicated to the
one, than those diffused upon the other. As a Man is a more noble Creature than
a Brute, so is the Goodness concerned with him, higher and of greater value,
than that exercised upon a Beast. God is the Father of Spirits, and for that
very Reason will not be implacable and irreconcilable to his own dear
offspring, but though he chastise and scourge them for their bold and audacious
revolt from his blessed Nature, yet will not cast off for ever, but in his
sorest corrections remembers mercy. Hence is that Prophetical Speech of the end
of Christ's Death, that it should be for the gathering together the scattered
Sons of God: Joh. 11.52.
though the Souls of Men had voluntarily forsaken God, and traveled into a
strange Land, though their Iniquities had scattered them into far distant
places from their own Home, yet an everlasting Goodness followed them still,
and carefully sought the Reduction of those disobedient Sons of God, who had
divided and separated themselves from him.

3. By how much the more fatal, desperate and universal the evil is, by so much
the more glorious is the Goodness employed in the recovery of the Creature from
it. Sin and wickedness is the misery, not of a part only, but of the whole Race
of Mankind; and this their Degeneracy became so fatal, that it brought Darkness
and Death it self upon all their better Faculties, and placed them in an utter
Incapacity for ever of recovering themselves by their own solitary power and
effort, into that state of immortality and life, which sin had deprived them
of. -- Death passed upon all men, (says St. Paul) for that [or forasmuch as]
all have sinned. So that all Mankind, by their fall from God, were under the
Reign, Dominion and Power of sin and death, and out of this thraldom and
captivity, no Man could extricate and deliver himself, whereby their condition
became very deplorable and desperate. But Divine Goodness, that it might show
it self more conspicuously and gloriously to the World, has brought on a more
cheerful scene of things under the Gospel, rescuing Men from the Power of sin
and death, and delivering them from the Tyranny of the Devil, through the
meritorious Death and Passion of Jesus Christ, who by his Glorious Resurrection
has fully declared himself a Powerful Conqueror of all his Enemies, assuring
Mankind of their re-enjoyment of Immortality, and redeeming them from their
Captivity under the Empire of Sin and Death, and translating them into the
peaceful Kingdom of Life and Righteousness. Now as the desperateness of the
Disease magnifies the skill of the Physician, so the fatal and universal
Degeneracy of the Sons of Men, commends the transcendent love of God in their
Recovery and Redemption. Greater love than this can no Man show, than to lay
down his Life for his Friend, but herein has God commended his love to us, in
that while we were Enemies to God and righteousness, and strangers to his life,
Christ dyed for us. Such is that Testimony and Witness, which our Savior bears
to Divine Love and Goodness; every word of which is strangely emphatical: Joh.
3.16.
So [in such a wonderful and transcendent manner] God [the great Lord of all
Beings, who stands not in need of any of his Creatures, but is Infinite Fullness
and Happiness to Himself] loved [first and without any Motive or Occasion of
this love given from us; herein is love, not that we loved God, 1 John 4.10.
but that he loved us] the World [not only the particular Nation of the Jews,
with whom formerly he entered into Covenant, but the whole Race of Mankind,
Christ becoming a Propitiation for our sins (says the Apostle, the best
Interpreter of himself, 1 John 2.2.) and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole World] that he gave [delivered unto Death freely, and that
upon no other Motive or Invitation, but that of his own Eternal Goodness and
Love] his only begotten Son [not a Servant, or an Angel, not an adopted, but
his own Natural Son, that Son who is one with himself, and in whom he is well
pleased, as the obedience of Abraham was more grateful to God, when he
withheld not his Son, Genesis 22.12
his only Son from him.] The whole Gospel is a Design and Contrivance of
Infinite Love and Goodness; a palpable Pledge and Assurance of which, was, the
sending of Jesus Christ from Heaven: He that spared not his own Son, says the
Apostle; as if he had said, The delivering up of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be
an Expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of Men, is so high a Demonstration of
Infinite Love, that it begets in us a confident Assurance and full Persuasion,
that the same goodness will not fail of bestowing upon us, whatever may
possibly contribute to our everlasting Happiness, as far as our Natures are
capable of.

The sum of all is this, that to Infinite Goodness we owe not only the
Production, but the continual Preservation of our Beings, not only the freeing
us from a certain Misery, and a just and deserved Punishment, but the receiving
us into grace and favor, and investing us with a Happiness much bigger than
our hopes and expectations, even the Eternal enjoyment of Himself in Heaven.
And that this should be wrought and effected by Jesus Christ, the only begotten
Son of God, who left the Sacred Mansions of Heaven, and veiled his Glory under
a clould of Flesh and Blood, and while he lived upon Earth, endured the
contradictions of sinners, the bitter reproaches of vile and ungodly Men, and
at last suffered an Ignominious and accursed Death upon the Cross, What is it
but an everlasting Monument of Divine Goodness? such a high Demonstration of
Infinite Love, as may well make us cry out with wonder and amazement, Behold
what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us!

2. Secondly, in the Frame and Mystery of the Gospel, there is a clear
Demonstration of Infinite Wisdom. 1 Cor. 1.24
To them who are called (says the Apostle) Christ the Power and the Wisdom of
God: i. e. Though the preaching of the Gospel were a stumbling block to the
Jews, and accounted but foolishness by the Greeks, the one expecting their
Messiah to be an earthly Prince, and dreaming of nothing but worldly Felicity,
and the other counting it not worth the hearing, because not agreeing with the
Principles of that vain Philosophy they had addicted themselves to; yet to
those who were docible, tractable and obedient, there appeared an Infinite
Wisdom, and an Eternal Understanding: they could not look into it, but they
beheld (as the same Apostle speaks) the mysterious and recondite wisdom of
God, 1 Cor. 2.7.
which he ordained before the World, that is, whose sacred plot and contrivance
was not then framed or laid, when it was first promulgated and manifested to
the World, but lay hid in the bosom of an Infinite Understanding from all
Eternity. It Is true, the loveliness and glory of this great Wisdom appears not
so evidently to all, partly from their own carelessness and negligence, in not
arriving to that measure and degree of Holiness, which may fit and qualify
them for a clear discerning of it: Hence the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.6.
that he speaks wisdom among them that are perfect, such as were well grown in
the practice of the Offices and Duties of Christianity; such as had senses
exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5.14. and partly, through the great
Corruption, Depravity and Degeneracy of the minds of others, which put them
into an utter Incapacity and Impossibility (while they remain such) of
understanding Divine and Heavenly Truths; for the natural [animal or sensual]
man receives not the things of the spirit of God. 1 Cor. 2.14
But where these Impediments are removed, and the spirits of Men aptly disposed
for the Reception of so great a Blessing, such Persons behold with enravishment
and joy the exact strokes and perfect lineaments of an Eternal Wisdom.

Which Wisdom appears,

1. In the Admirableness of the Contrivance of the Gospel. Christianity carries
with it such evident Proofs of an Incomprehensible Wisdom, that those
sagacious Creatures, the Angels, employ themselves in searching into it: And
surely it must needs be an admirable piece of Wisdom, and a wonderful
Contrivance, 1 Pet. 1.12
that must draw those Blessed Creatures to look into it.

Now the Wonderfulness and Admirableness of the Evangelical Plot and
Contrivance, for the Salvation of Humane Souls, shows it self,

1. In finding out a way, whereby God might demonstrate, both his just and
implacable hatred of sin, and his exuberant Love and Goodness in saving Men.
Sin is no part of God's Creation, nor any thing of the true Nature of the Soul,
but an extraneous and adventitious Being, brought first into the World by the
Devil, the great Enemy of Mankind. It is the Destruction and Ruin of the
Workmanship of God's own hands, and being so infinitely contrary to his Sacred
Life and Nature, it is no wonder, if he bear an irreconcilable hatred against
it, and seek by all means, the driving it quite out of the World. But although
God, by reason of the Infinite Purity and Holiness of his Nature, could not
look with any favorable eye upon sin, yet his Almighty Love pitied his
Creatures, Isai. 63.15.
and his bowels yerned over them, being, as it were, grieved and troubled at
the heart, that they should be miserable for ever. Wherefore, God, through his
Eternal Wisdom, resolved upon a course, which should both effectually
extirpate and eradicate sin and evil out of the World, and yet reduce those
strayed souls, which through it, had revolted from his blessed Life and Nature,
to a participation of it again. And this he has done, by sending his own Son
into the World, to become an Expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of all Mankind.
For should God have cast Men off for ever, and thrown them into Hell, though he
had still been Just and Righteous in his Actions, and declared but a high
dislike of that, which his Essential Holiness could never patronize or
countenance, yet his Goodness and Love had not so conspicuously and gloriously
appeared. Sine hoc holocausto poterat Deus tantum condonasse peccatum; sed
facilitas veniae laxaret habenas peccatis effrenibus quae etiam Christi vix
cohibent passiones, quae vix sceleratos animos a voluptatum faece avellunt.
Cyprian. sive Author libri de Cardinal. Christi Oper. Sermon. 14. Sic Zanch. lib.
2 de Incarnat. c. 3. q. 1. Etsi vero Deus servare nos poterat solo suo Imperio,
peccata simpliciter ex sua misericordia condonando: noluit tamen --
On the other hand, should God have received the World into grace and favor,
forgiving their Iniquities, without any previous satisfaction for sin, though
he might have done this, without any breach of the Eternal Purity and Justice
of his Nature, yet he had not so sensibly affected the minds of Men, with his
just aversation of sin, nor so effectually discovered to them, his Anger and
Displeasure against all evil and wickedness. But now in the Death of Jesus
Christ, God has reconciled Goodness and Holiness, Justice and Mercy, punishing
sin, and yet saving the sinner.

Behold therefore, and wonder at the Ineffable Goodness, and Transcendent love
of God! Could not Man redeem his Brother, and give unto God a Ransom for him?
No surely, for that Sacrifice, that is presented and offered up to God, must be
without spot and blemish; but when the Lord looked down from Heaven, upon the
Children of Men, he beheld them all gone aside, and become filthy, so that
there was not one that did good, no not one. But if this might not be, yet,
could not God have declared his will to us by an Angel, by a Voice from Heaven,
or by uniting himself to the Angelical Nature? Certainly he might, but none of
these ways could have been with such endearing circumstances, with such
sensible Testimonies of dear Compassion and Benignity, as enravish ingenuous
Minds into suitable Returns and expressions of love. Jesus Christ therefore, the
Delights of his Father, the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image and
character of his Person, took flesh and dwelt among us. He that was in the form
of God, clothed with all the Majesty and Glory of the supramundane life, Phil.
2.6, 7, 8.
yet emptyed himself of all this unspeakable Felicity, and took upon him the
form of a Servant, (...).
i. e. an Earthly, or a body of flesh and blood, in opposition to that state,
which he before called, the form of God; (...).
and being found in that servile scheme, he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. What higher expressions of
love, can Humane Understandings possibly conceive, than these? The endearing
love of Friends could never give any greater evidence of it self, than that
they lay down their lives one for another: but such was the transcendent love
of Jesus, that he dyed for Rebels, for Apostates from that sacred life of God,
to which alone the Sovereign Command and Rule both of Heaven and Earth, does of
right belong. Behold him a Man of sorrows, exposed to the envy, hatred and
malice of the cruel and unbelieving Jews, and yet, so inwardly affected with
tenderness and commiseration toward them, that he omits nothing, which a Heart
enflamed with love and compassion, could do to make them happy. And though God,
in his Eternal Wisdom, foresaw the accursed Disposition of the Jewish Nation,
who, as they had been heretofore thirsty after the blood of the Prophets and
righteous Men, so now would never leave, till they had satiated their Revenge,
in the Blood of his only begotten Son, yet he delivers him up into their hands:
for, so the Apostle speaks, that they had taken, and by wicked hands crucified
and slain [(...)] him, Act. 2.23.
that was given out of the protecting hand and providence of God, to the will
of his Enemies. A love which the Tongues of Men and Angels are never able
sufficiently to express.

And as the Infinite love of God appears, in this way of saving Men by Christ
Jesus, so his severity and hatred against sin, is no less manifest and
conspicuous; for in that, God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up to
Death, it is a sufficient proof and Argument of his utter Detestation of all
sin and evil. No circumstance of his bitter Passion, but speaks forth the heavy
wrath and indignation of God against sin. When he came into the Garden of
Gethsemane, where began the first Scene of his Tragical Passion, the Scripture
tells us, that he was sore amazed and very heavy, Mar. 14.33
and this inward grief, and ineffable trouble of his soul, he expresses in that
Passionate speech to his Disciples, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto
Death, Mat. 26.38
not only extensively, such as must last, till Death it self do end it, but
likewise intensively, so great, as is usually at the very point of Death. And
whence arose this sorrow? It was not out of any cowardly fear of pain and
death, for knowing all things that should come upon him, yet with a firm
constancy and sedate Resolution of mind, he comes to his implacable Enemies at
Jerusalem; Luke 9.51.
and when he was betrayed in the Garden, he willingly offers himself into their
hands, I am he. Though certain it is, Joh. 18.5.
our Blessed Savior, bearing about him our Humane Nature, was likewise subject
to all the harmless Passions and affections of it, and was so far from that
Stoical stubbornness and insensibility, that his Passive and tender
Constitution filled him with grief, and yielded to the fear of pain and Death.
Nor did his sorrow proceed from any displeasure of God against his Person; for
he being perfectly obedient, and fully and exactly conformable to his Fathers
will; it could not be, that he should groan under the anger and wrath of God.
Nor was it altogether Bodily pains that made him so, but there was something
extraordinary; As,

1. A withdrawing the sensibleness of Divine Assistance from him. As the Sun at
our Savior's Crucifixion, though not disjoined from the World, yet for a time
deserted the World, by withdrawing his light from it. And although this
withholding the sensibleness of the Divine Presence, was done without any
Aversation and dislike of the Person of our blessed Lord, which not only
before, but at that very instant, was tenderly beloved of God, yet the
Apprehension of it could not but make him bemoan his case, in that sad
exclamation; My God, my God, why [or how] have thou forsaken me!

2. Because, then all the Powers of Hell and darkness were let loose upon him.
The Prince of Darkness, with his accursed Legions, did then (as we may
reasonably suppose) appear to him, in the most affrighting and dreadful forms,
and by the Permission of Divine Providence, exerted and tried the utmost of
their Insulting Rage, in these their last and most furious Assaults; the
Conquest and Victory over whom being to be achieved, not by the Divine Power,
but by the Piety and Obedience of our Savior, he falls into an Agony, and an
Angel descends from Heaven, to strengthen and comfort his fainting Soul in
these horrendous Conflicts.

3. Christ suffering for Men's sins, must needs have a distinct Apprehension of
the manner, measure and odiousness of them, and beheld all this with a bleeding
heart, forasmuch as he saw himself cast into those sad circumstances, bruised
for the iniquities, and wounded for the transgressions of Mankind. All which
put together were sufficient Causes of the highest grief and sorrow. Consider
now, Jesus Christ, the eternally beloved Son of God, sorrowful and amazed,
sweating drops of Blood in his Agony, bereaved of the sensibleness of Divine
Assistance, conflicting with the utmost Rage and Insultation of the Devil, and
dying a Painful and Ignominious Death upon the Cross, and it gives the highest
Demonstration of God's implacable Hatred against all sin, that possibly can be
imagined.

2. The admirableness and wonderfulness of the Evangelical plot and
contrivance, declares it self, in rendering this Way and Method effectual for
the salvation of Men. That it should not be lost labor, or a work to no
purpose, alarming the World with great hopes and expectations, and at last
become abortive, or prove nothing but a windy birth, but that it should really
attain the end, for which it was designed, that is, that men should receive
benefit by it, and be eternally saved.

To this purpose three things are necessary; 1. That what God requires, be in
it self possible. 2. That Man be endued with a sufficient power. 3. That some
allowance be made for our Infirmities.


1. First, I say, that the Commands of the Gospel be possible: For it were the
most unreasonable and Tyrannical thing in the World, to exact that of another,
which we know he is in no Possibility of performing; and therefore, being a
thing so abhorrent and repugnant to the natural reason and equity of Mankind,
it is at no hand to be attributed to God, whose very Nature is the most perfect
and living Law of Justice. Wherefore, the Gospel being given to be the Religion
of all Mankind, and for no other end, but their everlasting Benefit and
Blessedness, we cannot but imagine all the duties and commands required of
them, to be possible to be done; for otherwise it would be so far from
contributing to their advantage, that it would be but an Exprobration of their
misery, and a Tyrannical and Arbitrarious Insultation over their calamitous
condition. Nay, we are assured, that the laws of Righteousness required of us
by the Gospel, are not only possible, but gracious and easy, and that from the
mouth of the Blessed Author and giver of them; My yoke (says he) is easy, Mat.
11.28
and my burden is light: and the beloved Apostle has left it upon Record, that
the commands of God are not grievous, that is, 1 John 5.3.
they are not insupportable burdens, too heavy for the nature of Man to bear,
nor are they fetters and shackles of Iron, contrived only to ensnare and make
the Creation miserable, but such gracious Precepts and Constitutions, as are in
themselves immutably good, and so infinitely agreeable to the true and proper,
that is, the Intellectual Nature of Man, that he can no sooner understand his
own happiness, but he would choose them, if they had never been commanded. The
Wisdom of God never interesses it self in unprofitable things, which surely
this must have been, if the Observance and Practice of the Injunctions of the
Gospel had been in it self impossible. Besides, supposing such intolerable and
impracticable things imposed upon the reason of Mankind, it would subvert all
future rewards and punishments. As for Rewards, there could be no such thing,
for Rewards are only upon the consideration of Duty, and there can be no duty,
where the commands are impossible: Nor can there be any equitable exaction of
Punishment, because the Law it self is not feasible and practicable, and so the
transgression becomes necessary and inevitable, and no more in the power of Men
to help, than to hinder their being born into the World. Wherefore, upon the
whole matter, unless the Gospel contain only such things as are possible, it is
certain, no man can be accountable for them, unless we will suppose God such an
Arbitrarious Being, as acts by no other Law, than that of his own Will and
Authority, which is all one, as for a Man to think to get himself a name of
Power and Sovereignty, by going about all day, and treading upon a few poor
Worms. And certainly it is all one to have no notion and apprehension of God at
all, and to think so meanly of him, and so much below the excellency and
dignity of his Blessed Nature and ^erfections.

But here it will be objected, that if the commands of the Gospel be not only
possible, but easy and gracious, how comes it then, that Men are not presently
made good, and all the World become true Christians?

To this, I have these things to reply. 1. That God forces none to be good, but
having made us Rational Creatures, he has endued us with a free Principle. And
without this, there would be no such thing as Moral Goodness upon Earth; for
that which a man is compelled and forced to, by the irresistible Determination
of an exterior Principle, is neither good nor evil in reference to him because
it was not a true exertion of his will, but an act of something without him.
And therefore should God irresistibly bend and incline the wills of Men to the
Laws and Practice of Virtue, it would take away the distinction of good and
evil, and Men would be what they are, by a fatal necessity, and not by choice.
Moreover, should God forcibly make Men good, it would rather destroy, than
recover the Nature of Mankind, and make them more imperfect Creatures, than
they are already. It is the glory of our faith, that being tried, it be found
unto praise and honor; but what praise can be due to that, which is performed
by the violent constraint of an uncontrollable Power? There would be little
reason for the Scripture (says a worthy Prelate) so much to magnify the grace
of faith, Princ. of Not. Rel. lib. 1. c. 3.
as being so great a Virtue, and so acceptable to God, if every one were
necessitated to it, whether he would or no. 2. True Religion has a great
disagreement with our present sinful Natures. Christianity came into the World
to curb our extravagant desires, to restrain the sinful and exorbitant
affections of the Animal life, and to draw off our minds from the fading and
enchanting Beauties of sense, to the living and Immortal forms of righteousness
and truth. And it is no wonder if it be accounted troublesome and uneasy to a
carnal mind, when its whole design is to let out the corrupt life and blood of
the old man, and to renew men into that faultless nature, sin and wickedness
had destroyed. Religion is not such a formidable and difficult thing, such an
insuperable task in it self, but because it is an affliction to our natural
life, to do violence to our lusts and bodily Passions, therefore sensual and
hypocritical Persons judge it to be hard, troublesome and uneasy. But 3dly,
Men generally distempered as they are, have no mind to set upon Religion in
good earnest. They are for the most part in love with sin, and Vice is become
customary and natural, and because it is some trouble to root out and extirpate
an habitual corruption, therefore they fairly lay Religion by, as a thing too
austere and unpleasant. So that there is not so much difficulty in Religion, as
in bringing men to entertain firm purposes and resolutions of embracing it,
that is, of bettering their lives by it. Were but Men sincere in their
endeavors after holiness, and the participation of the nature of God, the
pretended roughness and asperity of Religion would quickly wear off, and they
would see, that its ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its paths peace. By
which it appears, that notwithstanding all the objections of our sensual and
animal life, that it is possible, nay easy for us to become sincere
Christians, and that the commands of God are so far from being Tyrannical and
grievous, that they are the most agreeable to our Intellectual and Rational
Natures.

2. It is necessary that Man be endued with a sufficient Power. For though the
conditions of salvation be in themselves possible, yet if we be not put into a
capacity, and endued with power from on high, sufficient for the performance of
them, we are never the better. Though the walking of a Mile be a thing possible
and feasible, yet it is impossible for him that has lost the use of his Legs.
If Christ, when he cured the Impotent and Lame in the Gospel, by bidding them,
Rise up and walk, had not at the same time confirmed and strengthened their
feeble Limbs, his command had been utterly ineffectual. So although we, through
our own fault, are fallen into a state of sin and misery, weakness and
imperfection, yet if God intend to better our condition, and to recover us to
our former life and health, he must confer upon us such a Power, as may make
his Design effectual. It is confessed, that all Mankind have utterly disabled
themselves for the attainment of everlasting Blessedness, by their own naked
and solitary endeavors; but God, out of his free goodness and love, making a
new Covenant with the World, and propounding certain terms and conditions, upon
which they may again be made happy, it is altogether repugnant with his
Infinite Wisdom and Justice to require of Men the performance of these
Conditions, without enduing them with a sufficient strength for that purpose.
Should God offer life and salvation upon the terms of the Gospel, and yet never
endue us with an ability to embrace and accept of them, it would not be a
design worthy of him, nor agreeable with those serious professions and Desires
of our Immortal Happiness.

For the fuller Illustration of this, we must know, that God has always
declared his delight in the Felicity, and his aversation of the misery and
destruction of his Creatures, and lest we should question the reality of this
his love, he has confirmed it with an Oath: As I live, Ezekiel. 33.11.
says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. And this
fervent desire of the good and welfare of the World, moved him to enter into a
Covenant with them in Christ Jesus. Now, as in all mutual compacts, and
stipulations between Parties, there are terms and conditions on both sides, and
each Party obliges himself to the performance of something: So in this great
Indenture or Covenant, which God has made with the World, he is graciously
pleased to oblige himself to do something for us, and we are likewise tied to
the observation of certain Articles and conditions required on our part. And
this notion of the Gospel seems to be intimated by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.19.
The Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows who are
his. And let every one that names the Name of Christ, depart from iniquity.
Where, give me leave to insert, what a very learned Man observes, concerning
the signification of the word (...), Mr. Mede.
which our Translation renders [foundation.] That the Hebrew word, to which it
answers in the Rabbinical Dialect, is used for Tabulae contractus, a Bill of
contract, and so (...) here signifies, the Compact or Covenant of God; for the
very mentioning of a Seal here, implies a Bill of Contract: for Bills of
Contract had their Seals appendant to them; each side whereof had his Motto,
the one suiting with the one party contrahent, the other with the other. To
this the Apostle here alludes, God's (...), says he, stands sure, (that is,
God's Bill of Contract, or his Chirographum) having a Seal according to the
manner; the one side whereof carries this Motto, The Lord knows them that are
his, i. e. he will never fail to own those who continue faithful to him; the
other this, Let every man that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity:
which if he do not, he forfeits all the Privileges, which he might otherwise
hope for, from this Covenant of the Gospel. And this God's entering into a
Covenant, is in other terms expressed, by being reconciled to the World, God
was in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19.
reconciling the World unto himself, not so, as to take all Men immediately
into Heaven, but so far as to put all Mankind, by the Gospel, into a capacity
of salvation. To which end and purpose, amongst other (...), or Gratuitous
Donations which God has freely engaged himself to bestow, this is one very
considerable, the giving of all men sufficient power and strength to enable
them to perform his will and commands, so as he will accept of. Which very
thing is made a part of God's holy Covenant, Luke 1.74.
that he would grant unto us, i. e. that he would give us power, as the word is
used, Revel. 11.3. or qualify us with a sufficient strength and ability, to
serve him in holiness and righteousness, before him, all the days of our lives.
For the further proof of this, I shall offer these two Arguments.

1. That it is necessary that God should empower all Men to whom the Gospel is
preached, with a sufficient ability to perform what is required in it, that he
may manifest his Intentions of saving all the World to be real. The Apostle
tells us, that God is the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10
and how he can be so, unless he put all Men, some way or other into a capacity
of salvation, I profess my self not able to understand: Now what is it to put
any one into a capacity of salvation, but to place him in that way, and to
provide for him all those means which shall be necessary and effectual for the
obtaining that glorious end? Hence the same Apostle informs us, that God would
have all men to be saved, that is, 1 Timothy 2.4
as far as lies in him, and may be consistent with the Nature of Rational
Creatures, and that it may appear there is nothing wanting on God's part to
make them happy. Wherefore those who deny to the greatest part of Mankind such
a Participation of the assistance and grace of God, as may place them under a
capacity of obtaining Heaven, seem to me to question the reality and sincerity
of God's Design and Intention of saving all the World by Christ Jesus. For if
the purpose of God, in sending Jesus Christ into the World, was, that he should
tast^ death for every man, Heb. 2.9. Joh. 3.17.
and that the World through him might be saved, it was likewise undoubtedly a
part of this purpose, that they should all be qualified and empowered with such
ability, the faithful actuating of which should certainly attain that end for
which it was designed. And that God should intend the salvation of all Mankind,
and promulgate this his Intention, and alarm the hopes and expectations of all
the World, and yet deny them that, without which they cannot be saved, is
utterly irreconcilable with those apprehensions, which we ought to have of the
Divine Nature.

2. That all Men might thereby be accountable to God. No Man can be accountable
for any more than he has received, and if there were any number of Men to whom
the Gospel were faithfully preached, and the means of salvation made known, and
yet were always left destitute of a power and ability of believing and acting,
according to the prescriptions of it, they would be so far from being left
without excuse, or having their mouths stopped, that their Apology would be as
reasonable, as if God should expostulate with them for not creating the World,
or raising the Dead. For if they never were so much as put unto a capacity of
believing, how can they be justly punished as Infidels? But because the
righteous Governor of Heaven and Earth, cannot but do that which is just and
equal, and that all men to whom God has communicated the Gospel, shall be
accountable to him for it, therefore we are assured that all of them, at some
time or other, were endued with such a measure and degree of God's powerful
assistance, as should enable them to do what he required of them, and so as he
would accept of. This is the condemnation, (says our Blessed Savior, Joh.
3.19.) not that all the World was in a state of Darkness, but that Light, that
is, the Gospel, is come amongst them, and by It they are put into a capacity,
not only of discovering, but of coming out of their sins, and they loved
darkness rather than light, that is, preferred the satisfaction of their own
corrupt lusts, before a sincere obedience to the will of God. And methinks, the
Righteousness of God's Dispensation with Men in this kind is evidently
prefigured, in that Parable of the Vineyard, Isai. 5. which is alike applicable
to the state of things under the Gospel, as it was then to the Jewish Church:
the planting it in a fruitful soil, the careful manuring and cultivation of it,
implying all necessary means for the increase and growth of Men in grace and
virtue, whereby might very well have been expected such Wine, as might cheer
and exhilarate the heart of God and man, but when, after all this pains, it
brought forth nothing but wild Grapes, then God determines upon the just
destruction of it, and for the Equity and Justice of this Procedure, appeals to
the Consciences of Men, What could have been done more that I have not done?

But against this it is objected, that if all Men under the Gospel are put into
a capacity of salvation, whence then comes the different entertainment of it,
and Why is it that all Men are not effectually convinced and wrought upon by it?

For the solution of this difficulty, I shall return, lib. 6. contr. Cells. p.
315
1. That of Origin, that to an effectual persuasion there is required not only
that the Perswader offer such things as are apt to beget belief, but likewise a
suitable disposition and tractable frame in him that is to be persuaded. So that
the Reason why many Men do not entertain and believe the Gospel, is not that
the Gospel is unfurnished of perswasory Arguments, or that God is wanting in
any thing on his part, but because they reject and refuse those things which do
in others, and might in them (if it were not for their own obstinacy) produce
faith and belief. As (says the Father) the most eloquent Orator that ever spoke
may persuade in vain where he meets with a stubborn and refractory disposition.
It is sufficient therefore that the Gospel suggests and offers (...) such
rational Arguments and Motives as are proper to beget Belief in Moral Agents,
but the (...) perswasibility, or the Act of being persuaded is a work of Men's
own. For proof of which the Father cites these Scriptures, Gal. 5.8. Persuasion
comes not of him that calls you. And Isai. 1.19, 20. If ye be willing and
obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land: but if ye refuse and rebel, ye
shall be devoured with the Sword. Which account Origin seems to have taken out
of Irenaeus, lib. 4. c. 76.
Facere enim proprium est benignitatis Dei, fieri autem proprium est hominis
Naturae. Si igitur tradideris ei quod est tuum, id est fidem in eum and
subjectionem, percipies ejus artem, and eris perfectum opus Dei. Si autem non
credideris ei, and fugeris manus ejus, erit causa imperfectionis in te, qui non
obedisti, sed non in illo qui vocavit. 2. The Assistance and aid of the grace
and spirit of God under the Gospel is not by Omnipotency or Power at large, but
such a concurrence as leaves to Men the liberty of their own wills, as is
manifest from several places of the sacred Scriptures, Joh. 5.40. Ye will not
come unto me that ye may have life. Though our blessed Savior spoke as never
Man spoke, and wrought such Miracles as never Man did, beyond which nothing can
be offered to make the Gospel credible, yet those contumacious Jews would not
receive him. And of the Pharisees and Lawyers it is said, Luke 7.30. That they
rejected the counsel of God against themselves, that is, the merciful purpose
or design of God toward them in making provision for their salvation, as well
as the rest of the Jews.

3. It is necessary that some allowance be made for our infirmities. For though
a mighty Power engage it self on our behalf, yet if God should be extreme to
mark what is done amiss, if he should take advantage of every frailty and
miscarriage, who then could be saved? Hence it is that our merciful God
considering our frame, and remembering the imperfection of Humane Nature, is
willing to abate and strike off much of our account upon that stock, and treats
with us not according to the degrees of an Angel, but the measures of a Man,
not after the highest rigor, but (...), according to equity which is the truest
and most perfect Justice. For herein consists the excellency of the Gospel
Covenant, in that under it 1. God allows of our Repentance for past sins. 2.
Accepts of our sincerity for the time to come. It was part of that Commission
which Christ gave his Apostles before his Ascension into Heaven, that they
should Preach repentance and remission of sins in his Name among all Nations:
which they faithfully observed, Luke 24.47.
offering life and salvation to those that crucified the Son of God, provided
they would repent of this their heinous crime and become new Creatures. Repent
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. Act. 3.19.
It is the great comfort the Christian Religion brings guilty sinners, in that
it assures them of the love of an offended God, that their past sinful lives
shall not ruin or exclude them from his favor, but that now in this day of
mercy and peace, if they will return unto him by a speedy Repentance, he will
be merciful to their Unrighteousness, and will remember their iniquities no
more. The Conscience of Men's own guilt makes them afraid, and like Adam, run
from the Presence of God; wherefore to prevent those misgiving thoughts of the
Nature of God, which Men's sinful hearts possessed them withal, and for the
future to take away all jealousies and suspicious fears out of their Minds, God
is pleased to publish a Declaration of Pardon and Indulgence to all Penitent
Persons, giving them all imaginable security of his Propensity and readiness to
be reconciled, and of his unfeigned desire and willingness to accept of their
Persons upon their serious and hearty detestation of their former sins and evil
courses. And to the end that Men may be perfectly convinced that God is not
inexorable and implacable, and that he consults not his own Glory in any other
way than that of the Creatures good and advantage, he vouchsafes out of his
undeserved favor and grace to accept of our Sincerity for the time to come;
the knowledge of which is therefore imparted unto Men by the Gospel to settle
their Minds and quiet their Consciences, which otherwise upon every failure in
their Duty would perpetually torment them with the fear of God's everlasting
Anger and Displeasure. By sincerity, I mean such a frame and constitution of
spirit, whereby our whole Souls are faithfully carried out in obedience to the
will of God, so far as it is made known to us. 1 John 2.1.
These things I write unto you (says the beloved Apostle) that ye sin not, that
is, It is the design of the Gospel perfectly to abolish all sin, and therefore
it requires Men's utmost caution and endeavor against it. But because Men may
fall into sin through the improvidence and short-sightedness of Humane Nature,
or through the sudden incursion of a Temptation, and the Violence and
importunity of it; yet let them not cast away their confidence, nor sink under
their load and dye, for if any man thus sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, a royal Agent at the right hand of God, who makes intercession for us,
not as in the days of his flesh by offering up Prayers with strong crying and
tears, but by Virtue of that Power and Authority of ruling his Church according
to his own Pleasure, dispensing his favors and saving Men by the mercies and
compassions of the Gospel, which Prerogative he purchased and merited for
himself by his bitter Death and Passion. For God does not exact of us a
perfect, unsinning Obedience, so as never to fail in our duty, or offend in the
least tittle or circumstance, but he requires of us a perfection of sincerity,
the not giving way to any known sin, or doing that upon deliberation, which a
Man's conscience tells him is a breach and violation of the Law of God, though
there be never so great Temptations to it. This is that which the Scripture
calls by the Names of the New Man and the New Creature, when we love and serve
God with our whole hearts, and retain such a clear sense of the deformity of
sin, and the loveliness of Virtue, as makes us studiously prosecute the one,
and detest and abhor the other. And though this sincerity of heart may be
accompanied with meekness and imperfection, yet it is such as God has
graciously promised to accept of, and to wash away those lesser frailties and
infirmities in the Blood of Christ. This state of mind is an everlasting
Fountain of Peace and Joy, a spring of Eternal contentment and satisfaction. It
supports us in all dangers, carries us undauntedly through all difficulties,
and fills our souls with an enravishing calmness and tranquillity. It is
certainly the best Companion and the surest Friend in all the World: for when
the Clouds gather and a storm arises, and the face of things in this lower
Region becomes troubled and confused, yet our sincerity never leaves us, but in
the most formidable and dismal appearance of Nature puts on a cheerful
countenance, and looks abroad and meets the greatest dangers with a high and
generous resolution, being confident of this, that that everlasting goodness
which folds the whole Creation in tender Arms, will never disdain or cast away
a sincere Person, nor despise him who unfeignedly and bewailing his weakness
prosecutes that which is simply and absolutely the best.

2. A second thing wherein the Excellency of Divine Wisdom appears, lies in
the manner of the manifestation of the Gospel to us. God was manifest in the
flesh, says St. Paul, that is, the wonderfulness of the mystery of the Gospel
consisted in this, that God took upon him our flesh and blood. God communicated
his will to us by sending down his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, (Romans
8.3.) that is, in a body of flesh and blood. I shall not here insist upon those
(...), those various ways and diverse manners by which God spoke to the Fathers
of old, communicating his will to them sometimes by Dreams and Visions, by a
Voice from Heaven and the Apparitions of Angels, but consider that way which
God has chosen of manifesting himself to the World in these last days by his
Son, which as it best suits with the Evangelical Dispensation, so it discovers
to us that manifold wisdom the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 3.10. a Wisdom that
displays it self in several ways and manners, and yet all tending to one great
end and purpose, namely the recovery of Men from sin to a state of Purity and
Holiness. For in this great design of instructing the World by the Incarnation
of our blessed Savior, we discover the evident Traces and Footsteps,

1. Of a condescending Wisdom accommodating things to our Apprehensions and
Capacities. The delivery of the Law on Mount Sinai was ushered in with a
terrible and amazing solemnity, the Mountain quaking and vomiting out pitchy
Clouds of smoke and globes of Flame, a fiery Tempest or Whirlwind roaring with
formidable peals and claps of Thunder, together with the prodigious sound of a
Trumpet rending and tearing the Heavens, so that Moses himself exceedingly
feared and trembled: But the Gospel being wholly a design of Mercy and Love
carries with it no terrors and affrightments, but is composed of the kind
invitations of Peace and comfort, the Mount Sion wherein the resplendent glory
of the firstborn is displayed, shining only with the gentle beams of an
attractive and pleasing light, and Jesus the blessed Mediator of this New
Covenant with his extended Arms proclames his willingness to embrace and
receive the World which he has reconciled to God with his own blood. This is
that Economy which the Apostle calls the foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 1.21
not as if it were so in it self, but because it is a way of condescending
wisdom, wherein God stoops down to our apprehensions, and frames things so as
we may understand them, and receive an infinite benefit by them. For Man,
partly from the frame and constitution of his Nature consisting of Body as well
as Soul, but much more from his fall and descent into this lower life becomes
wonderfully affected with gross Phantasms and Exterior Representations. Whence
it comes to pass that we do more easily and frequently conceive of things as
they appear to sense than as they are in themselves, when apprehended by a more
discerning Principle. Wherefore the Infinite Wisdom of God that makes not its
Operations in a way of Absolute sovereignty and immensity of Power, forcing the
Creatures against those inbred Principles she has placed in them, but sweetly
and powerfully directs them in a steady way of congruity and proportionateness
to the natures of things, being to work out Man from this low contracted state,
the sad Region of sin and Death, to a participation of Immortality and more
free emanations of Divine life, contrived a way most suitable and agreeable to
the shallow capacities and faculties of Humane Souls. God would not appear to
us in a flame of fire, nor speak by an Angel in a body of pure Air, but in the
Form of a Servant clothed with our Humane Flesh, and subject to all the
harmless Passions of our Nature, that he might more kindly disenslave us from
the cruel Tyranny of sin and Satan. For let us but consult with our own
Reasons, whether this be not a greater Incitation and more powerful inducement
to Men to believe and obey the Declarations of the Divine Will, to exhibit to
them some extraordinary and remarkable Person that should by the fullest
demonstrations and sensible signs prove himself to be the Eternal Son of God,
and by sweetly compulsive Motives even to the suffering a barbarous and
shameful Death attract Humane Minds to the Imitation of his Virtues and
following his steps, than that God should by any of those forementioned ways
manifest himself in effects of Benignity or Displeasure. The whole Nation of
the Jews discover the sense of Mankind in such a case, when being affrighted
with the terrors accompanying the descent of God upon the Mount, they said unto
Moses, Exodus 20.19.
speak thou with us and we will hear, but let not God speak with us lest we
dye. For,

1. Considering the world partly from themselves, and partly from the cunning
of Satan, so much addicted and given over to the belief of sense, had not
Christ visibly appeared and conversed with Men, the Gospel could never have
captivated Humane Understandings with such irresistible evidence, or wrought in
them such a full persuasion of the things it taught, as we see it has done.
Should the great Pillars of the Christian Faith, I mean the Apostles and
Disciples of the Holy Jesus have laid its first groundwork upon the hearing of
some voice, or persuaded their Auditors (as Numa Pompilius and some other
Heathen Lawgivers) from the converse they had with some Angel, that their
Doctrine was (...) delivered to them from Heaven, and had God for its Author,
yet how hardly would Men have embraced it upon these accounts, especially
considering those imminent and apparent Dangers they were likely to incur upon
the profession of it. How ill resented is that great Doctrine of our Blessed
Savior Self-denial and Resignation among vulgar spirits, and how difficult a
thing is it to bring off degenerated Hearts from the Interests of the World?
and is it likely then that Men should be so prodigal of their dearest Blood, as
to sacrifice it to an uncertain Rumor and Report, which every Impostor is able
to pretend? But to see the meek Lamb of God made in our own likeness, having
left the sacred Mansions of Light and Glory, and clothed himself with our frail
Mortality, to behold him (I say) testifying by many Miracles and irrefragable
Arguments through the whole course of his abode on Earth, and at last taking it
upon his Death, that he was the Son of the ever-living God, and came down from
Heaven to make known to Men that God was reconciled to the World through him,
this must needs strike our Imaginations more forcibly than whatever else the
wit of Man could possibly conceive.

2. The Gospel was intended to transform and work our Natures into that which
is the flower and perfection of the Divine life, that is an universal love: to
call off our minds from those little Interests they are apt to espouse by
looking upon themselves as so many particular Beings divided and separated from
the rest of the World, and created only for themselves and their Private
concernments, and to beget in them an universally extensive charity by widening
their Capacities to the Dimensions of the whole Creation. By which we are
taught not to think it enough that our love ascend in copious flames to Heaven,
unless it likewise descend in due measures and degrees upon all Mankind. And
indeed it is impossible for a Man that is thoroughly baptized into this spirit
of Universal love, to have any self designs in opposition to the general good
of the whole World, but he must needs be infinitely desirous and pleased to see
the life and nature of God communicated to all Beings capable of receiving of
it. And this love is so strong and vigorous that it firmly unites it self to
all in whom it finds any true likeness and resemblance of the Divine Image, and
so far endears them to it self, as to constrain us to lay down our lives for
the Brethren. 1 John 3.16.
But certainly this Flame could never have burnt so bright if it had not been
raised and quickened by that sensible demonstration of inimitable affection in
the Death of the Holy Jesus. For what greater encouragement could there be to
oblige and unite Men's souls to one another, than that their love should first
be kindled from Heaven by that great and unparalled Exemplar of noble
Charity, who laid down his life to expiate the crimes of his own and his
Fathers Enemies?

2. Of a congruity and compliance with the state and condition of Mankind both
in respect of 1. Moral 2. Natural
Evils.

First, in respect of Moral Evils: The degeneracy and fall of Mankind from God
made them Slaves and Vassals to sin and Satan; for the busy Tempter being not
able to work upon them by external force and violence, drew their wills into
consent by craft and specious solicitations, till at last he had so far
enlarged his Kingdom, as to bring the whole Race of Mankind under his Dominion.
Wherefore the Gospel being designed to free Men from that unnatural Bondage,
and to restore them to their true liberty, it does in all points confront the
ways and methods by which their Captivity was compassed and effected. It had
been a small matter by a high hand, and by an Infinite Power at large, to have
destroyed the Devils Kingdom, but herein appeared an excellent Wisdom, so to
lay the Ground and Foundation of this glorious purpose of the salvation of the
World, that the Politic Prince of Darkness might be taken in his own
craftiness, and lose this his Empire and Dominion by the same methods by which
he at first obtained it. The Woman being first in the Transgression, and
bringing sin and Death upon all her Offspring, that Divine Wisdom that draws
light out of darkness, and Order out of Confusion, decreed that the seed of the
Woman should break the Serpents head, that is, Genesis 3.15.
that Christ who is the Seed of the Woman, (...), by Nature, and his Members,
who are so (...) by spiritual engraftment into him, should dispossess the Devil
of that Power, Sovereignty and Principality which he holds over the World by
sin. According to this early Declaration of Men's Recovery, Jesus Christ the
true Seed of the Woman comes into the World, and by walking exactly contrary to
his Enemy, restores to the World what they lost by the first Adam. And whereas
the Devil managed his Kingdom of sin and Death with all imaginable Tyranny and
Insultation over poor Mortals, our Blessed Jesus was so far from requiring
Humane Blood to be sacrificed to him, that out of a deep sense of our Calamity
he parted with his own Blood for the life of the World. A more effectual and
agreeable course could never have been taken than this, that the Captain of our
salvation should visibly appear and conquer the Kingdom and Powers of Darkness
in that Nature which the first Adam ruined and destroyed.

Secondly, in respect of Natural Evils: Though it be no disgrace nor shame to
be made a Man, yet he that deeply reflects upon Humane life, shall find it at
the best very calamitous and standing in need of much Pity and Compassion. We
are born into the World helpless and weak, and as if we did presage our own
future miseries, the first actions of our life are spent in crying and tears:
Our very Bodies are a sad load and burden upon our Spirits, inclining them to
many foolish lusts and passions, subject to many Pains, Diseases and Death,
insomuch that many good and holy Men have in passionate streins bewailed their
stay and continuance here on Earth, Woe is me that I sojourn in Meseck, and
have my habitation in the Tents of Kedar! and, O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of Death! Now none can so affectionately pity,
nor so intimately resent the distress of another, as he that has smarted and
suffered under the same calamity: Therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 4.15.
We have not an High Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, by reason of the great distance, disproportion and sublimity of
his Nature, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin, that
is, manifested and declared himself to be a true Man, by being subject to all
the harmless affections and infirmities of humane flesh and blood; forasmuch
therefore as he became our Brother, by taking upon him the same Natural
condition, he must needs be thoroughly apprehensive and sensible of our state,
and so the more apt to sympathize with and commiserate poor Mortals, and by
that powerful sovereignty to which he is exalted, act for us and send down
relief from Heaven to us. For though the Infinite Essence of God pervade the
whole World and all the Creatures live within it, and therefore must needs feel
and know the inmost Energies, Motions and stillest Actings of all Beings; yet
it affords not such a sensible comfort to Humane minds, as to behold the Son of
God taking upon him our Nature, and by that Union and Proximity assuring us of
his Tenderness and Compassion toward us. For he took not on him the nature of
Angels, being unwilling to be so far removed from us, but took on him the Seed
of Abraham. Heb 2.16, 17, 18.
Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that
he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest -- for in that he himself has
suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.

3. A third thing, which demonstrates the excellency of Divine Wisdom in the
dispensation of the Gospel, consists in the fitness and sutableness of it to
the end for which it was designed. For things are so much the more excellent,
by how much the congruity and fitness is greater for the accomplishing their
end and purpose. Now the great intent and design of God in the Gospel being (as
I have said) the everlasting blessedness of Humane Souls, the more congruously
and fitly disposed it shall be found to be for the obtaining this effect, the
greater is the glory of the Divine Wisdom interessing and concerning it self
about it. This aptness and sutableness is seen,

1. In that the Gospel is furnished with all those Arguments that are requisite
to approve it self worthy of Belief to all Rational Persons. To this two things
are necessary.

1. The attestation of God himself.

2. Rational evidence and conviction. For whatever is attested of God, and has
his Seal affixed to it, is by the general consent of all Men to be looked upon
and entertained as infallibly true: Veracity being an Essential Attribute and
Perfection of the Divine Nature. St. Paul discoursing of the mystery of
Godliness tells us that Christ and Christianity was justified by the spirit, i.
e. owned, approved and recommended to the World by the spirit of God. And this
God's recommendation of our blessed Savior to the World, as a Person
commissioned and invested with full Authority to declare his will unto Mankind,
was done at several Times and in diverse manners.

1. At the Baptism of our Savior, Mat. 3.16, 17. when the Heavens were opened,
and the spirit of God descended upon him, and a Voice from Heaven proclaiming
him the beloved Son of God in whom he was well pleased. And this manner of
Divine Revelation by a Voice from Heaven, as it was the most ancient, Genesis
21.17.
so the most honorable way of God's communicating his will to Mankind, Exodus
20.22. Ye have seen that I have talked with you from Heaven. Vid. Deuteronomy. 4.33.36.
For what the Jews relate of the Bath-kol, are for the most part fabulous, or
else Magical and Satanical Delusions. Certain it is (as a very learned Author
observes) there is not the least mention in the Holy Scriptures of a Voice
speaking from Heaven, Dr. Lightfoot.
between the giving of the Law and the Baptism of our Savior. And it were very
strange if God withdrawing those ordinary ways of revealing his Will under the
second Temple, should yet continue the most noble of all, by speaking to Men
from Heaven. And that we may not think there was any plot or combination
between John the Baptist and our Savior Christ, it is said, Joh. 1.33. that
John knew him not, but had this sign given him, that upon whom he should see
the spirit descending and remaining on him, that same was the true Messiah and
Savior of the World. And to this Voice our Lord himself appeals, Joh. 6.27.
Him has God the Father sealed, i. e. visibly approved and owned Christ from
Heaven, to the end that he having this wonderful attestation of God himself
might be believed on in the World, and his Doctrine as unquestionably received
as the Letters of a King, when his Seal is affixed to them.

2. Another confirmation of Christ and his Doctrine was at his Transfiguration.
Mat. 17.5. A Voice comes out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. And this St. Peter brings as a
Demonstration of the Truth of the Gospel, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17.
For we have not followed cunningly devised Fables, when we made known unto you
the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, q. d. We have not imposed upon
the Minds and Spirits of Men, as the manner of cheaters and deceivers is, but
have delivered to you such things as we have seen and heard, being
eyewitnesses of his Majesty; For he received from God the Father honor and
glory, when there came such a Voice to him from the excellent Glory, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: And this Voice which came from Heaven we
heard, when we were with him in the Holy Mount.

3. God approved our Lord Jesus by inabling him to work Miracles, which is such
a clear Testimony of the Divine Mission of our Savior, that both Jews and
Gentiles ought to be convinced by it. To the Jews it ought to be Convictive
from their own Law, Deuteronomy. 18.22. When a Prophet speaks in the Name of the Lord,
if the thing follow not nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord has
not spoken -- Which Rule was given them to discern true Prophets from false;
for if the Prophet brought to them a New Doctrine, and confirmed it by
supernatural and miraculous Operations, though he commanded them something
contrary to the Law, yet if he persuaded nothing but the worship of the One
true God of Israel, they ought to obey him, forasmuch as there could be no
greater Evidence of the Divine Testimony and Approbation, than by inabling such
a Man to work Miracles. And though this General Rule might be applied to all
the Jewish Prophets, yet did it more particularly respect the coming of the
Messiah, there being none more conspicuous and illustrious for all those signs
by which God would have the Prophet that speaks in his Name to be known than
Jesus Christ. Nor is it of less moment and argument to the Gentiles, for
Miracles being such unquestionable evidences of the Interposition of a Divine
Power, it follows that whoever shall lead a sincere and unblameable life, and
teach nothing but the worship of the true God and the conscientious practice of
Virtue, and for the confirmation of this his Doctrine shall work Miracles, we
ought to believe him sent from God. This was it which convinced Nicodemus, We
know that thou art a Teacher come from God, Joh. 3.2.
for no man can do these Miracles that thou do except God be with him. He
saw that Jesus Christ professed and commanded only the worship of the true God,
and that he exhorted only to the practice of real Righteousness and Holiness,
and therefore that those great Miracles which he wrought, exceeding the power
of evil spirits, were a sensible Demonstration that he was sent from God.

It may now not improperly be inquired, Whether Miracles are always necessary
to beget belief of the Divine Authority of a Doctrine: and how far they are so?

To this I answer, that Miracles to some Persons and in some Circumstances are
proper means to beget assent; for that they are not always convictive, appears
from the Incredulity of the Jews, whom neither the frequent and stupendous
Miracles of our Savior, nor of his Apostles could persuade, but
notwithstanding this powerful way of conviction, they put the Master to death
as a Malefactor, and murder his Servants: I say therefore that to some Persons
and in some circumstances, Miracles are proper means to beget Faith. 1. They
are necessary means to them who have been constantly used and trained up by
Miracles. Such were the Jews, who received their Law in a miraculous manner,
the Divinity of which was frequently afterward attested by Miracles, and upon
any great and notable defection of the People to Idolatry, God was pleased to
reduce them by sending and inabling a Prophet to work Miracles. Now it is very
unreasonable to think that the Gospel which should introduce and make so mighty
a change in the Judaical Economy should gain belief of them, unassisted of
miraculous evidence and testimony, who were already in possession of a Law
which God himself had so often owned and set his Seal to by Miracles and
supernatural Operations. Hence it came to pass that the Jews demanded of Christ
a sign, Joh. 2.18. forasmuch as he called God his Father, and carried himself
in the way of a Prophet, they require him to evidence this his Authority by
some miraculous Actions, which our blessed Savior both promises and fulfils by
raising himself from the Dead. 2. Miracles do more powerfully strike the
senses, and so are more apt to beget belief in them, who are not capable of a
rational apprehension and dijudication of Truth. Hitherto we may refer Christ's
upbraiding Chorazin and Bethsaida, If the mighty works which were done in them,
Mat. 11.21
had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in
sackcloth and ashes, that is, they would very probably have done so: for they
lying under a great and inveterate Ignorance, and being so perfectly enslaved
to sense, were more likely to have been rouzed out of their blockishness and
stupidity by miracles which so forcibly strike the imagination, than by the
most Rational Discourse to which they had so little vital congruity and
agreeableness. And it is very observable, that the Apostles never wrought a
Miracle, but upon an urgent occasion and great necessity, where they found
their Auditors capable and apprehensive: When the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, S. Paul, came to Athens, a place long famous for all Polite Learning,
Acts 17.
he makes an excellent Metaphysical Discourse, and proves the Unnaturalness and
Unreasonableness of Idolatry, by such Principles as were common to, and
Universally received by the Intellectual nature of Man. And indeed a Rational
conviction seems more clear and evident than a miraculous One, by how much the
Innate Idea's and Dictates of the Understanding are more sure and constant,
than the perplexed motions of a Versatile Imagination. And we find that the
Jews evaded the force of our Savior's Miracles, by saying they were done by
the power of the Devil, and though Lazarus come to them from the Dead, yet they
did not believe, but sought to murder him, and a perverse spirit will find
various Artifices to elude the Assent which a Miracle commands from us. But now
Humane Reason being in all Men one and the same, it is more likely to prevail
when advantageously propounded, from that antecedent sutableness and Harmony
there is between it and all Truth. And without doubt our blessed Savior
himself seems to intimate, that the Assent which is extorted upon the working
of Miracles, is much less generous and Noble, than that which is gained from
the Understanding, by the Native evidence and beauty of Truth: Except ye see
signs and wonders, ye will not believe; Joh. 4.18.
whereas the Facility of the Samaritanes is commended, who believed on Jesus
upon his own Discourse, v. 42.
though he did no Miracle among them. And besides all this, Christ says
expressly, that the very Nature and frame, the Sanctity and Majesty of the
Doctrine he propounded, was alike sufficient to render the Jews inexcusable, as
the unparalled Works he performed in their Presence. If I had not come and
spoken to them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin.
Again, Joh 15.22, 24.
If I had not done amongst them the works which none other man did, they had
not had sin.

Wherefore to us who have Moses and the Prophets, the Discourses of our Blessed
Savior, and the Writings of his Apostles transmitted, if we shall yet be
incredulous, it is as likely and probable we shall still continue so, though
one come to Us from the Dead. For,

1. We have already all things, pertaining to life and godliness, perspicuously
delivered in the Holy Scriptures, and this Doctrine at the first delivery of
it, was sufficiently confirmed and attested by Miracles and Supernatural
Actions, the History of which is made as credible to us, as any Records of
things can be, which we our selves were not Spectators of. Now, if we can
believe any Histories of former Ages, any Records of Times past, we have the
same Reason to believe the History of the Gospel, and he that sincerely credits
that, will be as much confirmed in the Religion he professes, by those Miracles
he finds long ago wrought to evidence its Divine Authority, as if they were
done now at this present before his eyes. Blessed are they who have not seen,
Joh. 20.29.
and yet have believed.

2. To desire new Miracles for the begetting of Faith, is to question the
Wisdom of God in the Contrivance of the Gospel. For either the Scriptures are
sufficiently confirmed and attested, by the Miracles wrought by Christ and his
Apostles, to beget Faith and Credence in any unprejudiced and disinteressed
Person, or they are not. If they are, it is in vain to require the Reproduction
of Miracles in its behalf. If they are not, we then call in question the
wisdom of God, as if he either knew not the Natures and Constitutions of Men,
or did not foresee what was sufficient to work belief in them.

3. The perpetuating Miracles for every Man's Conviction, would destroy and
make useless their Rational Faculties. For the Christian Religion is a
manifestation of the highest Reason that ever the World had any cognizance of,
and all its Parts and Doctrines are every way fitted to Rational Capacities:
But now Miracles being only Convictive to sense, if for the confirmation of
every Article of Religion, there must be the concurrent Testimony of a Miracle,
all Appeal to our Reason and Intellectual Faculties were useless and
supervacaneous.

4. The Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, was a notable suffrage and
testimony of his Divine Mission. It is the highest instance of Divine
Providence watching over and carefully superintending the Person of our Holy
Lord and Master, which though it permitted Him to fall into the Hands of wicked
and cruel Men, who bereaved him of his Innocent Life, yet forsook him not in
Death and the Grave, but justified and approved the Design and Cause he managed
in the World by dismantling those Infernal Prisons, and bringing Him up to life
again. And this the Apostle takes as an eminent Declaration of the Divinity of
Jesus, who though according to that mortal and frail state he took upon him in
the World, became a Man of the Seed of David, Romans 1.4.
yet in regard of that Spiritual and Celestial condition, which he obtained by
the Resurrection from the Dead, was manifestly declared the glorious and
powerful Son of God. For we cannot think that God would do so much for an
Impostor, or that the Divine Power would so highly concern it self in raising
him from the Dead, and thereby owning him in so singular and eminent a manner,
if he had not spoken in his Name, and done all things by his Authority and
Commission.

5. Another Instance of the Divine Approbation of the Doctrine of our Savior,
appears in sending down the Holy Ghost after his Ascension into Heaven. This
Mission of the Holy Spirit, Christ promised his Disciples before he left the
World, and signally performs it upon the Day of Pentecost. And this very thing
is brought by the Author to the Hebrews, as an Indubitable Confirmation of the
Gospel: How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord, Chapter 2.3, 4.
and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him: God also bearing them
witness (approving and owning the Doctrine of his Son Jesus) both with signs
and wonders, and with diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to
his own will. God is brought in here as a Witness to the Truth of the Gospel,
and his Testimony is the Mission of the Holy Ghost, by whom the Apostles were
enabled and furnished with diverse gifts and miraculous Powers for the
conviction of the World, that Jesus was the beloved Son of God and Savior of
Mankind. And this Redargution of the World was made a part of the Advocateship
of the Holy Spirit by our Lord, When he is come he will reprove the World of
sin, Joh. 16.8, 9, 10.
because they believe not on me, that is, he shall take upon him the defense of
my cause, and convince the World of their great sin in slaying me a true
Prophet, who came to declare the will of God unto them. Of righteousness,
because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; that is, he should make it
appear that I was just and innocent, though condemned as a Malefactor, and that
I was owned and approved of God in that he visibly took me up into Heaven.
Which plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit in such a wonderful manner, whenas
he had been withdrawn from the Jews as to those extraordinary and Prophetical
gifts for the space of four hundred years, was a Testimony clear as the Sun
that Jesus was the true Messiah, the beloved Son of GOD, and therefore that
they ought to have believed on Him.

6. Lastly, Christ was approved by the Spirit of Prophecy. Their want of
understanding and incredulity of the Prophetic Oracles, was that for which our
Savior upbraided his two Disciples, O Fools and slow of heart to believe all
that the Prophets have spoken. Luke 24.25.
Whereby we are informed that the Prophets had long ago given, not only a
character and description of the Person, but of the Doctrine, Death, Burial and
Resurrection of the Messiah; and these Prophecies being so directly applicable
to Jesus and to none else, it was an unquestionable proof that he was the true
Messiah, and that the World ought to believe on him. This Argument St. Peter
makes use of against the Jews; Act. 10.43.
To him give all the Prophets witness -- q.d. If you believe not us the
Apostles of Jesus, yet believe your own Prophets, who unanimously point out and
refer to this Jesus, whom we preach to you. And thus St. Paul pleads for the
Gospel, Act. 26.22. that he taught no other things than those which the
Prophets and Moses did say should come. By all these several ways, it is very
apparent that God has born witness to Christianity, and approved and owned the
Person and Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is the first thing required
to the credibility of the Gospel, namely the Attestation of God himself.

2. The Second is Rational Evidence and Conviction.

The most Noble Faculties of the Soul of Man are the Understanding and the
Will, and that Religion bear a Rational Evidence and Conviction, it must be
fitted with Arguments that must convince the Understanding, and persuade the
Will to a due Reception and entertainment of it. Now the proper Object of the
Understanding is Truth, from whence it follows that Christianity must be true
that it may be believed. For the Truth of Religion, I shall refer to those
Learned Authors, who have purposely handled that Argument, and brought as clear
Evidence as the thing it self is capable of: And he that cannot believe without
a Mathematical certainty, declares himself to be very absurd and disingenuous,
and may upon the same grounds as well expect the same Demonstrative Evidence
for the affairs of Humane life, or to prove the Truth of the Chronicles of the
Kings of England, or France, that is, he is so strangely unreasonable, as to
desire such proof, as the nature of the things will not bear, though in the
mean time he have the highest evidence, and most unquestionable assurance of
the Truth of Religion, that the thing it self is capable of, that is, a Moral
certainty. For the Mind of Man may be as indubitably assured of the Truth of a
Moral Proposition, as of a Mathematical or Physical one, although there be not
the same way of Probation in all. As for Example, This is a self-evident Truth
in Morals, and needs no other light, but that of its own to gain Assent; That
in those things which we have not seen nor experienced our selves, See Dr.
More's Enchiridion Ethicum.
we ought to believe them that say they have seen and experienced, provided
they live up to their profession, and are not moved to it by secular respect.
Which if it be not assented to, we must be Scepticks even in ordinary affairs
and transactions of Humane life, we must not believe there is such a Place as
Constantinople, nor credit any thing but our own Eyes and Ears, and say in a
larger sense than ever the Psalmist did, that all men are liars. See more of
this in Bishop Wilkins Principles of Natural Religion.

Now for the Will, that Religion may have a full and complete entertainment in
the Soul of Man, there must be something likewise to work upon that Wherefore
to make a thing eligible, it must have the appearance of Good, that is, it must
have a sutableness, congruity and harmony with the Intellectual Nature of Man,
and a tendency to promote the perfection thereof; And such is the Christian
Religion in its whole Frame and Contexture. For let us consider, who it is that
owns, and has interessed himself, as the Blessed Author of the Evangelical
Economy, even the Eternal Logos and Wisdom of God, that Almighty Mind which
has closely contracted, and deeply sealed upon all Intellectual Agents, that
large and diffusive wisdom, that is seen in all the Parts of Heaven and Earth.
And to think that Christianity should be in any of its Parts unreasonable, is
to imagine this to be the only Unreasonable thing, that ever the Divine Wisdom
was the Author of, and this alone of all his numerous Offspring to be unlike
the Father. The Gospel does in the most intimate manner derive it self from
Christ the Eternal Son of God, and is especially owned and superintended by
him, as being the repairing that work which he alone made, and which he alone
can rectify: and to imagine that an Infinite Reason should propound any thing
to us that were unreasonable, is as fond as to say that cold can flow from
fire, or darkness positively ray from the bosom of light. Jesus Christ did not
bring a Religion into the World, to perplex our minds and dazzle our
understandings, but for the real good and behoof of the lapsed Creation, to
form our minds according to his own Image, and to regenerate our spirits into a
living nature of Truth and Righteousness, which Design were utterly lost, if
there were not in Christianity a perfect symphony, congruity and agreeableness
with our Intellectual Natures. Besides, let any Man but consider, how the Will
is allured and solicited to Action, and he shall find, that it is then the most
vigorously tempted forth, when something is propounded, which has a Natural
sutableness and harmony with those Constitutive Principles, of which we are
made: but on the contrary, it is naturally averse to, and not at all concerned
with that, to which it has no vital sympathy or concord. Which is an evident
sign that Christianity is not only agreeable to, but perfective of our Rational
Powers. What can be more agreeable to the true Nature of Man than
Righteousness? What more suitable to his higher and Diviner Faculties than Truth
and Goodness? These beautiful and glorious Forms shone bright in our Souls,
before Vice and Sin had covered and overspread them, and forced our Minds into
a Preternatural state. Now Christianity is designed for the Recovery of Us to
our Pristine Health and Rectitude, and tends to the enlargement of our better
Powers, and the Recovery of them from that narrow and contracted state, sin and
evil had brought them to. Vice and Wickedness are none of God's Creation, but
are Obliquities and Aberrations from those Rules and Laws he implanted in us,
and therefore as it is impossible the Soul should have any proper agreement
with sin, because it is none of its Nature, so she must needs, on the other
hand, sensibly embrace and acquiesce in the Principles and Precepts of
Holiness, from that Vital Cognation they bear to her own Moral Being. There is
no capacious and generous Mind, but will find it self wonderfully affected and
enamored with the loveliness of Christianity, there being nothing found, but
Principles of the highest worth and nobility, and whatever else may speak true
excellency and perfection. The Gospel is nothing, but God manifested in the
Flesh, an eternal Mind clothed with the condescensions of Humane Nature,
showing us the Beauty and Pulchritude of that life, from which we had so foully
apostatized and degenerated, and confirming and re-establishing that Happy
league, which was once between our Souls and Righteousness. By the tenor of
which sacred Institute, we are obliged to great measures and degrees of
Holiness, to Sobriety and Temperance, Chastity and Purity, to be strict
observers of the Rules of Justice and Equity, full of good nature and the
desirable fruits of tenderness and compassion; in a word, we are enjoined no
other things in Religion, than what the best and bravest spirits the World ever
knew, have always accounted the flower and summity of Rational Natures. And do
not all considering Men, find the greatest ease and satisfaction of Mind, in
the exercise of these things? And whence comes this Heavenly calm and serenity
of Soul, but only from that gratefulness and symmetry, that is between such
things and our Intellectual Man? so that the more earnestly we attend to them,
the more fully are we transformed into their lovely Image and likeness. True
Christianity is so far from debasing, that on the contrary it infinitely exalts
them, by setting them at a true proportion to their proper Objects, and raising
them to such a state, as all wise Men have ever acknowledged the highest
Happiness and Perfection of the Soul of Man.

I have now shown the fitness and sutableness of the Gospel, to the end for
which it was designed, in that it is furnished with all those Arguments of
Credibility, that may beget Assent in Rational Persons: but its aptness and
accomodateness to that great purpose of Men's salvation, may further be
demonstrated in that,

2. Secondly, It is so attemper'd to Humane Nature, that Men shall certainly
believe, and yet no violence done to their Wills. For Men being Moral Agents,
must be dealt withal according to their Natural Powers and Faculties, and this
makes the Method of saving Humane Souls by the Gospel, to be indeed a Work of
Wisdom and Counsel, whereas if God should by his Omnipotency force them to a
Belief and Obedience of it, it would not have been so much an effect of
Wisdom, as of absolute and uncontrollable Power. Now herein appears the Glory
of Divine Wisdom, in the choice of such means and ways, as shall effectually
bring to pass its end and purpose, and yet no violence and force offered to
that Nature in whose behalf it acts. As therefore to assert, that there is no
necessity of the assistance of the grace and spirit of God, in our progress in
Virtue and Holiness, but that Men may be good by the strength of the Powers of
Nature, is directly repugnant to the frame of Christianity, delineated in the
Holy Scriptures, and the sense of the Universal Apostolic Church of Christ; so
to think that the Operation of God's Spirit upon the Hearts of Men, is by an
External Impetus and Force, is no less precarious and absurd, than the other is
wicked and abominable. I shall therefore wave the first of these, as not being
at all concerned with it, but directly supposing the contrary; and only
discourse so far of the concourse and energy of the Spirit of God upon the
minds, will and affections of Men, as is evidently declared in the Holy
Scriptures. And here I humbly conceive, that the Sacred Writings do no where
declare the concurrence, or operation of the Spirit of God upon Men's Souls, to
be by an Omnipotent Power at large, such as was shown in the Creation of the
World, or Resurrection of the Dead, and which supposes us so altogether
passive, as not to be in the least measure capable of promoting, or hindering
our own good; for this were to destroy that noble faculty of Humane Souls their
Will, and render all their Actions fatal and necessary: Whereas the Christian
Religion was intended to heal and cement, to join and confirm the dislocated
and disordered powers of our Souls, not to take them away, to perfect and
complete, not to extirpate and eradicate their very Nature and Being. No Man
acknowledges the actions of Brutes or Engines, or the results of our Animal and
irrational powers capable of Moral Goodness; because they act fatally and
necessarily; and such would the actions of Mankind be, if they were produced by
an irresistible Power. A power and assistance then it is certain God has given
us, and that of his Holy Spirit under the Gospel, but the manner of his
Operation is not absolute and unconditionate, but hypothetical, like the great
conciliating and formative Principle of God in Nature, requiring certain terms
and previous Dispositions and Qualifications, without which it is as vain to
hope for the complete efformation of Christ within us, as to expect the
Rudiments of the Body of an Animal, to be formed out of a piece of Brass or
Marble. For though we do not distrust the Power of God, but believe he is able
to raise himself up Children out of the very stones of the Fields, and to
change and alter the Natures of things as he pleases; yet since we find him
framing and guiding them, not according to Will and Power alone, but according
to the Counsel of his Will, Ephesians. 1.11.
we are likewise ascertained, that in the conducting Humane Souls to Heaven,
God works sutably to their Natures and Capacities, and in such an orderly Way
and congruous Method, as supposes the Presence of an Infinite Wisdom and
Counsel in the Management of it. And this not only appears from the
consideration of the frame of Humane Nature, which in its choicest part is
wholly Intellectual, and therefore not to be forced by an outward violence, but
moved and drawn (as the Scriptures speak) with bands of love, and cords of a
man, Hos. 11.4.
that is, by Rational means and persuasive Arguments, whose force and strength
must lie in their Congenerousness and sutableness with the Ancient Idea's and
Inscriptions of Truth upon our Souls, but is likewise manifest,

1. From the resistibility of the Operations of the Spirit of God. And for a
demonstrative and convictive Evidence of this, we need look no further than the
preaching of the Son of God, while he conversed with the World and dwelt
amongst us, who though he were the Essential wisdom of his Father, and his
Discourses full of Life and Power, who himself was transcendently anointed with
the Spirit of God, and able and willing to bestow the same, according as the
needs and necessities of Men required, yet Jesus, the Author and finisher of
the salvation of Men, was not always succesful, but oft-times that precious and
Immortal seed, which he sowed, fell upon a Rock, and there were some that
rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, Luke 7.30.
and Many believed not on him, Joh. 12.37.
and others went back, and walked no more with him. Joh. 6.66.
Shall we say now that the Spirit of God did not accompany those excellent
Sermons of Jesus Christ? If it did, his Energy and Operation was not Absolute
and Unconditionate, since it was repulsed, and took no effect on many. Or is it
not rather plain, that the cause lay in the stubborness and obstinacy of their
own wills, according as Christ himself tells the Jews, I would, but ye would
not? Mat. 23 37
A like form of Speech God uses to their rebellious Ancestors, Ezekiel. 24.13.
vid. Isai. 65.12.
Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, that is, I have done my
part toward it, but thou would not do thine. Nor can I imagine, if the work
of Men's Conversion depended so wholly upon the Power of God, that no precedent
Qualifications were necessary to invite the Spirit of God to fall to work, why
Men's obstinate incredulity should debar Christ from working Miracles, Mar.
6.5, 6.
as we find it did; or why he should not require a tractable frame of mind, as
a precedent Qualification, for the exertion of his Almighty Power in the cure
of spiritual, as well as corporal diseases. Nay, the Apostles and Disciples of
our Savior were so far from imagining an irresistible Power, accompanying the
outward Word, that St. Stephen tells the Jews, they did resist the Holy Ghost,
even as their Fathers did. Act. 7.51.


2. From those Arguments, the Spirit of God makes use of, under the Gospel,
wherein Men are treated with according to their Rational Natures, and wrought
off from Vice and sin, to a firm and permanent adhesion to Virtue, by kindness
and love, by hopes and fears, by the inevitableness of impendent mischiefs, and
by the security of future rewards. Which Economy had been altogether
supervacaneous, if God had engaged his Omnipotent Power to make Men good. Under
the Gospel we are persuaded to Holiness and Righteousness, by the easiness,
pleasantness and satisfaction of such a state, to which our minds being once
arrived, they feel a full and entire Acquiescence and ineffable joy; a Pleasure
resulting from the connaturality and agreeableness of those Beautiful Forms,
with the inmost sense of our own Souls. And because the dispositions of Mankind
are various and different, some being encouraged to Action, out of a Principle
of Gratitude and innate Nobility; others not easily won, but by Advantage and
Interest; others again not without menaces of a severe and uneasy Discipline:
therefore God in the Evangelical Dispensation, has interwoven the most
effectual and cogent Arguments, to meet with each of these tempers in Men. To
the first, he propounds the consideration of the Death and Passion of his only
begotten Son, who being in the form of God, and dwelling in the Immortal
Mansions of Light and Glory, yet out of that dear and ineffable love and
compassion, which he always bare to the race of Mankind, was content to banish
himself from those Blessed Regions, and put on our Servile Scheme, being born
into the World a helpless Infant, subject to perpetual sorrows and afflictive
circumstances, leading an obscure and contemptible life, befriended of few, and
at last dying upon that uneasy Bed of sorrows, the Cross, that so his Death
might be an Expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the World. Which cannot but
enravish every Ingenuous Breast, and fill it with the highest and most faithful
love, to so kind and compassionate a Savior. But there being almost as few of
this sort of Men, as there were of old of those that embraced Virtue for it
self, and esteemed it eligible, though divested of all appendant Rewards,
therefore that Eternal Wisdom which has interessed it self in the Frame and
Conduct of the Gospel, propounds an advantageous Portion to the sincere and
unblameable Professors of Piety and Holiness, and assures them that their
labor shall not be in vain, but that their sorrows shall find refreshment,
their hardships and difficult enterprises, ease and pleasure, and their
faithful Perseverance in Righteousness be recompensed with the Happiness of
possessing glorified and Immortal Bodies in the highest Heavens. And if it
shall happen, the minds of Men to be deaf to all the charms of Gratitude and
Advantage, to the Allectives of good Nature and Interest, and there be no way
left to awake them out of their stupidity, but by the Voice of Thunder, then
Jesus Christ the Sovereign of Men and Angels, is represented to Us in
Scripture, coming in the Clouds of Heaven, attended with Thousands of Angels,
to take Vengeance on those that have not known God, nor obeyed his Laws and
Commands: And by his Powerful Operation, the Seeds and Principles of Fire shall
be excited, and that quick and Active Element insinuate and pervade all the
Commissures and Parts of the Earth, and a Deluge of Flame, as once of Waters,
shall overspread the Face of the World. Into which sulphurous and burning
Lake, the Devil and his Angels, and all those who in this life delight in
wickedness, and cast the fear of God behind their backs, shall be plunged to
Eternal Ages.

These are the Arguments which are dispersed up and down, and urged in the Holy
Scriptures, as so many ties and bands, to engage us to a faithful and
peremptory prosecution of the indispensable Laws of Righteousness and Truth,
and which as well in their own Nature, as in the manner and way of their
Proposal, do evidently declare that they are not fatal and necessary, but moral
Instruments of propagating and diffusing the Life and Nature of God, and as all
other Rational means of Persuasion, may by an obstinate and perverse spirit be
slighted and contemned. And certainly the Nature of the thing it self requires
it should be so; for if the whole conduct of Men's souls, in order to their
salvation, were nothing but the effects and emanations of a peremptory and
uncontrollable Power, there would be no place left for those large Encomium's
of Wisdom in this great affair, Wisdom being Inventrix Mediorum, and then
most of all discovers its excellency, in fixing and determining upon such ways,
as shall operate effectually, and yet congruously and agreeably to the Nature
of Men, Moral Agents requiring Moral Instruments, to allure and invite them to
Action. But lest any Man should carelessly mistake me, and think that what I
have said, tends to the invalidating and weakening our belief of the Powerful
Assistance of the Spirit of God, I do confidently affirm, That no Man ought, or
can attribute his beginning, progress and continuance in goodness, to his own
solitary effort or powers, but to the benign and auspicious influence of the
Divine grace and spirit. It is he that forms in us the Life and Nature of God,
that makes us Holy, Righteous and Good, enlightening the Eyes of our Minds, that
we may see the inestimable riches of the Gospel, and convinces us of the Truth
of the Great Promises of Salvation. It is He that daily by a Vital Energy
purges and refines the minds of Men from all filthiness and uncleanness, and
consecrates their hearts as Holy Temples unto God. It is he that continually
burns up and consumes our unruly lusts, and breathes upon the Sacred Life of
God in our Souls, fanning it into a flame of love, that we dwell in God and God
in Us. Through his mighty Power we are secured from our Spiritual Enemies,
leading us with a Pillar of a Cloud by Day, and a light of Fire by Night, till
he bring us to Heaven the true Land of Canaan. But in all this, the Divine
Spirit does not pull and draw us like stocks and stones, nor offer any
irresistible violence to our wills, nor must we expect that God should do all
the work for us while we sit still, but we must do it for our selves, only he
has graciously promised to concur and lend us his hand and his assistance.
Phil. 2.12, 13.
Work out your salvation (says the Apostle) with fear and trembling, for it is
God who works in you both to will and to do, (...), of his good pleasure, or
according to your desire, that is, God stands ready to help you with Power and
Ability to do it according to your desire, or as you desire it of him, and we
are to take care that we actuate that Power, which of his gracious bounty he
confers upon us. Which very thing makes us (...) cooperate with God, 2 Cor. 6.1.
as the Apostles are called (...) laborers together with God in the
Dispensation of the Gospel. 1 Cor. 3.9.


Having now discovered the Great Influence of the Divine Goodness and Wisdom
in the Work of Man's Salvation, it remains likewise that I now show, how the
Power of God has interessed and concerned it self in the same: For the Apostle
tells the Corinthians, that he Preached Christ to them, not only the Wisdom,
but the Power of God. And again, to them who are saved, the preaching of the
Cross is the Power of God.

Now this Power manifested it self, 1. In raising our Blessed Savior from the
Dead. Thus St. Paul says, that Jesus was declared the Son of God with power,
Romans 1.4.
by the Resurrection from the Dead, that is, God did own and publicly declare
him to be his beloved Son, in that powerful manner of raising Him from the
Dead. And again, he calls it the mighty power of God which he wrought in Christ
when he raised him from the Dead. Ephesians. 1.20.
For when the Jews had crucified our Savior, the Cause of the Gospel, as to
all Humane Appearance lay dead and buried with him as a lost and undone Cause,
insomuch that the Disciples themselves were brought to this, We trusted it had
been he that should have redeemed Israel, so little hopes and expectations had
they of a new state of things, when they saw their great Master dead upon the
Cross. But suffering Virtue being so illustrious an object of the Divine
Providence, God who owned and approved our Lord Jesus all the time of his life,
would not now suffer his Credit and Reputation to lie at stake being dead, and
therefore notwithstanding the malice of the Jews, and the envious diligence of
the spirits of Darkness, asserts and maintains the Truth of his Mission, by
bringing him up to life again. The impious care and industry of his Enemies,
made the glory of our Savior's Innocence so much the more clear and
conspicuous: they look upon him as an Impostor, and having heard him before
speak of his Resurrection, they endeavor by all means to hinder it, that they
might blast his Memory and bury his Honor with Disgrace; therefore they roll a
great Stone to the Mouth of the Sepulcher, sealing it, (probably with the
Signet of Pilate) and setting a Band of Soldiers to watch about his Grave. But
God that loved his Son Jesus to his Death, and took the care of Him when he was
laid in the Grave, disappointed the hopes and expectations of the Jews, and
made their malicious contrivances subservient Testimonies to the Truth of his
Resurrection. A mighty Angel comes down from Heaven, at whose Presence and
awful Majesty the Keepers trembled, and the Earth it self was moved, and rolls
away the Stone and sits upon it, and the stupendous Power of the Divinity
shakes the Territories of Night and slumber, and dismantles the Prisons of the
Grave, and restores to our Savior that Life the Jews bereaved him of,
notwithstanding all their fraudulent Practices and Machinations. A palpable
Indication of the mighty and efficacious Power of God, who alone can call the
things that are not, and quicken and enliven the Dead, beyond all Humane
Thoughts and Apprehensions.

2. The Power of God in the Gospel, has been very notable in the Destruction of
the Devils Kingdom. When Mankind began to apostatize from God, and fall into
Idolatry, he gave them over to the Tyranny and Dominion of the Prince of
Darkness, as a just Punishment of their wilful Adhesion to his Counsels and
Inspirations, and for Reasons reserved in the Depth and Abyss of Divine
Providence, permitted all the World (save that he selected himself a Church out
of the Posterity of Abraham) to be abused by the Devil, and to lie under that
servitude and slavery, till the coming of Christ into the World. But when the
Son of Righteousness was risen, the Nations of the Earth soon saw and walked in
his light, and the Prediction of our Blessed Savior became verified and
fulfilled in the Ruin of the Devils Kingdom, whose lapse and fall was like
lightning from Heaven. For notwithstanding the mutual Combinations and
Confederacies of the Kings and Potentates of the Earth against the Lords
anointed, and his Disciples and Followers, notwithstanding the furious Rage of
Satan, in stirring up and raising many cruel and bloody Persecutions against
the Church, yet the Word of God grew mightily and prevailed so far that the
whole Roman Empire at last became Christian, whereby the Devil utterly lost his
hold, his Oracles being silent, and his whole Worship destroyed. And surely had
not the Christian Religion been of God, it could never have so Universally
prevailed against such Potent opposition of Men and Devils. The hand and Power
of God was visibly and eminently discovered in the ample Diffusion and high
success of the Gospel, which from such weak and small Beginnings ran and was
glorious, captivating the Minds of Men to the obedience of Christ's Laws, and
bringing the World under the Scepter of his Kingdom. Which Destruction of the
Devils Rule and Dominion over Mankind, being in so great a measure already
accomplished by the preaching of the Gospel, and that Powerful Assistance that
attended it from Heaven, shall receive its full and final completion, when the
Mountain of the Lord's house is exalted upon the tops of the Mountains, and all
Nations flow unto it: that is, when both Jews and Gentiles shall unite
themselves under the Banner of the crucified Jesus. And now that I am
discoursing of that signal overthrow of the Devil's Kingdom by Christianity,
or the Gospel under the Powerful conduct of the Lord Jesus, whereby he became
dispossessed of his Usurped Dominions, and those who had so long time been his
Slaves and Vassals, returned to the Loyalty and Obedience they owed to their
Natural Sovereign, I cannot forbear to insert a Conjecture of the Pious and
Learned Mr. Mede, concerning the American, or New World. Lib. 4. Epist. 43.
That those Countries were first Inhabited since our Savior and his Apostles
times, and not before; yea perhaps some Ages after: there being no signs or
footsteps found amongst them, or any Monuments of older Habitation, as there
is with us. That the Devil being impatient of the sound of the Gospel, and the
Cross of Christ in every part of this old World, so that he could in no place
be quiet for it, and foreseeing that he was like at length to lose all here,
bethought himself to provide him of a Seed, over which he might reign securely,
and in a Place, Vbi nec Pelopidarum facta neque nomen audiret. That accordingly
he drew a Colony out of some of those barbarous Nations, dwelling upon the
Northern Ocean, (whither the sound of Christ had not yet come) and promising
them by some Oracle to show them a Country far better than their own, (which he
might soon do) pleasant, large, where never Man yet inhabited, he conducted
them over those Desert Lands and Islands (which are many in that Sea) by the
way of the North into America; which none would ever have gone, had they not
first been assured there was a passage that way into a more desirable Country.
Namely as when the World Apostatized from the Worship of the true God, God
called Abraham out of Chaldee into the Land of Canaan, of him to raise him a
Seed to preserve a light unto his Name: So the Devil when he saw the World
Apostatizing from him, laid the Foundations of a new Kingdom, by deducting
this Colony from the North into America, where since they have increased into
an innumerable Multitude. And where did the Devil reign more Absolutely and
without Control, since Mankind fell first under his clutches? And here it is
to be noted, that the story of the Mexican Kingdom, (which was not founded
above 400. Years before ours came thither) relates out of their own Memorials
and Traditions, that they came to that Place from the North, whence their God
Vitzliliputzli led them, going in an Ark before them: and after diverse Years
Travel, and many stations (like enough after some Generations) they came to a
Place which the sign he had given them at their first setting forth pointed
out, where they were to finish their Travels, build themselves a City and their
God a Temple; which is the Place where Mexico was built. And though the Devil
in those Quarter, and such other Parts of the World seem to Lord it alone over
abused Mankind without any control and opposition, yet the Son of God to whom
the uttermost Parts of the Earth are promised for an Inheritance, will at
length lay a Powerful claim to his own Possessions, and take out of the hands
of his Grand Enemy, by the pure and incorrupt Propagation of the Gospel, that
Sovereignty which he exercises over those Desolate People. For as Christ in the
Days of his Flesh by his Powerful and efficacious Word, commanded the Devils
out of their usurped Habitations in the Bodies of Men, as a Praeludium of that
Universal Conquest he should hereafter obtain; so will he after such Periods of
Divine Providence fixed and determined by his All-comprehensive Wisdom, go
forth with his Legions of Light, and recover those wretched Mortals out of the
Hands of the spirits of Darkness, by whom they have been captivated and seduced
at their Will. Nor is this a bare Airy Notion or Fancy, but a thing to be hoped
and prayed for upon very Rational Grounds, it being nothing but the enlargement
of the Kingdom of Truth and Righteousness, and the Dissemination of that Holy
and Blessed Life of God, to which Men's Souls have a Natural Cognation, though
for the present bent and forced out of their true state and Position.

3. The Power of God will Discover it self in a very eminent manner, in raising
all Holy Men from the Dead, and rewarding their faithful services with
Immortality and Life at the last Day. The last enemy that shall be destroyed
(says the Apostle) is Death: And when God shall think fit to put an end to the
Generations of Men, and conclude the Scene of the affairs of this World, then
shall the Holy Jesus descend from Heaven with a shout, with the Voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trumpet of God, and the Dead shall be raised and
presented each one in the Visible and Individual Personality they bare in this
World, before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive for the things done in
their Bodies, whether good or bad: Joh. 5.29.
and they that have done good shall come forth to the Resurrection of life, and
they that have done evil to the Resurrection of Damnation. Which final sentence
at the Conclusion of that dreadful Appearance shall be executed accordingly,
the Wicked being plunged into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, but the
Righteous, through the gracious Bounty and stupendous Operation of their
merciful Redeemer, shall be taken up into the Regions of Immortality and life,
where their Corruptible Bodies shall put on Incorruption, and be transformed
into the similitude of the Glorious Body of the Son of GOD, through that mighty
Power whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. And though this
Transcendent state and Portion may very well be thought too big for our humble
Hopes and Expectations, and exceed all that we can do or suffer, yet since God
is pleased of his Infinite Bounty to promise, we have no Reason to distrust his
Faithfulness and Truth in the Performance of it, since he has moreover given us
a palpable Pledge and Assurance of it in the Resurrection of our Blessed
Savior from the Dead, and because he lives we may be confident we shall live
also. Christ is risen from the Grave, having conquered Death by dying, and is
ascended into the pure and peaceable Habitations of Glory, therefore all his
Members who are united to Him in the inseparable bands of Faith and Love, shall
feel the effects of his Powerful Life in immortalizing their very Bodies, which
shall then be absorpt into the Great Vortex of Eternity, where both Body and
Soul shall be decked with such a refulgent Light and Glory, as shall cause them
to shine as the Sun and Stars for evermore. So that what the Poet fabulously
speaks of the Apotheosis of Daphnis, shall much more be verified in the
Translation of every good Man into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Candidus insuetum miratur limen Olympi,
Sub pedibusque videt nubes and sidera Daphnis.
Having thus far brought this Discourse toward an end, and displayed the
Goodness, Wisdom and Power of God in the Gospel, the great Instrument of the
blessedness of Mankind, it becomes our duty to receive it with the highest and
most honorable thoughts and apprehensions; not to let our Conceptions dwindle
into something low and mean, and unworthy of the Nature of God, who has so
intimately concerned himself in it. For whatever, whether Opinion or Practice,
lessens that esteem and veneration Men ought to have of the Works of God, is a
high Affront and Injury, and an Unworthy Derogation from the Perfections of the
Divine Nature; whereas nothing shallow, trifling and contemptible can ever be a
suitable Object of Divine Goodness, Wisdom and Power: much less can there be
any thing such in the Evangelical Economy, which was designed for so great a
Work and so Universal and general a Good, as the Immortal Happiness of Humane
Souls. The very light of Reason it self teaches us, that we ought to speak
worthily of God, and to have due and right Apprehensions of his Nature, the
Excellency of which, though it were in a great measure stamped and ingraved
upon the Minds of Men at their first Creation, yet is more clearly and sensibly
discovered under the Gospel, than by any other Dispensation since the World
began. And as we are to take care that our thoughts and expressions be agreeabe
and becoming so great a Mystery, so are we concerned vigorously to prosecute
that which is the Grand Intent, scope and aim of the Gospel, that is our
progress and growth in Virtue and Holiness; to perfect our Minds in true
Goodness, by a sincere Practice of all the indispensable Laws and Rules of
Righteousness. For however Men may please themselves in expounding Christianity
in an Opinionative and Notional way, in peculiar Phrases and Terms of Art, as
if Religion were a thing deduced and borrowed from the Schools; yet certain it
is, that the true Life of God, which our Holy Lord and Master Jesus Christ came
to disseminate and propagate by the Gospel, is not a bare sound of Words, but
an inward Principle of Life and Power, elevating and raising the Souls of Men
from all childish toys and follies, to a manly and generous Apprehension of
Righteousness and Virtue, advancing their Rational to a complete and entire
command and superiority over their sensual and Animal Powers and Faculties, and
begetting in them such a lively sense of whatever is absolutely good and holy,
as may at last reduce their thoughts, words and actions into an entire
conformity to the Divine Will. And forasmuch as this Heavenly Life consists in
the sincere Prosecution and Practice of Virtue, and that Morality and Virtue
are depressed beneath the concerns of Christianity, by those who pretend a more
free Exaltation of Grace, as it will not be Impertinent to the present
Discourse, so I am sure it is infinitely necessary for every Man to contribute
his Pains, in stopping and damming up that Flood of Wickedness and Immorality,
that has broken in upon the World, by showing the Indispensable Necessity of
the Practice of Morality, that true Religion and Virtue are at no such Mortal
Jarrs, but that whoever is false and Hypocritical, to the sincere and
Conscientious Practice of it, though he fly to Heaven in his vain Dreams and
Imaginations, and talk of the Vision of God, and an Immediate Communion and
Converse with Him, yet he has neither seen nor known Him, and is so far from
being a true Christian, that he has very little of the Life of Christianity
dwelling in him.

As I desire not therefore to charge any Man with the Evil Consequences of his
Opinion, but charitably suppose that he holds fast to the Foundation, and
whatever Tendency his Opinions may have in their Consecutions, that yet in
their Primary Intention, he designs not the discountenancing of unfeigned
Piety; so neither would I, nor can by any considering Person be upbraided, with
setting and exalting Works above the Grace of God, as will appear, when I have
a little explicated and unfolded those Terms, which have of late raised such
hideous storms and Tragedies.

By [Virtue] therefore I mean that Power of the Soul, which so rules and
governs all the Animal motions and inclinations, that she does every where, and
in every thing constantly and unmoveably follow that which is best. As for the
word [Grace] all the Notions of it in the Sacred Dialect (as a Learned Critic
observes) spring from that Primary Notion of it for Charity or Liberality. Dr.
Hammond.
Wherefore the Participation of the Divine Nature, being the highest Perfection
and Accomplishment of the Soul of Man, and the ultimate end of Christianity it
self, all those Acts which have a Natural Tendency to the furtherance and
attainment of so high and glorious a purpose are styled Virtues, they being
nothing but the Powerful Exertions of the Soul in the subjugation of its
Corporeal Passions, that it may with ease and constancy follow that which is
simply Best: and Graces, because they are the free, undeserved and Gratuitous
Donations of him, whose Almighty and Beneficent Spirit pervades the whole Order
and Comprehension of Intellectual Agents, refining and purifying the Minds and
Spirits of the lapsed Creation, and every where attempting the Replantation of
that Beautiful Image, Sin and Vice had obliterated and defaced. Now for the
Term [Moral] remaining to be explained, I conceive it may signify, Whatever
contains in it an Eternal, Immutable and Indispensable Obligation. By Eternal,
Immutable and Indispensable, I exclude from it all Temporary Constitutions and
Positive Sanctions, though deriving their Authority from GOD Himself. I add
Obligation, to difference Moral Truths from Speculative and Theoretical; for
there may be many Physical and Mathematical Notions, which may properly be
called Eternal and Immutable Verities, which yet lay no necessary Obligation
upon Us. That what is once moved will continue to move till something hinder
it, is alike an Eternal and Immutable Verity with this, That every Man is to
honor his Parents, but the One lays a necessary Obligation upon the Soul,
whereas the other does not. Wherefore though the subject of all Truths
whatever, and so of Moral Ones, be the Perceptive and Intellectual Part of the
Soul, yet the sole and Adequate Object of Morality seems to be the Immutable
Idea's and Reasons of Good and Evil. And so far forth as the Soul exercises it
self in the Discrimination of Moral Entities, it is called by the Name of
Conscience. So that the mistake seems to arise from hence, that Men distribute
Humane Actions, in reference to Religion, into Moral and Evangelical, whereas
Moral is not opposed to Evangelical, but to Thetical or Positive. But to give
some further light to this business, we may consider these two things.

1. That the sincere Practice of Morality is a part of the Condition required
of us under the Gospel, in order to our Justification. For unless the Practice
of Moral Virtue be no part of the Divine Will revealed to Us in the Gospel, it
must necessarily follow, that so far as it is made a Condition of the Covenant
of the Gospel, so far it is required in order to the Justification and
Acceptance of our Persons before God. For though we are said in Scripture to
be justified by Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, yet we are not to understand by
this, an empty, bare and naked Faith, but such a Faith as is perfected and
consummated by Love, which the Apostle Saint James expresses by Works, that is,
such a Faith as is not merely Notional and inactive, but productive in the Soul
of a New and sincere Obedience. And what more frequent Instances does the
Scripture bring of our Faithful Conformity to the Will of God, than in our
Constant Exercise and Practice of Moral Virtue? Insomuch that Saint Paul says,
that those who neglect the sincere observance of Morality and Virtue, will
easily be induced to turn Heretics, 1 Timothy 1.19
and deny the Faith, Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put
away, concerning faith have made shipwreck. So indispensably necessary is a
Virtuous Conversation to our Participation of the Blessed Life and Nature of
GOD, that no Man can be understood to be a Partaker of the Divine Nature, who
does not live soberly, righteously and godly in the World. For what sign does
he give of a Spirit renewed and changed into the Compassionate Nature of the
Lord Jesus, who can willingly pain and grieve and afflict his Brother? What
Specimen does he produce of a sincere Conformity to the Eternal Laws of Justice
and Righteousness, who can knowingly and wittingly overreach and defraud his
Neighbor? Or what Evidence does he offer of a Mind desirous to be renewed into
a state of Angelical Purity and Holiness, who makes it his business and seeks
for all Occasions to gratify his Carnal Appetite in the full enjoyment of all
Sensual Pleasures, that may be had without manifest Diseases? Or is it possible
to conceive the Life and Nature of GOD, that Life of Universal Holiness and
Purity, Justice and Goodness, without the Exercise of these and such like
Virtues?

2. That the Maturity and Ripeness of Religion, consists in having a sensible
Discernment of Good and Evil in a Moral sense. The full knowledge of the
Mysteries of Christianity (as the Author to the Hebrews tells Us) belongs to
them that are of full age, Heb. 5.14.
that is, such as are arrived to the Perfection and Maturity of Religion, and
these Persons he describes in the next words, to be such as have a Vital relish
and sensible Discernment of good and evil, Who by reason of use have their
senses exercised to discern both good and evil. That there are Natural
Differences between good and evil, is as evident and apparent as the Difference
between health and sickness: For as health is nothing but the right and Natural
Constitution of all the Parts of the Body; and Sickness the Oppression,
Distortion and Deviation from it: So is it in the Soul of Man. Its true and
proper Nature, is that healthful Temper and Constitution wherein God at first
Created it: But now Sin and Evil is a forcing it into a Preternatural State,
the driving it into a Disease and Distemper, and the putting its Powers and
Faculties into Jarring and Discord. And that these Differences are nothing but
the Vital relishes and sensations of the Soul of Man, in that double Capacity
and Resolution of Rational and Animal, or in the Sacred Dialect of the (...)
and (...) the inward and outward Man, or the Flesh and Spirit, I think is as
evident to any Considering and Judicious Person. Now this Maturity and Ripeness
of Religion discovers it self, 1. In a particular knowledge of the Difference
between Good and Evil, so as to be able to distinguish what is from the Flesh
and Animal, and what from the Spirit and Rational Life. 2. In a ready
Application of this to all the Passages of our Lives. For that Blindness of
mind the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 4.18.
to which the Gentiles as a just Punishment of their former carelessness were
given up, does fully express the Necessity of this Discriminative Sense and
Discerning between Good and Evil. For when once the Criterion, or Perceptive
Faculty has lost its Tenderness and Sensibility, and the Mind becomes
Reprobate, (...) Romans 1.28
then Darkness and Light, Good and Evil, Bitter and Sweet are all one. Then it
is (as in the above mentioned place) Men are dedolent and past feeling, (...).
Ephesians. 4.19.
and having no other Law, but that of the Corporeal Life, become insatiable in
Impiety, and work Wickedness with greediness: which surely as it is the most
deplorable condition the Soul of Man can fall into, so ought most carefully to
be avoided by endeavoring after a particular Distinction, and clear knowledge
of the Notices, Emanations and Suggestions of the Flesh and Spirit. And as this
inward Sense is not to be stifled, so neither to remain useless and idle, but
to extend it self and have an Influence upon all our Actions. It must be fanned
and kept alive by sincere Devotion, and a constant and Habitual Practice of
Virtue, by which at length it will become a Powerful and Vital Principle,
begetting in us a true relish of Righteousness and Holiness, that we may not
only talk and maintain an Artificial and Mechanical Religion consisting of
Words, or the running the same Circle of outward Performances and Duties, but
may be really regenerated and formed into a new Nature, and act out of choice,
and from the innate Loveliness and Beautifulness of Virtue. For by bringing our
Actions to this Test and Rule, and applying them to the Natural Difference and
Distinction of Good and Evil, it will keep us from all deliberate Violations of
the Laws and Prescriptions of Holiness. By this, Wickedness and Sin will appear
in its Natural Dress and Genuine Colors, and its Ugliness and Deformity be
rendered so manifest, that our Wills and Affections will not easily be drawn
into a Compliance with it, and the various Passages of our Lives freed and
discharged from the least Appearance of Evil.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and sold by Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard.
DR. More's Reply to a late Answer to his Antidote against Idolatry, with the
Appendix. 8o. H. Mori Opera Theologica. Fol. Spenceri dissertatio de Vrim and
Thummim. 8o. Frederici Lossii Observationes Medicae. Octavo. Speed's
Epigrammata Juvenilia, in 4 Parts divisa, Encomia, Seria, Satyras and Jocosa.
Octavo. Doctor William Smith's Unjust Man's Doom. Octavo. Two Sermons at the
Assizes in Suffolk. Oct. Two Sermons at Norwich: May 3. and May 29. 1676.
Quarto. Mr. Hallywell's Discourse of the Excellency of Christianity. Oct.
Account of Familism, as it is revived and propagated by the Quakers. Oct. Some
Opinions of Mr. Hobbes considered, in a second Dialogue between Philautus and
Timothy. Oct. Breerwood's Enquiries into the Diversities of Languages. Oct. Mr.
Allen's Mystery of Iniquity unfolded, or the false Apostles and Authors of
Popery compared, etc. Oct. Animadversions on Mr. Ferguson, about Justification.
Oct. Friendly Address to the Nonconformists, beginning with the Anabaptists.
8o. Mr. Lamb's stop to the course of Separation, Oct. Sherlock's Discourse of
the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Octavo. Defense and Continuation of the
Discourse, etc. Octavo. Answer to a scandalous Pamphlet, entitled a Dialogue
between Satan and Sherlock. Quarto. Dr. Worthington's Great Duty of
Self-resignation to the Divine Will. Oct. Mr. Hotchkis Discourse of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to Us, and our Sins to Him. Oct. Gage's
Survey of the West Indies. 8o. Dr. Goodall's Vindication of the College of
Physicians. Oct. Smith's Pourtract of old Age. Oct. Webster's History of
Metals. Quar. Dr. More's Remarques upon two late Ingenious Discourses, the one
an Essay of the Gravitation and Non-gravitation of fluid Bodies, the other
Observations touching the Torricellian experiment. 8o. Sydenham's Observationes
Medicae. 8o. An Account of Mr. Ferguson's Common-Place-Book in two Letters
between Mr. Sherlock and Mr. Glanvil. Quar. Dr. Grew's Comparative Anatomy of
Trunks, together with an Account of their Vegetation grounded thereupon:
Octavo.
THE END.

