VERA EFFIGIES REVERENDI DONI IOSEPHI HALL NORWICI EPISCOPI


This Picture represents the Form, where dwells
A Mind, which nothing but that Mind excells
There Is Wisdom, Learning, Wit; there Grace and Love
(...) all the rest: enough to prove
(...) the froward Conscience of this Time
The Reverend Name of BISHOP is no Crime
RESOLVTIONS AND DECISIONS (...) of CONSCIENCE In continual Use amongst Men,
Very necessary for their Information and Direction in these evil Times. In
four Decades. The Second Edition, with some ADDITIONALLS.

By Jos: HALL, B. Norwich.

LONDON, Printed for N. B. and are to be sold by R. Royston at the Angel in
Ivie-lane. 1650.

To the READER.
OF all Divinity that part is most useful, which determines cases of
Conscience; and of all cases of Conscience the Practical are most necessary;
as action is of more concernment than speculation: And of all practical Cases
those which are of most common use are of so much greater necessity and benefit
to be resolved, as the errors thereof are more universal; and therefore more
prejudicial to the society of mankind: These I have selected out of many; and
having turned over diverse Casuists have pitched upon those Decisions, which I
hold most conformable to enlightened reason, and religion: sometimes I follow
them, and sometimes I leave them for a better Guide.

In the handling of all which, would I have affected that course which Seneca
blames in his Albutius, to say all that might be spoken, I could easily have
been more Voluminous, though perhaps not more satisfactory. If these lines meet
with different judgments; I cannot blame either my self, or them. It is the
opinion of some Schoolmen (which seems to be made good by that instance in the
Prophet Daniel Dan. 10. 13. 20, 21. 12. 1.
) that even the good Angels themselves may holily vary in the way, though they
perfectly meet in the end: It is far from my thoughts to obtrude these my
Resolutions as peremptory, and magisteriall upon my Readers, I only tender
them submissely, as probable advises to the simpler sort of Christians; and as
matter of grave censure to the learned.

May that infinite Goodness to whose only glory I humbly desire to devote my
self and all my poor endeavors, make them as beneficial, as they are
welmeant to the good of his Church, by the unworthiest of his Servants

Higham near Norwich, March 29. 1650. I. H. B. N.

The CONTENTS of the first Decade.
Cases of Profit and Traffic.
I. WHether it be lawful for me to raise any profit by the loan of Money. p. 1
II. Whether may I not sell my wares as dear as I can, and get what I may of
every Buyer? 13 III. Whether is the Seller bound to make known to the Buyer the
faults of that which he is about to sell? 19 IV. Whether may I sell my
commodities the dearer for giving days of payment? 24 V. Whether and how far
Monopolies are, or may be lawful? 30 VI. Whether and how far does a fraudulent
bargain bind me to performance? 38 VII. How far and when am I bound to make
restitution of another man's goods remaining in my hands? 47 VIII. Whether and
how far does a promise extorted by fear, though seconded by an oath, bind
my Conscience to performance? 54 IX. Whether those moneys, or goods which I
have found may be safely taken, and kept by me to my own use? 61 X. Whether I
may lawfully buy those goods, which I shall strongly suspect, or know to be
stolen, or plundered; or if I have ignorantly bought such goods, whether I may
lawfully (after knowledge of their Owner) keep them as mine? 66
The CONTENTS of the second Decade.
Cases of Life and Liberty.
I. WHether and in what cases it may be lawful for a man to take away the life
of another. p. 71 II. Whether may I lawfully make use of a Duel for the
deciding of my right; or the vindication of my honor? 81 III. Whether may it
be lawful in case of extremity to procure the abortion of the Child for the
preservation of the Mother? 89 IV. Whether a man adjudged to perpetual
imprisonment, or death, may in conscience endeavor, and practice an escape?
101 V. Whether and how far a man may be urged to an Oath. 108 VI. Whether a
Judge may upon allegations, proofs and evidences of others, condemn a man to
death, whom he himself certainly knows to be innocent? 117 VII. Whether and
in what cases am I bound to be an accuser of another? 129 VIII. Whether a
Prisoner indicted of a felonious act which he has committed; and interrogated
by the Judge concerning the same, may stand upon the denial, and plead not
guilty? 136 IX. Whether and how far a man may take up arms in the public
quarrel of a war? 143 X. Whether and how far a man may act toward his own
death? 150
The CONTENTS of the third Decade.
Cases of Piety and Religion.
I. WHether upon the appearance of evil Spirits, we may hold discourse with
them, and how we may demean our selves concerning them. 161 II. How far a
secret pact with evil Spirits does extend; and what actions and events must be
referred thereunto. 174 III. Whether reserving my conscience to my self, I may
be present at an Idolatrous devotion; or whether in the lawful service of God I
may communicate with wicked persons? 183 IV. Whether vows be not out of
fashion now under the Gospel; of what things they may be made; how far they
oblige us: and whether and how far they may be capable of a release. 192 V.
Whom may we justly hold an Heretic; and what is to be done in case of
Heresy. 201 VI. Whether the laws of men do bind the conscience; and how
far we are tied to their obedience. 210 VII. Whether Tithes be lawful
maintenance for Ministers under the Gospel; and whether men be bound to pay
them accordingly. 219 VIII. Whether it be lawful for Christians, where they
find a Country possessed by Savage Pagans and Infidels, to drive out the
native Inhabitants, and to seize upon and enjoy their lands upon any pretense
whatsoever; and upon what grounds it may be lawful so to do. 233 IX. Whether
I need in case of some foul sin committed by me to have recourse to Gods
Minister for absolution; and what effect I may expect therefrom. 249 X.
Whether it be lawful for a man that is not a professed Divine, that is (as we
for distinction are wont to call him) for a mere Laick person, to take upon him
to interpret Scripture. 262
The CONTENTS of the fourth Decade.
Cases Matrimonial.
I. WHether the Marriage of a Son or Daughter, without or against the Consent
of Parents, may be accounted lawful. 285 II. Whether marriage lawfully made
may admit of any cause of Divorce, save only for the violation of the
Marriage Bed by fornication, or adultery. 296 III. Whether after a lawful
Divorce for adultery, the innocent party may marry again. 311 IV. Whether the
authority of a Father may reach so far as to command or compel the Child to
dispose of himself in marrage where he shall appoint. 322 V. Whether the
marriage of Cousensgerman, that is, of Brothers and Sisters children, be
lawful. 331 VI. Whether it be necessary or requisite there should be a
witnessed contract, or Espousalls of the Parties to be married, before the
solemnization of the marriage. 343 VII. Whether there ought to be a
prohibition, and forbearance of marriages, and marriage-duties for some times
appointed. 353 VIII. Whether it be necessary that marriages should be
celebrated by a Minister; and whether they may be valid, and lawful without
him. 361 IX. Whether there be any necessity or use of thrice publishing the
Contract of marriage in the Congregation before the celebration of it; and
whether it be fit, that any Dispensation should be granted for the forbearance
of it. 366 X. Whether Marriages once made, may be annulled, and utterly voided;
and in what cases this may be done? 372
ADDITIONALS to the fourth Decade.
I. WHether a Marriage consummate betwixt the Uncle and Niece be so utterly
unlawful, as to merit a sentence of present separation. 383 II. Whether it be
lawful for a man to marry his Wives Brothers Widow. 406 III. Whether an
incestuous Marriage contracted in simplicity of heart betwixt two Persons
ignorant of such a defilement, and so far consummate as that Children are
borne in that wedlock, ought to be made known and prosecuted to a
dissolution. 412.
I Have perused these four Decades of Practical Cases of Conscience with much
satisfaction and delight, and find them to be in respect of their subject
matter so profitable, necessary and daily useful; and so piously, learnedly
and judiciously discussed and resolved, that they seem unto me best though they
come last, (like the Wine in the marriage feast made sacred by Christ's divine
presence and miracle) and therefore do well deserve (amongst many other the
divine dishes and delicacies wherewith this right reverend, pious and learned
Author, has plentuously furnished a feast for the spiritual nourishment and
comfortable refreshing of Gods guests) both the approbation and commendation of
all, and my self amongst the rest, though unworthy to pass my censure on such
a subject.

John Downame.

RESOLUTIONS. The first Decade. Cases of Profit and Trafick.
CASE I.
Whether is it lawful for me to raise any profit by the loan of money?

YOu may not expect a positive answer either way: Many circumstances are
considerable ere any thing can be determined.

First, Who is it that borrows? A poor neighbor that is constrained out of
need? or a Merchant that takes up money for a freer trade? or a rich man that
lays it out upon superfluous occasions?

If a poor man borrow out of necessity, you may not expect any profit for the
loan: (Deuteronomy 15. 7, 8, 9.) To the poorest of all we must give, and not
lend: to the next rank of poor we must lend freely: but if a man will borrow
that money (which you could improve) for the enriching of himself; or out of a
wanton expense will be laying out that which might be otherwise useful to you,
for his mere pleasure, the case is different; For God has not commanded you
to love any man more then your self; and there can be no reason why you should
vail your own just advantage to another man's excess.

Secondly, upon what terms do you lend? whether upon an absolute compact for
a set increment, (what ever become of the principal) or upon a friendly trust
to a voluntary satisfaction according to the good improvement of the sum
lent? The former is not safe, and where there has been an honest endeavor of
a just benefit disappointed either by unavoidable casualty, or force, may not
be rigorously urged, without manifest oppression. The latter can be no other
then lawful: and with those that are truly faithful and conscionable, the
bond of gratitude is no less strong then that of law and justice.

Thirdly, if upon an absolute compact; is it upon a certainty, or an adventure?
for where you are willing to hazard the principal, there can be no reason but
you should expect to take part of the advantage.

Fourthly, where the trade is ordinarily certain, there are yet farther
considerations to be had: to which shall make way by these undeniable grounds.

That the value of moneys or other commodities is arbitrable according to the
sovereign authority and use of several Kingdoms and Countries.

That whatsoever commodity is saleable, is capable of a profit in the loan of
it; as an horse, or an ox, being that it may be sold, may be let out for
profit.

Money it self is not only the price of all commodities in all civil
Nations, but it is also, in some cases, a trafiqueable commodity: the price
whereof rises, and falls in several countries upon occasion; and yields
either profit or loss in the exchange.

There can be no doubt therefore but that money thus considered, and as it were
turned merchandise, may be bought and sold, and improved to a just profit.

But the maine doubt is, whether money merely cousidered as the price of all
other commodities, may be let forth for profit; and be capable of a warrantable
increase. For the resolving whereof be it determined,

That all usury, which is an absolute contract for the mere loan of money, is
unlawful both by law natural, and positive, both divine and humane.

Nature teaches us that metals are not a thing capable of a superfoetation;
that no man ought to set a price on that which is not his own time: that the
use of the stock once received, is not the lenders, but the borrowers; for the
power, and right of disposing the principal, is by contract transferred for
the time to the hands of him that receives it; so as he that takes the
interest by virtue of such transaction, does but in a mannerly and legal
fashion rob the borrower.

How frequent the Exodus 22. 25. Levit. 25. 36, 37. Deuteronomy. 23. 19, 20. Nehem. 5.
7. Psalm. 15. 5. Prove. 28. 8. Ezekiel. 18. 8.
Scripture is in the prohibition of this practice, no Christian can be
ignorant: And as for humane laws raised even from the mere light of Nature
amongst Heathen Nations, how odious, and severely interdicted usurary
contracts, have been in all times, it appears sufficiently by the Records
which we have of the Decrees of Vid. Alexand. ab Alexand. Genesis dierum l. 1. c.
7.
Egypt, of Athens, of Rome; and not only by the restraint of the Twelve
Tables, and of Claudius and Vespasian; but by the absolute forbiddance of many
popular statutes condemning this usage: Tiberius himself, though otherwise
wicked enough, yet would rather furnish the Banks with his own stock, to be
freely let out for three years to the Citizens, upon only security of the
sum doubled in the forfaiture, then he would endure this griping and
oppressive transaction: And how wise Cato drove out all usurers out of Sicilie,
and Lucullus freed all Asia from this pressure of Interest, History has
sufficiently recorded.

As for Laws Ecclesiastical, let it be enough that a Council. Viennens.
Council has defined, that to say usury is not a sin, is no better then
heresy: and in succeeding times how liable the usurer has ever been to the
highest censures of the Church; and how excluded from the favor of Christian
burial, is more manifest then to need any proof.

Secondly, however it is unlawful to convenant for a certain profit for the
mere loan of money, yet there may be, and are circumstances appending to the
loan, which may admit of some benefit to be lawfully made by the lender for
the use of his money; and especially these two; the loss that he sustaines,
and the gain that he misses, by the want of the sum lent: For what reason
can there be, that to pleasure another man, I should hurt my self, that I
should enrich another by my own loss?

If then I shall incur a real loss or forfaiture by the delayed payment of
the sum lent, I may justly look for a satisfaction from the borrower; yea if
there be a true danger of loss to me imminent, when the transaction is made,
nothing hinders but that I may by compact make sure such a sum as may be
sufficient for my indemnity; And if I see an opportunity of an apparent profit
that I could make fairly by the disbursing of such a sum bonafide, and
another that has a more gainful bargain in chase shall sue to me to borrow
my money out of my hand for his own greater advantage, there can be no reason
why in such a case I should have more respect to his profit, then my own; and
why should I not even upon pact, secure unto my self such a moderate sum as
may be somewhat answerable to the gain which I do willingly forgo, for his
greater profit? Since it is a true ground which Lessius (with other Casuists)
maintains against Sotus and Durand, that even our hopes of an evident commodity
are valuable; and that no less then the fears of our loss.

Shortly, for the guidance of our either caution, or liberty in matter of
borrowing, and lending, the only Cynosure is our Charity; for in all humane
and civil acts of Commerce, it is a sure rule, That whatsoever is not a
violation of Charity cannot be unlawful, and whatsoever is not agreeable to
Charity can be no other then sinful: And as Charity must be your rule, so your
self must be the rule of your Charity; Look what you could wish to be done to
you by others, do but the same to others, you cannot be guilty of the breach
of Charity: The maxims of Trafique are almost infinite; only Charity (but
ever inseparable from Justice) must make the application of them; That will
teach you that every increase by loan of money is not usurarie; and that those
which are absolutely such, are damnable: that will teach you to distinguish
betwixt the one improvement of loan, and the other; and will tell you that if
you can find out a way, whether by loan, or sale, to advance your stock, that
may be free from all oppression, and extortion; and beneficial as well to
others, as to your self, you need not fear to walk in it with all honest
security: but in the mean time take good heed that your heart beguile you not
in mis-applications; for we are naturally too apt out of our self-love to
flatter our selves with fair glozes of bad intentions; and rather to draw the
rule to us, then our selves to the rule.

But whiles I give you this short solution, I must profess to lament the
common ignorance, or mistaking of too many Christians, whose zeal justly cries
down usury as a most hateful and abominable practice, but in the mean time
makes no bones of actions no less biting, and oppressive: they care not how
high they sell any of their commodities, at how unreasonable rates they set
their grounds, how they circumvent the buyer in their bargains, and think any
price just, any gain lawful that they can make in their markets: not
considering that there is neither less, nor less odious usury in selling and
letting, then there is in lending: It is the extortion in both that makes the
sin; without which the kind or terms of the transaction could not be guilty.
Surely it must needs be a great weakness to think that the same God who
requires mercy and favor in lending, will allow us to be cruel in selling;
Rigor and excess in both equally violates the law of commutative Justice,
equally crosses the law of Charity: Let those therefore that make scruple of an
usurious lending, learn to make no less conscience of a racking bargain;
otherwise their partial obedience will argue a gross hypocrisy; and they
shall prove themselves the worst kind of what they hate, usurers: For in the
ordinary loan-usury, the borrower has yet time to boot for his money; but here
the buyer pays down an excessive interest, without any consideration at all,
but the sellers cruelty. For the fuller clearing of which point; whereas you
ask

CASE II.
Whether may I not sell my wares as dear as I can, and get what I may of every
buyer?

I answer,

THere is a due price to be set upon every saleable commodity; else there were
no commerce to be used among men: For if every man might set what rate he
pleases upon his lands or goods, where should he find a buyer? surely nothing
could follow but confusion, and want; for mere extremity must both make the
market and regulate it.

The due price is that which cuts equally and indifferently betwixt the buyer
and seller; so as the seller may receive a moderate gain, and the buyer a just
pennyworth.

In those countries wherein there is a price set by public authority upon all
marketable commodities, the way of commerce is well expedited, and it is soon
and easily determined, that it is meet men should be held close to the rule.

But where all things are left to an arbitrary transaction, there were no
living if some limits were not set to the sellers demands.

These limits must be the ordinary received proportion of price current in the
several countries wherein they are sold; and the judgment of discreet, wise,
experienced and unconcerned persons; and the well stated conscience of the
seller.

If men shall wilfully run beyond these bounds, taking advantage of the
rareness of the commodity, the paucity or the necessity of the buyers to
enhance the price to an unreasonable height, they shall be guilty of the breach
of charity, and in making a sinful bargain purchase a curse.

Not that a man is so strictly tied to any others valuation, as that he may not
upon any occasion ask or receive more then the common price; or that if the
market rise he is bound to sit still: There may be just reason upon a general
mortality of cattle to set those beasts that remain at an higher rate, or upon
a dearth of grain, or other commodities, to heighten the price; but in such
cases we must be so affected as that we grudge to our selves our own gain,
that we be not in the first file of enhancers, that we strive to be the lowest
in our valuation, and labor what we may to bring down the market; always
putting our selves in our conceits into the buyers room; and bethinking how we
would wish to be dealt with, if we were in his clothes.

It is lawful for the seller in his price to have regard not to his rents and
disbursements only, but to his labor, and cost, to his delay of benefit, to
his loss in managing, to his hazard or difficulty in conveyance; but all these
in such moderation, as that he may be a just gainer by the bargain: not
setting the dice upon the buyer; not making too much haste to be rich, by the
secret spoils of an oppressed neighbor.

Those things whose end is only pleasure or ornament, as a Jewel, an Hawk,
or an Hound, can admit of no certain value; the owners affection must estimate
it, and the buyers desire must make up an illimited bargain; but even in
these, and all other commodities that carry the face of unnecessary, Conscience
must be the Clarke of the Market; and tell us that we must so sell, as we could
be willing to buy. From all which it follows,

That the common maxim current Dom. Sot. de Justit. and Jure l. 6. quaest. 2.
Artic. 3. tradit hoc ut Axioma Jurisconsultorum.
in the shops of trade, that things are so much worth as they can be sold for;
and those ordinary rules of chapmen, that men who are masters of their wares
may heighten their prices at pleasure, and get what they can out of all
comers; that what ever they can get out of the simplicity, or necessity of the
buyers, is lawful prize, are damnably uncharitable, and unjust.

It were an happy thing, if as it is in some other well ordered nations, there
were a certain regulation of the prices of all commodities by public
authority, the wisdom whereof knows how to rise and fall according to the
necessity of the occasion; so as the buyer might be secured from injury, and
the seller restrained from a lawless oppression. But where that cannot be had,
it is fit that Justice and Charity should so far overruled men's actions, that
every man may not be carried in matter of contract by the sway of his own
unreasonable will, and be free to carve for himself as he lists of the buyers
purse: every man has a bird in his bosom that sings to him another note.

A good conscience therefore will tell you that if (taking advantage of the
ignorance or unskilfulnesse of the buyer) you have made a prey of him by
drawing from him double the worth of the commodity sold, you are bound to make
restitution to him accordingly; and in a proportion so, in all the considerable
sums which you shall have by your false protestations, and oaths, and
plausible intimations wrought out from an abused buyer; above that due price
which would make you a just and rightly moderated gainer: For assure your
self, all that you willingly do this way is but a better-coloured picking of
purses; and what you thus get is but stolen goods varnisht over with the
pretense of a calling, and will prove at the last no other then gravel in your
throat.

CASE III.
Whether is the seller bound to make known to the buyer the faults of that
which he is about to sell?

IT is a question that was long since disputed betwixt the Heathen Sages,
Antipater and Diogenes, as Cicero Tull. de Offic. l. 3.
informs us: with whom Cato so decides it as that his judgment may justly
shame and condemn the practice of too many Christians: For a full answer, due
consideration must be had of diverse circumstances.

First, what the nature and quality of the fault is; whether it be fleight and
unimporting; or whether such as may vitiate the thing sold, and render it
either unusefull or dangerous to the buyer: or again, whether the fault be
apparent, or secret: both these do justly vary the case: slight and harmles
faults may be concealed without injustice; maine and importing must be
signified: if apparent defects be not discerned by the buyer, he may thank
himself; secret faults known only to the seller, (such as may be
prejudicial to the buyer) ought not to be concealed: or if they be concealed
so, as that the buyer pays for it as sound, and perfect, bind the seller in
conscience, either to void the bargain, or to give just satisfaction.

Secondly, it would be considered, whether the buyer before the bargain be
stricken, has required of the seller to signify the faults of the commodity
to be sold, and out of a reliance upon the sellers fidelity and warrant, has
made up the match: or whether in the confidence of his own skill, without
moving any question, he enter resolutely, (de been essc) upon the bargained
commodity: If the former, a double bond lies upon the seller to deal
faithfully with the buyer, and therefore to let him know the true condition of
the thing exposed to sale, that so either he may take off his hand; or if he
shall see that notwithstanding that defect it may serve his turn, he may
proportion the price accordingly: otherwise he shall be guilty (besides
falsehood and oppression) of perfidiousnesse. But if the buyer will peremptorily
rely upon his own judgment, and as presuming to make a gain of that bargain
(which the seller out of concience of the imperfection, sets (as he ought) so
much lower as the defect may be more disadvantageous to the buyer) will go
through with the contract, and stand to all hazards, I see no reason why the
seller may not receive the price stipulated; but withal if the match may carry
danger in it to the buyer, (as if the horse sold be subject to a perilous
starting, or stumbling; the house sold have a secret crack that may threaten
ruin; or the land sold be liable to a litigious claim which may be timely
avoided) the seller is bound in conscience (at least after the bargain) to
intimate unto the buyer these faulty qualities, that he may accordingly provide
for the prevention of the mischief that may ensue.

But if the seller shall use art to cover the defects of his commodity, that so
he may deceive the buyer in his judgment of the thing bargained for, or shall
mix faulty wares with sound, that they may pass undiscovered, he is more
faulty then his wares, and makes an ill bargain for his soul. In this,
shortly, and in all other cases that concern trade, these universal rules
must take place. That it is not lawful for a Christian chapman to thrive by
fraud. That he may sell upon no other terms then he could wish to buy. That
his profit must be regulated by his conscience, not his conscience by his
profit. That he is bound either to prevent the buyers wrong; or if heedlesly
done, to satisfy it. That he ought rather to affect to be honest, then rich:
And lastly, that as he is a member of a community both civil and Christian, he
ought to be tender of another man's indemnity no less then of his own.

CASE IV.
Whether may I sell my commodities the dearer for giving days of payment?

THere is no great difference betwixt this case, and that of loan, which is
formerly answered; save that there money is let, here commodities money-worth;
here is a sale, there a lending; in the one a transferring of the right and
command for the time; in the other perpetually: but the substance both of the
matter and question is the same; for in both there seems to be a valuation of
time: which whether in case of mutuation, or sale, may justly be suspected for
unlawful.

For answer;

There are three stages of prices acknowledged by all Casuists; the highest,
which they are wont to call Rigorous; the mean, and the lowest; If these keep
within due bounds, though the highest be hard, yet it is not unjust, and if the
lowest be favorable, yet it is not always necessary.

If then you shall proportion but a just price to the time, and worth of your
bargain, so as the present shall pass for the easiest price, some short time
for the mean, and the longer delay for the highest, I see not wherein, all
things considered, you do offend.

And certainly to debar the contract of a moderate gain for the delay of
payment upon months prefixed, were to destroy all trade of merchandise: For
not many buyers are furnished with ready money to buy their wares, at the Port;
nor could the sellers make off their commodities so seasonably, as to be ready
for further trafique, if they must necessarily be tied to wait upon the hopes
of a pecuniary sale; and not left to the common liberty of putting them over to
wholesale men upon trust; who upon a second trust distribute them to those,
that vent them by retaile, both for days agreed upon: By which means the trade
holds up, and the commonwealth enjoyes the benefit of a convenient and
necessary commerce.

A practice that is now so habituated amongst all nations into the course of
trade, that it cannot well consist without it: So as nothing is more ordinary
in experience then that those who are able to pay down ready money for their
wares, know to expect a better pennyworth, then those that run upon trust:
And there may be just reason for this difference; For the present money
received enables the seller to a further improvement of his stock, which lies
for the time dead in the hands that take day for their payment.

So then, it is not mere time that is here set to sale, which were odious in
any Christian to bargain for; but there are two incidents into this practice
which may render it not unwarrantable. The one is the hazard of the sum
agreed upon: which too often comes short in the payment: whiles those
subordinate chapmen into whose hands the gross sum is scattered, turn
bankrupts, and forfait their trust; so as no small loss is this way commonly
sustained by the confident seller; in which regard we are wont to say justly,
that One bird in the hand is worth two in the wood. The other is the cessation
of that gain which the merchant might in the mean time have made of the sum
differred; which might in likelihood have been greater then the proportion of
the raised price can amount unto; to which may be added the foreseen
probability of the raising of the market in the intervall of payment: the
profit whereof is precluded by this means to the seller; whose full engagement
takes him off perhaps from a resolution to have reserved those commodities in
his own hands in expectation of an opportunity of a more profitable utterance,
had not the forwardness of the buyer importuned a prevention.

Upon these considerations, if they be serious, and unfeigned; I see not why you
may not in a due and moderate proportion, difference your prices according to
the delays of payment, without any oppression to the buyer: Howbeit, if any
man pleases to be so free, as to take no notice of time, but to make future
days in his account, present, I shall commend his charity, though I dare not
press his example as necessary.

The case is equally just on the behalf of the seller: who if he be either
driven by some emergent necessity; or drawn by the opportunity of a more
gainful bargain, to call for his money before his day, may justly be required
by the late buyer, to abate of the returnable sum, in regard of the
prevention of the time covenanted; by reason of the inconvenience or loss
whereunto he is put upon the sudden revocation of that money, which is not by
agreement payable till the expiration of the time prefixed. But what quantity
is to be allowed on the one part, or defalked on the other, is only to be
moderated by Christian Charity, and that universal rule of doing what we would
be willing to suffer.

CASE V.
Whether, and how far, Monopolies are, or may be lawful.

THe most famous Monopoly that we find in history is that of Egypt, Genesis 41.
56, 57. wherein the provident Patriarch Joseph, out of the foresight of a
following dearth, bought up the seven years grain for Pharaoh, and laid it up
in public storehouses; and in the general scarcity sold it out to the
inhabitants, and strangers, with no small advantage; which was so far from
unlawful, as that he thereby merited the name of the Savior of Egypt: So the
Vulgar renders Zapnath-paaneah Salvator mundi, Genesis 41. 45.
and if any worthy Patriot out of a like providence, shall beforehand gather
up the commodities of his country into a public Magazine for the common
benefit and relief of the people, upon the pinch of an ensuing necessity, he
is so far out of the reach of censure, as that he well deserves a statue with
the Inscription of Public Benefactor; So as it is not the mere act of
Monopolizing that makes the thing unlawful, but the ground and intention, and
the manner of carriage.

All Monopolies, as they are usually practiced, are either such as are allowed
by Sovereign authority, or privately contrived by secret plot and convention
for a peculiar gain to some special persons. If the first, it must be
considered upon what reason that privilege is granted, and upon what terms;
If both these be just, the grant can be no other. For first, it may not be
denied, that supreme authority, whether of Princes or States, has power to
grant such privileges where they shall find just cause; and secondly, that
there may be very just motives of granting them to some capable and worthy
persons; I should be a shamed to imagine that either of these should need any
probation.

Doubtless then, there is manifest equity that where there has been some
great merit, or charge, or danger in the compassing of some notable work for a
common good, the undertaker should be rewarded with a patent of a secured
profit to himself. As put case some wel-minded Printer (as one of the
Stephens) is willing to be at an excessive charge in the fair publication of a
learned and useful work for the benefit of the present and following ages; it
is most just that he should from the hands of Princes or States receive a
Privilege for the sole impression; that he may recover, with advantage, the
deep expense he has been at; Otherwise some Interloper may perhaps underhand
fall upon the work at a lower rate, and undo the first editor; whose industry,
care and cost shall thus be recompensed with the ruin of himself and his
posterity; as were too easy to instance.

If a man have by notable dexterity of wit, and art; and much labor and charge
after many experiments, atained to the skill of making some rare engine of
excellent use for the service of his Prince and Country, as some singular
water work; or some beneficial instrument for the freeing of navigable rivers
from their sandy obstructions, it is all the reason in the world, that by the
just bounty of Princes he should be so far remunerated as that he alone may
receive a patent of enjoying a due profit of his own invention.

But how far it may be lawful for a Prince not only to gratify a
well-deserving Subject, with the sea of his own devise, but with a profit
arising from the sole sale of marketable commodities through his Kingdom; or
whether, and how far in the want of moneys for the necessary service of his
State, he may for the public use, raise, set, or sell monopolies of that
kind, is diversely agitated by Casuists; and must receive answer according to
the absoluteness or limitation of those Governments, under which they are
practiced: But with this, that where this is done, there may be great care had
of a just price to be set upon the commodities so restrained, that they be not
left to the lawless will of a privileged engrosser, nor heightened to an undue
rate by reason of a particular indulgence.

This may be enough for authoritative Monopolies. The common sort of offensive
practices this way are private and single, or conventionall, and plotted by
combination; The former, as when some covetous extortioner out of the strength
of his purse buys up the whole lading of the ship, that he may have the sole
power of the wares to sell them at pleasure, which, there is no fear but he
will do with rigor enough: The true judgment of which action, and the degrees
of the malignity of it, must be fetched, as from the mind, so from the
management of the buyer; as being so much more sinful, as it partakes more of
oppression. The latter, when some brethren in evil conspire to prevent the
harvest, to buy up, or hoord up the grain; with a purpose to starve the
market, and to hatch up a dearth: A damnable practice in both kinds; and that
which has of old been branded with a curse; neither less full of injustice
then uncharitableness; and that which cries aloud, for a just punishment, and
satisfactory restitution.

I cannot therefore but marvel at the opinion of learned Lessius (which he
fathers also upon Molina) that too favorably minces the heinousness of this
sin; bearing us in hand that it is indeed an offense against charity, and
common profit, but not against particular Justice. His reason: To buy that
corn (says he) could not be against justice, for he bought it at the current
price: Nor yet to sell it, could be against justice, because he was not tied
out of justice at that time to bring it forth to sale: When he might easily
have considered, that it is not the mere act of buying, or of not selling, that
in it self is accused for unjust; but to buy, or not to sell, with an
intention, and issue of oppressing others, and undue enriching themselves by a
dearth. For what can be more unjust then for a man to endeavor to raise himself
by the affamishing of others?

Neither can it serve his turn to say, by way of excuse, that the multitude of
buyers may be the cause of a dearth, and yet without sin; since they do rather
occasion, then cause a scarcity; and are so far from intending a dearth in
making their market, that they deprecate it, as their great affliction.

And if, by his own confession, those who either by force, or fraud hinder the
importation of corn, that a dearth may continue, are guilty of injustice, and
are bound to make restitution both to the Commonwealth in giving cause to raise
the price; as also to the Merchant, whom they have hindered, of his meet gain;
how can those be liable to a less sin, or punishment, that either buy up, or
wilfully keep in, their grain with a purpose to begin, and hold on a dearth?
and what less can it be then force or fraud, that by their crafty and cruel
prevention the poor are necessitated to want that sustenance, whereby their
life should be maintained?

Wise Solomon shall shut up this Scene for me. He that withholds corn, the
People shall curse him, but blessings shall be upon the head of him that
sells it. Prove. 11. 26.

CASE VI.
Whether, and how far does a fraudulent bargain bind me to performance?

HOw far in matter of law, you must advise with other Counsel, but for matter
of conscience, take this:

Is the fraud actively yours, done by you to another? or else passively put by
another upon you? If the former, you are bound to repent and satisfy; either
by recinding the match, or by making amends for the injury: If the latter;
wherein did the fraud lie? If in the maine substance of the thing sold, the
bargain is both by the very law of nature, and in conscience, void; yea
indeed, none at all: as if a man have sold you copper lace for gold; or
alchymie-plate for silver; the reason is well given by Lessius l. 2. c. 17.
dub. 5.
Casuists: There is no bargain without a consent; and here is no consent at
all, whiles both parties pitch not upon the same subject; the buyer propounds
to himself gold and silver, the seller obtrudes copper, and Alchymie; the one
therefore not buying what the other pretended to sell, here is no bargain
made, but a mere act of cozenage, justly liable to punishment by all laws of
God and man. But if the fraud were only in some circumstances; as in some
faulty condition of the thing sold not before discerned; or in the overprizing
of the commodity bought; the old rule is, Caveat emptor; You must (for ought I
know) hold you to your bargain; but if that faulty condition be of so high a
nature that it marres the commodity, and makes it useless to the buyer, the
seller (being conscious of the fault) is injurious in the transaction, and is
bound in conscience to make satisfaction; and if he have willingly over-reacht
you in the price, in a considerable proportion is guilty of oppression.

It is very memorable in this kind that Cicero relates to us of a fraudulent
bargain betwixt Cicer. de Offic. l. 3. Sect. 58.
Canius, a Roman Knight and Orator, and one Pythius a Banker of Syracuse.
Canius coming upon occasion of pleading to the city of Syracuse, took a great
liking to the place; and settling there, gave out that he had a great desire to
buy some one of those pleasant gardens, wherewith, it seems, that city
abounded; that he might there recreate himself when he pleased, with his
friends.

Pythius a crafty merchant hearing of it, sends word to Canius, that he had a
fair garden which he had no mind to sell; but if he pleased to make use of it
for his solace, he might command it as his own; and withal courteously
invites Canius to sup with him there the day following: In the mean time being
a man by reason of his trade of exchange, very gracious in the city, he calls
the fishermen together, and desires them that the next evening they would fish
in the stream before his garden, and bring him, what they shall have caught;
Canius in due time comes according to the invitation, to supper; where there
was delicate provision made for him by Pythius; and store of boats bringing in
their plentiful draughts of fish, and casting them down at the feet of
Pythius: Canius asks the meaning of this concourse of Fishermen, and store of
proffered provision? Pythius tells him this is the commodity and privilege of
the place, if Syracuse yield any fish, here it is caught, and here tendered;
Canius believing the report, importunes his host to sell him the ground: the
owner after some seeming loathnesse, and squeamish reluctation, at last yields
to gratify him with the bargain: The dear price is paid down with much
eagerness. The new master of the place, in much pride of his purchase, the
next day repaires early to his garden, invites his friends to a friday feast;
and finding no boat there, asks the neighbor whether it were holiday with the
fishermen, that he saw none of them there; No, said the good man, none that I
know; but none of the trade use to fish here; and I much marvailed at the
strange confluence of their boats here yesterday: The Roman Orator was down in
the mouth; finding himself thus cheated by the money-changer: but, for ought I
see, had his amends in his hands; He meant, and desired to buy the place,
though without any such accommodation; but over-bought it upon the false
pretense of an appendent commodity; the injury was the sellers, the loss must
be the buyers.

But if such be the case, that you are merely drawn in by the fraud, and would
not have bought the commodity at all, if you had not been induced by the
deceit, and false oaths and warrants of the seller, you have just reason,
either, if you may, to fall off from the bargain; or, if the matter be
valuable, to require a just satisfaction from the seller; who is bound in
conscience either by annulling the bargain, or abatement of price to make good
your indemnity.

In these matters of contract there is great reason to distinguish betwixt a
willing deceit, and an involuntary wrong; If a man shall fraudulently sell an
horse which he knows secretly and incurably diseased, to another for sound;
and that other, believing the sellers deep protestation, shall upon the same
price, bona fide, put him off to me; I feel my self injured, but whither shall
I go for an amends? I cannot challenge the immediate seller, for he deceived me
not; I cannot challenge the deceiver, for he dealt not with me; In humane
laws, I am left remediless; but in the law of conscience, the first seller,
who ought to have born his own burden of an inevitable loss, is bound to
transfer by the hands that sold me that injurious bargain, a due
satisfaction.

Neither is it other of fraudulent conveyances in the houses or land, how ever
the matter may be intricated by passing through many perhaps unknowing hands,
yet the sin and obligation to satisfaction, will necessarily lie at the first
door; whence if just restitution do not follow, the seller may purchase Hell
to boot.

Think not now on this discourse that the only fraud is in selling; there may
be no less (though not so frequent) fraud in buying also; whether in unjust
payment, by false coin; or by injustice of quantities, as in buying by
weights, or measures above allowance; or by wrong valuation of the substance
and quality of the commodity, misknown by the seller; As for instance, A simple
man, as I have known it done in the Western parts, finds a parcel of
Ambergris cast upon the sands; he perceiving it to be some unctuous matter,
puts it to the base use of his shoes, or his cart wheel; a merchant that smells
the worth of the stuff buys it of him for a small sum; giving him a
shilling or two, for that which himself knows to be worth twenty pounds: the
bargain is fraudulent; and requires a proportionable compensation to the
ignorant seller, into whose hands providence has cast so rich a booty.

Shortly, in all these intercourses of trade, that old and just rule which had
wont to sway the trafique of heathens, must much more take place amongst
Christians, (cum bonis been agier) that honest men must be honestly dealt with:
and therefore that all fraud must be banished out of their markets; or, if it
dares to intrude, soundly punished; and mulcted with a due satisfaction.

CASE VII.
How far, and when am I bound to make restitution of another man's goods
remaining in my hands?

REstitution is a duty no less necessary, then rarely practiced amongst
Christians. The Arch-publican Zacheus knew that with this he must begin his
conversion; and that known rule of Saint Austen Aug. epist. 54. ad Macedon.
is in every man's mouth, No remission without restitution. For this act is no
small piece of commutative Justice; which requires that every man should have
his own: Most just therefore it is, that what you have taken, or detained from
the true owner should be restored; neither can it be sufficient, that you have
conceived a dry and bootlesse sorrow for your wrongful detention, unless you
also make amends to him by a real compensation.

But you are disabled to make restitution by reason of want, your will is good,
but the necessity into which you are fallen, makes you incapable of
performance: See first, that it be a true, and not fained necessity; Many a
one, like to lewd criples that pretend false soars, counterfeit a need that is
not, and shelter themselves in a willing Jaile, there living merrily upon their
defrauded creditor, whom they might honestly satisfy by a well improved
liberty: This case is damnably unjust; but if it be a true necessity of Gods
making, it must excuse you for the time; till the same hand that did cast you
down, shall be pleased to raise you up again; then, you are bound to satifie;
and in the mean time, lay the case truly before your creditor, who if he be
not merciless, where he sees a real desire, and endeavor of satisfaction,
will imitate his God in accepting the will for the deed: and wait patiently for
the recovery of your estate.

You ask now, to whom you should tender restitution?

To whom, but the owner? But he, you say, is dead; That will not excuse you; he
lives still in his heirs; It is memorable (though in a small matter) which
Seneca reports of a Pythagorean Philosopher at Athens, who having run upon the
score for his shoos at a shop there; hearing that the shoemaker was dead, at
first was glad to think the debt was now paid; but straight recollecting
himself, he says within himself; Yet, howsoever, the shoemaker lives still to
thee, though dead to others; and thereupon puts his money into the shop, as
supposing that both of them would find an owner. It is a rare case that a man
dies, and leaves no body in whom his right survives: But if there be neither
heir, nor executor, nor administrator, nor assign; the poor (says our
Savior) ye shall have always with you; Make thou them his heir: Turn your
debt into alms.

Obj. But alas you say; I am poor my self, what need I then look forth for any
other? Why may not I employ my restitution to the relief of my own necessity?

Sol. It is dangerous, and cannot be just for a man to be his own carver
altogether in a business of this nature; You must look upon this money, as no
more yours then a strangers; and howsoever it be most true that every man is
nearest to himself, and has reason to wish to be a sharer, where the need is
equal; yet it is fit this should be done with the knowledge and approbation of
others: Your Pastor, and those other that are by authority interessed in these
public cares, are fit to be acquainted with the case; (if it be in a matter
meet to be notified) as a business of debt or pecuniary engagement let their
wisdom proportion the distribution; But if it be in the case of some secret
crime, as of theft, or cozenage, which you would keep as close as your own
heart, the restitution must be charged upon your conscience to be made with so
much more impartiality, as you desire it more to be concealed; Herein have a
care of your soul, what ever becomes of your estate.

As for the time of restitution it is easily determined, that it cannot well be
too soon for the discharge of your conscience, it may be too late for the
occasions of him to whom it is due; Although it may fall out that it may prove
more fit to defer for the good of both: wherein charity and justice must be
called in as arbitrators; The owner calls for his money in a riotous humor to
misspend it upon his unlawful pleasure; if your delay may prevent the
mischief, the forbearance is an act of mercy: The owner calls for a sword
deposited with you, which you have cause to suspect he means to make use of,
for some ill purpose; your forbearing to restore it is so both charitable and
just, that your act of delivery of it may make you accessory to a murder.
Whereto I may add, that in the choice of the time, you may lawfully have some
respect to your self; for if the present restitution should be to your utter
undoing, which may be avoided by some reasonable delay, you have no reason to
shun another inconvenience by your own inevitable ruin; in such case let the
creditor be acquainted with the necessity, his offense deprecated; and rather
put your self upon the mercy of a Chancery, then be guilty of your own
overthrow.

But when the power is in your hand, and the coast every way clear, let not
another man's goods or money stick to your fingers; and think not that your
head can long lie easily upon another man's pillow.

Yea, but you say the money or goods mis-carried, either by robbery or false
trust, ere you could employ them to any profit at all; This will not excuse
you; after they came into your power, you are responsible for them; What
compassion this may work in the good nature of the owner for the favor of an
abatement, must be left to his own breast; your tie to restitution is not the
less; For it is supposed, had they remained in the owners hands they had been
safe; if it were not your fault, yet it was your cross, that they miscarried;
and who should bear your cross but your self?

Shortly then, after all pretenses of excuse; the charge of wise Solomon must
be obeyed: VVith-hold not good from the owners thereof, when it is in the power
of thine hand to do it, Prove. 3. 17.

CASE VIII.
Whether, and how far does a promise extorted by fear, though seconded by an
oath, bind my conscience to performance?

A Mere promise is an honest man's strong obligation; but if it be withal backed
with an oath, the bond is sacred, and inviolable.

But let me ask you what promise it is that you thus made, and bound; If it be
of a thing unlawful to be done, your promise and oath is so far from binding
you to performance, that it binds you only to repentance that ever you made
it; In this case your performancee would double and heighten your sin: It was
ill to promise, but it would be worse to perform: Herod is by oath engaged for
an indefinite favor to Salome; She pitches upon John Baptist's head; He was
sorry for such a choice, yet for his oaths sake he thinks he must make it good:
Surely, Herod was ill-principled, that he could think a rash oath must bind him
to murder an innocent; He might have truly said, this was more then he could
do; for that we can do, which we can lawfully do.

But if it be a lawful thing that you have thus promised, and sworn; though
the promise were unlawfully drawn from you by fear, I dare not persuade you to
violate it. It is true that diverse learned Casuists hold, that a promise drawn
from a man by fear is void, or at least revocable at pleasure; and so also the
oath annexed, which follows the nature of the act whereto it appends; chiefly
upon this ground; that both these are done without consent, mere involuntary
acts, since nothing can be so contrary to consent as force and fear: But I
dare not go along with them; for that I apprehend there is not an absolute
involuntarinesse in this engagement, but a mixed one; such as the Arist. Eth. l.
2. c. 2.
Philosopher determines in the Mariner, that casts his goods over board to save
his life; in it self, he has no will to do it; but here and now upon this
danger imminent, he has an halfe-will to perform it.

Secondly, I build upon their own ground; There is the same reason, they say,
of force, and of fraud; now that a promise and oath drawn from us by fraud
binds strongly, we need no other instance then that of Joshua made to the
Gibeonites; there could not be a greater fraud then lay hid in the old shoes,
threadbare garments, rent bottles, and moldy provisions of those borderers;
who under the pretense of a remote nation put themselves under the interest and
protection of Israel: Josh. 9. 12, 13. etc. the guile soon proved apparent,
yet durst not Joshua, though he found himself cheated into this covenant, fall
off from the league made with them; which when, after many ages, Saul out of
politic ends went about to have broken, we see how fearfully it was avenged
with a grievous plague of famine upon Israel, even in David's days, 2 Samuel 21.
1. who was no way accessory to the oppression; neither could be otherwise
expiated then by the bleeding of Readiness bloody house. When once we have
interessed God in the business, it is dangerous not to be punctual in the
performance. If therefore a bold thief taking you at an advantage have set his
dagger to your breast, and with big oaths threatened to stab you unless you
promise and swear to give him an hundred pounds to be left on such a day in
such a place for him, I see not how (if you be able) you can dispense with the
performance; the only help is, (which is well suggested by Lessius de Jure,
etc. l. 2. C. 42. dub. 6.
Lessius) that nothing hinders why you may not, when you have done, call for it
back again, as unjustly extorted. And truly, we are beholden to the Jesuit
for so much of a real equivocation: why should you not thus right your self,
since you have only tied your self to a mere payment of the sum? upon
staking it down for him, you are free. But if he have forced you to promise,
and swear not to make him known, you are bound to be silent in this act,
concerning your self; but withal, if you find that your silence may be
prejudicial to the public good, for that you perceive the licentiousness of
the offender proceeds (and is like so to do) to the like mischief unto
others, you ought, though not to accuse him for the fact done unto you; yet to
give warning to some in authority to have a vigilant eye upon so lewd a person,
for the prevention of any further villainy.

But if it be in a business, whose peril rests only in your self, the
matter being lawful to be done; your promise and oath (though forced from you)
must hold you close to performance, notwithstanding the inconveniences that
attend. If therefore you are dismissed upon your Parole, for a certain time,
to return home, and dispose of your affairs, and then to yield your self
again prisoner to an enemy; the obligation is so strict and firm, that no
private respects may take it off: and it should be a just shame to you that a
Attilius Regulus.
Pagan should out of common honesty hold himself bound to his word, (not
without the danger of torment and death) when you that are a Christian slip
away from your oath.

CASE IV.
Whether those moneys or goods which I have found, may be safely taken and
kept by me to my own use.

IT is well distinguished by Sotus out of Aquinas Dom. Sot. de Jure et Justit.
l. 5. q. 3. page 436.
, that those things which may be found, are either such as call no man master,
as some pearl, or precious stone, or Ambergris lying upon the shore; or such as
have an owner, but unknown to us, or (as we may add, to make up the number
complete) such as whose owner we know. Where the true owner is known, speedy
restitution must follow; otherwise the detention is in the next door to theft;
Where the commodity found has no owner, it justly falls to the right of the
first finder; for both the place and the thing are masterlesse, (adespota) and
common; offering themselves to the next commer: The only difficulty is in
those things which have an unknown owner: And certainly common justice and
honesty suggests to us, that we may not seize on commodities of this kind, as
absolutely our own; the casualty of their mis-laying does not alter their
propriety; they are still his that lost them; though out of his sight, yet not
out of his right; and even natural Justice, would give every man his own. The
Laws both Civil and Canon, and Municipall do sufficiently guide our practice
in many particular cases. of this nature, and our Conscience must lead us to
follow them: If they be quick commodities, as horses, sheep, kine, and the
like, (which we call Waives and Strayes) every one knows they are to be
publicly impounded, that upon search the owner may be the surer to find them;
and if he come not in, the sooner, to be openly cried in several markets, that
the noise of his own neglected goods may come to his care: and if, upon a
continuing silence, they be put into the Custody of the Lord of the Manor,
(who is most likely to be responsible) and he shall make use of them, before
his year and day be expired, he shall not do it without some mark of
distinction, that yet the true owner may know, they are not challenged by the
present possessour, as his own, but lie open to the just claim of their true
master.

But if they be dead commodities, as a jewel, a purse, or some ring of price,
or the like, the finder may not presently smother up the propriety of it in his
own coser; his heart tells him that the mere accident of his finding it,
cannot alienate the just right of it from the true owner; he is therefore bound
in conscience, in an honest sincerity to use all good means for the finding out
of the right proprietary, whether by secret inquiry, or open publication: and
if after due inquisition, no claim shall be made to it for the present, he
shall reserve it in his hand in expectation of a just challenge: upon the
assurance whereof (how late soever) he is bound to restore it to the proper
owner: who, on the other side, shall fail in his duty of gratitude, if he
return not some meet acknowledgment of that good office, and fidelity: In all
which mutual carriages, we ought to be guided by those respects which we could
wish tendered to our selves in the like occasions. Mean while, in all the time
of our custody, we are to look upon those commodities as strangers; making
account of such a potentiall right only in them, as we are ready and desirous
to resign to the hands that purchased and lost them. On the contrary, no words
can express the horrible cruelty and injustice that is wont to be done in this
kind, not only on our shores, but in other nations also, upon the
ship-wracked goods both of strangers, and our own compatriots; whiles in stead
of compassioning and relieving the loss, and miseries of our distressed
brethren, every man is ready to run upon the spoil, and, as if it were from
some plundered enemy, is eagerly busy in carrying away what riches soever come
to hand, which they falsely, and injuriously term Gods Grace, when as indeed it
is no other then the Devils booty. This practice can pass for no other then a
mere robbery, so much more heinous, as the condition of the mis-carried owner
is more miserable: What a foul inhumanity is this, to persecute him whom God
has smitten; and upon no other quarrel to be cruel to our brother, then
because the Sea has been merciless? Dear countrymen, ye especially of the
West, leave these abominable pillages to savage Nations, that know not God;
and, putting on the bowels of tender compassion, lend your best succor rather
for the rescue of poor wracked souls, and safely preserving that small
residue of their drowned freight, which you cannot imagine that the Sea has
therefore forborne to swallow, that you might.

CASE X.
Whether I may lawfully buy those goods which I shall strongly suspect, or know
to be stolen or plundered; or, if I have ignorantly bought such goods, whether
I may lawfully (after knowledge of their owner) keep them as mine.

TO buy those goods which you know, or have just cause to suspect to be stolen
or plundered, is no better then to make your self accessory to the theft; if
you do it with an intention to possess them as your own; for what do you
else herein, but ex-post-facto partake with that thief, who stole them; and
encourage him in his lewd practices? since according to the old word; If there
were no receivers, there would be no thieves. Neither will it serve the turn,
that in the case of plunder, there may seem a pretense of justice, in that
this is pleaded perhaps to be done by some color of authority; for certainly
where there is not law, there can be no justice, whereof law is the only rule:
Whatever then is against an established Law, in matter of right and possession,
can be no other then unjust; Take heed therefore lest that heavy challenge of
the Almighty be (upon this bargain) charged upon you; Psalm. 50. 18. When thou
saw a thief, thou consentedst with him: These stolen waters may be sweet in
the mouth, but they will be poison in the maw, and like the water of a just
jealousy, rottenness to the belly: But if (as these ill-gotten goods are
lightly cheap penny-worths) you buy them only with an intention to gratify
the true owner, with an easy purchase of his own, (which would perhaps else
be unrecoverable) (whiles your profession it do it for no other end takes off
the scandal) I cannot but allow your act, and commend your charity.

But if, making use of that rule which Saint Paul gives for meat, in bargaining
for any other commodities, you shall extend your liberty to whatsoever is sold
in the market, and shall in the exercise of that freedom upon a just and
valuable consideration ignorantly buy those goods which you afterward hear,
and know, to be another, the contract is on your part valid, and faultlesse,
since your invincible want of knowledge acquits you from any guilt of consent;
but withal, there is an after-game to be played by you: you are bound (upon
just notice) to acquaint the true owner with the matter, and to profer your
self ready to join with him in the prosecution of law, or justice upon the
offender, and upon a meet satisfaction to tender him his own.

But if the theft be only upon probability; and it be doubtful whether the
goods belong to the owner notified to you, your duty is to make diligent
inquiry into the business; and if upon due inquisition, you find too much
likelihood of the theft, I dare not advise you (with some Casuists) to reverse
the bargain, and to return the commodity to those false hands that purloyned
it; but rather to call the probable owner, and with him to appeal unto just
authority, for a more full examination of the right, and an award answerable to
justice: but if there appear no good grounds for an impeachment, you may
peaceably sit down in the possession, till further evidence may convince your
judgment in the contrary.

RESOLUTIONS. The second Decade. Cases of Life and Liberty.
CASE I.
Whether, and in what cases it may be lawful for a man to take away the life
of another.

HOw light a matter soever it may seem to the world now long soaked in blood, a
man's life is most precious; and may not (but upon the waightiest of all causes)
be either taken, or given away. The great God has reserved to himself this
prerogative, to be the only absolute Lord of it; neither can any creature have
power to command it, but those only to whom he has committed it by special
deputation; nor they neither, by any independent or illimited authority; but
according as it is regulated by just laws: to call for a man's life merely out
of will, is no other then a Turkish tyranny.

Now the same God that has ordained Sovereign powers to judge of, and protect
the life of others, has given weighty charge to every man to tender and manage
his own: which binds him to use all just means for his own preservation;
although it should be the necessitated destruction of another.

Let us see therefore how far and in what cases, man, that is always appointed
to be master of his own life, may be also master of another man's.

That public justice may take away the life of heinous malefactors, is
sufficiently known, to be not lawful only, but required; and indeed so
necessary, that without it there were no living at all amongst men.

That in a just war the life of an open enemy may be taken away, is no less
evident; the only question is of private men in their own cases.

And here we need not doubt to say that even a private man, being mortally
assaulted, may in his own defense lawfully kill another; I suppose the assault
mortal, when both the weapon is deadly, and the fury of the assailant
threatens death; as for some slight and sudden passages of a swich, or a
cane, they come not under this consideration, although those small affronts
offered to eminent persons prove oftentimes to be quarrels no less then
mortal. But even in these assaults, (except the violence be so too impetuous,
that it will admit of neither parle nor pause) there ought to be (so much as
may consist with our necessary safety) a tender regard and endeavor to avoid the
spilling of blood; but if neither persuasion, nor the shifting (what we may)
our station, can abate any thing of the rage of the assailer, death must; Yea,
if not my brother only, but my father, or my son should in this forcible
manner set upon me, howsoever I should hazard the award of some blows; and
with tears beg a for bearance, yet, if there would be no remedy, nature must
pardon me; no man can be so near me as my self.

I cannot therefore, subscribe to the counsel of Les. de. jur. etc. l. 2. c.
9. dubit. 8. Ex Antonio et Sylvestr. etc.
Leonardus Lessius (abetting some ancient Casuists, and pretended to be
countenanced by some Fathers) that it were meet for Clericall and Religious
persons rather to suffer death then to kill a murderer: since no reason can be
showed, why their life should not be as dear to them as others; or why they
should be exempted from the common law of nature; or why their sacred hands
should be more stained with the foul blood of a wicked manslayer, justly
shed, then any others. I am sure Phineas thought not so; nor Samuel after him;
and (which is most of all) that the honor and privileges of the sons of Levi
were both procured, and feoffed on them upon an enjoined blood shed.

Ibid. paragr. ult.
Only here is the favor and mercy of that learned Casuist, that Clerks and
Votaries are not always bound rather to dye, then kill: for, says he, if such
religious person should bethink himself, that he is in a deadly sin, and
should thereupon fear that he should be damned, if he were killed in that
woeful and desperate estate; he were then bound by all means to defend
himself, and to prefer the safety of his own soul, before the life of
another: As if nothing but the fear of damnation could warrant a man for his
own safeguard; as if nothing but the danger of hell could authorize an holy
person to be his own guardian; as if the best of lives were so cheap and
worthless, that they might be given away for nothing: whereas contrarily
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of all his Saints. Psalm. 116.
But in such a case (according to the opinion of this great Less. ibid.
Casuist) charity to our selves does not more arm and enforce our hand, then
charity to our neighbor holds it, and binds it up: We may not kill lest the
man slayer dying in the attempt of this murder, should everlastingly perish:
Surely, I cannot but admire this unreasonable mercy in a father of the Society;
Where was this consideration when so many thousands of innocent persons were
doomed to be blown up in a state of impenitence; whose unrepented heresy must
needs have sent them up instantly to their hell?

By this reason, a malefactor if he be obdured in his sin, and professes to be
remorslesse, may not feel the stroke of Justice. Shortly then, if a man will
needs be wicked to my destruction, the evil is his own; let him bear his
own guilt, let me look to my own indemnity.

The case is yet more difficult where the attempt is not upon my person, but my
goods; if a man will be offering to rob my house, or to take my purse, what
may I do do in this case? Surely, neither charity, nor justice can dissuade
me from resisting; the laws of God and man will allow me to defend my own;
and if in this resistance the thief, or Burglayer miscarry, his blood will be
upon his own head: although in the mean time, charity forbids that this
slaughter should be first in my intention; which is primarily bent upon my own
safety, and the vindication of my own just propriety: the blood that follows
is but the unwilling attendant of my defense: of the shedding whereof, God is
so tender, that he ordained it only to be inoffensively done in a nightly
robbery; Exodus 22. 2. where the purpose of the thief is likely to be more
murtherous, and the act more incapable of restitution.

What then if the thief, after his robbery done, ceasing any further danger of
violence, shall betake himself to his heels, and run away with my money? In
such a case, if the sum be so considerable, as that it much imports my
estate, how ever our Municipall laws may censure it (with which, of old, even
as killing ( Dalton p. 244.
se defendendo) was no less then felony of death) my conscience should not
strike me if I pursue him with all might, and in hot chase so strike him, as
that by this means I disable him from a further escape, for the recovery of my
own; and if hereupon his death shall follow, however I should pass with men,
God and my own heart would acquit me.

Neither doubt I to say the like may be done upon a forcible attempt of the
violation of the Chastity of either sex: A case long ago adjudged by the
doom of nature it self in Marius the General of the Roman army (as Orat.
pro. Mil.
Cicero tells us) clearly acquiting a young man for killing a Colonel that
would have forced him in this kind.

But I may not assent to Bann. q. 64. a. 7. dub. 9. Navar. l. 2. c. 3. Lessius
l. 2. de Jure, etc. c. 9. dub. 8.
Djominicus Bannez, Retrus Navarrus, and Cajetan, (though grave authors) who
hold, that if a man go about upon false and deadly criminations to suborne
witnesses against me, to accuse me to a corrupted Judge, with a purpose to
take away my life, in a color of justice, if I have no other way to avoid the
malice, I may lawfully kill him: It were a woeful and dangerous case, if every
man might be allowed to crave himself of justice; Mere accusations are no
convictions; How know I what God may work for me on the Bench, or at the bar
to what evidence he may raise to clear me? what confusion, or contradiction he
may cause in the mouths of the hired witnesses? what change he may work in
the Judge; what interposition of higher powers? There is a providence in this
case to be relied upon; which can and will bring about his own holy purposes,
without our presumptuous, and unwarrantable undertakings.

CASE II.
Whether may I lawfully make use of a Duel for the deciding of my right, or
the vindication of my honor?

I have long ago spent my opinion upon this point, in a large epistolar
discourse, which I find no reason to alter: thither I might refer you to spare
my labor; but lest perhaps that should not be at hand; shortly thus:

The sword in a private hand was never ordained to be a decider of any
controversies, save this one, whether of the two is the better Fencer; nor yet
that always, since Eccles. 9. 11. The race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong; as Solomon has observed: It can be no better
therefore, then a more tempting of God, as Rodrig. Sum. cas. Tom. 1. cap. 73.
Rodriguez justly censures it, to put our selves, or our cause upon so
unwarranted a trial: I find but two practices of it in the records of
Scripture; the one, that famous challenge of Goliath, which that proud Philistim
had not made, if he had not presumed of his Giantly strength, and stature, so
utterly unmatchable by all Israel, 1. Sam. 17. 24. that the whole host was
ready to give back upon his appearance; he knew the advantage so palpable, that
none would dare to undertake the quarrel; and had still gone on to triumph
over that trembling army, had not Gods inexpected champion, by divine instinct
taken up the monster, and vanquished him, leaving all but his head, to bedung
that earth, which had lately shaken at his terror.

The other was in that mortal quarrel betwixt Joab and Abner, on the behalf
of their two Masters, David and Ishbosheth; 2 Samuel 2. 14. wherein Abner invites
his rival in honor, to a Tragical play, (as he terms it) a monomachie of
twelve single combatants on either part; which was so acted, that no man went
victor away from that bloody Theater; Only it is observable, that in both these
conflicts still the challengers had the worst.

In imitation of which latter, I cannot allow that which I find frequently done
in the managing of public hostility; that some confident Cavalier out of mere
bravery of spirit craves leave to put himself forth before both armies, and (as
in way of preface to an ensuing battle) bids defiance to any Antagonist; An
act of more valor then judgment; whereof the undertaking is void of warrant;
and the issue (lightly) of success: whiles it pleases God commonly to punish
prefumption with a foil; and the ominous miscarriage of one, proves a sad
discouragement to many.

And if single fortitude be not triable this way, much less Justice in causes
litigious; To make the sword arbiter of such differences, were no better then
to revive the old Ordalian trial used by our Heathen Ancestors: Since God has
no more ordained, nor promised to bless the one then the other; And reason it
self tells us, in how ill a condition that righteous cause is, which must be
carried by the sharpor weapon, the stronger arm, the skilfuller fencer.

Now whereas there are two acts, as introductions into the field, a Challenge,
and an Acceptance; both of them have their guilt, but the former so much more,
as it has in it more provocation to evil.

I cannot therefore but wonder at, and cry down the opinion of Bannez, and
Cajetan, that a man sclandered by an unjust accuser, may justly challenge him
the field, and vindicate himself by the sword; A doctrine, which if it were
allowed, and accordingly practiced, besides that it would destroy the course of
justice, and wrest revenge out of the hands of the Almighty, were enough to
make the world an Accldama; For who would not be his own Judge for the
Accusation; and his own Executioner for the revenge?

There may yyt seem more innocence in the Acceptance; which makes show of a
mere passive nature, and appears to be extorted by the insolence of a
provoking adversary, whose pressures are wont to receive such construction, as
that the challenged party refusing, upon what ground soever, is in the vulgar
opinion proclaimed for base and recreant; and I must needs confess, the
irritation diminishes the offense; but withal, how ever the Spanish and
Italian Casuists (whose Nations are wont to stand a little too highly upon the
points of a mis-called honor) are wont to pass fair interpretations of the
matter, I cannot but find it deeply guilty also: for what is this other, then a
consent to sin by engaging in blood; which by a man wise and conscionable might
be turned off with a just contempt, without imputation of cowardice: since the
plea of conscience is able to bear down the vain fancies of idle swordmen:
or, if that will not be taken, the false blurres that are cast upon a worthy
man's reputation by vulgar breath, deserve no entertainment but scorn; or
lastly, other means lie open to both parts for the proof of a questioned
valor, which in a lawful way the challenged is ready to embrace; he walks not
unprovided about the business of his calling, if he be fairly set upon, on
equal terms, he shall make no doubt to defend himself: But to make a formal
business of a quarrel, on either part, and to agree upon a bargain of
bloodshedding, is wicked and damnable; and though both should come fairly off,
yet the very intention to kill, is murder.

This case is so clear, that the Council of Conc. Tr. Sess. 25. Rodriguez.
Tom. 1. c. 73. de duello.
Trent has thought fit to denounce heavy sentences, and inflict sharp censures
upon Emperors, Kings, States, and Potentates that shall give allownce to duels
within their Dominions; pronouncing them ipso jure excommunicate; and depriving
them of those towns, cities, lands, (if held of the Church) where such
unlawful acts are made: And that those who either act, or patronize, and by
their presence assist, countenance, or abett such combats, shall incur the
sentence of excommunication, the loss of all their goods, and perpetual
infamy; and if they dye in such quarrel, shall, as selfe-murtherers, be
debarred the privilege of Christian burial.

Briefly therefore, neither your justice, nor your honor may depend upon the
point of private swords; and if there can be no other remedy, you must rather
suffer in either, then hazard your soul.

CASE III.
Whether may it be lawful, in case of extremity, to procure the abortion of
the child, for the preservation of the mother?

I Fear want of true judgment renders too many of the weaker sex grossly
culpable in matter of willing abortion; whiles, being not well principled
either in nature, or grace, they think it not unlawful, or at least, venially
so, whether out of the fear of painful childbirth, or for the avoidance of
too great a charge, to prevent the fullness of their conceptions; and
therefore, either by over-vehement motion, or unwholesome medicine, are not
unwilling to forest all nature, and to free themselves early of that which
might in time prove their burden: Wherein they little know how highly they
offend the Majesty of God in destroying his potentiall creature, and how heavy
weight of guilt they lay upon their souls, whiles they endeavor to give an
undue ease to their bodies.

Your question supposes an extremity; and surely such it had need to be, that
may warrant the intention of such an event.

For the deciding whereof, our Casuists are wont to distinguish double; both of
the state of the conception; and of the nature of the receipt: In the former;
they consider of the Conception, either as it is before it receive life, or
after that it is animated: Before it receive life, they are wont to determine,
that howsoever it were no less then mortal sin, in a Physician, to prescribe
a medicinal receipt to cause abortion, for the hiding of a sin, or any
outward secular occasion; yet for the preservation of the life of the mother,
in an extreme danger, (I say, before animation) it might be lawful: But after
life once received, it were an heinous sin to administer any such mortal
remedy. The latter Casuists are better advised; and justly hold that to give
any such expelling or destructive medicine, with a direct intention to work an
aborsement, (whether before, or after animation) is utterly unlawful, and
highly sinful: And with them I cannot but concur in opinion; For, after
conception we know that naturally follows animation, there is only the time
that makes the difference; which in this case is not so considerable, as to
take off a sin: That of Tertul. in Apol. c. 9.
Tertullian comes home to the point which both Covarruvias and Less. l. 2. c.
9. du. 10.
Lessius urge to this purpose: Homicidii festinatio est prohibere nasci; It is
but an hastening of murder to hinder that which would be borne; Homo est qui
futurus est; It is a man that would be so, etc.

Upon this ground we know that in a further degree of remoteness, a voluntary
selfe-pollution has ever been held to have so much guilt in it, as that
Angelus Politianus reports it as the high praise of Ne se pollueret, mavit ipse
mori. Ex Politiano Gerard. Voss. de orig. and progres. Idol. l. 3. c. 18.
Michael Verrinus, that he would rather die, then yield to it: how much more,
when there is a further progress made toward the perfection of humane life?

And if you tell me that the life of the mother might thus be preserved,
whereas otherwise both she and all the possibilities of further conceptions are
utterly lost; I must answer you with that sure and universal rule of the
Apostle, that we may not do evil that good may come thereon, Romans 3. 8.

The second consideration is of the nature of the receipt, and the intention of
the prescriber; There are prescripts that may, in, and of themselves tend
toward cure, and may have ordinarily such an effect; but yet being used and
applied for the mothers remedy, may prove the loss of the conception, being
yet inanimate; these if they be given with no other intention then the
preservation of the mothers life, may be capable of excuse; for that the
inconvenience (or mischief rather) which followed upon the receipts was
accidental, and utterly against the mind, and hopes of him that advised them.

But if the conception be once formed, and animated, the question will be so
much more difficult, as the proceedings of nature are more forward: Whereupon
it is, that the Septuagint in their Translation (as Lessius well observes) have
rendered that Mosaicall law (in Exodus 21.) concerning abortions, in these
terms. If a man strike a woman that is with child, and she make an abortion,
if the child were formed, he shall give his life for the life of the child; if
it were not formed, he shall be punished with a pecuniary mulct to her husband
Exodus 21. 22. The Septuagint seem to have taken (...) (death) for (...) a
diminutive of (...) a man: as Cornel. a Lapid. probably guesses.
: applying that to the issue, which the Vulgar Latin understands of the mother;
and making the supposition to be of a formation and life; which the Latin more
agreeably to the Original, makes to be Death; and our English, with Castal. Si
pernicies non fucrit: Ours, if no mischief follow.
Castalion expresses by Mischief: but whether the Mischief be meant of the
death of the mother, or of the late-living issue, the Scripture has not
declared: Cornel. a Lap. in Exodus 21.
Cornelius a Lapide taking it expressly of the mothers death, yet draws the
judgment out, in an equal length to the death of the child, once animated;
making no difference of the guilt; since the infants soul is of no less
worth, then hers that bears him.

In this case of the conception animated, I find the Casuists much divided;
Whiles some more tender then their fellows, will not allow in the utmost
extremity of a dying mother, a medicine that may be directly curative to be
given her, if it should be with any apparent danger of the child; in case that
the child may be probably drawn forth alive; which they do upon this false
and bloodily uncharitable ground, Vel. ut alii, Quorum animae certissime in
limbum descendunt sine Baptismo. Mart. Alphons. Viv. Explan. Bullae de abort.
that the child dying without Baptism, is liable to eternal damnation; which
woeful danger therefore the mother ought to prevent, though with the certain
hazard of her own life: but the foundation of this judgment being unsound,
(since to doom the children of believing Parents inevitably to hell for the
want of that which they are not possibly capable to receive, is too cruel and
horrible) the structure must needs totter. These men whiles they profess
themselves too careful of the soul of the child (which yet may perhaps be
safer then their own) seem to be some what too hard hearted to the body of
the mother.

Rodr. Sum. To. 1. ca. 5. de Abort.
Others more probably hold, that if the case be utterly desperate, and it be
certain that both mother and child must undoubtedly perish if some speedy
remedy be not had; it may then be lawful to make use of such receipts as may
possibly give some hopes to save the mother though not without some peril of
the child.

But all this while, the intentions, and endeavors must be no other then
preservatory; however it pleases God to order the events: Shortly, no man that
purposely procures an abortion, as such, can wash his hands from blood; No
woman that wilfully acts, or suffers it, (how ever the secrecy may exempt her
from the danger of humane laws) can think to avoid those judgments of the
righteous God, which he has charged upon murderers.

I cannot here therefore forbear to give the world notice of the impious
indulgence of a late Pope in this kind; Sixtus quintus, who in our time sat in
the Sea of Rome, finding the horrible effects of that liberty, which too many
both secular and religious persons took to themselves in this matter of
abortion; in a just detestation of that damnable practice, thought meet in much
fervor of spirit to set forth his Bulla Cruciatae; then which there was never
a more zealous piece, published to the world; wherein that Pope pronounces all
those which have any hand in the acting or procuring of this wicked fact, of
the ejecting of conceptions, whether animate or inanimate, formed, or informed,
by potions, or medicaments, or any other means whatsoever, to have incurred
both the crime and punishment of manslaughter: charging due execution to be
done upon such persons accordingly: And withal in a direful manner
excommunicates them, and sends them to hell, (without repentance) reserving the
absolution solely to himself and his successors.

Now comes a late Vid. Rodrig. ubi supra.
successor of his, Gregory 14; who finding the sentence too unreasonably hard
for his petulant, and thriftie Italians, and, indeed, for all loose persons of
both sexes; mitigates the matter; and, as a Spanish Casuist expresses it truly,
in the very first year of his Pontificate in a certain Constitution of his,
dated at Rome, the last day of May, 1591. delevit censuras, quas Sixtus V.
imposuerat contra facientes, procurantes, etc. abolisht and took off those
heavy censures, which Constit. Greg. 14. Quae dicit quod quivis Confessor
approbatus ab Ordinario potest absolvere a peccato abortus. Ibid.
Sixtus had imposed; and reduced the terrible punishments by him ordained to be
inflicted unto a poor bare irregularity; and determines, that any Confessor
allowed by the Ordinary, may obsolve from this sin of procured abortion: By the
sleightnesse of the censure, in effect, animating the sin: An act well
becoming the mother of Fornications: After all which Pandarisme, let all good
Christians know, and resolve the crime to be no less then damnable.

But withal, let me advise you, (with Murt. Alphons. Vivald. expli. Bull. Cruc.
Martinus Vivaldus) that what I have herein written against the procurers of
abortions, may not be extended to the practice of those discreet Physicians,
and Chirurgeans, who being called to for their aid in difficult and hopeless
child-births, prescribe to the woman in travail, such receipts, as may be like
to hasten her delivery, (whether the child be alive or dead:) forasmuch as the
conception is now at the full maturity; and the endeavor of these Artists is
not to force an aborsement, but to bring forward a natural birth, to the
preservation of the mother, or the child, or both.

CASE IV.
Whether a man adjudged to perpetual imprisonment, or death, may in conscience
endeavor, and practice an escape.

WHat the Civil or Common laws have in this case determined for the public
good, comes not within the compass of our disquisition: Let the Gaurdians, and
Ministers of those laws look carefully to the just execution of them
accordingly: The question is only of the law of private conscience; how far
that will allow a man to go in case of a sentence passed upon him, whether of
death or bonds.

And first of all; if such sentence be unjustly passed upon an innocent, no man
can doubt, but that he may most lawfully by all just means work his own
freedom: But if an offender, what may he do? The common opinion of Casuists
is peremptory; Qui retinetur in carcere propter aliquod delictum, etc. Rodrig.
Sum. cap. 40.
That he that is kept in prison for any offense whereupon may follow death, or
loss of limb, whether the crime be public or private, may lawfully flee from
his imprisonment, and may for that purpose use those helps of filing, or
mining, which conduce to this purpose: Their ground is, that universal rule,
and instinct of selfe-preservation, which is natural to every creature; much
more eminent in man, who is furnished with better faculties then the rest, for
the working of his own inde^nity: Whereto is added that main consideration of
Aquinas; That no man is bound to kill himself, but only doomed to suffer
death; not therefore bound to do that upon which death will inevitably follow,
which is to wait in prison for the stroke, if he may avoid it; it is enough
that he patiently submits to what the law forces upon him, though he do not
cooperate to his own destruction: his sentence abridges him of power, not of
will to depart: Whereupon they have gone so far, as to hold it in point of
conscience not unlawful for the friends of the imprisoned, to conveigh unto
him files, and cords, or other instruments useful for their escape: But herein
some better-advised Doctors have justiy dissented from them; as those, whose
judgment has not been more favorable to malefactors, then dangerous and
prejudicial to the Commonwealth: for how safe soever this might seem in
lighter trespasses, yet if this might be allowed as in conscience lawful to be
done to the rescue of murderers, traitors, or such other flagitious villains,
what infinite mischief might it produce? and what were this other then to
invite men to be accessory to those crimes, which the law in a due way intends
to puuish? Certainly, by how much a more laudable act of Justice it is, to free
the society of men from such wicked miscreants, by so much more sinful and
odious an office it were, to use these sinister means for their exemption from
the due course of Justice; But howsoever for another man to yield such
unlawful aid, is no better then a foul affront of public Justice, and
enwrappes the agent in a partnership of crime; yet the law of nature puts this
liberty upon the restrained party himself, both to wish and endeavor his own
deliverance: Although not so; but that if the prisoner have engaged himself by
solemn promise, and oath to his keeper, not to depart out of his custody;
honesty must prevail above nature; and he ought rather to die, then violate
that bond which is stronger then his irons: Very Heathens have by their example
taught us this lesson; To regard our fidelity, more then our life: Thus it
should be, and is, with those that are truly Christian and ingenuous, under
what ever captivity; but in the case of graceless and felonious persons,
Gaolers have reason to look to their bolts and locks; knowing (according to
the old rule of wise Thales) that he who has not stuck at one villainy, will
easily swallow another; perjury will easily down with him, that has made no
bones of murder.

But where the case is entire, no man can blame a captive if he would be free;
and if he may untie the knot of a cord, wherewith he was bound; why may he not
unrivet, or grate an iron wherewith he is fettered? for so much as he is not
bound, to yield, or continue a consent to his own durance: This charge lies
upon the keeper, not the prisoner.

A man that is condemned to perish by famine, yet if he can come by sustenance
may receive, and eat it: That Athenian malefactor, in Val. Max. l. 5. Dom. Sot.
de Jure, etc. l. 5. g. 5.
Valerius Maximus, sentenced to dye by hunger, was never found fault with, that
he maintained himself in his dungeon by the breasts of his goodnatur'd daughter.

And if a man be condemned to be devoured by a Lion, there can be no reason why
he should not (what he may) resist that furious beast, and save his own life.

But when I see our Romish Casuists so zealously tender in the case of
Religious persons, as that they will not allow them upon a just imprisonment to
stir out of those grates whereto they are confined by the doom of their
Prelates; And when I see the brave resolutions of holy Martyrs, that even when
the doors were set open, would not flee from a threatened death, I cannot but
conclude, that whatsoever nature suggests to a man, to work for his own life
or liberty, when it is forfaited to Justice, yet that it is meet and
commendable in a true penitent, when he finds the doom of death or perpetual
durance justly passed upon him, humbly to submit to the sentence; and not
intertaine the motions and means of a projected evasion: but meekly to stoop
unto lawful authority, and to wait upon the issue whether of Justice, or
Mercy: and at the worst, to say with him in the Poet, Merui, nec deprecor.

CASE V.
Whether, and how far a man may be urged to an Oath.

AN Oath, as it is a sacred thing, so it must be no otherwise then holily used;
whether on the part of the giver, or taker; and therefore may neither rashly be
uttered, nor unduly tendered upon slight, or unwarrantable occasions: We have
not to do here with a promissory oath, the obligation whereof is for another
inquisition; It is the assertory oath that is now under our hand; which the
great God by whom we swear, has ordained to be an end of controversies; At
the mouth of two or three witnesses shall the matter be established, Deuter.
19. 15. and 17. 6. As for secular titles of mine, or thine, the propriety of
goods, or lands, next after written evidences, testimonies upon Oath must needs
be held most fitly decisive; the only scruples are wont to be made in causes
criminal.

1. Wherein surely we may lay this undoubted ground, that no man is to be
proceeded against without an accuser, and that accusation must be made good by
lawful witnesses: A Judge may not cast any man upon the plea of his own
eyesight: should this liberty be granted, Innocence might suffer, and Malice
triumph: Neither may any man be condemned upon hearsay; which how commonly
false it is, daily experience sufficiently evinceth.

On the other side, men are apt enough to connive at each others wickedness;
and every man is loath to be an Informer, whether out of the envy of the
office, or out of the conscience of his own obnoxiousnesse.

And yet thirdly, it is requisite that care should be taken, and all due means
used by authority, that the world may not be overrun with wickedness; but
that vice may be found out, repressed, punished.

There cannot, fourthly, be devised a fairer, and more probable course for the
effecting hereof, then by the discovery upon oaths of the officers and Jurors
in Assizes, and Sessions; and of Churchwardens, and Sidemen in Visitations.

The ground of all presentiments to, or by these men must be either their own
knowledge, or public fame, or an avowed information. Any of these gives a
lawful hint to the Judge, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, to take full
trial of the cause and person.

Knowledge is always certain, but fame is often a liar; and therefore every
idle rumor must not be straight taken upon trust; the inconvenience and injury
whereof I have often seen; when some malicious person desiring to do a
despite to an innocent neighbor, raises a causeless slander against him,
whispers it to some disaffected Gossips, this flies to the care of an
Apparitor; he straight runs to the Office, and suggests a public fame; the
honest man is called into the Court; his reputation is blurred in being but
summoned; and after all his trouble and disgrace has his amends in his own
hands.

The rule of some Casuists, that ten tongues make a fame, is groundless and
insufficient; neither is the number so much to be regarded as the quality of
the persons.

If a whole pack of debauched companions shall conspire to stain the good name
of an innocent (as we have the often known) it were a shameful injustice to
allow them the authors of a fame: the more judicious Doctors have defined a
public fame by the voice of the greater part of that Community, wherein it is
spread, whether Town, Parish, City: and therein of those that are discreet,
honest, well behaved. We are wont to say, Where there is much smoke, there is
likely some fire: an universal report from such mouths, therefore, may well
give occasion to a further inquiry. If any man's zeal against vice will make it
a matter of instance, the case is clear, and the proceeding unquestionable;
But if it be matter of mere office, the carriage of the process may be liable
to doubt; Herein it is meet such course be taken, as that neither a notorious
evil may be smothered, nor yet innocence injured: To which purpose the most
confident reporter may be called upon (because fame has too many tongues to
speak at once) to lay forth the grounds of that his whispered crimination; and
if the circumstances appear pregnant, and the suspicions strong, I see not why
the Ecclesiastical Judge (for with him only in this case I profess to
meddle) may not convent the person accused, lay before him the crime which is
secretly charged upon him; and either upon his ingenuous confession, enjoyne
him such satisfaction to the scandalized Congregation as may be most fit, or
upon his denial urge him to clear himself by lawful witnesses, of the crime
objected; Or why he may not, if he see further cause, appoint a discreet and
able prosecutor to follow the business in a legal way; upon whom the accused,
if he be found guiltless, may right himself.

But all this while, I find no just place for an oath to be administered to a
man for his own accusation; which certainly, is altogether both illegal, and
unreasonable; If a man will voluntarily offer to clear himself by an Oath,
out of the assuredness of his own innocence, he may be allowed to be heard,
but this may neither be pressed to be done, nor yet conclusive, when it is
done; for both every man is apt to be partial in his own case, and he that
durst act a foul sin will dare to face it. It was ever therefore lawful (even
when Ecclesiastical Inquisitions were at the highest) for a man to refuse
answer to such questions upon oath, or otherwise, which tended to his own
impeachment; as unjustly, and unwarrantably proposed: and it was but a young
determination of Silvestr. V. Correct. Dom. Sot. l. 5. de Jure, q. 4. Less. de
Judice l. 2. c. 29.
Aquina, when he was only a Bachelour, in the General Chapter at Paris,
contradicted by all the ancient Graduates there, that when the crime is
notorious, and the author unknown, the secret offender is bound upon his
Ordinaries charge and command, to reveal himself.

Even the Spanish Casuists, the great favorers and abettors of the
Inquisition, teach that the Judge may not of himself begin an inquiry, but
must be led by something which may open a way to his search, and as it were
force him to his proceeding, ex officio, as public notice, infamy, common
suspicion, complaint; otherwise, the whole process is void in law; although
herein some of them go too far in favor of their great Diana, that where the
crime is known, and the author unknown, the Judge may in a generality inquire
of him that did it, and if he have any private information (though without any
public fame foregoing) he may in foam cases, raise a particular inquisition
upon the party, and call him to defend himself; which course certainly, gives
too much advantage to private malice; and opens too much way to the wronging of
Innocence. The fair way of proceedings in all Christian Judicatures, should
be, by accuser, witness, and Judge; in distinct persons, openly known; the
accuser complains, the witness evinceth, the Judge sentences: The one may not
be the other; much less all three: Were that to be allowed, who could be
innocent.?

When a witness then is called before a competent Judge, to give evidence upon
oath concerning a third person, in a matter cognoscible by that Jurisdiction,
he is bound to swear in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness; Jer. 4. 2.
as for his own concernments, he must refer himself to the testimonies and
oaths of others.

CASE VI.
Whether a Judge may upon allegations, proofs, and evidences of others,
condemn a man to death, whom he himself certainly knows to be innocent.

THe question has undergone much agitation; The stream of all ancient
Divines, and Casuists runs upon the affirmative; their ground is, that the
Judge as he is a public person, so in the seat of Judicature he must exercise
a public authority; and therefore waving his private knowledge and interest,
must sentence according to the allegations and proofs brought before him;
since he is a Judge of the cause, not of the law; whereof he is to be the
servant, not the master: There he sits not to speak his own judgment, but to
be the mouth of the law, and the law commands him to judge according to the
evidence; the evidence therefore being clear and convictive, the doom can be
no other then condemnatory.

For my part, I can more marvel at their judgment herein, then approve it;
professing for the negative, with some fewer and latter Authors, upon these
sure grounds.

It is an evident and undeniable law of God which must be the rule of all
Judges; The innocent and the righteous slay thou not, Exodus 23. 7. This is a
Law neither to be avoided, nor, dispensed with: Accusations and false witnesses
cannot make a man other then innocent; they may make him to seem so; in so
much as those that know not the cause exactly, may perhaps be misled to
condemn him, in their judgments: But to the Judge, whose eyes were witnesses
of the parties innocence, all the evidence in the world cannot make him other
then guiltless; so as that Judge shall be guilty of blood, in slaying the
innocent, and righteous.

Secondly, the law of judging according to allegations and proofs is a good
general direction in the common course of proceedings; but there are cases
wherein this law must veil to an higher, which is the law of Conscience: Woe
be to that man who shall tie himself so close to the letter of the law, as to
make shipwreck of conscience; And that bird in his bosom will tell him, that
if upon what ever pretenses, he shall willingly condemn an innocent, he is no
better then a murderer.

Thirdly, it is not the bare letter of the law that wise men should stand upon,
but the drift and intention of the law; of that, we may in some sense say as
the Apostle did of an higher law, The letter kills. Now every reasonable man
knows that the intention of the law, is to save and protect the Innocent; to
punish only the guilty: The Judge therefore shall be a perverter of law, if,
contrary to his knowledge, he shall follow the letter against the intention, in
condemning an Innocent.

Let no man now tell me, that it is the law that condemns the man, and not the
Judge; This excuse will not serve before the Tribunal of heaven; The law has
no tongue; It is the Judge that is lex loquens; If he then shall pronounce that
sentence which his own heart tells him is unjust and cruel, what is he but an
officious minister of injustice? But, indeed, what law ever said, Thou shall
kill that man whom thou know innocent, if false witness will swear him
guilty? This is but a false gloss set upon a true text, to countenance a man
in being an instrument of evil.

What then is in this case to be done? Surely, as I durst not acquit that
Judge, who under what ever color of law should cast away a known Innocent, so
I durst not advise against plain evidences and flat dispositions, upon private
knowledge, that man to be openly pronounced guiltless; and thereby discharged;
for as the one is a gross violation of justice; so were the other a public
affront to the law; and of dangerous consequence to the weale-publique:
Certainly, it could not but be extremely unsafe, that such a gappe should be
opened to the liberty of judgment, that a private breast should be opposed
(with an apparent prevalence) against public convictions: Our Casuists have
beaten their brains to find out some such evasions, as might save the innocent
from death, and the Judge from blood-guiltinesse: Herein therefore they advise
the Judge to use some secret means to stop the accusation or indictment; (a
course that might be as prejudicial to justice, as a false sentence) To sift
the witnesses apart, as in Susannaes case, and by many subtle interogations of
the circumstances to find their variance or contradiction. If that prevail
not, Cajetan goes so far, as to determine it meet (which how it might stand
with their law, he knows, with ours it would not) that the Judge should before
all the people give his oath, that he knows the party guiltless; as whom he
himself saw at that very hour in a place far distant from that, wherein the
fact is pretended to be done: Yea Dom. a Sot. de Jure, etc. l. 5. qu. 4.
Dominicus a Soto could be content (if it might be done without scandal) that
the prisoner might secretly be suffered to slip out of the jail, and save
himself by flight. Others think it the best way, that the Judge should put off
the cause to a superior Bench; and that himself should (laying aside his
scarlet) come to the Bar, and as a witness avow upon oath the innocence of the
party, and the falsity of the accusation: Or lastly, if he should out of
malice, or some other sinister ends (as of the forfaiture of some rich estate)
be pressed by higher powers to pass the sentence on his own Bench, that he
ought to lay down his Commission, and to abdicate that power he has, rather
then to suffer it forced to a willing injustice.

And truly were the case mine, after all fair and lawful indevours to justify
the innocent, and to avoid the sentence, I should most willingly yield to this
last resolution: Yea rather my self to undergo the sentence of death, then to
pronounce it on the knowne-guiltlesse; hating the poor pusillanimity of
Dominicus a Soto Etenim quod homo qui officio suo vivit debeat tantam jacturam
facere, durum creditu est. Dom. Sot. ubi supra.
, that passes a nimis creditu rigidum, upon so just a determination; and is so
weakly tender of the Judges indemnity, that he will by no means hear of his
wilful deserting of his office on so capital an occasion.

In the maine cause of life and death, I cannot but allow and commend the
judgment of Leonardus Lessius; but when the question is of matters Civil, or
less criminal, In causis civilibus et minus criminalibus.
I cannot but wonder at his flying off; In these wherein the business is but
pecuniary, or banishment, or loss of an office, he holds it lawful for the
Judge, (after he has used all means to discover the falsenesse of the
proofs, and to hinder the proceedings, if thus he prevails not) to pass
sentence upon those allegations and probations, which himself knows to be
unjust.

The reasons pretended are as poor as the opinion; Less. de Jure, etc. l. 2. de
Judice Dub. 10. Quia resp. habeat authoritatem disponendi, etc.
For, says he, the Commonwealth has authority to dispose of the estates of
the subjects, and to translate them from one man to another, as may be found
most availing to the public good; and here there appears just cause so to
do, lest the form of public judgments should be perverted, not without
great scandal to the people; neither is there any way possible to help this
particular man's inconvenience and loss; therefore the Commonwealth may
ordain that in such a case the Judge should follow the public form of
Judicature, though hereby it falls out that a guiltless man is undone in his
fortunes; and yet his cause known to be good by him that condemns it. Thus he.

But what a loose point is this? why has not a man, as true propiety in his
estate as his life? or what authority has the Commonwealth, causelessly to
take away a man's substance or inheritance (being that he is the rightful
owner) more then a piece of himself? When his patrimony is settled upon him and
his in a due course of law and undoubted right of possession, what just power
can claim any such interest in it as without any ground of offense to
dispossess him? Or what necessity is there that the form of public
judgments should be perverted, unless an honest defendent must be undone by
false sentence? Or rather is not the form of public judgment perverted,
when innocence suffers for the maintenance of a formality? Or how is the Judge
other then a partner in the injury, if for want of his seasonable interposition
a good cause is lost, and a false plea prevails?

That therefore, which in the second place he alleges, that the Subject can
have no reason to complain of the Judge, for as much as it is out of his power
to remedy the case, and to pass other sentence then is chalked forth by the
rule of law; might as well be alleged against him in the plea of life and
death, wherein he will by no means allow the Judge this liberty of an undue
condemnation; neither is there any just pretense why an honest and well-minded
Judge should be so sparing in a case of life, and so too prodigal in matter of
livelihood.

As for his third reason, that the mis-judgment in case of a pecuniary damage
or banishment, may be afterward capable of being reversed, and upon a new
Traverse the cause may be fetched about at further leisure; whereas death once
inflicted is past all power of revocation; It may well infer that therefore
there should be so much more deliberation, and care had in passing sentence
upon capital matters, then civil, by how much life is more precious, and
irrevocable, then our worldly substance; but it can never infer that
injustice should be tolerable in the one, not in the other. Justice had wont to
be painted blindfold, with a pair of scales in her hand; wherefore else, but
to imply that he who would judge aright, must not look upon the issue or event,
but must weigh impartially the true state of the cause in all the grounds, and
circumstances thereof, and sentence accordingly? To say then that a Judge may
pass a doom formally legal, but materially unjust, because the case upon a
new suit may be righted, were no other then to say, I may lawfully wound a man,
because I know how to heal him again.

Shortly therefore, whether it be in causes crimiall, or civil, whether
concerning life, or estate, let those who sit in the seat of Judicature, as
they will answer it before the great Judge of the world, resolve (what event
soever follow) to judge righteous judgment, not justifying the wicked, not
condemning the innocent; both which are equally abominable in the sight of the
Almighty.

CASE VII.
Whether, and in what cases am I bound to be an accuser of another.

TO be an accuser of others, is a matter of much envy, and detestation; in so
much as it is the style of the Devil himself to be accusator fratrum, an
accuser of the brethren: Yet not of his own brethren in evil; It was never
heard that one evil spirit accused another; but of our brethren; Revel. 12.
10. it was a voice from heaven which called him so: Saints on earth are the
brethren of the glorious spirits in heaven; It is the wickedness of that
malicious spirit to accuse Saints: But though the act be grown into hatred, in
respect both of the agent and of the object; yet certainly there are cases
wherein it will become the Saints to take upon them the person, and office of
accusers.

Accusation therefore is either voluntary, or urged upon you by the charge of a
superior. Voluntary is either such as you are moved unto by the conscience of
some heinous and notorious crime committed, or to be committed by another, to
the great dishonor of God, or danger of the common peace, whereto you are
privy: or such as whereunto you are tied by some former engagement of vow, or
oath: In the former kind; a worthy Divine in our time travailing on the way,
sees a lewd man committing abominable filthiness with a beast; the sin was so
foul and hateful, that his heart would not suffer him to conceal it; he
therefore hastens to the next Justice, accuses the offender of that so
unnatural villainy; the party is committed, endicted, and upon so reverend
(though single) testimony found guilty.

Or, if in the case of a crime intended, you have secret, but sure
intelligence, that a bloody villain has plotted a treason against the sacred
person of your Sovereign, or a murder of your honest neighbor; which he
resolves to execute; should you keep this fire in your bosom, it might justly
burn you. Whether it be therefore for the discovery of some horrible crime
done, or for the prevention of some great mischief to be done, you must either
be an accuser, or an accessory.

The obligation to accuse is yet stronger where your former vow or oath has
fore-ingaged you to a just discovery; You have sworn to maintain and defend
his Majesty's royal person, state, dignity; and to make known those that
wilfully impugn it; if now, you shall keep the secret counsels of such wicked
designments, as you shall know to be against any of these, how can you escape
to be involved in a treason, lined with perjury?

These are accusations which your conscience will fetch from you, unasked; But
if being called before lawful authority, you shall be required upon oath, to
testify your knowledge even concerning offenders, of an inferior nature; you
may not detract your witness, though it amount to no less then an accusation.
Yet there are cases, wherein a testimony thus required, tending to an
accusation, may be refused; As in case of duty, and nearenesse of natural, or
civil relation; It were unreasonably unjust for a man to be pressed with
interrogations, or required to give accusatory testimonies in the case of
parents, or children, or the partner of his bed: Or if a man out of remorse of
conscience shall disclose a secret sin to you formerly done, in a desire to
receive counsel, and comfort from you; you ought rather to endure your soul
to be fetched out of your body, then that secret to be drawn out of your lips:
Or if the question be illegal, as those that tend directly to your own
prejudice; or those which are moved concerning hidden offenses, not before
notified by public fame, or any lawful ground of injury, which therefore the
Judge has no power to ask; In these cases, if no more, the refusal of an
accusation, though required, is no other then justifiable.

But where neither the conscience of the horridness of a crime done; nor
prevention of a crime intended, nor duty of obedience to lawful authority; nor
the bond of an inviolable pre-ingagement, call you to the Bar; It is not a more
uncharitable, then thanklesse office to be an accuser: Hence it is that
Delators, and Informers, have in all happy and well-governed States, been ever
held an infamous and odious kind of Cattle. A Tiborius, and a Domitian, might
give both countenance and rewards to them, as being meet factors for their
tyranny, but a Vespasian, and Titus, and Antoninus Pius, and Macrinus, or what
ever other Princes carried a tender care to the peace and welfare of their
subjects, whipped them in the public Amphitheater, and abandoned them out of
their dominions, as pernicious, and intolerable. And as these mercenary Flies,
whether of State, or of Religion, are justly hateful, next to the public
executioners; so certainly, those busy spirited men, which out of the itching
humor of meddling, run from house to house, with tales of private detraction,
may well challenge the next room in our detestation. This together with the
other, is that which God so strictly forbids in his Law, Levit. 19. 16. Thou
shall not go up and down as a Talebearer amongst thy people, neither shall
thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor: I am the Lord. A practice which
wise Solomon, though a great King; and (as one would think) out of the reach of
tongues, cries down with much feeling bitterness; Prove. 18. 8. The words of a
Tale bearer are as wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of the
belly: No less then five several times in his divine Prove. 11. 13. 20. 19.
26. 20. 26. 2.
Proverbs, inveighing sharply (as if himself had been stung in this kind)
against these close, backbiting calumniations.

Shortly then, accuse when you are forced, either by the foulness of the
fact, or the necessity of your duty: otherwise reserve your tongue for better
offices.

CASE VIII.
Whether a prisoner indicted of a felonious act, which he has committed, and
interogated by the Judge concerning the same, may stand upon the denial, and
plead not guilty.

THe Casuists vary; and out of respect to their own Laws, are much perplexed
in their resolutions: making the great scruple to be in the Juridicall
interrogations, (which if the Judge have not proceeded in the due forms of law
required in such cases) may warrant the offenders denial; and secondly, making
difference of the quality of the offense, and danger of the punishment; which
if no less then capital, may (say they Rodriguez. Tract. Ordinis Judicialis.
cap. 10.
) give just ground to the accused party, either to conceal the truth, or to
answer with such amphibolies, and equivocations, as may serve to his own
preservation; in which course, natural equity will bear him out, which
allows every man to stand upon his own defense: And the case I perceive is
aggravated in foreign parts, as by the Rack, so by an Oath administered to the
person accused, (which they call Sotus l. 5. q. 6. de Justi. 11. Rei, Art. 1.
Juramentum calumniae) which Lessius justly calls a spiritual torture, by the
virtue whereof, he is solemnly urged, not to deny what he knows, or believes
to be true, concerning the business questioned; A practice, which I cannot
blame Les. de jur. l. 2. cap. 13. dub. 3a.
Lessius, if he profess to wish that the Pope, and all secular Princes, would
join together to abrogate; as being an evident occasion of much perjurie. To
lay down and determine the case as it stands with us in our ordinary
proceedings of justice; it must be premised:

1. To deny a known truth, and to aver a wilful lie, cannot be other then a
sin.

2. There is a vast difference betwixt concealing a Truth and denying it.

3. It may be sometimes lawful to conceal some Truths, though never lawful
to deny, or contradict them.

4. No man can be bound directly to accuse himself.

5. It is consonant to natural equity, that a man for the saving of his life
should use the help of all evasions that are not sinful.

6. It cannot be sinful to put himself upon a legal trial in a case
importing his life.

7. There is no place for a legal trial, where there is an absolute
confession of guiltiness.

These positions being pre-required; I say, that it is lawful for the
prisoner, though convinced in his conscience of the fact, yet to plead Not
guilty to the Indictment at the Bar: for as much as he does therein,
according to the sense both of the Judge, and Jury, only hide and keep back
that Truth; the finding out, and eviction whereof, lies upon their further
search and proof; so as he does, in pleading Not guilty, in effect as good as
say, What ever I find in my self, I have no reason to confess my guiltiness;
I stand upon my lawful defense, and cast my self upon my just trial;
Yielding my self only so far guilty, as your evidence and proofs can make
me: let Justice pass upon me, I have no reason to draw on my own
condemnation: The plea thus construed is lawful, and just; wherein not the
shuffling equivocations of the offender, but the upright verdict of a legal
Jury must carry the cause: to which purpose, that which sounds as a denial in
the accused, is nothing else but a professed referring himself to a juridicall
trial of that fact which he is not bound to confess.

But when the hand of God has once found out the man in his sin; and he
finds himself legally convinced of his crime; it greatly behooves him (as
Joshua charged Achan after the lot had discovered his sin) to give glory to
God, in a free and full confession of his wickedness, and to be more open and
ingenuous in his acknowledgment, then he was close, and reserved in his plea:
wherein as he shall discharge his conscience to that great and holy God, whom
he has offended, so he shall thus tender some kind of poor satisfaction to
that society of men, whom he has scandalized by his crime. In which regard I
cannot but marvel at the strange determination of learned Mart. Azpil. Navar.
enchirid. cap. 25. number 38.
Azpilcueta, the Oracle of Confessaries, who teaches, that the prisoner, who
being rightly interrogated by the Judge, stood stiffly in denial of the fact,
and is upon his Condemnation, carried to his execution, is not bound at his
death to confess the crime to the world, if he have before secretly whispered
it in the ear of his ghostly father, and by him received absolution.

A sentence that allows the smothering of truths, and the strangling of just
satisfaction to those who are concerned, as patience, in the offense; and
lastly, highly injurious to public Justice; whose righteous sentence is by
this means left questionable, and obnoxious to unjust censure.

How much more requisite were it that a public confession should, in this
case, save the labor of a private, whereby certainly, the soul of the
offender would be more sensibly unloaded, justice better vindicated, more glory
would accrue to God; and to men, more satisfaction.

But however it be lawful for the accused to stand upon these points of
legality in the proceedings against him: yet for my own part; should I be so
far given over, as to have my hand in blood; and thereupon be arraigned at
the bar of public Justice; I should out of just remorse be the first man
that should rise up against my self; and (which in other men's cases were
utterly unlawful) be my own accuser, witness, and Judge: and this
disposition I should rather commend in those, whose conscience has inwardly
convicted them for haynously criminous: that since they had not the grace to
resist so flagitious a wickedness; they may yet endeavor to expiate it, before
men, with an ingenuous confession: as before God, with a deep and serious
repentance.

CASE IX.
Whether, and how far a man may take up arms in the public quarrel of a
war.

War is no other then a necessary evil, necessary in relation to peace:
only, as that without which so great a blessing cannot be had: As the wise
woman said to Joab, 2 Samuel 20. 18. they should first treat with the men of
Abel, ere they smite: and upon the charge of the Lord of hosts, Deuteronomy. 20. 10.
conditions must first be tendered even to heathen enemies, before any acts of
hostility shall be exercised; where this which is the worst of all remedies,
proves needful, if you ask how far it is lawful to engage; I must ask
you, (ere I can return answer) first of the justice of the quarrel: for
surely, where the war is known to be unjust, the willing abettors of it
cannot wash their hands from blood: To make a war just (as our Casuists
rightly) there must be a lawful authority to raise it; a just ground whereon
to raise it; due forms and conditions in the raising, managing, and cessation
of it: That no authority less then supreme can wage a war, it is clear in
nature; for that none other besides it can have power of life and death; which
both must lie at the public stake in war.

That none but a just and weighty cause can be the ground of a war, every
man's reason apprehends; for how precious a blessing had that need to be, that
is held worth the purchasing with the price of so much blood; and how heavy a
curse must that needs be, which can only be remedied, or prevented by so
grievous a judgment as war?

That due terms and conditions are requisite to be offered ere war be
undertaken; and observed in the managing, and ceasing of it, humanity it self
teaches us; without which men should run upon one another with no less fury
and disorder then beasts; not staying for any capitulation but the first
advantage; nor terminating their discord in any thing but utter destruction.

Where all or any of these are wanting, the war cannot be just: and where it
is known not to be such, woe be to those hands that are willingly active in
prosecuting it.

Now the care of all these three maine requisites must lie chiefly upon that
Power which is entrusted by the Almighty with the overruling of public
affairs: For the Subject, as he is bound to an implicit reliance upon the
command of the supreme power; so (unless it be in a case notoriously apparent
to be unjust) must yield a blindfold obedience to authority; going whither he
is led, and doing what he is bidden; But if the case be such, as that his heart
is fully convinced of the injustice of the enterprise, and that he clearly
finds that he is charged to smite Innocence and to fight against God; I cannot
blame him, if with Saul's footmen (when they were commanded to fall upon the
Priests of the Lord) he withhold his hand, and craving pardon, show less
readiness to act, then to suffer.

In the second place, I must ask you with what intentions you address your
self to the field; If it be out of the conscience of maintaining a just cause,
if out of a loyal obedience to lawful authority: I shall bid you go on, and
prosper: but if either malice to the parties opposed, and therein desire of
revenge, or a base covetousness of pay, or hope and desire of pluuder have put
you into arms: repent and withdraw: For what can be more sordid, or cruel,
then to be hired for dayes-wages to shed innocent blood? Or what can be more
horribly mischievous for a man, then to kill, that he may steal?

Upon your answer to these questions it will be easy for me to return mine;
In a just quarrel, being thereto lawfully called, you may fight; warrantable
authority has put the sword into your hand; you may use it. But take heed that
you use it with that moderation, and with those affections that are meet: Even
an authorized hand may offend in striking; Magistrates themselves, if there be
revenge in their executions, do no other then murder: Far be it from you to
take pleasure in blood; and to enjoy another man's destruction: If (especially
in those wars that are intestine) you shall mingle your tears with the blood
which you are forced to spill, it may well become Christian fortitude.

Shortly; do you enter into your arms, impressed, or voluntary? If the former,
you have nothing but your own heart to look unto for a fit disposition; That
Power, whom you justly obey, must answer for the cause; If the latter, you have
reason diligently to examine all the necessary points, of the Power, of the
cause, of your intentions: as well considering that in a war it is no less
impossible that both sides should be in the right, then that in a contradiction
both parts should be true: Here therefore your will makes it self the Judge of
all three; and (if any of them fail) leaves you answerable for all
miscarriages; so as you had need to be carefully inquisitive, in this case,
upon what grounds you go; that so (whatsoever may befall) a good conscience
may bear you out in the greatest difficulties, and saddest events that are
wont to attend upon war.

CASE X.
Whether and how far a man may act toward bis own Death.

DIrectly to intend or endeavor that which may work his own death, is
abominably wicked, and no less then the worst murder.

For if a man may not kill another, much less himself; by how much he is
nearer to himself then to another: and certainly if we must regulate our love
to another by that to our selves, it must follow that love to our selves must
take up the first room in our hearts: and that love cannot but be accompanied
with a detestation of any thing that may be harmfull to our selves. Doubtless,
many that can be cruel to another are favorable enough to themselves; but
never man that could be cruel to himself would be sparing of another blood.

To will or attempt this is highly injurious to that God, whose we only are;
who has committed our life as a most precious thing to our trust, for his use,
more then our own; and will require from us an account of our managing of it,
and our parting from it. It is a foul misprision in those men, that make
account of themselves as their own, and therefore that they are the absolute
Lords of their life: Did they give themselves their own being; had they
nothing but mere nature in them; can they but acknowledge an higher hand in
their formation, and animating? What a wrong were it therefore to the great
Lord and giver of life, to steal out of the world, without his leave that
placed us there? But much more if Christians, they know themselves, besides,
dearly paid for; and therefore not in their own disposing, but in his that
bought them. Secondly, most desperately injurious to our selves, as incurring
thereby a certain damnation (for ought appears to lookers on) for ever, of
those souls which have wilfully broken Gods more easy, and temporary prison,
to put themselves upon the direful prison of Satan to all eternity.

Nature it self, though not enlightened with the knowledge of the estate of
another world, found cause to abhor this practice: However the Stoicall
Philosophers, and some high Roman spirits following their doctrine, have been
liberal of their lives; the Thebans of old professed detestation of this worst
of prodigalities: And the Athenians enacted that the hand which should be
guilty of such an act, should be cut off, and kept unburied; And it was wisely
ordained by that Grecian Commonwealth, when their Virgins (out of a peevish
coffeehouse) were grown into a selfe-killing humor, that the bodies of such
offenders should be dragged naked through the streets of the city; the shame
whereof stopped the course of that mad resolution.

It is not the heaviest of crosses, or the sharpest bodily anguish that can
warrant so foul an act. Well was it turned off by Antisthenes of old, when in
the extremity of his pain he cried out; Oh who will free me from this torment!
and Diogenes reached him a poynard, wherewith to dispatch himself: Nay, said
he, I said, from my torment, not from my life: as well knowing it neither safe,
nor easy, to part with our selves upon such terms.

Far, far be it from us to put into this rank and file those worthy
Martyrs, which in the fervor of their holy zeal have put themselves forward to
martyrdom; and have courageously prevented the lust and fury of Tyrans, to
keep their chastity, and faith inviolable. I look upon these as more fit
objects of wonder, then either of censure, or imitation. For these (whom we may
well match with Sampson, and Eleazar) what Gods spirit wrought in them, he
knows that gave it; Rules are they by which we live, not examples.

Secondly, However we may not by any means directly act to the cutting off the
thread of life; yet I cannot but yield with learned Less. de Jure l. 2. c. 9.
dub. 6.
Lessius, that there may fall out cases, wherein a man may (upon just cause)
do, or forbear something whereupon death may indirectly ensue: Indirectly, I
say, not with an intention of such issue. For it is not an universal charge of
God, that no man should upon any occasion expose his life to a probable danger;
if so, there would be no war, no trafique; but only that he should not
causelessly hazard himself; nor with a resolution of wilful mis-carriage.

To those instances he gives of a soldier that must keep his station, though
it cost him life: of a prisoner that may forbear to flee out of prison, though
the doors be open: of a man condemned to dye by hunger, in whose power it is to
refuse a sustenance offered: of a man that latches the weapon in his own body
to save his Prince: or of a friend, who when but one loaf is left to preserve
the life of two, refraines from his part and dies first: or that suffers
another to take that planke in a shipwreck which himself might have
prepossessed, as trusting to the oars of his arms; or that puts himself into
an infected house out of mere charity to tend the sick, though he know the
contagion deadly; or in a sea fight blows up the deck with gunpowder, not
without his own danger; or when the house is on fire casts himself out at the
window with an extreme hazard: To these, I say, may be added many more; as the
cutting off a limb to stop the course of a Gangrene; to make an adventure of a
dangerous incision in the body, to draw forth the Stone in the bladder; the
taking of a large dose of opiate pills, to ease a mortal extremity; or lastly,
when a man is already seized on by death, the receiving of some such powerful
medicine, as may facilitate his passage (the defect of which care and art, the
eminentlylearned Lord (...). L. Verulam. Advanc. of Learning.
Verulam justly complains of in Physicians:) In these, and the like cases, a
man may lawfully do those things which may tend, in the event, to his own
death, though without an intention of procuring it.

And unto this head must be referred those infinite examples of deadly
sufferings for good causes, willingly embraced for conscience sake. The seven
Brethren in the Maccabees, (alluded to by S. Paul to his Hebrews, Heb. 11. 35.)
will and must rather endure the butchering of their own flesh, then the eating
of swines-flesh, in a willing affront of their law; Daniel will rather die then
not pray. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego will rather fall down bound into the
fiery Furnace sevenfold heated, then fall down before the golden image.

And every right-disposed Christian will rather welcome death then yield to a
willing act of Idolatry, rebellion, witchcraft: If hereupon death follow by the
infliction of others, they are sinful agents, he is an innocent sufferer.

As for that scruple among our Casuists, whether a man condemned to dye by
poison, may take the deadly draught that is brought him; it is such, as wise
Socrates never made of old, when the Athenians tendered him his hemlock; and
indeed it may as well be disputed, whether a man condemned to dye by the axe,
may quietly lay down his head upon the block; and not, but upon force, yield
to that fatal stroke. A juster scruple is, whether a man condemned to a
certain and painful death, which he cannot possibly eschew, may make choice
rather of a more easy passage out of the world; wherein I marvel at the
indulgence of some Doctors that would either excuse, or mince the matter. For
although I cannot blame that natural disposition in any creature, to shrink
from pain, and to affect (what it may) the shifting from extremity of misery:
yet for a Christian so to do it, as to draw a greater mischief to himself,
and an apparent danger to his soul, it cannot justly bear any other then a
hard construction. For thus to carve himself of justice, is manifestly to
violate lawful authority; and whiles he would avoid a short pain, to incur
the shame and sin of a selfe-executioner.

But if in that way, wherein the doom of death is passed, a man can give
himself ease, or speed of dissolution (as when a Martyr being adjudg'd to the
fire, uses the help of a bag of Gunpowder, to expedite his passage) it cannot
be any way judged unlawful: The sentence is obeyed, the execution is
accordingly done; and, if the patient have found a shorter way to that end
which is appointed him, what offense can this be either to the law, or to the
Judge?

RESOLUTIONS. The third Decade. Cases of Piety and Religion.
CASE I.
Whether upon the appearance of Evil Spirits we may hold discourse with them;
and how we may demean our selves concerning them.

THat there are evil spirits, is no less certain then that there are men:
None but a Sadduce, or an Atheist can make question of it.

That evil spirits have given certain proofs of their presence with men,
both in visible apparitions, and in the possessions of places, and bodies, is
no less manifest, then that we have souls, whereby they are discerned.

Their appearances are not wont to be without grievous inconveniences; whether
in respect of their dreadfulnesse; or their dangerous insinuations.

It is the great mercy of the God of spirits that he has bound up the evil
Angels in the chains of darkness, restraining them from those frequent, and
horrible appearances which they would otherwise make to the terror, and
consternation of his weak creatures.

Whenever it pleases the Almighty, for his own holy purposes, so far to
loosen, or lengthen the chains of wicked spirits, as to suffer them to exhibit
themselves in some assumed shapes unto men, it cannot but mainly import us to
know, what our deportment should be concerning them. Doubtless to hold any
fair terms of commerce, or peace (much more of amity or familiarity) with
them, were no better then to profess our selves enemies to God; for such an
irreconcilable hostility there is betwixt the holy God, and these malignant
spirits, that there can be no place for a neutrality in our relation to them:
so as he is an absolute enemy to the one, that bids not open defiance to the
other.

As therefore we are wont by our silence to signify our heart-burning against
any person (in that we abide not to speak unto those whom we hate,) so must we
carry our selves toward evil spirits: And if they begin with us as that
Devil did in the Serpent with Eve; how unsafe and deadly it may be to hold
chat with them, appears in that first example of their onset; the issue whereof
brought misery, and mortality upon all mankind; yet then, were our first
parents in their innocence, and all earthly perfection: we now so tainted with
sin, that Satan has a kind of party in us, even before his actual
temptations.

As therefore we are wont to say that the fort that yields to parle is half
won; so may it prove with us, if we shall give way to hold discourse with
wicked spirits; who are far too crafty for us to deal withal: having so
evident an advantage of us, both in nature (we being flesh and blood, they
spiritual wickednesses) and in duration, and experience, we being but of
yesterday, they coetaneous with the world and time it self.

If you tell me that our Savior himself interchanged some speeches with the
spirits whom he ejected; it is easily answered, that this act of his was never
intended for our imitation; since his omnipotence was no way obnoxious to their
malice, our weakness is.

I cannot therefore but marvel at the boldness of those men who professing no
small degree of holiness, have dared to hold familiar talk with evil spirits,
and could be content to make use of them for intelligence; as the famous
Jesuit, in our time, Pere Cotton; who having provided 50. questions to be
propounded to a Demoniack (some concerning matters of learning, some other
matters of State, concerning the then French King and the King of England) and
having them written down under his own hand to that purpose; being questioned
concerning it, answered, that he had license from Rome to tender those demands:
as I received it upon certain relation from the learned Dr. Tilenus with many
pregnant and undeniable circumstances, which I need not here express. Although
this need not seem strange to me, when I find that Navarr. Enchir. cap. 11. n.
28.
Navarre determines plainly, that when evil spirits are present (not by our
invocation) as in possessed bodies, it is lawful to move questions to them,
(so it be without our prayers to them, or pact with them) for the profit of
others; yea thus to confer with them, even out of vanity, or curiosity, is but
venial at the most: Thus he: with whom Less. l. 2. De ma^gia cap. 44. dub. 6.
Lessius goes so far as to say; Licitum est petere verbo a Diabolo ut nocere
destnat etc. It is lawful to move the Devil in words to cease from hurting,
so that it be not done by way of deprecation, or in a friendly compliance, but
by way of indignation: A distinction which I confess past the capacity of my
apprehension; who have not the wit to conceive how a man can move without
implying a kind of suite; and how any suit can consist with an indignation.

It savours yet of a more heroical spirit which the Church of Rome professes
to teach and practice, the ejection of evil spirits by an imperious way of
command; having committed to her Exorcists a power of Adjuration, to which the
worst of Devils must be subject; a power more easily arrogated then really
exercised: Indeed this overruling authority was eminently conspicuous, not
only in the selected twelve, and the seventy Disciples of Christ, who returned
from their Embassy with joy, (Luke 10. 17.) that the Devils were subject to
them through his name, but even in their holy Successors of the Primitive
Church, whiles the miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost were sensibly powered out
upon men; but if they will be still challenging the fame power; why do they not
as well lay claim to the speaking of strange tongues? (Mar. 16. 17. 18.) to the
super-naturall cure of all diseases? to the treading on serpents and scorpions?
to the drinking of poisons without an Antidote? and if they must needs
acknowledge these faculties above their reach, why do they presume to divide
the Spirit from it self; arrogating to themselves the power of the greatest
works, whiles they are professedly defective in the least? wherein surely, as
they are the true successors of the sons of Sceva, Act. 19. 13, 14, 15, 16.
who would be adjuring of Devils by the name of Jesus, whom Paul preached, so
they can look for no other intertainment then they found from those
Demoniacks, which was to be baffled, and beaten, and wounded.

Especially, if we consider the foul superstition, and gross magic which
they make use of in their Conjurations; by their own vainly-devised
Exorcismes, feoffing a supernatural virtue upon drugges, and herbs, for the
dispelling, and staving off all evil spirits; Because the books are not
perhaps obvious, take but a taste in one, or two: Thesaurus Exorcismorum; atque
Conjurationum terribilium, etc. Tract. Dispersio daemonum. Fratris Valcrii
Polydori Patavini. Ord. Minorum Conventualium.
In the treasure of Exorcismes, there is this following Benediction of Rue, to
be put into an hallowed paper, and to be carried about you and smelled at for
the repelling of the Invasion of Devils Tit. applicabile. 3. Rutae in charta
benedicta super seportaudae and olfaciendae, ad omnem invasionem diabolicam
repellendam.
. I conjure thee o thou creature of Rue, by the holy Lord, the Father, the
almighty and eternal God, which brings forth grass in the mountains, and
herbs for the use of man: And which by the Apostle of thy Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, have taught, that the weak should eat herbs: I conjure thee that thou
be blessed, and sanctified to retain this invisible power and virtue, that
whosoever shall carry thee about him, or shall smell to thee, may be free from
all the uncleanness of Diabolical infatuation; and that all Devils, and all
witchcrafts may speedily fall from him, as herbs or grass of the earth:
through the same our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall come to judge the quick and
the dead, and the world by fire. The like is prescribed to be done to the seeds
of Hypericon or S. John's wort.

Applicabile. 15. Tit. Profumigatio borriblis, ejusque vulgata benedictio.
Add to this, the horrible fumigation to this purpose as it follows. I
conjure thee o thou creature of Galbanum, Sulphur, Assa faetida, Aristolochium,
hypericon and Rue, by the living God; by the true God etc. by Jesus Christ etc.
that thou be for our defense; and that thou be made a perpetual fumigation,
exorcised, blessed, and consecrated to the safety of us, and of all faithful
Christians; and that thou be a perpetual punishment to all malignant spirits,
and a most vehement, and infinite fire unto them, more then the fire and
brimstone of hell is to the infernal spirits there, etc.

But what do I trouble you with these dreadful incantations, whereof their
allowed books of Conjuration are full? To these I may add their application
of holy water, (wherein they place not a little confidence) which (says Less.
ubi supra Dubit. 5a.
Lessius) receives the force from the prayers of the Church, by the means
whereof it comes to pass, that it is assisted with divine power; which (as it
were) rests upon it, and joins with it, to the averting of all the
infestations of the Devil: But feign would I learn where the Church has any
warrant from God to make any such suit; where any overture of promise to have
it granted? what is their prayer without faith? and what is their faith,
without a word? But I leave these men (together with their Crosses, and
Ceremonies, and holy relics, wherein they put great trust in these cases) to
their better informed thoughts. God open their eyes that they may see their
errors.

For us, what our demeanure should be in case of the appearance, or molestation
of evil spirits, we cannot desire a better pattern then S. Paul; his example
is our all-sufficient instruction; 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8. who when the messenger of
Satan was sent to buffet him, fell presently to his prayers; and instantly
besought God thrice, that it might depart from him. Lo he that could command
evil spirits out of the bodily possession of others; when it comes to his own
turn to be buffeted by them, betakes himself to his prayers to that God whose
grace was sufficient for him: Verse. 9. To them must we still have our
recourse; if we thus resist the Devil he shall flee from us: Jam. 4. 7. In the
primitive times, those that could command, needed not to sue: and therefore
fasting and prayers was an higher (as a more laborious) work (to this purpose)
in the disciples, then their imperative course of ejection; but for us, we that
have no power to bid, must pray; Pray; not to those ill guests that they would
depart; not to the blessed Virgin, or our Angel Keeper that they would guard us
from them, but to the great God of heaven, who commands them to their chains:
This is a sure and everlasting remedy, this is the only certain way to their
foil, and our deliverance, and victory.

CASE II.
How far a secret pact with evil spirits does extend, and what actions and
events must be referred thereunto.

IT is a question of exceeding great use, and necessity; for certainly many
thousands of honest, and well-minded-Christians are in this kind drawn into
the snares of Satan, unwarily, and unwittingly: For the determining of it,
these two grounds must be laid; First, that there is a double compact with
Satan; One direct and open; wherein Magicians and witches, upon woeful
conditions, and direful ceremonies, enter into a mutual covenant with evil
spirits: The other, secret and indirect; wherein nothing is seen, or heard, or
known to be agreed upon; only by a close implication, that is suggested and
yielded to be done, which is invisibly seconded by diabolical operation.

The second ground is; that whatsoever has not a cause in nature according to
Gods ordinary way, must be wrought either by good, or evil spirits: That it
cannot be supposed that good Angels should be at the command of ignorant, or
vicious persons, of either sex, to concur with them in superstitious acts,
done by means altogether in themselves ineffectuall and unwarrantable: and
therefore that the Devil has an unseene hand in these effects, which he
marvailously brings about, for the winning of credit with the world, and for
the obliging and engaging of his own clients: of this kind there is too
lamentably-much variety in common experience: Take an handful, if you please,
out of a full sack: let the first be, that authentic charm of the Gospel of
S. John allowed in the parts of the Romish correspondence; wherein the first
verses of that divine Gospel are singled out, printed, in a small roundell,
and sold to the credulous ignorants, with this fond warrant, that whosoever
carries it about him shall be free from the dangers of the days mis-happes:
The book and the key; the sive and the sheeres, for the discovery of the
thief; The noching of a stick with the number of the warts which we would have
removed; the rubbing of them with raw flesh, to be buried in a dunghill that
they may rot away insensibly therewith, or washing the part in moone-shine for
that purpose: words, and characters, of no signification, or ordinary form,
for the curing of diseases in man, or beast; more then too many whereof we find
in Cornelius Agrippa, and Paracelsus.

Forms of words and figures for the stanching of blood; for the pulling out of
thorns, for easing pain, for remedying the biting of a mad dog.

Amulets made up of relics, with certain letters and crosses, to make him
that wears them, invulnerable.

Whistling for a wind wherewith to winnow; as it is done in some ignorant
parts of the west.

The use of an holed flint, hanged up on the rack, or beds head, for the
prevention of the nightmare in man, or beast.

The judging by the letters of the names of men or women, of their fortunes, as
they call them; according to the serious fopperies of Arcandam.

The seventh sons laying on of hands for the healing of diseases; The putting
of a verse, out of the Psalms, into the vessel, to keep the wine from
sowring; The repeating of a verse out of Virgil to preserve a man from
drunkenness all that day following; Images astronomically framed under
certain constellations to preserve from several inconveniences; as under the
sign of the Lion the figure of a Lion made in gold, against melancholic
fancies, dropsy, plague, fevers: which Lessius might well marvel how Cajetan
could offer to defend; when all the world knows how little proportion and
correspondence there is betwixt those imaginary signs in heaven, and these
real creatures on earth.

Judiciary Astrology, as it is commonly practiced, whether for the casting of
nativities, or prediction of voluntary, or civil events, or the discovery of
things stolen or lost: for, as the natural Astrology when it keeps it self
within its due bounds is lawful, and commendable, (although not without much
uncertainty of issue;) so that other Calculatory, or figure-casting Astrology
is presumptuous and unwarrantable; cried ever down by Counsels and Fathers,
as unlawful; as that which lies in the midway betwixt magic, and imposture,
and partakes not a little of both.

The anointing of the weapon for the healing of the wound, though many miles
distant; wherein (how confident soever some intelligent men have been)
doubtless there can be nothing of nature; since in all natural agencies, there
must necessarily be a contaction either real, or virtuall; here in such an
intervall, none can be: neither can the efficacy be ascribed to the salve;
since some others have undertaken and done the cure, by a more homely and
familiar ointment; It is the ill-bestowed faith of the agent that draws on the
success from the hand of an invisible physician.

Calming of tempests, and driving away devils by ringing of belles, hallowed
for that purpose.

Remedy of witcheries, by heating of Irons, or applying of crosses. I could
cloy you with instances of this kind; wherewith Satan beguiles the simple upon
these two mis-grounded principles; 1. That in all experience they have found
such effects following upon the use and practice of such means; which indeed
cannot be denied: Charms and spells commonly are no less unfailing in their
working, then the best natural remedies; doubtless, the Devil is a most
skillful Artist: and can do feats beyond all mortal powers; but God bless
us from employing him: 2 King. 1. 3. Is it not because there is not a God in
Israel that we go to enquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron?

2. That there may be hidden causes in nature for the producing of such effects
which they know not; neither can give any reason of their operations; whereof
yet we do commonly make use, without any scruple; and why may not these be
ranged under the same head? which they have used with no other but good
meaning; without the least intention of reference to any malignant powers; In
answer whereto, I must tell them, that their best plea is ignorance; which may
abate the sin, but not excuse it: There are indeed, deep secrets in nature,
whose bottom we cannot dive into; as those wonders of the lodestone; a piece
outwardly contemptible, yet of such force as approaches near to a miracle:
and many other strange sympathies and antipathies in several creatures; in
which rank may be set the bleeding of the dead at the presence of the
murderer: and some acts done for the discovery of witchcraft both in this, and
our neighbor kingdom; But withal, though there be secrets in nature which we
know not how she works; yet we know there are works which are well known,
that she cannot do: how far her power can extend is not hard to determine: and
those effects which are beyond this, (as in the forementioned particulars) we
know whither to ascribe: Let it be therefore the care and wisdom of
Christians to look upon what grounds they go: whiles they have God, and
nature for their warrant, they may walk safely; but where these leave them,
the way leads down to the chambers of death.

CASE III.
Whether reserving my conscience to my self I may be present at an Idolatrous
devotion; or whether in the lawful service of God I may communicate with
wicked persons.

THe question is double: both of them of great importance; The former I must
answer negatively; your presence is unlawful upon a double ground; of sin, and
of scandal: of sin, if you partake in the Idolatry; of scandal, if you do
but seem to partake: The scandal is threefold; you confirm the offenders in
their sin; you draw others by your example into sin; you grieve the spirits of
those wiser Christians, that are the sad witnesses of your offense. The great
Apostle of the Gentiles (1 Cor. 8. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.) has fully determined
the question in a more favorable case: The heathen sacrifices were wont to be
accompanied (in imitation of the Jewish, prescribed by God himself) with
feasts; the owners of the feast civilly invite the neighbors (though
Christians) to their banquets; The Tables are spread in their Temples; The
Christian guests out of a neighbourly society, go, sit, eat with them: S.
Paul cries down the practice, as utterly unlawful: yet this was but in matter
of meat; which sure was Gods, though sacrificed to an Idol; how much more must
it hold in rites and devices, merely, either humane, or devilish?

I need not tell you of the Christian Soldiers in the Primitive Persecution,
who when they found themselves by an ignorant mistaking drawn, under a
pretense of loyalty, into so much ceremony as might carry some semblance of an
Idolatrous thurification, ran about the City in an holy remorse, and proclaimed
themselves to be Christians: Nor how little it excused Marcellinus Bishop of
Rome, from an heavy censure, that he could say he did but for company cast a
few grains of incense into the fire. The charge of the Apostle (1 These. 5.
22.) is full, and peremptory, that we should abstain from every appearance of
evil.

It is a poor plea that you mention of the example of Naaman. Alas, an
ignorant pagan: whose body if it were washed from his leprosy, yet his soul
must needs be still foul: 2 Kings 5. 17, 18, 19. yet even this man will
thenceforth offer neither burnt offering, nor sacrifice unto any other God, but
unto the Lord; nor upon any ground but the Lords peculiar; and will therefore
lade two Mules with Israelitish earth; and is now a professed convert: Yea, but
he will still bow in the Temple of Rimmom: But how will he bow? Civilly only,
not religiously; In the house of Rimmon, not to the Idol; Not in relation to
that false deity, but to the King his master: you shall not take him going
alone under that Idolatrous roof, but according to his office, in attendance
of his Sovereign: nor bowing there, but to support the arm that leaned upon
him: And if upon his return home from his journey he made that solemn
protestation to his Syrians, which he before made to the Prophet: Take notice o
all ye Courtiers, and men of Damascus, that Naaman is now become a proselyte of
Israel; that he will serve and adore none but the true God; and if you see him
at any time kneeling in the temple of your Idol Rimmon, know that it is not
done in any devotion to that false God, but in the performance of his duty and
service to his royal master; I see not but the Prophet might well bid him, Go
in Peace. How ever that ordinary and formal valediction to a Syrian, can be no
warrant for a Christians willing dissimulation.

It is fit for every honest man to seem as he is; what do you howling amongst
Wolves, if you be not one? Or what do you amongst the Cranes, if you be a
Storke? It was the charge of Jehu, when he pretended that great sacrifice to
Baal; Search, and look that there be here with you none of the servants of the
Lord, (2 King. 10. 23.) but the worshippers of Baal only: surely had any of
Gods clients secretly shrouded himself amongst those Idolaters, his blood had
been upon his own head: Briefly then, if you have a mind to keep your self
in a safe condition for your soul, let me lay upon you the charge which Moses
enforced upon the congregation of Israel in the case of Corahs insurrection,
Depart I pray you from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of
theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins. Number. 16. 26.

The latter I must answer affirmatively: If the ordinances be holy, why should
not you take your part of them?

It is an unjust niceness to abridge your self of a blessing, for another
man's unworthiness: Doubtless, there ought to be a separation of the precious
from the vile; the neglect whereof is the great sin of those, whom in duty it
concerns to perform it; but where this is not accordingly done, shall I suffer
for another offense? my own sins may justly keep me off from Gods Table;
if another man's may do so too, I appropriate the guilt of his sin to my own
wrong: surely it argues but small appetite to these heavenly viandes, if you
can be put off with a pretense of others faults: Judge of the spiritual repast
by this earthly; were you thoroughly hungry, would you refrain from your meat
because one of the guests has a pair of foul hands? that may be a just
eyesore to you, but no reason why you should forbear wholesome dishes: Carve
you for your felfe, and look to your own trencher; he feeds for himsefe, not
for you; sin is the uncleanness of the soul; that cleaves closer to it, then
any outward nastinesse can to the skin; to feed thus foul then is doubtless
unwholesome, to himself, it can be no hurt to you. But you are ready to strain
the comparison higher to your own advantage: say, that one of the guests has
a plague sore running upon him, shall I then think it safe to sit at the Table
with him? now sin is of a pestilent nature, spreading its infection to others
besides its own subject; therefore it is meet we keep aloof from the danger
of his contagion: True, there are sins of a contagious nature, apt to diffuse
their venom to others, (as there are othersome whose evil is intrinse call to
the owner) but these infect by way of evil counsails, or examples, or familiar
conversation, not by way of a mere extemporary presence of the person, by
spreading of their corruption to those that are taken with them; not by
scattering abroad any guilt to those that abhor them. Well did our Savior
know how deadly an infection had seized on the soul of Judas, yet he drives
him not from his board, lest his sin should taint the disciples.

The spirit that writes to the seven Asian Churches (Rev. 2. 20, 21, 22.) saw
and professed to see the horrible infection spread amongst the Thyatirians by
the doctrine and wicked practices of their Jesebel, yet all that he enjoynes
the godly party is to hold their own.

Have no fellowship, says the Apostle, with the unfruitful works of
darkness: (Ephesians. 5. 11.) Lo he would not have us partake in evil: he does
not forbid us to partake with an evil man in good works.

However therefore we are to wish and endeavor (in our places) that all the
congregation may be holy; and it is a comfortable thing to join with those,
that are truly conscionable, and carefully observant of their ways, in the
immediate services of our God: yet where there is neglect in the overseers, and
boldness in the intruders, and thereupon, Gods sacred Table is pestred with
some unworthy guests; it is not for you, upon this ground, to deprive your
self of the benefit of Gods blessed Ordinances; notwithstanding all this
unpleasing encombrance you are welcome, and may be happy.

CASE IV.
Whether Vows be not out of season now under the Gospel; of what things they
may be made; how far they oblige us; and whether and how far they may be
capable of release.

IT is a wrongful imputation that is cast upon us by the Roman Doctors, that
we abandone all vows under the Gospel: They well see that we allow and
profess that common vow (as Lessius terms it) in Baptism; which yet both
Bellarmine, and he, with other of their consorts, deny to be properly such: It
is true, that as infants make it by their proxies, there may seem some
impropriety of the engagement as to their persons; but if the party Christened
be of mature age, the express vow is made absolutely by, and for himself.
Besides this we allow of the renovation of all those holy vows, (relating to
the first) which may bind us to a more strict obedience to our God; yet more,
though we do not now allow the vows of things in their nature indifferent, to
be parts of Gods worship, (as they were formerly under the law) yet we do
willingly approve of them, as good helps and furtherances to us, for the
avoiding of such sins as we are obnoxious unto; and for the better forwarding
of our holy obedience.

Thus, the charge is of eternal use, Psalm. 76. 11. Vow unto God and perform
it: Not that we are bound to vow; that act is free and voluntary: but that when
we have vowed, we are straightly bound to performance: It is with us for our
vows as it was with Ananias and Saphira for their substance, Whiles it
remained (says S. Peter) was it not thine own? (Act. 5. 4.) He needed not to
sell it, he needed not to give it; but if he will give, he may not reserve: If
he profess to give all, it is death to save some; he lies to the holy Ghost,
that defalkes from that which he engaged himself to bestow.

It mainly concerns us therefore to look carefully in the first place, to
what we vow; and to our intentions in vowing; and to see that our vow be not
rash and unadvised; of things either trivial, or unlawful, or impossible, or
out of our power to perform; for every vow is a promise made to God; and to
promise unto that great and holy God, that which either we cannot, or ought not
to do, what is it other then to mock and abuse that Sacred Majesty; which will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain? It is the charge to this
purpose of wise Solomon; Be not rash with thy mouth; and let not thine heart be
hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth,
therefore let thy words be few. Eccles. 5. 2.

Your vow therefore must be either of things morally good; for the quickening
you in that duty which you are bound to do: or of things indifferent in
themselves, the refraining, or doing whereof may tend either to the restraint
from sin, or the furtherance of your holy obedience: As a man that finds his
brains weak, and his inclination too strong to pleasing liquor, binds
himself by a vow to drink no wine save only at Gods table: or a man that
finds himself apt to be mis-carried by his appetite, confines himself by his
vow to one dish; or to one meal for the day: or a man that finds himself
given to the pleasure of gaming, to the loss of his time, and the weakening of
his estate, curbes himself by his vow never to play for money: or a man that
finds his prayers weak, and his flesh rebellious, vows to tame his unruly
desires, and to stir up his duller devotions, by fasting.

And as the matter of your vow must be carefully regarded; so also your
intentions in vowing; for if you vow to do good to an ill end, your thank is
lost, and danger of judgment incurred: as if you vow to give alms for vain
glory, or ostentation: or, if God shall prosper your usurious, or monopolizing
project, you will build an hospital; your vow is like to be so accepted, as
the story tells us, the prayers were, of that bold Curtizan, who coming to the
shrine of S. Thomas of Bromiard. sum. praedict.
Canterbury (as that traitor was styled) devoutly begd, that through the
intercession of that Saint, she might be graced with so winning a beauty, that
might allure her paramours, to a gainful courting of so pleasing a mistress;
when suddenly (as my author tells me) she was stricken blind: and certainly,
so it might well be; for if a supposed Saint were invoked, it was God that was
highly provoked by the sinful petition of a shameless harlot: and it was most
just for him to revenge it; and so we may well expect it shall be with
whosoever shall dare to make use of his sacred name to their own wicked or
unwarrantable purposes.

Since therefore our vows must be for their matter (as Casuists well
determine) De meliore bono, and for intentions, holy and directed only to
good; it plainly appears that many idle purposes, promises, resolutions are
wont to pass with men for vows, which have no just claim to that holy title:
One says he vows never to be friends with such a one that has highly abused
him; another, that he will never come under the roof of such an unkind
neighbor: one that he will drink so many healths to his honored friend;
another that he will not give the wall or the way to any passenger: one that he
will never wear suit but of such a color; another that he will never cut his
hair till such an event; These, and such like may be foolish, unjust,
ridiculous selfe-ingagements; but vows they are not; neither therefore do
bind the conscience otherwise then as Sampsons cords, and withes, which he may
break as a thread of towe. Judge. 16. 9. 12.

But as for true vows; certainly they are so binding, that you shall sin
hainously in not performing them: It is no better then dishonesty to fail in
what we have promised to men; but to disappoint God in our vows, is no less
then sacrilege: That of Solomon's is weighty; Eccles. 5. 4, 5, 6. When thou
vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in
fools; pay that which thou have vowed: Better it is that thou should not
vow; then that thou should vow and not pay it: Suffer not thy mouth to cause
thy flesh to sin; neither say before the Angel that it was an error; wherefore
should God be angry at thy vows and destroy the work of thine hands? If
therefore a lawful and just vow have passed your lips, you may not be false to
God, and your self in not keeping it.

But if it shall so fall out, that there proves to be some maine inconvenience
or impossibility in the fulfilling of this your solemn promise unto God,
whether through the extreme prejudice of your health, and life, or the
overswaying difficulty of the times what is to be done; surely as under the law
(Number. 30. 3, 4, 5.) it was left in the power of the parent to overruled the vow
of the child, so I doubt not but under the Gospel, it is left in the power of
your spiritual fathers, to order, or dispense with the performance of those
vows, which you would, but cannot well fulfill: neither was it spoken in
vain, nor in matter of sins only, which our Savior in way of authorization,
said to his Apostles and their successors, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven. Mat. 18. 18. In this case therefore, I should advise you to
make your address to your spiritual pastor, and freely to lay open your
condition before him, and humbly to submit your self to his fatherly
directions in that course which shall be found best and safest for your soul:
Think it not safe in a business of so high nature to rely upon your own
judgment, and to carve out your own satisfaction; but regard carefully what God
has said of old, The priests lips should keep knowledge: and they should
seek the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. Mala.
2. 7.

CASE V.
Whom may we justly hold an Heretic; and what is to be done in the case of
Heresy?

THere is no one point wherein the Church of God has suffered more then in the
misunderstanding of this question; How many thousand innocents have in these
latter ages of the Church perished in this unhappy quarrel? yea how many
famous Churches have been most unjustly thunderstruck with direful censures
of Excommunication, down to the pit of hell, upon pretense of this crime, which
have been less guilty then their Anathematizers? And even amongst our selves,
how apt we are to brand one another with this hateful mark where there is no
true merit of such a reproach?

It much imports us therefore to know who may be deservedly thus stigmatized by
us: I have elsewhere somewhat largely insisted on this theme; whither I might
spare some lines to refer you; But, in short, thus: To let pass the
original sense, and diverse acceptions of the word; An heresy is no other then
an obstinate error against the foundation; All truths are precious, but some
withal necessary; All errors are faulty, but some damnable; the haynousnesse
of the error is according to the worth of the truth impugned; There are
Theological verities fit for us to know and believe; there are Articles of
Christian faith needful to be known and believed; There are truths of meet and
decent superstructure, without which the fabric may stand; there are truths of
the foundation so essential, as that without them it cannot stand: It is a
maime to the house if but a tile be pulled off from the roof, but if the
foundation be razed, the building is overthrown: this is the endeavor and act
of heresy.

But now the next question will be, what doctrines they are which must be
accounted to be of the Foundation; Our countreyman Fisher the Jesuit, and his
Associates will tell you roundly, that all those things which are defined by
the Church to be believed, are Relat. of the third confer. p. 6.
fundamental: A large groundworke of faith: Doubtless the Church has defined
all things contained in the scripture, to be believed; and theirs (which they
call Catholic) has defined all those Traditionall points which they have
added to the Creed, upon the same necessity of salvation to be believed; now if
all these be the foundation, which is the building? what an imperfect fabric
do they make of Christian Religion; all foundation, no walls, no roof? Surely
it cannot, without too much absurdity, be denied, that there is great
difference of Truths, some more important then others; which could not be, if
all were alike fundamental: If there were not some special Truths, the
belief whereof makes, and distinguishes a Christian, the authors of the Creed
Apostolic (besides the other Symboles received anciently by the Church) were
much deceived in their aim: He therefore that believes the holy Scriptures
(which must be a principle presupposed) to be inspired by God; and as an
abstract of the chief particulars thereof, professes to believe and embrace
the Articles of the Christian faith, to regulate his life by the law of Gods
commandments, and his devotion by the rule of Christ prescribed; and lastly to
acknowledge and receive the Sacraments expressly instituted by Christ;
doubtless this man is by profession a Christian, and cannot be denied to hold
the foundation; and whosoever shall wilfully impugn any of these, comes within
the verge of Heresy: wilfully, I say; for mere error makes not an heretic;
if out of simplicity, or gross ignorance, a man shall take upon him to
maintain a contradiction to a point of faith, being ready to relent upon
better light, he may not be thus branded: eviction and contumacy must improve
his error to be heretical. The Church of Rome therefore has been too
cruelly-liberall of her censures this way; having bestowed this livery upon
many thousand Christians whom God has owned for his Saints: and upon some
Churches more Orthodoxe then her self; presuming upon a power (which was never
granted her from heaven,) to state new articles of faith; and to excommunicate
and bar all that shall dare to gainsay her oracles: Whereas the great Doctor
of the Gentiles has told us from the spirit of God, that there is but one
Lord, one faith, one baptism; (Ephesians. 4. 5.) and what faith is that? S. Jude
tells us: Jude 3. The faith that was once delivered the Salnts; so that as well
may they make more reiterations of Baptism, and multipliclties of Lords, as
more faiths then one: some explications there may be of that one faith, made by
the Church, upon occasion of new-sprung errors, but such, as must have their
grounds from fore-written truths; and such, as may not extend to the
condemnation of them whom God has left free: new articles of faith they may
not be: nor bind further then God has reached them.

Heretics then they are and only they, that pertinaciously raze the
foundation of the Christian faith; what now must be done with them? surely,
first, if they cannot be reclaimed, they must be avoided: It is the charge of
the beloved disciple to the elect Lady, 2 John v. 10. If any man come unto you
and bring not (that is, by an ordinary Hebraisme, opposes) this doctrine,
receive him not into your houses, neither bid him God-speed; But the Apostle of
the Gentiles goes yet higher; for writing to Titus the great Super-intendent of
Crete, his charge is, Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an heretic, after the first
and second admonition reject.

Now, when we compare the charge with the person, we cannot but find that this
rejection, is not a mere negative act, of refraining company; but a positive
act of censure, so as he who had power to admonish, had also power to reject in
an authoritative, or judicatory way: He says then, Devita, reject or avoid,
not (as Erasmus too truly, but bitterly scoffs the Romish practice) De vita
toll: This of killing the heretic, as it was out of the power of a spiritual
supervisor, so was it no less far from the thoughts of him that desired to
come in the spirit of meekness: Fagots were never ordained by the Apostle for
arguments to confute heretics; this bloody Logic and Divinity was of a much
later brood; and is for a Dominick, not a Paul to own: for certainly faith is
of the same nature with love, it cannot be compelled; persuasions may move it,
not force: These intellectual sins must look for remedies of their own kind;
But if either they be (as it is often) accompanied with damnable blasphemies,
against God, whether in his essence, or attributes, or the three
incomprehensible persons in the all-glorious Deity, or the blessed mediator
betwixt God and man Jesus Christ, in either of his natures; Or else, shall be
attended with the public disturbances and dangerous distempers of the
Kingdom, or State wherein they are broached, the Apostles wish is but
seasonable, in both a spiritual and a bodily sense; Gal. 5. 12. Would to God
those were cut off that trouble you: In the mean time, for what concerns your
self, if you know any such, as you love God, and your souls, keep aloof from
them, as from the pestilence. Epiphan. haeres. l. 1.
Epiphanius well compares heresy to the biting of a mad dog, which as it is
deadly, (if not speedily remedied) so is it withal dangerously infectious; not
the tooth only, but the very foame of that envenomed beast carries death in
it; you cannot be safe, if you avoid it not.

CASE VI.
Whether the laws of men do bind the conscience; and how far we are tied to
their obedience.

BOth these extremes of opinion concerning this point must needs bring much
mischief upon Church and Kingdom: Those that absolutely hold such a power in
humane laws make themselves slaves to men: Those that deny any binding power in
them, run loose into all licentiousness: Know then that there is a vast
difference betwixt these two; To bind the conscience in any act; and to bind a
man in conscience to do or omit an act: Humane laws cannot do the first of
them; the latter they may, and must do: To bind the conscience is to make it
guilty of a sin in doing an act fobidden, or omitting an act enjoined as in it
self such: or making that act in it self an acceptable service to God which
is commanded by men: Thus humane laws cannot bind the conscience: It is God
only, 1 John 3. 21. who, as he is greater then the Conscience, so has power to
bind or loose it: Esaias 31. 22. It is he that is the only Lawgiver to the
Conscience: Jam. 4. 12. Princes and Churches may make laws for the outward
man; but they can no more bind the heart, then they can make it; In vain is
that power which is not enabled with coertion; now what coertion can any humane
power claim of the heart, which it can never attain to know? the spirit of man
therefore is subject only to the father of spirits, who only sees and
searches the secrets of it, and can both convince, and punish it.

Besides, well did penitent David know what he said, when he cried out: Against
thee only have I sinned: Psalm. 51. he knew that sin is a transgression of the
law; and that none but Gods law can make a fin: men may be concerned, and
injured in our actions, but it is God who has forbidden these wrongs to men,
that is sinned against, in our acts of injustice and uncharitableness: and who
only can inflict the spiritual (which is the highest) revenge upon offenders.
The charge of the great Doctor of the Gentiles to his Galatians, was, Gal. 5.
1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free; and be not
entangled again in the yoke of bondage. What yoke of bondage was this but the
law of Ceremonies? what liberty was this but a freedom from the bondage of
that law? And certainly if those ordinances, which had God for their author,
have so little power to bind the conscience, as that the yoke of their bondage
must be shaken off, as inconsistent with Christian liberty; how much less is
it to be endured, that we should be the servants of men, in being tied up to
sin by their presumptuous impositions?

The laws of men therefore do not, ought not, cannot bind your conscience, as
of themselves; but, if they be just, they bind you in conscience to obedience:
They are the words of the Apostle to his Romans; Romans 13. 5. Wherefore ye must
needs be subject; not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. However
then their particular constitution in themselves put no special obligation
upon us, under pain of sin, and damnation; yet in a general relation to that
God, who has commanded us to obey authority, their neglect or contempt
involves us in a guilt of sin: All power is of God; that which the supreme
authority therefore enjoynes you, God enjoynes you by it; the charge is
mediately his; though passing through the hands of men.

How little is this regarded, in these loose times, by those lawless persons,
whose practices acknowledge no soverainty but titular, no obedience but
arbitrary; to whom the strongest laws, are as weapons to the Leviathan, who
esteems Iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood? Job 41. 27.

Surely had they not first cast off their obedience to him that is higher then
the highest, they could not without trembling hear that weighty charge of the
great God of heaven, Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers: For there is no power but of God; and the powers that be, are ordained
of God: 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake; and therefore should be convinced in themselves, of that awe, and
duty, which they owe to Sovereignty, and know and resolve to obey God in men;
and men for God.

You see then how requisite it is, that you walk in a middle way betwixt that
excessive power which flattering Casuists have been wont to give to Popes,
Emperors, Kings, and Princes in their several jurisdictions; and a lawless
neglect of lawful authority: For the orthodox, wise, and just moderation
whereof, these last ages are much indebted to the learned and judicious
Chancellor of Paris Tract. de Vit. spec. lect. 4. Cit. Dom. a Soto ut infra.
, John Gerson; who first so checked that overflowing error of the power of
humane usurpation (which carried the world before it) as gave a just hint to
succeeding times, to draw that stream into the right channel; in so much as
Gersonis positio parum distat ab haeresi Lutherana. Dominic. a Soto De Jure,
etc. l. 1. qu. 6.
Dominicus a Soto complains greatly of him, as, in this, little differing from
the Lutheran heresy: But in the way which they call heresy, we worship the
God of our fathers; rendering unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and unto
God those things that are Gods; yielding our bodies to Caesar, Act. 24. 14.
reserving our souls for God: tendering to just laws, our active obedience, to
unjust, passive.

But in the mean time, far be it from us to draw this knot of our obligation
harder, and closer then authority it self intends it: What ever Popes may do
for their Decrees, certainly good Princes never meant to lay such weight upon
all their laws as to make every breach of them (even in relation to the
authority given them by God) to be sinful.

Their laws are commonly shut up with a sanction of the penalty imposed upon
the violation: There is an obedientia bursalis, (as, I remember, Gerson, calls
it,) an obedience, if not of the person, yet of the purse; which Princes are
content to take up withal: we have a world of sins (God knows) upon us in
our hourly transgressions of the royal laws of our maker; but woe were us,
if we should have so many sins more, as we break statutes: In penal laws,
where scandal or contempt find no place, humane authority is wont to rest
satisfied with the mulct paid, when the duty is not performed.

Not that we may wilfully incur the breach of a good law, because our hands
are upon our purse-strings ready to stake the forfeiture; This were utterly to
frustrate the end of good laws, which do therefore impose a mulct that they
may not be broken; and were highly injurious to sovereign authority, as if it
sought for our money, not our obedience, and cared more for gain, then good
order; then which there cannot be a more base imputation cast upon government:
As then we are wont to say in relation of our actions to the laws of God; that
some things are forbidden because they are sinful, and some things are sinful
because they are forbidden, so it holds also in the laws of men; some things
are forbidden because they are justly offensive; and some other things are
only therefore offensive because they are forbidden; in the former of these,
we must yield our careful obedience, out of respect even to the duty it self;
in the latter, out of respect to the will of the lawgiver; yet so, as that if
our own important occasions shall enforce us to transgress a penal law,
without any affront of authority or scandal to others, our submission to the
penalty frees us from a sinful disobedience.

CASE VII.
Whether Tithes be a lawful maintenance for Ministers under the Gospel; and
whether men be bound to pay them accordingly.

AS the question of Mine and Thine has ever embroyled the world; so this
particular concerning Tithes has raised no little dust in the Church of God:
whiles some plead them in the precise (quota parta) due and necessary to be
paid, both by the law of God, and nature it self; others decry them as a
Judaicall law, partly Ceremonial, partly Judicial; and therefore either now
unlawful, or at least neither obligatory, nor convenient.

What is fit to be determined in a business so overagitated; I shall shut up
in these ten propositions.

1. The maintenance of the legal ministry allowed and appointed by God was
exceeding large and liberal.

Besides all the tithes of corn, wine, oil, herbs, herds, flocks; they had
forty eight cities set forth for them, with the fields round about them, to the
extent of two thousand cubits every way: They had the first fruits of wine,
oil, wool, etc. in a large proportion; he was held to be a man of an evil eye
that gave less then the sixtieth part: They had the first born of cattle,
sheep, Beeves, goats; and the price of the rest, upon redemption: even the
firstborn of men must ransom themselves at five shekels a man; They had the
oblations and vows of things dedicated to God: They had the ample loaves (or
Ten hand breadths long, five broad, seven fingers high.
cakes rather) of shewbread; and no small share in meat offerings,
sinofferings, trespass offerings, heaveofferings, shake-offerings; of
sacrifices eucharisticall they had the breast and shoulder; of other, the
shoulder, and the two cheeks; yea the very burnt-offerings afforded them an
hide: Besides all these; all the males were to appear before the Lord thrice a
year; none were exempted (as their Doctors tell us) but servants, deaf, dumb,
idiots, blind, lame, defiled, uncircumcised, old, sick, tender, and weak, not
able to travel, and no one of these which came up might appear empty-handed.

What do I offer to particularize? there were no less then twenty-four gifts
allotted to the Priests, expressly in the law; the severalls whereof who so
desires to see, may find in the learned and profitable Annotations of Master
Ainsworth H. Ainsworth in Lev. 24. 9. ex Maimonide.
out of Maimonides.

2. We can have no reason to imagine, that the same God who was so bountiful
in his provisions for the legal ministry, should bear less respect to the
Evangelicall; which is far more worthy and excellent then the other: Justly
therefore does Saint Paul argue from the maintenance of the one, a meet
proportion for the fit sustentation of the other, I Cor. 9. 13.

3. It is not fit for Gods ministers to be too intent to matter of profit;
their main care must be the spiritual proficiency of the souls of their
people; the secular thoughts of outward provisions must come in only on the
by; but howsoever they may not be entangled in worldly affairs, yet they ought
in duty to cast so much eye upon these earthly things as may free them from
neglect; It is to Timothy that S. Paul writes, that if any man provide not for
his own, and especially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith,
and is worse then an Infidel. 1 Timothy 5. 8.

4. Under the law the tenth part was precisely allotted by the owner of all
things, for the maintenance of the sacred Tribe; And if the wise and Holy God
had not found that a meet proportion for those that served at his Altar; he had
either pitched upon some other, or left it arbitrary: yea even before the law,
Genesis 14. 20. Abraham (and in his loins Levi himself) paid tithes to
Melchisedec (Heb. 7. 4.) the priest of the most high God; and whether it were
by his example, or by some natural instinct, we find the very heathen
nations, after some great victory achieved, were wont to devote still the
tithe of their spoils to their Deities: so Camillus, when he had after a long
siege taken the rich City Vejos, (a place of such importance, that upon the
taking of it, he wished some great cross might befall Rome for the tempering
of so high a felicity) he presently offers the tithe to his (...), etc. Clem.
Al. Stro. 1.
Gods: yea it was their custom who were most devout, to consecrate the tithe
of all their increase to those Gods they were most addicted unto; in so much as
the Romans noted it in their Lucullus, that he therefore grew up to so vast an
estate, because he still devoted the tithe of his fruits to Hercules: And Plin.
l. 12. Bongus de number. Myster. number. 10.
pliny tells us that when they gathered their Frankincense, none of it might be
uttered till the Priest had the tithe of it set forth for him.

5. There can be no good reason given, why we may not observe the very same
rate of proportion in laying out the maintenance of the ministry under the
Gospel; and if these rules and examples be not binding, (since Religion
consists not now in numbers at all) yet there is no cause why Christian
Kingdoms, or Commonwealths may not settle their choice upon the same number,
and quantity with both Jews, and Gentiles.

6. The national laws of this Kingdom have set out the same pro-Kingdome
have set out the same proportion of Tenthes for this purpose; If therefore
there were no other obligation from the law of God or of the Church, nor any
precedents from the practice of the rest of the world, yet in obedience to our
municipall laws, we are bound to lay forth the tenth part of our increase to
the maintenance of Gods service; and that tenth is as truly due to the
minister, as the nine parts to the owner.

7. Since the tenth part is in the intention of the law both civil and
ecclesiastical, dedicated to the service of God; and in the mere intuition
thereof, is allotted to Gods ministers, there can be no reason why it can be
claimed, or warrantably received by Lay persons, for their proper use and
behoof; so as this practice of Impropriation, which was first set on foot by
unjust and sacrilegious Bulls from Rome, is justly offensive both to God, and
good men; as mis-deriving the well-meant devotions of charitable, and pious
souls into a wrong channel. Nothing is more plain then that Tithes were
given to the Church; and in it, to God: how therefore that which is bequeathed
to God may be alienated to secular hands, let the possessors look.

8. Let men be tied to make good the Apostles charge (since the legal rate
displeases) and it shall well satisfy those that wait upon Gods services under
the Gospel; The charge of the Apostle of the Gentiles, is: Let him that is
taught in the word communicate to him that teaches, in all good things, Gal.
6. 6. whereto he adds, ver. 7 Be not deceived, God is not mocked: The charge
is serious, and binding: and the required communication is universal; and that
with a grave Item of Gods strict observation of performance: we may not think
to put it off, with Ambroses, mis-pointed reading, of referring the all goods
things to the teaching (a conceit sensibly weak, and mis-constructive:) nothing
is more evident then that it has relation to the communicating; wherein (for
ought I see) God intends a larger bounty to the Evangelicall ministry then to
the legal; where all is to be communicated, what is excepted? All, not
exclusive of the owner; but imparted by the owner; Let this be really done,
there will be no reason to stand upon the Tenths.

9. But that this may be accordingly done, there is no law that requires a
mere arbitrarinesse in the communicators: the duty of the teacher is
punctually set down, and so well known that the meanest of the people can
check him with his neglect: and why should we think the reciprocal duty of
the hearer fit to be left loose, and voluntary: yet such an apprehension has
taken up the hearts of too many Christians as if the conttibutions to their
ministers were a matter of mere Alms; which as they need not to give, so they
are apt, upon easy displeasures; to upbraid: But these men must be put in
mind of the just word of our Savior; The labourer is worthy of his wages: The
ministry signifies a service; a public service at Gods altar; whereto the
wages is no less due, then the meat is to the mouth of him that pays it; No
man may more freely speak of tithes then my self, who receive none, nor ever
shall do: Know then ye proud ignorants, that call your Ministers your
Almesmen, and your selves their Benefactors, that the same right you have to
the whole they have to a part: God and the same Laws that have feoffed you in
your estates, have allotted them their due shares in them; which without wrong
ye cannot detract: It is not your charity but your justice which they press
for their own: Neither think to check them with the scornful title of your
servants; servants they are indeed, to Gods Church, not to you: and if they do
stoop to particular services for the good of your souls, this is no more
disparagement to them, then it is to the blessed Angels of God, to be
ministering spirits, Heb. 1. 14. sent forth to minister for them who shall be
heirs of salvation.

Shortly, it is the Apostles charge ratified in heaven, that they which labor
in the word and doctrine should be remunerated with a double honor; that is
not formal of words and complements, but real of maintenance; which he lays
weight upon his Timothy to enjoyne, 1 Timothy 5. 17.

10. And surely how necessary it is that we should be at some certainty in this
case, and not left to the mere arbitrary will of the givers, it too well
appears in common experience; which tells us how ordinary it is, where
ministers depend upon voluntary benevolences, if they do but upon some just
reproof gall the conscience of a guilty hearer; or preach some truth which
dis-relishes the palate of a prepossessed auditor, how he straight flies out;
and not only withholds his own pay, but also withdrawes the contributions of
others: so as the free-tongued teacher must either live by air, or be forced
to change his pasture: It were easy to instance, but charity bids me forbear.

Hereupon it is, that these sportulary preachers are feign to sooth up their
many masters, and are so gagged with the fear of a starving displeasure, that
they dare not be free in the reprehension of the daring sins of their
uncertain benefactors; as being charmed to speak either placientia or
nothing. And if there were no such danger in a faithful and just freedom, yet
how easy is it to apprehend, that if even when the laws enforce men to pay
their dues to their ministers, they yet continue so backward in their discharge
of them: how much less hope can there be that being left to their free choice,
they would prove either liberal or just in their voluntary contributions?

Howsoever therefore in that innocent infancy of the Church, wherein zealous
Christians out of a liberal ingenuity were ready to lay down all their
substance at the Apostles feet, and in the primitive times immediately
subsequent, the willing forwardness of devout people took away all need of
raising set maintenances for Gods ministers; yet now, in these depraved and
hard-hearted times of the Church, it is more then requisite, that fixed
competencies of allowance should by good laws be established upon them; which
being done by way of Tithes in those countries wherein they obtain, there is
just cause of thankfulness to God for so meet a provision, none for a just
oppugnation.

CASE VIII.
Whether it be lawful for Christians where they find a country possessed by
savage Pagans and Infidels, to drive out the native inhabitants; and to seize,
and enjoy their lands upon any pretense; and upon what grounds it may be
lawful so to do.

WHat unjust and cruel measure has been heretofore offered by the Spaniard to
miserable Indians, in this kind, I had rather you should receive from the
relation of their own Bishop, Bartolomaus Casa, then from my Pen.

He can tell you a sad story of millions of those poor savages made away, to
make room for those their imperious successors; the discovery of whose unjust
usurpation, procured but little thanks to their learned professors of Complutum
and Salamanca: Your question relates to our own case; since many thousands of
our nation have transplanted themselves into those regions, which were
prepossessed by barbarous owners: As for those countries which were not
inhabited by any reasonable creatures, (as the Bermudas, or Summer-Islands;
which were only peopled with hogs, and deer, and such like brute cattle)
there can be no reason why they should not fall to the first occupant; but
where the land has a known master the case must vary: For the decision
whereof some grounds are fit to be laid.

No nation under heaven but has some Religion or other, and worships a God
such as it is, although a creature much inferior in very nature to themselves;
although the worst of creatures, evil spirits: and that religion wherein they
were bred, (through an invincible ignorance of better) they esteem good at
least.

Dominion and propriety is not founded in Religion, but in a natural, and
civil right; It is true that the Saints have in Christ, the Lord of all
things, a spiritual right in all creatures; All things are yours, (says the
Apostle) and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: but the spiritual right
gives a man no title at all to any natural or civil possession here on earth;
yea Christ himself, though both as God, and as Mediator, the whole world were
his, yet he tells Pilate, My Kingdom is not of this world; neither did he
(though the Lord Paramount of this whole earth) by virtue of that transcendent
sovereignty put any man out of the possession of one foot of ground which fell
to him, either by birth, or purchase: Neither does the want of that spiritual
interest bebarre any man from a rightful claim and fruition of these earthly
inheritances.

The barbarous people were Lords of their own; and have their Sagamores; and
orders, and forms of government under which they peaceably live without the
intermedling with other nations.

Infidelity cannot forfeit their inheritance to others; no more then enmity
professed by Jews to Christian Religion, can escheat their goods to the
Crowns under which they live; yea much less: for those Jews, living amongst
Christian people, have, or might have had means sufficient to reclaim them
from their stubborn unbelief, but these savages have never had the least
overture of any saving helps toward their conversion: They therefore being as
true owners of their native inheritances, as Christians are of theirs, they can
no more be forced from their possessions by Christians, then Christians may be
so forced by them: Certainly, in the same terms wherein they stand to
Christians, do also in their judgment, Christians stand to them; and if it
would seem hard to us, that an inundation of Pagans should (as heretofore it
has done) break in upon us, and drive us out of our native possessions, how
could it seem less unjust in us to them?

Their Idolatries, and sins against nature are heinous and abominable; and such
as for which God of old condemned the seven nations to an utter extirpation;
But what commission have we for their punishment? Could we show such a patent
in this case as the Israelites had for their wars against Amalek, and those
neighboring heathens, all were sure: But you know who said, What have I to do
to judge them that are without? 1 Cor. 5. 12. And if he may not be a Judge, who
may be an executioner?

Refusal of Christianity can be no sufficient ground of either invasion, or
expulsion: since violence is not the appointed way for plantation of the faith:
which must be persuaded, and not compelled; that sentence therefore of Pope
Greg. cap. Pervenerabilem: and cap. Si non. 23. q. 4. Justum sanctumque esse
bellum quod infidelibus a Christianis infertur, ut eis imperio subditis
praedicari possit Christi Evangelium, ne si imperio subditi non sint,
praedicationi and conversioni little qui crediderint impedimento esse possint.
Gregory; Justum sanctumque esse bellum etc. (That it is a just and holy war
which is by Christians made against Infidels, that they being brought under
subjection, the Gospel of Christ might be preached unto them; lest that if
they should not be subjected, they might be an hindrance to preaching, and to
the conversion of those that would believe;) is surely either not out of the
chair, or beside the cushion; and better beseems a successor of Romulus, then
of Peter: I may not omit to acquaint you how hotly this maine question was
disputed by Spanish and Italian Divines upon the very first entrance of this
litigious usurpation: At which time Pope Alexander 6. (Anno. 1493.) gave his
large Decretory Bull to Ferdinand King and Isabella Queen of Castile and Aragon
for his expedition against the barbarous Indians of the then newly discovered
world: Genesius Sepulveda a learned Spaniard writ then, in defense and
encouragement of this holy invasion, a Dialogue, which he called Democrates
secundus, which was published at Rome, by the procurement of Antonius
Augustinus, Auditor of the Palace; which no sooner came abroad, then it was
eagerly set upon, by the Divines both of Italy and Spain; amongst these
latter, the Doctors of Salamanca, add the Completenses; and above them
Antonius Ramirus Bishop of Segovia fall foul upon that offensive discourse,
which Genesius would feign have vindicated by an Apology, set forth to that
purpose; but how insufficiently, it were easy to show, if it were as needful:
But to make the matter good, he thinks to back himself by the authority of
great, and famous persons, both Counselors, and Doctors, by him cited; and
above all by that loud Bull of Decret. and indultum Alex. 6. super expeditione,
etc. Populos in ejusmodi insulis and terris degentes ad Christianam religionem
indulcere velitis and debeatis, etc.
Franciscus a Victoria, the famous Professor of Divinity at Salamanca,
concerning this so weighty affair; which he has published with such wisdom
and moderation, as so great a business required; stating the question aright
on both sides; both showing the insufficiency of the received grounds of that
Indian expedition, and directing to those just motives, and rules of
proceedings herein, as might be, in such a case, justifiable: to which grave
and solid discourse of his, you may, if you please, be referred for further
satisfaction.

Onwards, I shall draw forth some few of such considerations from him as may
serve for my present purpose.

First therefore it is lawful for Christians to travel into any country under
heaven; and as strangers to stay there, without any wrong done to the natives;
A thing allowed by the law of nations derived from the law nature; By which law
it is every where held an inhumane thing to offer ill measure to a stranger. It
is the argument that righteous Lot used to the worst of Pagans, the Sodomites;
Only unto these men do nothing; for therefore are they come under the shadow
of my roof, Genesis 19. 8.

And if before the division of nations, the earth lay freely open to all
passengers without scruple, to travel whither they pleased, surely, that
partition was never intended to warrant a restraint: And if nature have made
the Sea and all the In-lets of it common, it were very injurious to abridge any
nation of the free use of so liberal an element.

Secondly, it is lawful for us to use trafique with those Infidels, and to
interchange commodities with them, and to abide upon their coasts for
negotiation; and to fish in their sea, and to take part of those profits which
nature has made common to all comers: And if those Pagans shall oppose us in
so warrantable courses, it will be meet for us to tender them all fair
satisfaction; persuading them that we intend no harm or prejudice to them in
their persons, or estate; but much good to both; laboring to win them by all
courteous demeanure; But if they shall fly out, notwithstanding all our kind
indevours, into a violent opposition of us; setting upon us in a hostile
manner, offering to cut our throats in so unjust a quarrel, it is lawful for
us to stand upon our defense, and to repel one force with another; and to use
all convenient means for our security; and if we cannot otherwise be safe, to
raise bulwarks or fortifications for our own indemnity; and if we find our
selves over-powred by implacable Savages, to call for the aid and assistance of
our friends, and (if the enmity continue and proceed) of our Princes: since the
just cause of war is the propulsation of public injuries; and such injury
is as great, as barbarous.

But if not so much cruelty of disposition as fear and suspicion of a strange
nation shall arm them against us; our care must be so to manage our own
defense, as may be least offensive to them; and therefore we may not take this
occasion of killing their persons, or sacking their towns, or depopulating
their countries; for that in this case they are no other then innocent.

If after all gentle entreaties, courteous usages, and harmless selfe-defence,
they shall persist in a malicious hostility, and can by no means be reclaimed
from their impetuous onsets; there is now just cause not to deal with them as
innocents, but as enemies: and therefore to proceed against them accordingly.

But an higher and more warrantable title, that we may have to deal with these
barbarous Infidels, is, for the propagation of Christian Religion; and the
promulgation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ amongst these miserable savages: For
which we have good ground from the charge of our Savior: Go preach the
Gospel to every creature; Mar. ult. and he that was in bonds for the name of
the Lord Jesus, tells us, the word of God is not bound; 2 Timothy 2. 9. not bound,
either in fetters, or within limits: Oh that we could approve to God, and our
consciences, that this is our maine motive and principal drift in our western
plantations; but how little appearance there is of this holy care and endeavor,
the plain dealer upon knowledge has sufficiently informed us; Although I now
hear of one industrious spirit that has both learned the language of our
new-Islanders, and printed some part of the scripture in it; and trained up
some of their children in the principles of Christianity: a service highly
acceptable to God, and no less meritorious of men: The Gospel then may be,
must be preached to those heathens, (otherwise they shall perpetually remain
out of the estate of salvation) and all possible means must be used for their
conversion; But herein I must have leave to depart from Victoria, that he holds
it lawful if the savages do not freely permit (but go about to hinder) the
preaching of the Gospel, to raise war against them; as if he would have them
cudgelled into Christianity: surely this is not the way: It is for Mahumetans
to profess planting religion by the sword; it is not for Christians; It is a
just clause therefore, that he puts in, that the slaughters hereupon raised may
rather prove an hinderance to the conversion of the savages, as indeed it fell
out; the poor Indians being by these bloody courses brought into such a
detestation of their masters, the Castilians, that they professed they would not
go to heaven if any Spaniards were there.

The way then to plant the Gospel of Christ successefully among those
Barbarous souls, must be only gentle, and plausible: first, by insinuating
our selves into them by a discreet familiarity, and winning deportment, by an
holy and inoffensive living with them; by working upon them with the notable
examples of impartial justice, strict piety, tender mercy, compassion,
chastity, temperance and all other Christian virtues; and when they are thus
won to a likeing of our persons, and carriage, they will be then well capable
of our holy counsels; Then will the Christian faith begin to relish with them;
and they shall now grow ambitious of that happy condition, which they admire in
us: Then shall they be glad to take us into their bosoms: and think
themselves blessed in our society, and cohabitation: Lo this is the true way
of Christian conquests.; wherein I know not whether shall be the greater
gainer, the victor, or the conquered; each of them shall bless other, and both
shall be blessed by the Almighty.

CASE IX.
Whether I need in case of some foul sin committed by me, to have recourse to
Gods Minister for absolution; and what effect I may expect therefrom.

A Mean would do well betwixt two extremes; the careless neglect of our
spiritual fathers on the one side, and too confident reliance upon their
power, on the other: some there are that do so over-trust their leaders eyes,
that they care not to see with their own; others dare so trust their own
judgment, that they think they may slight their spiritual guides: there can
be no safety for the soul, but in a midway betwixt both these.

At whose girdle the keys of the kingdom of heaven do hang, me thinks we
should not need dispute, when we hear our Savior so expressly deliver them to
Peter, in the name of the rest of his fellows; and afterward to all his
Apostles, and their lawful successors in the dispensation of the doctrine and
discipline of his Church: In the dispensation of doctrine to all his faithful
Ministers under the Gospel; In the dispensation of discipline to those that
are entrusted with the mannaging of Church Government; with these latter we
meddle not; neither need we, if we had occasion; after the so learned and
elaborate discourse of the power of the Keys, set forth by judicious Doctor
Hammond; to which I suppose nothing can be added. The former is that which lies
before us: Doubtless, every true minister of Christ, has by virtue of his
first and everlasting commission, two keys delivered in his hand; they key of
knowledge, and the key of spiritual power: the one, whereby he is enabled to
enter and search into, not only the revealed mysteries of salvation, but also,
in some sort, into the heart of the penitent; there discovering (upon an
ingenuous revelation of the offender) both the nature, quality, and degree of
the sin; and the truth, validity, and measure of his repentance: The other
whereby he may in some sort either lock up the soul under sin, or free it
from sin: these keys were never given him, but with an intention that he
should make use of them upon just occasion. The use that he may and must make
of them, is both general, and special: General; in publishing the will and
pleasure of God signified in his Word, concerning sinners; pronouncing
forgiveness of sins to the humble penitent, and denouncing judgment to the
unbeleeving, and obdured sinner: In which regard, he is as the Herald of the
Almighty, proclaiming war and just indignation to the obstinate; and tendering
terms of pardon and peace to the relenting and contrite soul: or rather, as
the Apostle styles him, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Gods Ambassador offering and suing for
the reconciliation of men to God; and if that be refused, menacing just
vengeance to sinners.

Special, in a particular application of this knowledge and power to the soul
of that sinner which makes his address unto him: Wherein must be inquired both
what necessity there is of this recourse, and what aid and comfort it may
bring unto the soul.

Two cases there are wherein certainly there is a necessity of applying our
selves to the judgment of our spiritual guides; The first is in our doubt of
the nature and quality of the fact; whether it be a sin, or no sin; for
both many sins are so gilded over with fair pretenses and colorable
circumstances, that they are not to be descryed but by judicious eyes; and some
actions which are of themselves indifferent may by a scrupulous conscience be
mistaken for heinous offenses: whither should we go in these doubts but to our
Counsel learned in the Laws of God; of whom God himself has said by his
Prophet, The Priests lips should keep knowledge; and they should seek the law
at his mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2. 7.

The second is in the irresoluble condition of our souls, after a known sin
committed; wherein the burdened conscience not being able to give case unto it
self seeks for aid to the sacred hand of Gods Penitentiary here on earth: and
there may find it; This is that which Elihu, as upon experience, suggesteth
unto Job; on his dunghill: Job 33. 22. The soul of the remorsed draws near to
the grave; and his life to the destroyers: ver. 23. But if there be a messenger
(of God) with him, an interpreter, one of a thousand, to show unto man his
uprightness, (and the soundness of his repentance) ver. 24. then is (God)
gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down into the pit; I have
found a ransom, etc. ver. 26. He shall pray unto God; and he will be
favorable unto him; and he shall see his face with joy. In case of some
dangerous sickness of the body we trust not our own skill, nor some ignorant
quack salvers, but seek to a learned and experienced Physician for the
prescription of some sure remedies; whereas, if it be but for a sore finger, or
a toothache, we care only to make use of our own receipts: And so in civil
quarrels; if it be only some slight brabble, we think to compose it alone;
but if it be some maine question importing our freehold, we are glad to wait
on the stairs of some judicious Lawyer, and to fee him for advice: How much
more is it thus in the perilous condition of our souls; which as it is a part
far more precious then its earthly Tabernacle, so the diseases whereto it is
subject, are infinitely more dangerous, and deadly.

Is your heart therefore embroyled within you, with the guilt of some heinous
sin? labor what you may to make your peace with heaven; humble your self unto
the dust before the Majesty whom you have offended; beat your guilty breast,
water your cheeks with your tears; and cry mightily to the father of mercies
for a gracions remission; but if after all these penitent indevours you find
your soul still unquiet, and not sufficiently apprehensive of a free and full
forgiveness, betake your self to Gods faithful Agent for peace; run to your
ghostly Physician, lay your bosom open before him; flatter not your own
condition; let neither fear nor shame stay his hand from probing and searching
the wound to the bottom; and that being done, make careful use of such
spiritual applications as shall be by him administered to you: This, this is
the way to a perfect recovery, and fullness of comfort.

But you easily grant that there may be very wholesome use of the ghostly
counsel of your Minister in the case of a troubled soul; but you doubt of the
validity and power of his absolution: concerning which it was a just question
of the Scribes in the Gospel; Who can forgive sins but God only? Mar. 2. 6.
Our Savior therefore to prove that he had this power, argues it from his
divine omnipotence; He only has authority to forgive sins, (ver. 7.) that
can say to the decrepit paralytick; Arise, take up thy bed and walk; (ver. 9.)
none but a God can by his command effect this; he is therefore the true God
that may absolutely say, Thy sins be forgiven thee: (ver. 10.) Indeed, how
can it be otherwise? Against God only is our sin committed; against man only
in the relation that man has to God; He only can know the depth of the
malignity of sin, who only knows the soul wherein it is forged; He only who
is Lord of the soul, the God of spirits, can punish the soul for sinning; He
only that is infinite can doom the sinful soul to infinite torments; He
only therefore it must be, that can release the guilty soul from sin, and
punishment. If therefore man, or Angel shall challenge to himself this
absolute power to forgive sin let him be accursed.

Yet withal it must be yielded, that the blessed Son of God spoke not those
words of his last commission in vain; Whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them, and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained; John
20. 23. neither were they spoken to the then present Apostles only, but in
them to all their faithful successors to the end of the world.

It cannot therefore but be granted, that there is some kind of power left in
the hand of Christ's ministers, both to remit and retain sin: Neither is this
power given only to the Governors of the Church, in respect of the censures
to be inflicted, or relaxed by them; but to all Gods faithful ministers, in
relation to the sins of men: A power not sovereign and absolute, but limited
and ministerial, for either quieting the conscience of the penitent, or
further aggravating the conscience of sin and terror of judgment to the
obstinate and rebellious; Neither is this only by way of a bare verbal
declaration, (which might proceed from any other lips) but in the way of an
operative and effectual application, by virtue of that delegate, or
commissionary authority, which is by Christ entrusted with them: For certainly,
our Savior meant in these words to confer somewhat upon his Ministers, more
then the rest of the world should be capable to receive, or perform, The
absolution therefore of an authorized person must needs be of greater force and
efficacy, then of any private man, how learned or holy soever, since it is
grounded upon the institution and commission of the Son of God, from which
all power and virtue is derived to all his ordinances: and we may well say,
that whatsoever is in this case, done by Gods minister (the Key not erring) is
ratified in heaven: It cannot therefore but be a great comfort, and cordial
assurance to the penitent soul, to hear the messenger of God (after a
careful inquisition into his spiritual estate and true sight of his
repentance) in the name of the Lord Jesus pronouncing to him the full remission
of all his sins.

And if either the blessing, or curse of a father go deeper with us, then of
any other whosoever; although but proceeding from his own private affection
without any warrant from above; how forcible shall we esteem the (not so much
apprecatory, as declaratory) benedictions, of our spiritual Fathers, sent to
us, out of Heaven?

Although therefore you may perhaps, through Gods goodness, attain to such a
measure of knowledge and resolution, as to be able to give your self
satisfaction concerning the state of your soul; yet it cannot be amiss, out of
an abundant caution to take Gods minister along with you, and making him of
your spiritual Counsel, to unbosome your self to him freely, for his
fatherly advice and concurrence: The neglect whereof, through a kind of either
strangeness, or mis-conceit, is certainly not a little disadvantageous to the
souls of many good Christians. The Romish Laity makes either Oracles, or Idols
of their Ghostly Fathers; if we make Ciphers of ours, I know not whether we be
more injurious to them, or our selves. We go not about to rack your
consciences to a forced, and exquisite confession, under the pain of a no
remission; but we persuade you for your own good, to be more intimate with, and
less reserved from, those whom God has set over you for your direction,
comfort, salvation.

CASE X.
Whether it be lawful for a man that is not a professed Divine, that is, (as
we for distinction are wont to call him) for a laick person, to take upon him
to interpret the Scripture.

MAny distinct considerations had need to make way to the answer.

First, it is one thing for a man to interpret Scripture, another thing to take
upon him the function of preaching the Gospel, which was perhaps in your
intention; this is far more large then the other; every man that preaches,
interprets the Scripture; but every one that interprets Scripture, does not
preach: To interpret Scripture is only to give the sense of a Text; but to
preach is to divide the Word aright; to apply it to the conscience of the
hearer; and in an authoritative way to reprove sin, and denounce judgment
against sinners; to lay forth the sweet promises of the Gospel to the
faithful and penitent; for the performing whereof there must be a commission
to Gods minister from him that sends him; upon which the Apostle has
pronounced a ((...)) Who is sufficient for these things?

Secondly, it must be considered in what nature, and within what compass the
interpretation is; for doubtless the just degrees of callings must be herein
duly observed; whether in a public way, as Pastors of congregations; or in a
private way, as masters of families; whether in the schools, in a mere
Grammatical way; or in the Church, in a predicatory.

Thirdly, it must be considered, as what the calling, so what the gifts are of
the interpreter: for surely, mere interpretation does not depend upon the
profession, but upon the faculty of the undertaker; whether he be learned, or
ignorant; whether skillful in languages and arts (which certainly must be
required in whosoever would put forth his hand to so holy and great a work) or
whether inexpert in both: where these gifts of interpretation, and eminent
endowments of learning are found, there can be no reason of restraining them
from an exercise so beneficially edificatory to the Church of God: without
which the truth of Christian religion had wanted much both of her vigor, and
luster in all generations. How famously is it known that Origin before his
entering into holy Orders, even at eighteen years of his age entered into that
great work of his Catechisings? Act. 18. 24, 25. Apollos the Alexandrian was
an eloquent man, and mighty in scriptures, and taught diligently the things of
the Lord; yet knew nothing but the Baptism of John: till Aquila and Priscilla
took him to task, and more perfectly expounded to him the way of God; and what
happy use it pleased God to make of laick hands, for both the defense and
propogation of the Gospel, we need no other witness then S. Jerome; who has
memoriz'd amongst the primitive Christians, Aristides, Agrippa, Hegesippus,
Justin, Musunus, Modestinus, both the Apollonii, Heraclius, Maximus, and many
others, whom God raised up amongst the learned laity of those times, to
Apologize for Christianity; And in the last foregoing age, how scarce removed
out of our sight, are Laurentius Valla, both the Earls of Mirandula, Capnio,
Fagius, Erasmus, Faber, and the rest of those famous way-makers to the
succeeding restitution of the evangelicall truth; And what a treasure in this
kind had the Church of God lost, if it should have missed the learned
annotations upon the scripture, derived to us from the hands of Mercerus,
Joseph Scaliger, Drusius, both Casaubons, Tilenus, Grotius, Heinsius, Seldom,
and such other expert Philogists, never initiated into sacred Orders?

Fourthly, due and serious consideration must be had of the interpretation it
self; that it be genuine, and orthodox: for there can be nothing in the world
more dangerous then to mis-construe God speaking to us in his Word; and to
affixe upon his Divine Oracles a sense of our own, quite dissonant from the
intention of that spirit of Truth: care therefore must be taken that the
interpretation given be every way conform to the Analogy of faith, and fully
accordant to other Scripture; the neglect whereof, through either ignorance or
mesprision has bred many foul and perilous Soloecismes in Divinity; To give
you a taste of too full a dish: In the 18. of Ecclesiasticus Eccles. 18. 1.
(...).
, where the Vulgar reads, He that lives for ever created all things at once:
some, and those no mean ones, of the Ancient, followed also by latter
interpreters, have been misled into an ungrounded conceit of an instantany and
entire creation of the world, and all the parts thereof, in the first moment of
time; whereas the Scripture, has expressly and punctually set down the several
six days, wherein each part of it was distinctly formed: which those
misconstruers are fain to understand of the distinct notifications given to the
Angels concerning this almighty work: and what curious subtilties have been
hereupon raised by our school Divines (...). communiler. Montan.
, is more fit to be past over with an unpleasing smile, then to be seriously
recounted; whereas the intention of the place, is only to signify that God
made all things in the universal world that have any being; intimating not the
time of creation, but (as our Estii Annotas. in bocum.
Version has it) the Generality of things created.

What advantage the blasphemous Arrians have formerly taken from the
mis-interpretation of Proverbs 8. 22. where Wisdom is brought in (by the
mistaking of some ancients) to say, Prove. 8. 22. (...).
The Lord created me (in stead of possessed me) in the beginning of his may,
before his works of old, is more worthy of indignation, then any further
prosecution. But most pregnant and notable is the gross mes-prison of a late
famous school-man, Franciscus d'Arriba, Confessor to the late Queen Mother of
France, who to maintain that new way of reconciling that scholasticall
difference among the Roman doctors, concerning the effectual aid of Divine
Grace, depending or not depending upon free will, (about which he had sixty
days disputation with Cardinal Ascoly and Cardinal Bellarmine; showing how
it might well be maintained without the devises of physical predeterminations,
or that scientia media of our late Jesuits) relies chiefly for his opinion
upon that Text of Vulg. Tra. Esa. 45. 11.
Esaias 45. 11. Haec dicit Dominus sanctus Israelis qui fecit ventura, Thus says
the Lord the holy one of Israel who has made things to come: following a
mis-edition of the Vulgar which perverts the sense, by making a wrong stop in
the sentence, whereas their own Montanus, and any other that has but seen the
Hebrew Text, would read it; Haec dicit Dominus sanctus Israelis qui fecit eum;
Ventura interrogate me: Thus says the Lord the holy one of Israel; and his
maker: Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, etc. referring the
ventura, (things to come) to the following interrogate. So Poza the late
extravagant Doctor of Spain, in the maintenance of his novel opinions against
Fathers and Councels, pressed against him, stands upon his defense, out of the
Synod of Constantinople, Act. 5. grounded upon the Ecclus. 25. 9. Blessed is he
that preaches a word unheard of.
words of mis-called, Solomon; Beatus qui praedicat verbum inauditum;
corrupting both the Text and the Council; whereas it should be read, verbum
inauditum obedientis: and the Council has it aright, (...):) as ours turns
it likewise, well is he that speaks in the ears of them that will hear: It
were easy to fill a just volume with instances of this kind.

To this purpose it will be requisite to make use of all those helps that may
enable an interpreter to understand the Scriptures; whether those that are
internal in it self; or external from other supplies: of the former kind are
a diligent sifting of the context and inference; and a careful comparing and
conferring of one Scripture with another; for all truths agree with themselves;
and this Word of God is the Sun that gives us light to see it self External;
where it will be needful to call both for the aid of arts and tongues; and for
the testimonies and judgments of reverend antiquity, and the
not-to-be-neglected authority of modern Doctors; and thirdly, a due regard of
those golden rules of Interpreting; which are recommended to posterity by the
learned pens of Clemens of Alexandria, Hierome, Augustine, Gerson, Hyperius,
Illyricus, Jacobus Matthias, and others; which, as meet for a volume apart, may
not expect to find a room in so concise a Tractate.

The want and neglect of all which requisites what strange work it must needs
make with the simple and unlettered, we may well conceive, when great Clerks
have hereupon bewrayed so foul and palpable miscarriage.

Albinus, the learned master of Charles the great, writing upon John, finding
it said of Judas that having received the Sop, he went immediately out; Erat
autem ipse nox.
Et erat nox; and it was night; puts both together as spoken of Judas; He
(faith he) was the night that went out; as Christ is the day that gives
knowledge to his disciples, that were day too; so Judas the night gives
knowledge to the Jews that were night, of a traitorous wickedness, etc.

What work Psalm. 91. 6. Bern. Ser. 33.
Bernard, (who showed in this, that he saw not all things) makes of the
Domonium meridianum, the noone-day-Devill, in one of his Sermons, is evident to
be seen; yet had he been as well seen in language as he was fervent in his
devotion; he had spared that discourse as raised from a mere ungrounded
interpretation; there being no Devil in the text; but a phantasme of his
deluded imagination: And if I should set forth the descants that our Postillers
run upon the names of Jobs three daughters, I should seem to you as apt to
sport in so serious a subject; and if I could think it worth the labor of
gathering up the wild senses, far-fetcht Allegories, absurd inferences, that
ignorant Friars have fastened upon scripture, it is not a small skin that would
contain that Tome.

Surely that man, whosoever he be, that would be hoising sail in these deeps
of scripture, had need to be well ballast, and well tackled, and skillful in
the Compass, else he will have much ado to escape a wrack: He that will walk
in paths of danger had need to have his eyes about him; an hoodwinkt man may
easily be carried against a post: and he that has not light enough to see his
own way, had need to take heed whom he trusts: He that would blindfold follow
those very interpretations which the Church of Rome has commended for
authentical, would run into foul and dangerous absur dities: let me single
out some few confessed by their own Estius, and Lucas Brugensis; such as are
plainly contradictions to Scripture, and do, as it were, give the lie to Gods
spirit. Such is that 2 Samuel 8. 18. Filii autem David sacerdotes erant; The
sons of David were Priests: whereas every child knows that the Scripture
frequently tells us none could be priests but of Aarons order and tribe; out of
Levies loins; and that David was of the house of Judah: the Septuagint rightly
turns it (...) The word in the original is (...) which every man knows to be
used ordinarily to signify either Principes, or Sacerdotes, as Exodus 2. 16.
. Again who that shall find it in the Vulgar interpretation: David desperabat
etc. David despaired that he could escape from the face of Saul: would not
infer that he utterly distrusted Gods assurance by the prophet of his future
Kingdom; whereas the original is by Estius his own confession, Festinabat,
as we also turn it, David made have to get away etc. 1 Samuel 23. 26. He that
should find it reported of one of the sons of Er, Qui stare fecit solemn, (he
that made the sun to stand still) would justly wonder what kind of man this
was, that had been so long obscured from the world, and yet should have done so
strange a miracle as never was done but by Joshua; (1 Chronicles. 4. 22.) whereas he
that looks into the text, shall find no mention at all of the Sun; but
only of the mere proper name of Jochim the son of Er.

He that shall read in Job, where God speaks of the Leviathan; Cum sublatus
fuerit (i. Leviathan) timebunt Angeli et territi purgabuntur; when he raises
up himself the Angels shall fear, and being terrified shall be purged; Job
41. 25. would sure think this Whale were the Devil, (as some ancients have
mistaken him) and may well wonder how the good Angels (being celestial
spirits) could be capable of fear; or how the evil Angels could be capable of
purging: when the text has no men^ion, nor thought of Where doubtless (...)
was mistaken for (...) which title is sometimes given to the Angels. 1 King.
11. 5.
Angels; but only signifying the strength and terriblenesse of the Whale
expresses it in these words; When he raises up himself the mighty are afraid;
by reason of breakings they purify themselves. Solomon was faulty enough in
his Idolatry, but he that shall read 1 Kings 11. 5. (in the Vulgar
interpretation) that he went after Chamosh the God of the Moabites, shall add
one Idol more to him then we find him guilty of. Solomon was in his holy and
regular times, 1 King. 4. 32. full of heavenly meditations, and divine ditties:
but he that should follow the Vulgar interpretation, would fasten upon him
almost Quinque milla, for mill and quinque, five thousand, for a thousand and
five.
four thousand more then ever he owned.

After that Merab Saul's eldest daughter was given away to Adriel the
Meholathite, 1 Samuel 18. 20. contrary to engagement, he that will follow the
Vulgar, must say that David straight fell in love with Michal, the other
sister; whereas the text tells us that Michal fell in love with him.

He that should find in the Vulgar construction, that Saul sung all the day
naked before Samuel in Naioth; would think his new prophesying had put him into
a merry vein; 1 Samuel 19. 24. whereas the text only tells us that he fell down
stripped of his wonted clothes. Cecinit for Cicidit.


He that should find in the Vulgar, Psalm. 71. 5. David reporting of himself
[Non novi literaturam] I know no learning, would wonder at the Prophets
disparagement of his skill, who had elsewhere professed himself wiser then his
teachers; whereas all that he says, is, The word is (...) numeros.
that the mercies and blessings of God upon him have been so many, that he
knows not the numbers thereof.

He that should find the seven Angels in the Revelation Vestitos lapide;
clothed with stone Rev. 15. 6. (...). Suid. (...). Rev. 15. 6.
, Rev. 15. 6. would sure think them buried; whereas the Text is, clothed in
pure white linen.

And what do you imagine would a plain reader think of that charge of the
wise man; Noli velle mentiri omne mendacium; Be not willing to lie all manner
of lies, Ecclus. 7. would he not straight say: some belike I am allowed to lie?
whereas the words are peremptory even in Estius his reading, according to ours;
Use not to make any manner of lies.

Yea that very correction of the Vulgar interpretation which Brugensis allows
and magnifies, 1 Cor. 15. 51. with what safety can it pass the judicious;
whiles hs reads; Omnes quidem resurgemus, sed non omnes immutabimur; We shall
all rise again, but we shall not all be changed: For how can those rise again,
that never died? how are those capable of a resurrection, which are only
changed? Whereas the just sense runs according to our (...) pro (...).
Version, We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. For those that
are found alive at our Saviors second coming shall not sleep in death; yet
both they and the formerly dead must undergo a change.

I could utterly weary you with instances; How must he that reads the
Apoeryphall Ecclesiasticus, needs say that this man (how obscure soever in his
authority) saw more and clearer then all the acknowledged Prophets of the Old
Testament; for he has foretold us expressly the very name of our Lord Jesus
which none of them ever before hand published: For he (Ecclus. 43. 23.)
speaking of the deep sea, is read in the Vulgar to say, Plantavit illum Dominus
Jesus: The Lord Jesus planted it: I shame to think what sport a Jew will make
of such a gross mistaking; wherein (...) Jesus is mis-read, for (...):
Islands: so as the right sense is only this; God by his counsel appeaseth the
deep, and planteth Islands therein; But I forbear, only if you have too much
leisure, you may be pleased to cast your eye upon the Margin.

In these and many more (for I meant to give you but an assay) the Neh. 6. 2.
Percutiamus soedus in vitulis, in campo uno: for, In viculis, in campo, Ono.
Anni nostri sicut aranca meditabuntur, Psalm. 90. 9. for, as a tale that is
told: Concupiscentia spadonic devirgiuabit juvenculam, Ecolus. 20. 4. Super for
subter. Genesis 35. 8. Vulnera for ulccra, Exodus 9. 9. Distinctum for Bis tinctum,
Exodus 49. 28. Sanctuarii for Sancto atrii, Levit. 6. 16. Tonsis for Tusis,
Levit. 22. 24 Neque for atque, Levit. 25. 11. Solis, for salis, Deuteronomy. 29. 23.
Non fucrit, for fucrit. Josh. 2. 18. Occidentalem, for Orientalem, Jos. 12. 3.
Hamata for Squamata, 1 Samuel 17. 5. Vagi habitabunt for pagi habitabuntur, 1 Samuel 27. 8. Judam for Ludam 2 Samuel 6. 20. Tumulum for tumultum, 2 Samuel 18. 29.
I apides seculi, for Sacculi; Prove. 16. 11. Ad alia for ad alta, Prove. 26. 2.
Sponsa for Spcciosa, Cant. 2. 13. Adultera for adulta, Ecclus. 42. 9. Infidelem
for fidelem, Esa. 17. 10. Imitantes for irritantes: Terra for ^er, Ecclus 48.
2, 3. Obsurduit for obsorduit, Esa. 33. 19. Imprudentem for impudentem, Esa.
33. 19. Faunis sicariis for fatuis sicariis. Esa. 50. 39. Vinctas, for tinctas.
Ezec. 23. 13. Ejiciat, for mittat. Mat. 9. 38. Angelus for Angulus. Zach. 10.
4. Servivit for servavit, Ose. 12. 12. Confessus, for confusus, Mar. 8. 38.
Sexta for tertia, Mar. 15. 25. Mytelem for Melita, Acts 28. 1. Compellebantur,
for Complebantur. Luke 8. 23. Placucrunt for Latuerunt. Heb. 13. 2. Adduxistis
for addixistis. Jac. 5. 6. In carne for in carcere, 1 Pet. 3. 19.
Apppropiuquabit for appropinquavit, 1 Pet. 4 7. Tubarum for turbarum, Rev. 19.
1. De igne Chaldaeorum for de ur Chaldaeorum, Nehem. 9. 7.
mistakes are important, and such as make no small change in the Text; which I
have therefore produced that I might let you see how easy it is for a man that
takes all things upon trust to be abused by his credulity; and how unsafe it is
much more for an unexpert and injudicious person to meddle with the holy
Oracles of the Almighty.

The conclusion then must be, that however it may be lawful for the eminently
learned, either in schools or families, (according as their calling may
warrant them) to interpret even difficult Scriptures, and to untie the knots of
a Text; yet since not many are thus qualified, and those that are so qualified,
if they neglect to follow the prescribed rules, may easily miscarry, to the
great peril both of their own souls, and others; I should therefore advise
that this may be the act of but some few choice persons, and of them, with all
possible caution: and that ordinary Christians, if they have a desire, (besides
all fundamental truths (which are laid down openly and clearly in the sacred
Word of God) to inform themselves in those darker verities, which lie hidden
in more obscure Scriptures) to have recourse to their learned and faithful
Pastors; and rather to rest in that light which they shall receive from their
well-digested instructions, then to rely upon their own (perhaps confident,
but much weaker) judgment.

RESOLUTIONS. The fourth Decade. Cases Matrimonial.
CASE I.
Whether the marriage of a Son or Daughter without or against the Parents
consent may be accounted lawful.

MAtrimony, though not a Saorament, yet a sacred institution of God for the
comfort and propagation of mankind, is so fruitful of questions as that Thom.
e Sanchez. Societ. Jes. Theol. Dematrimonio.
Sanchez the Jesuit has stuffed and in the L. 2. c. De Patribus qui etc.
law civil there is the like permission, although under certain conditions;
and particularly in an utter exigency, Victus causa; To the latter whereof,
some Covarruv: l 3. var. c. 14. ex Accursio and aliis. Les.l. 2. c. 5. D^b. 4.
Expositors hold so strictly, as that they will not admit this to be done for
the redemption of the parent from death, or perpetual bondage; but only to
preserve him from affamishing: wherein certainly they are over-strait laced,
and too much wedded to syllables; it being questionless the intention of the
law to comprehend all equallypressing necessities; to which they add that this
must be only in the fathers power, and that to a child not emancipated, and
left to his own disposing: It is not in my way to dispute the case with them,
take it at the easiest, it sufficiently shows the great power that Nature it
self yields to the parent over the child; By how much stronger then the parents
interest is in the child, so much more wrongful it must needs be in the child
to neglect his parents in finally bestowing himself; And if we look into the
positive law of Number. 30. 3, 4, 5, 6.
God, we shall find the child so wholly left to the parents will and
disposition, as that he may, at his pleasure, dispense with, or frustrate the
vow of his child made to God himself.

Neither do the Less. de Jure l. 2. c. 40. dub. 14.
Roman doctors generally hold otherwise this day in case of an under-age; and
some of them extend this power yet further; yet not without a distinction:
holding, that after the age of puberty, those vows only are in the mercy of
the father, which may be prejudicial to the government of the family, and
paternall power; which is sufficient for my purpose in the question in hand.

And although those Casuists do sufficiently dote upon their Navar. enchir. 4.
prae. c. 14. h. 14. Filius qui parentibus in extrema necessitate constitu^ is
etc.
Monkery, and the vows thereunto appertaining; yet they ascribe so much to the
bond of filial duty, as that they teach, That a son which (his parents being
in extreme need, and wanting his help) enters into a religious order; or comes
not out of it (though professed) when he might be likely by his coming forth to
be aidfull to his said parents, is guilty of a sin against the fifth
Commandment: so as even with them, the respect to a parent ought to over-weigh
a vow of religion; although consummate by a solemn profession.

But, that you may not object to me the age of the law as therefore abrogated
because Mosaicall; hear what the chosen vessel says under the new law of the
Gospel.

If any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his virgin if she
pass the flower of her age, and need so require, let him do what he will; he
sins not; let her marry: (1 Cor. 7. 36.) Nevertheless he that stands
steadfast in his heart, having no necessity; but has power over his own will,
and has so decreed in his heart that he will keep his virgin, does well etc.
(ver. 37.) Lo, the Apostle supposes it in the parents power either to keep
his daughter a virgin, or to dispose of her in marriage: she is not her own,
either to hold, or give; but must be altogether ordered by the superior will
of a parent: Not, that any force is allowed either way, to be used toward the
daughter; whether to continue her in a constrained virginity, or to cast her
against her mind upon a disaffected match; No, that God who disposes all
things sweetly, would have us do so too; he allows parents to be rulers of
their children, but not tyrannes: what they do therefore in this kind, must
be more by counsel, then command: and with more sway of love, then authority:
thus, consulting wisely with the state of times, and the child's disposition,
and abilities of containing, must the parent either keep his virgin, or labor
for the provision of a meet consortship: Thus did the two great Patriarchs of
Gods ancient Church, Abraham and Isaac, provide fit matches for their holy
seed; whiles the unholy provided unfit matches for themselves: Thus did their
godly issue in all generations take their parents along with them in the choice
of meet yoke follows, whiles the godless, whether out of impetuous lust, or
stubborn disobedience, affect with Esau, Genesis 28. 6, 7, 8. to be their own
purveyours, to the great regret, and heartbreaking of their parents.

Lastly, the latitude that S. Paul gives of the liberty of marriage to all
Christians is, Tantum in Domino; only in the Lord; 1. Cor. 7. 39. Now how can
that marriage be in the Lord, which is against him? and how can that be other
then against the Lord; which is against the Lords commandment? And what
commandment can be more express then, Honor thy father and thy mother, Gal. 6.
1. And, Children obey your parents? ver. 2. And what can be more contrary to
the honor and obedience due to Parents, then to neglect them in the maine
business that concerns our lives? And what business can concern our life so
much, as the choice of a meet partner, with whom we may comfortably wear out
all the days of our pilgrimage on earth?

Doubtless then, we may in a generality safely conclude, that it is altogether
unlawful for a child to slight his Parents consent in the choice of his
marriage; There may be some particular cases incident, wherein perhaps this may
without sin or blame be forborne; as when the child either by general
permission, or former elocation shall be out of the Parents disposing, or where
the parent is defective in his intellectualls, or where the child lives in
remotis, out of the compass of intelligence; or where the Parent being averse
from the true Religion denies his consent to match with any but those of his
own strain; or shall upon other by-occasions wilfully stand upon so
unreasonable terms, that neither friends nor authority can overruled him; But
where these or the like preponderating exceptions do not intervene, the child
cannot without sin balk the Parents consent to his choice in marriage.

But though such marriages without, or against consent, be not lawfully made;
yet being once made; they are valid. Matrimonia esse irrita, etc. Instit. de
nuptiis et, ff. de jure nuptiarum. Ita and Evarist. in constit. edita. Anno C.
100.
The civil law, out of the grounds of policy, goes herein too far, which
sentenceth those marriages void, which are made without the consent of Parents,
or Guardians; but as Matrimony has something in it of Nature, something of
Civility, something of Divinity, as instituted by God, and by him to be
regulated; so sure this last interest ought to over-sway the other two; The
marriage therefore thus made, being though faulty yet true, is doubtless after
consummation indissoluble. The parties repentance, and the parents sorrow may
have leisure to afflict them, no power to relieve them.

CASE II.
Whether Marriage lawfully made may admit of any cause of divorce, save only
for the violation of the marriage bed by fornication or adultery.

OUr Savior has so punctually decided the case in his Divine Sermon upon the
mount, that I cannot but wonder at the boldness of any man, who calls himself
a Christian, that dares raise a question after so clear and full a
determination from the mouth of Truth it self.

Whosoever (says he) shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of
fornication, causes her to commit adultery; and whosoever shall marry her that
is divorced, commits adultery, Mat. 5. 32. Yet I find this so evident an
assertion checked by two sorts of adversaries; The one, certain wild
Novellists, who admit of very slight causes of separation; the other, Romish
Doctors, who plead for some other main and important additions to this liberty
of divorce.

I have heard too much of, and once saw, a licentious Pamphlet thrown abroad in
these lawless times, in the defense, and encouragement of Divorces (not to be
sued out, that solemnity needed not, but) to be arbitrarily given by the
distiking husband, to his displeasing and unquiet wife; upon this ground
principally, that Marriage was instituted for the help and comfort of man;
where therefore the match proves such, as that the wife does but pull down a
side, and by her innate peevishness, and either sullen, or pettish and froward
disposition brings rather discomfort to her husband, the end of Marriage being
hereby frustrate, why should it not, says he, be in the Husbands power (after
some unprevailing means of reclamation attempted) to procure his own peace, by
casting off this clogge, and to provide for his own peace and contentment in a
fitter Match?

Woe is me: To what a pass is the world come that a Christian pretending to
Reformation, should dare to tender so loose a project to the public? I must
seriously profess when I first did cast my eye upon the front of the book, I
supposed some great wit meant to try his skill in the maintenance of this so
wild, and improbable a paradox; but ere I could have run over some of those too
welpenned pages, I found the Author was in earnest, and meant seriously to
contribute this piece of good counsel in way of Reformation to the wise and
seasonable care of superiors: I cannot but blush for our age, wherein so bold
a motion has been, amongst others, addmitted to the light: what will all the
Christian Churches through the world, to whose notice those lines shall come,
think of our woeful degeneration in these deplored times, that so uncouth a
design should be set on foot amongst us?

Or how can they construe it other, then a direct contradict on to our Saviors
sentence, in maintaining that practice, which he expressly professes to oppose?
for, what was the Jewish guise here checked by our Savior, but a voluntary
repudiation of a lawful wife upon the terms of dislike, other then
fornication? Their mis-interpretation of the Law alluded unto, argues no less;
The law alluded unto is, that of Deuteronomy; where God says, When a man has
taken a wife, and has been her husband, and it shall be, that she find not
grace in his eyes, because he has found in (...)
her matter of nakedness, he shall write her a bill of divorcement, and send
her away, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. whereupon he infers with an, Ego dico, I say unto you,
Whosoever shall put away his wife saving for fornication, causes her to commit
adultery: the matter of nakedness therefore, for which the Jews were then
wont to divorce their wives, (and offended in so divorcing them) was any other
displeasing quality, besides the breach of wedlock through bodily uncleanness;
for which only had they dismissed their wives, our Savior had neither faulted
their Gloss, nor their Practice; so as herein Christ the giver of the Law,
decides one of those great controversies, which were agitated between the
emulous schools of Sammai, and Hillel: determining on Sammai's side, that for
no other nakedness but that of adultery it was lawful to divorce a wife: and
flatly condemning by the like answer that [(...)] (Mat. 19. 3.) every cause of
repudiation then ordinarily received; as it was by the Pharisee purposely
propounded unto him.

Answerable whereunto is that of the Prophet Malachi, who (in our just reading)
has so fully decided the cause, as if it had been expressly referred to his
umperage: The Lord (says he) has been witness between thee, and the wife of
thy youth; against whom thou have dealt treacherously: Yet is she thy
companion, and the wife of thy covenant, Mal. 2. 14, 15, 16. (Lo, the wife of
thy covenant; therefore too sure settled to be turned off upon every slight
occasion; what? was thy covenant to take her for thy wife till thou should
dislike her? what were this but to mock God, and the world? thy covenant
implies no less then firmitude, and perpetuity.)

Therefore take heed to your spirit; and let none deal treacherously against
the wife of his youth: For the Lord the God of Israel says that he hatoth
putting away; For one covers violence with his garment, says the Lord of
hosts: Therefore take heed to your spirit that you deal not treacherously. What
is this treachery, which the Prophet cries out against, thus vehemently thrice
over, with a breath; but pretended and unjust suggestions against a lawful
wife for her undue divorce? and what is that violence, but the injurious
execution of those suggestions? upon which unsufficient grounds the Lord
professes to hate putting away.

Yea how apparently contrary is this practice to the very original institution
of marriage it self? He that made it in paradise ordained thus: Therefore
shall a man leave his father and his mother and shall cleave unto his wife; and
they two shall be one flesh: Genesis 2. 24. Lo before ever there was father, or
mother, or son in the world, God has appointed that the bond betwixt husband
and wife shall be more strait and indissoluble then betwixt the parent, and
child; and can any man be so unreasonable as to desend it lawful, upon some
unkind usages, or thwartnesse of disposition, for a parent to abandon and
forsake his child; or the son to cast off his parent? much less therefore
may it be thus betwixt an husband and wife: They two are one flesh: Behold here
an union of Gods making: A man's body is not more his own, then his wives body
is his: And will a man be content to part easily with a piece of himself? Or
can we think that God will endure an union made by himself to be so slightly
dissolved? Or how is this bodily matrimony a lively image of the spiritual
marriage betwixt Christ and his Church (who has said, I will betroth thee unto
me for ever; Yea I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in
judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies, Hos. 2. 19.) if upon small
occasions it may be subject to utter dissolution? Yea, what speak I of
Divinity? Even modest Heathens would hiss this Libertinisme off the stage:
Amongst the rest, what a fool was Socrates? The Oracle, belike, called him the
wisest man of his time; but what a fool was he to endure the unquiet clack of
his Xantippe with such cool patience, if he might have quit himself of the
trouble with a sudden act of her dismission? Or what use was there of those
Delegates of Athens and the Harmosyni of Lacedaemon for the peecing up of these
domestique breaches betwixt husband and wife, if the imperious husband had
power to right himself by turning the scold out of doors?

Lastly, what silly counsel was that which the Jewish Rabbi gave to his
client, matched with a shrew; The bone that is fallen to thy lot, that do thou
gnaw upon; if it were altogether free for him to leave that bone, and take
another?

But I have dwelt too long on so gross a subject: There may yet seem some
better color for the plea of the Romish doctors which admit infidelity and
heresy into the rank of those causes which may warrant a divorce: But herein
the ambiguity of the word (if heed be not taken) may deceive you; The Deuteronomy. 24.
1. (...).
Hebrew text, to which our Savior alludes, uses a word which signifies
excision, or cutting off; The Greek, a departing away, or putting off; The
Latin, Divortium, in his true sense is not so heinous as either of the other;
signifying rather a turning aside, but in our ordinary acception amounts to no
less then both. But what unjust difference they make betwixt final separation
and dissolution, we shall find in our next discourse: Onwards, that such
separation may not be made of man and wife (lawfully joined together) for
heresy, or misbeleefe; we need no other conviction then that peremptory and
clear determination of our Savior which we have formerly infisted on: For
though his words on the mount were in a way of doctrinall assertion, yet
afterward, the same words were used by him, in way of a satisfactory answer to
the Pharisees question concerning causes of divorce; professedly resolving that
there could be no allowable ground of such separation except fornication. What
words can be more plain? It is but a shift to say (as the Cardinal does) that
our Savior here meant only to express the proper cause of the separation of
married persons; which is the breach of marriage faith: as having no occasion
to speak of those general grounds which reach to the just sundring of all
humane societies; such as Heresy and Infidelity; which are enough to unglew
all natural and civil relations betwixt father and son, master and servant,
husband and wife: For it is clear that neither question nor answer were bounded
with any particularities; The Pharisee asks, Whether for every cause; Our
Savior answers; For no cause but fornication; And it is spoken beside the
book, that child or servant should or may forsake parent or master in case of
Heresy, or Infidelity: S. Paul teaches other Doctrine: Let as many servants
as are under the yoke (of bondage) count their (infidel) masters worthy of all
honor; 1 Timothy 6. 5. not worthy therefore of desertion, and disclamation: And if
the servants may not shake off the bonds of duty; much less may the son
break or file off the bonds of nature; and as for the matrimonial knot, how
too sure it is to be loosed by infidelity it self, let the Apostle speak; If
any brother has a wife that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with
him, let him not put her away, 1 Cor. 7. 12. And the woman which has an
husband that believes not; and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not
leave him, ver. 13. And if even Infidelity have not power to dis-oblige the
wife or husband, much less, Heresy: In this pretended c^se therefore to
separate from board and bed, is no better then a presumptuous insolence; It is
the peremptory charge of Christ, What God has joined together, let not man put
asunder, Mat. 19. 6. In all lawful marriages, it is God that joins the hands
and hearts of the Married. How dare man then undo the work of God upon devises
of his own? Had the Lord ever said, If thy wife be a wilful mis-beleever, rid
thy hands of her; this separation were just; but now that his charge is clean
contrary, what an impious sauciness is it to disjoyne those whom God has
united?

As therefore, it is not in the power of any third person, upon any whatsoever
pretense, violently to break the sacred bond of Marriage; so neither may the
husband, or wife, enthrall each other by a wilful desertion; whether upon
pretext of religion, or any secular occasion; In which case what is to be done
must come under a further disquisition; Certainly it was never the intention of
the holy and wise God, by virtue of that which was ordained for man's comfort,
and remedy of sin, to bind him to a remediless misery; which must necessarily
fall out, if upon the departure of an unbeleeving, or heretical yoke fellow,
the relict party must be tied up to a perpetualll necessity of either
containing, (if he can) or, if he can not, of burning; The wise Doctor of the
Gentiles well foresaw the dangerous inconvenience that must needs hereupon
ensue, and has given order for prevention, accordingly.

But if the unbeleeving depart, let him depart; A brother, or a sister is not
under bondage in such cases; but God has called us to peace, 1 Cor. 7. 15.
Not, that it is free for a man or woman so forsaken, to carve him, or her-selfe
of redress (what an infinite confusion would follow upon such licentiousness?)
but that after long and patient expectation, and all probable means used for
the reduction of the party deserting; recourse be had (as to the last refuge)
to public Ecclesiastical authority (which is the fittest to manage these
matrimonial affairs, in whose power it may be, either by grave admonitions,
and just censures to bring back the offender to his duty; or upon his
continuing contempt, to set a day for the publication of the just freedom of
the forsaken: wherein they shall do no other then execute that Apostolic
sentence for exemption from an unjust bondage, and providing for a just peace.

CASE III.
Whether after a lawful Divorce for adultery, the innocent party may marry
again.

ALthough Matrimony be not, according to the Romish tenet, one of those
Sacraments which imprint an indeleble Character in the receiver; yet it has,
as they hold, such a secret influence upon the soul, as that it leaves a
perpetual bond behind it, never to be dissolved till death; So as those
offenders, which by just censure are separated from the board and the bed,
cannot yet be freed from the bond of marriage: upon this ground it is that they
bar the innocent party from the benefit of a second marriage, as supposing
the obligation of the former, still in force. In the ordinary Bills of the
Jewish divorce, the repudiated wife had full scope given her of a second
choice; as the words ran: Maimon. Treat. of Divorce.
She was to be free, and to have power over her own soul; to go away; to be
married to any man whom she would: They were not more liberal, then our Romish
divorcers are niggardly: The Jewish divorce being upon unwarrantable cause,
made their liberality so much more finfull, as their divorce was more unjust:
for the divorced woman was still in right the lawful wife of that unrighteous
husband that dismissed her; the Romish doctrine makes their strait-handednesse
so much more injurious, as the cause of separation is more just.

Even this question also is expressly determined by our Savior in his answer to
the Pharisee: Whosoever shall put away his wife except it be for fornication,
and marries another, commits adultery: Mat. 19. Lo then, he that for so
just a cause as fornication puts away his wife and marries another,
commits not adultery: the exception manifestly implies so much, both in
reason and common use: neither indeed, are the words capable of any other
probable sense: That which Bellarmine would fasten upon it, referring the
exception to the former clause, of dismission only, so as it might be lawful
to divorce only for fornication, but not to marry after divorce; cannot stand
without a supply of words of his own, which God never allowed him to
intersert; and besides utterly destroies the sense; casting such a doctrine
upon our Savior, as he would hate to own; for except that restraint be
referred to the marrying again, the sense would run thus, whosoever puts away
his wife commits adultery; which stands not with truth or reason: since it is
not the dismission, that is adulterous, but the marriage of another: It is
therefore the plain drift of our Savior, to teach the Pharisee, that the
marriage of a second wife (after dismission of a former, upon any other cause
except for fornication) is no less then adultery: thereby enforcing, that upon
a just dismission for fornication, a second marriage cannot be branded with
adultery.

Neither will it serve his turn, which he would borrow from S. Augustine, that
upon this negative of our Saviors, we may not look to build an affirmative of
our own; for though it be granted, that he, who putting away his wife not for
fornication, and marries another, sins; yet it follows not that he who
having dismissed his wife for fornication, marries another, sins not at
all: A sin it may be, though not an adultery: For surely if it be a sin, it
must be against a commandment; and if against any commandment, it must be
against the seventh; and what is the seventh commandment, but Thou shall not
commit adultery? Besides, the Pharisees question [Is it lawful for a man to
put away his wife for every cause?] was not without a plain implication of
liberty to marry another; which our Savior well knowing, gives a full answer
as well to what he meant, as what he said; which had not been perfectly
satisfactory, if he had only determined that one part concerning dismission,
and not the other concerning marriage; which clause if two other Evangelists
express not, yet it must be fetched necessarily, from the third; since it is a
sure and irrefragable rule; That all four Evangelists make up one perfect
Gospel. It is therefore a very tottering and unsure ground which our Rhemists
build upon; as if the Apostle meant to cross his Lord, and master, when he
says, The woman which has an husband is bound by the law to her husband, so
long as he lives, Romans 7. 2. therefore only death can dissolve the bond of
marriage; not divorce, not adultery, not divorce for adultery: For how plainly
do the words carry their answer in themselves: So also 1 Cor. 7. 39.
The woman (says the Apostle) that has an husband: but the woman legally
divorced for fornication, has no husband: S. Paul speaks of a true wife, not
a divorced harlot: He had no occasion here to look aside at matter of divorce,
but takes marriage as in its entire right; rather desiring to urge (for
clearing the case of our obligation to the law) that the husband being once
dead, the wife is free to marry again, then to intimate the case of her
incapacity to marry till he be dead.

As for that bond therefore, which is so much stood upon, if it be taken
without all relations to the duties of bed, and board; it is merely
Chimericall; nothing but fantasy. There are, or should be Bonds of
affectation; Bonds of mutual respects, and reciprocal duties betwixt man and
wife; and these must hold firm notwithstanding any local separation; neither
time, nor place may so much as flacken, much less loose them: but, where a
just divorce intervenes, these bonds are chopped in pieces, and no more are, then
if they had never been: And if all relations cease in death, (as they do, in
whatsoever kind) surely divorce, being (as it is) no other then a legal death,
does utterly cut off (as the Hebrew term imports) all former obligations and
respects betwixt the parties so finally separated.

The adulterous wife therefore duly divorced being thus dead in law as to her
husband, the husband stands now as free as if he had never married: so as I
know not why the Apostle should not as well speak to him as to any other; when
he says: Nevertheless to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife,
1 Cor. 7. 2. Neither is it otherwise in the case of a chaste wife after her
separation from an adulterous husband, Mar. 10. 12. In these rights God makes
no difference of sexes; both may lawfully claim the same immunities: which
certainly should they be denied to either, must needs draw on very great
inconveniences: For in how hard a condition should the innocent party be
hereupon left? Either the husband, or wife must be forced to live with an
adulterous consort; or be tied to a perperuall necessity of either doing that
(which perhaps they cannot do) containing; or of suffering that which they
ought not to endure, burning.

What remedy now can be expected of so great a mischief? Our Romish Doctors
propose two; Reconciliation, or Continence: Both good, where they may be had;
Reconciliation, in case of a seasonable and submisse repentance; That which is
the Apostles charge in case of desertion, holds here also, [(...)] let her be
reconciled; the more heinous the wrong is, the more commendable is the
remission.

Continence, after such separation, in case of ability so granted: for surely
this holy disposition is a gift; and therefore is not had, where it is not
bestowed; those that place it in our power, derogate from the thanks of the
giver: yea, he that gives it tells us all cannot receive it: Mar. 19. 11. he
must not only give it, but give us power to take it.

But where the offending party is obstinately vicious; and the innocent (after
all endeavors) unable to contain, without a supply of Marriage, the case is
remediless; and we know Gods mercy such, as that he leaves no man for matter
of resolution utterly perplexed.

Shortly then, I doubt not but I may (notwithstanding great authorities to the
contrary) safely resolve, that in the case of divorce it is lawful for the
innocent person to marry; But for that I find the Decrecing to take bonds of
the persons divorced to remain single. Can. and Constit. c. 107.
Church of England hitherto somewhat tender in the point; and this practice,
where it rarely falls, generally held, though not sinful, yet of ill report,
and obnoxious to various censures: I should therefore earnestly advise, and
exhort those whom it may concern, carefully, and effectually to apply
themselves to the forementioned remedies: Reconciliation, if it be possible,
to prevent a divorce; Holy endeavors of a continued continence, (if it may be
obtained) to prevent a second marriage after divorce: But if these prevail
not, I dare not lay a load upon any man's conscience which God has not
burdened; I dare not ensnare those whom God will have free.

CASE IV.
Whether the authority of a Father may reach so far as to command or compel
the Child to dispose of himself in Marriage where he shall appoint.

THe extent of a paternall power, as we have partly showed already, has been
wont to be very large; reaching in some cases by the Civil law to the life of
the Child; and by the Jewish law, to his liberty: so as it might seem much
more over ruling in case of Marriage; which also seems to be intimated by the
Apostle in that he supposes, and gives a power to the parent either to give or
keep his virgin: And how apt parents are to make use of this awful authority
in matching their children for their own worldly advantage, contrary to their
affections and disposition, we have too lamentable experience every day;
neither is it easy to set forth the mischievous effects that have followed
upon those compelled marriages: for hence ensue perpetual discontentments to
the parties so forcedly conjoined; an utter frustration of the end of marriage,
which should be mutual comfort: and not seldom, dangerous machinations
against the life of the disaffected consort; as it were too easy to instance
every where; but especially, if the affections of the young couple have been
before (as it often falls out) placed elsewhere; what secret heart-burnings; what
loathing of conjugall society; what adulterous plottings do straight follow;
what unkind defiances pass between them? how do they wear out their days in
a melancholic pining, and wish each other, and themselves dead too soon? Yea
herein an imperious or covetous parent may be most injurious to himself, in
robbing himself of that comfort which he might receive from a dutiful child
in her person, in her posterity: For the avoiding of which mischiefs it were
meet and happy, that both parent and child could both know their limits, which
God, and nature has set, and keep them.

Let the child then know that he is his parents; that as he was once a part of
them, in respect of his natural being, so he should be still in his
affections, and obsequiousness, and therefore that he ought to labor by all
means to bring his heart unto a conformity to his parents will and desire,
according to that universal rule of of the Apostle, Children obey your parents
in all things; for this is well pleasing unto the Lord: Colos. 3. 20. The word
is comprehensive, In all things. Things unlawful pass for unpossible; we only
can do, what we ought; In all those things then which are honest, lawful,
just, parents must be obeyed: And the motions for marriage being such, impose
upon the child so far a duty of obedience as that he is bound to work his
affections what he may, to a compliance with his parents will: the wilful
neglect whereof is no better then a kind of domestique rebellion.

Let the parent again consider, that the child however derived from his
loins, is now an entire person in himself; that though the body came from
him, yet the soul was from above; that the soul of his child is endowed with
powers, and faculties of its own; that as he is not animated by his parents
spirits, so he is not inwardly swayed by his parents will or affections; that
when his reason comes to be improved, there may be differences of judgment
betwixt his parent and him; and from thence may arise a diversity or
contrariety of affections and desires; and these affections and passions may
grow to such strength as that he himself shall not be able to master them; and
if the parent fool himself subject to such infirmities, well may he be
induced to pity those whom a vigorous heat of youth has rendered more
headstrong and unruly; withal, let him consider that though the child should
be advised by the parent, yet it is fit that he should like for himself; that
the will is to be led, not driven; that no marriage can be happy, but that
which is grounded in love; that love is so altogether voluntary, that it cannot
consist with constraint.

Lastly, let him know that the power of the father though great, yet is not
unlimited; It is the charge which the father of mercies has laid upon all
earthly fathers, in their carriage toward their children; Fathers, prevoke not
your children to wrath, (or (as the (...), Ephesians. 6. 4. (...), Colos. 3. 2.
Vulgar reads it) to indignation,) lest they be discouraged: and surely, if
there be any thing, wherein the passion of the child may be like to be
inordinately stirred, it is in the crossing of an once-well-setled affection;
and diverting the stream of love into another channel; For the avoiding
whereof the Imperial laws have been so indulgent to the child; as that
(according to their best glosses) they permit not the father to disinherit the
daughter for choosing an husband, not unworthy of her self, though against her
fathers mind; yea some of them have gone a step further: but I forbear: How
far it may be lawful, and fit for the parent to punish the dis-respect of a
child, in so important a case, is not for me to determine; doubtless where the
provision is arbitrary, the parent will be apt so to manage it, as to make the
child sensible of a disobedience; so as both parts herein suffer, and are put
into a way of late repentance.

Briefly therefore, on the one side the Son or Daughter do justly offend, if
without cause, or wilfully they refuse the Parents choice; and are in duty
bound to work their hearts to an obedient subjection to those, unto whom they
owe themselves; and for this cause must be wary in suffering their affections,
to over-runne their own reason, and their parents guidance; either suppressing
the first motions of unruly passions, or if they grow impetuous, venting them
betimes into the tender cares of their indulgent Parents, or discreet and
faithful Friends; that so they may seasonably prevent their own misery, and
their Parents grief: On the other side the Parent shall offend, if holding too
hard an hand over the fruit of his own body, he shall resolve violently to
force the Child's affections to his own bent; and where he finds them settled
will rather break then bow them; not caring so much to persuade as to compel
love: These harshnesses have too much of the Tyran in the^, to be incident into
a Christian Parent; who must transact all these matrimonial affairs in a
smooth and plausible way of consent, and indulgence: A noble and ancient
pattern whereof we find in the contract betwixt Isaac and his Rebecca, Genesis
24. 49, 50, 51, 52, etc. the match was treated on betwixt Abraham's proxy, and
the maids father Bethuel, and her brother Laban: The circumstances drew their
full consent; all is agreed upon betwixt Parents; but when all this is done,
nothing is done, till Rebecca have given her assent; they said, We will call
the damsel, and enquire at her mouth, ver. 57. And they called Rebecca, and
said unto her, Will thou go with this man? And she said, I will go, ver. 58.
Now the contract is made up; till then, all the engagements of Bethuel and
Laban were but complements; Till then, all the rich Jewels of Gold and Silver
given to the intended Bride; and all the precious things given to her mother,
and brother, were but at the mercy of the receivers; Neither ought it to be
other in all Christian espousalls; the free and cheerful consent of Parents
and parties makes the match both full, and happy; Let not the Child dare to
cross his Parents; let not the Parent think to force the Child; and when an
undue bargain is, through the heat of passion, made up past reclamation, let
love and pity so far intercede for the offenders, that they may smart for their
rashness and neglect, without their utter undoing.

CASE V.
Whether the marriage of Consens-Germans, that is, of Brothers or Sisters
Children, be lawful.

THe displeasure of the Canon law against such marriages is so high flowne,
that no less can take it off then an utter diremption of them even though they
be not ratified only, but consummate by carnal knowledge: and the grave
authority of some Ancient and holy Fathers, and eminent Doctors of the Church,
(besides five several Counsels) have passed an hard sentence upon them. The
maine ground of the supposed unlawfulness, is, that clause of Gods Law which
was more then judicial: No man shall approach unto any near of kin to his
flesh to uncover their nakedness, I am the Lord, Levit. 18. 6. which though
Cornelius a Lapide Cor. a Lap. in locum.
(following his Radulphus) would seem to restrain to the ensuing
particularities only; yet they may not think that God will suffer so
universal a charge to be so straightly pent; especially, when we know that there
are diverse other no less unlawful copulations omitted in this black Roll of
uncleanness, then those which are expressly mentioned; the rest being intended
to come in by way of analogy only: for it is easy for any reader to observe,
that all the severalities of the degrees prohibited run still upon the male;
under which, if the like exorbitances of the other sex were not meant to be
comprehended, females should be lawless, and the law imperfect; To marry then
with a Cousen-german is apprehended by these Canonists to be an approach to one
near kin to our flesh; and therefore intimated in that inhibition: Doctor
Will. Syno. Controver. 15. de. Mart. q. 3.
Willet (a man much deserving of Gods Church) conceives these marriages to be
analogically forbidden, in this catalogue of Moses: For, says he, if the
degrees of affinity be limited to the third or fourth degree; as it is not
lawful for a man to marry his wives daughters daughter (Levit 18. 17.) why
should not the line of consanguinity hold to the fourth degree likewise; and so
neither the son to marry his fathers brothers daughter; or the daughter the
son? But that worthy Divine did not heedfully observe the great difference
betwixt these instanced degrees; for the one of these is an equal line, the
other in an unequal; the one is a collateral consanguinity, the other is in a
directly descending affinity; so as the husband should be grandfather in law to
the wife, which in all reason were very unlawful, and absurd; since in all
those descending degrees there is a kind of reverentiall inequality betwixt
the lower and superior, which abhorres from all proportion of a match; whereas
the collateral equidistance of cousensgerman from the stock whence both
descend, has in it no such appearance of inequality. Certainly then, no
analogy can draw these marriages within the prohibition; whether the nearenesse
of approach to our flesh be a just bar unto them, must be further considered.

Gregory Greg. resp. ad Interrog. Augustini. q. 6.
, (whom some would feign interesse in our English Apostleship) writing to his
Augustine, in way of answer to his Interrogations, puts these marriages in the
same rank with the marriages of brothers and sisters; which he brands with this
note, that they seldom ever prove fruitful; As for those of brothers and
sisters, (which were usual, as Diodorus Siculus tells us) amongst the
Egyptians, and are this day in use in barbarous nations) nature it self
abominates the mention of them; In the first plantation of the world there was
a necessity of them; as without which there could have been no humane
generation; but afterward, as the Earth grew more peopled, so these matches
grew still more odious: like as it was also in the first plantation of the
Church; the holy Seed being confined to a narrow compass, were forced, unless
they would join with Infidels, to match sometimes over-near to themselves; as
even Abraham himself, the father of the faithful, marrried his brothers
daughter: but when the bounds of men and believers came to be enlarged, the
greater elbow-room opened a wider liberty of choice; and now Gods select people
found it meet to observe a due distance in the elections of their wives; so
regarding the entirenesse of their Tribes, as that they fell not within the
lines of prohibition; wherein no mention being made of brothers and sisters
children, in all ages and nations, some have thought fit to make use of their
freedom in this kind.

What need I to urge the case of Zelophehads five daughters, Number. 36. 11. who
by Gods own approbation, were married to their fathers brothers sons; To
mince the matter, and to make these sons, nephews, according to the Hebrew
phrase (as Doctor Willet indevours to do) is without either need, or warrant;
since these scruples were not since that time stood upon by the Jewish people:
yea this practice was no less current among the civiller heathens of old; I
could tell you of Cic. orat. pro Cluentio.
Cluentia (by Ciceroes relation) married to her cosen Marc. Aurins; of Marcus
Antonius the wise and virtuous Philosopher, marrying his cosen Faustina; and a
world of others; were not this labor saved me by the learned lawyer Hotoman,
who tells us how universal this liberty was of old, as being enacted by the
laws of the Roman Empire; and descending to the laws of Hotoman de-grad.
cognat. Laurent. Kirchovius profes. Rostoch. in consil. Matrimon.
Justitian; confidently affirms that for five hundred years, all Christian
people (magno consensu) allowed and followed these Imperial constitutions
concerning Matrimony: Although I might here put him in mind of Theodosius
enacting the contrary in his time; as it is like, by S. Ambr. ep. ad Paternum.
66.
Ambroses instigation; who then sharply inveighed against these matches in a
vehement epistle to Paternus, being then in hand with a marriage betwixt his
son and his sisters daughter; But excepting that good Emperor, the coast was
clear perhaps, for the Cesarean constitutions; not so for the judgment of
Divines; amongst whom, it were enough that S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine (the
flower of the Latin fathers) if no other, do bitterly oppose it: This
judgment being found not probable only, but exceeding profitable to the Roman
See, it is no wonder if it obtained both credit and vigor from thence. Decrees
and Decretalls make this inhibition good, not without damning the contrary
practice; and now the Civil and Canon laws clashing with one another, how can
it be but the prevalence must be according to the power of the abettor? What
liberty the Court of Rome has taken to it self in the restraint of marriages,
and upon what ground; all Christendom both sees, and feels: One while their
prohibition reaches to the seventh degree in natural kindred; then to the
fourth: One while the impediment of spiritual cognation, is stretched so far,
without any color of divine authority, as that (what by Hodie cessat
fraternitas and aliqua ex part compaternitas per concilium Trident. Sess. 24.
Navar. c. 22. n. 27.
Baptism, what by Confirmation) twenty several persons are excluded from the
capacity of inter-marriage; another while the market is fallen to fourteen: And
wherefore this? but for the sweet and scarce valuable gain of Dispensations,
upon these occasions flowing into the Lateran Treasure? For which
considerations we have learned not to attribute too much to the judgment or
practice of the Roman Courtiers in this point. Upon the summing up then of this
discourse, will you be pleased to see the vast latitude of different opinions
concerning these marriages? The Canon law decryes them with such rigor, as to
ordain them (though after a conjugall conversation) separated; some moderate
Divines (as Doctor Willet) finding this sentence too hard, go not so far; but
hold this nearenesse of blood a sufficient bar to hinder a marriage
contracted, though not consummate: some others (as M. Perkins in my conference
with him) hold it, though not unlawful, yet inconvenient: some others, (as
learned and acute M. Wootton, and M. Attersoll, who has written a very large
discourse in way of vindication of them) hold them both lawful, and not
inexpedient; Hotoman de-vita matrimon. p. 6. citante Kirchovio, ut supra.
Hotoman yet higher, pium and Christianum esse, quod duarum sororum liberi
matrimonio copulentur; that such a marriage is pious and Christian: In all this
variety if you desire my opinion, I shall neither censure such marriages where
they are made; nor yet encourage them to be made, where they are not: To those
that are free I should be apt to suggest counsels of forbearance; the world
is wide, the choice abundant; let it be never so lawful, yet how unwise and
unsafe were it to put the conscience upon the nicety of a dangerous scruple,
when it may keep aloof off, with a clear freedom, and resolute contentment?
That these marriages are disallowed by so great authority, should be reason
enough to divert the free thoughts to a safer election: and again, that these
marriages are allowed both by Civil laws, and by the judgment of eminent
Divines; and not any where forbidden either (Jure Caesareo or Apostolico) by
Gods law or Caesar's; should be reason enough to bear up the hearts of those
who are so matched, from a scrupulous dejection. Let the persons therefore so
married enjoy themselves with mutual complacencie and comfort, not disquieting
themselves with needless anxieties; Let those single persons who have the
world before them look further off; and fasten their affections at a more
unquestionable distance: As it was wont to be worthy M. Perkins his expression
to this purpose; Let those who must walk close to the brim of a steep
precipice, look well to their feet, and tread sure, and so they may come off
perhaps as fafely as those that are further off; but if a man be to choose his
way, let him so cast it, as that he may not approach near to the brink of
danger.

CASE VI.
Whether is it necessary or requisite there should be a witnessed contract, or
espousals of the parties to be Married, before the solemnization of the
Marriage.

IT is necessary we should distinguish betwixt those things which are
essential to the very being of marriage, and those which are requisite to the
orderly, and well-being of it: It may not be denied that the Marriage is true
and valid, which with full consent of parties is made without the intervention
of a previous contract in a due and lawful form prescribed by the Church: but
it is no less true that such a marriage is very unmeet, and liable to just
exceptions: That God Exodus 22. 16. Levit. 19. 20. Deuteronomy. 20. 7. Deuteronomy. 22. 25.
23. 28. Jer. 2. 2.
, who is the author and institutor of Marriage made a difference in his law,
betwixt a bethrothing, and a matrimony; he that ordained the one, ordained the
other also; and ordained the one in order to the other: And this was constantly
observed in the practice of Gods ancient people accordingly: so we find the
Compare Mat. 1. 18. with Deuteronomy. 22. 13.
Blessed Virgin espoused to Joseph before his taking her to wife; neither did
the Christian Church think fit to vary from so Holy a pattern; whereto S.
Magdeburg. Cent. 2. de Conjugio. 2 Cor. 11. 2.
Paul alludes, when writing to, and of the Church of Corinth, (which he had
happily planted, and forwarded in grace) he says, I have espoused you to one
husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ. Lo he has
betrothed them to Christ in that he had entered them into a Covenant of grace,
and prepared their souls for a full consummation of their blessed union with
Christ in glory; intimating (as Matrimony is a lively resemblance of our
spiritual conjunction with the Lord of Glory) that our bodily espousalls here
below, are they which must make way for a complete marriage ensuing: It were
not difficult, if it were needful, to deduce this holy practice down from the
primitive times to the present: Before the Nicene Council we find the Synod
of Council. Anciran. can. 24.
Ancyra enjoining a severe penance to the man that should defile his body by an
incestuous copulation, after espousalls contracted: And the Council of
Eliveris or Granado, about the time of the Nicene covention, takes such notice
of these betrothings, as that it decreed Council. Eliv. c. 45.
, that if any Parents should break the faith mutually engaged in these
espousalls, they should be held off during the space of three years from the
Communion. What should I trouble you with the Decree of Luitbrand in Syric.
Syricius concerning these contracts; or with the pregnant testimonies of S.
Chrysostom and Ambrose to this purpose; which were but to waste time and paper
upon so clear a Truth? As there was no Christian Church which did not carefully
observe this sacred Rite: so above all other the Roman has been at least
curious enough in calling for a strict and severe account of their espousalls:
what voluminous discourses, what a world of nice questions have fallen from the
pens of their Canonists, and Casuists concerning this subject? Certainly this
is a point of so much use and agitation amongst them, that were it not for the
quarrels arising here-from, it is to be feared their consistories would want
work, and their Advocates employment: But to speak ingenuously, those of the
Roman Clientele are not more careful and punctual in scanning, and observing
the rules and practice of their espousalls, then ours here, are incurious of
both: How many have we heard to say, they will make no promise of themselves
till they come to the Church-dore? and of those that do contract themselves,
how weakly and insufficiently is it performed on many hands? so as their act,
if questioned, is no way obliging; nor such as upon the least discontent, will
endure a contestation.

Now whereas there is a double contract, or espousall, the one of the future;
the other of the present: that of the present, if it be expressed in full
terms, differs nothing from marriage it self, save only in the public
solemnization; which doubtless is a ceremony so requisite, as that without it
an horrible confusion must needs follow both in Church and State.

That of the future, is a mutual engagement of both parties that they will
marry each other; which is most properly an espousall-contract; giving both
assurance to each other of a mutual consent to a Matrimony that shall be; and
yet withal some meet respiration of a more full trial, and inquiry into each
other condition: For which purpose the wisdom of the Church has ordained that
there should be a solemn publication of that more private Contract three
several Sabbaths, to the whole Congregation; not without the earnest charge of
a discovery of whatsoever impediment might justly hinder the intended matrimony.

The frequent, but unfit, use of these Espousall contracts in the Roman Church,
betwixt their children in minority (allowing Aetas legitime contrahendi
matrimonium, est in musculis 14 annos, in foeminis 12; Spousalibus autom
contrahendis, septem in utrisque. Navar. c. 22. n. 28.
seven years in either party for a meet age to this purpose) must needs breed
both much question, and incovenience; but in those which are of a mature age,
and therefore able to judge of what may be most expedient for themselves, this
institution cannot be but singularly useful and beneficial: For neither is it
meet that so great a work, and so highly importing us as matrimony, should be
rashly and suddenly undertaken; neither does it a little conduce to our
safety, that since marriage once passed, is irreversible, we may have some
breathingtime betwixt our promise and accomplishment to inform our selves
thoroughly before it be too late, what we must trust to for ever. For we may
take notice, that though marriage is indissoluble, yet these espousalls, or
contracts of a future marriage, are not so: many things may intervene betwixt
this engagement by promise; and that full and complete, solemnization, which
may break off the match.

The Casuists determine of seventeen several cases, at the least, which may
sort to this effect; some whereof have a proper relation to the Romish
religion; others are common to what ever contracts of this kind; I shall not
grudge you the mention of them all. An espousall-contract therefore may
(according to their judgment) be broken off.

By the willing remission of both parts, although it had been seconded by an
oath: By the entrance of the one party into some order of religion: By a
contract with some other in words of the present: By the travail of one of the
parties into remote countries, and not returning upon a lawful summons at a
time prefixed by the Judge: By an affinity supervening upon the sinful
copulation of one of the parties with the near kinswoman of the other: By the
absolution of the Judge upon suit of one of the parties repenting and pleading
minority: By lapse of the time set for the accomplishment of the marriage by
the disease of one of the parties being fallen into palsy, leprosy, the
Neapolitan sickness, or any other contagious distemper, or notable deformity:
By the fornication of one of the parties committed since the contract: By a vow
of chastity preceding the contract: By some capital enmity intervening betwixt
the families and persons of the contracted by the omission of performing the
promised conditions; as when the dowry agreed upon, is retracted, or held off:
By the fame of a Canonical impediment; By susception of Orders after contract;
By the supervention of a legal kindred, inexpected; By the harshnesse and
asperity of disposition in either party: And (which may comprise many other
particularities) by the falling out and discovery of any such accident, or
event, as if it had been sooner known would have prevented the making of such
a contract; All these, say they, may bar a marriage after espousalls: but yet
so, as that the parties may not be their own arbiters, to break off their
contracts at pleasure, but must have recourse to the Judge Ecclesiastical; and
submit themselves to the overruling sentence of the Church.

If you balk those which are proper to the Romish superstition, yet you shall
find many just and allowable causes which may (after a contract of espousall)
interrupt a purposed matrimony: so as, if there were neither rule, nor example
of any such preceding engagement, yet surely, it were very fit for our own
security, and our confident and comfortable entrance into that estate which we
shall never put off, to observe carefully this previous betrothing of our
selves, ere we knit the knot that can never be loosed.

CASE VII.
Whether there ought to be a prohibition and forbearance of marriages, and
marriage duties for some appointed times.

IT is one thing what is lawful, another thing what is fit and expedient; as
S. Paul has taught us to distinguish: marriage being of Gods own institution,
and that in the perfection of Paradise, there can be no time wherein it may be
unlawful to celebrate it; yet there may be times wherein it is unfit: There is
the like reason of times and places; both of them are circumstances alike; The
debt of the marriage bed not only may, but must be paid by them whom God has
called to that estate; yet there are places, wherein it were barbarous and
piacular to defray it: even, besides those places which are destined to an holy
use, the Jews of old held this act done in the field or under a tree, worthy
of scourging: Maimon. Shicard. de Reg.
Doubtless, there are times so wholly consecrated to devotion, as that therein
it would be utterly unseasonable to let our thoughts loose to the most lawful
pleasures: Hence is that charge of the Apostle, Defraud not one the other,
except it be with consent for the time, that ye may give your selves to fasting
and prayer: 1 Cor. 7. 5. So then as Solomon himself can say, There is a time
to embrace, and a time to refrain from embraceing: Ecclus. 3. 5. But what the
limitation of this time may be, no small question has been raised in the
Church of God: neither do there want extremities on both sides: The Church of
Rome has heretofore been excessively large in her prohibitions; forbidding the
solemnization of marriage upon pretense of the holiness of the great feasts to
be observed; for the whole third part of the year; neither does the account
fall less, if we reckon from the Advent to the Epiphany; from Septuagesima
Sunday to the Octaves of Easter; and from three days before the Ascension to
the Octaves of Pentecost; all which had wont to be strictly kept; besides the
feast of S. John Baptist added by some; and the four Ember weeks by others;
but now of late upon second thoughts, their Council of Council Trid. Sess. 24.
Trent have found it meet to shorten the restraint, and somewhat to enlarge the
liberty of the seasons for marriage, having exempted the two only solemn
feasts of Easter and the Nativity; and abridged some previous weeks of the
former: and for us how observant our Consistories had wont to be of those
inhibitions for their own gain, every Almanac can witness. Some worthy
Divines in our Church did not stick to profess their great dislike of our
conforming herein to the Church of Rome, to the scandal of the Reformed:
Concerning both which, I must say: that if either we, or they do put any
holiness in the time exempted, or any unholinesse in the act inhibited, we
cannot be excused from superstition; Can any time be more holy then Gods own
day? yet on that day we do commonly both publish marriages, and celebrate
them. But if, as in some solemn fasts, indicted by the Church for some
public humiliation, we both do, and injoyne to abstain from all conjugall
society; so in a desire the more devoutly to celebrate the memory of Gods
infinite mercy to mankind in sending a Savior into the world for our
Redemption; and of the glorious resurrection of that Son of God for our
justification, we shall take off our selves from all worldly cares or delights,
I see not why it should not be both lawful, and commendable.

But, to say as it is, as the Romanists are guilty of too much scruple in this
kind, so too many of our own are no less faulty in a careless dis-regard of
the holiest occasions of restraint; which I would to God it did not too
palpably appear in the scandalous carnality of many (otherwise inoffensive)
professors. It is a common practice (which I have long wished an opportunity to
censure) that husbands and wives forget one another too soon: Scarce are their
consorts fully cold, ere they are laying for a second match; and too few
months are enough for the consummation of it. Let me be bold to say, this have
has in it too much not immodesty only, but inhumanity: If we look abroad into
the world, we shall find not among Gods peculiar people only, but even
amongst the very Heathens, a meet (and not niggardly) intermission betwixt the
decease of the one husband, or wife, and the marriage of another: A whole year
was found little enough for the wife to mourn for her husband departed: and so
is still amongst the very Chinese, though Atheous Pagans Alex. ab. Alex. l. 3.
Genesis dier. c. 7. Cod. l. 2. tit. 12.
; And by the civil Laws, a woman marrying within a year after her husbands
death is counted infamous.

It was no short time that As appears by comparing of Genesis 23. 2. with 25. 1.
Abraham (though now very old) breathed upon the death of Sara, (the first of
wives mentioned as mourned for) before he took Keturah; and yet the Hebrew
(...) Gen 23. 2.
Doctors observe that there is a short letter in the midst of that word which
signifies his mourning; to imply (say they) that his mourning was but moderate:
I am sure his son Isaac (Genesis 24. 67.) was not comforted concerning the death
of that his good mother, till three years after her decease: At which time he
brought his Rebecca into that tent which even still retained the name of
Sarahs: whereas with us, after the profession of the greatest dearness, the
old posie of the deaths-ring tells what we may trust to; Dead and forgotten:
Who can but blush to read that some Heathens were feign to make laws that the
wife might not be allowed to continue her solemn mourning for her husband
above ten months; and to see that our women had need of a law to enforce them
so to mourn for the space of one?

In other Reformed Churches there is a determinate time of months set, until
the expiration whereof widows, (especially the younger) are not suffered to
marry; it were more then requisite that these loose times were, here with us,
curbed with so seasonable a Constitution; but it were yet more happy, if a due
regard of public honesty and Christian modesty could set bounds to our
inordinate desires; and so moderate our affections, that the world may see we
are led by a better guide then appetite.

CASE VIII.
Whether it be necessary that marriages should be celebrated by a Minister; and
whether they may be valid, and lawful without him.

IT is no marvel if the Church of Rome (which holds matrimony a Sacrament,
conferring Grace by the very work wrought) require an absolute necessity of
the Priests hand in so holy an act; but for us, who (though reverently
esteeming that sacred institution, yet) set it in a key lower, it admits of too
much question whether we need to stand upon the terms of a Ministers agency in
the performance of that solemn action: There are those in these wild times
that have held it sufficiently lawful for the parties having agreed upon the
bargain before friends and witnesses, to betake themselves to bed: others have
thought this act of conjoining the married persons in wedlock a fitter act for
the Magistrate to undertake. And certainly if there were nothing in marriage
but mere nature, it could not be amiss that men and women should upon their
mutual agreement couple themselves together after the manner of brute
creatures; And if there were nothing in marriage but mere civility, the
Magistrate might be meet to be employed in this service: But now that we
Christians know matrimony to be an holy institution of God himself; which he
not only ordained, but actually celebrated betwixt the first Innocent pair;
and which being for the propagation of an holy seed, requires a special
benediction; how can we in reason think any man meet for this office, but the
man of God, set over us in the Lord; to derive the blessings of heaven upon our
heads? From hence therefore have our wholesome laws taken a just hint to
appropriate this service to a lawful Minister only: so as what ever private
contract may be transacted in corners betwixt the parties affected to each
other, yet the marriage-knot cannot be publicly knit by any other hand, then
Gods Ministers. And herein certainly we have just cause to bless the wisdom
both of the Church and State, which has so regulated these matrimonial
affairs; as that they are not only orderly but safely managed: For doubtless
were not this provision carefully made, the world would be quite overrun with
beastliness, and horrible confusion: And in this point we may well give the
Church of Rome her due, and acknowledge the wise care of her Lateran and
Tridentine Counsels, which have enacted so strict Decrees against Clandestine
marriages, and have taken so severe a course for the reforming of many foul
disorders in these matrimonial proceedings; as may be of good use for the
Christian world: Had they done the like in other cases, their light had not
gone out in a snuff: As therefore it is generally both decreed and observed
(not without excellent reason) in all Christian Churches, that marriages should
be solemnized in the public Congregation of Gods people; so it cannot but be
requisite that it should be done by him, who is ordained to be the mouth of the
Congregation to God; and the mouth of God to the Congregation; And, as under
the Law, the Priest was the man, who must conveigh blessings from God to his
people; so under the Gospel who can be so apt for this divine office, as he
that serves at the Evangelicall altar? And if all our marriages must be
(according to the Apostles charge) made in the Lord, who is so meet to
pronounce Gods ratification of our marriages, as he who is the professed Herald
of the Almighty? As it is therefore requisite (even according to the Roman
Constitutions) that he who is betrusted with the Cure of our souls, should
besides other witnesses be both present and active in, and at our domestique
contracts of matrimony: so by the laws both of our Church and Kingdom, it is
necessary he should have his hand in the public celebration of them. There
may then be firm contracts, there cannot be lawful marriages without Gods
ministers.

CASE IX.
Wheeher there be any necessity or use of thrice publishing the contract of
marriage in the Congregation, before the Celebration of it; and whether it be
fit that any dispensation should be granted for the forbearance of it.

THere were amongst the Jews certain ceremonial Observations (besides the
Precepts) which they called the Hedge of the law; and such there cannot want
amongst Christians; whose prudence must direct them both to the ordaining, and
keeping of some such expedient rules, as may best preserve Gods laws from
violation: Of that kind is this which we now have in hand; This public and
reiterated denunciation of Council. Trident. Sess. 24. Decret. de Reformat.
matrimon.
Bannes before matrimony, is an Institution required and kept both by all the
Churches of the Roman-Correspondence, and by all the Reformed; amongst which,
as ours, is most eminent, so it has still expressed the most zeal and care of
the due observing of so wholesome a Rite: six several Constit. 62, 63, 101,
102, 103, 104.
Canons were made in our Provincial Synod under the Authority of King James of
blessed memory, in the year 1603. to this purpose; with as strict charges,
restrictions, and cautions, as the wit of man could in this case devise; and
the late Directory has found cause to second so useful and laudable a
Constitution; For the convenience, if not necessity, whereof, we need no other
argument then the grievous mischiefs that have followed upon the neglect of
this ordinance; that one were enough, which is instanced by the Tridentine
Council. Trid. ubi supra.
Synod it self; that some lewd persons having secretly married themselves to
one, take liberty to leave that match, and publicly join themselves to
another, with whom they live wickedly in a perpetual adultery; the frequent
practice whereof in those hotter climates we may easily believe; when we see
that in our own more temperate region, the fear of hanging cannot hold some
off from so foul a sin. Let me add hereunto the late experiments of some
odiously incestuous marriages, which (even by the relation of our Diurnalists)
have by this means found a damnable passage, to the great dishonor of God,
and shame of this Church; And hereupon the sad issues of stolen Marriages,
wherein Parents have been most feloniously robbed of their Children, are too
feelingly known, and irrecoverably lamented: But as for unfitness and
inequality of matches, both for age, and condition, (to the too late repentance
and utter undoing of both parties) they are so ordinary, that they are every
days Occurrences: And all these evils have sensibly grown from the want of
these public Denuntiations of Bannes; partly upon the unhappy throwing open
of the fence of discipline, and partly upon the surreption of
secretly-mis-gotten dispensations; And though that forementioned Synod of ours
seconded by Royal authority Constit. and Canons ut supra, Can. 101, 102, 103.
, took the most probable course that could be conceived (the liberty of those
Faculties being continued) for the preventing of these abuses; as the restraint
of the grant of them by any other, save those who have Episcopal authority;
and security to be given upon good bonds that the coast is clear from all
pre-contracts, suits of law, and prohibited degrees; that the full consent of
parents or Guardians is had; that the marriage shall be celebrated in the
parish Church where one of the parties dwells; and lastly the oaths required
of two sufficient witnesses (one whereof known to the Judge) that the express
consent of parents or Guardians goes along with the match intended; and that
there is no impediment from any pre-contract, kindred, or alliance: yet
notwithstanding all this prudent caution we have by woeful experience found our
offices cheated, faculties corruptly procured, and matches illegally struck up
contrary to the pretended conditions: Whereas all this mischief might have
been avoided, if as no marriage may be allowed but public; so those public
marriages might not be celebrated but after thrice publication of the contract
in both the parish Churches where the persons contracted are known to
inhabit: For so both the Parents of either side cannot but be acquainted with
the engagements of their children; and if there be any just hindrance, either
by precontract, or by proximity of blood, or affinity, it cannot be concealed;
that so the snare of either an unlawful or prejudicial matrimony may be
seasonably eschewed: To this good purpose therefore it is no less then
necessary (as I humbly conceive) to be both enacted and observed, that no
marriage should be allowed of any person whatsoever (except perhaps the Peers
of the Realm, who are supposed to be famously known through the Kingdom)
without a solemn publication of their contracts at three several meetings to
the Congregation assembled; and that there may no dispensation at all be
granted to the contrary upon any whatsoever conditions: And if some pretend
bashfulnesse, others fear of malicious prevention (as the Tridentine Doctors
suggest) yet it is fit that both should veil to the inevitable danger of those
mischievous inconveniences, which follow upon these clandestine matches, and
silent dispensations.

CASE X.
Whether marriages once made may be annulled, and utterly voided; and in what
cases this may be done.

IN what only case a divorce may be made after a lawful marriage, you have
seen before; now you inquire of the annulling or voiding of marriages made
unlawfully: which doubtless may be done by just authority upon diverse
well-grounded occasions: For as it is an indispensable charge, Those whom God
has joined together let no man put asunder; so it no less truly holds on the
contrary; Those whom God has forbidden to be joined, let no man keep together.

Our Casuists are wont to be very copious in this subject, distinguishing
betwixt those Impediments which may hinder a Marriage from being made; and
those which may undo and void the Marriage once made. They insist upon many
particularities of both kinds; and some perhaps too many: I shall instance
only in those of the latter sort which are unquestionable; whereof the first
shall be a mis-prison of the match; when one party is mistaken for another; as
when he who by a full contract consented to marry with Anne, is by a fraudulent
substitution put upon a marriage with Mary; whether upon the likeness of the
woman, or the want of a discerning sense in the man; or by some cunning
conveyance of the perfidious contrivers; For certainly, it is the consent that
makes the marriage; and if the hearts be not joined together by mutual
agreement and affection, the coupling of the hands is but a ceremony utterly
ineffectuall: I doubt not but it was in Jacobs power to have dis-avowed the
match with Leah, whom his father in law had deceitfully obtruded upon him,
being more injurious in changing his wise, then in ten-times changing his
wages; since his heart was not accessory to that match, which the darkness of
the night, and the suttlety of a Laban had drawn him into.

The like case is in the marrying a bondwoman in stead of a free; a base
plebeian in stead of a person of honor: As then we use to say that
mis-reckoning is no payment, so we may well affirm that a mis-marriage is no
true wedlock; and therefore justly to be branded with a nullity.

A second may be the foedity and unnaturalness of the match; when the parties
incestuously marry within the first collateral degree, of Brothers and
sisters; the very mention whereof, even nature it self, not depraved,
abhorres: so as I cannot but wonder that the Roman School should be so much
divided in this point, whiles Martin Alphons. Vivald. Candelab. aureum. de
matrim. and partic. de Consanguin.
Bonaventure, Richardus, and Durand hold such a marriage even by divine law, a
nullity; contrarily Aquinas, Cajetan, Thomas de Argentina and others (whom
Covarruvias recites) defend this to be only an impediment by the Canon law,
and therefore that it may be in the Popes power to dispense with so foul a
matrimony; Against whom upon better reason, Scot. m. 4. d. 40. Sot. ibid. q.
un. art. 4.
Scotus, and Dominicus a Soto prove such marriages by the law of nature to be
utterly void and null; with whom all ingenuous Christians cannot but willingly
concur in their judgments.

A third may be the horriblenesse of a crime committed in the way to a wicked
match; and that of two sorts: the one of murder, the other of adultery: The
former, when the wife has conspired with the adulterer to murder her husband,
with an intent to marry the murderer; or in the like case the husband to
murder the wife.

The latter when a man living in a known adultery with another man's wife,
contracts matrimony with the adulteress in the life time of her husband.

A fourth is the indissoluble knot of marriage with a former still surviving
husband or wife; the force whereof is such, as that it frustrates and voideth
any supervening matrimony, (except in the case specified in the foregoing
discourse of Divorce) during the natural life of the consorts. Many unhappy,
and perplexed cases have we met withal in this kind; neither does it seldom
fall out, that the husband being confidently reported for dead in the wars,
or in travel abroad; the wife after some years stay, and diligent
inquisition, finding the rumor strongly verified by credible testimonies, and
tendered oaths, begins to listen to some earnest suitor; and bestows her
self in a second marriage; not long after which, her only true, revived
husband returns, and challenges his right in that his lawful wife;
pretending the mis-carriage of letters and messages sent by him in that forced
absence. In this case what is to be done? The woman has cast her self upon
the danger of a Capital law, except she have expected the time limited by
statute; or if she escape one of the husbands is to seek for a wife, whom both
may not enjoy: Doubtless the second marriage, is by Ecclesiastical authority
to be pronounced, as it is, null; which indeed never had any true right to be:
and the first must be content to swallow its own inconveniences.

A fifth may be a violent enforcement of the match: when a woman is upon fear
of pain, or death compelled to yield her self in marriage, and is not
persuaded, but affrighted into the bonds of wedlock: surely this is rather a
rape then a matrimony, and therefore, upon utter want of consent, a nullity.

A sixth may be a preceding, irremediable impotency, or incapacity of marriage
duties; whether natural, or advantageous; whether by way of petpetuall
maleficiation, or casualty: I say, preceding; for if any such disability be
subsequent to the marriage, the nullity is avoided; But if the persons find in
themselves before hand such remediless incapability of a marriage estate, they
shall be highly injurious to each other, and shall foulely abuse the ordinance
of God in their entering into such a condition: For it is apparent, that the
maine ends of marriage are herein utterly frustrate; which were by Gods
appointment, the propagation of mankind, and the remedy of incontinency;
neither of which being attaineable in such a defective estate of body, justly
is such a match pronounced a nullity.

But here I cannot but take occasion to commend the modesty of the women of our
nation; amongst whom, there are so rare examples of suits in this kind,
prosecuted in our Ecclesiastical Consistories; it is not to be doubted but
there are many defects of this nature to be found every where, yet scarce one
in an age offers to complain, and call for redress: so as it seems they are
willing to smother all secret deficiencies, in a bashful silence; whereas
those of other warmer regions impatient of the wrongs of their conjugall
disappointments, fly out into open contestations, and fearelesly seek for
those remedies, which the laws provided in such cases will allow them.
Certainly the merit of this modest temper is so much the greater, by how much
more it is concealed from the world; and those of either sex that are content
to bite in their hidden grievances of this kind, are worthy of double honor
from those consorts, whose injurious infirmities they both have not disclosed,
and suffer in suppressing.

ADDITIONALS.
Certain cases of doubt, besides the formerly published, having been proposed
to me, and received a private solution; I have thought fit, upon the address
of a second Edition, to adjoyne them to their fellows, for the satisfaction of
any others, whom the same Cases may concern.
CASE I.
Whether a Marriage consummate betwixt the Uncle and Niece be so utterly
unlawful, as to merit a sentence of present separation.

RESOLUTION.
WHat prodigious Matches have been of late made, and are still continued, upon
advantage taken of the unsetlednesse of the times, I had rather silently
lament, then openly proclaim to the world: Such as are not capable of any
Apology, call for our blushing and tears; but there are some others which dare
stand upon the terms of defense: Such is this which you have here propounded
on the behalf of your friend, whom it seems a mis-learned Advocate would feign
bear up in a course altogether unjustifiable; that cause must needs be
desperately ill, that can find no mercenary abettors: His offensive marriage
with his Necce is hartned by a sophistical pleader; whose wit and skill is so
ill bestowed in this case, that I wish his fee might be perpetual silence: but
when he has made use of his best art to so bad a purpose, those colors of
defense, wherewith he thinks to daub over so foul a cause will prove but
watercolors, which shall easily be washed off by this present confutation.

It was lawful, he says, before the Leviticall Law, thus to Match: So were
worse Marriages then this: Let him tell me that Cain, and Enoch, and Seth
married their own Sisters; as Saturn also did, by the report of Diodorus
Siculus; Necessity made it then not unlawful: It is a just rule of In
Argumentum trati nequeunt, quae propter necessitatem sunt concessa.
Law, Those things may not be drawn into precedent, which have been yielded
upon mere necessity; as we use to say that necessity has no law, so it can
make none. Afterward, as mankind grew, nature it self taught men to keep
further aloof from their own flesh; and still remoteness of distance
enlarged it self with time.

Abraham (says he) married his niece Sarah, Genesis 11. 29. (if at least Sarah
were Iscah) Nahor his niece Milcha, Amram his Aunt Jochebed; and these not
without a large blessing upon the bed. Let him tell me also, that Jacob married
two Sisters, and conversed conjugally with both (which were now shamefully
incestuous) yet was herein blessed with the issue of six of those Patriarohs,
who were the root of those glorious stemmes of Israel. If we should speak most
flavourably of these conjunctions, to rank them under malum quia prohibitum,
it must needs follow, that till the prohibition came, they could not be
censured as evil: Though good Authors make it justly questionable, whether
these fore-alledged marriages should deservedly be charged with a sin, or
excused by Gods extraordinary dispensation; in the mean time the blessing was
to the person, not to the act: even Lots incestuous copulation with his
daughters sped well; two famous nations sprang thence, and of one of them, the
gracious progenitrice of the Savior of the world; Yet this is no plea for the
allowance of that monstrous conjunction. After the law, one justifiable example
were worth a thousand before it.

Lo, good Caleb (says he) married his daughter Achsah to his brother Othoniel.
Joshua. 15. 16, 17. Indeed, this case comes as home to the business as it is
far off from the text. See whether mes-prison of Scripture may mislead us: A
man that understands nothing but the English, or Vulgar Latin, may easily run
into so foul an error; weigh but the place well, and you will soon find the
fault without me; Othniel the son of Kenaz, Calebs brother, took
Kerath-Sepher, and Caleb gave him Achsah his daughter to wife; The English
wanting cases expresses it doubtfully, it will be clear in the Latin; as
Montanus, and Pagnine, two great Masters of the Hebrew in their Interlinear,
read it, Othniel filius Kenaz, fratris Calebi; Othniel the Son of Kenaz,
which Kenaz was Caleb's brother, Both the Hebrew and Chaldee clear that sense:
So the Septuagint, as Emanuel Sa also urges upon that place, Judge. 1. 13.
expressly say that Kenaz was the brother of Caleb, and not Othoniel; wherein
yet I cannot much blame an unballanced judgment, whiles I find the Septuagint
contrary to themselves: For in Josh. 15. 16. they say, Othniel was Caleb's
younger brother; In Judge. 3. 9. they say, Kenaz the father of Othniel was so;
for which there is no excuse, but the large sense of a Brother in the Hebrew,
We are brethren, says Abraham to Lot, yet he was Lot's Uncle: So was Kenaz a
Progenitor to Othniel, for Caleb is styled the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite,
Josh, 14. 14. and Numb. 32. 12. The case was only this, Kenaz was the Ancestor
of Caleb; and one of the same name was his brother, the father of Othniel: what
can be more plain then 1 Chronicles. 4. 13. And the sons of Kenaz, Othniel and
Seraiah; So as if we take this most strictly to the letter, it implies nothing
but the marriage of two Cozens German, Othniel the son of Kenaz, and Achsah
the daughter of Galeb, Brothers children, as Bucer upon the place, Melanehton
in his Tract De Conjugio, Junius; and indeed, who otherwise? And now by this
time you see what a poor ground this is to build upon; rather, you see a
castle, not built on the sand, but in the air; mere mis-conceit.

But, says the Advocate, this marriage is no where directly forbidden in the
Law; I must tell him it is but a mere shuffle to stand upon the terms of a
Direct prohibition, when there is one no less forceable, and convictive:

Two ways may ought be effectually forbidden in the law; Either in plain
expression of terms, or in clear implication of sense; surely, that is rather
more in the law which it means irrefragably, than what it verbally expresses:
Now, however this be not in the letter of the law, yet in the sense it is: The
same law that forbids the Nephew to marry the Aunt, does eadem opera, forbid
the Uncle to marry the Niece; In regard as of nearness, yea identity of blood,
the case is the same; however, some inequality may be conceived in respect of
government, and subjection: And if upon some oeconomicall terms, it be more
unfit for a Nephew to marry his Aunt, than for an Uncle to marry his Niece, yet
in regard of blood, and that bodily conjunction, which God principally aims at
in this prohibition, what difference can possibly be conceived? Nature has
made no other distance betwixt the Nephew, and the Aunt, than betwixt the Niece
and Uncle: or if there be any, they must be sharper eyes than mine that can
discern it: God himself (methinks) has put this out of doubt; the reason
wherewith he backs his command is irresistible; The Nephew shall not marry the
Fathers Sister; why so? For she is thy Fathers near Kinswoman, ver. 12. Lo, it
is the nearness of blood that makes this match unlawful, not respect of
civil inequality; Where the blood then is equally near, the marriage must be
equally unlawful.

That rule of Law which is pretended, In prohibitoriis, quicquid non
prohibetur, permittitur; What is not forbidden, is permitted, had need of a
fair construction; Indeed, that which is not forbidden either in words, or in
necessary analogy and implication of sense, is supposed to be left at large;
But what place has this Axiom in a case not less really forbidden, than the
expressed? And if we should strictly follow the letter of this Maxim, it
would lead us into Sodom; since there are marriages not specified, which would
be monstrously incestuous, and such as honesty would blush to mention, as shall
appear in the sequel.

Neither is there any more force in that other, In poenalibus non fit extensio,
That penal laws should not be stretched further, then their words import.
Certainly, in some sense I know no law that is not penal; but why this law,
Thou shall not marry thy Aunt or Niece should be rather penal, than, Thou
shall not commit adultery, I know not; I am sure learned Zanchius accounts
these of the 18. of Leviticus, equally moral: and Bucanus holds them to be
against the law of nature.

And if in humane laws this axiom may challenge a place, yet in the royal
laws of our Maker, where, under one sin mentioned, all the species and
appendances, and the whole claim of that wickedness is wont to be comprised,
doubtless it is utterly unsufferable; Neither is here any extension of this
prohibition beyond those limits which God has fixed in the undoubted sense of
his law; In the seventh Commandment, nothing is expressed but adultery, shall
we therefore say neither fornication, nor pollution, nor sodomie is there
forbidden? were not this to destroy that law, which God makes to be spiritual;
and to open the floodgates to a torrent of licentiousness? surely, it is
easy to observe that Gods Spirit no less means that which he pleases to
suppress. The Psalmist says, Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from
the West, nor from the South, Psalm. 75. 6. Shall we therefore say, It is from
the North? Is not that coast equally excluded, though not expressed? It is too
much boldness to hold God too strictly to syllables, when it is easy to
determine what he meant to imply: These rules then are useless: Let me see now
if the Advocate can as easily shake off one or two rules of law, which I shall
return upon him in lieu of his. Is committit in legem, etc. He wrongs the law
who keeping close to the letter, strives against the intent and purpose of the
law; And that other not unlike, In fraudem legis facit qui salvis verbis legis
sententiam ejus circumvenit, If this be not the case in hand, I shall profess
to know nothing.

From Rules, let us look to Authorities, It is directly maintained (he says)
by the Canonists, and Scholemen; But what is it, that is so maintained? Not
this match (let no man think so) but that proposition, viz. that this match is
no where directly forbidden in Gods law; If we take it of express terms, no
wise man ever denied it; not Canonists, and Scholemen only, or those few named
Authors, but all reasonable men concur in this truth; what needs a citation
of some, where all agree? But if we take it of the necessary and clear sense
of the law by just Analogy and infallible implication, now, none of the
forecited, or any other orthodox Authors will deny the certain and
indubitable prohibition of this marriage. How well the rest will speed, judge
by their foreman, Tho: Aquinas; who expressly determines it a false position,
that those are joined together by God, who match within the fourth degree;
whereas this is in the third; Not to say how stiffly Peter Lombard urges the
unlawfulness of marriages to the very seventh degree, vel quousque parentela
possit agnosci, even as far as the kindred may be discerned, following herein
Pope Gregory and Nicholas: To shut up short, none of all his cited Authors dare
be any other then professed enemies to this match; no less, then the most
zealous Commissioner of that nowabolished Court, whose late sentence is upon
Record enough to this purpose.

As for Lyra, who is trayled in here, and cited strongly in Othoniels case,
what shall I say? It grieves my soul to see any well-minded Christian so
abused by misinformation: This author has thus, Turpitudinom Sororis, etc.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy Fathers Sister, or thy Mothers
Sister, (and eodum modo) and in the same manner is forbidden the marriage
betwixt the brother, and the daughter of the Aunt, for it is the same degree:
so Lyra: Nothing can be more peremptory against this case, in favor of which
he is alleged.

This would be the issue of all the rest, if it were worth the while to examine
them, in that, which yielded, nothing advances the cause of the producer. They
are all as professed enemies to this match as my self; only they deny an
express mention of this cause, which was never either thought needful, or
intended to be pleaded.

For the Protestant Divines which are cited to give Testimony to the
nonprohibition of this marriage, I must cry shame upon those false hands, which
have so palpably abused both your friend, and the Authors; Let me give but a
taste of some, Melancthon, Zanchius, Bucanus; who are said to allow the match,
by admitting only the degrees mentioned to be prohibited; No place is
instanced, versatur in generalibus; You know the word, but let your eyes be
judges of their opinion; Melancthon, mentioning the marriage of Abraham and
Sarah in the second degree: Hoc gradu says he) in linea inaequali etc. In this
degree, in an inequall line, marriages are forbidden by Gods law, because God
does universally ordain a greater reverence to be yielded to a Superior
degree, then to an equal; It is the very case in hand, which Melancthon thus
sentenceth; For Zanchius; he citing the text of Levit. 18. 13. Thou shall not
uncover the nakedness of thy Mothers Sister; adds, ergo neque matter teram,
etc. Therefore no man, says he, may marry his Aunt; and that charge, which he
gives concerning the Aunt, would God have to be understood also of the Uncle,
which is the Fathers brother, or the Mothers brother; whiles he adds a reason
of the prohibition, For she is the near kinswoman of thy Father, or Mother;
Thus Zanchius in his book de Operibus Dei. Lib. 4. de Sponsalibus; who
absolutely condemns this marriage as incestuous, and indispensable.

Bucanus, moving the case of Abraham's marriage with Sarah, and Amrams with
Jochebed etc. Leaves it in doubt whether these men were (as the times stood)
particularly dispensed with by God, or whether they sinned in thus marrying,
even before the law, against the law of nature, by which he holds these matches
utterly prohibited; With what forhead then, could any Scholar obtrude these
false allegations upon an honest client, whether to draw his foot into a snare,
or to keep it there, under pretense of favoring what they professedly oppose.

As for the modern Jews, to whom he stretches out his hand for succor, it
matters little what they now teach or do; they are not more without God, then
without honesty, or credit; Their opinions are fabulous, their judgment
frivolous, and their practice not worth our knowledge, or regard.

I rather descend to the resolution of our own Church; That our ever honored
Mother has passed her condemnatorie sentence upon this Marriage in her
Ratification of that Orthodoxe and just Table of forbidden Degrees, set forth
by authority under Archb. Parker, what doubt we now? Do we acknowledge the
Oracular Voice of our dear and holy Mother the Church of England, and yet
question whether we should obey it? Certainly in a case of Conscience, a
dutiful son (me thinks) should rather hold fit to follow the sacred
determination of the Church, then the municipall Acts of the civil state. It
is an ill office of those that would set Church, and State, Canons and
Statutes, together by the ears even in these points wherein they are perfect
friends.

The statute of 32. of Henry 8. c. 38. intending to mar the Romish market of
gainful dispensations, and injurious prohibitions, professes to allow all
marriages that are not prohibited by Gods Law; such is this in hand;
prohibited, though not in the Letter, yet in necessary inference, and
interpretation; The Canon 99, of 1603. has thus; No person shall marry within
the degrees prohibited by the laws of God, and expressed in a Table set forth
by Authority in the year 1563. and all marriages so made and contracted shall
be adjudged incestuous and unlawful.

What scruple can arise hence? here is a perfect harmony betwixt statute, and
Canon. It is a mere Cavil (no better) to take And for Or; as if the meaning
were, that all degrees whether prohibited by the law of God, or expressed in
that Table are forbidden; This is a foul strain both to Grammar, and to the
sense and Scope of the Canon, which plainly intends to aver that all those
degrees prohibited in that Table are also forbidden by the laws of God; A
truth so certain, that if either self-love, or love of gain did not betray
the eye, it is a wonder how it should abide a contradiction.

It is observable that neither statute, nor Canon speak of an express
prohibition in Gods Law; And the Canon purposely distinguishes the terms
prohibited by Gods Law, and expressed in the Table, as justly supposing, there
may be as strong a prohibition in a sense employed, as verbally expressed: Else,
if our Laws (as is pretended) should give allowance (which God forbid) to any
marriages not expressly interminis, forbidden; we should have strange and
uncouth mixtures.

God by Moses expressly forbad the uncovering the nakedness of Father and
Mother; he expressed not the nakedness of Son, and Daughter: He expressly names
the nakedness of the Fathers wife, he expresses not the nakedness of the
Mothers husband; He expressly names the nakedness of thy Sister; he expresses
not the nakedness of thy Brother; he expresses the nakedness of thy Sons
Daughter, he expresses not the nakedness of thy Daughters Son: He expresses
the nakedness of thy Fathers Wives Daughter, he expresses not the Mothers
Husbands Son; he expresses the Fathers Sister, not the Mothers Brother; He
expresses the Daughter-in-law, not the Son-inlaw. So as by this Rule, if it
should be carried only by mere verbal expressions, a Woman might marry her
Son-in-law; the Nephew might marry his great Aunt, the Niece her great Uncle;
the Daughter might marry her Mothers Husbands Son; the Grand mother might
marry her Daughters Son; the Daughter might marry with her Mothers Husband;
Were these things to be allowed, the world would be all Sodom: These things
therefore are of necessity included in the Law by a clear Analogy; no less
then if they had been expressed.

But have there been (as he says) precedents of this match? I am sorry to hear
it; surely, the more the worse; and the more need to redress it: the addition
of this, if neglected, would help to strengthen an ill claim.

Cozens German, he says, have been allowed to marry; What is that to the
present case? The difference is as much as betwixt a Nephew and an Uncle; The
Uncle has too much of the Parents both right, and blood, to challenge an
equal claim with a Cozen.

In the shutting up, it pitties me to see your worthy Friend driven to this
plea; and like a drowning man, to snatch at so small a twigge; Being done (he
says) it ought not to be undone. Alas, the Canon is peremptory; It is
incestuous and unlawful; what plea is there for continuance? Speak not
therefore of either connivence or dispensation; This match is only capable of
a late, but much wished repentance on the Offenders part; and a just diremption
on the part of the Judges.

CASE II.
Whether it be lawful for a man to marry his Wives Brothers Widow.

AMongst all the heads of Casedivinity there is no one that yeildeth more
seruples, then this of Marriage, whether we regard the qualification of the
Persons, or the emergency of actions, and events. It is the lawfulness of this
match that you inquire after, not the expedience, and I must shape my answer
accordingly.

It has been the wisdom and care of our godly and prudent Predecessors, to
ordain a Table of all the prohibited degrees to be publicly hanged up in all
the several Churches of this Nation; to which all Comers might have recourse
for satisfaction: This Catalogue you have perused, and find no exception of the
case specified; I know no reason therefore why you may not conclude it not
unlawful.

The question of the Expedience would require another debate; doubtless, in
all cases of this nature, it must needs be yielded that it were more meet, and
safe (since the world yields so large a latitude of choice) to look further
off; A wise and good man will not willingly trespass against the rules of just
expedience: and will be as careful to consider what is fit to be done, as what
is lawful; but that comes not, at this time, within your inquiry.

Whiles therefore I give my opinion for the lawfulness of this Marriage with
the Relict of the Wives brother, I do no whit clash (as you suggest) with the
judgment of Beza, and Master Perkins, who profess their dislike of such
copulations: I shall as readily cry them down for unmeet, and inconvenient, as
those, that with too much boldness come over near to the Verge of a sinful
conjuction; but for the not unlawfulness of this match, I did upon the first
hearing, give my affirmative answer: and the more I consider of it, I am the
more confirmed in that resolution.

That universal rule mentioned by you, as laid down by those two worthy
Authors, must endure a limitation; Cujus non licet inire nuptias, ejus nec
conjugis licet; that there is the same degree and force of relation of a third
person (in the case of marriage) to the husband, and to the wife; so as
proximity of blood in the one, should not be a greater bar, then the same
proximity of alliance in the other; Otherwise, many more copulations will fall
under censure, then common practice will condescend unto; and that ground of,
uxor pars quaedam viri, The Wife is as a part of the Husband, as it holds not
in natural relation, at all, so not in all conjugall; as might be too easily
instanced in diverse particulars.

And if there were not some difference in these relations, those second persons
which are interessed in the Husband, or Wife, might not come near to the next
in affinity to them; For example, my Brother may not marry my Sister, therefore
by this rule, he might not marry my Wives Sister, and so it should be unlawful
for two Brothers, to marry two Sisters; then which nothing is more ordinary, or
less obnoxious to disallowance.

That general rule therefore, must be restrained necessarily, to the first
rank of affinity; if we descend lower, it holds not. For further explanation,
our Civilians and Canonists are wont to make two kinds or degrees of Affinity,
The one Primary, the other Secondary; In the first, is the affinity betwixt the
Husband, and the Cozens of blood to his Wife, or, e converso; which indeed, is
justly held no less for a bar of marriage, then his own natural
consanguinity; for that is an affinity contracted upon interest of blood, by
virtue of that entire union, betwixt Man and Wife, whereby they both become one
flesh; The Secondary affinity is that, wherein there is another Person added
moreover to that first kind, now mentioned; the affinity arising only from
the interest of an affinity, formerly contracted, not from consanguinity; and
this is not so binding, as either to hinder a marriage to be contracted, or
being contracted, to dissolve it.

In this rank are the Brothers Wife, and Sisters Husband; and therefore, upon
the decease of the Brother and Sister, the Husband of the Sister deceased, and
the Wife of the deceased Brother may marry together, as Dr. Nicholaus
Everhardus out of Richardus de Media Villa, and Panormitan, has clearly
determined Consil. Matrimonial. Germanor. Consil. 5.
; Of this kind is the Marriage now questioned, which therefore does not fall
within the compass of the prohibition, Secundum genus affinitatis, etc. The
second kind of affinity, which is by a Person added unto the first kind is no
bar to Matrimony; And with this judgment I find no reason why I should not
concur; but if any man think that he sees just ground to entertain a
contrary opinion, I prejudge him not, but modestly leave him to the freedom of
his own thoughts.

CASE III.
Whether an incestuous Marriage contracted in simplicity of heart betwixt two
Persons ignorant of such a desilement, and so far consummate as that Children
are borne in that wedlock, ought to be made known and prosecuted to a
dissolution.

IT is a question (as it may be put) full of doubt and intricacy, Parallel
whereunto, and eminent in this kind, was that case, which I had long since,
from the relation of M. Perkins, and since that, have met with it in the report
of two several German Authors.

The case thus: A Gentlewoman of great note in those parts, being left a Widow,
had her Son trained up in her house; who now having passed the age of his
puberty, grew up, as in stature, so in wanton desires; earnestly soliciting her
Chambermaid to his lust; she had the grace, not only to repel his offers,
but being wearied with his wicked importunity, to complain to her Mistress,
of his impetuous motions: The Mother out of a purpose to repress this wild
humor in her Son, bids the Maid, in a seeming yeildance to make appointment
the night following with him, at which time she would change beds with the
Maid, and school the young man to purpose. This being accordingly done, the
Devil so far prevailed with the Mother, that in stead of chastising, she
yielded to the lust of her Son, and by him conceived a Daughter: and now
finding her self to grow big, for the hiding of her shame, she retired
secretly to a remote part of the country, where she unknown left the burden
of her womb, and took order for all care and secrecy of education: After some
years the Mother thinks fit to call home her concealed issue, under the
pretense of a Kinswoman, and gives her such breeding in her house, as might
become the Child of a Friend: The Maid grew up to such comeliness, both of
person, and behavior, that the Son, now grown a Man, fell into passionate
love with her; and in short, married her; little thinking that he was now
matched with his own Daughter, begotten by him of his own Mother: They lived
lovingly and comfortably together, and had diverse Children betwixt them. Only
the Mother, who was alone conscious of this monstrous copulation, began to
find an hell in her bosom; and in a deep remorse, made the case, at last,
known to some learned Divines of that time, who bestowed many serious thoughts
upon so uncouth a business; and finally agreed upon this determination, That
all circumstances thoroughly weighed; the penitent Mother should after a sold
humiliation secretly make her peace with God, for so foul and prodigious a
sin; but that the knowledge of the horrible incestuousnesse of this match,
should still, and ever be concealed from the young couple, who thought of
nothing, but a fair and honest legality in this their conjunction.

The decision of this point comes somewhat home to yours; to spend my opinion
therefore in this case, I find no reason, all things considered, to vary from
their judgment.

I say then, that the Mothers sin was not more heinous in yiedling to so
abominable an act of incest with her Son, then in smothering the seasonable
notice of it for the preventing of a worse incest with her Daughter; for that
first act of her incest was transient, but this incest which was occasioned by
her silence was permanent, and derivable to her posterity: She ought therefore,
though to her perpetual shame, when she saw an inclination in her Son to so
foulelyunnaturall a match, to have forestalled it by a free confession, and to
have made him sensible of so odious a procation: Which not being done, it must
needs be said, that, as the first act of the Son was a voluntary fornication,
but an involuntary incest; so this incestuous copulation of the Son with the
Daughter, was involuntary in them both; and there cannot be an actual sin,
wherein there is not a consent of the will.

On the one side, it is shameful to think that so grievous a sin should
pass without some exemplary censure, and that so foul blood should be
propagated to succeeding ages, for want of the timely intervention of a
vindicative authority; but on the other side, it would be well considered what
miserable inconveniences, yea mischeifes would follow upon so late a
discovery; First all honest hearts are put into a just, but unprofitable
horror, to think that sueh a flagitious wickedness could be committed; Then
the Mother who had rinced her soul, with a fountain of tears, for so
hateful a mis-carriage, and reconciled her self to that God, who was the
only witness of her sin, should be so late exposed to the unseasonable shame
of that world, which never was privy to her offense.

As for the young couple thus prodigiously conjoined, how could they choose,
upon the too late notice of their so deplorable condition, but run mad for
anguish of soul, and wear out the rest of their days in shame, and sorrow;
And for the children borne to them in so detestable a wedlock, whom they had
formerly beheld with complacence, and comfort, as the sweet pledges of their
conjugall love, how must they now needs look upon them, as the living
monuments of their ignominy; and loath them as the most basely-begotten impes
of a worse then bestiall copulation. And when riper age should bring that
unhappy offspring forth into the world, how should they be every where pointed
at, and hooted after; as some strange aberrations of nature; all which are
avoided by this seorecy.

But if on the other side you shall reply that this one evil is more, then
equivalent to all these; that in the mean time, these parties live in a
continual Incest, and traduce it to following generations; I must put you in
mind, to distinguish, betwixt the state of Incest, and the Sin of Incest; It
is true, they live in a state of Incest, but, from the sin of Incest they are
excused by an ignorance, altogether invincible; an ignorance both of the
original fact, and of their mutual relations; for it is to be supposed, that
had they had the least intimation of the natural interest of Father, and
daughter, they would with much indignation have defied so foul a commixture,
which even brute creatures (if we may believe histories) have by the instinct
of nature abominated, and, upon after knowledge, revenged.

And if any light of knowledge should have broken forth unto the parties, of
that condition, wherein they stood, then to have continued under that state of
Incest, but an hour, had been damnably sinful; now all those inevitable
consequences of shame and horror must have been slighted and forgotten, and
must have shut up in a sudden dissolution.

But, as there are many degrees of Incest; and the sin is so much more, or
less heinous, as the parties are nearer, or more remote; I perceive the case
intimated by you, concerns a lower rank of incestuous copulation; namely, an
incest arising from a man's carnal knowledge of a person too near in blood
unto her, whom he afterward marries; The fact known only by one, who now
doubts whether he be not bound to reveal it: And why not sooner, when so
faulty a match might have been prevented? Why so late, when the remedy
intended, would be as noxious as the disease? Why at all, when there is no
necessity, or use of the revelation? This question starts another more
universal, how far we may, or ought to make known the secret sin of another?
Doubtless to prevent some enormious act, which may follow upon our silence; or
upon the urging of lawful authority, when we are called to give evidence
concerning a fact questioned; Or to antevert some great danger to the public,
to our selves, to our friend, we may, and must disclose our knowledge of a
close wickedness; Or if the act be so haynously flagitious, and redounding to
so high dishonor of God, as that our conscience tells us we shall participate
of this sin in concealing it; our holy zeal shall herein bear us out in a
just accusation; although in this case, heed must be taken, that our single
crimination may be so carried and made good by circumstances, that it draw us
not into the peril of a sclander; But, without these, I cannot see, that the
revealing of a secret sin, can be construed any otherwise, than an act of
Detraction; than which, nothing can be more odious and prejudicial to humane
society: We have learned from Aquinas that there are eight ways of this
hateful practice; whereof four are direct; the raising of a false crime, the
amplifying of a true crime; the disclosing of a crime secret, and the sinister
construction of another fact. To these, I must add, that even where the act
is such as challenges a revelation, the time may be unseasonable, and past the
date; You know that the notice of treason, if too long smothered, draws the
concealer into danger: and in this case, though there be no peril in the
silence, yet there may be injury: Shortly, this sin, if ever, should have been
so early made known to the party concerned, as might have prevented the making
up of a match secretly sinful; and have convinced the agent of a foul
illegality, whereof he was ignorant. But now thus overlate, would break out to
an unprofitable vexation; since this crime which might justly have hindered the
marriage from being contracted, ought not to have the force, after so long
intermission, and success of an intervenient wedlock, to dissolve it. The time
was, when the Minister in a solemn preconization, called you either then to
speak, or for ever after to hold your peace: had you then spoken it might have
been construed as Zeal, now, not to hold your peace, will be interpreted no
better then malice.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
I Have been earnestly moved by some judicious friends, to go on with this
subject, and to make up a complete body of Case-Divinity, both practical,
speculative, and mixed, whereof I confess there is great defect in our
language; But I remember the talk which Plutarch reports to have been betwixt
Plut in vita Crassi.
Crassus, and King Deiotarus, two old (...), but great undertakers. Crassus
jeeres Deiotarus for laying the foundation of a new City in his decayed age;
Deiotarus twits Crassus for going about, in the like age to subdue the warlike
Parthians; both justly supposing our decrepit age a just disswasive from
venturing upon great enterprises; Although herein I should not want a worthy
precedent, that honor of Navarre, Martinus Azpilcueta, who at ninety years
finished the fourth Edition of that his elaborate Manual of Cases of
Conscience. But as for me, I am sufficiently conscious of my own inabilities
for so long, and difficult a work; Only this, I shall willingly profess,
that such scruples as I meet with in my way, I shall not allow my self to
balk, and shall leave the answers upon the file. In the mean time, let me
incite some of our many eminent Divines, whose wits are fresh, and bodies
vigorous, to go through with so useful a work; Many years are passed since
my ancient and learned Colleague, Dr. Ralph Cudworth told me that he had with
much labor finished that task, and devoted it to the press, which yet sleeps
in some private hands. It were happy if his worthy Son, the just heir of his
Fathers great abilities, would make strict inquiry after it, and procure it to
the public light, for the common benefit of Gods Church both in the present,
and succeeding ages.

The End.

