A TRUE RELATION Of the late GREAT FIGHT AT SEA, BY THE ENGLISH FLEET, AND THE
HOLLANDERS: Between DOVER and CALIS.

On Wednesday, the 19. of this instant May 1652.

From a very sure Hand.

Printed at Leith by Evan Tyler. 1652.

A True Relation of the late Great Fight at Sea, by the English Fleet, and the
Hollanders, between Dover and Calis.
On Wednesday the 19. of this instant May, 1652.
Loving Friend,
THE Hollanders have deceived you, and many others, (but themselves most.) In
the height of their spirits they came upon our Coasts, with about Forty Sail:
upon Tuesday last they sent two of their Frigots into the Downs, whilst the
others hovered up and down about the South-end of Goodwin: They saluted our
Vice Admiral, Major Bourn. Our Admiral was then with his Guard about
Dunghilness; They were re-saluted. The two Captains came a-board, with (as may
be conceived) a lie in their mouths: Their request was, to come in and water at
Deal, under pretense they were forced from their Anchors, by foul weather, from
their own Road, so that they came away unprovided Major Bourn asked them,
Whether they would strike their Flags; for they were then up where they were.
They replied, They had Order to strike to no Nation. Major Bourn replied;
Neither had he any Order to give them leave to come in to water. This was the
salute; and having given them the entertainment with a Glass of Wine, the two
Dutch Captains departed to the Ships; and at their going out of the Downs, gave
another fair Salute, which was answered with the like Civilitie. So, the Dutch
Fleets anchored between the Light-house and Dover Castle that night; and next
day about one or two of the clock in the afternoon, (in the mean time there was
Intelligence went between General Blake, and Major Bourn) and it seemed by the
event, the Resolution was, That our two Squadrons should meet, so soon as VVind
and Tide would give them leave; for the wind was contrary to Genesis Blake, being
Northerly, so that he was fain to wait the Tide. which was about one or two of
the clock: and the wind fitted Major Bourn. So soon as they weighed their
Anchors, and hoised sail, the Hollander did the like, they lying between our
two Squadrons, and observing their motion: At first, we by their sailing,
thought they had made homeward, without any intention to fight, for they were
gone near half Seas over, between us and Calis, and by the way received an
addition of Ships, as we could plainly discover: But on a sudden, a
VVarning-Piece being shot off, they all tackt about, and made for our Coasts
somewhat: but for the most part, kept themselves near the middle of the
Channel Southward, as if bound that ways against Dover. Our two Squadrons
being somewhat near together, they also drew near: And the Dutch Admiral, before
the rest of his Fleet, with one Friggot, bore up to our Admiral, with the Flag
up: Our Admiral shot to have him strike; this he did twice: And then they to
their broad sides, Pell Mell, with as much force as any Sea Fight has been
managed since 88. The Fight began about six in the afternoon, and held till
between nine and ten, the Dutch Admiral being extremely beaten, so that he was
fain to lie upon the Lees, and came little in Play after the first fierce
Encounter. Our men went on with much resolution, and Performance, as you can
imagine men to do. The Lord gave them Courage beyond measure: many Volunteers
offered themselves from Dover, and Deal, and did very good Service; about fifty
men came from Sandwitch, but a little too late; I add this to let you see how
the spirits of the English are raised up against the Dutch, though the number
of their Ships were double to ours, we having but twenty four, whereof two of
them being fire ships that did no service, and theirs about fifty; we saw at
the back of the sands, which we suppose might be about 20. Sail, which some of
Dover say, came in before the Fight was ended; however it pleased the Lord to
honor our Nation with this most incomparable Victory as great as any we have
had, if considered in itself, and in the Consequences of it: But to be short,
we sunk one of the greatest Ships, took another of Forty Guns: I saw the
Ensign of it at the stern of a Catch, sent in by General Blake to the Major
of the T^^^^n trailing them in the water, under ^^e English Colors: The rest
of the Hollanders Fleet being (well) beaten, silently in the Night, withdrew
themselves (as was conceived) to Callis, and since we have not seen them: Our
Fleet (I suppose) by this time, may be near Dover-Road to refresh themselves,
and to take care for their vvounded men: Yet this is a mercy not to be omitted,
that there is not a Captain of the Fleet hurt, nor any Officer of Note slain:
In our Admiral which sustained the greatest Brunt in the Fight, there were
eight slain, and twelve ^^^ound^d; what, on how many in other Ships, I know
not. This which I have written, I am confident to be very true: What, I was
not a Spectator of, I have from the Major of Dover, and other honest men of
credit,

Vale. Dover, M^. (...). 1652. Your very loving Friend I. H.

FINIS.

