VERA EFFIGIES-REVERENDI DONI IOSEPHI HALL NORWICI EPIS COPI.
This Picture represents the Form, where dwells
A Mind, which nothing but that Mind excells.
There Is Wisdom, Learning, Wit; there Grace and Love
Rule over all the rest: enough to prove,
Against the froward Conscience of this Time,
The Reverend Name of BISHOP is no Crime.
W. M. scul^^it (...)

portrait of Joseph Hall

SATAN'S FIERY DARTS QUENCHED, OR, TEMPTATIONS REPELLED.

In three DECADES.

For the help, comfort, and preservation of weak Christians in these dangerous
times of Error and Seduction.

By I. H. D. D. B. N.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for N: Butter. And are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the Bishops-head and Golden-Lyon, and in Cornhill by N. Brooks.
1647.

To the Christian Reader Grace and Peace.
SOme few months are past, since a worthy and eminent Divine from the Mr
Hannibal Gammon of Cornwall.
West (once part of my charge) earnestly moved me to undertake this task of
Temptations, seconding his Letters with the lines of a dear intercessour from
those parts; Upon the first view, I slighted the motion; returning only this
answer; That I remembered this work, was already so completely performed by the
reverend, and learned Mr Downame, in his Christian warfare, as that who so
should meddle with this subject, should but seem to gleane after his sickle:
But when I had sadly considered the matter; my second thoughts told me that
there is no one point of Divinity, wherein many pens have not profitably
labored in several forms of discourse: and that the course which I was
solicited unto, was in a quite different way of Tractation; namely, to furnish
my Fellow Christians with short and punctual answers to the particular
suggestions of our great enemy; and that our deplored age had rifely yielded
public Temptations of Impiety, which durst not look forth into the world in
those happy days; I was thereupon soon convinced in my self, how useful and
beneficial such a Tractate might be to weak souls; and embraced the motion as
sent from God; whose good hand I found sensibly with me in the pursuance of it;
I therefore cheerfully addressed my self to the work; wherein what I have
assaied or done, I humbly leave to the judgment of others; with only this;
that if in this Treatise my decrepit hand can have let fall any thing that may
be to the service of Gods Church, to the raising up of drooping hearts, to the
convincing of blasphemous errors, to the preventing of the dangerous
insinuations of wickedness, I desire to be thankful to my good God, whose
grace has been pleased to improve those few sands that remain in my glass to
so happy an advantage: That God, the father of all mercies fetch from these
poor labors of his weak servant, much glory to his own name, and much benefit
to the souls of his people.

And may the same God be pleased to stir up the hearts of all his faithful
ones, that shall (through his goodness) receive any help by these welmeant
endeavors, to interchange their prayers with and for me, the unworthiest of
his Ministers, that I may finish the small remainder of my course with joy.
Amen.

From my Cottage at Higham near Norwich, Feb. 12. 1646.
A List of the hellish Temptations here Repelled.
I. DECADE.
I. Temptation FOolish sinner, thou leanest Temptations of Impiety.
upon a broken reed whiles thou reposest all thy trust in a crucified Savior.
Page 1. II. Temptation Still thou have upon all occasions recourse to the
Scriptures as some divine Oracles, and think thou may safely build thy
soul upon every text of that written word, as inspired from heaven, whereas
indeed this is nothing but an humane devise to keep men in awe, and never came
nearer heaven then the brains of those Politicians that invented it. p. 17.
III. Temptation Art thou so sottish to suffer thy understanding to be
captivated to (I know not what) divine authority, proposing unto thee things
contrary to sense and reason, and therefore absurd and impossible? Be thou no
other then thy self, a Man: and follow the light and guidance of that which
makes thee so, right Reason, and whatsoever disagrees from that, turn it off as
no part of thy belief, to those superstitious bigots which are willing to lose
their reason in their faith, and to bury their brains in their heart. p 29.
IV. Temptation In how vain and causeless awe art thou held, of dangers
threatened to thy soul; and horrors of punishment after this life; whereas
these are nothing but politic bugs, to affright simple, and credulous men?
Sin freely man; and fear nothing; Take full scope to thy pleasures; After
this life there is nothing; The soul dies together with the body, as in brute
creatures; There is no further reckoning to be made. p. 40. V. Temptation Put
case that the soul after the departure from the body, may live; but art thou so
foolishly credulous, as to believe that thy body, after it is moldred into
dust, and resolved into all its elements, having passed through all the degrees
of putrefaction, and annihilation shall at last return to it self again, and
recover the former shape and substance? Do thou not apprehend the
impossibility of this so absurd assertion? p. 54. VI. Temptation If the soul
must live, and the body shall rise, yet what needst thou affright thy self
with the terrors of an universal judgment? Credulous soul, when shall these
things be? Thou talkst of an awful Judge, but where is the promise of his
coming? These sixteen hundred years has he been looked and yet he is not
come; and when will he? p. 69. VII. Temptation If there must be a resurrection,
and a judgment, yet God is not so rigid an Exactor, as to call thee to account
for every petty sin; Th^se great Sessions are for heinous malefactors: God is
too merciful to condemn thee for small offenses: Be not thou too rigorous to
thy self, in denying to thy self the pleasure of some harmless sins. p. 83.
VIII. Temptation What a vain imagination is this wherewith thou please thy
self; that thy sins are discharged in another man's person; that another
righteousness should be thine; that thine offense should be satisfied by
another punishment. Tush, they abuse thee that persuade thee God is angry with
mankind which he loves and favors; or that his anger is appeased by the bloody
satisfaction of a Savior; and that thou stand acquitted in heaven by that
which another has done and suffered: These are fancies not fit to find place
in the heads of wise men. p. 91. IX. Temptation How confidently thou buildest
upon a promise; and if thou have but a word for it, make thy self sure of
any blessing; Whereas thou may know that many of those promises which thou
accountest sacred and divine, have sbrunk in the performance. How has God
promised deliverance to those that trust in him, yet how many of his faithful
servants have mis-carried? What liberal promises has he made of provision for
those that wait upon him; yet how many of them have miserably perished in want?
p. 100. X. Temptation Thou art more nice then needs; your Preachers are too
straitlaced in their opinions; and make the way to heaven narrower then God
ever meant it: Tush, man; thou may be saved in any religion, Is it likely
that God will be so cruel as to cast away all the world of men in the several
varieties of their professions; and save only one poor handful of Reformed
Christians; Away with these scruples; A general Belief and a good meaning
will serve to bring thee to heaven without these busy disquisitions of the
Articles of faith. p. 114.
II. DECADE.
I. Temptation WEre it for some few sins of ignorance or infirmity, Temptations
of Discouragement.
thou might hope to find place for mercy; but thy sins are, as for multitude
innumerable, so for quality, heinous. presumptuous, unpardonable; With what
face can thou look up to heaven and expect remission from a just God? p. 127.
II. Temptation Alas poor man, how willing thou art to make thy self believe
that thou have truly repented; whereas this is nothing, but some dump of
melancholy, or some relenting of nature, after too much expense of spirits, or
some irksome coffeehouse after a satiety, and weariness of pleasure; or
some slavish shrinking in upon the expectation of a lash; True penitence is a
spiritual business, an effect of that grace which was never incident into thy
bosom. p. 138. III. Temptation Thou have small reason to bear thy self upon
thy repentance; it is too slight; seconded with too many relapses; too late to
yield any true comfort to thy soul. p. 145. IV. Temptation Tush, what do
thou please thy self with these vain thoughts; If God cared for thee, could
thou be thus miserable? p 155. V. Temptation Foolish man! how vainly do thou
flatter thy self in calling that a chastisement, which God intends for a
judgment; in mistaking that for a rod of fatherly correction which God lays on,
as a scourge of just anger and punishment. p. 165. VI. Temptation Away with
these superstitious fears, and needless scruples, wherewith thou fondly
troublest thy self; as if God that sits above in the circle of heaven*
regarded these poor businesses that are done upon earth, or cared what this man
does, or that man suffers: Do thou not see that none prosper so much in the
world as those that are most noted for wickedness? and do thou se any so
miserable upon earth as the holiest? Could it be thus, if there were a
providence that over-looks and overrules these earthly affairs? p. 173. VII.
Temptation If God be never so liberal in his promises, and sure in
performances of mercy to his own, yet what is that to thee? Thou art none of
his; neither can lay any just claim to his Election. p. 195. VIII. Temptation
Alas, poor man, how grossly deludest thou thy self? Thou talkest of thy faith;
and bear thy self high upon this grace; and think to do great matters
by it, whereas the truth is, thou have no faith, but that which thou
mis-callest so, is nothing else but mere presumption p. 208. IX. Temptation
Thou thoughtst perhaps once that thou had some tokens of Gods favor; but now
thou can not but find that he has utterly forsaken thee; and withdrawing
himself from thee has given thee up into my hands, into which thy sins have
justly forfaited thee. p. 216. X. Temptation Had God indeed ever given thee any
sure testimonies of his love, thou might perhaps pretend to some reason of
comfort and confidence; But the truth is, God never loved thee; he may have
cast upon thee* some common favors, such as he throws away upon reprobates;
but for the tokens of any special love that he bears to thee, thou never
did, never shall receive any from him p. 2^6.
III. DECADE.
I. Temptation THou have hitherto thus long Temptations of Allurement.
given entertainment to thy sin, and no inconvenience has ensued; No evil
has befallen thee; thy affairs have prospered better then thy scrupulous
neighbors: Why should thou shake off a companion that has been both
harmless and pleasant? Go on man, sin fearlesly, thou shall speed no worse
then thou have done. Go on, and thrive in thine old course, whiles some
precisely conscientious beg and starve in their innocence. p. 237. II.
Temptation Sin still; thou shall repent soon enough, when thou can sin no
more; Thine old age, and deathbed are fit seasons for those sad thoughts; It
will go hard if thou can not, at the last, have a mouthfull of breath left
thee, to cry God mercy; And that is no sooner asked, then had; Thou have to do
with a God of mercies; with whom no time is too late, no measure too slight to
be accepted. p. 246. III. Temptation. Thou art one of Gods chosen; Now God sees
no sin in his elect; none therefore in thee; neither may thou then take
notice of any sin in thy self; or need any repentance for thy sin. p. 256.
IV. Temptation. Thou may live as thou listest; Thy destiny is irreversible;
If thou be predestined to life, thy sins cannot damn thee; for Gods election
remains certain: If thou be ordained to damnation, all thy good endeavors
cannot save thee; Please thy self on earth, thou can not alter what is done
in heaven. p. 271. V. Temptation Why will thou be singular amongst and above
thy neighbors; to draw needless censures upon thy self? Be wise, and do as
the most. Be not so over-squemish as not to dispense with thy conscience in
some small matters; Lend a lie to a friend, swallow an oath for fear, be
drunk sometimes for good fellowship, ^alsify thy word for an advantage, serve
the time, frame thy self to all companies; thus shall thou be both warm, and
safe, and well respected. p. 284. VI. Temptation It is but for a while that
thou have to live; and when thou art gone, all the world is gone with thee;
Improve thy life to the best contentment; Take thy pleasure whiles thou may.
p. 297. VII. Temptation It is for common wits to walk in the plain road of
opinions. If thou would be eminent amongst men, leave the beaten track, and
tread in new paths of thine own: Neither let it content thee to guide thy
steps by the dim lanterns of the Ancient; he he is no body that has not new
lights either to hold out, or follow. p. 306. VIII. Temptation Pretend
religion, and do any thing: what face is so foul as that Mask will not
cleanly cover? seem holy, and be what thou will. p. 315. IX. Temptation Why
should thou lose any thing of thy height? Thou art not made of common mold;
neither art thou as others; If thou know thy self, thou art more holy, more
wise, better gifted, more enlightened then thy neighbors; Justly therefore
may thou over look the vulgar of Christians, with pity, contempt, censure;
and bear thy self as too good for ordinary conversation, go apart, and avoid
the contagion of common breath. p. 323. X. Temptation However the zeal of your
scrupulous Preachers is wont to make the worst of every thing; and to damn the
least slip to no less then hell: Yet there are certain favorable
temperaments of circumstances, which may (if not excuse, yet) extenuate a
fault, such as age, complexion, custom, profit, importunity, necessity, which
are justly pleadable at the bar both of God, and the conscience, and are
sufficient to rebate the edge of divine severity. p. 335.
March the 14. 1646.
I Have perused this Treatise, entitled, Satan's fiery darts quenched; in which
I find so many excellent helps for the strengthening of the Christians faith,
the repelling of Temptations, and the comforting of afflicted consciences in
the day of trial, that I judge it well worthy to be printed and published.

JOHN DOWNAME.

TEMPTATIONS REPELLED.

The first Decade.

Temptations of Impiety.

Satan's fiery darts quenched.
I. DECADE.
I. TEMPTATION,
Foolish sinner, thou leanest upon a broken reed whiles thou reposest all thy
trust in a crucified Savior, Repelled.

BLasphemous Spirit; It is not the ignominy of the Cross that can blemish the
honor of my Savior; Thou feelst to thy endless pain and regret, that he who
would die upon the tree of shame has triumph't victoriously over death, and
all the powers of hell; The greater his abasement was, the greater is the glory
of his mercy: He that is the eternal God would put on man, that he might work
man's redemption, and satisfy God for man; Who but a man could suffer? and who
but a God could conquer by suffering? It is man that had sinned; it is God that
was offended; who but he that was God and man could reconcile God unto man? He
was crucified through weakness, yet he lives (and triumphs) 2 Cor. 13. 4.
in the power of his (omnipotent) Godhead; Neither was it so much weakness to
yield unto death; as it was power to vanquish it; yea, in this very dying there
was strength; For here was no violence that could force him into his grave; who
should offer it? I and the Father are one, says that word of Truth; and in
Unity there can be no constraint; And, if the persons be diverse; He thought it
no Philip. 2. 6.
robbery to be equal with God the Father; and there is no authority over
equals; and for men or Devils, what could they do to the Lord of life? I lay
down my life, Joh. 10. 17, 18.
says the Almighty redeemer, that I might take it again; No man takes it from
me, but I lay it down of my self. I have power to lay it down, and I have power
to ^^ke it again; Oh infiniteness both of power and mercy met in the center
of a willing death!

Impudent tempter, do thou not remember thine own language? The time was,
indeed, when thou could say, If thou be the Son Matthew. 4. 3, 6.
of God; but when thou foundest thy self quelled by that divine power, and
saw those miraculous works fall from him which were only proper to an
infinite Godhead; now thou were forced to confess, I know who thou Mar. 1. 24.
art, even the holy one of God; and again, Jesus the Son of the most high God;
and yet Mar. 5. 7.
again, What have we to do Mat. 8. 20.
with thee, Jesus the Son of God? art thou come to torment us before the time?
Lo then, even in the time of his humane weakness, thou could with horror
enough acknowledge him the Son of the most high God, and dare thou now that
he sits crowned with celestial glory, disparage his ever-blessed Deity?

Thy malice has raised up, as in the former, so in these later days, certain
cursed imps of heretical pravitie, who under the name of Christians, have
wickedly re-crucified the Lord that bought them; not sparing to call into
question the eternal Deity of him whom they dare call Savior; whom if thou
had not steeled with an hellish impudence, certainly, they could not profess
to admit the word written, and yet the whiles, deny the personal Word: How
clear testimony does the one of them give to the other? when thou presumedst to
set upon the Son of God by thy personal temptations, he stopped thy mouth with a
Scriptum est; how much more shall these Pseudo-Christian agents of thine be
thus convinced? Surely, there is no truth, wherein those Oracles of God have
been more clear and punctual; Are we not there required to Joh. 3. 13, 18.
believe in him as God, upon the promise of eternal life, Joh. 18.
under the pain of everlasting condemnation?

Are we not commanded Mat. 28. 29. Act. 2. 35.
to baptize in his name as God? Is not the holy Ghost 10. 48.
given as a seal to that baptism? Are we not charged to give divine Psalm. 22.
27.
honor to him? Is not this required and reported to be done not only by the
Psalm. 72. 11, 15.
Kings of the earth, but by the Rev. 5. 11, 12. and 4. 9, 11.
Saints and Angels in heaven? Is he not there declared to be Philip. 2. 6.
equal with God? Is he not there asserted to be Joh. 10. 30. 1 John 5. 7.
one with the Father? Does he not there challenge a joint Joh. 16. 15. and 17.
19.
right with the Father in all things both in heaven, and earth? Are not the
great works of divine power attributed to him? ^sa. 45. 12. Psalm. 33. 6. and
102. 26.
Has not he created the earth, and man upon it? have not his hands stretched
out the heavens? has not he commanded all their host?

Are not all the Attributes of God, his? Is he not eternal? Is it not he of
whom the Psalmist, Psalm. 45. 6, 7.
Thy throne O God is for ever and ever; the scepter of thy kingdom is a right
scepter? Is not he the Esa. 9. 6.
Father of eternity; Revel. 1. 17.
the first and the last; Micah 5. 2.
have not his goings forth been from everlasting? Joh 17. 5.
Had not he glory with the Father before the world was? Is not he the Joh. 1. 1.
Word which was in the beginning; the word that was with God; and the word that
was God?

Is he not infinite and incomprehensible? Is it not he that Ephesians. 4. 10.
fills all things; Joh. 3. 13.
that was in heaven, whiles he was on earth?

Is he not Rev. 1. 8.
Almighty? even the Esa. 9. 6.
mighty God who upholds all things by the word of his power* Yea, is he not
expressly styled* the Lord, Esa. 40. 3. and 45. 21, 22.
Jehovah, The Esa. 45. 13. Esa. 6. 3.
Lord of hosts; Romans 9. 5.
God blessed for ever; 1 John 5. 20.
The true God, and eternal life; Tit. 2. 13.
The great God and Savior; 1 Cor. 2. 8.
The Lord of glory?

Has he not abundantly convinced the world of his Godhead, by those miraculous
works which he did both in his own person whiles he was here on earth, and by
the hands of his followers? works so transcending the possibility of nature,
that they could not be wrought by any less then the God of nature? as ejecting
of Devils by command; raising the dead after degrees of putrefaction; giving
eyes to the borne blind, conquering death in his own resuscitation, ascending
gloriously into heaven? charming the winds, and waters, healing diseases by the
very shadow of his transient disciples?

Yea tell me, by what power was it that thine Oracles (whereby all the world was
held in superstition) were silenced? What-power whereby the Gospel so opposite
to flesh and blood has conquered the world, and in spite of all the violence
of Tyrants, and oppugnation of rebellious nature, has prevailed?

Upon all these grounds how can I do less then cry our with the late-believing
disciple, My Lord, and my God? Joh. 20. 28.


Malignant spirit, thou do but set a face of checking me by my Saviors
Cross; thou know and feel'st that he was the Chariot of his Triumph,
whereupon being exalted, Colos. 2. 15.
he dragged all the powers of hell captive after him, making a show of them
openly, to their confusion, and his glory; Thou know that had it not been for
that Cross, those infernal regions of thine had been peopled with whole
mankind; a great part whereof is now delivered out of thy hands, by that
victorious redemption. Never had heaven been so stored; never had hell been so
foiled, if it had not been for that Cross.

And can thou think to daunt me with the mention of that Cross, which by the
eternal decree of God was determined to be the means of the deliverance of all
the souls of the elect? Do thou not hear the Prophet say of old; He was cut
Esa. 53. 8, 9.
off from the land of the living; for the transgression of my people was he
stricken; And, he made his grave with the wicked and the rich in his death. He
has poured out his soul unto death, and he was Esa 53. 12.
numbered with the transgressors; and he ^ar^ the sin of many? Did thou not
hear my Savior himself, after his glorious resurrection, checking Cleopas, and
his fellow-traveller, for their ignorance of this predetermination? O fools,
and slow of Luke 24. 25, 26.
heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken: Ought not Christ to have
suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?

Yea lastly, when had my Savior more glory then in this very act of his
ignominious suffering, and crucifixion? It is true, there hangs the Son of man
despicably upon the tree of shame; He is mocked, spit Luke 23. 35, 36.
upon, buffered, scourged, nailed, reviled, dead: now have men and Devils done
their worst; But, this while, is the son of God acknowledged and magnified in
his almighty power, both by earth and heaven; The Sun for three hours hides his
head in darkness, as hating to behold this tort offered to his Creator; the
earth quakes to bear the weight of this suffering; The rocks Mat. 27. 51.
rend in pieces, the dead rise from their graves to see, and wonder at, and
attend their late dying, and now risen Savior; The veil of the Mat. 27. 54.
Temple tears from the top to the bottom, for the blasphemous indignity
offered to the God of the Temple; And the Centurion upon sight of all this, is
forced to say, Truly, this was the son of God. And now after all these
irrefragable attestations, his Easter makes abundant amends for his passion;
There could not be so much weakness in dying, as there was power in rising
from death; His resurrection proves him the Lord of life and death, and shows
that he died not out of necessity, but will; since he that could shake off the
grave, could with more ease have avoided death: Oh then the happy and glorious
conquest of my blessed Savior, declared to be the Son Romans 1. 4.
of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection
from the dead! Go now wicked spirit, and twit me with the Cross of my Savior;
That which thou objectest to me as my shame, is my only glory; God forbid that
I should glory Gal. 6. 14.
save in the Cross of my Lord Jesus Christ; whereby the world is crucified
unto me and I unto the world.

II. TEMPTATION,
Still thou have (upon all vocasions) recourse to the Scriptures as some divine
Oracles; and think thou may safely build thy soul upon every Text of that
written word, as inspired from heaven, whereas indeed this is nothing but an
humane devise to keep men in awe, and never came nearer heaven, then the brains
of those Politicians that invented it, Repelled.

WIcked Spirit; when thou presumedst personally to tempt my Savior; and had
that cursed mouth stopped by him, with an [It is written] thou daredst not
then, to raise such a blasphemous suggestion against this word of truth:
Success in wickedness has made thee more impudent; and now, thou art bold to
strike despitefully at the very root of religion: But know, that after all thy
malicious detractions, this word shall stand, when heaven and earth shall
vanish; and is that, whereby both thou, and all thy accomplices shall be judged
at that great day: It is not more sure that there is a God, then that this God
ought to be served and worshipped by the creature: Neither is it more sure that
God is, then that he is most wise, most just, most holy; This most wise just
and holy God, then, requiring and expecting to be served, and worshipped by his
Creature, must of necessity have imparted his will to his creature, how, and in
what manner he would be served, and what he would have man to believe
concerning himself, and his proceedings; Else, man should be left to utter
uncertainties, and there should be a failing of those ends, which the infinite
wisdom, and justice, has proposed to it self: There must be therefore some
word of God, wherein he has revealed himself to man; and that this is, and
must be acknowledged to be that only word* it is clear, and evident; for that
there neither was, nor is, nor can be any other word, that could, or durst
stand in competition, or rivality with this word of the Eternal God: and, if
any other have presumed to offer a contestation, it has soon vanished into
contempt, and shame; Moreover, this is the only word, which God ownes for his;
under no less style then [Thus says the Lord,] which the son of God has so
acknowledged for the genuine word of his eternal Father, as that out of it (as
such) he has pleased to refell both thy suggestions, and the malicious
arguments of his Jewish opposites.

It drives wholly at the glory of God; not sparing to disparage those very
persons, whose pens are employed in it; in blazoning their own infirmities in
what they have offended; which could not have been, if those pens had not been
guided by an higher hand; It discovers, and oppugnes the corruptions of nature,
which to mere men are either hid; or, if revealed, are cherished, and upheld;
it lays forth the misery, and danger of our estate under sin; and the
remedies, and means of our deliverance, which no other word has ever pretended
to undertake.

Besides, that there is such a Majesty in the style wherein it is written, as
is unimitable by any humane author whatsoever; the matter of it is wholly
divine; aiming altogether at purity of worship, and integrity of life; not
admitting of any the least mixture either of Idolatry and superstition, or of
any plausible enormities of life; but unpartially laying forth Gods judgments
against these, and whatever other wickednesses. This word reveals those things
which never could be known to the world by any humane skill or industry; as the
Creation of the world, and the order and degrees of it; and the course of Gods
administration of it, from the beginning; thousands of years before any records
of history were extant; As it was only the Spirit of the most high God in
Daniel that Dan. 2. 11.
could fetch back and give an account of a vision fore-passed; All the
Soothsayers and Magicians confess this a work of no less then divine
omniscience.

And as for things future, the predictions of this word of things to be done
after many hundreds, yea some thousands of years (the events having then no
preexistence in their causes) being accordingly accomplished, show it to
proceed from an absolute unfailing, and therefore infinite prescience.

And whereas there are two parts of this word; The Law, and the Gospel: The Law
is more exact then humane brains can reach unto; meeting with those
aberrations, which the most wise and curious Lawgivers could not give order
for; extending it self to those very thoughts which nature knows not to
accuse, or restrain; Romans 7. 7.
The Gospel is made good, as by the signs and wonders wrought in all the 2 Timothy 3. 15.
primitive ages; so by the powerful operation that it has upon the soul;
such, as the word of the most prudent man on earth, or of the greatest Angel in
heaven should in vain hope to parallel: And whereas the penmen of both these,
were Prophets, and Apostles; The Prophets are sufficiently attested by the
Apostles, to be men 2 Pet. 1. 21.
holy, and inspired by the Holy Ghost; the Apostles are abundantly attested by
the Holy ghost powered out upon them in their Pentecost, and (besides variety of
tongues) enabling them to do such miraculous works, as astonished, and
convinced their very enemies. To these may be added the perfect harmony of the
Law, and the Gospel; the Law being a prefigured gospel, and the gospel a law
consummate; both of them lively setting forth Christ the redeemer of the world,
both future and exhibited. Neither is it lightly to be esteemed, that this word
has been by holy men in all ages received as of sacred and divine authority;
men, whose lives and deaths have approved them eminent Saints of God; who have
not only professed, but sealed with their blood, this truth which they had
learned from him that was rapt into the third heaven, That all 2 Timothy 3. 16.
Scripture is given by inspiration of God; a truth which cannot but be
contested by their own hearts, which have sensibly found the power of this
word, convincing them of sin; working effectually in them a lively faith, and
unfaigned conversion; which no humane means could ever have effected.

Lastly, it is a strong evidence to my soul, that this is no other then the
word of a God; that I find it so eagerly opposed by thee, and all thy malignant
instruments in all ages; Philosophers both natural, and moral, and politic,
have left large Volumes behind them in their several professions, all which
are suffered to live in peace; and to enjoy their opinions with freedom, and
leave; but, so soon as ever this sacred book of God looks forth into the world,
hell is in an uproar, and raises all the forces of malice, and wit, and
violence against it; Wherefore would it be thus, if there were not some more
divine thing in these holy leaves, then in all the monuments of learned
humanity: But the protection is yet more convictive then the opposition, that
not withstanding all the machinations of the powers of darkness this word is
preserved entire; that the simplicity of it, prevails against all worldly
policy; that the power of it subdues all nations, and triumphs over all the
wickedness of men and devils; it is proof enough to me that the God of heaven
is both the author, and owner and giver of it: Shortly then, Let my soul be
built upon this rocky foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; Let thy storms
rise, and thy floods come, and thy Mat. 7. 24, 25.
winds blow, and beat upon it; it shall mock at thy fury, and shall stand firm
against all the rage of hell.

III. TEMPTATION,
Art thou so sottish to suffer thy understanding to be captivated to (I know
not what) divine authority, proposing unto thee things contrary to sense and
reason; and therefore absurd, and impossible? Be thou no other then thy self, a
man; and follow the light and guidance of that which makes thee so, right
Reason; and what soever disagrees from that, turn it off as no part of thy
belief, to those superstitious bigots which are willing to lose their reason
in their faith, and to bury their brains in their heart,

Repelled.

WIcked tempter, thou wishest me to my loss; woe were to me if I were but a
man; and if I had no better guide to follow, then that which thou call'st
Reason; it is from nature that I am a man; it is from grace that I am a man
regenerate; Nature holds forth to me as a man, the dim and weak
rush-candle-light of carnal reason; The grace of regeneration shows me the
bright torch-light, yea, the sun of divine illumination; Thou bid'st me, as a
man, to follow the light of reason; God bids me as a regenerate man to follow
the light of faith; whether should I believe, whether should I listen to? It is
true, that reason is the great gift of my Creator, and that which was intended
to distinguish us from brute creatures; but where is it in the original purity
to be found under heaven? Surely it can now appear to us in no other shape then
either as corrupted by thy depravation, or by Gods renovating grace restored;
as it is marred by thee, even natural truths are too high for it; as it is
renewed by God, it can apprehend and embrace supernatural verities: It is
regenerate reason that I shall ever follow; and that will teach me to subscribe
to all those truths, which the un-erring Spirit of the holy God has revealed
in his sacred word; how ever contrary to the ratiocination of flesh, and blood;
Only this is the right reason, which is illuminated by Gods spirit, and
willingly subjected to faith; which represents to me those things, which thou
suggestest to me for unreasonable and impossible, as not faisible only, but
most certain. That in one Deity there are three most glorious persons;
distinguished in their subsistences; not divided in their substance; That in
one person of Christ the Mediator, there are two natures, divine and humane,
not converted into each other; not confounded each with other; That the Creator
of all things should become a creature; That a creature should be the mother of
him that is her God; how ever they be points which carnal reason can not put
over, yet they are such, as reason illuminate and regenerate can both easily,
and most comfortably digest: Great is the 1 Timothy 3. 16.
mystery of godliness; God manifested in the flesh: What mystery were there in
godliness, if the deepest secrets of religion did lie open to the common
apprehension of nature? My Savior, who is truth it self, has told me, that no
man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to Mat. 11. 27.
whom the Son will reveal him; and with the same breath gives thanks to his
heavenly Father, that he has hid Mat. 11. 25.
these things from the wise and prudent (who were most likely, if reason might
be the meet judge of spiritual matters, to attain the perfect knowledge of
them) and has revealed them to babes. It is therefore Gods revelation, not the
ratiocination of man that must give us light into these divine mysteries. Were
it a matter of humane disquisition, why did not those sages of nature, the
learned Philosophers of former times, reach unto it? But now a more learned man
then they, the great Doctor of the Gentiles, tells us, that the Gospel and
preaching Romans 16. 25, 26.
of Jesus Christ yields forth the revelation of the mysteries, which was kept
secret since the world began; But now manifested by the Scriptures of the
Prophets, and, according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known
to all nations, for the obedience of faith; Lo, he says not to the obedience
of reason, but of faith; and that faith does more transcend reason, then reason
does sense, Thou urgest me therefore to be a man; I profess my self to be a
christian man; it is reason that makes me a man, it is faith that makes me a
christian; The wise and bountiful God has vouchsafed to hold forth four
several lights to men; all which move in four several orbs, one above
another; The light of sense, the light of reason, the light of faith, the light
of ecstaticall, or divine vision; and all of these are taken up with their own
proper objects: Sense is busied about these outward and material things;
reason is confined to things intelligible; faith is employed in matters
spiritual and supernatural; divine vision in objects celestial, and
infinitely glorious; None of these can exceed their bounds, and extend to a
sphere above their own; What can the brute creature, which is led by mere
sense, do, or apprehend in matters of understanding and discourse? What can
mere man who is led by reason, discern in spiritual and supernatural things?
What can the Christian, who is led by faith, which is the evidence of things
not seen attain unto in the clear vision of God, and heavenly glory? That God,
who is a God of order, has determined due limits to all our powers, and
faculties: Thou that art a spirit of confusion go about to disturb, and
disorder all those just ranks; laboring to jumble together those distinct
orbs of reason, and faith; and by the light of reason, to extinguish the light
of faith; and would have us so to put on the man, as that we should put off
the Christian; but I have learned in this case to defy thee; grounding my self
upon that word, which is mighty 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
through God to the pulling down of strong holds; casting down imaginations,
and every high thing, that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; I will
therefore follow my sense so far as that will lead me; and not suffer my self
to be beaten off from so sure a guide; Where my sense leaves me, I will betake
my self to the direction of reason, and in all natural and moral things,
shall be willingly led by the guidance thereof; but when it comes to
supernatural and divine truths; when I have the word of a God, for my
assurance, farewell reason, and welcome faith; as when I shall have dispatched
this weary pilgrimage, and from a Traveller shall come to be a Comprehensor,
farewell faith, and welcome vision.

In the mean time I shall labor what I may to understand all revealed truths;
and where I cannot apprehend, I shall adore; humbly submitting to that word of
the great and holy God; My thoughts Esa. 55. 8, 9.
are not your thoughts; neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord; For as
the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then your ways,
and my thoughts, then your thoughts.

IIII. TEMPTATION
In how vain and causeless awe art thou held, of dangers threatened to thy
soul; and horrors of punishment after this life; whereas these are nothing but
politic bugs, to affright simple, and credulous men? Sin freely, man; and
fear nothing; Take full scope to thy pleasures; After this life there is
nothing; The soul dies together with the body, as in brute creatures; There is
no further reckoning to be made Repelled.

Deceitful spirit; How thou go about to persuade me to that, which thy
self would be most loathe should be true? for if the soul of man expired with
the body, what subject should thou have of that tyranny, and torment which
thou so much affectest? How willingly do thou seem to fight against thy
self, that thou mighrest overcome me? But this dart of thine is too blunt to
pierce even a rational breast; Why do thou not go about to persuade me that I
am not a man, but a brute creature? such I should be, if my soul were no other
then theirs; For as for bodily shape, there are of them not much unlike me: Why
do thou not persuade me, that those brute creatures are men; if their souls
were as ours; What were the difference? Can thou hope I can so abdicate my
self, as to put my self into the rank of beasts? Can thou think so to
prevail with thy suggestions, as to make reason it self turn irrational?
How palpably do thou confound thy self in this very act of Temptation? For,
if I had not a soul beyond the condition of brute creatures, how am I capable
of sinning? Why do thou persuade me to that whereof my nature (if but
brutish) can have no capacity? Do thou labor to prevail with thy
temptations upon beasts? Do thou importune their yeildance to sinful
motions? If they had such a soul as mine, why should they not sin, as well as
I? why should they not be equally guilty? Contrarily, are those brute things
capable of doing those works which may be pleasing unto God; the performance
whereof thou so much envyest unto me? Can they desire and endeavor to be holy?
are they capable of making conscience of their ways? Know then, O thou wicked
spirit, that I know my self animated with another, and more noble spirity,
then these other material creatures; and that I am sufficiently conscious of
my own powers; that I have an inmate in my bosom of a divine original; Which,
though it takes part with the body, whiles it is included in this case of clay;
yet, can and will (when it is freed from this earth) subsist alone, and be
eternally happy in the present, and perpetual vision of the God that made and
redeemed it: and in the mean time exercises such faculties, as well show
whence it is derived; and far transcend the possibility of all bodily
temperament? Can it not compare one thing with another? Can it not deduce one
sequel from another? Can it not attain to the knowledge of the secrets of
nature, of the perfection of Arts? Can it not reach to the scanning of humane
plots; and the apprehension of divine mysteries? Yea, can it not judge of
spirits? how should it do althis, if it were not a spirit? How evidently then
does the present estate of my soul convince thee of the future? Al operations
proceed from the forms of things; and every thing works as it is; Can thou
now deny, that my soul whiles it is within me, can, and does produce such
actions, as have no derivation from the body, no dependence on the body? for
however in matter of sensation, it sees by the eyes, and hears by the ears,
and imagines by those fantasmes that are represented unto it; yet when it comes
to the higher works of intellectual elevations, how does it leave the body
below it? raising to it self such notions, as wherein the body can challenge
no interest? how can it now denude and abstract the thing conceived from all
consideration of quantity, quality, place; and so work upon its own object, as
becomes an active spirit? Thou can not be so impudent, as to say the body
does these things by the soul; or that the soul does them by the aid and
concurrence of the body; and if the soul does them alone, whiles it is thus
clogged; how much more operative shall it be when it is alone separated from
this earthen lump? And if the very voice of nature did not so sufficiently
confute thee, that even thine own most eminent heathens have herein taken part
against thee, living and dying strong assertors of the souls Immortality; how
fully might thine accursed mouth be stopped by the most sure words of divine
truth? Yea, were thou disposed to play at some smaller game, and by thy
damnable clients to plead, not so much for the utter extinction, as for the
dormition of the soul, those oracles of God have enough to charm thee, and
them; and can with one blow cut the throat of both those blasphemies: That
penitent thief, whose soul thou made full account of, when he was led to
his execution, (which yet my dying Savior snatched out of thy hands) could hear
comfortably from those blessed lips, This day Luke 23. 42.
thou shall be with me in Paradise: shall we think this malefactor in any other,
in any better condition then the rest of Gods Saints? Does not the chosen
vessel tell us, that upon the dissolution of our 2 Cor. 5. 1.
earthly house* of this Tabernacle, we have a building of God not made with
hands eternal in the heavens? Presently therefore after our flitting hence, we
have a being, and that glorious; who can think of a being in heaven without a
full sense of joy? Does not our Savior tell us, that the soul of poor Lazarus
Luc. 16. 22.
was immediately carried by Angels into Abraham's boome? The damned glutton knew
so well that he was not laid there to sleep, that he sues to have him sent on
the message of his refrigeration: Did not the beloved disciple, when he was in
Pathmos, upon the opening of the fifth Revel. 6. 9.
feale, see under the altar the Souls of them that were slain for the word of
God, and for the testimony which they held? Did he not hear them cry, How long
Lord, holy* and true? What? Shall we think they cried in their sleep? Did he
not see and hear the hundred forty four Revel. 14. 1, 3.
thousand Saints, before the throne, harping, and singing a new song to the
praise of their God? Can thou persuade us they made this heavenly music in
their sleep? Does he not tell us most plainly from the mouth of one of the
heavenly Elders, that those which stood before the throne and the Lamb, Revel.
7. 14.
clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands, were they that came out
of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb; therefore 1.
are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple;
and he that sits on the throne shall dwell among them; They shall hunger 16.
no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any
heat; For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, shall 17.
feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains, and God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes; This service both day and night, and (...) leading
forth can suppose nothing less then a perpetual waking; Neither is this the
happy condition of holy Martyrs and Confessors only; but is common to all the
Saints of God, in what ever profession; Blessed are the Revel. 14 13.
dead, which dye in the Lord; How should the dead be blessed, if they did not
live to know themselves blessed? What blessedness can be incident into those
that either are not at all, or are senseless? They rest, but sleep not; they
rest from their labors, not from the improvement of their glorified faculties:
Their works followthe^: yea and overtake them, in heaven; to what purpose
should their works follow the if they lived not to enjoy the comfort of their
works?

This is the estate of all good souls, in despite of all thine infernal
powers; and what becomes of the wicked ones, thou too well know; Dissemble
thou how thou will those torments; and hide the sight of that pit of horror
from the eyes ofthy sinful followers; He that has the keys of Revel. 1. 18.
hell and of death has given us intimation enough; Fear not them which kill
the body, Mat. 10. 28.
but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him, who is able to
destroy both body and soul in hell: Neither is he more able out of his
omnipotence, then willing out of his justice, to execute this righteous
vengeance on the impenitent, and unbeleevers; Tribulation Romans 2. 9.
and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil.

In vain therefore do thou seek to delude me with these pretenses of
indemnity, and annihilation; since it cannot but stand with the mercy, and
justice of the Almighty, to dispose of every soul according to what they have
been, and what they have done; To them who by To m. 2* 8.
patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory and honor and immortality,
eternal life; But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth,
but obey unrighteousness indignation and wrath: shortly, after all thy
devilish suggestions, on the one part, The Wisd. 2. 1.
souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment
touch them: On the other, In flaming fire shall vengeance 2 Thessalonians. 1 8, 9.
be taken on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.

V. TEMPTATION
Put case that the soul after the departure from the body may live; but art
thou so foolishly credulous, as to believe that thy body, after it is moldred
into dust, and resolved into all its elements, having passed through all the
degrees of putrefaction, and annihilation, shall at last return to it self
again, and recover the former shape and substance? Do thou not apprehend the
impossibility of this so absurd assertion? Repelled.

NO, Tempter, it is true and holy faith, which thou reproachest for fond
credulity: Had I to do with no greater power then thine, or then any Angels in
heaven, that is, merely finite; I might well be censured for too light belief
in giving my assent to so difficult a truth: but now that I have to do with
omnipotence; it is no less then blasphemy in thee, to talk of impossibility:
Do not thy very Mahumetan vassals tell thee, that the same power which made
man, can as well restore him? and can thou be other then apposed with the
question of that Jew, who asked whether it were more possible to make a man's
body of water, or of earth? All things are alike easy to an infinite power. It
is true, The resuscitation of the body from its dust is a supernatural work;
yet such as whereof God has been pleased to give us many images, and
prefigurations even in nature it self; In the face of the earth, do we not
see the image of death in winter season; and in the spring of a cheerful
resurrection? Is not the life of all herbs, flowers, trees buried in the earth,
during that whole dead season? and does it not rise up again with the
approaching Sun, into stemmes and branches; and send forth blossoms, leaves,
fruits, in all beautiful variety? What need we any other then the Apostles
instance; Thou fool, 1 Cor. 15. 36,
that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die: And 37,
that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare
grain; it may 38.
chance of wheat, or of some other grain; but God gives it a body as it
pleases him, and to every seed his own body; Lo, it must be rottenesse and
corruption that must make way for a flourishing increase: If I should come to a
man that is ignorant of these fruitful productions of the earth; and showing
him a little naked grain should tell him; This which thou see shall rot in
the ground; and after that, shall rise up a yard high, into diverse stalks, and
every stalk shall bear an ear; and every ear shall yield twenty or thirty
such grains as it self is; or showing him an akorne, should say; this shall be
buried in the earth, and after that, shall rise up twenty or thirty foot high;
and shall spread so far, as to give comfortable shade to an hundred persons;
Surely, I should not win belief from him; yet our experience daily makes good
these ordinary proofs of the wonderful providence of the Almighty? Or should I
show a man that is unacquainted with these great marvells of nature, the small
seed of the Silk-worme, lying scattered upon a paper, and seemingly dead, all
winter long; and should tell him, these little atoms, so soon as the mulberry
tree puts forth, will yield a worm; which shall work it self into so rich a
house, as the great Princes of the earth shall be glad to shelter themselves
with and after that, shall turn to a large fly; and in that shape, shall live
to generate, and then speedily die; I should seem to tell incredible things,
yet this is so familiar to the experie^ced that they cease t owo^der at it.

If from these vegetables we shall cast our eyes upon some sensitive creatures;
Do we not see snayles, and flies, and some birds lie as senseless, and
livelesse all the winter time, and yet, when the spring comes, they recover
their wonted vivacity? Besides these resemblances, have we not many clear
instances and examples of our resurrection? Did not the touch of Elishaes bones
raise up the partner of his grave? Was 2 Kings 13. 21.
not Lazarus called up out of his sepulcher after four days possess^ion; and
many noisome degrees of rottenesse? Were not the graves opened of many bodies
of the Saints, Mat. 27. 52,
Which slept? Did not they arise, and come out of their graves, after my Saviors
resurrection, 53.
and go into the holy city, and appear unto many?

Besides examples, have we not an all sufficient pledge of our certain rising
again, in the victorious refurrection of the Lord of life? Is not he our head?
Are not we his members? Is not he the 1 Cor. 15. 20.
first fruits of them that slept? Did not he conquer death 1 Cor. 15. 57.
for us? Can the head be alive and glorious, whiles the limbs do utterly
perish in a final corruption? Certainly then, if we believe that Jesus dyed
and rose again; 1 These. 4. 14.
even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. And if there
were no more, that one argument wherewith my Savior of old confounded thy
Sadduces lives still to confound thee, God is the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the Mat. 22. 32.
God of Jacob; But God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: The soul
alone is not Abraham; whole Abraham lives not if the body were not to be joined
to that soul.

Neither is it only certain that the resurrection will be; but also necessary
that it must be: neither can the contrary consist with the infinite wisdom,
goodness, justice, mercy of the Almighty: For, first, how can it stand with
the infinite goodness of the all-wise God, that the creature which he esteems
dearest, and loves best, should be the most miserable of all other? man is
doubtless the best piece of his earthly workmanship; holy men are the best of
men; Were there no resurrection, surely no creature under heaven were so
miserable as the holiest man: The basest of brute creatures find a kind of
contentment in their being, and (were it not for the tyranny of man) would live
and dye at ease; And others of them in what jollity and pleasure do they wear
out their time? As for wicked men who let the reins loose to their licentious
appetite, how do they place their heaven here below, and glory in this that
they are yet somewhere happy? But for the mortifyed christian, were it not for
the comfort and amends of a resurrection, who can express the misery of his
condition? He beats down his body in the willing exercises of sharp austerity;
and (as he would use some sturdy slave) keeps it under, holding short the
appetite (oftentimes) even from lawful desires; so as his whole life is little
other then a perpetual penance; And as for his measure from others, how open
does he ly to the indignities, oppressions, persecutions of men? how is he
trampled upon, by scornful malignity; how is he reputed the offscouring of the
world? how is he made a gazing stock of reproach to the world, to Angels, and to
men? Did there not therefore abide for them 1 Cor. 15. 19.
the recompense of a better estate in another world, the earth could afford no
match to them in perfect wretchedness: which how far it abhors from that
goodness which made all the world for his elect, and so loves them, that he
gave his own Son for their redemption, let any enemy besides thine accursed
self, judge: How can it stand with the infinite justice of God (who dispenses
due rewards to good and evil) to retribute them by halves? The wages of sin is
death, the gift of God is eternal life; both these are given to the man not to
the soul; The body is copartner in the sin, it must therefore share in the
torment; it must therefore be raised that it may be punished; Eternity of joy
or pain, is awarded to the just, or to the sinner; how can the body be capable
of either if it should finally perish in the dust? How can it stand with the
infinite mercy of God, who has given his Son entirely for the ransom of the
whole man, and by him salvation to every believer, that he should shrink in his
gracious performances, making good only one part of his eternal word to the
spiritual half, leaving the bodily part utterly forlorn to an absolute
corruption? Know then, O thou wicked one, that when all the rabble of thine
Athenian scoffers, and Atheous Sadduces, and carnal Epicureans shall have
misspent all their spleen, my faith shall triumph over all their sensual
reason, and shall afford me sound comfort against all the terrors of death from
the firm assurance of my resurrection; and shall confidently take up those
precious words, which the mirror of patience wished to be written in a book,
and Job 19. 23
graven with an iron pen in 24, 25,
the rock for ever; I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at
the latter day upon the earth: and though after my skin worms 26.
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: and my soul shall set up
her rest in that triumphant conclusion of the blessed Apostle, This 1 Cor. 15.
53,
corruptible must put on incorruption; and this mortal must put on
immortality; So when 54,
this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have
put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written,
Death is swallowed up in victory? O death where is thy sting? O grave, where is
thy victory? 55,
The sting of death is sin; the 56.
strength of sin is the Law; But thanks be to God which gives 57.
us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

VI. TEMPTATION
If the soul must live; and the body shall rise: yet what need thou to
affright thy self with the terrors of an universal judgment? Credulous
soul, when shall these things be? Thou talkest of an awful Judge: but where
is the promise of his coming? These sixteen hundred years has he been
looked for: and yet he is not come, and when will he? Repelled.

THy damned scoffers were betimes foreseen to move this question, even by that
blessed Apostle, whose eyes saw his Savior ascending 2 Pet. 3. 3.
up to his glory, and who then heard the Angel say, Ye men of Galilee, why
stand ye Act. 1. 11.
gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven. What
do thou and they but make good that sacred truth, which was delivered before
so many hundred generations? Dissemble how thou will, That there shall be a
general assise of the world, thou know, and tremblest to know: what other
could thou mean, when thou askedst my Savior that question of horror, Art
thou come Mat. 8. 29.
to torment us before the time? That time thou know to be the day, in which
God will judge the world in righteousness by Acts 17. 31.
that man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given assurance to all men, in
that he has raised him from the dead; How clear attestation have the inspired
Prophets of God given of old to this truth? The ancientest Prophet that ever
was, Henoch the seventh from Adam, in the time of the old world, foretells of
this dreadful day; Behold, the Lord comes, Jude 14. 15.
with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon all; and to convince
all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodly committed; and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him; From the old world is this verity deduced to the new, and
through the succession of those holy Seers derived to the blessed Apostles; and
from them to the present generation; Yea, the sacred mouth of him, who shall
come down, and sit as Judge in this awful tribunal, has fully laid forth not
the truth only, but the manner of this universal judicature; The Son of man
shall come in his glory, and all Mat. 25. 31.
the holy Angels with him; Then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory; And
before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from
another, as a shepherd divides his sheep: And if this most sure word of the
Prophets, Apostles, yea, and of the eternal son of God be not enough
conviction to thee; yet to my soul they are an abundant confirmation of this
main point of my Christian faith, that from heaven he shall come to judge both
the quick and the dead; Indeed, thus it must be: How many condemned innocents
have in the bitterness of their souls, appealed from that unrighteous bar of
men, to the supreme Judge, that shall come; those appeals are entered in heaven
and sued out; how can it stand with divine Justice that they should not have a
day of hearing?

As for mean oppressors, there are good laws to meet with them; and there are
higher then the highest to give life of execution to those laws; but if the
greatest among men offend, if there were not an higher then they, what right
would at last be done? Those that have the most power and will to do the
greatest mischief, would escape the fairest: And though there be a privy
Sessions in heaven upon every guilty soul, immediately upon the dissolution;
yet the same justice, which will not admit public offenses to be passed over
with a private satisfaction, thinks fit to exhibit a public declaration of
his righteous vengeance upon notorious sinners, before men and Angels: So as
those very bodies which have been engaged in their wickedness, shall be in the
view of the whole world, sent down to take part of their torment; and indeed
wherefore should those bodies be raised, if not with the intent of a further
disposition either to joy, or pain? Contrarily, how can it consist with the
praise of that infinite justice, that those poor Saints of his, which have
been vilified and condemned at every bar: persecuted, afflicted, tormented,
and have passed through all Heb. 11. 37.
manner of painful and ignominious deaths, should not at the last be gloriously
righted in the face of their cruel enemies? Surely, faith the Apostle, it is a
righteous thing 2 Thesl. 1. 6,
with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you who
are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus 7.
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels. What is it, O thou
wicked spirit, whereto thou art reserved in chains of darkness? Is it not the
judgment Jude 6.
of the great day? what is it whereto the manifestation of all hidden truths,
and the accomplishment of all Gods gracious promises are referred? Is it not
the great day of the Lord? shall the all-wise and righteous Arbiter of the
world decree, and reverse? Has he not from eternity determined, and set this
day; Wherein we must all appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, that every
2 Cor. 5. 10.
one may receive the things done in his body; according to that he has done,
whether it be good, or evil? That there is therefore such a day of the Lord;
in the which the heavens shall 2 Pet. 3. 10.
pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat,
the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up; wherein the
Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, 1 These. 4. 16.
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God, is no less
certain then that there is an heaven from whence he shall descend. All thy
cavil is concerning the time; Thou, and thine are ready to say, with the evil
servant in the Gospel, my Master defers his coming; And was not this wicked
suggestion of thine foretold many hundred years ago, by the prime Apostle,
and by the same pen answered? Has he not told thee that 2 Pet. 3. 8,
our computations of time are nothing to the infinite? That one day with the
Lord, is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day? Has he not
told us, that this mis-construed slacknesse 9.
is in man's vain opinion, not in Gods performance? He is slack to man that
coms not when he is looked for, he is really slack that comes not when he has
appointed to come; Had the Lord broken the day which he has set in his
everlasting counsel, thou might have some pretense to cavil at his delay;
but now that he only overstayes the time of our misgrounded expectation, ^he
does not slacken his pace, but correct our error: It is true, that Christians
began to look for their Savior betimes; insomuch, as the blessed Apostles were
feign to persuade their eyes not to make such haste; putting them in mind of
those great occurrences of remarkable change, that must befall the Church of
God (in a general apostasy, and the revelation of the great Antichrist)
before 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1.
that great day of his appearance. And the prime Apostle sends them to the last
days (which are ours) for those scoffers, which shall say, 2 Pet. 3. 3.
Where is the promise of his coming? If they looked for him too soon, we cannot
expect him too late; He that is Amen, will be sure to be within his own time;
when that comes, he that should come will come, and not tarry: In the mean
while, not only in the just observation of his own eternal decree, but in
much mercy, does he prolong his return, mercy to his elect, whose conversion
he waits for, with infinite patience; it is for their sake that the world
stands; The Angel that was sent to Genesis 19* 22.
destroy Sodom could tell Lot, that he could do nothing till that righteous
man were removed; no sooner was Genesis 19. 22.
Lot entered into Zoar, then Sodom is on a flame: mercy, even to the wicked,
that they 24.
may have ample leisure of repentance; Neither is it any small respect that the
wise and holy God has to the exercise of the faith, and hope, and patience of
his dear servants upon earth; faith in his promises, hope of his performances,
and patience under his delays; whereof there could be no use in a speedy
retribution. In vain therefore do thou, who fear this glorious Judge will
come too soon, go about to persuade me, that he will not come at all: I
believe, and know, by all the foregoing signs of his appearance that he is now
even at the threshold; Lo, he comes, he comes for the consummation of thy
torment, and my joy; I expect him as my Savior, tremble thou at him as thy
Judge, who shall fully repay to thee al those blasphemies which thine accursed
mouth has dared to utter against him.

VII. TEMPTATION
If there must be a resurrection and a judgment; yet God is not so rigid an
exactor, as to call thee to account for every petty sin; those great Sessions
are for heinous malefactors; God is too merciful to condemn thee for small
offenses; be not thou too rigorous to thy self in denying to thy self the
pleasure of some harmless sins. Repelled.

FAlse tempter; there is not the least of those harmless sins, which thou will not be ready to aggravate against me, one day, before the dreadful
tribunal of that infinite justice: those that are now small, will be then
heinous; and hardly capable of remission: thy suggestions are no meet measures
of the degrees of sin: It is true that there are some sins more grievous then
others; there are faults, there are crimes, there are flagitious wickednesses;
If some offenses be foul, others are horrible, and some others irremissible;
but that holy God, against whose only majesty sin can be committed, has
taught me to call no sin, small: The violation of that Law which is the rule of
good, cannot but be evil; and betwixt good and evil there can be no less
then an in finite disproportion: It is no small proof of thy cunning, that thou
have suborned some of thy religious panders to proclaim some sins venial,
and such, as, in their very nature, merit pardon: Neither thou, nor they, shall
be Casuists for me, who have heard my God say; Cursed is every one that
continues Gal. 3. 10. Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
not in all things that are written in the book of the Law to do them. Sin
must be greater, or less according to the value of the command, against which
it is committed; there is, (as my Savior has rated it) a least Commandment;
Mat. 5. 19.
and there are mo points then one in that least Command; now the Spirit of
truth has told me, that whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
Iam. 2. 10.
one point, he is guilty of all; And shall he that is guilty of the breach of
the whole Law escape with such ease? I am sure a greater Saint then I can ever
hope to be, has said, If I sin, thou markest me, Job 10. 14.
and wilt not acquit me from mine iniquity; and, old Eli, as indulgent as he
was to his wicked sons, could tell them; If one man sin against another, the
Judge shall judge 1 Samuel 2. 25.
him; but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? What need
is there, thou say, of any entreaty? Gods mercy is such that he will pardon
thy sins unasked; neither will he ever stick at small faults; Malignant
spirit, how fain would thou have Gods mercy, and justice clash together? but
thou shall as soon wind thy self out of the power of that justice, and put thy
self into the capacity of that mercy, as thou shall set the least jarre
between that infinite justice and mercy; It is true, it were wide with my
soul, if there were any limits to that mercy; That mercy can do any thing but
be unjust; it can forgive a sinner, it cannot encourage him; forgive him upon
his penitence, when he has sinned; not encourage him in his resolution to sin:
If thou Lord should mark iniquities, O Psalm. 130. 3, 4.
Lord, who shall stand? But there is forgiveness with thee that thou may be
feared. I know therefore whither to have my recourse, when I have offended my
God; even to that throne of grace where there is plenteous redemption; free and
full remission; I hear the heavenly voice of him that says, I, even Esa. 43.
25.
I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not
remember thy sins; but, I dare not offend because his grace abounds: justly
does the Psalmist make the use and effect of his mercy, to be our fear: we
must fear him for his mercyes; and for his judge ments, love him; so far am I
from giving my self leave to sin because I have to do with a merciful God;
as that his judgments have not so much power to drive me, as his mercies have
to draw me from my dearest sins. As therefore my greatest sins are not too
big for his mercy to remit, so my least sins are great enough to deserve
his eternal displeasure. He that shall come to be Judge at those great Assizes,
has told us, that even of eve ry idle word that Mat. 12. 36.
men shall speak they shall give an acccount; What can be sleighter then the wind
of our words? and what words more harmless then those which have no evil
quality in them, though no good? such are our idle words; yet even those may
not pass without an account; and if our thoughts be yet less then they; even
those must so try us, as either to accuse or excuse us; and, if evil, may
condemn us: Romans 2. 15.
Think not therefore to draw me into sin because it is little; Mat. 15. 14.
The wages of sin is death; here is no stint of quantities; If sin be the work,
death is the wages; Persuade me now, if thou can, that there is a little
death for a little sin; persuade me that there is a lesser infiniteness; and a
shorter eternity: til the great Judge of the world reverse his most just
sentence, I shall look upon every sin as my death, and hate thee for the cause
of both. But as thy suggestion shall never move me to take liberty to my self
of yiedling to the smallest sin; so the greatness of my most heinous sin,
shall not daunt me whiles I rely upon an infinite mercy; even my bloodiest
sins are expiated by the blood of my Savior; that my all-sufficient surety
has cleared all my scores in heaven; In him I stand fully discharged of all my
debts; and shall (after all thy wicked temptations) hold resolute, as not to
commit the least sin, so not fear the greatest.

VIII. TEMPTATION
What a vain imagination is this, wherewith thou please thy self, that thy
sins are discharged in another man's person; that another righteousness should
be thine; that thine offenses should be satisfied by another punishment: Tush,
they abuse thee that persuade thee God is angry with mankind, which he loves,
and favors; or that his anger is appeased by the bloody satisfaction of a
Savior; that thou stand acquitted in heaven by that which another has done
and suffered: These are fancies not fit to find place in the heads of wise men
Repelled.

NAy rather, these are blasphemies not fit to fall from any but a malignant
Devil: what is this but to flatter man, that thou may sclander God? Is not
the anger of a just God deservedly kindled against man for sin? Do not our
iniquities Esa. 59. 2.
separate between us and our God? Do not our sins hide his face from us, that
he will not hear? Are we not all by nature the Ephesians. 2. 3.
children of wrath? Does not the wrath of God come (for sin) upon Ephesians. 5. 6.
the children of disobedience? Does not every willing sinner (after his
hardness and Romans 2. 5.
impenitent heart) teasure up unto himself lest he should not have enough wrath
against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the just judgment of God? why
do not thy Socinian clients go about to persuade us (as well) that God is not
angry with thee, though he torment thee perpetually; and hold thee in
everlasting Jude 6.
chains under darkness? what proofs can we have of anger but the effects of
displeasure? was it not from hence that man was driven out of Paradise? was it
not from hence that both he, and we in him, were adjudged to death? as it is
written, By one man sin entered into the Romans 5: 12.
world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all men
have sinned: yea, not only to a temporal death, but, By the offense of one,
judgment Romans 5. 18:
came upon all men to condemnation. Thou who art the dreadful executioner
know too well who it is that had the power of death; over Heb. 2. 14, 15.
those who through the fear of death were all their lives long subject unto
bondage. Under this woeful captivity did we lie; sold under sin, Romans 7: 14.
vassals to it, and death, and thee; till that one Mediator Romans 6: 16.
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus was pleased to give himself a
ransom 1 Timothy: 2: 5.
for all; that he might redeem us from all iniquity; who Tit. 2. 14:
by his own blood entered in once into the holy place Heb: 9. 12.
making an eternal redemption for us: Lo, it is not doctrine, and example, it
is no less then blood, the blood of the Son of God shed Ephesians. 1. 7:
for our redemption, that renders him a perfect Mediator, and cleanses us from
all sin, 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
He has loved us, and has given Ephesians. 5. 2:
himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling
savor: He has redeemed Gal. 3: 13:
us from the curse of the Law; from the power of darkness; Col. 1. 13:
and has reconciled us in the body of his flesh, through death Col. 1. 22.
to present us holy, unblameabl; and unreproveable in his sight, 1 Pet. 2. 24:
He it is that bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to
sins, should live unto righteousness. So abundant and clear testimony has
God been pleased to give to the infinite merit, and efficacy of the bloody
satisfaction of his Son Jesus made for us, that were thou not as unmeasurably
impudent as malicious, thou could not endeavor to outface so manifest a
truth: Think not to beat me off from this sure and saving hold by suggesting
the improbability of another satisfaction, and obedience becoming mine; what
is more familiar then this? Our sins are debts, (so my Savior Mat. 6. 12:
has styled them) how commona a thing is it for debts to be set over to
another hand? how ordinary for a bond to be discharged by the surety? If the
debt then be paid for me, and that payment accepted of the Creditor, as mine,
how fully am I acquitted?

Indeed, thou do no other then sclander our title; The righteousness whereby
we stand just before our God, is not merely another; it is by application
ours; it is Christ's; and Christ is ours; He is our Head, we, as members, are
united to him; and by virtue of this blessed union, partake of his perfect
obedience, and satisfaction: It is true, were we strangers to a Savior, his
righteousness could have no relation to us; but now that we are incorporated
into him, by a lively faith, his graces, his merits are so ours, that all thy
malice cannot sever them: I, even I who sinned in the first Adam, have
satisfied in the second: The first Adams sin was mine; 2 Cor. 5. 21.
The second Adam was made sin for me; I made my self sinful in the first
Adam, and in my self; My Christ is made to me of God righteousness 1 Cor. 1.
30.
and redemption: The curse was my inheritance; Christ has redeemed me from
Gal. 3: 13:
the curse of the Law; being made a curse for me, that I might be made the
righteousness 2 Cor. 5: 21.
of God in him. It is thy deep envy thus to grudg unto man, the mercy of that
redemption, which was not extended to thy self; but in despite of all thy
snarling, and repining, we are safe. Being justified by faith, we Romans 5. 1.
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

IX. TEMPTATION
How confidently thou buildest upon a promise; and if thou have but a word for
it, make thy self sure of any blessing: whereas thou may know, that many
of those promises, which thou accountest sacred and divine, have shrunk in the
performance; How has God promised deliverance to those that trust in him; yet
how many of his faithfullest servants have miscarried? what liberal promises
has he made of provision for those that wait upon him; yet how many of them
have miserably perished in want? Repelled.

BLasphemous spirit; that which is thine own guise thou art ever apt to impute
unto the holy one of Israel; It is indeed thy manner to draw on thy clients
with golden promises of life, wealth, honor, and to say (as once to my
Savior) All these will I give thee, when thou neither mean, nor can give
any thing but misery and torment. As for my God, whom thou wickedly slanderest,
his just title is, Holy, and true: his promises Rev. 6. 10. 2 Cor. 2. 20:
Revel. 1. Numb: 23. 10.
are Amen, as himself: Thy Balaam could let fall so much truth, that God is not
a man that he should lie, nor the son of man that he should repent; Has he
said, and shall he not do it; or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good?
Cast thine eyes back upon his dealings with his Israel, a people unthankful
enough: and deny, if thou can, how punctual he was in all his proceedings
with them? Hear old Joshua, now toward his parting, profess: Behold, this
Josh. 23. 14.
day I am going the way of all flesh, and ye know in your hearts, and in all
your souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good things which the
Lord your God spoke concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one
thing has failed thereof; Hear the same truth attested many ages after by the
wifest King; Blessed be the 1 King. 8. 56.
Lord (says he) that has given rest unto his people Israel, according to all
that he promised: There has not failed one word of all his good promise, which
he promised by the hand of Moses his servant. And lest thou should cavil that
perhaps God takes greater liberty to himself in matter of his promises under
the Gospel, then he formerly did under the Law; Let me challenge thy malice to
instance in any one absolute promise, which God has made since the beginning
of the world unto this day, which he has failed to perform; It is not, I
grant, uneasy to name diverse conditionate engagements, both of favors, and
judgments, wherein God has been pleased to vary from his former intimations;
and such alteration does ful-well consist with the infinite wisdom, mercy, and
justice of the Almighty, for where the condition required, is not performed by
man, how just is it with God either to withold a favor, or to inflict a
judgment; or, where he sees that an outward blessing promised (such a
disposition of the soul as it may meet withal) may turn to our prejudice, and
to our spiritual loss, how is it other then mercy to withdraw it? and in
stead thereof to gratify us with a greater blessing undesired? In all which,
even our own reason is able to justify the Almighty; for can we think God
should be so obliged to us, as to force favors upon us, when we will needs
render our selves incapable of them? or so tied up to the punctuality of a
promise, as that he may not exchange it for a better?

The former was Eli's case who received this message from the man of God sent
to him for that purpose: The 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Lord God of Israel says, I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy
father should walk before me for ever; but now the Lord says; Be it far from
me; for them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed. God meant the honor of the Priesthood to the family of Eli;
but what? was it in so absolute terms, that how ever they dishonored God, yet
God was bound to honor them? All these promises of outward favors do never
other then suppose an answerable capacity in the receiver; like as the menaces
of judgment (how ever they sound) do still intend the favorable exception of
a timely prevention by a serious repentance. And though there be no express
mention of such condition in the promises and threatenings of the Almighty: yet
it is enough that he has once for all made known his holy intentions to this
purpose by his Prophet; At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, Jer.
18. 7,
and concerning a kingdom to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; If
that nation against whom I have 8,
pronounced, turn from their evil; I will repent of the evil that I thought
to do unto them; And, at what instant I shall 9,
speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom to build and to plant it;
If it do evil 10.
in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good,
wherewith I said I would benefit them.

The message of Hezekiah's death, and Niniveh's destruction was, in the letter,
absolute, but in the sense and intention, conditionate; with such holy and just
reservations are all the promises and threats of the Almighty in these
temporal regards; whiles they alter therefore, he changes not; but for his
spiritual engagements, that word of his shall stand everlastingly, I will not
suffer Psalm. 89. 33, 34.
my faithfulness to fail; My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing
that is gone out of my mouth: Indeed this is the Tentation, wherewith thou have
formerly set some prime Saints of God, very hard: How does the holy Psalmist
hereupon break out into a dangerous passion? Will Psalm. 77. 7,
the Lord cast off for ever? and will be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean
gone for ever? 8,
does his promise fail for evermore? has God forgotten to be gracious? has
he shut up his tender mercies in displeasure? 9,
Lo, the man was even falling, yet happily recovers his feet; And I said, this
is 10.
mine infirmity; thine infirmity sure enough (O Asaph) to make question of the
veracity and unfailablenesse of the sure mercies, and promises of the God of
truth: Well was it for thee, that thy God, not taking advantage of thy
weakness, puts forth his gracious hand, and stays thee with the seasonable
consideration of the years of the v. 11.
right hand of the most high; with the remembrance of the works of the Lord,
and of his wonders of old; these were enough to teach thee the omnipotent
power, the never-failing mercy of thy maker and redeemer. In no other plight
through the impetuousnesse of this temptation was the man after Gods own
heart, whiles he cried out; I was greatly afflicted, I said in my haste all men
Psalm. 116. 10, 11,
are liers: the men that he mis-doubted were surely no other then Gods
prophets, which had foretold him his future prosperity, and peaceable setlement
in the throne; these (upon the cross occurrences he met with) is he ready to
censure as liars, and through their sides, what does he but strike at him that
sent them? But the word was not spoke in more haste, then it was retracted; I
believed, therefore v. 10,
I spoke; and then sense of mercies does so overtake the sense of his
sufferings, that now he takes more care what 12,
to retribute to God for his bounty, then he did before how to receive it, and
pitches himself upon that firm ground of all comfort, Oh 16.
Lord, truly I am thy servant; I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid;
Thou have loosed my bonds. Here shall I stay my soul against all thy
suggestions of distrust, O thou malicious enemy of mankind; building my self
upon that steady rock of Israel, whose word is, I am Jehovah, I change not.

Thou tel'st me of deliverances promised, yet ending in utter mis-carriages; of
provisions vanished into want: Why do thou not tell me that even good men
die? These promises of earthly favors to the godly declare to us the ordinary
course, that God pleases to hold in the dispensation of his blessings: which
he so orders, as that generally they are the Lot of his faithful ones, for
the encouragement and reward of their services; and contrarily his judgments
befall his enemies, in part of payment; But yet the great God, who is a most
free agent, holds fit to leave himself at such liberty, as that sometimes for
his own most holy purposes, he may change the scene: which yet he never does,
but to the advantage of his own; so as the oppressions and wrongs which are
done to them, turn favors; The Hermit in the story could thank the thief
that robbed him of his provision, for that he helped him so much the sooner to
his journies end; and indeed, if being stripped of our earthly goods, we be
stored with spiritual riches; if whiles the outward man perishes, the inward
man be renewed in us; if for a little bootlesse honor here, we be advanced to
an immortal glory; if we have exchanged a short and miserable life, for a life
eternally blessed; finally if we lose earth, and win heaven, what cause have we
to be other then thankful? whereto we have reason to add, that in all these
gracious promises of temporal mercies, there is ever to be understood the
exception of expedient castigation, and the meet portage of the Cross; which
were it not to be supplied, Gods children should want one of the greatest
proofs of his fatherly love toward them: which they can read even written in
their own blood; and can bless God in killing them for a present blessedness.
So as after all thy malice, Gods promises are holy, his performances certain,
his judgments just, his servants happy.

X. TEMPTATION
Thou art more nice then needs; Your preachers are too straitlaced in their
opinions, and make the way to heaven narrower then God ever meant it; Tush,
man, thou may be saved in any religion: Is it likely that God will be so
cruel, as to cast away all the world of men in the several varieties of their
professions, and save only one poor handful of reformed Christians? Away with
these scruples; A general belief, and a good meaning will serve to bring thee
to heaven, without these busy disquisitions of the Articles of faith. Repelled.

IT is not for good that thou make such liberal tenders to my soul; thou
well know how ready man's nature is to lay hold on any just liberty that may
be allowed him; and how repiningly it stoops to a restraint; but this which
thou craftily suggestest to me (wicked spirit) is not liberty, it is
licentiousness: Thou tell me the way to heaven is as wide as the world; but
the spirit of truth has taught me, that strait is the Mat. 7. 13.
gate, and narrow is the way, that leads unto life, and few there be that
find it: I know there is but one truth, and one life, and one way to that life;
and I know who it was that said, I am the way, the truth, and the life. He who
is one of these, is all; My Savior who is life, the end of that way, is
likewise the way that leads unto that end; neither is there any way to heaven
but he; All that is besides him, is by-pathes and error; And if any Teacher
shall enlarge, or straiten this way Christ, let him be accursed. And if any
Teacher shall presume to chalk out any other way then Christ, let him be
accursed; Tell not me therefore of the multitudes of men, and varieties of
religions that there are in the world; If there were as many worlds as men, and
every of those men in those worlds, were severed in religion; yet, I tell thee,
there is but one heaven, and but one gate to that heaven, and but one way to
that gate; and that one gate, and way, is Christ; without whom therefore there
can be no entrance. It is thy blasphemy to charge cruelty upon God, if he do
not (that, whereof thou would most complain, as the greatest loser) set
heaven open on all sides to whatsoever comers: Even that God and Saviors
which possesses and disposes it, has told us of a strait gate, and a narrow
way; and few passagers. In vain do thou move me to affect to be more
charitable then my redeemer: He best knows what he has to do with that
mankind, for whom he has paid so dear a price; Yet, to stop thy wicked mouth;
that way, which in comparison of the broad world is narrow, in it self* has a
comfortable latitude; Christ extends himself largely to a world of
believers: This way lies open to all; no nation, no person under heaven is
excluded from walking in it; Yea all are invited by the voice of the Gospel to
tread in it: and whosoever walks in it with a right foot, is accepted to
salvation.

How far it may please my Savior to communicate himself to men, in an
implicit way of belief; and what place those general and involved
apprehensions of the redeemer may find for mercy, at the hands of God, he only
knows that shall judge: this I am sure of, that without this Savior, there can
be no salvation; That in every nation he that fears Act. 10. 35.
God, and works righteousness is accepted with him; That he that has the
Son, has 1 John 5. 12.
life, and he that has not the Son has not life.

As therefore we do justly abhor that wild scope of all religions, which thou
suggestest; so we do willingly admit a large scope in one true religion; so
large as the author of it has thought good to allow: For we have not to do
with a God that stands upon curiosities of belief; or that, upon pain of
damnation, requires of every believer an exquisite perfection of judgment,
concerning every capillar vein of Theological truth; it is enough for him if
we be right for the main substance of the body; He does not, call rigorously
for every stone in the battlements, it suffices, for the capacity of our
salvation if the foundation be hold in tire: It is thy sclander therefore that
we confine Truth; and blessedness to a corner of Reformed. Christians* no;
we seek and find it every where, where God has a Church and Gods Church we
know to be Universal: Let them be Abassines, Cophties, Armeniant, Georgians,
Jacobites, or what ever names either sclander, or distinction has put upon
them; if they hold the foundation firm (howsoever disgracefully built upon
with wood, hay, 1 Cor. 3. 12.
stubble) we hold them Christ's, we hold them ours. Hence it is, that the new
Jerusalem Revel. 21. 12.
is for her beauty, and uniformity set forth with 12 precious gates, (though
for use and substance, one) for that from all coasts of heaven there is free
access to the Church of Christ, and in him to life and glory.

He who is the Truth and the life has said, This is eternal life to know
thee, and him whom thou have sent. This knowledge which is our way to life, is
not alike at tained of all; foam have greater light, and deeper insight into it
then others, That mercy which accepts of the least degree or the true
apprehension of Christ, has not promised to dispense with the wilful neglect
of those who might know him more clearly, more exactly: Let those careless
souls, therefore, which stand indifferent betwixt life and death, upon thy
persuasion, content themselves with good meanings, and generalities of belief,
but for me I shall labor to furnish my self with all requisite truths; and
above all shall aspire toward Philip. 3. 8, 10.
the excellency of the knowledge of my Lord Jesus Christ; that I may know him,
and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings.

TEMPTATIONS REPELLED.

The second Decade.

Temptations of Discouragement.

II. DECADE.
I. TEMPTATION
Were it for some few sins of ignorance, or infirmity, thou might hope to
find place for mercy; but thy sins are, as for multitude innumerable, so; for
quality, heinous, presumptuous, unpardonable: with what face can thou look up
to heaven and expect remission from a just God?

Repelled.

EVen with the face of an humble penitent, justly confounded in himself, in the
sense of his own vileness, but awfully confident in a promised mercy:
Malicious tempter; how like thou art to thy self? when thou would draw me on
to my sins; then, how small, slight, harmless, plausible they were? now thou
have fetched me in, to the guilt of those foul offenses, they are no less
then deadly and irremissible. May I but keep within the verge of mercy, thou
can not more aggravate my wickedness against me, the^ I do against my self;
thou can not be more ready to accuse, then I to judge and condemn my self;
Oh me, the wretchedest of all creatures, how do I hate my self for mine
abominable sins; done with so high a hand, against such a Majesty, after such
light of knowledge, such enforcements of warning, such indearments of mercy,
such reluctations of spirit, such check of conscience; what less then hell
have I deserved from that infinite justice? Thou can not write more bitter
things against me, then I can plead against my own soul; But when thou have
cast up all thy venom; and when I have passed the heaviest sentence against my
self, I, who am in my self utterly lost, and forfeited to eternal death, in
despite of the gates of hell shall live, and am safe, in my Almighty, and
ever-blessed Savior who has conquered Death and hell for me. Set thou me
against my self; I shall set my Savior against thee; urge thou my debts, I
show his full acquittance: Sue thou my bonds, I shall exhibit them cancelled,
and nailed to his cross: press thou my horrible crimes, I plead a pardon
sealed in heaven: Thou tell me of the multitude, and heinousness of my
sins, I tell thee of an infinite mercy; and what are numbers and magnitudes to
the infinite? To an illimited power what difference is there betwixt a
mountain and an ant-heape? betwixt one and a million? were my sins a thousand
times more and worse then they are, there is worth abundantly enough in every
drop of that precious blood which was shed for my redemption, to expiate them:
Know, O tempter, that I have to do with a mercy which can die my scarlet sins,
Esa. 1. 18.
white as snow; and make my crimson, as wool; whose grace is so boundless,
that if thou thy self had, upon thy fall, been capable of repentance, thou
had not everlastingly perished; The Lord is gracious, Psalm. 145. 8,
and full of compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy; The Lord is good to
all; and his tender mercies are over all his 9,
works; And if there be a sin of man unpardonable, it is not for the
insufficiency of grace to forgive it, but for the incapacity of the subject
that should receive remissision.

Thou feel'st to thy pain, and loss, wherefore it was that the eternal son
of God, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
Jesus Christ, came into the world; Even to save sinners! and if my own heart
shall conspire with thee to accuse me as the chief of those sinners, my
repentance gives me so much the more claim, and interest in his blessed
redemption: Let me be the most laden with the chains of my captivity, so I may
have the greatest share in that all-sufficient ransom.

And if thou who art the true fiery serpent in this miserable wilderness, have
by sin stung my soul to death; let me (as I do) with penitent and faithful
eyes but look up to that brazen serpent which is lift up far above all heavens,
thy poison cannot kill, cannot hurt me. It is the word of eternal truth, which
cannot fail us, If we confess our sins, he is 1 John 1. 9.
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

Lo, here, not mercy only, but justice on my side; The spirit of God says not
only, if we confess our sins, he is merciful to forgive our sins, as he
elsewhere speaks by the pen of Solomon: but more; Proverb. 28: 13.
he is faithful and just to forgive our sins; Our weakness and ignorance is
wont to fly from the justice of our God, unto his mercy; What can we fear,
when his very justice yields remission? That justice relates to his gracious
promise of pardon to the penitent; whiles I do truly repent therefore, his very
justice necessarily infers mercy, and that mercy forgiveness: Think not
therefore, O thou malicious spirit, to affright me with the mention of Divine
Justice; Woe were me if God were not as just, as merciful; yea if he were not
therefore merciful because he is just; merciful in giving me repentance, just
in vouchsafing me the promised mercy and forgiveness, upon the repentance
which he has given me.

After all thy heinous exaggerations of my guilt, it is not the quality of the
sin, but the disposition of the sinner that damns the soul; If we compare the
offensive acts of a David, and a Saul, it is not easy to judge whether were
more foul; thou which stirred'st them up both to those odious sins, made
account of an equal advantage against both; but thine aim failed thee; the
humble and true penitence of the one saved him out of thy hands, the
obdurednesse, and falseheartednesse of the other gave him up, as a prey to thy
malice; It is enough for me that though I had not the grace to avoid my sins,
yet I have the grace to hate and bewail them; that good spirit which thought
not good to restrain me from sinning, has been graciously pleased to humble
me for sinning. Yea such is the infinite goodness of my God to my poor soul,
that those sins which thou have drawn me into, with an intent of my utmost
prejudice, and damnation, are happily turned, through his grace, unto my
greatest advantage; for had it not been for these my sinful miscarriages, had
I ever attained to so clear a sight of my own frailty and wretchedness? so
deep a contrition of soul? so real experience of temptation? so hearty a
detestation of sin? such tenderness of heart? such awe of offending? so
fervent zeal of obedience? so sweet a sense of mercy? so thankful a
recognition of deliverance? What have thou now gained, O thou wicked spirit, by
thy prevalent temptations? What Trophies have thou cause to erect for thy
victory and my soil? Could thou have won me to a trade of sinning, to a
resolution in evil, to a pleasure as in the commission, so in the memory of my
sin, to a glorying in wickedness, and then might have taken the advantage of
snatching me away in a state of unrepentance, thou might have had just cause
to triumph in thy prey; but now, that it has pleased my God to show me so much
mercy, as to check me in my evil way, to work in me an abhorring of my sin,
and of my self for it, and to pull me out of thy clutches, by a true and
seasonable repentance, thou have lost a soul, and I have found a Savior; Thou
may upbraid me with the foulness of my sins, I shall bless God for their
improvement.

II. TEMPTATION
Alas, poor man, how willing thou art to make thy self believe that thou have
truly repented; whereas this is nothing but some dump of Melancholy; or some
relenting of nature after too much expense of spirits; or some irksome
coffeehouse after a satiety and weariness of pleasure, or some slavish
shrinking in upon the expectation of a lash; true penitence is a spiritual
business, an effect of that grace which was never incident into thy bosom
Repelled.

MAlicious tempter, it is my no small happiness that thou art not admitted to
keep the key of my heart, or to look into my breast, to see what is in my
bosom; and therefore thou can not, out of knowledge, pass any censure of my
inward dispositions; only wilt be sure to suggest the worst; which the falser
it is, the better does it become the father of lies; But that good spirit which
has wrought true repentance in my heart, witnesses, together with my heart,
the truth of my repentance. Can thou hope to persuade me, that I do belie, or
mis-know my own grief? Do not I feel this heart of mine bleed with a true
inward remorse for my sins? Have I not poured out many hearty sighs, and
tears for mine offenses? Do I not ever look back upon them with a vehement
loathing and detestation? Have I not with much anguish of soul confessed them
before the face of that God whom I have provoked?

Think not now to choke me with a Cain, or Saul, or Judas, which did more, and
repented not; and to fasten upon me a worldly sorrow that works Death; No
wicked one, after all thy depravations, this grief of mine looks with a far
other face then theirs, and is no other then a Godly sorrow working repentance
2 Cor. 7. 10.
to salvation, not to be repented of; theirs was out of the horror of
punishment, mine out of the sense of displeasure; theirs for the doom and
execution of a severe Judge, mine for the frowns of an offended father; theirs
attended with a woeful despair, mine with a weeping confidence; theirs a
preface to Hell, mine an introduction to salvation. And since thou will needs
disparage, and mis-call this godly disposition of mine; Lo, I challenge this
envy of thine to call it to the Test, and to examine it thoroughly whether it
agree not with those unfayling rules of the sympcomes and effects of the
sorrow, which is according to God: Has not here been a 1 Cor. 7. 11.
true carfulness; as to be freed and acquitted from the present guilt of my
sin; so to keep my soul unspotted for the future; both to work my peace with my
God, and to (...) it? Has not my heard earnestly* labored to clear it self
before God* not with shuffling excuses, and flattering mitigations; but by
humble and sincere confessions of my own vileness? Has not my breast swelled
up with an angry indignation at my sinful mis-carriages? have I not seriously
rated my self, for giving way to thy wicked temptations? Have I not trembled,
not only at the apprehension of my own danger by sin, but at the very
suggestion of the like offense? have I not been kept in awe with the jealous
fears of my miserable frailties, lest I should be again ensnared in thy
mischievous ginnes? Have I not felt in my self a servent desire above all
things to stand right, in the recovered favor of my God; and to be strengthened
in the inner man with a further increase of grace; for the preventing of future
sins; and giving more glory to my God, and Savior? Has not my heart within me
burned with so much more zeal to the honor and service of that Majesty which
I have offended, as I have more dishonored him by my offense? has it not been
inflamed with just displeasure at my self, and all the instruments and means
of my mis-leading? Lastly, have I not fallen foul upon my self for so easy a
seduction? have I not chastised my self with sharp reproofs* have I not held my
appetite short, and upon these very grounds punished it with a denial of
lawful contentments? have I not thereupon tasked my self with the harder
duties of obedience* and do I not now resolve, and carefully endeavor to
walk conscionably in all the ways of God; Malign therefore how thou will, my
repentance stands firm against all thy detractions, and is not more impugned
by thee on earth, then it is accepted in heaven.

III. TEMPTATION
Thou have small reason to bear thy self upon thy repentance; it is too slight;
seconded with too many relapses, too late, to yield any true comfort to thy
soul Repelled.

NOr thus can I be discouraged by thee, malicious spirit; The mercy of my God
has not ^et any stint to the allowed measure of repentance; Where has he ever
said; Thus far shall thy penitence come, else it shall not be accepted? It is
truth that he calls for, not measure; That happy thief, whom my dying Savior
rescued out of thy hands, gave no other proof of his repentance, but, We are
justly Luke 23. 41.
here; and receive due reward of our deeds; yet was admitted to attend his
Redeemer from his Cross to his Paradise.

Neither do we hear any words from penitent David after his foul crimes, but,
I have sinned, Not that any true penitent can be afraid of too much compunction
of heart; and is ready to dry up his tears too soon; rather pleasing himself
with the continuance and pain of his own smart; but that our indulgent father,
who takes no pleasure in our misery, is apt to wipe away the tears from our
eyes, contenting himself only with the syncernesse, not the extremity of our
contrition: Thy malice is altogether for extremes; either a wild security, or
an utter desperation; that holy and merciful Spirit, who is a professed lover
of mankind, is ever for the mean; so hating our carelessness that he will not
suffer us to want the exercises of a due humiliation; so abhorring despair,
that he abides not to have us driven to the brinke of that fearful precipice.
As for my repentance, therefore it is enough for me that it is sound, and
serious for the substance; yet, withal, (thanks be to that good Spirit that
wrought it) it is graciously approveable even for the measure; I have heartily
mourned for my sins, though I pined not away with sorrow; I have broken my
sleep for them, though I have not watered my couch with my tears; and, next to
thy self, I have hated them most: I have beaten my breast, though I have not
rent my heart; and what would I not have done, or given that I had not sinned?
Tell not me that some worldly crosses have gone nearer to my heart, then my
sins; and that I have spent more tears upon the loss of a son, then the
displeasure of my heavenly father; The father of mercies will not measure our
repentance by these crooked lines of thine; he knows the flesh and blood we are
made of; and therefore expects not we should have so quick a sense of our
spiritual, as of our bodily affliction; it contents him that we set a
valuation of his favor, above all earthly things; and esteem his offense the
greatest of all evils that can befall us: and of this judgment and affection
it is not in thy power to bereave my soul.

As for my relapses; I confess them with sorrow and shame: I know their
danger; and (had I not to do with an infinite mercy) their deadliness: Yet
after all my confusion of face, and thine enforcement of justice, my soul is
safe; for upon those perilous recidivations my hearty repentance has made my
peace; The long-suffering God, whom I have offended, has set no limits to his
remission: After ten miraculous signs in Egypt, his Israel tempted him no
less Numb. 14. 22.
then ten times in the wilderness, yet his mercy forbore them: not rewarding
their reiterated sin with deserved vengeance; Has not that gracious Savior of
mankind charged us to forgive our offending brother no less then seventy times
seven times? Mat. 18. 22.
and what proportion is there between our mercy, and his? Could thou charge
me with encouraging my self to continue my sin upon this presumption of
pardon, thou had cause to boast of the advantage, but now that my remorse
has been sincere, and my falls weak, my God will not withold mercy from his
penitent; that has not only confessed but forsaken Prove. 28. 13.
his sin.

As for the late season of my repentance, I confess I have highly wronged and
hazarded my soul in the delay of so often required, and so often purposed a
work; and given thee fair advantages against my self, by so dangerous a
neglect; but blessed be my God that he suffered not these advantages to be
taken; I had been utterly lost, if thou had surprised me in my impenitence:
but now, I can look back upon my peril well passed, and defy thy malice: No
time can be prejudicial to the king of heaven; no season can be any bar
either to our conversion, or his merciful acceptance: It is true, that
latenesse gives shrewd suspicions of the truth of repentance; but where our
repentance is true, it cannot come too late. Object this to some formal
souls, that having lavisht out the whole course of their lives in wilful
sensuality and profaneness, think to make an abundant amends for all, on
their deathbeds with a fashionable, Lord have mercy; These whom thou have
mocked and drawn on with a stupid security all their days, may well be upbraided
by thee, with the irrecoverable delay of what they have not grace to seek; but
that soul which is truly touched with the sense of his sin; and in an humble
contrition makes his address to God, and interposes Christ betwixt God and it
self, is in vain scarred with delay; and finds that his God makes no
difference of hours. Do I not see the Prodigal in the Gospel, after he had
run himself Luke 15. 14, 15, etc.
quite out of breath and means, yet at the last cast, returning, and accepted*
I do not hear his father austerely say, Nay, unthrift, had thou come whiles
thou had some bags left, I should have welcomed thy return as an argument of
some grace, and love: but now that thou have spent all; and necessity, not
affection drives thee home, keep off, and starve; but the good old man runs,
and meets him; and falls on his neck and kisses him, and calls for the best
robe, and the fatted calfe: Thus, thus deals our heavenly Father with us
wretched sinners; if after all refuges vainly sought, and all gracious
opportunities carelessly neglected, we shall yet have sincere recourse to his
infinite mercy the best things in heaven shall not be too good for us.

IV. TEMPTATION
Tush! What do thou please thy self with these vain thoughts? if God cared
for thee could thou be thus miserable? Repelled.

AWay thou lying Spirit; I am afflicted; but it is not in thy power to make me
miserable: And did I yet smart much more, would thou persuade me to measure
the favor of my God by these outward events? Has not the Spirit of Truth
taught me that in these external matters, All things come Eccles. 9. 2.
alike to all; there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked; to the
good and clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that
sacrifices not; as is the good, so is the sinner; and he that swears, as he
that fears an Oath: But if there were any judgment to be passed upon these
grounds, the advantage is mine; I smart, yea I bleed under the hand of my
heavenly father; Whom Heb. 12. 6.
the Lord loves he chasteneth; and scourges every son whom he receives: Lo,
there cannot e so much pain in the stripes, as there is comfort in the love of
him that lays them on; He were not my father if he whip't me not; Truth has
said it, If ye be Heb. 12. 8.
without chastisements, ye are bastards, and not sons: He cannot but love me,
whiles he is my father: and let him fetch blood on me, so he love me: After all
thy malice, let me be a bleeding son to such a father; whiles thy baseborne
children enjoy their ease.

Impudent tempter, how can thou from my sufferings argue Gods disfavour, when
thou know that he whom God loved best, suffered most? The eternal Son of
his love, that could truly say, I and the Father are one, endured more from the
hand of that his heavenly Father then all the whole world of mankind was
capable to suffer* Surely he has Esa. 53. 4,
borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows; He was wounded for oue
transgressions, he was 5,
bruised for our iniquities* the chastisements of our peace were upon him* the
Lord has laid 6.
on him the iniquities of us all. What poor flea bitings are these that I am
afflicted with* in respect of those torments which the Son of God under went
for me?

Thou that saw the bloody sweat of his agony, the cruel tortures of his
crucifixion, the pangs of worse then death, the sense of his Fathers wrath and
our curse, do thou move me, whom he has bought with so dear a price, to
murmur, and recoyle upon divine providence for a petty affliction?

Besides, this is the load which my blessed Savior has with his own hands
laid upon my shoulders; If Luke 9. 23. Mat. 16. 24. Mar. 8. 34.
any man will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross
daily, and follow me. Lo, every Cross is not Christ's; each man has a cross
of his own, and this cross he may not think to tread upon, but he must take
up; and not once perhaps in his life, but daily, and with that weight on his
neck he must follow the Lord of life, not to his Tabor only, but to his
Golgotha: And thus following him on earth, he shall surely overtake him in
heaven; for if we suffer with 2 Timothy 2. 12.
him, we shall also reign with him*

It is still thy policy, O thou envious Spirit, to fill mine eyes with the
cross, and to represent nothing to my thoughts, but the horror and pain of
suffering, that so thou may drive me to a languishing dejectedness of
spirit, and despair of mercy; But my God has raised and directed mine eyes to
a better prospect, quite beyond thine, which is a crown of glory. I see that
ready to be set upon my head after my strife, and victory, which were more then
enough to make amends for an hell upon earth: In vain should I hope to obtain
it without a conflict; how should I overcome if I strive not? These struglings
are the way to a conquest; After all these assaults the foil shall be thine,
and mine shall be the glory and triumph; The God of Truth has said it: Be
faithful to the death, and I will give thee a crown of life.

Thine advantage lies in the way, mine in the end; the way of affliction is
rugged, deep, stiff, dangerous; the end is fair, and green, and strewed with
flowers; No chastening for the present Heb. 12. 11.
seems to be joyous, but grievous; nevertheless afterward, it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby.

What if I be in pain here for a while? The sufferings Romans 8. 18.
of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall
be revealed in us.

It is thy maliciousness that would make the affliction of my body the bane of
my soul: but if the fault be not mine, that which thou intendest for a poison
shall prove a cordial: Let patience Jam. 1. 4.
have her perfect work, and I am happy in my sufferings: For our light
affliction, which 2 Cor. 4. 17.
is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal
weight of glory* Lo; it does not only admir of glory, but works it for us; so
as we are infinitely more beholden to our pain, then to our ease; and have
reason not only to be well apayd, but to rejoice in tribulations; knowing,
That Tribulation Romans 5. 3.
works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope; and hope
makes not ashamed.

Tell me if thou can, which of those Saints that are now shining bright in
their heaven, has got thither un-afflicted? How many of those blessed ones
have endured more, then my God will allow thee to inflict upon my weakness?
Some more, and some less sorrows; all some, yea many: so true is that word of
the chosen vessel, That through much tribulation we must enter into the Act.
14. 22.
kingdom of God.

By this then I see that I am in my right way to that blessedness I am
traveling toward; Did I find my self in the smooth, pleasant and flowery path
of carnal ease and contentment; I should have just reason to think my self
quite out of that happy road; Now I know I am going directly toward my home;
the abiding City which is above; So far therefore are my sufferings from
arguing me miserable, that I could not be happy if I suffered not.

V. TEMPTATION
Foolish man, how vainly do thou flatter thy self in calling that a
chastisement, which God intends for a judgment; in mistaking that for a rod of
fatherly correction, which God lays on as a scourge of just anger, and
punishment. Repelled.

IT is thy maliciousness, O thou wicked spirit, ever to mis-interpret Gods
actions; and to sclander the footsteps of the Almighty; But notwithstanding all
thy mischievous suggestions, I can read mercy, and favor in my affliction;
neither shall it be in the power of thy temptation to put me out of this just
construction of my sufferings; For, what? Is it the measure of my smart that
should argue Gods displeasure? How many of Gods dearlings on earth have endured
more? What say thou to the man, with whom the Almighty did once challenge
and foil thee, the great pattern of patience; was not his calamity as much
beyond mine, as my graces are short of his? Do thou not hear the man after
Gods own heart say, Lord, remember David and all his troubles? Do thou not
hear the chosen vessel who was rapt up into the third heaven, complain, We
are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; 2 Cor. 4. 8.
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but
not destroyed. Of the Jews five 2 Cor. 11. 24,
times received I forty stripes save one; Thrice was I beaten 25,
with rods; once was I stoned; thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I
have been in the deep; In journying often, 26,
in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by my own countrymen, in
perils by the heathen, etc. In weariness and 27,
painfulnesse, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in
cold and nakedness; Yea which was worse then all these, do thou not hear
him say, There was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to
buffet me? Do thou not too well know (for thou were the maine actor in those
woeful Tragedies) what cruel torments the blessed Martyrs of God in all ages
have undergone for their holy profession? None upon earth ever found Gods hand
so heavy upon them, none upon earth were so dear to heaven; The sharpness
therefore of my pangs can be no proof of the displeasure of my God; Yea
contrarily, this visitation of mine (what ever thou suggestest) is in much love
and mercy: Had my God let me loose to my own ways, and suffered me to run on
carelessly in a course of sinning without check, or control, this had been a
manifest argument of an high and heinous displeasure: God is grievously angry
when he punishes sinners with prosperity; for this shows them reserved to a
fearful damnation; but whom he reclaims from evil by a severe correction,
those he loves, there cannot be a greater favor then those saving stripes;
When we are 1 Cor. 11. 32.
judged, we are chastened of the Lord that we should not be condemned with the
world.

Besides, the manner of the infliction speaks nothing but mercy; for, what a
gentle hand does my God lay upon me? as if he said, I must correct thee, but I
will not hurt thee; what gracious respites are here; what favorable
inter-spirations; as if God bade me to recollect my self; and invited me to
meet him by a seasonable humiliation; This is not the fashion of anger and
enmity; which aiming only at destruction, indevours to surprise the adversary,
and to hurry him to a sudden execution.

Neither is it a mere affliction that can evince either love or hatred; all is
in the attendants, and entertainment of afflictions; Where God means favor, he
gives together with the cross an humble heart, a meek spirit, a patient
submission to his good pleasure, a willingness to kiss the rod, and the hand
that wields it, a faithful dependence upon that arm from which he smarts; and
lastly, an happy use and improvement of the suffering, to the bettering of the
soul; who so finds these dispositions in himself may well take up that
resolution of the sweet singer of Israel, It is Psalm. 119. 71, 75.
good for me that I have been afflicted; I know, O Lord, that thy judgments
are right; and that thou in very faithfulness have afflicted me: Contrarily,
where God smites in anger, those strokes are followed and accompanied with
woeful symptoms of a spiritual malady; either a stupid senslesnesse and
obdurednesse of heart; or an impatient murmuring at the stripes; saucy and
presumptuous expostulations, fretting and repining at the smart; a perverse
alienation of affection, and a rebellious swelling against God; an utter
dejection of spirit, and lastly an heartlesse despair of mercy. Those with
home thou have prevailed so far as to draw them into this deadly condition of
soul, have just cause to think themselves smitten in displeasure, but as for
me, blessed be the name of my God, my stripes are medicinal, and healing: Let
the righteous God thus smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove
me, it shall be an excellent oil that shall not break my head.

VI. TEMPTATION
Away with these superstitious fears, and needless scruples wherewith thou
fondly troublest thy self; as if God that sits above in the circle of heaven
regarded these poor businesses that pass here below upon earth; or cared what
this man does, or that man suffers: Do thou not see that none prosper so
much in the world as those that are most noted for wickedness? and do thou
see any so miserable upon earth as the holiest? Could it be thus if there were
providence that over looks and overrules these earthly affairs? Repelled.

THe Lord rebuke thee, Satan. Even that great Lord of heaven and earth, whom
thou so wickedly blasphemest; would thou persuade me that he who is infinite
in power, is not also infinite in providence? He whose infinite power made all
creatures, both in heaven above, and in earth beneath, shall not his infinite
providence govern and dispose of all that he has made? Lo, how justly the
spirit of wisdom calls thee, and thy clients, fools, and brutish things; They
say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob Psalm. 94. 7,
regard; Understand ye brutish 8,
among the people; and ye fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the
ear, shall he not 9,
hear? he that formed the eye, shall not he see? he that teaches 10.
man knowledge, shall not he know? It was no limited power, that could make
this eye to see, this ear to hear, this heart to understand; and if that eye
which he has given us, can see all things that are within our prospect; and
that ear that he has planted, can hear all sounds that are within our
compass; and that heart that he has given us, can know all matters within the
reach of our comprehension; how much more shall the sight, and hearing, and
knowledge of that infinite Spirit (which can admit of no bounds) extend to all
the actions and events of all the creatures, that lie open before him that ma^e
them?

It is in him that we live, Act. 17. 28.
and move, and have our being; and can we be so sottish, as to think we can
steal a life from him, which he knows not of? or a motion that he discerns
not?

That word of his by whom all creatures were made, has told me, that not one
sparrow Mat. 10. 29.
(two whereof are sold for a farthing) can fall to the ground without my
heavenly Father; yea, that the very hairs of our v. 30.
heads (though a poor, neglected excrement) are all numbered: and can there be
any thing more slight then they? How great care must we needs think is taken
of the head, since not an hair can fall unregarded?

The Lord makes poor and 1 Samuel 2. 7,
makes rich; he brings down and lifts up: He raises up v. 8.
the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set
them among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory; for the
pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he has set the world upon them.

Even Rabshakeh himself spoke truer then he was aware of; Am I now comne up 2
Kings 18. 25.
without the Lord against this place? No certainly, thou insolent blasphemer,
thou could not move thy tongue, nor wag thy finger against Gods inheritance,
without the providence of that God, who returned answer to thy proud Master,
the King of Assyria, I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in,
and thy rage against 2 Kings 19. 27, 28.
me; Thy rage, and thy tumult is come up into my ears; therefore I will put an
hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the
way by which thou came: So true is that word of Elihu; His eyes are upon the
ways of Job 34. 21.
man; and he soeth all his goings; there is no darkness, nor shadow of death,
where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves; Seconded by the holy
Psalmist; The Lord looks Psalm. 33. 13, 14.
from heaven, he beholds all the sons of men; From the place of his
habitation he looks upon all the inhabitants of the earth.

Neither is this divine providence confined only to man, the prime piece of
this visible creation; but; it extends it self to all the workmanship of the
Almighty: O. Lord how manifold are, thy Psalm. 104. 24,
works; in wisdom have thoumade them all; the earth is full of thy riches: So
is the great 25,
and wide Sea; wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great
beasts; these wait all upon thee, that 27.
thou may give them their meat in due season, thou give it them, they
gather; thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good: The young Lions Psalm.
104. 21.
roar after their prey; and seek their meat from God; The ravens Luke 12. 24,
neither sow nor reap, no^ have any storehouse, or barn, yet God feeds
them; The Lillies 27.
toil not, nor sp^^, yet the great God clothes them with more then Salomons
glory. Who knows not in all Job 12. 9, 10.
these, that the hand of the Lord has wrought this? In whose hand is the soul
of every living thing; and the breath of all mankind. What do thou then, O
thou false spirit, think to choke divine providence with the smalnesse, and
multitude of objects? as if quantities or numbers could make any difference in
the Infinite? as if one drop of water were not all one to the Almighty, with
the whole deep? One corn of sand with the whole mass of the earth? as if that
hand which graspeth the large circumference of the highest heaven could let
slip the least fly, or worm upon earth? When thou feel, to thy pain, that
this eye of omniscience, and this hand of power reaches even to thy neither
most hell; and sees and orders every of those torments wherewith thou art
everlastingly punished; and at pleasure puts bounds to thy malicious indevours
against his meanest creatures upon earth?

Thou tellest me of the wickedest men's prosperity; This is no new dart of
thine, but the same which thou have thrown, of old, at many a faithful heart;
Holy Job, David, Jeremie felt the dint of it; not without danger, but without
hurt.

It is true; Wicked men flourish; what marvel is this? The world loves his
own: Does any man wonder to see the weeds overtop the good herbs? They are
natives to that soil, whereto the other are but strangers. Wicked men prosper;
It is all the heaven they are like to have; and yet, alas, at the best, it is
but a woeful one; how intermixed with sorrows and discontentments? how full of
uncertainties? how certain of ruin, and confusion? It is a sure and sad
interchange, whereof Father Abraham minds the man who was now more full of
torment, then formerly of wealth; Son, remember, that thou in thy Luke 16. 25.
life time receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus evil; but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented.

The wicked man prospers; but how long? I have Psalm. 37. 35, 36.
seen the wicked in great power; and spreading himself like a green bay tree;
yet he passed away, and, lo, he was not; I sought him, but he could not be
found.

The wicked prosper; Alas, their welfare is their judgment; God does not owe
them so much favor, as to afflict them: They walk on mertily toward a deadly
precipice: The just God lets them alone; and will not so much as molest their
jollity with a painful check.

The wicked thrive in the world; How should they do other? Mammon is the God
they serve, and what can he do less then bless them with a miserable
advantage? for thus their wealth is made to them an occasion of falling; The
prosperity of fools Prove. 1. 32.
shall destroy them.

The wicked prosper; Let me never prosper if I envy them: Do not I see their
day coming? Do not I know that they are merely fed up to the slaughter?
Wherefore do the crammed fowls, and fatted Oxen fare better then their fellows?
Is it out of favor, or is it that they are designed to the dresser? Amnon is
feasted with his brethren, those that serve him see death in his face:
Belshazzar triumphs in mirth, and carouseth freely in the sacred vessels; The
hand writes upon the wall, Thy days are numbered, thy Dan. 5. 26.
kingdom finished: The revelling of the wicked, is but a lightning before an
eternal death.

Thou tell me on the the contrary, that the godly are persecuted, afflicted,
tormented. It is true; None Heb. 11. 37.
knows it better then thy self, who under the permission of the most High, art
the author of all their sufferings. It is thou, the red Dragon, Revel. 12. 4,
that stand ready to devour the masculine issue of Gods Church; It is thou,
13,
that when the persecuted woman flees into the wilderness, powrest out of thy
mouth, after her, floods of water to drown her: It is thou that inspirest
Tyrants v. 15.
with rage against the innocent Saints of God; and actuatest their hellish
cruelty: But, when thou have all done, the most wise and mighty arbiter of
heaven turns all this to the advantage of his dear ones upon earth: The blood
of the Martyrs does, and shall prove the seed of the Church; whereof every
grain yields thirty, sixty, an hundred fold: Neither had the Act. 7. 52.
Church of God been so numerous, if there had been less malice in thy
prosecution: And as for those several Christians, that have undergone the
worst of thy fury, they are so far from finding cause of complaint, that they
rejoice and triumph in the happy issue of their intended miseries; They can say
to thee as Joseph said of old, to his once-envious brethren; Thou Genesis 50. 20.
thoughtst evil against us, but God meant it unto good; they had not now sat
so gloriously crowned in the highest heaven, if thou had not persecuted them
unto blood.

None are so afflicted (thou say) as the godly; True, their Savior has told
them before hand what to trust to; In the world ye shall have Joh. 16. 33. Mat.
24. 9. Luke 21. 12, 13. Joh. 15. 18. 2 Timothy 3. 12, 19.
tribulation; Have they any reason to look for better measure then their
blessed redeemer? If the world hate you, (says he) ye know that it hated me
before it hated you: If ye were of the world, the world would love his own,
but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you; Now, welcome, welcome that hate that is raised
from our dear Saviors love and election; Woe were us if we were not thus
hated: Let the world hate, and hurt us thus still, so we may be the favorites
of heaven.

None fare so ill on earth as the godly, both living and dead; The dead bodies
of Gods servants, have they given to Psalm. 79. 2,
be meat to the fowls of the heaven, the flesh of his Saints, unto 3,
the beasts of the field, their blood have they shed like water, and there was
none to bury the^; They are become a reproach 4.
to their neighbors; a scorn and derision to them that are round about them.
Oh the poor impotent Rev. 16. 6.
malice of wicked spirits, and men! What matters it if our carcasses rot upon
earth, whiles our souls shine in heavenly glory? What matters it, if for a
while we be made a gazingstock 1 Cor. 4. 9.
to the world, to Angels, and to men; whiles the Son of God has assured us of
an eternal royalty? To him that Rev. 3. 21.
over-commeth will I grant to sit with me in my throne; even as I also overcame
and am set down with my Father in his throne.

None are so ill entreated as the godly: It is true, for none are so happy as
they: Blessed are they which are persecuted Mat. 5. 10,
for righteousness sake; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye,
when 11,
men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil of you,
falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, 12.
for great is your reward in heaven: Who would not endure wrongs a while to be
everlastingly recompensed? Here is not place only for patience, but for joy,
and that exceeding; in respect of a reward so infinitely glorious. It is no
marvel then, Mat. 5. 44.
if we be bidden to pray for them which despitefully use us, and persecute us;
these are the men that are our great Benefactors, and (though full sore against
their wills) contribute to our eternal blessedness.

The wicked triumph, whiles the righteous are trampled upon; What marvel? we
are in a middle region betwixt heaven, and hell; but nearer to this latter,
which is the place of confusion: It is but staying a while; and each place will
be distinctly peopled with his own; there is a large and glorious heaven
appointed for the everlasting receptacle of the just, an hell for the godless:
till then, the eternal wisdom has determined for his most holy ends to give
way to this confused mixture, and to this seeming-inequality of events. How
easy were it for him to make all heaven; but he has a justice to glorify, as
well as a mercy: and (in the mean time) it is the just praise of his infinite
power, wisdom, goodness, that he can fetch the greatest good, out of the
worst of evils.

All things go cross here; the righteous droop, the wicked flourish: The end
shall make amends for all; The world is a stage; every man acts his part; the
wise compiler of this great interlude has so contrived it; That the middle
Scenes show nothing but intricacy; and perplexednesse; the unskilful spectator
is ready to censure the plot; and thinks he sees such unpleasing difficulties
in the carriage of affairs, as can never be reconciled; but by that time he
have sat it out, he shall see all brought about to a meet accordance; and all
shut up in a happy applause. Blessed is the man Jam. 1. 12.
that endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of
life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

The world is an Apothecaries shop, wherein there are all manner of drugs, some
poisonous, others cordial; An ignorant, that comes in, and knows only the
quality, not the use of those receipts, will straight be ready to say; What do
these unwholesome simples, these dangerous mineralls, these deadly juices here?
But the learned, and skillful artist knows how so to temper all these noxious
ingredients, that they shall turn Antidotes, and serve for the health of his
patient. Thus does the most high and holy God order these earthly (though
noxious) compositions, to the glory of his great name, and to the advantage of
his chosen: So as that suggestion, wherewith thou meant'st to batter the divine
providence of the Almighty, does invincibly fortify it; his most wise
permission and powerful overruling of evil actions and men through the whole
world to his own honor, and the benefit of his Church.

VII. TEMPTATION
If God be never so liberal in in his promises and sure in performances of
mercy, to his own, yet what is that to thee? thou art none of his, neither
can lay any just claim to his election; Repelled.

HOw boldly can I defy thee, O thou lying spirit, whiles I have the assurance
of him, who is the word of Truth; How confidently dare I challenge thee upon
that unfailing testimony, which shall stand Mat. 5. 18.
till heaven and earth shall pass; Ye that have believed Ephesians. 1. 13,
in Christ, are sealed with that holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest
of our inheritance, until the redemption of the 14.
purchased possession unto the praise of his glory: Lo here a double assurance,
which all the powers of hell shall in vain labor to defeat; The Almighties
Scale, and his Earnest: both made, and given to the believer; and therefore to
me: In spite of all temptations I believe, and know whom I have believed; I
can accuse my faith of weakness, thou can not convince it of untruth; and
all the precious promises of the Gospel, and all the gracious engagements of
God, are made, not to the measure, but to the truth of our belief, and why
should not I as truly know that I rely upon the word of my Savior, as I know
that I distrust, and reject thine? Since then I am a subject truly capable of
this mercy, what can hinder me from enjoying it? Cheer thy self up therefore,
O my soul, with this undefeisible confidence, that thou have Gods seal, and
his earnest for thy salvation. Even an honest man will not be less then his
word; but if his hand have seconded his tongue, he holds the obligation yet
stronger; but if his seal shall be further added to his hand, there is nothing
that can give more validity to the grant, or contract: yet, even of the value
of Seals there is much difference: The Seal of a private man carries so much
authority as his person; the seal of a Community has so much more security in
it, as there are more persons interessed: But the signet of a King has wont to
be held, to all purposes, authentical; as we find (to omit Ahab) in the
signatures of Ahasuerus, and Darius; Who desires any better assurance for the
estate of him and his posterity, then the Great Seal? And behold here is no
less then the great seal of heaven for my election and salvation; Ye are
sealed with the spirit of promise.

But lest thou should plead this to be but a grant of the future, and
therefore, perhaps, upon some intervenient mis-deamures, or unkindnesse taken,
reversible; know that here is yet further, an actual conveyance of this mercy
to me; in that here is an Earnest given me beforehand of a perfect
accomplishment: An earnest, that both binds the assurance, and stands for part
of payment of that great sum of glory which abides for me in heaven. This seal
I show, this earnest I produce; so as my securance is unfailable: And, that
thou may not plead this Seal to be counterfeit, set on only with a stamp of
presumption and self-love; know that here is the true and clear impression of
Gods spirit in all the lines of that gracious signanature; a right (though
weak) illumination of mind in the true apprehension of heavenly things,
sincerity of holy desires, truth of inchoate holiness, unfainedness of
Christian charity, constant purposes and endeavors of perfect obedience: And
as for my earnest, it can no more disappoint me, then the hand that gave it; My
soul is possessed with true (how ever imperfect) grace: and what is grace but
the beginning of glory? and what is glory but the consummation of grace? What
should I regard thy cavils, whiles I have these pledges of the Almighty? It is
not in thy power, malicious spirit, to sever those things which Gods eternal
decree has 2 Pet. 1. 10.
put together: Our calling* and election are thus conjoined from eternity; All
the craft and force of hell cannot divorce them: Whom he Romans 8. 30.
did predestinate them also he called; and whom he called them he also
justified; and whom he justifies them also he glorifieth; It is true that
outwardly many are called, but few chosen; but none are inwardly called which
are not also chosen: in which number is my poor soul, whereto God has showed
mercy in singling it out of this wicked world, into the liberty of the sons of
God; For, do not I find my self sensibly changed from what I was? am I not
evidently freed from the bondage of those natural corruptions, under which
thou heldst mo miserably captived? Do I not hate the courses of my former
disobedience? Do I not give willing ear to the voice of the Gospel? Do I not
desire and endeavor to conform my self wholly to the will of my God and
Savior? Do I not heartily grieve for my spiritual faylings? Do not I
earnestly pray for grace to resist all thy temptations? Do not I cordially
affect the means of grace and salvation? Do I not labor in all things to keep
a good conscience before God, and men? Are not these the infallible proofs of
my calling, and the sure and certain fruits of mine election? Can thou hope
to persuade me, that God will bestow these favors where he loves not? that he
will repent him of such mercies? That he will lose the thanks and honor of so
gracious proceedings? Suggest what thou will; I am more then Philip. 1. 6.
confident, that he who has begun this good work in me, will perform it until
the day of Jesus Christ.

Do not I hear the chosen vessel tell his Thessalonians, that he knows them to
be elected of God? And upon what grounds does he raise this assurance? For
(says 1 Thessal. 1. 4, 5.
he) our Gospel came not to you in word only, but also in power, and in the
Holy Ghost: That which can assure us of another man's election, may much more
secure us of our own: the entertainment and success of the Gospel in our
souls. Lo, that blessed word has wrought in me a sensible abatement of my
corrupt affections; and has produced an apparent renovation of my mind; and
has quickened me to a new life of grace, and obedience; this can be no work of
nature; this can be no other then the work of that Spirit, whereby I am sealed
to the day of redemption; My heart Ephesians. 4. 30.
feels the power of the Gospel; my life expresses it; maugre all thy malice;
therefore I am elected. When the gates of hell have done their worst, none of
Gods children can miscarry; For Romans 8. 17.
if children, then they are heirs; heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ.
Now, as many as Romans 8. 14.
are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God; and this is the
direction that I follow. There are but three guides that I can be led by; my
own will, thy suggestions, the motions of Gods spirit. For my own will, I were
no Christian if I had not learned to deny it, where it stands opposite to the
will of my God; as for thy suggestions, I hate and defy them; they are only
therefore the motions of that good Spirit which I desire to follow; and if at
any time, my own frailty have betrayed me to some aberrations, my repentance
has overtaken my offense; and in sincerity of heart, I can say with an holier
man; I have gone astray like a sheep: seek Psalm. 119. 176.
thy servant, for I do not forget thy commandments: All thy malice therefore
cannot rob me of the comfort of mine adoption.

It is no marvel if thou, who art all enmity, can not abide to hear of
love; but God, who is love, has told me; that love is of God, and 1 John 4. 8.
4. 7.
that every one that loves is borne of God; and that by this we know that we
have passed 1 John 3. 14.
from death to life, because we love the brethren; now, my heart can
irrefragably witness to me, that I love God because he is good; infinitely
good in himself, and infinitely good to me; and that I love good men because
they are his sons, my brethren; I am therefore as surely passed from death to
life, as if I had set my foot over the threshold of heaven.

VIII. TEMPTATION
Alas, poor man, how grossly deludest thou thy self? thou talk of thy faith,
and bear thy self high upon this grace; and think to do great matters
by it; whereas the truth is, thou have no faith, but that which thou
mis-callest so, is nothing else but mere presumption. Repelled.

IS it any wonder that thou should sclander the graces of God, who art ever
ready to calumniate the giver? No, tempter; Can thou challenge this faith of
mine, which thou censurest, to be thine own work? such it should be, if it
were presumption; Were it presumption, would thou oppose it? would thou
not foster and applaud it as thine? The presumption is thine, who dare thus
derogate from the gracious work of the Almighty; and fasten sin upon the holy
Spirit; Mine is faith; yet so mine, as that it is his that wrought it: There is
not more difference betwixt thee, and an Angel of light, then betwixt my faith,
and thy presumption: True faith (such is mine, after all thy sclanderous
suggestions) is grounded upon sound knowledge, and that knowledge upon an
infallible word; Whereas presumption rests only upon opinion, and conceit,
built upon the sands of self-love: Whence it is that the most ignorant are ever
the most presumptuous; when the knowing soul sees what dangers it is to
encounter, and provides for them with an awful resolution.

True faith never comes without careful and diligent use of means; The word,
sacraments, prayer, meditation are but enough with their conjoined forces to
produce so divine a work; whereas presumption comes with ease; it costs
nothing, no strife, no labor to draw forth so worthless and vicious a
disposition; yea rather corrupt nature is forward not only to offer it to us,
but even to force it upon our admission; and it is no small maistery to repel
it.

True faith struggles with infidelity; this Jacob is wrestling with this Esau
in the womb of the soul; and, if at any time, the worse part (through the
violence of a temptation) get the start of the better, the hand lays hold on
the heel, and suffers not it self to be any other then insensibly prevented;
but recovers the light ere the suggestion can be fully completed; and at last
so far prevails, that the elder shall serve the younger; This is 1 John 5. 4.
the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith:

Whereas presumption is ever quiet and secure; not fearing any peril; not
combating with any doubt; pleasing it self in its own ease and safety; and in
the confidence of a perpetual prosperity can say, I shall never be Psalm. 30. 6.
moved.

True faith, wheresoever it is, purifieth the heart, and will not suffer any
known Act. 15. 9.
sin to harbor there; and is ever attended with care, awfulnesse, love,
obedience:

Whereas presumption impures the soul, and works it to boldness, obduration,
false joy, security, senslesnesse.

True faith grows daily; like the grain of mustardseed in the Gospel, which
from small beginnings arises to a tall, and large-spreading plant: presumption
has enough, and sits down contented with its own measure, applauding the
happiness of its own condition.

True faith, like gold, comes out pure from the fire of Temptation; and, like
to sound friendship, is most helpful in the greatest need; Presumption, upon
the easiest trial, vanishes into smoke and dross, and is never so sure to
fail us as in the evil day.

So then this firm affiance of mine, being grounded upon the most sure
promises of the God of Truth, upon frequent use and improvement of all holy
means; after many bickerings with thy motions of unbelief; being attended with
holy and purifying dispositions of the soul; and gathering still more
strength, and growing up daily toward a longedfor perfection; and which, now,
thy experience convinces thee, to be most present and comfortable in the hour
of Temptation, is true faith, not as thou falsely suggestest, a false
presumption.

It is true, my unworthiness is great, but I have to do with an infinite
mercy; so as my wretched unworthiness does but heighten the glory of his most
merciful pardon and acceptance. Shortly then, where there is a divine promise
of free grace and mercy, a true apprehension and embracing of that promise; a
warrant and acceptance of that apprehension, a willing relyance upon that
warrant, a sure knowledge and sense of that relyance, there can be no place for
presumption; This is the case betwixt God and my soul; His word of promise,
and warrant that cannot deceive me, is: He that Joh. 3. 36.
believes on the Son has everlasting life; and, He that believes Joh. 5. 24.
in him that sent me has everlasting life; and shall not come into
condemnation, but has passed from death to life; My own heart irrefragably
makes out the rest; which is the truth of my apprehension, relyance, knowledge.
Mine therefore is the faith; the presumption in casting sclander upon the grace
of Gods spirit is thine own.

IX. TEMPTATION
Thou thoughtest perhaps once, that thou had some tokens of Gods favor; but
now, thou can not but find that he has utterly forsaken thee, and
withdrawing himself from thee, has given thee up into my hands, to which thy
sins have justly forfaited thee. Repelled.

BE not discouraged, O thou weak soul, with this malicious suggestion of the
enemy: Thou art not the first, nor the holiest that has been thus assailed; So
hard was the man after Gods own heart driven with this Temptation; that he
cries out in the bitterness of his soul, Will the Lord cast (me) Psalm. 77. 7.
off for ever? and will he be 9.
favorable no more? has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut
up his tender mercies? Is his mercy clean 8.
gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Thy case was his for the
sense of the desertion, why should not his case be thine for the remedy? Mark
how happily and how soon he recovers himself: And I said, This is 77. v. 10,
my infirmity; But I will remember the years of the right 11,
hand of the most high; I will remember the works of the Lord; surely I will
remember the wonders of old; I will meditate 12.
of all thy works: Lo, how wisely, and faithfully David retreats back to the
sure hold of Gods formerlyexperimented mercies, and there finds a sensible
relief: He, that when he was to encounter with the proud Giant, could
beforehand arm himself with the proof of Gods former deliverances and
victories, (Thy servant 1 Samuel 17. 36.
slew both the lion and the bear; and this uncircumcised Philistim shall be as
one of them;) now animates himself after the temptation against the spiritual
Goliath, with the like remembrance of Gods ancient mercies, and indearments to
his soul; as well knowing that, what ever we are, God cannot but be himself;
God is not as a man, that Number. 23. 19.
he should lie, neither the son of man, that he should repent; Having loved his
own, which Joh. 13. 1.
were in the world, he loved them unto the end: Have thou therefore formerly
found the sure testimonies of Gods favor to thee, in the real pledges of his
holy Graces; live thou still, whiles thou art thus besieged with temptations,
upon the old store; know, that thou have to do with a God, that can no more
change, then not be: Satan cannot be more constant to his malice then thy God
is to his everlasting mercies. He may for a time be pleased to withdraw himself
from thee; but it is, that he may make thee so much more happy in his
re-appearance: It is his own word, For a small moment have I Esaias 54. 7,
forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. In 8.
a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer.

In the case wherein thou now art, thou can be no meet Judge either of Gods
respects to thee, or thine own condition; Can the aguish palate pass any true
judgment upon the taste of liquors? Can the child entertain any apprehension
of his parents favor whiles he is under the lash? Can any man look that the
fire should give either flame or heat, whiles it lies covered with ashes? Can
any man expect fruit, or leaves from the tree in the midst of winter? Thou art
now in a fit of temptation; thou art now smarting under the rod of correction;
thy faith lies raked up under the cold ashes of a seeming desertion; the
vegetative life of thy soul is, in this hard season of thy trial, drawn
inward, and run down to the root; thine estate is never the less safe for
this, though more uncomfortable: wait thou upon Gods leisure with all humble
submission; the event shall be happy; when the distemper is once over, thou
shall return to thy true relish of Gods mercy; when thine heavenly father
shall smile upon thee, and take thee up in his arms, thou will see love in his
late stripes; when those dead ashes shall be removed, and the gleeds of grace
stirred up again in thee, thou shall yield both light, and warmth; when the
Sun of righteousness shall approach to thee, and with his comfortable beams
draw up the sap into the branches, thou shall blossom and flourish; In the
mean time fear nothing; only believe, and thou shall see the salvation of the
Lord; Thy soul is in surer hands then thine own, yea then of the greatest
Angel in heaven; far out of the reach of all the Coloss. 3.
powers of hell; For our life is hid with Christ in God; Hid; not lost, not
laid open to all eyes; but hid; hid, where Satan cannot touch it, cannot find
it; even with Christ in the heaven of heavens.

Fear not therefore, O thou feeble soul, any utter dereliction of thy God;
Thou art bought with a price: God paid too dear for thee, and is too deeply
engaged to thee, to lose thee willingly; and for any force to be offered to the
Almighty, what can men or Devils do?

And if that malignant spirit shall challenge any forfeiture; plead thou thy
full redemption: It is true; the eternal and inviolable law has said, Cursed
is every one Galat. 3. 10.
that continues not in all things that are written in the book of the Law to
do them; and, the soul that sins shall die; Death and curse is therefore
due to thee; But thou have paid both of these, in thy blessed redeemer; Christ
Galat. 3. 13.
has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; Where
sin abounded, Romans 5. 20,
grace did much more abound; that as sin has reigned unto 21.
death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by
Jesus Christ our Lord; It is all one to pay thy debt in thine own person, and
by thy surety; Thy gracious suerty has staked it down for thee to the utmost
farthing: Be confident therefore of thy safe condition; thou art no less sure,
then thine adversary is malicious.

X. TEMPTATION
Had God ever given thee any sure testimonies of his love, thou might
perhaps pretend to some reason of comfort and confidence. But the truth is, God
never loved thee; he may have cast upon thee some common favors, such as he
throws away upon reprobates, but for the tokens of any special love that he
bears to thee, thou never did; never shall receive any from him. Repelled.

THis is language wellbefitting the professed makebate betwixt God and man;
but know, O thou false tempter, that I have received sure and infallible
testimonies of that special love, which is proper to his elect: First then,
(as I have to do with a bountiful God, who where he loves, there he inriches;
so) I have received most precious gifts from his hands; such as do not import a
common, and ordinary beneficence, (which he scatters promiscuously amongst the
sons of men) but such as carry in them a dearnesse, and singularity of divine
favor: even the greatest gifts, that either he can give, or man receive; For
first he has given me his spirit, the spirit of Adoption, 1 John 4. 13. Romans
8. 15,
whereby I can call him Father; for the assurance whereof, The Spirit it self
bears witness with our spirit, that 16.
we are the children of God: Deny, if thou can, the invaluablenesse of this
heavenly gift; and if thy malice cannot detract from the worth, but from the
propriety; yielding it to be great, but denying it to be mine; know, O thou
envious spirit, that here is the witness of two spirits combined against
thine; Were the testimonies single, surely I had reason to believe my own
spirit, rather then thine, which is a spirit of error; but now, that the
spirit of God conjoines his inerrable testimony together with my spirit,
against thy single suggestion, how just cause have I to be confident of my
possession of that glorious, and blessed gift? Neither is that good spirit
dead, or dumb, but vocal, and operative: it gives me a tongue to call, God,
Father; it teaches me to pray; it Romans 8. 26.
helps mine infirmities, and makes intercession for me, with groanings which
cannot be uttered; It works effectually in me a sensible conversion; Even
when I was dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1,
God, who is rich in mercy, 4,
for his great love wherewith he loved me, has by this spirit of his quickened
5,
me together with Christ, and has raised me up together 6.
with him: By the blessed effects therefore of this regenerating Spirit happily
begun in my soul I find how rich a treasure the Father of mercies has
conveyed into my bosom. Besides, my life shows what is in my heart; it was a
gracious word, that God spoke to his people of old, and holds for ever; I will
put my Ezekiel. 36. 27,
spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes; I will 29.
also save you from all your uncleanness; The spirit of God can never be
severed from obedience; If the heart be taken up with the holy Spirit, 1 John
5. 3.
the feet must walk in Gods statutes; and both heart and life must be freed
from all wilful uncleanness; I feel that God has wrought all this in me;
from him it is, that I do sincerely desire, and endeavor to make straight steps
in all the ways of God; and to avoid, and abhor all those foul corruptions of
my sinful nature; Flesh and blood has not, would not, could not work this in
me; The Spirit therefore of him who Romans 8. 11.
raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in me; And if this be not a pledge of his
dearest love, heaven cannot yield one.

Moreover, he has bestowed upon me another gift, more worth then all the
world; his own son, the son of his love, the son of his nature by eternal
generation; Whom he has not only given for me, in a generality with the rest
of mankind, but has by a special donation conveyed unto me, and, as it were
put into my bosom; in that he has enabled me by a lively faith to bring him
home unto my soul; and has thus by a particular application made him mine: so
as my soul is not more mine, then he is my souls; And having given me his
son, he has with him given me all things: If there can be greater tokens of
love then these, let me want them.

Besides his gifts, his carriage does abundantly argue his love; were there a
strangeness between God and my soul, I might well fear there were no other
then overly respects from him toward me: but now, when I find he does so
freely and familiarly converse with his servant, and so graciously imparts
himself to me; renewing the daily testimonies of his holy presence in the
frequent motions of his good spirit, answered by the returns of an humble and
thankful obedience; here is not love only, but entireness. What other is
that poor measure of love, which our wretched meannesse can return unto our
God, but a weak reflection of that fervent love which he bears unto us? It is
the word of Divine Wisdom, I love them Prove. 8. 17.
that love me, and the disciple of love can tell us the due order of love, We
love him, 1 John 4. 19.
because he first loved us. The love of God therefore which is shed abroad in
our hearts, by Romans 5. 5.
the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us, is an all-sufficient conviction of
Gods tender love unto us: My heart tells me, then, that I love God truly, though
weakly; God tells me that he embraces me with an everlasting love, which thy
malice may snarle at, but can never abate.

TEMPTATIONS REPELLED.

The third Decade.

Temptations of Allurement.

III. DECADE.
I. TEMPTATION
Thou have hitherto thus long given entertainment to thy sin, and no
inconvenience has ensued; no evil has befallen thee, thy affairs have
prospered better then thy scrupulous neighbors; why should thou shake off a
companion, that has been both harmless, and pleasant? Go on man, sin
fearlesly; thou shall speed no worse then thou have done; Go on, and thrive in
thine old course, whiles some precisely conscientious beg, and starve in their
innocence. Repelled.

IT is right so as wise Solomon observd of old: Because sentence against an
evil work is not executed speedily; Eccles. 8. 11.
therefore the hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do evil.
Wicked spirit; What a deadly fallacy is this which thou put upon miserable
souls? Because they have aged in their sins, therefore they must die in them:
because they have lived in sin, therefore they must age in it; because they
have prospered in their sin, therefore they must live in it; whereas all these
should be strong arguments to the contrary; There cannot be a greater proof of
Gods disfavour then for a man to prosper in wickedness; neither can there be a
more forcible inducement to a man to forsake his sin, then this, that he has
entertained it: What do thou other in this then persuade the poor sinner to
despise the riches of the Romans 2. 4,
goodness and forbearance, and long suffering of God; which should lead him to
repentance; and after his hardness, and impenitent 5.
heart to treasure up unto himself wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God? What an horrible abuse is this of
divine mercy? That which is intended to lead us to repentance, is now urged by
thee to draw us from repentance; Should the justice of God have cut off the
sinner in the flagrance of his wicked fact; there had been no room for his
penitence, and now God gives him a fair respite for his repentance, thou
turnest this into a provocation of sinning; Let the case for the present be
mine; If sin have so far bewitched me as to win me to dally with it; must I
therefore be wedded to it? or if I be once wedded to it, through the
importunity of Temptation, shall I be tied to a perpetual cohabitation with
that fiend, and not free my self by a just divorce? Because I have once yielded
to be evil, must I therefore be worse? Because I have happily, by the mercy of
my God, escaped hell in sinning, shall I wilfully run my self headlong into the
pit, by continuing in sin? No, wicked one, I know how to make better use of
Gods favor, and my own miscarriages: I cannot reckon it amongst my comforts,
that I prospered in evil; Let obdured hearts bless themselves in such
advantages; but I adore that goodness, that forbore me in my iniquity; neither
dare provoke it any more. Think not to draw me on by the lucky success of my
sin; which thou have wanted no endeavor to promote; Better had it been for me,
if I had fared worse in the course of my sinning; but had I been yet outwardly
more happy, do I not know that God vouchsases his showers, and his sunshine to
the fields of those, whose persons he destines to the fire? Can I be ignorant
of that, which holy Job observed in his time, That the Tabernacles Job 12. 6.
of the wicked prosper; and they that provoke God are secure, into whose hands
God brings abundantly; That Job 21. 13.
they spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave; and
(as the Psalmist seconds him) There are no bands in their death; but Psalm. 73.
4.
their strength is firm; They are not in trouble like other men, therefore
pride compasses them about as achaine; And let these jolly men brave it out in
the glorious pomp of their unjust greatness; The same eyes that noted their
exaltation, have also observed their downfall. They are exalted for a little
Job 24. 24.
while (says Job) but they are gone, and brought low; they are taken out of
the way, as all others; and cut off, as the tops of the ears of corn. And in
his answer to Zophar; Where are the dwelling places of the wicked? Have ye not
asked them that go by the way, and do ye not know their tokens? That the wicked
is reserved to the day of destruction; they shall be brought forth to the day
of wrath; The eyes of the wicked Job 11. 20.
(even those scornful and contemptuous eyes, which they have cast upon Gods
poor despised ones) shall fail, and they shall not escape; and their hope
shall be as the giving up of the ghost.

How false an inference then is this, whereby (...) go about to delude ^y
soul; Thou have hitherto prospered in thy wickedness, therefore thou shall
prosper in it still, and ever; To morrow shall be as yesterday, and more
abundant; As if the just God had not set a period to iniquity? As if he had not
said to the most insolent sinner, as to the raging Sea, Here shall thou stay
thy proud waves: How many rich Epicures have with Crassus, sup't in Apollo, and
broken their fast with Beelzebub, the prince of Devils? How many have lien
down to sleep out their furfeit, and have waked in hell? Were my times in thy
hand, thou would not suffer me long to enjoy my sin; and forbear the seizure
of my soul; but now they are in the hands of a righteous God, who is jealous
of his own glory, he will be sure not to over-pass those hours, which he has
set for thy torment, or my account.

Shortly therefore, I will withdraw my foot from every evil way; and walk
holily with my God; however I speed in the world; Let me with the conscientious
men beg, or starve in my innocence; rather then thrive in my wickedness and
get hell to boot.

II. TEMPTATION
Sin still; thou shall repent soon enough, when thou can sin no more; Thine
old age, and deathbed are fit seasons for those sad thoughts; It will go hard
if thou may not, at the last, have a mouthfull of breath left thee, to cry
God mercy; And that is no sooner asked, then had; Thou have to do with a God of
mercies; with whom no time is too late, no measure too slight to be accepted.
Repelled.

OF all the blessed Attributes of God, whereby he is willing to make himself
known unto men, there is none by which he more delights to be set forth, then
that of mercy; When therefore he would proclaim his style to Moses, this is
the title which he most insists upon: The Lord, The Lord God; merciful Exodus
34. 6. Number. 14. 18. Psalm. 103. 8. Psalm. 145. 8, 9. Exodus 20. 6. Psalm. 86. 15.
Nehem. 9. 30, 31. Lament. 3. 31. Jona. 4. 2. Mic. 7. 18. Psalm. 72. 13.
and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness, and truth; keeping
mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin; And all
his holy Heralds the Prophets have still been careful to blazon him thus to
the world; Neither is there any of those divine Attributes, that is so much
abused by men, as this which is most beneficial to mankind; For the wisdom of
God every man professes to adore it; for the power of God every man magnifies
it; for the justice of God, every man trembles at it; but, for the mercy, and
long-sufferance of God, how apt are men and devils to wrong it by a sinful
mis-application? Wicked tempter, how ready art thou to mis-improve Gods
patience to the encouragement of my sin; and to persuade me therefore to offend
him, because he is good; and to continue in sin, because grace abounds; Thou
bidst me sin still; God forbids me upon pain of death to sin at all; whether
should I listen to? God calls me to a speedy repentance, thou perswadest me to
defer it; whether counsel should I hold more safe? Surely there cannot be but
danger in the delay of it; in the speed there can be nothing but a comfortable
hope of acceptance: It is not possible for me to repent too soon; too late I
may: To repent for my sin, when I can sin no more, what would it be other
then to be sorry that I can no more sin? And what thank is it to me, that I
would, and am disabled to offend? Thou telst me that mine age, and deathbed
are meet seasons for my repentance; As if time and Grace were in my power to
command; How know I whether I shall live till age? yea till to morrow? yea till
the next hour? Do not I see how fickle my life is? And shall I with the
foolish Virgins, delay the buying of my oil, till the doors be shut? But, let
me live; Have I repentance in a string, that I may pull it to me when I list?
Is it not the great gift of that good Spirit, which breaths when, and where
it pleases? It is now offered to me in this time of Grace; if I now refuse it,
perhaps I may seek it, with tears, in vain: I know the gates of hell stand
always wide open to receive all comers, not so the gates of heaven; they are
shut upon the impenitent, and never opened but in the seasons of mercy; The
porches of Bethesda were full of cripples expecting cure; those waters were not
always sanative; if when the Angel descends and moves the water, we take not
our first turn, we may wait too long: But of all other, that season whereon
thou pitchest, my deathbed, is most unseasonable for this work, most
serviceable for thy purpose; How many thousand souls have thou deluded with
this plausible, but deadly, suggestion? For then, alas, how is the whole man
taken up with the sense of pain, with grapling with the disease, with
answering the condoling of friends, with disposing the remainder of our estate,
with repelling (then most importunate) temptations, with encountering the
horrors and pangs of an imminent dissolution; And what room is there then for
a serious task of repentance? No, wicked one, I see thy drift; thou would
feign persuade me to do like some idle wanton servants, who play, and talk out
their candlelight, and then go darklings to bed; I hate the motion, and do
gladly embrace this happy opportunity, which God holds forth to me, of my
present conversion.

Thou tell me how hard it would be, if I should not have one mouth-full of
breath, at the last, to implore mercy; I tell thee of many a one that has not
had so much; neither has it been hard, but just, that those who have had so
many and earnest solicitations from a merciful God, and have given a deaf
ear to them; should not at the last have a tongue to ask that mercy, which
they have so often refused.

But let me have wind enough left to redouble the name of mercy; am I sure upon
so short warning to obtain it? How many are there that shall say, Lord, Lord;
and yet shall be answered, with Depart from me, I know you not? Do I not hear
that God, whom vain men frame all of mercy, say, even of his Israel; I will
not pity, Jerem. 13. 14.
nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy them? There is a time for judgment, as
well as a time for mercy; neither of these may encroach upon other; as
judgment may not be allowed to seize upon the soul, during the season of
mercy, so neither may mercy put forth it self to rescue the soul in an
execution of judgment; both must have their due turns; let me sue therefore
for grace, ere the time of grace be over-passed; Heaven is as a strong castle,
whereto there is but one way of entrance; the drawbridge is let down all the
day; all that while the passage is open; let me stay till night; the bridge is
hoysed up, the way precluded; I may now stand without, and call long enough for
an hopeless admittance.

It shall be my care to get within those gates, ere my Sun be set; whiles the
willing neglecters of mercy shall find hell open, heaven inaccessible.

III. TEMPTATION
Thou art one of Gods chosen; Now God sees no sin in his elect; none therefore
in thee; neither may thou then take notice of any sin in thy self; or
need any repentance for thy sin.

Repelled.

Deceitful tempter; now thou would feign flatter me into hell; and make Gods
favor a motive of my damnation; I doubt not but I am, through Gods mercy, one
of his chosen; his free grace in Christ my Savior, has put upon me this
honor; neither will I fear to challenge any of the happy privileges of my
Election; But that this should be one of the special prerogatives of Grace,
that God should see no sin in me, I hate to hear; That God imputes no sin to
his elect, is a divine truth; but that he sees no sin in his Elect, is a
conceit hatched in hell: For, tell me, thou Antinomian spirit, if God see no
sin in his Elect, is the reason on the behalf of God, or of the sin? Either
for that there is no sin at all to be seen, or for that though there be sin in
them, yet God sees it not; If the former; it must be either in relation to the
person of the sinner, or to the act and nature of the sin: Either, that he
cannot do that act which is formally sin, or, that though he do such an act,
yet in him it is no sin. If the latter; it must be either for the defect of his
omniscience, or upon a willing connivence; In each of these there is gross
error, in some of them blasphemy: For first, what can be more evident then
that the holiest of Gods elect upon earth fall (and that not infrequently) into
sin? Who can say, I have made Prove. 20. 9.
my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? was the just challenge of wise Solomon;
and his father before him said no less, There is none that does good, Psalm.
14. 3. Romans 3. 12.
no not one; And, elsewhere, Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me
from Ps. 19. 12.
my secret faults: We all (says Esa. 53. 6.
the Prophet Esaias) putting himself into the number, have like sheep gone
astray; we have turned every one to his own ways: And wherefore were Levit.
4. 2. 13. 22. Number. 15. 24.
those legal expiations of old by the blood of their sacrifices, but for the
acknowledged sins both of Priests, and people? Persuade us if thou can, that
our election exempts us from being men: for certainly, whiles we are men we
cannot but be sinners: So sure is that Parenthesis of Solomon, There is no man
2 Kings 8. 46. 1 John 1. 8, 10.
that sins not, as that, If we say we have no sin, we both deceive our
selves, and make God a lier.

What then? That which in it self is sin, is it not sin in the Elect? Does
evil turn good as it falls from their person? where did the holy God infuse
such virtue into any creature? Surely, so deadly is the infection of sin, that
it makes the person evil; but that the holiness of the person should make the
sin less evil, is an hellish monster of opinion; Yea so far is it from that;
as that the holiness of the person adds to the haynousnesse of the sin; The
adultery had not been so odious, if a David had not committed it; nor the
abjuration of Christ so grievous, if it had not fallen from him that said,
Though all men, yet not I: Sin is sin even in an Angel; and the worse for the
eminence of the actor: For what is sin but the transgression of the law in
whomsoever? whersoever Jam. 3. 2.
therefore Transgression is; there is guilt; And such the best of all Gods
Saints have acknowledged and lamented in themselves; Woe is me, says Esa. 6. 5.
the Prophet Esaias, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips: The
evil that I Romans 7. 19.
would not do, that I do, says the chosen vessel; Yea in many Jam. 3. 2.
things, says St. James, we offend all. It is true, that as the beloved
Disciple has taught us, He that is borne of 1 John 5* 18. 1 John 3. 9.
God sins not; Not that he may not fall into the same act of sin with the
most carnal man, but that he sins not in the same manner; The one sins with
all his heart, with the full sway of his will, the other not without a kind of
renitency: The one makes a trade of his sin; the other steps only aside
through the vehemence of a Temptation; The one sins with an high hand, the
other out of mere infirmity; The one walks on securely and resolutely, as
obfirmed in his wickedness, the other is smitten with a seasonable remorse for
his offense. The one delights and prides himself in his sin; the other, as he
sinned bashfully, so he hates himself for sinning; The one grows up daily to a
greater height of iniquity; the other improves his sin to the bettering of his
soul; But this difference of sin, as it makes sin unmeasurably sinful in the
worst men; so it does not quite anull it in the holiest; It is their sin still,
though it reign not in them, though it kill them not.

Whiles then there cannot but be sin in the Elect, is it possible that God
should not see it there? Is there any thing in heaven, or earth, or hell that
can be hid from his all-seeing eyes? where should this sin lurk, that he should
not espy it? Do not the secrets of all hearts lie open before him? Are not his
Rev. 1. 14.
eyes a flame of fire? Is it not expressly noted, as an aggravation of evil;
Judah did evil 1 King. 14. 22.
in the sight of the Lord; And, Our transgressions (faith Isaiah) are
multiplied before thee: It is out of his infinite holiness, that he cannot
abide to behold sin; but it is out of his absolute omniscience, that there is
no sin which he beholds not; and out of his infinite justice, that he beholds
no sin which he hates not.

Is it then for that sin has no being, as that which is only a failing, and
privation of that rectitude and integrity which should be in us, and our
actions, without any positive entity in it self? upon this ground God should
see no sin at all; no not in the wickedest man upon earth; and, whereas wicked
men do nothing but sin, it should follow that God takes no notice of most of
the actions that are done in the world; whereof the very thought were blasphemy.

Since then it cannot be out of defect of knowledge, that God sees not the
sins of his elect; is it out of a favorable connivence that he is willing
not to see, what he sees? surely, if the meaning be, that God sees not the
sins of the penitent with a revengefull eye; that out of a merciful
indulgence, he will not prosecute the sins whereof we have repented, with due
vengeance, but passes them by, as if they had not been; we do so gladly yield
to this truth, that we can never bless God enough for this wonderful mercy to
poor sinners; it is his gracious word, which we lay ready hold upon; I, even I
am he that blotteth out thy transgressions Esa. 43. 25.
for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins. But if the meaning be, that
God bears with sin, because theirs; that he so winkes at it as that he neither
sees nor detests it, as it falls from so dear actors; it is no other, then a
blasphemous charge of injustice upon the holy one of Israel; Your iniquities,
faith Isaiah, speaking of Gods Esa. 59. 2.
chosen people, have separated between you and your God; and your sins have
hid his face from you, that he will not hear; who was dearer to God then the
man after his own heart; yet when he had given way to those foul sins of
adultery and murder; Nathan tells him from God; Now 2 Samuel 12. 10,
therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house, because thou have
despised me, and have taken the wife of Vriah the 11.
Hittite to be thy wife; Thus says the Lord, Behold I will raise up evil
against thee out of thine own house etc.

How full and clear is that Psalm. 90. 78.
complaint of Moses the man of God? We are consumed by thine anger, and by thy
wrath are we troubled; Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret
sins in the light of thy countenance; And Jeremy to the same purpose; We have
Lam. 3. 42,
transgressed and have rebelled, thou have not pardoned; Thou 43.
have covered with anger, and persecuted us, thou have slain, thou have not
pityed us: Thou have covered thy self with a 44.
cloud, that our prayer should not pass thorough: Doubtless then God so sees
sin in his elect: that he both more notes and hates sin more in his dearest
children then in any other. Upon this impious supposition of Gods not seeing
sin in his chosen, would thou raise that hellish suggestion, that a man must
see no sin in himself; no repentance for sin: Then which, what wider gappe can
be opened to a licentious stupidity? For, that a man should commit sin, as
Lot did his incest, not knowing that he does the fact, what is it but to
bereave him of his senses? To commit that fact which he may not know to be sin,
what is it but to bereave him of reason; not to be sorry for the sin he has
committed, what is it but to bereave him of grace? How contrary is this to the
mind and practice of al Gods Saints? Holy Job could say; How many Job 13. 13.
are mine iniquities and sins; make me to know my transgression and my sin?
and at last, when God had wrought accordingly upon his heart; I Job 42. 6.
abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes; Penitent David could say, I
acknowledge Ps. 51. 3.
my transgression, and my sin is ever before me; and elsewhere, I will declare
mine iniquity, Ps. 38. 18.
and be sorry for my sin; and Solomon's suppliant that would hope for audience
in heaven, must know the plague of his own heart. carry on therefore thy
deluded 1 Kings 8. 38.
clients in a willing ignorance of their finnes, and a secure regardlesnesse of
their repentance; for me, I will ransack my heart for my secret sins; and
find no peace in my soul till it be truly sensible of my own repentance,
and Gods remission.

IV. TEMPTATION
Thou may live as thou listest; Thy destiny is irreversible; If thou be
predestined to life, thy sins cannot damn thee; for Gods election remains
certain. If thou be ordained to damnation, all thy good endeavors cannot save
thee; Please thy self on earth, thou can not alter what is done in heaven.

Repelled.

THe suggestion is pernicious; and such, as that Satan's quiver has not many
shafts more deadly; for where ever it enters, it renders a man carelessly
desperate, and utterly regardlesse either of good, or evil: bereaving him at
once both of grace, and wit. The story tells us of a great Prince tainted with
this poison; whom his wise Physician happily cured; for being called to the
sick bed of him, whom he knew thus dangerously resolved; in stead of medicine,
he administers to his patient this just conviction: Sir, you are conscious of
your stiff opinion concerning predestination; why do you send to me for the
cure of your sickness? Either you are predestined to recover and live, or
else you are in Gods decree appointed to dye: If you be ordained to live and
recover, you shall live, though you take noe helps of physic from me; but if
to dye, all my art and means cannot save you. The convinced Prince saw, and
felt his error, and recanted it: as well perceiving, how absurd, and
unreasonable it is, in whatsoever decree of either temporal or spiritual good,
to sever the means from the end; being both equally determined; and the one in
way to the other: The comparison is clear and irrefragable; Gods decree is
equally both certain, and secret, for bodily health, and life eternal; The
means appointed, are food and medicine for the one, and for the other,
repentance, fait^, obedience: In the use of these we may live, we cannot but
dye in their neglect: were it any other then madness in me to rely upon a
presupposed decree, willingly forbearing the while the means whereby it is
brought about? To say, If I shall live I shall live, though I eat not; If I
shall dye, though I eat I shall not live; therefore I will not eat, but cast
my self upon Gods providence, whether to dye or live: In doing thus, what am I
other then a self murderer? It is a prevailing policy of the Devil so to work
by his temptations, upon the heart of man, that in temporal things he shall
trust to the means without regard to the providence of the God that gives
them; In spiritual, he should cast himself upon the providence of a God,
without respect to the means, whereby they are effected; whereas, if both
these go not together, we lose either God, or our selves, or both.

It is true, that if God had peremptorily declared his absolute will concerning
the state or event of any creature, we might not endeavor, or hope to alter his
decree; If God have said to a Moses; Go up to the Mount and dye there, it is
not for that obedient servant of God, to say; Yet I will lay up some years
provision, if perchance I may yet live; Although, even thus, in the minatory
declarations of Gods purpose (because we know not what conditions may be
secretly intended) we may use what means we may for a diversion: The Ninivites
heard that express word from Jonah [Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be
destroyed] and though they believed the Prophet, yet they betook themselves to
an universal humiliation for the prevention of the judgment: David heard from
the mouth of Nathan; The child that is born 2 Samuel 12. 14.
unto thee shall surely dye; Yet he besought God, and fasted, and lay all night
upon the earth, and could say, Who can tell whether God will be *verse 22.
gracious to me that the child may live? good Hezekiah was sick unto death,
and hears from Isaiah; Set thy house in order, for thou shall dye and not 2
Kings 20. 1, 2.
live; yet he turns his face to the wall, and prays; and makes use of his
bunch of verse 7.
figs; and recovers; But, where the counsel of God is altogether secret,
without the least glimpse of revelation, for a man to pass a peremptory doom
upon himself, and either thereupon wilfully to neglect the known means of
his good, or to run willingly upon those courses which will necessarily work
his destruction, it is the highest degree of madness, that can be incident
into a reasonable creature.

The father of mercies has appointed means of the salvation of mankind, which
lie open to them, if they would not be wanting to themselves; but especially to
us, who are within the bosom of his Church, he has held forth saving helps
in abundance. What warnings, what reproves, what exhortations, what
invitations, what entreaties, what importunities, has he forborne for our
conversion? what menaces, what afflictions, what judgments has he not made use
of, for the prevention of our damnation? Can there be now any man so
desperately mad, as to shut heaven gates against himself, which the merciful
God leaves open for him? or, as to break open the gates of hell, and rush
violently into the pit of destruction, which God had latched against him?

Thou say, If I be predestined to life, my sins cannot damn me. Man; thou
beginnest at the wrong end; in that thou take thy first rise at Gods eternal
counsails, and then judge doubtfully of thine own ways; It is not for thee
to begin first at heaven, and then to descend to earth; this course is
presumptuous and damnable; What are those secret and closed books of Gods
eternal decree, and preordination, unto thee? They are only for the eyes of
him that wrote them; The Lord knows them that are his; Look if thou will upon
the outer seal of those Divine secrets; and, read, Let every one that names
the name of 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Christ depart from iniquity.

Thy way lies from earth to heaven; The revealed will of God, by which only we
are to be regulated, is; Repent, believe, obey, and thou shall be saved; live
and dye in thy sins, impenitent, unbeleeving, thou shall be damned; According
to this rule frame thou thy courses, and resolutions; and if thou can be so
great an enemy to thine own soul, as determinately to contemn the means of
salvation, and to tread wilfully in the paths of death, who can say other, but
thou art fair for hell? But if thou shall carefully use and improve those good
means which God has ordained for thy conversion, and shall thereupon find
that true grace is wrought in thy soul; that thou abhorrest al evil ways,
that thou do truly believe in the Lord Jesus, and heartily purposest, and
indevourest to live holily, and conscionably in this present world, thou may
now as assuredly know thy name written in heaven, as if thou had read it in
those eternal characters of Gods secret counsel: Plainly, it is not for thee
to say, I am predestinate to life, therefore thus I shall do, and, thus I
shall speed; but contrarily, thus has God wrought in me, therefore I am
predestinate; Let me do well, it cannot but be well with me; Glory, and
honor, and peace to every man that works good; Romans 2. 10.
Let me do my utmost diligence to make my calling and 2 Pet. 1 10.
election sure; I am safe, and shall be happy.

But if thou have been mis-carried to lewd courses, and have lived as without
God in the world; whiles thou do so, thy case is fearful: but who allowed
thee to ^it judge upon thine own soul? and to pass a peremptory doom of
necessary damnation upon thy self? Are not the means of grace (Gods blessed
ordinances) still held forth unto thee? Does not God still graciously invite
thee to repentance? Does not thy Savior stand ready with his arms spread
abroad to receive thee into his bosom? And can thou be so desperately, and
presumptuously merciless to thy self, as to say, I shall be damned, therefore
I will sin? Thou can not be so wicked but there may be a possibility of thy
reclamation; whiles God gives thee respite, there may be hope; Be not thou so
injurious to thy self as to usurp the office both of God, and the Devil; of
God, in passing a final judgment upon thy self; of the Devil, in drawing thy
self into damnation. Return therefore, O sinner, and live, break off thy
sins by repentance, and be saved; But if otherwise, know, that Gods decree
does neither necessitate thy sin, nor thy damnation; Thou may thank thy self
for both; Thy perdition is of thy self, O Israel.

V. TEMPTATION
Why will thou be singular amongst and above thy neighbors; to draw needless
censures upon thy self? Be wise, and do as the most. Be not so over-squemish as
not to dispense with thy conscience in some small matters; Lend a lie to a
friend, swallow an oath for fear, be drunk sometimes for good fellowship,
falsify thy word for an advantage, serve the time, frame thy self to all
companies; thus thou shall be both warm, and safe, and kindly respected.

Repelled.

PLausible tempter, what care would thou seem to take of my ease, and
reputation, that, in the mean time, thou might run away with my soul? Thou
perswadest me not to be singular amongst my neighbors; it shall not be my
fault if I be so: If my neighbors be good, and virtuous, I am with, and for
them; let me be hissed at, to go alone; but if otherwise, let me rather go
upright alone, then halt with company: Thou tellst me of censures; they are
spent in vain that would disharten me from good, or draw me into evil; I am
too deep rooted in my resolutions of good, then to be turned up by every slight
wind, I know who it is that has said, Blessed are ye when men shall revile
Mat. 5. 11.
you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely
for my names sake. Let men take leave to talk their pleasure; in what I know I
do well, I am censureproofe. Thou bidst me be wise, and do as the most; These
two cannot agree together; Not to follow the most, but the best, is true
wisdom; My Savior has told me, that the many go in the broadway, which
leads to destruction; Mat. 7. 13.
and it is the charge of God, Thou shall not follow Exodus 23 2.
a multitude to do evil; whiles I follow the guidance of my God, I walk
confidently, as knowing, I cannot go amiss; as for others, let them look to
their own feet, they shall be no guides of mine.

Thou bidst me dispense with my conscience in small matters; I have learnt to
call nothing small, that may offend the Majesty of the God of heaven;
Dispensations must only proceed from a greater power; Only God is greater
then my conscience; where he dispenses not, it were a vain presumption for me
to dispense with my self:

And what are those small matters wherein thou solicitest my dispensation? To
lend a ly to a friend; why do thou not persuade me to lend him my soul? Yea
to give it unto thee for him? It is a sure word of the wise man; The mouth that
lies, Wis. 1. 11.
slays the soul; How vehement a charge has the God of truth laid upon me,
to avoid this sin, which thou, the father of lies, would draw me unto? What
marvel is it, if each speak for his own? He who is truth it Ioh. 8. Lev. 19.
11. Col. 3. 9.
self, and loves truth in the inward parts, justly calls for it in the
tongue; Laying aside lying (says the Spirit of Ephesians. 4. 25.
God) speak every man truth with his neighbor; Thou, who art a lying Spirit,
would be willing to advance thine own brood under the fair pretense
offriendship; But what? shall I to gratify a friend, make God mine enemy?
shall I to rescue a friend from danger, bring destruction upon my self? Thou
shall Psalm. 5. 6.
destroy them that speak leasings, says the Psalmist: Without Rev. 22. 15.
shall be every one that loves, or makes lies. If therefore my true
attestation may avail my friend, my tongue is his, but if he must be supported
by falsehood; my tongue is neither his, nor mine; but is his that made it.

To swallow an oath for fear? No, tempter; I can let down none such morsels; an
oath is too sacred, and too awful a thing for me to put over out of any
outward respects against my conscience? If I swear, the Oath is not mine, it
is Gods; Exodus 22. 8. Eccl. 16. 59.
and the revenge will be his, whose the offense is. It is a charge to be
trembled at; Ye shall not swear by my name falsely; neither shall thou profane
Lev. 19. 12.
the name of thy God, I am the Lord; And if the word of charge be so dreadful,
what terror shall we find in the word of judgment? Lo, God swears too; and
because there is no greater to swear by, he swears by himself; As I live,
surely mine oath that he has despised, and my Covenant Ezekiel. 17. 19.
which he has broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head: It was one
of the words that were delivered in fire and smoke and thunder and lightning,
in Sinai; The Lord will not hold Exodus 20. 7.
him guiltless that takes his name in vain. I dare not therefore fear any
thing so much as the displeasure of the Almighty; and (to dye for) will neither
take an unlawful oath, nor violate a just one. As for that sociable excess,
whereto thou temptest me, how ever the commonness of the vice may have seemed
to abate of the reputation of hainousnes, in the opinion of others, yet to me
it represents it so much more hateful; as an universal contagion is more
grievous then a local: I cannot puchase the name of good fellowship with the
loss of my reason, or with the price of a curse; Daily experience makes good
that word of Solomon, that Wine is a mocker, robbing a man of himself, Prove.
20. 1.
and leaving a beast in his room: And what woes do I hear denounced against
those that rise up early in the morning that they may follow Esa. 5. 11.
strong drink, that continue till night til the wine inflame them: If any man
think he may pride himself in a strong brain, and a vigorous body; Woe to
them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength Es. 5. 22.
to mingle strong drinks: Let the Iovialists of the world drink wine in
bowls, and feast themselves without fear, Amos 6. 6.
let me never join my self with that fellowship, where God is banished from
the company. Would thou persuade me to falsify my word for an advantage?
what advantage can be so great as the conscience of truth, and fidelity? That
man is for Gods tabernacle, that swears Psalm. 15. 4.
to his own hurt, and changes not; Let me rather lose honestly, then gain by
falsehood and perfidiousnesse. Thou biddest me serve the time; So I will do;
whiles the time serves not thee; but if thou shall have so corrupted the time,
that the whole 1 Ioh. 5. 19.
world is set in wickedness, I will serve my God in opposing it: gladly will I
serve the time in all good offices, that may tend to rectify it, but to serve
it in a way of flattery, I hate and scorn.

I shall willingly frame my self to all companies; not for a partnership in
their vice, but for their reclamation from evil, or encouragement in good; The
chosen vessel has by his example taught me this charitable, and holy
pliablenesse; Though I be free from all men, yet have 1 Cor. 9. 19.
I made my self a servant unto all, that I might gain the more. To the Jews I
became as a 20.
Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as under
the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law; To them that are
without Law, as without 21.
Law, (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ that I might
gain them that are without Law; To the 22.
weak I became weak that I might gain the weak; I am made all things to all
men that I might by all means save some: My only scope shall be spiritual
gain; for this will I (like some good Merchant) trafique with all nations,
with all persons.

But for carnal respects, to put my self (like the first matter) into all
forms, to be demure with the strictly-severe, to be debaucht with the
drunkard, with the Atheist profane, with the Bigot superstitious, what were
this but to give away my soul to every one, save to the God that ownes it; and
whiles I would be all, to be nothing; and to profess an affront to him that
has charged me be not conformed to this world. Shortly, let me be despicable,
and starve, Romans 12. 2.
and perish in my innocent integrity, rather then be warm and safe, and
honored upon so evil conditions.

VI. TEMPTATION
It is but for a while that thou have to live; and when thou art gone, all the
world is gone with thee; Improve thy life to the best contentment; Take thy
pleasure whiles thou may. Repelled.

Even this was the very no^e of thine old Epicurean clients, Let us eat and
drink, 1 Cor. 15 32.
for to morrow we shall die, I acknowledge the same dart and the same hand that
flings it; a dart dipped in that deadly poison that causes the man to dye
laughing; a dart that pierces as deeply into the sensual heart, as it easily
retorted by the regenerate. These wild inferences of sensuality are for those,
that know no heaven, no hell: but to me that know this world to be nothing but
a thorow-fare to eternity either way, they abhor, not from grace only, but
from reason it self; In the intuition of this immortality, what wise man would
not rather say, my life is short, therefore it must be holy? I shall not live
long, let me live well; so let me live for a while, that I may live for ever?
These have been still the thoughts of gracious hearts, Moses the man of God,
after he has computed the short periods of our age, and confined it Psalm. 90.
10.
to fourscore years, (so soon Psalm. 90. 10.
is it cut off, and we fly away) inferres with the same breath, So teach us to
number our days that we may apply our hearts to 12.
wisdom; As implying that this holy Arithmeticke should be an introduction to
Divinity; that the search of heavenly wisdom should be the true use of our
short life; and the sweet singer of Israel after he has said, Behold, thou
have made my days as a span Psalm. 39. 4. 5.
long, mine age is nothing to thee; finds cause, to look up from earth to
heaven, And now, Lord, what wait I 7.
for? surely my hope is even in thee: He that desired to know the measure of
his life, finds it but a span; and recompenses the shortness of his
continuance, with hopes everlasting, as the tender mercy of our God pities our
frailty, remembering that we are but flesh, a wind that passes away, and
comes not again; Ps. 78. 39.
So our frailty supports it self with the meditation of his blessed eternity;
My days (says the Psalmist) Ps. 102. 11, 12.
are like a shadow that declineth, and I am withered like grass; But thou, O
Lord, shall endure for ever, and thy remembrance to all generations.

As therefore every man walks in a vain shadow, in respect of his
transitorinesse, so the Good man in respect of his holy conversation, can say,
I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the living; Ps. 16. 9.
and knows himself made for better ends then vain pleasure; I shall not dye
but live, and declare the works of Ps. 118. 17.
the Lord It is for them who have their portion in this life; Ps. 117. 14.
who have made their belly their God, and the world their heaven, to place
their felicity in these carnal delights; Gods secret ones enjoy their higher
contentments; Thy loving Ps. 63. 3.
kindness is better then life, says the Prophet; Thou have Ps. 4. 7.
put gladness in my heart, more then (they had) in the time that their corn
and their wine increased.

Miserable worldlings, who walk in the vanity of their minds, being
alienated from Ephesians. 4. 17 18.
the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the
blindness of their hearts; who being past feeling, have given themselves over
to lasciviousness, 19.
to work all uncleanenesse with greediness: What wonder is it, if as their
life is merely brutish, so the happiness that they affect is no other then
bestiall; and if they snatch at those vanishing shadows of pleasure, which a
poor momentany life can afford them: according to the improvement of our best
faculties, so is our felicity; The best faculty of brute creatures is their
sense, they therefore seek their happiness in the delectation of their
senses: Man's best faculty is reason; he places his happiness therefore in the
delights of the mind, in the perfection of knowledge, and height of speculation;
The Christians best sacultie is faith; his felieity therefore consists in those
things which are not perceptible by sense, not fadomeable by reason, but
apprehensible by his faith, which is the evidence of things not seen, either by
Heb. 11. 1.
the eye of sense or reason: and as his felicity, so is his life, Phil. 1. 21.
spiritual. To me to live is Christ, says he that was rapt Gal. 2. 20.
into the third heaven; I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Our life
is hid with Christ in God, and, When Christ Col. 2. 3, 4.
which is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in
glory. Lo then, when the worldling dies, his life dies with him, and, to him,
the world is gone with both; but when I die to nature, I have a life that lives
still; a life that cannot die; a life that both is, and makes me glorious: It
is not for me therefore to hunt after these unsatisfying, and momentany
pleasures, which perish in their use, and shut up in repentance; but to lay up
those sure comforts, which shall never have an end, but after this transitory
life shall accompany me to eternity.

Tell not me therefore of taking my full scope to the pleasures of sin; I
know there is an hell, and I look for an heaven; upon this short moment of my
life depends everlastingnesse.

Let me therefore be careful to bestow this short life, as that I may be sure
to avoid eternity of torments, and to lay up for eternity of blessedness.

VII. TEMPTATION
It is for common wits to walk in the plain road of opinions. If thou would
be eminent amongst men, leave the beaten track, and tread in new paths of thine
own: Neither let it content thee to guide thy steps by the dim lanterns of the
Ancient; he is no body that has not new lights either to hold out, or follow.
Repelled.

Wicked tempter; I know thou would have me go any ways, save good; were
those new ways, right, thou would never persuade me to walk in them; now I
have just reason to mis-doubt and shun those paths which thou invitest me unto;
both as private, and as new: It is enough that they are my own; for can thou
think to bring me to believe my self wiser then the whole Church of God? Who
am I, that I should over-know not the present world of men only, but the
eminent Saints, and learned Doctors of all former ages? Why should I not rather
suspect my own judgment, then oppose theirs? When the Church in that heavenly
marriage-song inquires of the great shepherd of our souls; Tell me, Cant. 1. 7.
O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou make thy flocks
to rest at noone; for why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks
of thy companions? she receives answer; If thou know 8.
not (O thou fairest among women) go thy way forth by the footsteps of the
flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds tents. Lo, the tracks of the
flock, and the tents of the shepherds are my direction to find my Savior; if
I turn aside, I miss him, and lose my self.

It is more then enough that those ways are new: for truth is eternal; and
that is therefore most true, that comes nearest to eternity; as contrarily,
novelty is a brand of falsehood, and error: Thus says the Lord; Jer. 6. 16.
Stand ye in the ways, and see; and ask for the old paths, where is the good
way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls: Far be it from
me then, that I should be guilty of that contempt, whereof the Prophet, with
the same breath, accuses his Jews; But they said, We will not walk therein.
It is a fearful word that I hear from the mouth of the same Prophet; Because
my people have Jer. 18. 15.
forgotten me; and have caused them to stumble in their ways from the ancient
paths, in a way not cast up: I will scatter 17.
them as with an East wind before the enemy; I will show them the back and not
the face in the day of their calamity; Woe is me for these heavy times, wherein
it is not the least part of our sin, nor the least cause of our miseries, that
we have stumbled from the ancient paths, into the untrodden ways of schism
and error, and find not the face, but the back of our God turned to us, in
this day of our calamity; O God, thou art just; we cannot complain that have
made our selves miserable.

It is true, where our forefathers have manifestly started aside like a broken
bow; and having corrupted their Genesis 6. 12. Jer. 18. 15.
ways, have burnt incense to vanity, we must be so far from making their
precedent a warrant for our imitation, as that we hear God say to us, Be ye not
like unto 2 Chro. 30. 7.
your fathers; Walk not in the Ezekiel. 20. 18.
statutes of your forefathers, neither observe their judgments; For those that
turn Ps. 125. 5.
aside to crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of
iniquity; But where we see them walk with a Gal. 2. 14.
right foot, in the holy ways of God, and continue steadfastly in the faith
which was Jude 3.
once delivered to the Saints, we have reason to be followers of them, who
through Heb. 6. 12.
faith and patience inherit the promises; that walking in their ways, we may
attain to their end, the salvation of our souls.

Let me see those steps wherein the holy Prophets have trod; those wherein the
blessed Apostles have traced the Prophets, those wherein the Primitive Fathers
and Martyrs have followed the Apostles; those wherein the godly and learned
Doctors of the succeeding ages have followed those primitive Fathers; and if I
follow not them, let me wander, and perish; It is for true men to walk in the
Kings highway, thieves and suspected persons cross over through bypath, and
make way where they find none.

Thou tell me of new lights; I ask whence they rise: I know who it was that
said, I am the light of the world, he that follows me shall Joh. 8. 12. Joh.
12. 46.
not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life; and I know that light
was the true Joh. 1. 8, 9.
light; of whom holy David spoke long before, Thou art 2 Samuel 22 29. Ps. 36. 10.
my lamp, O Lord; and the Lord will lighten my darkness; and in thy light
shall we see light; Those that do truly hold forth this light shall be my
guides, and I shall follow them with all confidence; and shall find the path of
the just, as the shining light, Prove. 4. 18.
that shines more and more unto Job 22. 28.
the perfect day; As for any new light, that should now break forth, and shine
upon our ways; certainly it is but darkness; such a light as Bildad
prophesied of long Luc. 11. 35.
ago; The light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark Job. 18. 5. 6.
of his fire shall not shine; The light shall be darkness in his Tabernacle,
and his Candle shall be put out with him; So as the seduced followers of these
new lights may have just cause to take up that complaint of the Prophet, We
wait for light, but behold Esaias. 59. 9.
obscurity, for brightness, but we walk in darkness; we grope 10.
for the wall like the blind, we stumble at noone day as in the night.
Shortly then, that light which the father of lights has held forth in his will
revealed in his word, as it has been interpreted by his holy Church in all
ages, shall be my guide, till I shall see as I am seen; as for any other lights,
they are but as those wandering fires that appear in damp marshes, which lead
the travailer into a ditch.

VIII. TEMPTATION
Pretend religion, and do any thing: what face is so foul as that Mask will
not cleanly cover? seem holy, and be what thou will. Repelled.

YEa, there thou would have me; this is that deadly dart, wherewith thou
have slain millions of souls; Hence it is that the Mahumetan Saints may commit
public filthiness with thanks; Hence, that corrupt Christians bury such
abominable crimes in their cowls Hence, that false professors shroude so much
villainies under the shelter of piety; Hence, that the world abounds with so
many sheep without, wolves Math. 7. 15.
within; fair tombs full of Mat. 23. 27.
inward rottenness; filthy dunghills covered over with snow: rich
herse-clothes hiding ill-sented carcasses; Pro. 26. 23.
broken potsheards covered with silver dross; Hence, that the adversaries of
Judah Ezr. 4. 2.
offer to Zerobabel their aid in building the Temple; The harlot has her peace
offerings; Pro. 7. 14.
Absalom has his vow to pay; Herod will worship Mat. 2. 8.
the infant; Judas has a kiss for his Master; Simon Magus Mat. 26. 49
will be a Convert; Ananias Acts 8. 13.
and Sapphira will part with all; The Angel of the Rev. 3. 2.
church of Sardis will pretend to live; The beast has horns like a Lamb, but
Rev. 13. 11.
speaks like a dragon; in a word, the wickedest of men will counterfeit
Saints, and false saints are very Devils: for so much more eminent as the
virtue is, which they would seem to put on, so much the more odious is the
simulation both to God and man: now the most eminent of all virtues is
holiness: 1 Pet. 1. 19. Lev. 11. 44. 19. 2.
whereby we both come nearest unto God, and most resemble him: of all creatures
therefore out of hell, there is none so loathsome to God as the hypocrites, and
that upon a double provocation; both for doing of evil, and for doing evil
under a color of good; the face that the wicked man sets upon his sin, is
worse then the sin it self: Bring no Isa. 1. 13.
more vain oblations, (says the Es. 1. 13.
Lord) incense is an abomination to me; the new moons and Sabbaths, the
calling of Assemblies I cannot away with; it is iniquity; even the solemn
meeting; Your new Moons, and 14.
your appointed feasts my soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to
be are them. How feign would thou therefore draw me into a double
condemnation both for being evil, and seeming good, both which are an
abomination to the Lord; Do I not hear him say, For as much as this Isa. 29.
13.
people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but
have removed their hearts from me; therefore 14.
behold I will proceed to do a mavelous work amongst this people, even a
mavelous work and a wonder, for the wisdom of the wise shall perish; Do I
not hear him say by his prophet Jeremiah; They will deceive every one his
neghbour Ier. 9. 5.
and will not speak the truth: Their tongue is an arrow shot 8.
out, it speaks deceit; one speaks peaceably to his neighbor with his
mouth, but in heart he lays his wait; shall 9.
I not visit them for these things, says the Lord: shall not my soul be
avenged of such a nation as this? Indeed this is the way to beguile the eyes of
men like our selves; for who would mistrust a mortifyed face? an eye and hand
lift up to heaven? a tongue that speaks holy things? but when we have to do
with a searcher of hearts, what madness is it to think there can be any
wisdom or understanding, or counsel against the Lord? Woe be to them Isa.
29. 15.
therefore that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord; and their
works are in the dark, and they say, Who sees us; and who knows us? Woe
be to the rebellious children, says the Lord, Isa. 80. 1.
that take counsel, but not of me, that cover with a covering, but not of my
spirit, that they may add sin to sin. Shall I Mat. 23. 25.
then cleanse the outside of the cup, whiles I am within full of extortion,
and excess? shall I fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness? shall I under pretense of long prayers Esaias 58. 4.
devour widows houses? Mat. 23. 14.
shall I put on thy form, and transfigure my self into 2 Cor. 1. 14.
an Angel of light? shall not the all-seeing eye of the righteous God find me
out in my damnable simulation? Has not he said, and will make it good, Though
thou wash thee Ier. 2. ^2.
with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me?
Has not my Savior, who shall be our Judge, said, Therefore thou Mat. 23. 14.
shall receive the greater damnation? Can there be any heavier doom that can
fall from that awful mouth, then, Receive thy portion with hypocrites? Let
those therefore that are ambitious of an higher room in hell, maintain a
form of Godliness, and deny the power of it: face wickedness 2 Timothy 3. 5.
with piety: stalk under religion for the aims of policy: juggle with God and
the world, case a devil with a saint, and row toward hell whiles they look
heavenward. For me, All the Job 27. 3.
while my breath is in me, and the spirit which God gives me, is in my
nostrills, I shall walk in mine uprightness: All false Psalm. 26. 11
ways, and false semblances shall my soul utterly abhor: that so at the
parting, my rejoiceing 2 Cor. 1. 12.
may be the testimony of my conscience, that in simplicity, and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God I have had my
conversation in the world.

IX. TEMPTATION
Why should thou lose any thing of thy height? Thou art not made of common
mold; neither art thou as others; If thou know thy self, thou art more holy,
more wise, better gifted, more enlightened then thy neighbors; Justly therefore
may thou overlook the vulgar of Christians, with pity, contempt, censure;
and bear thy self as too good for ordinary conversation, go apart, and avoid
the contagion of common breath. Repelled.

IF pride were thy ruin, wicked spirit, how feign would thou make it mine
also? This was thy first killing suggestion to our first parents in paradise,
soon after thine own fall, (as if it had been lately before, thy own case)
Ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil: That Genesis 3.
which thou foundest* so deadly to thy self, thou art enviously willing to
feoffe upon man, that if through thy temptation, Pride may Psalm. 73. 6.
compass him about as a chain, he may bear thee company in those everlasting
chains wherein thou art reserved under darkness Jude 6.
to the judgment of the great day. Thou well know that the ready way to
make me odious unto God, is to make me proud of my self; Pride and arrogance,
Prove. 8. 13.
and the evil way does he hate; The day of the Lord of hosts Esa. 2. 11, 12.
shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, says the Prophet: He has
scattered the Luke 1. 51.
proud in the imaginations of their hearts, says the blessed Virgin; God
resists the Jam. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5.
proud, and gives grace to the humble, says the Apostle; The Lord will
destroy the house Prove. 15. 25.
of the proud, says Solomon; and his father David before him, Thine eyes are
upon the 2 Samuel 22. 28.
haughty that thou may bring them down; Down, indeed, even to the bottom
of that pit of perdition. Make me but proud therefore, and I am thine; Sure I
am, God will not own me; and if I could be in heaven with this sin, Esa. 14.
12.
would cast me down headlong into hell.

Thou bidst me not to lose any thing of my height; Alas, (poor wretched dwarf
that I am!) what height have I? if I have but grace enough to know and bewail
my own misery, and nothingnesse, it is the great mercy of my God; Who 1 Cor.
4. 7.
makes me to differ from another? and what have I that I have not received?
and if I have received it, why should I glory in it as my own? Whatsoever thou
perswadest me, let me rather lose of my height, then add to my stature, and
affect too high a pitch; That humility is rewarded with honor, this pride with
ruin; It is the word of truth himself, Whosoever shall exalt himself Mat.
23. 13, 14. Luc. 14. 11. 18. 14.
shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted; The way
then to lose my whole height, yea my being, is to be lifted up, in, and above
my self; for though I should build my nest as high as the Eagle; or advance a
throne among the stars, yet how soon shall he cast me down into the dust;
yea, (without my repentance) into the nethermost hell?

Thou telst me that (which the Pharisee said of himself) I am not as others;
True, for I can say with the chosen vessel, that I am the chief of sinners:
Thou would bring me into an opinion that I am more holy, and more wise then
my neighbors; I am a stranger to other men's graces, I am acquainted with my
own wants; Yea I so well know my own sinfulness and folly that I hang down my
head in a just shame for both; I know that he who was holier then I, could say,
I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing; Romans 7. 18.
and he that was wiser then I, could say, Surely I am more brutish then any
man, and have Prove. 30. 2,
not the understanding of a man; I neither learned wisdom, 3.
nor have the knowledge of the holy: All the holiness that I have attained
unto is to see and lament my defects of holiness; and all my wisdom is to
descry and complain of my own ignorance and foolishness.

Am I better gifted then another? Thou art an ill judge of either, who enviest
the gifts of both; But if I be so, they are gifts still; and such gifts as the
donour has not absolutely given away from himself to me, but has given (or
lent them rather) to me, for an improvement to his own use; which I have no
more reason to be proud of, then the honest factor, of his masters stock;
received by him, not for possession, but for trafique.

Am I more enlightened then others? the more do I discern my own darkness;
and the more do I find cause to be humbled under the sense of it; But if the
greater light which thou say is in me, were not of an humane imagination, but
of divine irradiation, what more reason should I have to be proud of it, then
that in this more temperate clime I have more sun shine then those of Lapland
and Finland, and the rest of those more northern nations; so much the more
reason have I to be thankful; none to be proud.

Why should I therefore over-looke the meanest of my fellow Christians; who may
perhaps have more interest in God then my self; for it is not our knowledge
that so much indeares us to God, as our affections; perhaps he that knows less
may love more; and if he had been blessed with my means, would have known more;
Neither is it the distribution of the Talents that argues favor, but the grace
to employ them to the benefit of the giver: if he that received the one Talent
had gained another, he had received more thanks then he that upon the receipt of
five Talents had gained one.

The Spirit breathes where it lists; and there may lie secret graces in the
bosom of those, who pass for common Christians, that may find greater
acceptance in heaven, then those whose profession makes a fairer ostentation
of holiness.

I can pity therefore those that are ignorant, and apparently graceless; but
for those that profess both to know, and to love Christ; whiles their lives
deny not the power of godliness, I dare not spend upon them either my
contempt, or censure, lest whiles I judge wrongfully, I be justly judged: much
less dare I separate my self from their communion as contagious; Thou know
how little it were to thine advantage, that I should be persuaded to depart
from Number. 16. 20, 21. 2 Cor. 6. 17. Ephesians. 5. 11.
the Tents of the notoriously wicked; and to have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness; as too well understanding that evil
conversation corrupts good manners; and that a participation in sin draws on a
partnership Number. 16. 26.
in judgment; Neither know I whether thou should gain more by my joining
with evil society, or my separating from good; infection follows upon the one,
distraction upon the other: Those then which cast off their communion with
Christ and his Church, whether in doctrine or practice, I shall avoid (as the
plague) soon, and far: But those who truly profess a real conjunction, with
that head, and this body: Into their secret let my soul come, and unto their
assembly let mine honor be united: But if, where I find weakness of grace,
and involuntary failings of obedience, I shall say, Stand by thy self, come
not near me, for I am holier then Esaias 65. 5.
thou; how can I make other account then that this pride shall be a smoke in
the nostrils 6.
of the Almighty, a fire that burns all day; and that he will recompense it
into my bosom?

Shortly, I know none so fit to depart from, as from my self, my own pride,
self love, and the rest of my inbred corruptions; and am so far from
over-looking others, that I know none worse then my self.

X. TEMPTATION
However the zeal of your scrupulous Preachers is wont to make the worst of
every thing; and to damn the least slip to no less then hell: Yet there are
certain favor able temperaments of circumstances, which may (if not excuse
yet) extenuate a fault, such as age, complexion, custom, profit, importunity,
necessity, which are justly pleadable at the bar both of God, and the
conscience, and are sufficient to rebate the edge of divine severity. Repelled.

Wicked tempter, I know there is nothing upon earth, that so much either
troubles thee, or impairs thy kingdom of darkness, as the zeal of
conscionable Preachers; those, who lift up their voice like a trumpet, and show
Esa. 58. 1.
Gods people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sin; this is it
that rescues millions of souls from the hand of hell, and gives thee so many
foyles in thy spiritual assaults; This godly and faithful zeal represents men's
sins to them as they are, and, by sins, the danger of their damnation; which
thy malicious subtilty would feign blanch over, and palliate to their
destruction; But when thou have all done, it is not in their power to make sin
worse then it is, or in thine to make it better: As for those favorable
temperaments which thou mentionest, they are mere Pandarismes of wickedness;
fair visors of deformity: For to cast a glance upon each of them; Age is not a
more common plea, then unjust: The young man pretends it for his wanton, and
inordinate lust: The old, for his gripplenesse; techinesse; loquacity: All
wrongfully, and not without foul abuse.

Youth is taught by thee to call for a swing: and to make vigor, and heat of
blood, a privilege for a wild licentiousness; for which it can have no claim
but from a charter sealed in hell: I am sure that God who gives this marrow to
his bones, and brawne to his arms, and strength to his sinews, and vivacity
to his spirits, looks for another improvement; Remember thy Ecl. 12. 1.
Creator in the days of thy youth, says Solomon; And his father before him;
Wherewithal Psalm. 119. 9.
shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy
word: Lo, the young man's ways are foul with lusts and distempered passions,
and they must be cleansed; and the way to cleanse them is attendance (not of
his own vain pleasures, but) of the holy ordinances of his maker: Thou
would have him run loose like the wild Ass in the desert, God tells him, It
is good for a man to bear the yoke in Lam. 3. 27.
his youth; even the yoke of the divine precepts, the stooping whereunto is the
best, and truest of al freedoms, so as he may be able to say with the best
Courtier of the wickedest King; I thy servant Obadiah in 1 Kings 18. 12.
fear the Lord from my youth; The aberrations from which holy laws of God are
so far from finding an excuse from the prime of our years, as that holy Job
cries out of them in the bitterness of his soul, Thou have made me to Job
13. 26.
possess the iniquities of my youth: and as David vehemently deprecates Gods
anger for them; Remember not, Psalm. 25. 7.
Lord, the sins of my youth; so Zophar the Naamathite notes it for an especial
brand of Gods judgment upon the wicked man, that his bones Job 20. 11.
are full of the sins of his youth; and God declares it as an especial mercy
to his people; Thou shall forget the shame of Esa. 54. 2.
thy youth; The more headstrong therefore my youth is, the more strait shall I
curb it, and hold it in: and the more vigorous it is, so much the fitter it is
to be consecrated to that God who is most worthy to be served with the best of
his own.

As for old age, it has I grant its humors and infirmities; but rather for
our humiliation, then for our excuse. It is not more common then absurd and
unreasonable, that when we are necessarily leaving the world, we should be most
fond in holding it; when we are ceasing to have any use of riches, then, to
endeavor most eagerly to get them; when we should be laying up treasure in
heaven, to be treasuring up wrath for our selves, and baggs, for we know not
whom: To be unwilling to spend what we cannot keep; and to be mad on getting
what we have not the wit or grace to spend: If then thou can persuade any man
to be so graceless, as to make his vicious disposition an apology for
wickedness, let him plead the faults of his age for the excuse of his avarice.

As for morosity of nature, and garrulity of tongue, they are not the
imperfections of the age, but of the persons; There are meek spirits under gray
hairs, and wrinkled skins; There are old men, who, (as that wise heathen
said of old) can keep silence, even at a feast; He has ill spent his age that
has not attained to so good an hand over himself, as in some meet measure to
moderate both his speech and passion.

If some complexions both incline us more, and crave indulgence to some sins,
more then other, (the sanguine to lust, the choleric to rage, etc.) wherefore
serves grace but to correct them? If we must be overruled by nature, what do
we professing Christianity? Neither humors, nor stars can necessitate us to
evil; whiles thou therefore pretendest my natural constitution, I tell thee
of my spiritual regeneration; the power whereof if it have not mortified my
evil and corrupt affections, I am not (what I profess to be) a Christian.

The strongest plea for the mitigation of sin, is Custom; the power whereof
is wont to be esteemed so great, as that it has seemed to alter the quality of
the fact, and of sin, to make no sin: Hence the holy Patriarchs admitted many
consorts into their marriagebed, without the conscience of offending; which, if
it had not been for the mediation of Custom, had been justly esteemed no
better then criminous: But however where is no contrary injunction, Custom may
so far usurp, as to take upon it to be no less then a law it self; Yet, where
there is a just regulation of law, the plea of Custom is so quite out of
countenance, as that it is strongly retorted against it self; neither is there
any more powerful reason for the abolition of an ill use, then that is a
custom; so much the more need therefore to be opposed and reformed. Hence was
that vehement charge of God to his Israel: After the doings of the land of
Egypt, wherein ye Lev. 18. 3.
dwelt, shall ye not do; and after the doings of the land of Canaan, whither I
bring you, shall ye not do; neither shall ye walk after their ordinances. Ye
shall v. 30.
keep mine Ordinance, that ye commit not any of these abominable customs,
which were committed before you; and that ye defile not your selves therein, I
am the Lord your God.

It is too true that the bonds of Custom are so strong and close, that they
are not easily loosed; in so much as Custom puts on the face of another
nature; Can the Ethiopian change his Jer. 13. 23.
skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed
to do evil; How stiffly did the men of Judah, (after all the dreadful
threatenings of the Prophet) hold to their Idolatrous customs, which they had
learned in Egypt; We will burn incense to the Queen Jer. 44. 17.
of heaven, and pour out drinkofferings to her, as we have done; we, and our
fathers, our Kings, and our Princes, in the Cities of Judah* and in the streets
of Jerusalem; It is with ill customs, as with diseases; which if they grow
inveterate, are so much the harder to be cured; but shall I therefore hug my
malady, because I have long had it? because it will not part away with ease?
Shall I bid a thief welcome, because he had wont to rob me?

Shortly then, so far is an ill custom from extenuating my sin, as that it
aggravates it; Neither shall I offend the less, because I offend with more;
but rather double it, both, as in my act, and, as in my imitation; in following
others amiss, and in helping to make up an ill precedent for others following
of me.

As for the profit that may accrue by sinning; let those carnal hearts value
it, that have made the world their God; To me, the greatest gain this way is
loss: Might I have that house-full of gold and silver that Balaam Number. 24. 13.
talk of; or all those kingdoms of the earth, and the glory of them which
thou shewedst to my Savior, what are all these to the price of a sin, when
they meet with a man that has learnt from the mouth of Christ; What profit
shall it be Mat. 16. 26. Mark. 8. 36.
to a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?

Importunity is wont to be a prevalent suitor; How many have been dragged to
hell by the force of others solicitations, who never else meant to have trod in
those paths of death? What marvel is it, if that which moved the unjust judge
to do right, against the bent of his will, be able to draw the weak sinner
awry? But if in these earthly angariations, one mile (according to our Saviors
counsel) may bring Mat 5. 41.
on another; yet in spiritual evil ways, no compulsion can prevail upon a
resolved spirit.

It is not the change of stations, nor the building of Number. 23. 14. and 29.
twice seven altars, nor the sacrificing of seven bullocks and seven rams that
can win a true Prophet of God to curse Israel; The Christian heart is fixed
upon sure grounds of his own, never to be removed; If therefore his father sue
to him; if his mother weep, and wring, and kneel; and beseech him by the womb
that bore him, and the breasts that gave him suck; if his crying children cling
about his knees, and crave his yeildance to some advantageous evil, or his
declining some bitter sufferings for the cause of Christ, he can shake them off
with an holy neglect; and say, What do you weeping and breaking Act. 21. 13.
my heart? for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die for the name of
the Lord Jesus; None of these things Act. 20. 24.
move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I may finish my
course with joy; And if any soul be so weak, as to be led rather by the
earnest motions of others, then by his own settled determinations, he shall
find no other ease before the Tribunal of heaven, then our first Parents did in
shifting the guilt of their sin, the man to the woman, the woman to the
serpent; In the mean while that word shall ever stand with me inviolable, My
son, if sinners entise thee, Prove. 1. 10.
consent thou not.

Lastly, what can be the necessity which may either induce to sin; or excuse
for sinning? What can the world do to make me say I must do evil? Loss,
restraint, exile, pain, death are the worst, that either malice can do, or
patience suffer; These may put me hard to the question, but, when all is done,
they must leave me free, either to act, or endure; I need not therefore sin,
since there is a remedy against sin, suffering.

It is true that we are in the hands of a most gracious and indulgent God, who
considers what we are made of, pities our infirmities, and knows to put a
difference betwixt wilful rebellion and weak revolt; his mercy can distinguish
of offenders; but his justice has said, Without shall be the fearful; Finally
then howsoever these circumstantiall temperaments may receive pardon, after the
fact, for the penitent at the mercy-seat of heaven; yet none of them can be
pleadable at the bar of divine justice; And if any sinner shall hearten
himself to offend out of the hopes and confidence of these favorable
mitigations, the comfort that I can give him, is, that he may howl in hell,
with thee, for his presumption.

FINIS.

