A SHORT ANSWER TO THE Tedious Vindication OF SMECTYMNVVS.

BY The AVTHOR of the Humble Remonstrance.

LONDON, Printed for NATHANIEL BUTTER in Paul's Churchyard at the pyde-Bull
near St. Austins gate. 1641.

TO The most High Court OF PARLIAMENT.
Most Honorable LORDS, And ye most Noble KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and BURGESSES of
the House of COMMONS:
NOthing could fall out more happily to me, then that my bold Adversaries have
appealed to your inviolable Justice; for sure I am, whiles you are (as you ever
will be) your selves, wise, and just, my cause cannot miscarry in your hands.
With no less, therefore, but better grounded confidence, I cast my self upon
your unpartiall judgment; rejoicing to think, how clearly you will distinguish
betwixt a facing boldness, and a modest Evidence of truth: How can I but
receive courage from your pious, and just proceedings? It is I that vindicate,
these men oppose that holy Leiturgy, which your most religious Order in this
Active session commanded to be entirely observed. How busy Faction is to
cross that your most seasonable Decree, every day yields new and lamentable
proofs. If these endeavors of mine serve only for the pursuance of your so
necessary, and gracious Act; they cannot fear to be unwelcome. But, if I have
hurt a good cause, by a weak and insufficient handling, let me suffer in your
censure, and let my Adversaries triumph in my sufferings. Contrarily, if after
all their smooth insinuations, it shall be found, that this champertous
combination has gone about, by mere shows of proof, to feed the unquiet humors
of men, in the unjust dislike of most justifiable, ancient, and sacred
Institutions, and to cast false blames upon my peaceable and sincere managings
of a certain Truth, let them pass for what they are, and feel that justice
which they have appealed.

An ANSWER TO A Calumniatory EPISTLE, Directed by way of PREFACE to the Reader.
READERS,
MY comfort is, that you have eyes of your own; and know how to use them: With
what gravity would our Smectymnuans else persuade you, that my late Defense is
fraught with such stuff, as you shall find undiscernable by any but their
eyes? You cannot well judge of the management of this quarrel, unless it will
please you to receive notice how this fray began. It is not long since I sent
forth a meek and peaceable Remonstrance, bemoaning the frequence of scandalous
Pasquins, and humbly pleading for the just and ancient right of Leiturgie and
Episcopacie. Wherein I could not suppose that any person could find himself
touched, save only those, who profess friendship to Libells, enmity to the
established forms: When all on the sudden, the Smectymnuans, a strange
generation of men, unprovoked, unthought of, cry out of hard measure, and fly
in my face, as men wrongfully accused; I know them not, I hurt them not; If
their own guilt have galled them, that is no fault of mine; A long and bitter
Answer is addressed by them, where no question was moved: Insomuch, as I could
hardly induce His Majesty, when I presented my Defense to His Royal hands, to
believe, that any except on could be taken to so fair and innocent a Discourse:
My labor was all for peace, even this is made the ground of the quarrel: What
should I now do? I were worse then a worm, if upon this treading upon, I did
not turn again; Yet, not so much out of respect to my own poor, and (if need
were) despicable reputation, as to the public cause of God, and his Church,
which I saw now engaged in this unjust brawl. According to my true duty,
therefore, I published a short and defensive Reply to their long Answer;
wherein, I hope the judicious will witness, that the Truth sustains no loss:
Now, enraged with a moderate opposition, they heat their furnace seven times
more, and break forth into a not more voluminous, then vehement Invective. I do
not see them look cleeringly through their fingers, at their seeminglyunknown,
(yet often discovered, and often vilified) Antagonist; it is all one, so long as
he is namelesse; if he be a Consul, they are Senators; Civility is but a
Ceremony; All faces under masks are alike; It matters not for the person, let
it please you to look at the cause: In the carriage whereof, they first tax me,
with over-lashing in my accusations; I had objected to them, mis-allegations,
misinterpretations, mis-inferences, weak and colorable proofs; neither can
their querulous noise make me go less, or be less confident in my charge.
They liken themselves to Cato, and well may, they are extremely like; of thirty
accusations, no one could be proved against Cato; of no fewer charges, which
are laid upon them, I see not how they acquit themselves of one.

Who can but wonder at this eminent boldness, that they dare tell you, Tertul.
Apol. c. 30. page of The Defense -- 13 August. Ep. 121. 14 Justin Martyr. Apol.
2. 14 Council. Laodie. c. 8. 15 Council. Carthag. 3. 15 Council. Milevit. 2. 16
Hieron. ad Euagr. 61 Greg. Naz. Orat. 28. 65 Firmilianus in Cypr. Ep 75. 71
Ambr. in Presbyt. consignant. 72 Council. Antioch. c. 10. 72 D. Raynolds. 101
Orig. contr. Cells. 141 August. contr. Crescon. l. 3. 146
There are (after all my general exclamations) but four places, for which I
tax them of falsehood? Falsehood, is their own word; Mis-allegation is mine: Be
pleased to cast your eye upon my Margin, and to count this quaternion of their
imputed errors: But they are mis-inferences, and weak inconsequences, which
(besides mis-citations) were upon the file of my accusations; wherein I fear
Cato's number will be out-vyed.

Readers, such fidelity, as you find in the denial of my manifest exceptions
against their allegations, look for in the demonstrative proofs of their
exceptions against mine. There is belike, a Machiavel somewhere, find him out,
I beseech you, and let him be brought forth to shame; certainly, where the
falsehood lies, there he lurks.

In the second place they tell you of raylings, revilings, scornings, never the
like since Montagues Appeal; and present you with a whole bundle of such
strange flowers of Rhetoric, as truly, I wondered should ever grow in my
Garden; wherein, they have done passing wisely, in not noting the Pages, as the
several beds, wherein such rare plants grew; for I have carefully re-examined
the Book, and profess seriously, that some of them I cannot find at all;
others I find, but utterly mis-applied; We are called (they say) Vain,
frivolous cavillers, riotous, proud, false, envious, etc. Let me appeal to your
eyes, Readers; where ever I thus wronged those, whom I call Brethren? Diverse of
these words I confess to have used, but to another purpose, upon a different
subject; that which I speak of the things, they unjustly take of the persons:
For example; I talk of false, and frivolous exceptions; They say, I call them
false and frivolous men: I talk of vain cavills; They charge me to say, they
are vain cavillers: I speak of a riot of assailants; They cry out, that I call
them riotous men: I say, a suggestion is envious; They take it to themselves: I
call the Libellers, Factious persons; They mis-apply it, as spoken of them: I
say an intimation is witless and malicious; I am taken to say the men are so:
And not to weary you with so odious a rabble, I say, this is weakly and
absurdly objected; They say, I call them weak and absurd men. Thus, I could
easily pass through the rest; and show you, that what I speak by way of
supposition, they take absolutely; what I speak as dehorting, they as accusing;
what of speeches, they of persons; what of others, they of themselves: And thus
rises the rare Rhetoric which they have imputed to me; wherein I doubt not,
but ye my Readers, will take occasion to think, what fidelity shall we expect
from these men, in citing other Authors, when they do so foully mis-report the
Book in our hand? They arenot then my flowers, but their own weeds, which they
have thus bundled up together.

But had I so far over-lashed, as is pretended, your wisdom, Readers, would
send you to inquire of the provocation: For surely, the occasion may, if not
justify a man's act, yet abate his blame; When therefore ye shall look back,
and see with what strange insolence I was entertained by these undertakers, ye
will be so far from complaining of my sharpness, that ye will rather censure
my patience; In the Answer to the Humble Remonstrance. Episcopal bravado. p. 3
Treason, treason. p. 4 Episcopal zeal broke into flames of indignation. p. 6.
We know not what his arrogancy might attempt. p. 14 So many falsities and
contradictions. p. 15 A face of confident boldness. p. 15 A self-confounded
man. p. 15 Notorious falsity. p. 15 Notorious -- p. 16 Not leave his -- p. 16
Os durum p. 18 Forgets not himself, but God also. p. 18 Words bordering upon
blasphemy. p. 18 Indignation will not suffer us to prosecute these falsities.
p. 18 A stirrup for Antichrist. p. 30 Antichristian government. p. 65 We thank
God we are none of you. p. 74 Borders upon Antichrist. p. 80 Pride, Rebellion,
Treason, Unthankfulness, which have issued from Episcopacie. p. 85
How blind self-love will make men in their own concernments? These men will
not see in themselves that true guilt, which they unjustly cry out of, in
another: So, I have heard a man with a very noisome breath, censure the ill
lungs of his neighbor; Let my Margin present thee, Reader, with but an
handful out of a full sack.

These are their terms in their very first papers; without any pretense of
imitation: But if we should rake together the scornful, girding and (as some
of their betters have styled them) unmannerly passages of this their angry
vindication, it were enough to fill a Book alone. Readers, ye may, if you
please, believe, how easy it were for me, to pay them home in their own coin;
But I had rather to consider what is fit for me (how namelesse soever) to give,
then what they are worthy to receive: Some others may perhaps be more sensible
of this indignity then my self; who have learned to think more meanly of my
self, then they can speak; and at once both to pity this petulancy, and
dis-regard it.

In the third place they talk of daring protestations, and bold asseverations;
and spend some instances of the particular expressions of my confidence. Do not
think, Readers, that I will be beaten out with words; there is no one line of
those passages, which they have recited, that I will not make good against all
the clan of Smetymnuus.

Neither can I, out of this assurance, decline any Bar under Heaven, for the
trial of my righteous cause; It is therefore an unreasonably envious
suggestion of theirs, that in dedicating my Book to His Sacred Majesty, I did,
ever the more, fly from the judgment of Parliament; when in that very
Epistle, I made confident mention of my secure reliance upon the noble justice
of their Judicature; Besides, that it is not too wise, nor too loyal an
intimation of these men, which would imply such a distance betwixt Sovereign,
and Parliamentary interest: For me, I would ever suppose such an entire union
betwixt them, as the head and the body; that they neither should, nor can be
severed in the rights of their several concernments.

As for that resolute averment of the Author of Episcopacie by Divine Right,
That he offers to forfeit his life to Justice, and his reputation to shame, if
any living man can show any Lay-Presbyter (not as they please to report the
word, a Ruling Elder) in the world, till Farell and Viret first created him;
Let me be his hostage; let my life go for his, if any one such Lay-Presbyter
can be produced. Let them search Records, and try their skill; and when they
have overcome, triumph. But in the mean time, they may not think to fob us off,
with the colorable testimonies of B. Whitgift, King, Saravia, who were all
well known to be just so good friends to Lay-Presbytery, as themselves are to
Episcopacie. For the rest, If I have been somewhat bold with them, in telling
them, right-down, of poor arguments, verbal exceptions, mere declamations,
shuffling of testimonies, unproving illustrations, I may crave your pardon,
Readers, but theirs I cannot; as not conscious of any ill-placed word, in this
easy Censure. Shortly, my much reverenced friend, learned Rivetus, will give
them but a little thanks in mis-applying his censure of Bishop Montague, to a
man so differently tempered, whom he has with particular respects vouchsafed
to honor, and oblige.

In the fourth place, they tell you, that after all these Thrasonicall boasts
of mine, if their whole Book were divided into four parts, there is one
quarter, of which I make no mention: Wherein, Readers, I think verily you may
believe them; For in the first leaf of my Defense, I foretold you so much; as
finding nothing in that swollen bulk, but a mere unsound Tympanie, instead of a
truly solid conception; whereof you may easily perceive the one half (well
near) bestowed either in mere verbal quarrels, or in real disputes of things
uncontroverted. I am more thrifty of my good hours, then to follow them in so
wild a chase: pitching, only, upon those points, which I conceived to be
valuable, and pertinent; wherein my profession was, so to save time, as that I
should not lose ought of truth: It is an injurious suggestion therefore, which
these men make, that where their proofs are strongest, there I have glided away
without answer; since I can safely call God to witness unto my soul, that I am
not conscious to my self of any one considerable argument of theirs, that I
have balked in my replicatory Defense: But if in their estimation, there be any
such, as wherein they have placed an overweening confidence, let them not spare
to reinforce it to the utmost; that the world may witness their valor, and my
cowardice.

What need is there of this, you will say, when they have already gloried in
the victory; vaunting, that they have me, confitentem reum; and, in effect, the
cause granted by me, in those things which are most material? Were it so,
Readers, as they pretend, that I come nearer to their Tenets, then some others;
one would think they should, in this, find cause to acknowledge, and embrace
mine ingenuity, rather then to insult upon me, as in way of disgrace. I wis, it
is not the force of their argutation, that could move me one foot forward; but
if Gods blessing upon my free disquisition of truth, should have so wrought
upon my better-composed thoughts, as that I should have yielded to go some
steps further then others, toward the meeting of peace, one would not think
this should yield any fit matter of exprobration; But, the truth is, I have not
departed, one inch, from either my own Tenet, or from the received judgment of
our Orthodox Divines.

Now that they may see the fault is not in my levity, but in their own
misunderstanding; that Identity of the names and offices of Bishops and
Presbyters, in the beginning of the Apostles times, whereat they take
advantage, they may see averred, at large, in Episcopacie by Divine Right, 2.
Part.. 4. and, to second it, they Defense, p. 48.
are challenged in my Defense, to name any one of our Writers, that has not
proclaimed this truth; Where then lies the contradiction?

The clear nominall distinction of the three Orders of Bishops, Presbyters,
Deacons, I professed to prove only out of the writings of those, who were the
next successors to the Apostles; What is here of either yeeldance or
contradiction? And if I have ingenuously granted, that the Primitive Bishops
were elected by the Clergy, with the assent of the people; That Bishops
neither do, nor may challenge to themselves such a sole interest in Ordination,
or Jurisdiction, as utterly to exclude Presbyters from some participation in
this charge, and Act; That they ought not to divest themselves of their
Iurisdictive power, by delegating it to others; That the ordinary managing of
secular employments is improper for them; If, in all these, I have gratified
them, why do they complain? and if I have disadvantaged my cause, why is it not
urged to my conviction?

It is warily said of these men, that I almost grant Lay Elders in Antiquity; I
do so almost grant them in my own sense, that I utterly deny them in theirs:
Why should I make any doubt to yield unto the Justice of their complaints, in
the Postscript against the insolence, and tyranny of Popish Prelates? What
lose we by this condescent? Or how can they plead they are not justly taxed for
diffusing other men's crimes to the innocent, when their consciences cannot but
fly in their faces for this injustice?

Lastly, I am charged with shameful self-contradictions, which surely must
needs argue great rashness, or much weakness of judgment. See the instances;
In the same Epistle, I profess not to tax their abilities, and yet call them
impotent assailants: And why not both of these? He that taxes not their
abilities, does not therefore presently approve them; they may, perhaps, not
want good abilities in themselves, and yet be unable to prove their cause; they
may be able men, and yet impotent matches.

The contradiction they would raise in the words concerning Evangelists, is
merely cavillatory; May you be pleased to turn to the ninety fourth Page of my
Defense, you shall clearly acknowledge it. The word in a common sense,
signifies any Preacher of the Gospel; but in the peculiar sense of the New
Testament, it signifies some persons extraordinarily gifted, and employed; not
settled in any one place, but sent abroad by the Apostles on that blessed
errand: Now, to say that any of these latter were such as had ordinary places,
and ordinary gifts, (as they do, Sect. 13. page 48.) I do justly blame as a
mere fancy, not herein contradicting any thing, but their light imagination.

In the contradiction pretended to be, concerning the extent of Episcopacie,
sure they cannot but check themselves; In my Remonstrance and Defense, they
report men to say somewhere (but, where, no man can tell) that Bishops had been
every where; and, that all Churches through the whole Christian world, have
uniformly, and constantly maintained Episcopacie; Elsewhere, that I say they
were not every where, and that there are less noble Churches that do not
confer to Episcopal government; Words are more easily accorded, then
acknowledged; There are not, there have not been every where settled Christian
Churches; Where ever there have been settled Christian Churches, there have been
Bishops; From the Apostles times to this present Age, there have been Bishops
in all Christian Regions; now, some late Reformed Churches have been
necessitated to forbear them; Where, I beseech you, lies the contradiction?

I have often granted, that the name of Bishops, and Presbyters was, at the
first, promiscuously used, and yet, I do no less justly maintain, that for
this sixteen hundred years, the name of Bishops has been ordinarily
appropriated (in a contra-distinctive sense) to Churchgovernors in an apparent
superiority. Distinguish times, and reconcile Histories.

The two next exceptions concerning Diocesan Bishops, and Civil government,
are fully cleared and convinced in the due places of this ensuing Answer; I
shall not blur paper in an unseasonable anticipating my own Discourse.

Sole Ordination, and sole Jurisdiction, we so disclaim, as that we hold the
power of both, primarily in the Bishop, the concurrent assistance in the
Presbyters; What opposition is there in an orderly subordination?

The last contradiction clearly reconciles it self: In stating the question
concerning Episcopacie, I distinguish betwixt Divine and Apostolical
Authority, professing, not to affirm that Bishops were immediately ordained by
Christ; and yet averring, that Christ laid the grounds of this imparity in his
first agents; What discordance is in these two? Is the groundwork of an house,
the whole frame of it? Can they find the roof in the foundation? In the
Epistles to the seven Asian Churches, Christ (I truly say) acknowledges (at
least intimates) the Hierarchy of those seven Angels: Do I imply that he did
immediately ordain them?

Readers, ye have seen the poor stuff of these their selected exceptions:
Believe it, such are all their contradictions to me, as these contradictions
which they find in me, to my self, groundless, and worthless: As I shall
make good in this following Discourse, concerning the ancient, holy, and
beneficial use of set-Leiturgies in the Church. This subject, because, as it
is untracked with any frequent pens of others, so it is that, wherein my
Adversaries seem most to pride themselves, (as supposing to have in it the most
probable advantages against me) I have somewhat largely handled, to your ample
satisfaction. But, as for that other head of Episcopacie, which has already
filled so many rhemes of waste-paper, for as much as I see they offer nothing,
but that which has passed an hundred ventilations, Transeat. I have resolved
to bestow my time better, then in drawing this Saw to and fro, to no purpose.
Let them first give a full, and punctual Answer to that, which has been
already, in an entire body of a Treatise, written concerning the Divine Right
of Episcopacie; and then, let them expect, that I should trouble my self with
sweeping away these loose scraps of their exceptions. Till then, let them, if
they can, be silent, at least I shall; as one that know how to give a better
account of the remainder of my precious hours.

A Short ANSWER To the Tedious VINDICATION OF SMECTYMNVVS.
SECT. I.
I Am sorry, Brethren, that your own importunity will needs make you guilty
of your further shame: Had you sat down silent in the conscience of a just
reproof, your blame had been by this time dead, and forgotten; but now, your
impetuous Defense shall let the world see, you did in vain hope to face out an
ill cause with a seeming boldness. I may not spend Volumes upon you, but some
Lines I must: enough to convince the Reader of the justice of my Charge, and the
miserable insufficiency ciencie of your Vindication; It is not your stiff
denial that can make it other then Gods truth, which I maintain, or that can
justify your Errors; Let the cause speak for it self, and let that great
Moderator of Heaven, to whom we both appeal, judge.

It was a light touch, that I gave to your Grammatical slip of Areopagi;
wherein it would not have hurt you, to have confessed your oversight; had you
yielded that you stumbled, though withal you say, You stumbled like Emperors,
we could have passed it over with a smile; but now, that you will needs fall
into a serious contestation, and spend almost a whole leaf in a faulty Defense;
I must tell you, that you make this an heinous trifle: To face out wilfully the
least error, is no less then a crime; and such is this of yours, as every
true Grammarian knows: I doubt not, but you had heard of Dionysius Areopagita;
but if you should have cited him under the name of Dionysius Areopagus, every
Scholar would have laughed you to scorn: Had you said, The admired sons of
Justice, the Areopagus; I grant it had been good, according to that which you
cite out of Sarisburiensis; but to say, The admired sons of Justice, the
Areopagi, no Grammar, no authority can bear you out; and however you face it,
that you can bring precedents enough, out of approved Authors, name but one, and
take all: That of Sarisburiensis, which you allege, is altogether for me,
against your selves: he says that Senate Does he say, those Judges were
called Areopagi?
of Athens was called Areopagus; so said my Margin before: But what is this to
your false Latin? Brethren, this matter of Latinity is but a straw, but let me
say, this willing defense of a plain falsehood, is a block, which your very
friends cannot but stumble at; and how can the Reader choose but think, he that
will wilfully stand in the defense of a known falsehood in Language, will not
stick to defend a known Error in his cause? Before, ye stumbled; now, ye fall:
rise up for shame in a just confession, and look better to your feet hereafter.

But belike, you have not a better faculty in stumbling, then I in leaping:
and talk of huge great blocks that I have over-skipped in this whole Book:
Where are they, which be they, Brethren? If such were, they are, I hope, still
visible; show them me, I beseech you, that I may yet try my skill: You
instance in some words sounding to contempt; I thought what these blocks would
prove: mere matter of words, not less windy, then the froth of your next
Paragraph; wherein your gravitie is set upon a merry pin; and, in a becoming
jeer, tells us of the Gentleman student in Philosophy, that desires to learn
the rare secret of the sinking of froth; for which, I remit you, and your deep
student, to the next Tapster.

IT is not all your shuffling that can shift Parag. 2.
the just charge of your gross uncharitableness; The Remonstrance comparing
in a general notion, the forms of Civil government and Ecclesiastical,
expresses it in these Terms; [Since if Antiquity may be the rule, the civil
Polity has sometimes varied, the Sacred, never; And if original authority
may carry it, that came from arbitrarie imposers, this from men inspired:] then
which, no word can be in a right sense more safe, or more innocent: Your good
gloss appropriates Answ. p. 4.
what (in thesi) was spoken of all forms of Civil government, to our particular
Monarchy; and tells your Reader, that I deliver it as Arbitrary, and Alterable;
then which, there cannot I suppose be any sclander more dangerous; and to mend
the matter now in your Vindication, you redouble your most injurious charge
upon the Remonstrant, as if upon this ground, it could follow that to attempt
the alteration of Monarchical government, had been, in his opinion, less
culpable then to petition the alteration of Episcopal; quite contrary to the
express words of my Remonstrance; whose implication is no other then this,
That, if it were capital in them who indeavored to alter the forms of Civil
government, they must needs seem worthy of more then an easy censure, that
went about in a Libellous way to work the change of a settled government in the
Church.

See, Reader, this latter is in the Remonstrants judgment, worthy of more then
an easy censure, the others accusation is no less then deadly: Whether now
does he hold less culpable? Truly, brethren, if you be not ashamed of this
unjust crimination, I hope some body will blush for you. With how bold a face
dare you appeal to the Reader, yea to the most honorable Parliament, and to
the Sacred Majesty of our Sovereign, that you do the man no wrong? Join
issue then and let all these judge: First you say, one of the most confident
Advocates of Episcopacy, has said, that where a National Church is settled in
the orderly regiment of certain grave Overseers, to seek to abandon this
form, and to bring in a foreign Discipline is as unreasonable, as to cast off
the yoke of just and hereditary Monarchy, and to affect many-headed
Sovereignty; This you think an assertion insolent enough, that sets the Mitre,
as high as the Crown; But what a foul injury is this? Reader do but view the
place, and see, where the Mitre stands: The words run thus: [So were it no
less They cite it [No less haynous] These words [Ruling under one
acknowledged Soveraigne] are purposely left out in their citation of them to
make the proposition odious: what fidelity there is in this, let the Reader
judge.
unreasonable where a National Church is settled in the orderly regiment of
certain grave Overseers, ruling under one acknowledged Sovereign, by wholesome
and unquestionable Laws, and by these Laws punishable if they overlash: etc.]
Say now, Reader, whether this man sets the Mitre as high as the Crown? Neither
does he say, it were no less heinous, (for the difference of the morality is
excepted before) but, no less unreasonable: as that which is there said to
argue a strange brainsick giddiness in either offense.

Yet more anger; The Remonstrant rises higher and sets the Mitre above the
Crown? Wherein, I beseech you, brethren? What a Woolseian insolence were this?
He tells us (you say) that Civil government came from Arbitrary imposers, the
Sacred from men inspired; now Civil government here includes Monarchy;
therefore this is to advance Episcopacy above Monarchy; since the one
challenges God for the Founder, the other humane arbitrament. Brethren, had
your argument as much reason, as spite, it would press sore: now, as you have
framed it, it is a mere cavil. The Remonstrant speaks of all Civil
government in general; the several forms whereof amongst several nations,
and people, no reasonable man can deny were introduced variously, according to
the first institution of their Founders; What error can your sharp eyes find
in this proposition? Now, you will needs draw this by an envious application to
Monarchy, as if I meant to derive it only from men, not from God: Ye are
mistaken, brethren: they are your better friends, that thus deduce Monarchy;
For us, we hold it is from God, by men, from God as the author and ordainer,
by men, as the means; we fetch it not from earth, but from heaven; we know
who said, By me Kings reign; and from him we derive their Crowns and
Scepters: But ye may know (which we have often blushed, and sighed to see laid in
our dish, by Popish Authors) who it was that said; Kings, Princes and Governors
The first and greatest Zelot at Franckford. lib de obedient. And Buchanan in
his Book de jure Regni. Nos autem id contendimus, populum a quo Reges nostri
habent quicquid juris sibi vendicant, regibus esse potentiorem, jus quidem in
illos habere multitudine^, etc. Buchan. de jure Regni.
have their authority of the people, and upon occasion they may take it away
again, as men may revoke their proxies: who it was that said, It is not enough
for subjects not to obey, but they must withstand wicked Princes. Sure they
were no fautors of Episcopacy, that have written so bloody lines against the
safety, and lives of lawful Princes, as I dare not transcribe; that have so
undervalued their power, and so abased their original; small reason had you to
twit me with this hateful guilt.

It is but a poor put-off, that you censure not my words as treasonable, from
my pen, which from yours had received no better construction: The words are the
same, the intimation evident; and not less evincible, then your vilifying of
the judgment of that wise, and (above all examples) learned K. James; whom
whiles you smooth in words, and directly oppose in his well-grounded Edict,
concerning the Liturgy of the Church, what do you but verbally praise, and
really check? Ye cannot therefore so easily wipe off these aspersions of
uncharitableness, by either stiff denial, or unjust recrimination; For me,
such is my malice toward you, that I can at once convince your want of
charity, and forgive it.

IF the Religion of King William Rufus, or Parag. 3.
the infallible judgment of Pope Pius may do you any service, make your best
of them; to me they are much alike. Whatsoever Daniel (the Poet, not the
Prophet) pleased to say; All Historians were not Monks, nor all Monks
false-tongued; Would God all Divines were true: The actions of this Prince
blazon him more, then the Historians pens; whereof some have taxed him for
favor of Judaisme, others for touches of Atheism, all for indevotion: As for
the Bishops of those times, I say they were Popish, and, in that notion,
tyrannical; for that dependence which they had upon him, who exalts himself
above all that is called GOD, exalted them to their proud contestation with
Princes. It was their Popery therefore, that made them insolent, and their
insolence, that made them odious to Kings.

It has been (ye say) the usual quality of former and later Bishops, to
tyrannize over such as fear them, and to flatter such as they fear: Your
tongues are your own; But, Brethren, if this be their quality, it is your
fault that you will not suffer it to be their property: There are those that
can do this, and more; can tyrannize over those whom they ought to reverence,
and flatter those whom they should not fear.

As for your Pius; should not the Pope have been my Antichrist, I am sure he is
yours; Little reason therefore could you have, to use his testimony against
your own profession. But, Why may we not (you say) use the testimony of
Antichrist, against Antichristian Bishops? Brethren, I understand you not; I
hope you have more grace, then to call ours so: If you have so much of the
Separatist in you, many good hearts will justly grieve to see that ye pretend
to come forth under License; sure you dare not mean, you dare not say, that the
public Government established here by Law, is Antichristian; this were to
strike where you would not; or, if you could be so bold, Authority might
over-see, but would never allow so lawless an affront: If our Bishops be
Antichristian, whence is your Ordination? Good speed may you have, Brethren,
toward Amsterdam.

Full witty, and sound is the inference which you draw from the grounds, which
I give of the Popes unwillingnesse to yield a Divine Right to Bishops; for that
he would have them derive their authority merely from himself: Therefore (say
you) it follows, That they have no more Divine Right, then the Pope: Just; for
the Pope thinks so; pretending his own (false) Right, and disclaiming their
true.

But what is this (I ask) to our Bishops, who profess notwithstanding the
Apostolical, that is, Divine Right of their calling, to hold the places and
exercise of their Jurisdiction, wholly from His Majesty: You answer, [Surely
ours have begun to affect the same exemption from secular power; to make large
and haughty strides, toward an independent Hierarchy.] Where, or wherein,
Brethren? Will any Justice hold it enough to accuse? I challenge your
instances, If you can find an universal guiltiness this way, spare us not; I
shall yield, we cannot suffer too much: But if your exceptions be either none,
(as your silence argues) or particular, why should not you smart for the unjust
branding of a whole Order?

Me thinks you should shame and fear to speak of our affected independence of
Hierarchy, when ye know that an independent parochial Hierarchy (if it could
be worth so high a name) is in public Pamphlets, and open Sermons set a-foote
with much earnestness by those, who would be thought no mean ones in your
fraternity; And when you cannot but know, that the Bishops Bench is openly
challenged in the name of too much dependence upon Sovereignty? Away with these
idle sclanders of your innocent, grave, and modest governors. For Mr Hooker, we
know you love and honor his memory, dearly, nothing of his can be unwelcome to
us; neither doubt we, but that you will be no less edified by his last works,
if they may see the light, then with his first; That man does not look, as if
he meant to contradict his own truths.

YE doubt to be chid for this licentiousness Parag. 4.
of your pen; and so you well may; for it can be no less then a foul sclander
to charge that faction upon whole Episcopacy, which you dare (upon urging)
impute but to a few. The more (ye say) is your misery, that a few Bishops can
put both the Kingdoms into so dangerous a combustion. True; But, if it be your
misery, it is not our sin; Blame the guilty, strike not the innocent: But,
if but a few can do this (ye say) what a stir would they all make, if they
should unite their powers? This is in your own phrase argumentum galeatum; If
a few factious Preachers in our neighbor Pulpits, since the entering of this
Parliament, have kindled such a fire in the City, and Kingdom, what would they
all do, if their seditious tongues were all united?

But now, ye speak to purpose; If but a few were factors for this attempt; how
was it that one of the Episcopal tribe in open Court called the Scottish
design, Bellum Episcopale? Who can forbear to smile at this doughty proof?
Why, Brethren, was that word too big for one man's mouth? Could he not utter it
without help of his fellows? Did they either say, or think it, the more,
because he spoke it? What reason have you to feoffe a private conceit on all?
especally when the words may be capable of a less evil construction, as
referring to the Northern rise of that quarrel, not to our prosecution.

But, where (ye say) were the rest of the peaceable and orthodoxe Bishops the
while? Truly in all likelihood, at home, quietly, in their own Sees; in their
retired studies; without notice of any plots, without any intimation of
dangers; much more without intermedling in any secrets of State, or close
stratagems of disturbance; So as, it was not their love to peace and truth,
that could oppose, what they never could reach to know: Neither is it any fault
of theirs, that the dear and precious name of Episcopacie is exposed to base
and vulgar obloquie. Let those who will needs pour contempt upon the
guiltless, look for a just revenge from him, who has said, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

Still therefore must I take leave to cry, Fie, upon those my Brethren, that
dare to charge faction upon Episcopacie, and withal to deplore the unhappy
mis-cariages of any of our spiritual Fathers, that shall be found guilty of
these woeful broils. What Cyprian would have done upon occasion of so high an
indignity offered by you to that holy function, appears sufficiently in his
Epistle to Rogatianus; Cypr. l. 3. ep. 9.
though no instance can come home to the point; For, let me boldly say, that
since Christianity looked forth into the world, there were never so high, and
base scorns put upon Episcopacie, as there have been by shameless Libellers
within the space of this one year in this Kingdom; yea in this City: God in
his great mercy forgive the authors, and make them sensible of the danger of
his just vengeance.

SECT. II.
What a windy Section have you past, wherein you confess you have striven
for words? Things, you say, shall now follow; Things well worthy to be not
more precious to the Remonstrant, then to every well-minded Christian;
Leiturgie and Episcopacie.

Leiturgie leads the way; We had need to begin with our prayers. I challenged
you for the instances of those many alterations you talked of, in the present
Leiturgie; You answer me, Truly Sir, if we were able to produce no fuller
evidence of this, then you have done of your Jewish Leiturgie ever since Moses
time, we should blush indeed; but if we can bring forth such instances, etc.
Truly Brethren, you could do little, if ye could not crack and boast: the
greatest cowards can do this best; Do not say, what ye can do, but do what ye
say; Put it upon this very issue. For the Leiturgie (ye say) we can bring forth
instances of such alterations as shall prove this present Leiturgie to be none
of that which was confirmed by Parliamentary Acts.

Mark well, Readers, for certainly, in plain English, these men go about to
mock you: The question is of the present Leiturgie, which is pretended to vary
extremely much from that in Queen Elizabeth's days; Now come our braving
Vindicators, and, after all their brags, labor to show that this our present
Leiturgie differs from that in the days of Edward the sixth; and spend one
whole Page, in the particular instances: Is not this pains well bestowed, think
you? have they not hit the bird in the eye? utterly balking what they
undertook, they undertake what no man questioned; and now beforehand crow, and
triumph in these cockle-shels of a famous conquest. But ye lay this for your
Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer. 1^. Eliz.
ground, That the Leiturgie confirmed by our Parliamentary Acts, is the same
which was made and confirmed in the fifth and sixth of Edward the sixth: With
one alteration, or addition of certain Lessons to be used on every Sunday in
the year, and the form of the Letany altered and corrected; and two sentences
only added in the delivery of the Sacrament to the Communicant, and none other
or otherwise; Thus says the Act. Now comes your rare sagacity, and finds
notwithstanding, Queen Elizabeth's Leiturgie varying from the former in many
omissions, in many additions, in many alterations: Wherein, what do ye other
then give the check to a whole Parliament? they say flatly, None other, or
otherwise; you say, The Book is so altered, that the Leiturgie now in use, is
not the same that was established by Act of Parliament: But, be that as it may;
there lies not the question: If Queen Elizabeth's Book did so much differ from
King Edwards; What is that to us? Say, (as you have undertaken) what such huge
difference there is betwixt King James his Book, and Queen Elizabeth's? Now,
your loud vaunts end in flat silence; neither can you instance in any thing,
save some two petty Particles, not worthy of mention; that in the title of
Confirmation, the words For imposition of hands, are added; and, in the Epistle
for Palm Sunday, In, is turned into At: These are all (besides those which I
forespecified) which have so mis-altered the Leiturgie, that it can no more be
known, to be it self, then the strangely-disguised Dames, which were mentioned
in Doctor Halls reproof. Now let the Reader say, who is worthy to wear those
Liveries of Blushes, which, in your Wardrobe of Wit, you have been pleased to
lay up for your friends. But I have not yet said all: If (you say) to these we
should add the late alterations in the use of the Leiturgie, bringing in loud
Music; uncouth, and unedifying Anthems; a pompous superstitious Altar-service,
we think any indifferent eye will say, this is not the Leiturgie established by
Parliament. What mean you, Brethren, thus to delude the Reader? are these
things you mention, any part of the Leiturgie? are they prescribed by any law
of the Church? are they found in any Rubric of the Communion-book? Do not the
allowed Forms of our public Prayers in all Parochial, and some Cathedral
Churches, in Chapels, in houses, stand entirely without these? Why do you
therefore bring in these things, as essential to Leiturgie; In the meet
omission of some whereof, no doubt, some Bishops of England (no less zealously
conscionable, though better tempered, then your selves) may be found to
conspire with you: As for the namelesse Bishop, whom you cite, you must pardon
me, if I did not understand either you, or him; for the words in your Defense,
run, [That the Service of the Church of England is not so dressed, that if a
Pope should come and see it, he would claim it as his own.] Now you report them
to be, That the Service of the Church of England is now so dressed, etc. so as
you cannot blame me if I knew not the meaning or the man; But by this your
description of his preaching it as matter of humiliation to all the Bishops of
this Kingdom, in a day of solemn and national fasting, I perceive it is the
Reverend Bishop of Carlisle whom you thus cited, and whom you have, herein, not
a little wronged; I acquainted that worthy Prelate with the passage, he
disavows the words, and defies the reporters, vehemently protesting, that he
never spoke either those words, or that sense; and to make it good, delivered
me the pretended clause, transcribed out of his notes, with his own hand;
which I reserve by me; no whit sounding that way; but signifying only a
vehement dislike of some innovations, as the turning the Table to an Altar, and
the low crindging toward the Altar so erected; but, as for the Leiturgy or
Service of the Church of England, not a touch of either in his thoughts, or
tongue: Now brethren, learn you hence just matter of private humiliation, for
so foul a sclander of a grave and religious Bishop, and in him, of this whole
Church.

For learned Calvin; if those who profess to honor his name, would have been
ruled by his judgment, we had not had so miserable distractions in the
Church, as we have now cause to bewail; all that I say of him, is, that his
censure of some tolerable fooleries in our holy Service, might well Tolerabiles
ineptiae.
have been forborne in aliena Republica; your vindication is, that he wrote
that Epistle to the English at Francford; Who doubts it? The parties were
proper, the occasion just, but not the censure; Parcius ista, when we meddle
with other men's affairs: I may well be pardoned, In Angloru^ controversia
moderatione^ tenui, cujus me non poenitet. Call. Epist.
if I say that harsh phrase does not answer the moderation which that worthy
Divine professes to hold in the controversy of the English.

AS for that unparalleld Discourse, Parag. 2.
whereon you run so much descant, concerning the Antiquity of Liturgies deduced
so high as from Moses time; you argue that it cannot be, because you never read
it: Brethren, your not omniscient eyes shall see that my eyes are so Lyncean,
as to see you proudly mis-confident; you shall see that others have seen what
you did not; and shall sample that which you termed, unparalleld.

It is neither thank to your bounty, nor praise to your ingenuity, that the
question is halfe-granted by you; but an argument of your self-contradiction;
An order of Divine service you yield, but not a form; or a form, but not
prescribed, not imposed; and for this, you tell us a tale of Justin Martyrs
Leiturgie, and Tertullians Leiturgie, how much to the purpose, the sequel
shall show.

In the former, you grant, that after the Exhortation they all rose, and joined
in prayer; prayer ended, they went to the Sacrament; but, whether these prayers
were suddenly conceived, or ordinately prescribed, there is the question; and
whether that Sacrament were administered in an arbitrary, and various form, me
thinks your selves should find cause to doubt: But, Justin says (to clear
this point) that in the beginning of this Action, the President powered out
prayers, and thanksgiving according to his ability, and the people said Amen.
What ever his ability was, I am sure you have a rare ability in mis-construing
the Fathers; and particularly these testimonies of Justin, and Tertullian.

To begin with the latter; out of him you say, The Christians in those times
did in their public assemblies pray, Sine monitore, quia de pectore; without
any prompter but their own heart. Prove, first, that Tertullian speaks of
public assemblies. Secondly, know that if he did, the place is to your
disadvantage; for (as a late learned Author well urges) would ye have it Author
of the use of public Prayer.
imagined, that the assembled Christians did betake themselves publicly to
their private devotions, each man by himself, as his own heart dictated? this
were absurd, and not more against ancient practice, then (as your This is that
which is ordinarily termed by the^ A Sacrifice of fools, out Eccles. 5. 1.
selves think) piety.

Was it, then, that not the people, but the Minister was left to the liberty of
his expressions? What is that to the people? How did they ere the more pray
without a prompter? How is it more out of their heart, when they follow the
Minister praying out of unknown conceptions, then out of foreknown
prescription? So as, you must be admonished, that your Sine monitore, without a
prompter, is without all color of proof of prayers conceived: your Zephyrus
blows with too soft a gale to shake the foundation of this argument; and indeed
is but a sidewinde to my Heraldus, and the very same blast with your Rigaltius;
though you would seem to fetch them out of different corners; If I give you
your own asking, you have gained nothing: For what would you infer? Christians
prayed for the Emperors without a monitor, as the heathens did not; therefore
they had no forms of Christian prayers: He were liberal, that would grant you
Precantes sumus pro omnibus Imperatoribus; vitam prolixam, imperiu^ securu^,
domu^ tutam, exercitus fortes, senatu^ fidele^, populum probum, orbem quietum.
Tert. Apol. c. 30.
this consequent; when rather the very place shows what the form was, which
the Christians then used; We are praying still for all Emperors, that God would
give them a long life, a secure reign, a safe Court, valiant hoasts, faithful
Counselors, good people, and a quiet world; This was Tertullians Leiturgie,
wherein the hearts of Christians joined without a monitor; It is small
advantage that you will find in my sense of Sine monitore; (not being urged by
any superior injunction) If no injunction, you say, how could it be a
Leiturgie, a commanded, imposed form? You are unwilling to understand, that
the injunction here meant is general, a command to pray for the Emperor, not
a particular charge of the forms enjoined in praying; this was therefore the
praise of their Christian loyalty, that even unrequired, they poured out their
supplications for Princes: Shortly then, after all these pretended senses,
Tertullian will not upon any terms be drawn to your party.

Those other two places of Tertullian and Austine are merely sleevelesse, and
unproving; not making any whit at all more for conceived prayers, then for
prescribed; Who ever made question, whether we might build our prayers upon
our Saviors form? or whether we might vary our prayers with our occasions?
Those Fathers say no more, we no less; Ye dare not say there were no public
Leiturgies in S. Austins time; My Margin was Your cavil in the Margin of your
book, shows you want matter of quarrel; The Suas, which you would have in
stead of Nostras, is a disadvantage to your self: Those are called the peoples
Prayers, which the Church ever had, and shall have; and those were to be looked
on, therefore prescribed, and to be read; there being a clear opposition
betwixt Audirent, and Intuerentur.
conviction enough; which ye touch as an Iron too hot, with an hand quickly
snatched away. Your denial should have drawn on further proofs.

Justin Martyr (though fifty years before Tertullian) follows him in your
discourse; How guiltily you both translate and cite him, an Author of no mean
judgment Justin Mart. Apol. 2. Use of public Prayers.
has showed before me. I shall not therefore glean after his sickle; But
shortly thus, take your ((...)) in your own best sense (for quantum pro virile
potest) what will follow? The word may as well imply all intention of voice,
because the congregation was large. Page 15.
The President prayed, and gave thanks to the utmost of his power; therefore the
Church had then no Leiturgie. What proof call you this? Look back, Brethren, to
your own citation; you shall find Prayers more then once in their Lord's Day
meetings; These latter were the Presidents, the former some other Ministers;
these in the usual set forms, those out of present conception; both stand well
together, both agreeable to the practice, as of these, so of former ages.

BUt whiles I affect over-full answers, I Parag. 3.
feel my self grow (like you) tedious, I must contract my self and them. Your
assertion of the original of set forms of Leiturgy, I justly say is more
Magistrall, then true, and such as your own testimonies confute.

That of the Council of Laodicea is most Conc. Laod. c. 19.
pregnant for set forms, before Arrius or Pelagius looked forth into the world;
wherein mention is expressly made of three forms of Prayer, one by and for the
Catechumeni, the second for the Penitents, the third for the Faithful. You
cannot elude so clear a proof, by saying the Council required prayers for
all these, but did not bind to set forms in prayers; for the same Council
stops your mouth whiles it tells you in plain terms, (...) that the same form
Conc. Laod. c. 8.
or Liturgy of Prayers was to be used morning and evening; And Clemens (though
not the true, yet ancient) tells us, (...), etc. and in the eight Book of his
Constitutions, recites large prayers which were publicly used in the Church.
Let the Reader now judge, where this shuffling lies: The Canon requires one of
these prayers to be in silence; what then? So does our Liturgy require in the
Ordination of Ministers, that in one passage of this solemn act, our prayers
should be secret and silent, yet the rest is no less in set forms.

You might then be ashamed to object want of fidelity to me in the citation of
that testimony, which I but barely quoted in my margin. Neither can you avoid a
self-confutation in your own proofs; There was no noise of the Arrian heresy
till the Nicene Council; The Council of Laodicea (wherein set forms are
notified) was before the Nicene by your own account: Yea, but, say you, the
heresy of Arrius was not just borne at the period of the Nicene Council;
True; but was it borne so long before, as that any Council took notice of it,
before the Nicene? This you dare not affirm: But (for a second shift) the
heresy of Arrius troubled the Church sometime, before the name of Arrius was
borrowed by it; Grant we (upon good authority of Fathers, and Councels) that
the ground of the cursed error of Arrius, concerning the Son of God, was laid
before by others; what is that to the question of set prayers? What is, if this
be not a plain shuffle? Neither is it any other then a mere slurre, wherewith
you pass over the unanswerable pressure of the Laodicean Council, before
mentioned, by cavilling the difference betwixt prescribing, and composing; the
Council is flat in both, and injoynes one and the same Liturgy of prayers:
Certainly, brethren, you find cold comfort at Laodicea; Let us see how you
mend your selves at Carthage. The Fathers Conc. Carthag. 3. c. 23.
there, injoyne that no man in his prayers should name the Father for the Son;
or the Son for the Father; that in assisting at the Altar, their prayers should
be directed to the Father; that no man should make use of any other form then
is prescribed, unless he did first confer with his more learned brethren:
Hence you gather, there was no set form in use in the Church; and no such
circumscribing of liberty in prayer that a man should be tied to a set
Liturgy. The charge was doubtless given upon a particular occasion, which is
buried with time; whether it were ignorance, or heedlesnesse in those African
Priests, that they thus mistook in their Devotions, I cannot determine; But,
why might it not be then, as it is with too many now, that notwithstanding the
Churches prescriptions, men will be praying as they list; and let fall such
expressions as may well deserve censure and restraint? However, that they had
set forms, seems to be sufficiently employed in their own words; Quicunque
sibi preces aliunde describit; for what can that aliunde relate unto but some
former prescription; which, that they had, even in these African Churches, we
need no other testimony then of the Magdeburgenses, who cite Cyprian himself
for this purpose Centur. Magdeb. cent. 3. c. 6.
in his Book de Oratione Dominica; where he tells us that the Priest began
with, Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts; and the Congregation answered, We
lift them up unto the Lord: To which they add, Formulas denique quasdam
precationu^ sine dubio habuerunt; They had then without doubt certain set
forms of prayers; and to suppose, that they had prescribed forms for public
use, which no man should be required to use, it were a strange and uncouth
fancy: Neither need we any better contest for our defense then him, whom you
cite in your margin, learned Cassander, in the just allegation both of this
Council, and the Milevitane, the Canon Council. Milevit. 2.
whereof runs thus; It pleases the Fathers that those prayers, or orisons
which are approved in the Synod, shall be used by all men; And no other shall
be said in the Church, but such as have been made, by some prudent Authors,
or allowed of the Synod; lest perhaps something may be composed by them
through ignorance, or want of care, contrary to the faith.

Say, Readers, is not this a likely testimony to be produced against set
forms of Prayer? What is it then that you would hence infer? First, that
this being (Anno 416.) is the first mention of prayers to be approved or
ratified in a Synod, and the restrayning to the use of them: Grant that it were
so, of prayers to be ratified, or restrained, Is it so of prayers to be used?
Are you not sufficiently convinced herein, by the Synod of Laodicea? It is the
occasion that draws on the Law; till now, this presumption of obtruding private
men's prayers upon the public use of the Church, was not heard of in those
parts; now only was it seasonable for correction.

Secondly, you say the restriction was not such but that it admitted a
toleration of prayers, framed by prudent Divines; no less, then those which
were approved by the Synod; What gain you by that? when these prayers were
said, and not conceived; and so said, that they were put into forms, not left
to arbitrary delivery.

Secondly, the occasion of this restriction (being the prevention of errors in
praying) is so universal both for time and place, that it may well argue this
practice to be most ancient for the original, and worthy to be perpetual for
the continuance. And now, that the Vindicators may see how small cause the
Remonstrant has to be convinced of the latenesse of set forms imposed, (not
till the Arrian and Pelagian Heresies invaded Vid. Author of the use of public
Prayer. page 8, 9.
the Church) let them be pleased to tell the Reader, what those (...), Prayers
prescribed were, whereof Origin speaks in his 6. book against Cells. so
frequently used; and if that word may undergo another sense, what those (...)
can be construed, wherefrom he quotes three or four passages of Scriptures, in
the fourth book against Celsus? Lastly, what the meaning and inference may be,
of that Cent. 3. c. 6. Where we often in our prayer, say, Give us, O Lord
Almighty, give us a portion with thy Prophets, give us a portion with the
Apostles of thy Christ, grant that we may be found in the footsteps of thine
only begotten Son.
which the Centuries allege out of Origin in his 11. Homily upon Jeremy; Vbi
frequenter in oratione dicimus, Da omnipotens, da nobis partem cum Prophetis,
da cum Apostolis Christi tui, tribue ut inveniamur ad vestigia unigeniti tui.
If this be not part of a set form of prayer, and long before Arrius or
Pelagius, I have lost both my aim, and the day; if it be, repent of your
confidence, and recant your error: and grant at last, that out of most
venerable Antiquity, the approvers of Liturgies have produced such evidences
for their ancient use, as your insolent wisdom may jeer, but can never answer.

HOw I admire your goodness! Merciful men, you pardon that fault, which
Parag. 4.
in justice ye could not find, or cannot prove: my confident assertion of the
prayers wherewith Peter and John joined, when they went up into the Temple at
the ninth hour of prayer, that they were not of a sudden conception, but of a
regular prescription, shall be made good with better authority, then your bold
and braving denial; I say the prayers wherewith they joined, not the prayers
which they made; the prayers which they made, were their own, (which wipes So
Hannah made her private prayers in the house of God, 1 Samuel 1. 10.
away your stout instance, in the Pharisee and Publican) but the prayers
wherewith they joined, were public and regular. For in all their Sacrifices
and Oblations, the Jews had their set Service of prayers, which gave life to
those otherwise dead (or, at least, dumb) actions. The noble and learned Lord,
Du-Plessis, the great glory of the Reformed Mor. de Ples. de Missa. l. 1. c. 3.
P. Fagius in Paraphras. Chald. in Lev. 16. and in 23. Du Pless. de Missa and
ejus partibus. l. 1. c. 5.
Church of France, speaks home to this purpose; so does the renowned P. Fagius
the dead Martyr of our Cambridge, besides learned Cappellus, whom we cited in
our late Defense. Confessio olim in sacrificio solennis; ejus, praeterquam in
lege vestigia, in prophetis formulam habemus: In ipsis Iudaeorum libris verba
tanquam concepta extant, quae sacerdos pronunciare solitus, says the said
Mornay Du-Plessis. There was a solemn confession in their sacrifice of old;
whereof, besides that we have certain footsteps in the Law, we have the very
form in (Verba tanquam concepta) the very words as conceived by him.
the Prophets; In the books of the Jews, the very express words are extant,
which the Priest had wont to pronounce. Thus he. And Lyranus well acquainted
with the Jewish practices (as being one of them himself) tells Lyran. in Lev. 16.
us, that the Priest was used to confess in general, all the sins of the
people, as (says he) we are wont to do in the entrance of our Mass. But
Ludovicus Cappellus, the French Lud Cappell. Spic in Act. 3 Whence we may see,
that the prayer for which Peter and John went up to the Temple, was that which
the Jews called (...)
Oracle of Hebrew learning, has those very words, whereat you jeer so often, as
falling from my pen: Ex quibus videre est, orationem cujus causa Petrus and
Johannes petebant Templum, fuisse eam, quae a Iudaeis dicitur (...) quae
respondet oblationi vespertinae lege praescriptae, quae fiebat, ut loquitur
Scriptura, inter duas vesperas; Thus he; whom I beseech you Brethren, laugh at
for company.

Admire with me, Reader, the subtlety of The lesser Oblation; which answered to
the Evening Oblation prescribed by the Law, etc.
this deep exception; Our Savior (I say) prescribed to his Disciples, besides
the Rule, a direct form of prayer; What say my great Challengers to this? The
Remonstrant will have an hard task (say they) to prove from Scripture, that
either John or our Savior gave to their Disciples public Liturgies, or that
the Disciples were tied to the use of this form. Truly the task were as hard,
as the very mention of it is absurd and unreasonable. For shame Brethren, leave
this palpable shuffling; the Remonstrant spoke of a Prayer, ye ask for a
Liturgy; the Remonstrant speaks of prescribing, ye talk of tying; which (till
your Reply) came not so much as into question; It must be a weak sight that
cannot discern your gross subterfuges.

The use that our Savior was pleased to make in his last Supper of the
fashions and words which were usual in the Jewish feasts, is plainly affirmed
not by Cassander only, (whose videtur you please to play upon) but by Paulus
Fagius at large, by Mornaeus, by Cappellus: And if these took it from
Maimonides, who wrote not till a thousand years after Christ; yet, from whom I
beseech you had Maimonides this observation? A man of yesterday may upon good
grounds of authority tell a truth of a thousand years old.

I let pass the mere nonsense wherewith you shut up this Paragraph, as more
worthy of the Readers smile then my confutation; who will easily assume by
comparing the place, how little I meant to fetch a Liturgy from a feast; or
necessity out of an arbitrary act.

TO prove that the Jews had a form of Parag. 5.
Liturgy even from Moses his time, I produced a monument above the reach of
your either knowledge, or censure; a Samaritan Chronicle, now in the hands of
our most learned and famous Primate of Ireland; written in Arabic, translated
into that tongue, out of the Hebrew, as Ios: Scaliger (whose it once was)
testifies; fetching down the story from Moses to Adrians time, and somewhat
below it; out of this so ancient Record, I cited the Postea mortuus est
Adrianus, cujus Deus non misereatur; obiitque cum luctu and magna contritione;
Tempus autem regni, anni sunt 21. (Deus conterat ejus ossa) ita ut computus
annorum ab Adamo ad mortem ejus 4513. men's. 7. Quo tempore etc. abstulit librum
optimum qui penes illos fuit, jam inde a diebus illis tranquillis and
pacificis, qui comprehendebat cantiones and preces sacrificiis praemissas;
Singulis enim sacrificiis singulas praemiserunt cantiones jam tum diebus pacis
usitatas, quae omnia accurate conscripta in singulas transmissa subsequentes
generationes a tempore Legati (Moses sc.) ad hunc usque diem per ministorium
Pontificum Max. Hunc ille librum abstulit, etc. quo libro historia nulla
praeter Pentateuchu^ Mosis antiquior invenitur, etc. Chron. Samaritan.
very words of the Author, which these men would feign mistake as my own;
wherein he mentions a book of the old Liturgy of the Jews, in which were
contained those Songs and Prayers which were used before their sacrifices:
Adding; For before every of their several sacrifices, they had their several
Songs still used in those times of peace; all which, accurately written, were
transmitted to the subsequent generations, from the time of the Legate (Moses)
unto this day, by the ministry of the high Priest. Thus he. This is our
evidence; now let us see your shifts: First, you tell us, Those were only
Divine hymns, wherein there was always something of Prayer. If but thus, we
have what we would; for what are praises, but one kind of prayers; And what
can be more said for a set form of hymns, then of petitions? But, brethren,
ye might have seen in the Authors own words, (which you are loath to see)
Songs and Prayers, which were ever used before their Sacrifices; and were
comprised in that ancient Service Book: See now Reader, whether there be not
something for set Prayers in the Authors own words, which these men would
wittingly outface, and not willingly see.

The Testimony cannot be eluded, now it must be disparaged; [Ioseph Scaliger
had certainly but two Samaritan Chronicles] Who says he had more? I cited but
one, what needed you (but to show the world you can tell something) to talk of
two? What business have we with that shorter Chronicle, which you will needs
draw into mention? Let that be as fond, as your exception is unseasonable;
What is that to us? How else should we have known, that you had taken notice
of a Samaritane Pentateuch, and learned Mr. Sell. dens Marmora Arundeliana? Away
with this poor ostentation; speak to the purpose; What can you say against
that large Samaritan Chronicle, which I produced, turned out of Hebrew into
Arabic, written in a Samaritan Character, and now not a little esteemed by the
great, and eminently judicious Primate, in whose Library it is? Surely, as I
have heard some bold pleaders; when they have feared a strong testimony, pick
quarrels at the face of the witness; so do you, brethren, in this case.
Scaliger himself you say (the former owner) passes this censure upon it, that
though it have many things worthy of knowledge, yet they are crusted over with
Samaritan devices. Who can expect other but that a Samaritan should speak like
himself, when it comes to a difference in Religion? but this is no reason, why
in matters accorded, there should be any distrust: What a Bellarmine writes of
the holy Trinity passes for no less current then the best of our own; If
Ainsworth lived and died a Separatist, yet we dare believe him in his report of
Jewish Antiquities, no less then Broughton, Weems, Drusius. So as this wind
shakes not the authority of this relation.

But, judge (you say) how much credit we are to give to this book for
Antiquity, as far as Moses, which makes no mention of their own original, any
other ways, then, That they came out of Egypt by Moses; A poor and groundless
exception: for that which we allege this Author for, is only the report of a
book containing the forms of prayers used by the Jews since Moses; and as
for the mention of their own Original, it was their glory to fetch themselves
from the first Jewish Patriarks, (as the Samaritan Woman did at Jacobs Well)
neither would they challenge a lower rise; no marvel therefore if they passed
in silence the History of the defection of the ten Tribes; as rather tending
to their own blemish; especially considering, what Josephus reports of their
fashion, That ever when the Jews prospered, they claimed brotherhood of them;
when contrarily, they proclaimed hostility; And what if this Author does only
touch the names of Sampson, Samuel, David, what does this detract from the
credit and validity of his history? So as notwithstanding your frivolous
cavils, we will take leave to make so much of our Samaritan Cronicle, as to
avow it for a noble and ancient proof of that my confident assertion of the
use of Liturgies since Moses.

YOur pretended proof to the contrary, which you so gloriously bring out of
Parag. 6.
your famous Rabbi Moses Maimonides in his Mishneh, will prove but a vain
flourish; and if it work any thing, it will be for my advantage. For what is
it that he says? It is (says he) an affirmative precept, that prayers
should be made to God, every day, etc. Caeterum neque numerus, etc. But neither
the number of those prayers, nor the obligation to this, or that prayer, nor
the certain, and definite time of prayer, is enjoined in the Law: Thus he.
Now, how does that concern us? Who ever defended, that Moses in the Letter of
the Law, had given order for either number, or time, or obligation of
particular prayers of several Israelites? although, under your good favor, we
know that even then there were solemn forms of words, to be used in the
remove and resting of the Arc; and in the solemn benedictions of Israel, and
in the trialls of Jelousie, prescribed Number. 10. 35, 36. Number. 6. 23, 24, 25, 26.
by God himself to the Priests; whereof what can ye make other, then a
shorter kind of stinted Liturgy? Length, or brevitie makes no variance. But
what does this imply other, then that there were of old, prescriptions both of
number, and time, and forms, though not expressed in the Law? particulars
whereof we shall produce in the sequel; such as were not only for the help
of the ignorant, but for the direction of the Priests themselves, and for the
better devotion of the people. That Ezra therefore and the men of the great
Synagogue, made use of those eighteen forms of prayers, or benedictions,
prescribed by them so long ago, it argues nothing, that the like forms were
not in set practice before their times; so as your Maimonides (after all your
proritation) holds no other then fair terms with our Samaritan Chronicle.

And would learned Capellus (think you) make himself so merry at the view of
this passage? surely, brethren, it would be at your fond and ridiculous
mis-prison, in playing not upon my words, but your own idle fancy.

I cited Capellus for the forms of prayer Capell. spicil. in Act. 2.
used at the Minchah, and other Sacrifices, which you cannot gainsay, but that
I should infer from him, that the Jewish Liturgies were as ancient as Moses;
it is your mere dream, not my assertion: It would become you to make more
conscience of your suggestions. As for the marginall note out of Buxtorfius, it
is worthy of but a marginall touch; What such abuse were it to say, that
Maimonides took those thirteen Articles of his Creed, from the Jews
devotion; when the same Author confesses they had a being before; but were by
Rabbi Moses Bar Maimon redacted into this Order, wherein they stand? Surely,
that ever since Ezra's time they had a known form of prayer, is confessed
clearly by the same Rabbin, in his Misnah, as we have formerly seen; and,
what place could be more proper for the seat of a Creed? But, to meet a little
with your crowing insultation, in this passage of the age of the Jewish
Liturgy, what say you to that express testimony of Paulus Fagius, (a man,
one of the best P. Fagius in Chal. Parap. Levit. 16.
acquainted with Hebrew learning, of all ours in his age) who upon the Chaldee
Paraphrase of Leviticus, Chap. 16. in the words [Et confiteatur super eum] has
thus, Forma confessionis qua tum usus est summus Pontifex, secundum Hebraeorum
relationem, haec fuit, etc. The form of confession which the high Priest
(then, in the first times of the Law) used, according to the relation of the
Hebrews, was thus, O Lord, thy people of the house O Domine, peccarunt, iniqua
egerunt, etc.
of Israel have sinned, they have done wickedly, they have grievously
transgressed before thee; I beseech thee now, O Lord, forgive their sins, and
iniquities, and transgressions, wherein thy people, the house of Israel, have
sinned, and done wickedly, and transgressed before thee? And when the said
High Priest Et cum offerret juvencum pro peccato.
offered a Bullock for a sin offering, then he said in this manner, O Lord, I
have sinned, I have done wickedly, and have grievously transgressed; I beseech
thee now, O Lord, be merciful to those sins, and iniquities, and grievous
transgressions wherein I have sinned, done wickedly, and transgressed against
thee. And when he should offer the other Bullock, he used much what the same
form, adding, I, and my house, and the Sons of Aaron, thy holy people, have
sinned, etc. I beseech thee now, O Lord, pardon the sins, and iniquities, and
transgressions, etc.

This triple confession did the High Priest solemnly use, in the feast of
Expiation; And what the form of the high Priests prayer was when he appeared
before the Lord, the said Fagius shows us out of the Thalmud. Ubi supra.


Besides this, there was a set form (and that somewhat large) of prayer and
benediction, which the Master of the Family amongst the Jews, was privately
wont to use in his holy feasts; which the same Author elsewhere in his Chaldee
Paraphrase, upon Deuteronomy. 8. fully expresses; adding withal, (which you were
pleased to make sport with, as mine) Verisimile est Christum quibusdam P.
Fagius in Chal. Parap. Deuteronomy. 8.
quae in his precibus continentur, usum fuisse; It is very likely, that our
Savior made use of some passages which are contained in these prayers: And
Paulus Burgensis tells us, it was an old Tradition amongst the Jews, that when
they had eaten the Paschall Lamb, they sung the Psalms, from Laudate pueri
Dominum, to Beati immaculati, that is, from the 113th. to the 119th. adding,
Verisimile hos a Domino decantatos: It is likely, that these were sung by our
Savior in his last Supper.

By this time the Reader sees there is somewhat more ground for a set form of
prayer amongst the ancient Jews, then your deep Rabbinisme would condescend
unto. I have dwelt somewhat longer in this point, because I see the chief
pride of your Vindication lies in this passage of Jewish skill; wherein I well
see with whose heifer you have ploughed; and what name you might add (if there
were room) to your learned Acrosticks; but when all is done, I am deceived, if
you may not put your gains in your eye.

FOr Christian Liturgies, your like confidence Parag. 7.
challenges the Remonstrant, to produce any Liturgy that was the issue of the
first three hundred years: I name those under the style of James, Basil,
Chrysostom; as ancient, though spuriously interserted; You tell me of those of
Peter, Matthew, Mark, etc. (though Peter's was the same with Marks) and cite
learned Rivetus, who censures these as zizania; the tares, which the enemy
sowed whiles the husbandman slept; Quite beside the cushion: Those were such,
as all wise Christians will confess (with St. Austin) were, A sutoribus
fabularum, sub Apostolorum nomine conscripti; Broached by some cogging
merchants, under the name of the Apostles: But these other were generally, both
for matter and manner, holy; though interspersed with some passages that might
argue a later hand; whiles others of them bear such age, as that they are
cited by ancient Fathers, for authentic parts of the formerly received
Liturgies: shortly then, to produce those entire Liturgies, which were in the
first three hundred years, is as unreasonable to demand, as impossible to
perform; How many noble monuments, besides these, have perished, as swallowed
up by the devouring jaws of time, which it were a vain hope to revoke? But
that there were such Liturgies in use, with those Churches, within the time
required, I doubt not to evince; what else, I beseech you, was that
Euchologium, which Origin (before that time) cites? whence were those passages
of interchanged devotion, which the Centuriators themselves instance in, from
Cyprian, fore-alledged by me? I dare boldly say, ye cannot answer these
demands, and not yield your cause: To which let me add in the next succeeding
age, those (...), which Eusebius tells us, (...). Eusebius. de vita Constable. li. 4.
c. 17.
that Constantine made use of in his Court: Our learned Christophorson renders
it thus; Constitutas cum universo Ecclesiae coetu, preces reddebat; so as
(notwithstanding your colorable proof in your Defense, of the frame of a
prayer enjoined to the soldiers by that good Emperor) it is clear enough
that, in those times, there was a set form of Liturgy, enjoined to the use of
the Church. Learned Morney, an Author past exception, shall attest with me;
who, in that elaborate, and accurate Treatise of the Mass and the parts
thereof, dividing that divine Service, according to the distribution of the
Laodicean Synod, (which you would feign have eluded by a pretense of no
prescription of forms) into that of the Catechumeni, that of the Penitents,
that of the Faithful, has thus; Hic jam mill Morn. de Pless. lib. de Miss.
cap. 5.
fidelium locus, cujus ab oratione generali exordium, etc. This then is the
place of the service of the faithful; whose entrance was always with a
general prayer, for all the world, for the state of the Church, for the
necessities both public and private. The Grecians call this a Letanie, or
supplication, etc. Quae autem orationis illius forma fuerit ab incunabulis
Ecclesiae, ad hoc usque seculum custodita, ex coaevis authoribus perspicuum:
What the form of that prayer was, which has been kept, even from the cradle
of the Church unto this very age, it is apparent out of the Authors that lived
in those times. Thus that famous Lord, Du Plessis; who seconds his own
judgment by pregnant authorities from Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine; to
which, out of the fear of tediousness, I remit my Reader. By all which it is
(I hope) made evident enough, that, before ever Pelagius, or Arrius infected
the world, prescribed forms of public prayers were commonly used in the
Christian Church. It is indeed more then an implication, which the Remonstrant
drew from the Ancyran Synod, The Presbyter that had once sacrificed, was
forbidden, (...), Council. Anc.
to offer, to preach, to officiate in priestly administrations: What is the
Ministers employment but the Word, Sacraments, and Prayers; all three here
inhibited, and these last, under the name of Liturgies?

And that these Anti-remonstrants may not delude the Reader with an opinion,
that any either mistake, or fraud will follow upon the ambiguitie of the word;
it may please the Reader, to take notice of what these carpers will not see; a
plain expression in my translated words, of Liturgies, or Ministrations. It is
great pity that the Remonstrant did not know so well as these deep heads,
that (...) is a word of both various, and general use: They needed not to send
him to Zonaras, or Balsamon, for this parcel of Phylologie, which he could
have taught them nearer home, out of Saint Paul himself, and Saint Luke; in
whom they shall find [(...)] applied to Zacharias Luke 1.
his sacrificing; and (...), which our last translation turns Vessels of the
ministry: Heb. 9. 21.
yea, the very collection of Alms is Saint Paul's (...) and Epaphroditus is his
1 Cor. 9. 12.
(...) What use then was there of this wast piece of Grammar-learning, when the
Remonstrant himself interpreted Liturgies by Ministrations?

I Extolled the due use of conceived prayer; even Parag. 8.
this does not please, but invites suspicion rather; well might I complain of
this sullenness and morositie.

If the quarrels that you picked with the both Original and Confirmation of our
Liturgy prove unjust, you may well allow me to call your arguing about it, no
other then wrangling. For the Original, I deduced it from ancient models, not
Roman, but Christian; you except at the terms of pretended opposition, and
still could fetch sparks to fling in the face of him, who by the suffrages of
unquestionable Divines has showed the just sense of the true visibilitie of
the Roman Church. Truly, brethren, this is merely to bark where you have no
power at all to bite. What faculty you have in flinging sparks I know not, but
I am sure, if you blow this coal hard, the sparks will fly in your eyes. The
question is so thoroughly settled by those (which you spitefully call begged)
suffrages, that no wit of man can find but a probable color to revive it.

Feign would you have something to say to Doctor Hall, if ye knew what it were;
In his book of the old Religion, he cites a speech of Luthers; that this good
friend of Rome says, Under the Papacy is true Christianity, yea the very
kernel of Christianity: What of this? Did Doctor Hall feign that Luther said
so? Or do these men fear that Luther is turned Papist? Compare this (you say)
with that the Bishop of Salisburie says, in his begged suffrage, who thus,
speaks; That the Church of Rome is no more a true Church, then an arrant whore
is a true wife to her husband. Well: Compare Luther with the Bishop of
Salisburie; two worthy Divines, what then? They will, I hope, prove good
friends, and Doctor Hall with them both; whose own suffrage has bin, and is
no less peremptory against Rome, then this which he begged; A married woman,
though she be a close harlot, is yet a wife; and though she be not true to her
husbands bed, yet she is truly his wife, till she belegally divorced: Such is
the state of the Roman Church, to Doctor Davenant, and Doctor Hall, and all
other Orthodox Divines. Where now is your charity in raising such groundless
intimations against your innocent brethren? Tell the Reader, I beseech you,
where that scorn lies, which you say is cast upon you in this passage of my
Defense. I justly boast of those our Martyrs and Confessors, which were the
composers of our Liturgy; You would feign counterpoize them with some holy
Martyrs and Confessors of the same reformed Religion, that opposed it, even to
persecution; and tell us of the troubles of Frankford. Pardon me, brethren;
some Confessors you may talk of, but Martyrs ye can name none: One, who was
the most vehement of all those opposers, I knew to live and dye in a quiet
submission to the Liturgy established; none of them suffered death for
Religion: they might be holy men, and yet might square in their opinions; even
betwixt Paul and Barnabas there was a (...). My praise of our Martyrs tended
not to the disparagement of any other.

AS for that slurre which your answer seemed to cast upon the Edict of King
Paragr. 9.
James, and our Parliamentary Acts, that they are not unalterable, as the Laws
of the Medes and Persians; your so deep protestation clears you in our
thoughts; I have charity enough to believe you; but I must tell you, that
speech might have a good heart, but it has an ill face; let it pass with
favor: and as for those cheerful expressions which you confess you have
taken liberty to make use of, in the passages of your book, you will pardon
me, if they be entertained with as cheerful answers: Tertullian, shall be
seconded by Horace, Ridentem dicere verum, Quis vetat? Let those laugh that win.

For your Quaeres; It seems you think I am merry too soon, in receiving
them with so sarcasticall a Declamation: Your project is of the altering of our
Liturgy; I tell you seriously, if you drive at a total alteration (as your
words seem to import) your quaere is worthy of no better reception then
scorn: For, that any private person should (as of his own head) move for the
entire change of a thing, established by so sacred authority, and such firm
and full Laws, can be no better then a bold and ridiculous insolence. It was
truly told you, that if you intended only a correction of some inconvenient
expressions, no doubt it would be considered of, by wiser heads then your
own; whereby I meant, that honorable and reverend Committee, to which this
great care was, by public assent, referred; you straight suspect a design to
gain upon the Parliament; and, by a pretended shadow of alteration, to prevent
a real and total reformation. Take heed, brethren; lest you heedlesly wrong
them whom you profess to honor, and we with you: Is the Parliament (think
you) so easy to be gained upon by pretended shadows? Will those solid
judgments be likely to be swayed by colors? Why do you cast that aspersion
upon them, to whom ye say you have presented these considerations; and to
whose grave wisdoms we do no less humbly submit? That God, who sits in the
assembly of the Judges of the earth, will, we hope, so guide the hearts of
those great, and prudent Peers and Commons, that they shall determine what may
conduce most to peace, and godly uniformitie. But sure, brethren, you could not
imagine, that by those wiser heads, we should mean our own; when you compare
your own designs and success, with our plain credulity, and late
un-thriving proceedings. Enjoy your winnings without our envy, not without our
pity of the poor Church of England, which will, I fear, too late rue your
prevalence.

THe alteration of the Liturgy sent into Paragr. 10.
Scotland is a business utterly unconcerning us: whatever unhappy hands were
in it, would God they had been prevented by some seasonable Gout, or Palsy;
in the report of the alteration made of the Liturgy in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's time, I fear, you do not well agree either with truth or with your
selves, if we compare this passage with your first entry into this large
Section; let the scanning of it be left to the Readers better leisure: as not
worthy to retard our way. Doctor Tailor (whom you are pleased seriously to
honor with the titles of my Ironie) has made good amends, belike, for the
praise he gave to our Liturgy which he helped to compose, in his censure of a
Bishops License, and the Priestly robes; the one whereof (you say) he called
the mark of the Beast, the other a Fools coat: But, what if the strange
variety of Popish vestments, seemed to that holy Martyr, ridiculous? What if to
take a license to preach from the hands of a Popish Bishop, seemed to him no
better then to receive the mark of a Beast? what is that to us? what to the
cause? Were these tenets erroneous, is this sufficient to enervate his
testimony, for the allowance of that Letanie, which he made his last prayer at
his parting with his dear consort? And for the free use whereof he blessed
that God to whom he was sending up his soul? Were it a good ground of
judgment, that he, who once erres, can never say true? But, for this censure
of the good Martyr, let those that feel the smart of it complain.

Let us descend (since you will have it so) to the re-examination of those your
reasons, which enforce your desired alteration: First, it symbolizeth with the
Popish Mass: I say, neither as Mass, nor as Popish: you disprove me in
neither, neither indeed can do. Could you instance, This prayer is
Superstitious, that Idolatrous, this Heretical, that Erroneous, you might have
just reason to except at any touch of our symbolizing with them; But, if the
prayer be good, and holy, why should I more refuse it, as coming from a
Papists mouth, then I would make use of a vicious prayer coming from the best
Protestant? Where I said, If the Devil confess Christ to be the Son of God,
shall I disclaim the truth, because it passed through a damned mouth? You
answer, But you know Sir, that Christ would not receive such a confession from
the Devils mouth, nor Paul neither, Act. 16. True, in respect of the person
confessing, not of the truth confessed: As it came from an evil spirit, our
Savior, and St. Paul had reason to refuse it; but neither of them would
disclaim the matter of that truth, which was so averred. There is great
difference betwixt the words of a foul spirit, and a faulty man; but if you
will needs make a parallel, it must be personal: Christ would not allow a
Devil to confess him; we will not allow a Popish sacrificer to usurp our
good prayers; but if my Savior would not dis-allow that I should make use of
the good Confession of an evil spirit, much less would he dislike that I
should make use of that good prayer, which was once the expression of an evil
man: And yet these were not such, being taken from the composures of holy men,
and ill places; so as this is no other, then to take up gold mis-laid in a
channel, which could not impure it: you may well ask why it was laid there;
you have no reason to ask why a wise man should take it up: Your question
therefore; What need we go to the Roman Portuise for a prayer, when we can
have one more free from jealousies in another place; might have been moved to
those Worthies, which gathered this pile of devotion, who would easily have
answered you, that your jealousy is causeless, whiles the prayers themselves
are past exception; but can with no color of reason be charged upon us, who
take holy prayers from good hands, not needing to enquire whence they had them.

YOur second reason is as forcelesse, as your first. Our Liturgy was composed
(you Paragr. 11.
say) into this form on purpose to bring the Papist to our Churches; that
failing, there is no reason to retain it. The argument fails in every part:
First, our Liturgy was thus composed on purpose, that all Christians might
have a form of holy devotion, wherein they might safely, and comfortably join
together, both publicly and privately, in an acceptable service to their God;
and this end, I am sure, fails not in respect of the intention of the
composers, however it speed in the practice of the users of it. Secondly, there
is no reason that where the issue of things fails, the good intention of the
agent should be held frustrate, or his act void: Our end in preaching the
Gospel, is, to win souls to God; if we prevail not, shall we surcease, and
condemn our errand as vain? But here, I say, the project sped; for till the
eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth, there was no Recusant. You tell me, It was
not the converting power of the Liturgy, but the constraining power of the
Law, that effected this: But, brethren, what constraining power was of any use,
where there was no Recusant? Every constraint implies a reluctation, here was
none: If then our Liturgy had no power of converting to our Churches, yet it
had no operation of averting from them. What the Popes negotiations were with
Queen Elizabeth, at this time, imports nothing; I am sure I have those
Manuscript Decisions of the Jesuitish Casuists, which first determined it
unlawful to join with our assemblies; till which our Liturgy had so good
effect, that those, who differed from us in opinion, were not separated in our
devotion. But how am I mistaken? That which I boasted of, as the praise, is
objected to me as the reproach of our divine service. What credit is this to
our Church (you say) to have such a form of public worship, as Papists may,
without offense, join with us in, etc. Or, How shall that reclaim an erring
soul that brings their bodies to Church, and leaves their hearts still in
error? I beseech you, brethren, what think you of the Lords Prayer? Is that a
perfect platform of our devotion, or is it not? Tell me then, what Christian
is there in the world, of what nation, language, sect soever, (except the
Separatist only) will refuse to join with their fellow Christians in that
form of prayer? And, What credit is it to our Christian profession to have
such a form of public prayer, as Papists, Grecians, Moscovites, Armenians,
Jacobites, Abassines, may, without offense, join with us in? I had thought you
would have looked for the reclamation of erring souls by the power of
preaching? Here is no unteaching or confutation of errors, no confirmations of
either Doctrines, or Uses in the forms of our prayers: And if I should ask
you how many you have reclaimed by your conceived prayers, you would not, I
fear, need to spend too much breath in the answer.

When I therefore impute the rare gain of souls to the want or weakness in
preaching, you think to choke me by an exprobration of the fault of your
Governors: Let the Bishops see how they will clear their souls of this sin,
who, having the sole power of admitting Ministers into the Church, have
admitted so many weak ones, and have rejected so many faithful, able
Preachers, for not conforming to their beggarly rudiments: Let those whose
guiltiness finds themselves galled with this crimination, fly out in an
angry answer; but if there be those, who have been conscionably careful not
to admit them that are not competently (...) not to eject any peaceable, and
conscionable Divine, for mere matter of ceremony, how injuriously have you
fastened upon them other men's delinquences? although it is not unpossible, that
men may be able Preachers, and yet turbulent; and there may be ceremonial
rites, neither theirs, nor beggarly.

You are deceived, brethren, it is not our Liturgy that has lost any; too
many have lost themselves by a mis-taught prejudice against our Liturgy: as
for the mis-catholick part, tell me, I pray you, whether is it more likely that
a staggering Papist will rather join with a Church that uses a Liturgy, or
one that has none? With a Church that allows some of their wholesome prayers,
or that which rejects and defies all, though never so holy, because theirs? And
for our own, surely, if our acute Jesuits had no keener arguments, then this
you bring, we should be in small fear to lose Proselytes; For what weak
Protestant could not easily reply, The Church of Rome was ancient, but yours
is new; that was orthodox, this false: The service was not yours, but borrowed
and usurped from better hands; we make use of it (as we may) in the right of
Christianity, not in any relation to you, and your errors? So much for you
and your Jesuit in the second reason.

YOur third Reason is grounded upon stumbling blocks, it is no marvel if it
Paragr. 12.
fall: Those, you say, are laid by the Liturgy; and I say, removed by many: So
ye know they are by Hooker, Abbot, Hutton, Morton, Burges, Covell, and I know
not how many others; amongst the rest I stumbled upon a blind man, whose
inward sight abundantly supplied the want of his bodily eyes; who has in many
of those points given, in my opinion, very clear satisfaction; but sure you
could not suppose me so weak, as to imagine that his lack of eyes could exempt
him from error; although diverse of your exceptions are (if they were worth our
insisting upon) more groundless then his tenets; But whiles I allowed many of
his passages, I never meant to justify all: It is far from me to excuse, or
patronize other men's Paradoxes. We know the old distinction of Scandals, taken,
and given; if there be any danger of the latter, it is (I say) under careful
hands to remove it; and, however it pleases you to fall into choleric
comparisons, perhaps those hands which you slight, may not be the least
active.

To the fourth, which is the Idolizing of the Liturgy, I say truly,
Separatists abhor it for such; never true Protestant adored it for such. Show
us the man that ever worshipped the Service-booke, that we may wonder at that
uncouth Idolatry: Show us the man that holds it the only worship of God in
England, as you unjustly pretend.

I tell you of some others that stick not to say, Too many do injuriously make
an Idol of preaching: (Why should you hope I am not serious in affirming so
undoubted a truth?) yet we may not think of abandoning it: Even, in cool
blood the argument holds firm, without equalizing one with the other. Some
have made an Idol of their silver and gold, must I therefore cast away this
metal? You needed not fear that I would speak ought to the derogation from
my own profession; But if I compare Gods ordinance of prayer, with his
ordinance of preaching, and this individual Liturgy, with that individual
Sermon, I hope there is no danger in that collation.

TO the fifth, The great distaste which these public prayers meet withal, is
truly lamentable, Paragr. 13.
and the effect of that distaste, separation: yet more? Let those mis-zealous
men who have infused these thoughts into well-meaning souls see how they will
answer it in that great day, to the Judge of the quick and dead; surely, if the
case were mine, I should fear it would fall heavy upon my soul; for, if it
be granted, that there are diverse passages in our Liturgy faulty, and worthy
of correction, yet no wise enemy can say, they are so heinous, that they bar
all Communion: Did they contain heresy, or blasphemy, we could but separate
from their use; now, their separation can no more be without our pity, then
without their own sin: Your argument hence inferred, that the partition wall
of our offensive Liturgy should be removed, because some brainsick men (for
that title is here merely your own, not mine) are scandalized thereby, will no
less hold, if this our Liturgy were either altered, or abolished: for, are
there not thousands that profess to be no less scandalized with any set
forms whatsoever? So then, if we have any prescribed, or stinted devotions at
all, the partition wall stands still; and if that should be demolished, how
many more, and more considerable thousands do ye think, would be scandalized
with the want of those holy forms, whereto they have been so long, and so
beneficially inured? Here is therefore a scandal on both parts, unavoidable;
and it will be our wisdom and piety, to fall upon the least. You say, ye
think, nay, you know that some few Prelates, by their over-rigorous pressing
of the Service-booke, and Ceremonies, have made more Separatists, then all the
Preachers disaffected to the Ceremonies in England: I examine not the truth of
your confident assertion; but will you to distinguish betwixt causes and
occasions: The rigor of those few Prelates might be the occasion; but the
mis-perswasions of those disaffected Preachers were the causes of this woeful
separation: Both might unhappily concur to this mischief; but those more,
who are the direct and immediate agents in so bad a service.

YOur last Reason is so slightly enforced, Paragr. 14.
that it merits rather pity then refutation; I do justly aver that, There
is no reason why difference in Liturgies should breed disunion between
Churches; or why union in religion should bind us to the same Liturgies;
distinguishing (as I ought) betwixt Essential points, and mere outward
Formalities. How faintly you reply, that, [It is true, every difference in
Liturgies does not necessitate a disunion of Churches: But here the difference
is too large to be covered with a few fig leaves!] Grant it to be larger then
it is; is it yet Essential? The question is not, what may cover our
differences, but what may disunite our Churches? It is not forms of Liturgies,
but matter of obstinate and fundamental error, that can draw on such an
effect: Tell not me therefore, or your Reader, of some Ceremonies of ours, that
will not down with other reformed Churches; when ye may, as good cheap,
hear of some fashions of theirs, which will not down with us: It is good
reason, that as we give, so we should take liberty in things indifferent;
without any reciprocal dislike. As for precedence of time in our Liturgy, and
of dignity in our Church, they may well have this operation with us, that our
Liturgy could not conform to that which had no being; and that other Churches
should rather conform to ours, which was ever noted for more noble, and
eminent. You desire not to eclipse the glory of this Church, as you profess;
yet you are willing to over-shadow it somewhat darkely; whiles you can say, Our
first reformation was only in Doctrine, theirs in Doctrine and Discipline too:
wherein you are double-faultie; first, in imputing a defect to our Church, most
unjustly, in the extent of our Reformation. What? Was there no Reformation but
in matter of Doctrine? None in matter of Practice? None in Idolatrous or
Superstitious rites? None in offensive Customs? None in corruption of
Government? None in laws Ecclesiastical? What call you eclipsing, if this be
none? Secondly, in imputing that to the reformed Churches as their perfection,
which is, indeed, their unwilling, and forced defect: Reformation implies the
renewing of a form that once was; now, show us, if you can, where ever in the
world, that form of Discipline (whose erection you applaud to some neighbor
Churches) found place, before it was in this last age provisionally taken up,
by those, who could not be allowed, with the liberty of true religion, to
enjoy their former government? As for the comparison you are pleased to
mention, betwixt the Liturgies of the reformed Churches, and those of other
Christians, Grecians, Armenians, etc. wherein you say, If you should set down
what you have read in the Liturgies of those Churches, you believe the
Remonstrant would blush for intimating, there is as much reason to conform to
their Liturgies, as those of the reformed Churches: I must tell you, it is of
your own making, neither did ever fall from my pen; I do blush indeed, but it
is to see your bold mis-takings, and confident obtrusions of things never
spoken, never meant: I do not mention a conformity to their Liturgies, as
equally good; but only ask, Why we should be tied to the forms of one
Church, more then another, as those who are entire within our selves, and
equally free from obligations to any; so as you shut up your first quaere with
a mere cavil, and the Reasons whereby you indevoured to back it, are utterly
reasonlesse.

YOur second quaere is to seek of so much Paragr. 15.
as any good pretense of reason, yea of sound authority; Whether the first
reformers of Religion did ever intend the use of a Liturgy further then to be
an help in the want, and to the weakness of the Ministers? For first, have
they ever professed their whole and sole intentions, or have they not? If not,
how come you to know what they never expressed? If they have, why have you
suppressed it? Secondly, it is obvious to every common understanding, that
there were other reasons besides this, of framing set forms of public
Liturgies; as, The uniformitie of Divine services in every national Church,
the opportunity of the better joining together of all hearts in common
devotions, the better convenience of fixing the thoughts upon the matter of a
fore-knowne expression: So as this, which you have so groundlesly intimated,
cannot be imagined to be the only reason of prescribed Liturgies. Tell me, I
beseech you, what think you of our Saviors Epitome of a Liturgy, the Lords
Prayer? for certainly it was no other; a form of prayer enjoined by divine
authority: Was that only intended to be an help in the want, and to the
weakness of the Ministers? Was it not prescribed for the help of the devotion
of all disciples? Your instances are (if it might be) poorer then your
assertion. The 23. Canon of the 4th. Council of Carthage ordaines, Ut nemo
Patrem nominet pro Filio, etc. In a care to prevent the dangerous mis-prisons
of some ignorant Priests in Africa, in mis-naming the sacred persons in the
Trinity, it charged them not to mis-apply the terms; Therefore all prescribed
forms of prayer are only intended to supply wants, or weaknesses, of
Ministers: A stout inference, and irresistible. The composers of the Liturgy
for the French Church at Frankford tell us, Hae formulae inserviunt tantum
rudioribus; nullius libertati praescribitur: These forms serve only for the
ignorant sort; not prescribing to any man's liberty. What mean you, brethren,
to urge so improbable a proof? First this was but a particular congregation,
and therefore of no use or validity for the practice of the whole Church:
Secondly, these prayers, which they set forth, were only for the private use
of Christians; for I hope you will not imagine, that when they say [rudioribus
tantum inserviunt, they serve only for the more rude and ignorant sort of
people,] that they herein meant to point out the Ministers; so as your very
allegation confutes your selves, and seconds me. Your following inforcement in
this Paragraph fails of sense, much more of reason; and does but beg what it
cannot evince. You tell me of thousands, who desire to worship God with devout
hearts, that cannot be easily persuaded that these set forms, (though never
so free from just exception) will prove so great an help to their devotion; I
tell you of many more thousands then they, and no less devoutly affected, that
bless God to have found this happy, and comfortable effect, in the fore-set
prayers of the Church. Neither does this plead at all against the use of
present conception, whether in praying, or preaching; or derogate any thing
from that reverent and pious esteem of conceived prayer, which I have formerly
professed: Surely, I do from my sold honor both; I gladly make use of both,
and praise God for them as the gracious exercises of Christian piety, and the
effectual furtherances of salvation: there is place enough for them both; they
need not justle each other: And, if experience had not made good this truth of
mine to many, the most eminent Divines of these later times (eminent, I mean,
not more for learning, then strict piety) why would they in their prayers,
both after, and especially before their Sermons, have confined themselves to a
set form of their own making, without the variation of any one clause, as I
can abundantly instance? Certainly, they wanted not that freedom of either
spirit, or tongue which is challenged by meaner persons, but did purposely hold
themselves to the usual conceptions, wherewith their thoughts, and the peoples
ears were best acquainted.

As for the difference which is pretended in the use of Liturgies in other
reformed Churches, which you say do use Liturgies, but do not bind their
Ministers to the use of them, it will prove no better then a mere Logomachie.
In this point, if we be understood, we shall not differ: If, as you
explicate your selves in the sequel, out of the Canons and Rubric both of the
Dutch, and Genevian Churches, you mean only, that the Ministers were not so
tied up to those prescribed forms, that they might not at some times, and upon
some occasions, make use of their own conceptions, you have herein no
adversary: Doubtless, all Christian Divines have ever had that liberty in all
the Churches that have professed the name of Christ; neither ought it, neither
can it be denied to any, either of theirs, or ours: All allegations to this
sense, might well have been spared; we shall willingly concur with you,
both in opinion, and practice: But, if by this [not binding to the use of a
Liturgie] you understand either an arbitrary power not in use in any Liturgy
at all, or an absolute release from any whatsoever usage of their
publickly-prescribed forms, and a wilful rejection of them, as either unfit
or unlawful, because set and stinted; none of your cited Authorities, no
practice of any well governed Church will countenance so strange a Paradoxe: In
this Calvin fights directly against you, whiles he orders, Ut certa illa
extet, a qua pastoribus discedere Calvin Epist. to the Protector, etc. prius
citat.
non liceat: That there should be a certain form, from which it may not be
lawful for Ministers to depart: The contradiction whereunto, alleged out of
your namelesse Liturgy, of Formulae pro arbitrio, I leave to your own
reconciling.

As for the Lutheran Churches, though they have more superfluity then want,
yet why they should be excluded out of the List of the Reformed, I know no
reason; since, if all Protestant Churches (which is the usual
contradistinction from Popish) come under that style, these are wont to
challenge the deepest share in that denomination: Neither is it out of any
disrespect to the Churches reformed (as your charity would feign suggest) that
I say, they are but a poor handful in comparison of the world of Christians
abroad; (I have ever honored them, no less then your selves) but in regard of
the paucitie of their Professors; Their value is no whit the less, because
their number is so. One spark of a Diamond may be worth large piles of
Marble: But I might well argue, that in a point; wherein no judicious man can
place an error, there can be no just reason that we should abandon the
received practice of all the Christian Churches upon earth, for the late
institution of a few: If herein I mis-judge, I am willing to be convinced.

THe Rubric of King Edward the sixth, Paragr. 16.
agreeing with the liberty given by diverse Ordinances, at this day, of omitting
(upon some great occasions) part of the Liturgy enjoined, makes nothing for
the proof of the proposition, supposed in your Quaere, [That the Reformers of
Religion did never intend the use of a Liturgy, further, then to be an help
in the want, or to the weakness of a Minister:] It will be an hard task to
make these two other then inconsequent: You tell me of the practice of some
stiff Ordinaries, that have denied this liberty; and plead, that what some
Ordinaries have voluntarily yielded, you cannot be blamed to desire, as a
favor from the high Court of Parliament: It is not for me to return the
answer of my Superiors; but I cannot but put you in mind, that there is a
vast difference betwixt an act of occasional indulgence, and a constant
claim; betwixt a particular dispensation, and an universal rule: Further then
this, I prescribe not, but obey. However the state of Homilies and Liturgies
be much different, these latter having been, even from the Primitive times,
prescribed to the common usage of the Church, which the former offers not to
challenge; yet I granted, that, If we did utterly abridge all Ministers of the
public use of any conceived prayer, on what occasion soever, the argument
might hold force against us. You tell me of some men that have sacrilegiously
done so: I send you to those some men for your answer: The commands and
practices of the Church of England are within the task of my Defense: Let
private men speak for themselves. From the Deske you leap into the Pulpit,
and tell us, that your argument is as strong against limiting in Prayer, as
limiting in Preaching; wherein you are unwilling to know, that our Church
allows equal freedom in both; Who that has sat within the report of our
Pulpits, can but say, that our Ministers do there ordinarily pray, as freely
as they preach? I pray God they may do it holily and discreetly in both:
Whiles they are allowed this freedom in their Pulpits, what inconvenience can
it be to be limited to solemn, public (but sacred) forms in their Deske? We
allow both, you would rob us of one, where is the sacrilege?

So then, in all this eager passage, your Reader sees what fearful venies you
give to your own shadow; for certainly, you have here no visibly real
adversary: if by a set Liturgy we went about to infringe all liberty of
conceived prayer, you might pretend some ground of a quarrel; but when we
allow, and commend, and practice both, in their due places, where can you
fasten?

THe reason is lamentable which you urge in the fifth place, that many deny
Paragr. 17.
their presence at our Church-meeting, in regard of those imposed prayers; Our
eyes can witness (not without tears) the too much truth of this sad
assertion; we have seen, and pitied to see many poor mis-guided Mechanics,
waiting abroad in the Churchyards, for the good hour; who, so soon as ever
the long expected Psalm calls in to the ensuing Sermon, have thronged into the
Congregation, as now only worthy of their presence; Alas poor souls, were
their knowledge (which they over-weene) but equal to their zeal, they would
see, and hate their own mis-judgement: In the mean time (shift it how you
please) woe, woe be to those teachers that have misled well-meaning people, to
this dangerous, and ungodly prejudice: It had been better for them never to
have been borne, then to have lived to be authors of so pernicious a Schism
in the Church of God. I have no reason to accuse you, whom I know not; although
I must tell you, your cold put-off does little less then accuse your selves:
For your parts, you say, you profess that you are not against a free use of a
Liturgy; We thank you for this favor; what is this but to say, If a
Liturgy be not left free, we profess our selves to be against it, we
animate all others in that profession?

You are yet more courteous, and tell us, Ye do not count a Liturgy a
sufficient ground of separation from the Church: Mark, Reader, there is fraud
in the words; they say, they do not count a Liturgy a sufficient ground of
separation; they do not say, this Liturgy: such a Liturgy as they could
devise, and upon such terms, might perhaps be no sufficient ground of a
separation; but this Liturgy of our Church, as it now stands, they do not
undertake for. Speak out, brethren, and do not smother your thoughts; declare
freely to your Auditors, whether the Liturgy established in this Church, be
such, as wherewith they ought to join; and whether that come within Saint
Augustines rule of non-scindendas Ecclesias: were you less reserved, the
Church would perhaps be more happy.

The Remonstrants Dilemma may peradventure come too late, when you have
forestalled the minds of ignorant men with strong resolutions against all
imposed Liturgies, but especially our own: Now, you can confidently say, [The
persons concerned will deny, that either the Liturgy is good; or lawfully
imposed, if it were good;] and here (for ought I see) they and you are resolved
to rest: in vain shall we go about to make good the Premises, whiles you have
taught them to hold fast the Conclusion: Disputes will not do it; you have
found a way that will work the feate: By loosing the bond of imposition, and
taking away the cause of disputes, and troubles of many thousand consciences.
Why now, Brethren, I like you well; plaine-dealing is a jewel: The way not to
be troubled with Liturgies, is to have no Liturgies at all; and the way to have
no use of Liturgies at all, is not to injoyne them: as if you said, The way to
loose the Gordian knot, is to cut it in pieces; the way to prevent the danger
of violating Laws, is to let them loose, or make them arbitrary; the way to
remedy the discontent of Popish Recusants, is to retract the Oath; the way not
to be barred by the gate, is to throw open the hedge: Truly, brethren, if this
be the only means of redress, you have reduced us unto a good condition; it
is the established, and (as has hitherto been thought) the wholesome Law of
this Kingdom, that this (and this only) Liturgy should be used, and
frequented by Ministers, and people; and this has hitherto been obediently,
and peaceably observed: now, upon some new exotic scruples, good people are
taught to place piety in the disobedience of those acknowledged Laws, and
nothing will quiet their many thousand consciences, but an abrogation of the
good Laws they were wont to live under. What must the indifferent Reader needs
think of this? The Law is the same it was, under which our religious
forefathers went happily to heaven; the change is in us. Oh miserable men,
whom some few tempestuous blasts from New England, and Amsterdam have thus
turned about, and made insensible of our former blessings!

Mean while, that which pincheth you in my Reply, you are willing to pass
over in silence. Were the imposition amiss, what were this to the people? The
imposition (if faulty) is upon the Minister; how can that more concern the
people, then their joining with him in an usual prayer, (whereto he ties
himself) of his own making? If the case be equal, why do you not labor to
convince your people of so unjust a partiality; and to reclaim them from so
palpable an error? the end whereof (without a speedy remedy) can be no other
then that I have most unwillingly fore-spoken, perfect difformity and confusion.

I May not omit to proclaim to the Reader Paragr. 18.
your eminent charity to me, of whom you say, Yea, so resolute he is not to
yield to a liberty, in what is established, etc. that we evidently see by his
answer, that had the reading of Homilies been as strictly enjoined as the
Book of Common Prayer, the ablest Minister in England, (were the Law in the
Remonstrants hands,) must be held as strictly to them, as to this. How now,
Brethren? What, in so angry a confidence? On what ground, I beseech you? The
Remonstrant is well known to have been as diligent a Preacher as any in your
Alphabet; and to be still (as not yet defective in that duty, so) as great an
incourager of Preaching as the best of your Patrons; why will ye thus unjustly
raise so envious a suggestion against him? [Hee is soresolute not to yield a
liberty;] Alas, what power has he, to either yield, or deny a liberty, who
professes (as he ought) nothing but humble obedience? But when a question is
stated concerning the injunction, or freedom of a Liturgy, you may be pleased
to give me leave to defend that part which my conscience (and I think upon
sure grounds) dictates to me for a certain truth: Non eadem sentire bonis,
etc. had wont to be a received rule; but, as to this challenge it self, might
the Readers leisure serve him to cast back his eye upon this passage of my
Defense, he shall no less marvel at the injustice, then the uncharitableness
of it: He shall there see with what inoffensive caution I marshall Homilies,
and Liturgy in the same rank; so making our obedience the rule of the use of
both, as that I profess a just liberty yielded in both; showing, that if
Homilies were enjoined to be read, and yet a free use of Preaching allowed,
there were no more cause to refuse them, then we have now to refuse the
Liturgy, having withal a freedom to our conceived Prayers: In which position
I would feign see what malice it self can find to carpe at.

AS for that strange project of yours, of Paragr. 19.
imposing the use of set forms as a punishment to un-sufficient Ministers, ye
might well give me leave to smile a little at so uncouth a penance, and so
unheard of a mulct; whereat, others, perhaps, will laugh out. You answer me
with a retortion of my own words, and seem to please your selves much in the
conceit, calling the ingenious Reader to record of your own gross mistaking:
Be this once pleased, Readers, since you are called up, to examine these men's
confident fidelity; I had (as I well might) taxed this rare project of theirs;
Yet himself (say they) comes out with a project about Preaching, never a whit
better, and does as good as confirm our saying, in the latter end: View the
place, I beseech you; see if you can find any the least intimation of either
preaching, or project; All that passage is only concerning prayer, the gift
whereof, I say, every forward Artizan will be unjustly challenging: Away then
(say I) with the book, whiles it may be supplied with his more profitable
nonsense; and conclude, how fit it is, where is nothing but an empty
overweening, and proud ignorance there should be a just restraint, a
restraint, I say, in a limitation of the forms of prayer; For what should
Artizans have to do with preaching? Or what such absurd project is there, in
this just restraint? Tell me now, Reader, whether this be not as like
Bellarmine, as the man in the Moon: Truly, how either the Cardinal came into
the line, or the Noble Peer into the margin, he were wise that could tell.
What was professed in the hearing of some of you, and some of your Superiors,
of a willing condescent to part with that which is indifferent to themselves,
if they might be informed it is offensive to others, must be supposed to
import, as a true information, so, a just offense; wherein they should be sure
of the concurrence of some whom you are pleased to censure, as less merciful;
then whom, none can be more ready to make good that of Gregory, in putting to
their hand for the removing of customs truly burdensome to the Church.

Thus you have very poorly vindicated the first part of your Answer concerning
Liturgy, having made good nothing which you have undertaken, disproved nothing
which I affirmed: and if (as you profess) your desire was a sincere pursuit of
truth, you are the more to be pitied, that you missed it; it is not yet too
late for you to recover it; be but ingenuous, in confessing what you cannot
but see, and we cannot differ: And if you do heartily join with me in
lamenting the breaches, and miserable distractions of the Church, why should
you not join with me in the effectual endeavors to make them up? Why do you
suffer your hands to widen that, which your tongues would seem to close? If
peace be the thing you desire, who is it that has broken it? We are where we
were; the change is on your parts: and if there have been some particular
encroachments, and innovations in some few hands; what is that to the whole
Church of England? what is that to those, whose proceedings have been square
and innocent? We hope then that the Worthies of that High Court, the great
Patrons of peace and truth, will soon see, and seriously consider where the
grief of the Church lies, and by their wisdoms put a seasonable end to these
miserable, and dangerous distempers.

SECT. III.
YOur third Section is nothing but a mere jangle of words; wherewith it was
too much for the Reader to be once troubled; for whose sake, I shall cut you up
short; making it apparent, that my affection to my cause, (however you are
pleased to scandalize my discourse) has no whit transported me to any
overreaching expressions, in lifting up the Antiquity, and extolling the
universality of Episcopal government beyond truth. That which I spoke of the
Libellers abroad, your charity would feign have extended to foreign Churches;
now, as ashamed of the misprision, you would feign salve it up with a pretended
probability of your mis-taken sense: for my part, now that my innocence is
cleared, if you can put any honest color upon your misunderstanding, I shall
willingly connive at it; although I must tell you there is enough dissimilitude
in your instance. In what sense you meant the self-confoundednesse you impute
to me, what matters it to the Reader? such a one you confess it was, that
makes men speak they know not what; It is a fair Livery, and well beseeming
the bounty of such munificent hands. I justly professed my self so
self-confounded, as to say confidently, that he is no peaceable and well
affected Son of the Church of England, that does not hate Libels, and wish well
to Leiturgie and Episcopacy. Your charity (presuming upon advantages) dares to
choke me with the name of a Parliament; wherein how you will answer your
injurious imputation to that High Court, I appeal to their Bar. To make the
matter altogether envious, you guiltily leave out the first clause, concerning
Libels, and aggravate the second; and that which I professedly spoke of
Complainants, you spightfully draw home to the Judges: whom I must still
suppose, you do hainously wrong, in fastening upon them this bold imputation
of illaffectednesse to a well established Leiturgie, and a wellregulated
Episcopacie: I believe those honorable Peers, and noble Commons will give you
small thanks for this insolent assertion.

What I said, concerning the derivation of Episcopal government from the times
of the Apostles, without the contradiction of any one Congregation in the
Christian world, I am ready to make good against all your frivolous clamours;
Purposely to lay the ground of a quarrel, you intersert, Diocesan; which came
not within the terms of my proposition; and to confute your own addition,
tell us how late Dioceses came into the Church, and now will needs enforce me
to maintain what your so magistrall power will put upon me: Pardon me,
Brethren, I undertake to defend my own words, not yours: But you say, as good
to have said nothing at all, as not this; and, we know what kind of government
it is that the Remonstrant pleads for: I grant, you have reason to guess it;
but what is that to my proposition? Whether they were Bishops of Cities, or
Dicceses, or Parishes, or Provinces, that is not essential to the question:
Neither do we speak of them, qua Diocesani, but, qua Episcopi: if they were
such as were placed in an imparity of degree above Presbyters, and were induced
with an eminent power of jurisdiction and ordination, what ever the limits of
their government were, my assertion holds good; On this ground well might B.
Hall say, that Timothy was a Diocesan Bishop, that is, sustained that place,
and did those offices, which his successors being formal Diocesans, held and
performed; This kind of Bishops, I defend to have continued in the Christian
world unto this age, without the contradiction of any one Congregation; You
tell me of Scotland, as if I had affirmed, that there had been Bishops
always, every where; It is no small wonder to me how you can with such sober
vehemence press upon me so impossible an absurdity: when you plainly see, that
all I contend for, is this, that there has been no time, no age from the
Apostles days, wherein this form of Episcopal government has not been
without contradiction continued; Yet your importunity will force a Tenet upon
me, mal-gre; and tells me you are sure it is the assertion of Episcopal men;
amongst whom you cite D. Halls irrefragable proposition; No man living, no
history can show any well allowed, and settled National Church, in the whole
Christian world, that has been governed otherwise, then by Bishops, in a meet
and moderate imparity, ever since the times of Christ and his Apostles, until
this present age; and the like passage you bring out of his Episcopacy by
Divine right part 2. p. 110. What can you make of these Allegations? There is
no one line in them, which I am not ready to justify; what one word is here
liable to exception? Will it follow from hence, that I affirm Bishops to have
been always every where? You see first it is limited to the Christian world,
not the Pagan, and in that, not to every Parochial Church, but a national;
and not to every national Church, which is in fieri, and inchoate; (such as
that of Scotland in those first times was) but a settled National Church; and
to make yet more sure, lest any schismatic company might put in for a share,
it is super-added, a well-allowed, settled, national Church. I should have
acknowledged you brave vindicators, indeed, if now, in the height of your
learned valor, you could have choked me with direct and particular instances
of any well-allowed, settled, national Churches in Christendom before this
present age, that were otherwise governed.

IN stead of this you tell me a tale of a sorry Para. 2.
quarrel taken up against the Bishop of Pampelona by some barbarous
Biscainers; whose rudeness when I proved to you by their Savage deportment to
their King, you give a very civil and charitable construction of my Marginall,
as intimating it no less crime to offer an affront to a Prelate, then to a
King; Thus love creepes where it cannot go. But to mend the matter, you
instance in the Reformed Churches; they have made contradiction to Episcopal
government; True, but not till this present age; That period was set before in
my assertion, whence now arises your sudden passion; Sir bethink you, take
up your Remonstrance, read your own words, mark the Parenthesis: Sir, I have
done all this, and wonder what it is that you would have me to see, or to say?
The words are plain, without either welt, or guard; say what you would infer
upon them. The limitation of time here (you say) has reference to the
continuance of Episcopacy, not the contradiction of Episcopacy; Certainly, in
any indifferent Readers eye, to both: neither does the very scope of the place
evince any less; for could you suppose any man so utterly insensate, as to
say; By the joint confession of Reformed Divines, the Reformed Churches of this
age have never contradicted Episcopacy? This were indeed a paradox fit for none
but a self-confounded man: fasten it upon those that are fit for dark rooms
and Ellebore. Just such another is the next, you say; Such another indeed, as
truly affirmed, and as unjustly excepted to: That Episcopal government has
continued in this Island, since the first plantation of the Gospel to this
present day, without contradiction: what talk you of taking in the manner, and
salving of credit? as if you had your adversary at a great advantage: (...),
as the Greek proverb is, and as we are wont to say; Here is great cry, and
little wool. For, whereas, the proposition may bear this double sense; The
continuance of Episcopacy in this Island, has had no contradiction; or, There
has been no contradiction to the right of the continuance of it in this Island;
at the choice of the propounder, I am ready to make it good in both senses,
neither are you able justly to oppose it in either; I am sure those instances
which you bring, out of Wickliffe, Lambert, Richardus de Mediavilla, Occam,
Walter Mapes, Robert Langland, in your next Section, will shrink in the
wetting, and come far short of your undertaking.

BUt brethren, I must sadly tell you, that in Para. 2.
your next, and last exception, you have exceeded your selves in malice; what
loud and hideous out cries have you made against me, both in your Answer, and
Vindication, for a safe and innocent passage in my Remonstrance? Speaking of
the continuance and derivation of Episcopacy from the Primitive times, I had
said; Certainly, except all Histories, all Authors fail us, nothing can be
more plain then this truth: Now comes your charitable veracity, and, in your
Answer (seconded now again by your Vindication) reports the words thus; Except
all Histories, all Authors fail us, nothing can be more certain then this
truth; and thereupon cry out, Os durum! and descant fearfully upon the word,
Nothing more certain? What Is it not more certain that there is a God? Is it
not more certain that Christ is God and man? Must this be an Article of our
Creed, etc. Nothing more certain? Oh that men should not only forget
themselves, but God also, and in their zeal for their own honor utter words
bordering upon Blasphemy.

Thus you; whether like sober, and honest men, let the Reader judge; who
casting back his eye upon that passage of my Remonstrance, shall Page 21.
well find that I have used no such word at all, as you have thus insolently
and injuriously played upon: My phrase was only, Nothing can be more plain,
you falsify it, Nothing more certain; and run strange, and uncharitable
descant upon it; such as whereof I think your friends will be ashamed; And when
I, not urging the great difference of this expression, was willing to pass it
over, with intimating only the ordinary use of this manner of speech, in our
hourly discourse, wherein we would be loath to be called to an account of our
Creed; yet still, as eager and unsatisfied, in this your Vindication, you
redouble the charge upon me; We cry out (you say) of such a shamelessness as
dares equal this opinion of his, of Episcopal government to an Article of our
Creed: When as here was no mention, no thought either of certainty, or of
Creed; but only an harmeless affirmation of the clear evidence of this truth:
But I will not stir this puddle any more; only beseeching my Reader, by this
one passage to judge of the spirit of these men, so set upon detraction, and
contradiction, that rather then they will want colors of exception, they will
devise them out of their own brains, and fasten them where they would
disgrace.

Lest this place should not yield you sufficient ground of so foul a
crimination, you fly back to Episcopacy by Divine right, and thence will
Episc. by D. R. p. 2. 127.
fetch a clearer conviction; where the Author says, He for his part is so
confident of the divine institution of the Majority of Bishops above
Presbyters, that he dare boldly say, there are weighty points of faith, which
have not so strong evidence in Scripture; He said it, and made it good by
instances in the same place: Why do you snarle at the speech, and not confute
the proofs? Try your skill in that one particular, the Baptization of
Infants; which, I am deceived, if the Church holds not a weighty point of
faith; Let us, if you please, enter into a serious contestation; Show me more
clear evidence of Scripture for this holy and universally received position,
and practice, of Baptizing Infants, then I can produce for the Majority of
Bishops above Presbyters; till then give me leave to return your own prayer;
God give the men less confidence, or more truth; and let me add, more
charity; for truly, in whether of these two latter you are more defective, it
is not easy to judge; In the mean time you have as much failed in clearing
your selves from those just imputations, which are laid upon you, as you have
overreached in the unjust bespattering of your stanch and innocent adversary.

ANd now forbear (if you can) Readers, to Para. 4.
smile in the parting, at the grave counsel of our wise Smectymnuus, who after
he has tired his Reader with a tedious volume in answer to my short Defense,
advises me very sadly, that my words may be less in number: Yet howsoever
his weary loquacitie may, in this causeless exprobration, deserve to move your
mirth; I shall resolve to make good use of his counsel. Est olitor saepe
opportuna locutus. In the sequel, my words (which were never yet taxed for an
offensive superfluity) shall be very few; and such as, to your greater wonder,
I shall be beholden for, to my kind adversaries: The rereward of my late
Defense was backed by the sound testimony of Dr. Abraham Scultetus, the famous
professor of Heydelburgh, and the great Oracle in his time of the Palatinate,
who in both the Tenets of Episcopacy by Divine right, and the
unwarrantablenesse of Lay-presbytery agrees so fully with me, as I do with my
self, the grounds whereof, I dare confidently say, are such as no wit of man
can overthrow, or weaken: Now what say my Smectymnuans to this? For brevity
sake, we will content our selves with what that learned Rivet spoke, when these
two Treatises of Scultetus were showed to him, by a great Prelate amongst us,
and his judgment required; Haec omnia jamdudum sunt protrita and profligata,
All these have been long since overworne and beaten out and baffled. In good
time, Brethren; And why should not I take leave to return the same answer to
you in this your tedious velitation of Episcopacie? There is not one new point
in this your over-swolne, and unweldie bulk; No hay-cock has been oftener
shaken abroad, and tossed up and down in the wind, then every argument of
yours has been agitated by more able pens then mine: Haec omnia jamdudum sunt
protrita and profligata; Why should I abuse my good hours; and spend my last
age (devoted to better thoughts) in an unprofitable babbling? You may perhaps
expect to meet with fitter matches, that have more leisure; The cause is not
mine alone, but common to this whole Church, to the whole Hierarchy; to all the
Fathers of the Church throughout the world; to all the dutiful Sons of those
Fathers wheresoever; You may not hope that so many learned and eminent Divines,
who find themselves equally interessed in this quarrel, can suffer either so
just a cause unseconded, or so high insolence unchastised; For my self, I
remember the story that Plutarch tells of the contestation Plutarch in vita
Crassi.
between Crassus and Deiotarus; men well-stricken in age, and yet attempting
several exploits, not so proper for their gray hairs: What, said Crassus to
Deiotarus; Do thou begin to build a City, now in the latter end of the day?
And truly, said Deiotarus to him again, I think it somewhat with the latest
for you to think of conquering the Parthians: Some witty lookers on, will
perhaps apply both these to me; It is the city of God, the Evangelical
Jerusalem which some factious hands have miserably demolished, is it for
shaking and wrinkled hands to build up again, now in the very setting, and
shutting in of the day?

They are dangerous and not inexpert Parthians, who shoot out their arrows,
even bitter invectives, against the sacred and Apostolical government of the
Church, and such as know how to fight, fleeing; are these fit for the
vanquishing of a decrepit Leader? Shortly then, since I see that our
Smectymnuans have vowed, (like as some impetuous Scolds are wont to do) to
have the last word; and have set up a resolution (by taking advantage of their
multitude) to tire out their better employed Adversary, with mere length of
discourse, and to do that by bulk of body, which by clean strength they
cannot, I have determined to take off my hand from this remaining Controversy
of Episcopacy (wherein I have said enough already, without the return of
answer, and indeed anticipated all those threadbare objections which are here
again regested to the weary Reader) and to turn off my combined opposites to
matches more meet for their age and quality: with this profession
notwithstanding, that if I shall find (which I hope I never shall) this just
and holy cause (whether out of insensiblenesse, or cautious reservednesse)
neglected by more able Defenders; I shall borrow so much time from my better
thoughts, as to bestow some strictures, where I may not afford a large
confutation; I have ever held (...), which as it holds in whatsoever matter of
discourse, so especially in this so beaten subject of Episcopacy; wherein since
I find it impossible for my Adversaries to fall upon any but former notions,
often urged, often answered, For brevity sake we will content our selves with what
that learned Rivet spoke of the two Treatises of Scultetus, Haec omnia jam
dudum sunt protrita and profligata: with this yet for a conclusion, that if in
this their wordy, and wearisome Volume, they shall meet with any one argument,
which they dare avow for new, they shall expect their answer by the next Post.

FINIS.

