A LETTER SENT TO AN HONORABLE GENTLEMAN, IN WAY OF SATISFACTION, CONCERNING
Some slanderous reports lately raised against the BISHOPS, and the rest of the
CLERGY of this KINGDOM.

Printed in the year, 1641.

To my noble friend Sir VV. VV. KNIGHT.
Much honored Sir,
SO soon as (to my great grief and astonishment) I received notice from you of
the strange rumor generally scattered abroad, of a thousand horse or more,
that should be provided by the Clergy, and especially by the Bishops of this
Kingdom, for some dangerous, but secret exploit; I acquainted some eminent
persons of that profession with the news: Who at the first seemed to
entertain it with a smiling kind of neglect, as the fained device of a thing
impossible to find belief: but when I told them, it was not only seriously
divulged, but also credited by many, who seemed not in-judicious, they began to
be stricken with much horror, and amazement; and to lament the condition of
themselves, and the times; and to impute the first invention of this crime, to
the malice of some ill affected persons, who meant, by this means, to stir up
the envy, and unjust hatred of good people against their persons, and calling.
Good Lord, said they, were we not laden enough before with the weight of more
then our own enormities, but we must be crushed with the heavier pressures of
imaginary mischiefs? Alas, what have we done thus to irritate, and enrage the
world against us? What can it be that makes us guilty of this fury? How many
of us are there, that have not yet been taxed with any crime but our Rochet?
yet we suffer no less, then if it were an offense to be innocent. After they
had a little breathed out their sorrow, they recollected themselves, and began
to think what they might do to give the world some kind of satisfaction, in
this odious aspersion that is cast upon them: at last they resolved that
however they doubted not but time would fully manifest their integrity, yet,
that in the mean while it was not fit that their silence should make them
accessory to their own causeless infamy; and therefore they earnestly desired
me to take, and give notice to your worthy self, and all other ingenuous
persons, of their serious and solemn Protestation, before God and the world,
of their clear and perfect innocence in this behalf. They do therefore call
the God of heaven to witness, that they are so far from having any hand in any
business of this kind, that they never heard or received the least intimation
of any attempt, word, purpose, or thought tending this way; neither can yet
imagine what the meaning of any such combination, or enterprise might be: as
those who have desired, in all their attendance on these public services, to
approve their fidelity, to God, their King, and Country. In the conscience
whereof, they bade me to challenge all those secret whisperers, who have thus
gone about to poison their good names in the opinion of all loyal and
true-hearted Subjects, to notify and bring forth speedily the grounds of those
accusations; and to fix them upon such persons, as they dare charge for guilty;
that the truth of these criminations may so appear to all the world, as that
either themselves may receive shame, or the offenders, judgment.

And withal they do most humbly beseech the most honorable Lords, and
Commons of this present Parliament, that they will be pleased, with all
possible speed, to search this matter to the bottom; and to follow this foul
slander home to the first rise; that if any of them be found, in the least
measure, guilty of this crime, pretended against King, or State, he may
forthwith suffer condign punishment to the utmost; wherein they profess that
their hands shall be the first upon him, as the unworthy and perfidious violater
of their sacred Order: And, if this report shall be found (as they are
confident) utterly groundless, and merely slanderous, they beseech that
highest Court of Justice, for Gods sake, and for the Churches sake, that they
will be tenderly sensible of this abominable injury, that is herein done to
their holy profession; and take some speedy course for the public vindicating
of their innocence to all the world.

And, lastly, they do earnestly beseech, and in the name of God, adjure, all
Christian people, to beware, how they give light credit to those slanderous
suggestions, that are, in these deplored times, most untruly raised, and cast
abroad by uncharitable, and malevolent men, against those, whom God has set
over them; and who desire, in all good conscience, to be approved to God, and
men; and that they will forbear to hurt their own souls in wronging the
innocent.

Thu^ Noble Sir, I have been bold to give you an account of the entertainment
of your ill news; not doubting of either your charitable belief of the truth
of this unfeigned Protestation, or of your just forwardness for the satisfying
of others; In which confidence, I take leave; not without my humble and fervent
prayers to the God of peace, that he would be pleased to temper all hearts, and
to compose them so to an happy unity and concord, that we may at the last
return to our homes with joy, and with the comfortable expectation of no less
blessed times then we have lived to see.

Your much devoted friend, E. I.


