THE BAPTIZING OF INFANTS REVIEVVED and DEFENDED from the Exceptions OF Mr.
TOMBS, In his three last CHAPTERS of his Book Entitled ANTIPEDOBAPTISME.

By H. Hammond, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher, for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivy lane.
1655.

THE BAPTIZING OF INFANTS Reviewed and Defended.
The Introduction.
stadia in these agones, and therein paid some degree of obedience to the
precept of Christ, Mat. 5.41. and withal to S. Peter's directions of rendering
an account of the Faith which is in us, (...) even to him that most
unnecessarily requires it; There is yet remaining one matter of discourse,
wherein some seeming engagement lies upon me, occasioned by the Resolution of
the 4th Quaere, concerning Infant Baptism; For to this Mr. Jo: Tombs has
offered some answers in the three last Chapters of his Book entitled
Antipaedobaptism.

annexed by way of appendage to that of Festivals; the treatises of Festivals
and Infant Baptism being so nearly conjoined in the first draught or
monogramme, that the defense of them (which may in some degree pass for the
(...)) ought incongruity to be contrived into the same table also. But the
length of this Answer has dissuaded that, and the desire that the Reader may
have no taskes imposed on him but by his own choice, has advised the
publishing this by it self, with some hope that this may conclude his trouble,
and that this new year may not bring me so many occasions of such contests, as
the last has done.

CHAP. I. Of Baptism among the Jews.
Sect. I. Probations more and less perfect. The use of Circumcision to this
question of Paedobaptisme. As also of Christ's reception of children. Childrens
coming and believing, Mat. 18. Children sinners.
foundation of Mr. Tombes's returns to me he is pleased to lay in some words,
which he has recited out of. 23. of my Resolution of the 4th Quaere, where I
say, that there is no need of laying much weight on this, or any the like more
imperfect ways of probation, the whole fabric being sufficiently supported
and built on this basis (the customary baptismes among the Jews) and that
discernible to be so, if we consider it first negatively, then positively.

Reply with these words, I like the Doctors ingenuity in his waving the
imperfect ways of proving Infant Baptism, viz. the example of circumcision,
Genesis 17. of baptizing a whole household, Act. 16.33. Christ's reception of little
children, Mat. 19.14. Mar. 10.16. and doubt not to show his own to be no better
then those he relinquisheth.

introduction of his I shall make some Reply in a general reflection on the
Treatise which he undertakes to answer, and begin with disclaiming his good
words and approbation of my ingenuity, assuring him that he is wholly mistaken
in these his first lines and that I do in no wise relinquish those ways of
probation by him taken notice of, nor shall so far despise the authority and
aides of the ancient Church writers, who have made use of them, as wholly to
neglect the force and virtue of them. And I thought it had been to him visible,
that I have made my advantage of every one of them. 20, 21, 22. though I do
verily think the foundation of this practice is more fitly laid in that other
of Jewish Baptism, which belonged to all, both Jews, and proselytes children,
females as well as males, whereas circumcision belonging to males only, was in
that and some other respects a less perfect basis of it.

probations are of two sorts, either less or more perfect, those I call less
perfect, which though they have full force in them, as far as they are used,
yet are not of so large an extent as to conclude the whole matter in debate,
which others that are more perfect may be able to do.

instituting of the Sacrament of circumcision among the Jews, and the express
command of God that the children of eight days old should by this rite be
received into Covenant, is an irrefragable evidence that those may be capable
of receiving a Sacrament, who have not attained to years of understanding the
nature of it, that children may be received into Covenant with God though they
are not personally able to undertake or perform the condition of it, and then
that argument will so far be applicable to Paedobaptisme, as to evidence the
lawfulness and fitness of it among Christians, by this analogy with God's
institution among the Jews, and so certainly invalidate all the arguments of
the Antipaedobaptist (i. e. of Mr. Tombs) drawn from the incapacity of
Infants, from the pretended necessity that preaching should go before
baptizing, from the qualifications required of those that are baptized, etc.
For all these objections lying and being equally in force against circumcising
of Infants, it is yet evident to be the appointment of God that every Infant of
8. days old should be circumcised, Genesis 17.12. and the threatening of God
denounced against them as transgressors in case it be neglected, The
uncircumcised manchild shall be cut off from his people, he has broken my
covenant, v. 14. And this the rather, because the Apostle compares baptism of
Christians with circumcision, Col. 2.11.12. In whom ye are circumcised --
buried with Christ in baptism, Isidor Pelusiote, l. 1. Ep. 125. (...), the
Jews used circumcision in stead of baptism, whereupon S. Epiphanius styles
Baptism (...) the great circumcision, and S. Augustine to them that require a
divine authority, whereby to prove the baptism of Infants, renders this of the
De Bapt. contr: Donat: l. 4. c. 23.
Jewish circumcision, ex qua veraciter conjiciatur quid valeret in parvulis
Sacramentum Baptismi, whereby true judgment may be made what force the
Sacrament of Baptism may have in Infants. And in like manner Isidore l. 1. Ep.
125. whereupon consideration of the Angel coming, to kill Moses because of the
child's not being circumcised, he concludes, (...), Let us make haste to baptize
our children.

evidenced to be lawful, and agreeable to divine appointment in the old
Testament, is not thereby presently proved necessary under the New (Christ
might otherwise have ordained, if he had pleased, and from his ordinance only,
as that was understood by his Apostles and by them delivered to the Church, the
necessity of our obedience, and so of Baptizing Infants, is completely deduced)
therefore it is, that I mentioned this, as a more imperfect way of probation,
in respect of the entire conclusion, which I undertook to make, viz. not only
the lawfulness, but the duty and obligation, that lies upon us to bring our
Infants to Baptism; which by the way, was much more then was necessary (the
showing the lawfulness being sufficient, and the example of circumcision being
competent) for the disproving the pretensions of the Antipaedobaptist, and so,
ex abundanti, an act of Supererogatory probation, in relation to Mr. T.

probation, which he supposes to be relinquisht by me, especially to that of
Christ's behavior to little children, commanding to suffer them to come unto
him (who yet were no otherwise able to come then as they were brought, and as
now they come to the font for baptism) and embracing and laying on his hands
and blessing them: But this is competently set down, and the force of it, how
far it is argumentative, 22.

Mat. 18.6. where Jesus speaking of little children, uses these words, who so
offends one of these little ones that believe in me, it were good for him
that a Millstone etc. may tend much to give us the full importance and
signification both of their coming to Christ, and of his commanding not to
forbid them (such as will nearly concern every Antipaedobaptist to take notice
of) For as in other places of the New Testament, the coming unto God and
Christ, is believing on him, seeking to receive benefit from him (as, He that
comes to me shall never hunger, and Come unto me all ye that are weary, and If
any man thirst let him come unto me and drink) so, it seems, by this place,
that that coming of the (...) little Infants (for so they are called in the
Parallel place Luke 9.47.) which they were capable of by the help of their
parents or friends, is styled by Christ the childrens believing, and so far
imputed to them, as that upon that account the sentence is very severe upon
those that shall scandalize them, repulse or discourage, or any way hinder them
in this their progress to Christ, though it be but in the arms of other men.

Infants, in respect of the guilt of original sin, under which they are born,
and for the remission of which (and not only for the entering into the Kingdom
of Heaven) the Fathers defined against the Pelagians, that baptism was
necessary for them, I shall not need here to enlarge, having formerly spoken to
that head. Only it may not be amiss here to advert, that it was as reasonable
for the children to be called (...) believers, who yet had no faith of their
own, but only of their parents etc. to bring them to Christ, as for the same
children to be accounted sinners (as undoubtedly they are) which yet never
committed any act of sin, which made S. Augustine De verb: Apost: Sermon: 4. say,
Absit ut ego dicam non credentes infantes, God forbid that I should say that
Infants are not believers, Credit in altero, qui peccavit in altero, He
believes by another who sinned by another, dicitur, Credit, and valet, and
inter fideles baptizatos computatur, the Susceptors say he believes, and so he
is reputed among the baptized believers. And this reputative faith the more
reasonably accepted by the Church, it being moreover evident by the baptism of
Simon Magus, and of all hypocrites, that it is the profession of faith, and not
the possession of it, which is required as the qualification which authorizes
the Church to admit them to baptism; and that being performed by the Infants
proxies in his name, the Church after the forementioned example of Christ, may
very lawfully accept it of those, who can perform no other, in lieu of a
personal profession.

Christ concerning children, though it be a certain evidence again against the
Antipaedobaptist, as has been showed, and I need no more then this one proof,
if I were destitute of all others, to refute his pretensions, yet because it
contains no relation of Christ's, or his Apostles baptizing infants, therefore I
put it in the rank of the more imperfect probations (in comparison with that
other way of probation, which I conceive, deduceth and concludes the whole
matter more entirely) though, as it is evident. 22. this was neither waved nor
relinquisht by me.

resolution of the Quaere to insist more largely on that way of probation,
which I discerned to be less considered or insisted on by others, and yet to
have perfect evidence in it, if it were duly explained and improved as it was
capable, and on the same account thought I might spare to multiply words, where
others had often enlarged, and therefore said but little of those common
arguments or heads of probation, and yet sufficient to testify my neither
waving nor relinquishing them, It will then abundantly appear, how little I
deserved Mr. T. his good words, and how justly I renounce that title to
ingenuity which he bestows upon me, being better pleased with his
animadversions on my dotages, as he after phraseth it, then these, his (...)
his liberalities to me by which he designed advantage to himself.

Sect. 2. The necessity of Paedobaptisme depending on the positive part of the
probation. The several sorts of Anabaptists. Testimonies the only proof of
Institutions.
two things, 1. That the Jewish baptism is not by me set up as the competent
proof, but only as the ground or foundation (which taken by its self is always
very imperfect in respect of the whole fabric or building,) 2. That the
perfect proof being set down to consist of two parts, a negative and a
positive, the first only showing the no incongruity or unlawfulness of
baptizing Infants, and the second adding thereto duty and obligation, these two
must in all reason remain conjoined in our discourse, and not be so severed, or
considered asunder, as if I thought the former way of negative probation
sufficient to do the whole work without the assistance of the latter; This I
needed not have said in relation to Mr. T. For the bare negative consideration
(that there is nothing in the pattern whence Christ's baptism is copied out,
nothing in the copy it self, as far as Christ's words in the Gospel, or the
Apostles practice extend, etc.) is perfectly sufficient to refute an
antipaedobaptist (such as he professes to be) who undertakes to show the
baptizing of Infants to be unlawful, but cannot pretend to show it by any
other way, but by producing some either law or practice of Christ or his
Apostles to the contrary, which he must be concluded unable to do, if my
Negative stand inviolate* But I thus interpose (and do it thus early) because
the positive part, being indeed the principal, especially when it is also added
to the negative, does not only demonstrate it lawful, but duty, to offer and
receive our Infants to baptism, the judgment and practice of the Universal
Church for 1600 years, (received, as the Fathers with one consent testify,
from the Apostles, as the will of Christ himself) having this force and
authority over every meek son of the Church, that he may not without incurring
God's displeasure, oppugn or contemn it.

needful, if Mr. T. had been the only adversary foreseen, even that which may
convince all sorts of opposers and disputers in this matter, from See G.
Cassan. in Praes. ad Duc. Jul. Cliv. ex Nichol. Blusdick de Orig Sect. Anabapt.
Peter de Bruce and Henry his Scholar, and the Petrobusiani and Henriciani that
sprang from them, to Nicholas Storck and John Munzer, Melchior Rinck, Balthazar
Habmaier, Michael Satelar the Switzers, and so on to Michael Hofman the skinner
in the Low Countries, to Vbbo and Menno of Friseland, and Theodorick Vbbo's
son, and all their followers, which either then lived, and set up in Germany,
or are now revived, or copied out among us; This one deduction of this practice
(of baptizing Infants) from the Apostles, if it be solid, being abundantly
sufficient to make an end of all controversies of this kind, It being highly
unreasonable that an institution of Christ's, such as each Sacrament is, should
be judged of by any other rule (whether the phansies or reasons of men) but
either the words wherein the institution is set down, or (when they, as they
are recorded in the Scripture, come not home to the deciding of the
controversy) by the records of the practice, whether of Christ, or (because he
baptized not himself) of the Apostles, however conserved or made known unto us.

customary baptism among the Jews being first laid only as the basis and
foundation (which, as I said, must be observed to differ from the whole
building, being indeed only, the first and most imperfect part of it) and
evidently brought home and applied to every branch of the Christian baptism, I
desire Mr. T. will permit the baptism of our infants to deduce and evidence it
self from the considerations, which are thereunto annexed, both negative and
positive, and then make trial how he shall be able to demolish that structure
which is thus founded and supported; Meanwhile I shall now consider the
severals of his exceptions, having premised thus much in general.

Sect. 3. The Jews Baptism of natives as well as proselytes. Testimonies of
their writers in proof thereof. Baptism among the heathens taken from the
Jews. Among both from Noah's flood. The derivation of Christian from Jewish
Baptism how manifested. Christ's answer to Nicodemus. Baptism (...) to the
deluge. Gr. Nazianzen's and Macarius's testimonies. The Fathers meaning in
affirming the Christians baptism to be in stead of Circumcision. The Lords
Supper founded in the Jews Postcoenium, yet in stead of their Passover.
AND first he will abbreviate and give the Reader the substance proof, which he
conceives to be this, that the Jews were wont when they admitted proselytes to
baptize them and their children. Here again at the entrance I must enterpose,
that his Epitome has done some injury to the Book, left out one considerable,
if not principal part, viz. that which concerned the Native Jewish children,
who were baptized as solemnly, as the Proselytes and their children.

T. makes haste to assume the contrary, that the Jews baptized not Jews by
nature, p. 306. that after the baptism Exo. 19.10. the Jews did not baptize
Jews but only proselytes, p. 307. and so makes a shift to conclude, that by
my arguing, the children of those that were baptized in infancy ought not to
be baptized, and so that no infant of Christian race, or descended from
Christian ancestors, is now to be baptized, p. 308. no infants but at the first
conversion of the parent, p. 309. And this I was many months before the
publication of his book, warned to expect from Mr. T. as an irresistible answer
to my way of defending infant baptism, mentioned by him in the pulpit, as
ready to be published, that by deducing the baptism of Christians from the
Jewish custom of baptizing of proselytes I had excluded all the children of
Christian ancestors from our baptism.

surprise to me, who knew that I had cleared that Iudaical baptism to belong
to the children of all native Jews, as well as of proselytes, so now I could
not but wonder to find there was so perfect truth in that relation, which I had
received, and have no more to say, but to desire the Reader to cast his eyes
upon that Treatise, and inform himself whether I have not as punctually
deduced from the Jewish writers the customary baptism of native Jewish
infants, as I have done the baptism of proselytes and their children, and
indeed mentioned the former as the original from which the latter was to be
transcribed, and so as the foundation and groundwork of that other.

recite here what is there so visible, yet because I see it is not taken notice
of, but the contrary assumed for granted, and the chief weight of his 24th
Chapter laid upon that supposition, there is nothing left me to do in this
matter, but to transcribe my words from that 6th. which are expressly these:

Baptism or washing of the whole body was a Jewish solemnity, by which the
native Jews were entered into the covenant of God made with them by Moses, so
says the Talmud tr: Repud: Israel or the Israelites do not enter into covenant
but by these three things, by circumcision (...) and by baptizing, and by peace
offering. So in Gemara ad tit. Cherithoth, c. 2. your fathers, i. e. the Jews
of old time did not enter into the covenant (...) but by circumcision and
baptism, and in Iabimoth, c. 4. Rabbi Joshua said, we find of our mother that
they were baptized ((...)) and not circumcised, so Maimonides tit: Isuribia, c.
13. By three things the Israelites entered into the covenant, by circumcision,
baptism and sacrifice, and soon after, what was done to you, to the Jews in
universum, ye were initiated into the Covenant by circumcision (...) and
baptism and sacrifice. All these Testimonies there thus set down, and then how
could I conclude less then there I do, that nothing can be more clearly
affirmed by them, i. e. by the Jewish writings of the greatest authority among
them, the Talmud, Gemara, and Maimonides?

third thing observable in this baptism among the Jews, that the baptism of
the natives was the pattern, by which the baptism of proselytes was regulated,
and wherein it was founded, and this made evident by the arguing, and
determining the question, in the Gemara, tit: Jabimoth, c. 4. after this
manner, Of him that was circumcised and not baptized Rabbi Eliezer said that he
was a Proselyte, because, said he, we find of our Fathers (Abraham Isaac --)
that they were circumcised but not baptized; And of him that was baptized and
not circumcised Rabbi Josua said, he was a proselyte, because said he, we find
of our mothers that they were baptized and not circumcised: But the wise men
pronounced that till he were baptized and circumcised he was not a proselyte,
where the example of the Jews is the rule by which the obligation of the
proselytes is measured.

reason rendered by the Jewish writers of their baptizing the proselytes, which
is generally taken by them from that command, Numb. 15.15. One ordinance shall
be both for you of the congregation, and also for the stranger (i. e. (...) the
proselyte) that sojourneth with you, an ordinance for ever in your generations,
as ye are, so shall the stranger be before the Lord, one law and one manner (i.
e, one (...) and one (...) Luke 1.6. one Law for moral duties, and one
ordinance for rituals or ceremonies) shall be for you and for the stranger that
sojourneth with you. Thus the Gemara tit: Cherithoth, c. 2. foundeth the
circumcising and baptizing of proselytes, upon those words, As to you, so shall
it be to the proselyte. So Maimonides tit: Isuri bia, c. 13. In like manner
through all ages as often as a Gentile will enter into the Covenant, and receive
the yoke of the Law upon him, it was necessary that circumcision and baptism
should be used for him, beside sprinkling of the sacrifice, and if it were a
woman, baptism and sacrifice, According as it is said (Numb. 15.15.) as to
you, so also to the proselytes.

original of this baptism among the Jews themselves, the 12.. out of their
writers deduceth it from the time of giving the Law in Mount Sinai, Exo. 19.10.
when God, to prepare them for the receiving it, commands Moses, Go to the
people and sanctify them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their
clothes. So says Maimonides Isuri bia, c. 13. But baptism was in the desert
before the giving of the Law, according as it is said, Thou shall sanctify
them -- And that agreeable to what we read of Jacob to his household, Genesis
35.2. Put away the strange Gods that are among you, and be clean and change
your garments (where being clean is answerable to being sanctified or baptized,
and changing to washing their garments) so that as the covenant made with
Abraham was sealed by circumcision, so the giving of the Law which was the
Covenant made by God with all the people, was thought to be sealed by baptism,
and that the washing, if not of the whole, yet of some parts of the body
(ordinarily called (...) sanctifications) and the washing (or wearing clean)
garments also.

perfect truth in what I now affirm, that baptism among the Jews belonged to
their natives as well as to proselytes (even to all that entered into the
Covenant, and those evidently were the Jewish children as well as men) but also
that this had before been evidenced in that Resol: of the 4th Quaere, which
here Mr. T. has been pleased to examine, and consequently that it was no small
injustice, and unkindness in him both to the reader, and to me, that he would
omit to take notice of it, but assume and build on it as a thing yielded and
granted him by my discourse that the proselytes only, and not the native Jews
were partakers of that Jewish baptism.

This sure was a strange infirmity in an answer, and that which must needs have
a special influence upon it, in any impartial weighing, even such an one, as
will make it very unnecessary for me to consider any of his other
considerations which he has offered in that matter, which must certainly have
no force in them, when that which is such a principal part of my arguing is so
perfectly omitted, and the contrary supposed by him.

attend him in all his motions, and inquire whether there be any particular
pitched on by him, which may deserve our farther consideration, in order to the
point in hand, that of Infant baptism among Christians.

Baptism, it seems, was a custom of all nations as well as the Jews, citing
Grotius for it on Mat. 3.6. and Mat. 28.19.

question, only I wonder what he could fancy from thence to conclude for his
advantage. Certainly he will not hope by that argument to evince the negative,
that it was not used among the Jews, for how can the Gentiles, using it
conclude, against all other evidence, that the Jews did not use it? Nor can he
pretend that Christ transcribed it from those Gentiles, and not from the Jews:
for Christ preaching, as he was sent, to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,
and (...), to them first, Act. 3.26. and if not to them only, yet in a far
more eminent manner to them then to any others, and accordingly adapting his
Reformation to the Jewish Religion, and lightly deducing so many other customs
from the Jews, and none from the Gentiles, can with no probability be
conceived to deduce this from the Gentiles, rather then from the Jews,
especially when (as Clement observes, (...), the heathens borrowed or stole
both their learning, and their custom from the Jews, so) it is very obvious
to imagine, that this of baptism, purgations and lustrations might by those
heathens be borrowed from the Jews, at least by both of them be derived from
the same common fountain, the sons of Noah, in remembrance of the deluge,
according to that famous verse among the Greeks, (...) the sea sweeps away all
the evils of men, to which S. Peter alludes in making baptism the (...) to
Noah's stood (as he has himself cited it out of Grotius,) and so in like
manner some of the Fathers, as Athanasius, in his (...). Tom. 2. p. 426. (...),
The first baptism is that of the deluge for the excision of sins.

deducible, that it matters little what else he can design to infer from it.
And so sure there was some want of answers, when this (so nothing to the matter
on either side) was thought fit to march in the front of them.

answer, he presently adds, that he does not know that Dr. H. or any other
has alleged one passage in Scripture, or any of the Fathers, that might evince
that the custom of baptizing, or baptizing infants was derived from the Jews
initiating proselytes by baptism.

Mr. T. whether he be ready to pay that reverence to the authority of the
Fathers, as to be concluded by their affirmations? If he be, I wonder why the
uniforme consent of them, that infants are to be baptized, should not prevail
with him: If he be not, why does he mention this as useful in this matter?

one containing two quaestions in it, 1. Whether this of initiating into the
Covenant by baptism were a Jewish custom? 2. Whether from thence Christ
derived this rite of baptizing of Christians? The former of these was that
which alone required proving the latter being of it self evident, without
farther probation, supposing only that the Fathers testified that to be
Christ's institution of baptism, which we find to have been thus agreeable to
the practice customary among the Jews.

doubt or question, whether Christ derived the Censures of his Church from the
Jews, It will sure be a sufficient answer to the question, if we shall first
find in the Jewish writers their customs of Excommunication, and then from the
Christian writers find the like records of the Christian custom, from the
institution of Christ, and the practice of his Apostles (...) down unto us; For
those two things being done, what need we any Father's assistance or guidance,
to secure us, that Christ derived, and lightly changed this custom of
Ecclesiastical censures in his Church, from what he found in the Jewish
Sanhedrim?

T. here does about baptism) that excommunication was a custom among other
nations, as well as the Jews, the description of it among the Druids in Cesar's
Commentaries being so famous and notorious to every man: which yet will not
sure prevail with any reasonable man, or make it necessary to produce the
testimonies whether of Scriptures or Fathers, that Christ took it not from the
Druids but the Jews. The like might be instanced again in the institution of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the Jews postcoenium, from which it is by
light change deduced.

baptism, the Jewish custom of baptizing (not only proselytes and their
children, but the Jewish natives) I thought necessary to clear from the most
competent witnesses of their customs, the Talmud, Gemara, and Maimonides, the
soberest of their writers; And so likewise in the second place, the practice of
the Christian Church, as it is from Christ and his Apostles deduced, and
applied particularly to the Resolution of our Quaere, to the baptizing of
Infants, I have cleared also from some footsteps of it in the Scripture it
self, and from the concordant testimony of the Fathers of the Church. And
having cleared these two particulars, wherein all the difficulty consisted, I
need not sure inquire of the opinion of antiquity for the dependence betwixt
these two, or the derivation of one of them from the other, the very lineaments
and features acknowledging and owning this progeny to have come forth from
that stock, this stream to have been derived from that fountain, without any
testimonials to certify it.

And yet 3dly. After all this, I demand whether Christ's words to Nicodemus,
Joh. 3. mentioned. 18. be not an evidence from Scripture it self of this very
matter, the derivation of the Christian from the Jewish baptism; when upon
Christ's discourse on that subject, that except a man be regenerate of water and
of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God, and on occasion of
Nicodemus's objection against this v. 9. Jesus answered, Art thou a master in
Israel, and know not these things? discernibly intimating that this his
institution of baptism was so agreeable to the Jewish customs of initiating,
and receiving into the Covenant by baptism, that a Rabbi among the Jews could
not reasonably be imagined to be ignorant of it.

baptism of the Jews had (as Mr. T. cites it out of Grotius) its first
original from the memory of the deluge purging away the sins of the world,
then sure that place of S. Peter which affirms the Christian baptism to be
(...), the antitype or transcript of Noah's deluge, is an express testimony of
it also. And this I hope might be a competent account of this matter.

Fathers in their discourses of baptism do ordinarily lay the foundation of it
in Moses, or the baptism of the Jews; witness Gregory Nazianzen Or. 39.
Seeing, says he, it is the feast of Christ's baptism, let us philosophize,
discourse exactly of the difference of baptismes, then after this preface
entering on the discourse, he thus begins, (...), Moses, says he, baptized but
in water, and before this in the cloud and in the sea, And then making that
(with S. Paul) a type of the Christian baptism, he proceeds to John's
baptism, which, says he, differed from the Mosaical, in that it added
Repentance to water, (...), John also baptized, but not Iudaically.

Macarius Hom. 32. having mentioned the circumcision which was under the Law
foresignifying the true circumcision of the heart, annexes thereto (...), the
baptism of the Law, which says he, (...) is a figure of true things, (...),
for there that washed the body, but here the baptism of the holy Ghost and of
fire purges and washes the polluted mind, and so goes on to the parallel
betwixt the legal Priest and Christ, making the same accord betwixt the one
and the other pair, So Hom. 47. p. 509. speaking of things under the Law, he
first mentions the glory of Moses face, a type of the true glory under the
Gospel. 2. Circumcision, a type of that of the heart; 3. (...), says he,
(...), among them there is baptism cleansing or sanctifying the flesh, but
with us the baptism of the holy Spirit and of fire, that which John preached
-- The same is intimated again, but not so explicitly set down Hom. 26. p.
349. (...), Peter succeeded Moses, having the New Church of Christ and the true
Priesthood committed to him, for now is the baptism of fire and the Spirit,
and a kind of circumcision placed in the heart, where it seems the Jewish
baptism was the figure of the Christian, as the J^wish priesthood of the
Christian, and the Jewish circumcision of the circumcision in the heart.

Athanasius's (...): qu: 103. Tom. 2. p. 426.
numbering up seven sorts of Baptism, the first even now mentioned, (...), that
of the flood for the cutting off of sin, the second that of Moses, in passing
the Red sea, which he calls, (...), figurative; the third is (...) the legal
baptism, (...), which the Hebrews had, whereby every unclean person (so is
every one by nature) (...), was baptized in water, had his garments washed, and
so entered into the camp, this it seems the ceremony of his admission. And
then follows the baptism of John and Christ. Other examples I doubt not the
Reader may observe in the Fathers writings on this subject, these few may serve
(...).

Mr. T. adds that some passages of the Fathers show rather, that they took it
as in stead of circumcision, the answer also is very obvious, that the Jews
custom being to initiate by circumcision and baptism both, and the former of
these being laid aside by Christ's reformation, and only the second continued,
and that so improved by Christ, as to have more then the whole virtue of both,
and to be the only initial Sacrament, the Fathers might well learn of S. Paul
to make this comparison or parallel betwixt the Jewish, and the Christian
Sacrament, and so betwixt baptism and circumcision, and indeed could not
properly say that the Christian baptism was in stead of the Jewish baptism
being rather the continuance of it, adding some ceremonies and virtue to that
which was formerly among them, not substituting somewhat else (as for
circumcision it did) in stead of it.

suggestion, knowing that in the other Sacrament which Christ visibly
instituted in the Jewish postcoenium, and imitated it in the delivering the
portions of bread and wine, the Fathers generally lay the comparison betwixt
the Paschal Lamb and that, and not without the authority of S. Paul himself,
saying that Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, the plain meaning of it
being this, that the Jewish Passover being abolished, we have now the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ (the true immaculate lamb of God)
substituted in the stead of it, but that copied out not from the Jewish manner
of eating the Lamb of Passover (for Christ did not eat it at that time, being
put to death before the hour in which it was to be eaten) but of the
postcoenium or close of the Jewish Supper, after which he took bread etc.
consecrating this ordinary custom of theirs into an higher mystery, then
formerly it had in it.

Sect. 4. The conceits of Pe: Alfunsus and Schickard of the Jewish baptism.
Raf: Alphus: Mr. T. his conclusion not inferred. The original of the Jewish
Baptism (the only doubt) vindicated. Jacob's injunction to his family.
Sanctifications Exodus 19.10. differ from washing garments.
Mr. Seldom, of some that conceived the Jewish baptism in initiating of
proselytes was in imitation of Christ's example (and so not Christ's of theirs)
and of Schickard that conceives they added baptism to circumcision, to
difference them from Samaritans, is too vain to deserve any other reply, then
what he himself has annexed concerning the former, viz. that Mr. Seldom (naming
only Pet. Alfansus for this) does not give any credit to him in it (but indeed
disproves it, and adds antidotes to that poison, that without them I should
not have thought likely to have wrought on any man.) And indeed so he does also
in plain terms concerning the latter, de Syxed: l. 1. c. 3. fateor me nondum
illud aut ea de re quicquam alibi legisse, p. 41.
he never read that or any thing of that matter any where else.

Schickard be examined, it will acknowledge it to be a singular conceit and
invention of his, and nothing else.

Chap. de Reg. Iud. he has these words, ad differentiam Samaritanorum
addiderunt baptismum quendam de quo Raf. Alphes Tom. 2. p. 26. and ipse Talmud
Mass. Jefamos fol. 47. citing the words at large in Hebrew. But in those words,
though they are by Schickard applied indefinitely, as if they were the
testification of the whole foregoing proposition, yet the reader shall find no
syllable to that purpose of differencing from Samaritanes, more then from all
other men, but only that when a proselyte is received he must be circumcised,
and then (...) when he is cured, they shall baptize him in the presence of two
wise men, saying, Behold he is as an Israelite in all things, or if she be a
woman, the women lead her to the waters etc. A plain testimony (to the sense of
those which we formerly produced) of baptizing both Jews and proselytes (for
else how could the proselyte, upon receiving this, be said to be a Israelite in
all things?) but no least intimation, that this was designed to distinguish
them from Samaritanes peculiarly, but as that which was always customarie
among the Jews, at their entering into Covenant with God.

And then the premises being so groundless and frivolous, I shall not sure be
concerned in any conclusion that Mr. T. shall infer from them, which it
seems, is to be this, that notwithstanding the Doctor's supposition that the
whole fabric of baptism is discernible to be built on that basis, the
customary practice among the Jews, yet many will conceive it needs more proof
then the bare recital of passages out of Jewish writers.

Mr. T. would be much put to it, to show in what mode and figure it is, that
this conclusion is drawn out of these premises: Certainly none that my Logic
has afforded me, for that has no engine first to draw many out of two; nor 2.
to infer that those that had mistaken for want of knowledge (as Alphunsus) or
adverting (as Schickard) of the Jewish customs, would need any more then the
recitation of clear testimonies out of the soberest Jewish writers, to disabuse
him: or 3. that they that either through prejudice, or any other principle of
obstinacy shall resist this degree of light thus offered them, will be
convinced by any other sort of testimonies, whether out of the Fathers, or
Scripture it self, being so well fortified and provided with inclinations, at
least if not with artifices, to reject one, or misinterpret the other.

Mr. T. is well enough satisfied, at least as far as to baptizing of
proselytes, that there was such a custom among the latter Jews before Christ's
incarnation; All the difficulty, says he, is concerning the original of it
among them, For that either it should begin from Jacobs injunction to his
household, Genesis 35.2. or from Gods command Exo. 19 10. for the Israelites to
wash their clothes before the giving of the law, he cannot conceive, those
places speaking of washing Jews by nature, not proselytes, whereas the Jews
baptized not Jews by nature (as Mr. Seldom says) but by profession.

original of the custom among the Jews is but an accessarie, wholly
extrinsecal to the matter in hand, and in no respect necessary to be defined by
us: If the custom be acknowleged, we need ask no more, and Mr. T. having
acknowleged the custom, grants all that in that matter we require of him, for
on that, and not on that particular original of it, it is that we superstruct
our whole fabric, as far as belong; to infant baptism, which is very fitly
founded in the Jewish custom of baptizing, from whence soever that custom was
derived to them, And so that one thing supersedes and answers that whole
difficulty, if indeed there were any such in this matter.

originals here set down and both rejected by him, it is a little strange that
he should think fit to do so, and not to substitute any third in the place of
them; For it is certain that every custom received universally into a Church or
society of men, must have some original or other, and consequently this
custom being by Mr. T. acknowleged, must not in any reason be left (...),
without Father, without Mother, without any original; and therefore those two
that are alleged for it by the Jewish writers, being by him so fastidiously
rejected, it was very fit that he should assign some other, and annex his
reasons of giving it the deference, upon which it should be preferred before
them.

embrace it, and make the same advantage of it which hitherto I have done of
either of these. But he is here pleased to be reserved, and gives not the least
intimation of any other reason, which is more suitable with his conceptions.
It Is true indeed he did before out of Grotius, mention Noah's flood, in memory
of which this custom arose among other nations, but besides that this original
of it was not by him deemed sufficient to appropriate it to the Jews, but
leaves it common to them with other nations, those other two, Jacobs
injunction, and Gods command before receiving the Law (either one or both) are
perfectly reconcilable with that, and the memory of the deluge being the more
remote and first original, these may be the nearer and more immediate, and so
are not prejudged by his pretending, or my yielding of that.

Jacobs injunction to his household, Genesis 35.2. it is no where vouched by me as
the original of this custom among the Jews, See. 12.
but only an intimation given, that that other, the command of God before the
giving the Law, was agreeable to what we read of Jacob to his household, and so
certainly it is, for as in the one the ceremony prescribed them to use at the
putting away strange Gods, was this, to be clean and change their garments; so
in the other they are enjoined to sanctify themselves and wash their clothes,
which is in other words directly the same thing: washing themselves and having
clean garments being among the Jews joined together, and the witness of their
garments prescribed in baptism (...) (says the Gloss on Gemara Babylon, tit*
Iabimoth) to receive the presence of the divine Majesty (just as in the
Christian Church the Dominica in albis, white or Whitsunday was a special day
for administration of baptism* and the persons baptized wore rhetorically
styled sometimes (...) stars rising out of the waters, sometimes (...) the
bright lilies of the font, as they are joined together in Proclus Orat: 12. p.
384. and in S. Chrysostom, new lilies planted from the font, Hom. 6. de
resurr: and accordingly on Constantine's great coin, stamped in memory of his
baptism, was engraven (on one side) a poole of water with a lilie grown out of
it; (see Jos: Scal: in Opusc:) and all these but figurative expressions of what
Chrysostom more plainly sets down by (...) their putting on white garments at
the receiving of baptism, Tract. de S. Pent. for which Jobius in Photius has
(...) only.)

Jacob vowed a vow to the Lord to give him the tenth of all, and accordingly
God after instituted the tithes for the Levites portion, and so the latter of
these was agreeable to the former, but yet the latter, viz. Gods institution,
the original of the custom of tithing among the Jews; so Jacob might enjoin
his household that ceremony of washing or baptism, and after that God enjoin
it in giving the Law, and one of these be agreeable to the other, and yet the
custom of baptism among the Jews be derived only from the latter, as from
the peculiar original of it.

God, Exodus 19.10. in which baptism is said to be founded by the Jews, is not
(as Mr. T. suggests) the command to the Israelites to wash their clothes
(nothing but the custom of changing their garments can be founded in that) but
the command to Moses to sanctify them ( Go unto the people and sanctify them
to day and to morrow) in the Hebr^w notion of the word (...), sanctifications,
for washing, either the whole, or some parts of the body, as is showed at
large,. 35.

sanctifying, i. e. baptizing them, Mr. T. did unwittingly substitute washing
their garments, then I hope, he may now be advised to reform that mistake, and
see more reason then hitherto he has done, to assign that command of Gods, as
the most agreeable original of this custom, and no longer imagine that it was
a custom of the latter Jews, taken up by themselves without any ground of
Scripture; But if formerly he saw this, and was willing to disguise it, and, on
purpose to misguide the reader, left out the mention of Moses's sanctifying or
baptizing them, and only set down the washing of their garments (which was not
at all proper for the turn) to be the original of baptism, wherein, as
Paulinus tells us, they were rendered nivei, white as snow, corpore as well as
babitu, in body as well as garment, I shall not then hope that even this length
of words will be sufficient for his conviction.

Lastly, For his reason against deducing the baptism of proselites from this
original [because the Jews baptized not Jews by nature but by profession,
whereas those places speak of washing Jews by nature, not proselytes] it will
presently appear to be very vain; for 1. The Jews baptized Jews by nature,
and not proselytes only, as has been both there and here showed at large, out
of the most creditable of the Jewish writers; 2dly. Their baptizing of
proselytes was founded in their precedent custom of baptizing of Jews, as
has been evidenced also from the Rabbines explication of Number. 15.15. One
ordinance shall be both for you of the congregation of Israel, and also for the
stranger or proselyte. And so it is evident that of Exodus 19.10. being the
original of baptizing native Jews, may, and must be the original of baptizing
the proselytes.

Selden's authority (if it should be, as is pretended) can be of no force
against those evidences which I have here produced, the best he offers us at
any time, to prove any thing concerning the Jewish customs. And I shall now
appeal to the Reader, whether Mr. T. could well have been expected to have
made more misadventures in so few words.

Sect. 5. Mr. Selden's notion of the Sea. The defense of my notion of it.
Learned men's affirmations to be judged of by their testimonies. Christ's
baptizing of Jews as well as Gentiles, no argument. Christ's vouching John's
baptism to be from heaven, no argument. No more, the pretended no intimations
of it. The no conformity. The proselytes children baptized, continually, not
only at the first conversion. The baptism of a woman with child, serving for
the child also, not argumentative. The Canon of Neocaesarea about it.
Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.1. of our Fathers being baptized into Moses (as in the
cloud, so) in the Sea. Where 1. He tells me that he does not conceive Mr.
Seldens exposition, that the sea was some vessel of waters -- but the red sea]
And I that am as little of Mr. Seldens mind, but expressly interpreted it, of
the Red sea,. 7. and rejected Mr. Seldens interpretation. 8. (although I
omitted to name the author of it) am not, he knows, concerned in that, but have
from his rejecting Mr. Seldens authority, when it is not for his turn, his
example for my not thinking my self bound up by it at other times, either in
that newly past, where he vouched his name as his only proof, that the Jews
did not baptize Jews by nature, or in other particulars which I find
afterward vouched from him, the truth of which I as little conceive, as Mr. T.
does this of the sea not signifying the Red sea, which I acknowledge to be
unconceiveable.

not think my exposition right neither (though I interpret it of the Israelites
passing through the Red sea, as he acknowledges to do) But what is my
interpretation? why, that their being baptized into Moses in the Red sea (as
also in the cloud) signifies their being initiated into God's covenant under
the conduct of Moses, as since they are wont to be initiated by baptism. And
why does he dislike this interpretation? why, because when it is said, our
fathers were baptized, it is not meant were baptized as since proselytes were
baptized among the Jews, but as Christians were baptized.

reason of exception to my interpretation; For 1. I compare not this baptism
of out fathers in the sea with the baptism of proselytes among the Jews, but
annex it immediately to the baptizing of the native Jews,. 6. before I
proceed. 9. to the baptism of proselytes. And 2. I do not lay the comparison
of the Apostle betwixt the baptizing in the sea, and the Jewish custom of
baptizing, but acknowledge it to be betwixt the baptism of the Fathers under
the Law, and the baptism since Christ among Christians, All the use I make of
the words of the Apostle, was to show that baptism among the Jews was a
ceremony of initiating into the covenant, and that upon that supposall it was,
that the Apostle used the phrase of the Israelites that came out of Egypt, and
entered into Covenant with him, under the conduct of Moses, God giving them an
essay of his receiving them under his wings (the phrase to signify reception
into the covenant) by invironing them with the sea. This I thought had been
before intelligibly enough set down, I hope now he will no longer misunderstand
it.

Mr. S. that after Exo. 19.10. the Jews did not baptize Jews but only
proselytes, has already been evidenced at large to have no truth in it, the
custom of baptism continuing to all their posterity, as well as that of
circumcision. And whereas this is said to be set down thus out of Maimonides
and other Jewish Rabbines, the Reader, if he will consult the place in Mr.
Seldom de Synedr: l. 1. c. 3. will find there is no such matter; That Mr. S.
himself so affirms p. 23* I willingly acknowledge, but in a matter of ancient
story, such as this is, neither he nor any else must be believed farther then
the testimonies produced by him out of their writers exact, especially against
express testimonies to the contrary. And such he there produces more then one,
p. 34. out of Gemara (...) What did our Fathers? truly they entered not into
Covenant without circumcision and baptism and sprinkling of blood, and again
p. 35. our mothers were baptized and not circumcised, and p. 26. out of
Victoria Porchetus, that our mothers (though not as he says, Sara and Rebecca,
referring the custom to a greater antiquity then that of the time of giving
the Law) were baptized and not circumcised, and p. 38. out of Maimonides, that
the Israelites entered into covenant by a threefold rite or ceremony, by
circumcision, baptism, and oblation. And again, p. 39. What was done to you?
ye entered into covenant by circumcision, baptism, and he sprinkling of the
sacrifice, and therefore the proselyte -- the custom of baptizing the
proselytes founded in that of baptizing the native Jews. All these clear
testimonies are by him produced directly to the proof of my position, that the
native Jews (indifferently) were baptized, and not a word in any other parts
of the testimonies to give reason to suspect, that after that one time of Exo.
19. the Jews did not baptize. What he has done in his other book de Jure Not.
ac Gent. I need not apprehend (and have not commodity to inquire or examine)
supposing that if there he had undertaken the proof of it, he would here, where
he affirms it without proof, and against express testimonies produced by
him, have referred (according to custom) to that place.

T. his observation that Christ and his Apostles baptized Jews as well as
Gentiles?] For 1. so certainly they might, and yet derive their baptism from
the custom formerly in use among the Jews, for they, we know, baptized native
Jews: nay 2. so they might, though the Jews had baptized none but proselytes,
for to that it would bear just proportion, that they should baptize both Jews
and Gentiles, in case both came in as proselytes to Christ. For it were a
fallacy a little too gross to deceive any man of common understanding, to
argue thus, The custom was to baptize proselytes, and not natives; therefore
Christ, if he observed that custom, was not to baptize native Jews; The
answer being so obvious, by distinguishing of proselytes, that they are either
such as come in to the Jewish religion, or such as came in to Christ, and that
Christ was to baptize all that were proselytes to him, and that the native
Jews as many as believed on him, were such, and as believers, i. e. as
proselytes to Christ, not as native Jews were baptized by him.

negative, that Christ baptism was not in imitation of, or in conformity with
the Jewish custom; for 2. says he, Christ would not have avouched the
baptism of John to be from heaven and not from men, if it had been in
imitation of the Jewish custom. But I wonder what appearance of concludencie
there is in that reason? May not any thing be from heaven or by God's
appointment, which is derived from a Jewish custom? may not God in heaven give
commission to John Baptist to preach repentance, after the same manner that
others before him, Noah and Jonah etc. had preached repentance, and to receive
all that came in on his preaching, by the ceremony of baptizing ordinarily
used, and known, to initiate men into covenant with God, among the Jews? I see
not the least incongruity in this, or that any obligation of reason can be
pretended, why God may not appoint a ceremony known among men to be used in
his service: such sure was imposition of hands, usual among the Jews in
benedictions, which now is made use of by the Apostles of Christ, in ordaining
Bishops over the Church. And so it may well be in this matter of John's or
Christ's baptism, which though it were unquestionably from heaven in respect
of the Commission given to them by God, appointing them to do what they did,
yet might the ceremony of washing used by them be derived from the customs
that were already familiar among them.

Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the power of the Keys (and many the like)
which though brought into the Church of Christians by Christ, and so from
heaven, were yet derived and lightly changed from Jewish observances, and in
that respect from men also.

it is likely some where or other some intimation would have been given of that
custom, as the directorie for Christians in the use of baptisme] is too
frivolous to require reply; for beside that the negative argument were of no
force, if it were as is pretended, It already appears that there are in the
Jewish writers, more then intimations of this custom, and some indications of
it even in the Scripture itself, as John 3.5.10. and for any plainer
affirmations, what need could there be of them, when both the matter it self
speaks it so plainly, that there was no need of words, to those that knew the
Jewish customs, as the first writers and readers of the New Testament did, and
when Christ's sole authority, and practice of his Apostles were sufficient
Directorie for the Christians in the use of baptism?

the institution and practice would have been comformable to it; And so I say,
and have made clear that it was, as far as to the controversy in hand we are
or can be concerned in it: But says Mr. T. the contrary appears, adding one
main instance of the inconformity, and 14. lesser disparities, The main
disparitie, says he, is in their baptizing no infants of the Gentiles at their
first conversions, whereas the Jews baptized only the Gentiles Infants at
their first proselyting, not the infants of those who were baptized in infancy.

proof beyond his own affirmation, and therefore it is sufficient to deny it,
as he knows we do, and evidently beggs the question in assuming and not
offering any proof for the contrary.

For the second, that of the Jewish practice, he pretends no more then what he
had before cited by reference (but now sets down in words) viz. the affirmation
of Mr. Seldom.

affirmation of Mr. S. was, as to the native Jews children, who were still
baptized after the giving of the Law. And the same I now add for the children
of those proselytes who had been baptized in infancy, there appears not the
least proof of this from the Jewish writers, who are the only competent
witnesses in it, but for the contrary I propose these two testimonies taken
notice of by Mr. S. himself de Synedr. c. 3. out of Gemara Babylon: (...) He
wants the rite of a proselyte for ever, unless he be baptized and circumcised.
Here baptism and circumcision are joined together, as aequally necessary to a
proselyte, and that for ever. And circumcision there is no doubt was to be
received by every male, not only at their first coming to the Church of the
Jews, at their first proselytisme, but through all posterities, every child of
a proselyte that was not circumcised (...) became straightways no proselyte:
And then sure this conjunction of baptism with circumcision on these terms of
equality, both of perpetual necessity to all proselytes, must needs extend the
baptism as well as the circumcision beyond the first proselytes and their
immediate children, to all their posterity that shall come from them
afterward, for to all those belonged circumcision.

and if he be not baptized, he remains a Pagan or Gentile; Here I shall ask,
whether the child of a proselyte who had been baptized in his infancy, were to
be a Pagan for ever? I suppose it will be answered, no; And then by the force
of that testimony of Gemara I conclude, therefore it must be supposed that he
was baptized, for else he would be a pagan for ever.

suggestion; 1. That if it were granted in the full latitude wherein it is
proposed, that the Jews baptized no other infants of proselytes, but those
whom they had at their first conversion; yet this would nothing profit Mr. T.
For it were then obvious to affirm, that Christ who imitated the Jews in
that, and so baptized the children of Christian proselytes, did make some light
change in this, and farther then the pattern before him afforded, baptized all
the posterity that should succeed them, and were born in the Church in their
infancy also, the reason though not the pattern belonging equally to them as
to the children of the first proselytes, and the Jewish custom of baptizing
their natives infants, being fully home to it.

children which the proselytes had at their first proselytisme were baptized
among the Jews, this is as evident a confutation of the Antipaedobaptist, and
so of Mr. T. as it would if all their infants to all posterity were baptized:
For by that very baptizing of the infants at their first proselytisme, it
appears that infants may be baptized, for I hope those proselytes infants are
infants; And if any infants may, and ought to be baptized, then are all their
pretensions destroyed, whose only interest it is to evince, that no infants
must or may be baptized. And I hope this will be of some use to Mr. T. when he
shall have considered it.

T. has to confirm this of the Jews not baptizing any infants of proselytes
born after their first conversion and baptism, is the resolution of the Jews,
that if a woman great with child became a proselyte and were baptized, her
child needs not baptism when it is born. And this I had cited,. 109. out of the
Rabbines, and so indeed I find it in Maimonides, tit. Isuri bia. c. 13. (...)
But I cannot think that (whether true or false) a sufficient proof to infer
the conclusion; For the Jewish Doctors might probably thus resolve upon this
other ground, because the mother and the child in her womb being esteemed as
one person, the woman great with child being baptized, they might deem the
child baptized as well as the woman, and not account it needful to repeat it
after the birth, which yet (by the way) it seems they would have done, if they
had not deemed the child all one with the mother, and consequently they must
be supposed to baptize those children which were begotten to the proselyte
after the time of his or her first conversion and baptism. And accordingly the
Christian Doctors in the Council of Neocaesarea Can. 6. having resolved the
contrary to that Jewish hypothesis, viz. that (...), the mother that bears the
child differs from the child, or is not all one with it, and her confession
in baptism is (...) proper or particular to her self, and belongs not to the
child in her womb, give the ((...)) the woman that is with child, and is then
converted to the faith, leave to be baptized, when she pleases, supposing that
the child which then she carries, shall, notwithstanding her baptism then, be
it self baptized after its birth.

answer to the argument deduced from the resolution of the Jews in that point,
so it is moreover an evidence how little of proof Mr. T. had either from his own
observation or Mr. Seldens testimonies, from all which he can produce no other
but this, which in the sound is so far from affirming what he would have, and
upon examination is found to conclude the contrary.

Sect. 6. Lesser inconformities no prejudice. Yet they do not all hold. Prayer
the Christian sacrifice. (...). The rule of judging in this matter. Baptizing
in the name of the Father etc. prescribed by Christ. So dipping or sprinkling.
The Pract* Cat. misreported. Mr. Marshals covenanting.
grand disparity then being cleared to be Mr. T. his mistake, I shall not need
to attend his other instances of disparity, this accord which has been already
mentioned and vindicated, being sufficient to my pretensions, and no
concernment of mine obliging me to believe or affirm, that the parallel holds
any farther then Christ was pleased it should hold, and of that we are to judge
by what the Scriptures, or ancient Church tells us was the practice of him, or
his Apostles; For 1. the Jews I doubt not, brought in many things of their own
devising into this, as into other institutions of God's, and the latter Jews
more, as of the proselytes being so born again in baptism, that lying with his
natural sister was no incest, and the like: And 2. Christ, I doubt not, changed
the Jewish economy in many things, as in laying aside circumcision, in
commissionating his disciples to baptize (and they leaving it in the hands of
the Bishop, and those to whom he should commit it, E^: ad Smyrn: Edit: Voss: p.
6.
(...), it is not lawful to baptize without the Bishop, says Ignatius) whereas
it was not among the Jews any part of the Priests office, any more then
circumcision was; And so in many other particulars.

pretentions, who affirm no more of the accordance betwixt the Jewish and
Christian practice, then eiher by some indications in the Scripture it self, or
by the Christian Fathers deductions from the Apostles times, appears to be
meant by Christ, and practiced by the Apostles; and then by the Jewish writers
is as evident to have been in use among them.

lesser disparities, and all that he has at large endeavored to infer from
them, supposing and granting them all to be such.

the baptism of males must be with circumcision and an offering, it is clear
that, though 1. circumcision be laid aside by Christ, and 2. when it was used
it had nothing to do with baptism, yet as to the adjoining of offering, or
sacrifice, the parallel still holds, the prayers of the Church being the
Christian sacrifice, and those in the Christian Church solemnly attendant on
the administration of baptism.

court of three Israelites, by the confession or profession of whom ((...),
says Maimonides) the infant was baptized, we have now not only the whole
Church, in the presence of whom it is publicly administered, and when more
privately, yet in the presence of some Christians, who are afterward, if there
be any doubt, to testify their knowledge to the Church, but more particularly
the Godfathers, and Godmothers, being themselves formerly baptized, do
represent the Church of which they are members, meaning thereby the people of
the Church, and the Minister commissionated thereto by the Bishop, represents
the Church also, meaning the Governors thereof.

Chap. (as far as I am concerned in it) unless it be to tell him that the
Bishops Canons are not the rule by which I undertake to define, wherein the
Jewish custom must be the pattern, wherein not; but (as he cannot but know, if
he had read the resolution of the 4th Quaere) the practice of the Apostles of
Christ, by the testifications of the Fathers of the Church made known unto us,
to which as I have reason to yield all authority, so I find the Canons and
rituals as of this, so of all other Churches in the world (no one excepted) to
bear perfect accoordance therewith, in this particular of infant baptism
(though in other lesser particulars they differ many among themselves, and all
from the Jewish pattern) And this I hope is a competent ground of my action,
and such as may justify it to any Christian artist to be according to rules of
right reason, of meekness, and sound doctrine, and no work of passion or
prejudice or singularity, or (as Mr. T. suggests) of the Doctors own pleasure,
as if that were the mutable principle of all these variations from the Jewish
pattern.

form of baptism, In the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost,
In this one thing, says he, which Christ did not prescribe, nor did the
Apostles, that we find, so conceive it, yet, says the Doctor Christ's
prescription must be indisspensably used.

form to be Christ's prescription; If the express words at his parting from
the world, Mat. 28. Go ye therefore, and teach, or receive to discipleship, all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, be not a prescription of Christ's, and if the universal doctrine and
continual practice of the whole Church through all times, be not testimony
sufficient of the Apostles conceiving it thus, and a competent ground of the
indispensable tinuing the use of it, I shall not hope to persuade with him,
only I shall mind him of the words of S. Athanasius in his Epistle to Serapion
Tom. 1. p. 204. (...). He that is not baptized in the name of all three,
receives nothing, remains empty and imperfect, For perfection is in the
Trinity, no baptism perfect, it seems, but that. And if this will not yet
suffice, I shall then only demand, whether he can produce so express grounds
from Christ, or the Apostles, or the Universal Church of God through all ages,
or from any one ancient Father, for his denying baptism to infants.

Practical Catechism, that I confess that by Christ's appointment the
baptized was to be dipped in water, i. e. according to the Primitive ancient
custom to be put under water, is a strange misreporting of my words, l. 6.. 2.
I wonder Mr. T. would be guilty of it. The words in the Pract. Cat. are
visibly these, By Christ's appointment whosoever should be thus received into
his family should be received with this ceremony of water, therein to be dipped
(i. e. according to the Primitive anetint custom to be put under water) three
times, or in stead of that to be sprinkled with it -- where 1. All that
Christ's appointment is affixt to, is, the receiving all that should be
received into Christ's family, with this ceremony of Water; 2. For the manner
of that reception by water, it is set down disjunctively, therein to be dipped
three times, or in stead of that to be sprinkled with it. These are evidently
my words; no way affirming either the dipping or sprinkling (one exclusively to
the other, to be appointed by Christ, but only the ceremony of water, whether
it be by dipping in it or sprinkling with it, either of which may be signified
by the word used from Christ by S. Matthew, (...), baptize ye.

Church of Christ has had to disuse immersion, and in stead of putting the
whole body under water, only to dip the face, or sprinkle it with water, I
shall not now discourse, all that I have to do in this place being to vindicate
my self, that I have no way affirmed the putting under water (used by the
Primitive Church) to be appointed by Christ, exclusively to sprinkling, and
that I hope I have already done by the exact reciting of my words, which had
been so much misreported by him.

Chapter. For as to the objection against Mr. M. drawn from his covenanting to
perform the worship of God, according to Gods word, and admiring that ever
mortal man should dare in Gods worship to meddle any jot farther then the Lord
has commanded, and yet in point of infant baptism following the Talmud, I
that am far from Mr. M. his persuasions, as well as practices, am not sure
bound to give answer for him, Aetatem habet, let him answer for himself; and
when he does so, 'twere not amiss he would consider, whether Episcopal
government stand not on as firm a basis in the Church of God, as Infant
baptism is by him vouched to do.

CHAP. II. Of Christ's words, Mat. 28.19.
Sect. 1. The Doctors pretended concessions examined. Christ's institution of
baptism not set down Mat. 28. but necessarily before that time.
Chapter is a view of my interpretation of Mat. 28.19. which lies thus, Go and
disciple ((...) make disciples, receive into discipleship) all nations,
baptizing them in the name etc. teaching them etc. thereby evidencing that the
making or receiving disciples, not supposing any precedent instruction, but
looking wholly on it as subsequent, can no way exclude the Christians infants
from baptism, when they are thus brought to the Church to be entered into the
School of Christ, and undertaken for that they shall learn when they come to
years.

proemial answer he has of many lines, which begins thus, Though I conceive
Dr. H. to ascribe more power to the Canons of the Prelates about the
Sacraments, then is meet, being one who has written in defense of the Common
prayer Book, yet by this allegation of Mat. 28.19. he seems tacitly to yield,
that if the words there include not infants under the discipled, then there is
something in the New Testament which excludes infants from baptism, although
he say 96. I do not believe or pretend that that precept of Christ does
necessarily infer (though it do as little deny) that infants are to be
baptized.

passing, how many incongruities are here amass't together in these few words.

written in defense of the Common Prayer Book is made use of as an evidence to
infer that I ascribe more to the Canons of Prelates, then is meet, it is
certain 1. that the Common Prayer book stands not by the Canons of the
Prelates, but by Act of Parliament, and consequently if I had been guilty of a
confessed partiality to the Common Prayer book, yet were this no evidence of my
ascribing any thing (therefore sure not more then is meet or too much) to the
Canons of Prelates.

Common Prayer book, I offended at all (therefore surely not about either, much
less against both the Sacraments.)

Common Prayer book, written long ago, a proof that I oftend now in somewhat
else; viz. in attributing too much to the Canons of the Bishop, is 1 the
connecting together things that are most disparate, concluding quidlibet ex
quolibet; and 2dly a plain begging of the question, for such certainly it is in
respect of him, with whom he disputes, and so must be, till he shall offer
proof that I have erred in that defense, The same, as if he should conclude,
that he who has once written the truth, were obliged the next time to swerve
from it.

allegation of Mat. 28.19. the word allegation must signify that I produce and
so allege that text as a proof of my position: But this he knows I do not; But
only suppose the Antipaedobaptist to found his plea in it, and all that I have
to do, is to show how useless it is like to prove to him; confessing also that
to me it is as useless, and so never attempting to draw any argument from it.

expressly to deny, this sure is very incongruous: It Is visible from the words
by me produced. 96. that I deny that that text of Mat. 28.19. can prejudice the
baptism of infants, and the only design I had in considering this text at all
in this place, was to evidence the second branch of the negative part of my
undertaking, that there appeared nothing in Christ's institution of baptism, or
commission to his Apostles, which was exclusive of infants: How then can it be
suggested with any show of truth, that I seem tacitly to yield, that if the
words include not infants under the discipled, there is then something in the
New Testament which excludes infants from baptism.

Christ's Commission for baptism to belong to infants, not from these words of
Christ (which as I said, I never proposed to that end to prove my position from
them, but only to answer the Antipaedobaptists objection founded in them) but
from the practice of the Apostles signifying their sense and persuasion of
Christ's meaning in his institution of baptism, which institution we know from
John 4.1. had long preceded the delivering of these words Matthew: 28.

discipling there, yet could not I deem infants thereby excluded from baptism,
whom by another medium, viz. the Apostolical practice, I supposed to be
admitted to it by Christ's institution.

Infants I suppose may be received into discipleship when their parents bring
them, and if so, then they are or may be included in the words Mat. 28. but if
they might not, and so were supposed not to be comprehended in these words of
Christ, Mat. 28. yet that which is not included, is not presently excluded, he
that says a man is a living creature, does not thereby deny an angel to be so
also: when Christ gives his disciples power to heal diseases, Mat. 10.1. he
cannot be deemed to withhold from them power of raising the dead, for that we
see comprehended in their commission v. 8. and so I could no way be enforced to
yield that they were excluded from baptism, as long as from any other medium I
were assured they were admitted to it.

appearance of truth in this discourse.

necessary for me if I will stand to my words elsewhere, to acknowledge infants
excluded by that text, To which end he has been very diligent in putting
together several scattered passages in my writings, in hope to find some
(...), and to raise some show of argument out of my own words, and so from my
temerity or inconstancy (for want of solid proofs) to conclude that if this
precept of Christ does not necessarily infer infant baptism, then by manifest
consequence it does deny it.

gathers up are these, The Doctor says,. 55. that Christ's institution makes
dipping or sprinkling with water a Sacrament, which institution is Mat. 28.19.
and therefore the Doctor will have the words there indispensably used in
baptism, and. 92. he says baptism is a Sacrament, that Sacrament an
institution of Christ's, that institution not founded in any reason of immutable
truth, but only in the positive will of Christ, and so that there is nothing
considerable in this question (or any of this nature) but how it was delivered
by Christ, And. 94. that which was done by the Apostles, if it were not a rule
for ever, yet was an effect of such a rule formerly given by Christ, and
interpretable by this practice to be so. And Pract. Cat. l. 6.. 2. he
expounding Christ's institution, says that the words import that the person
baptized acknowledges, makes profession of believing in three, delivers him
to three as authors of his faith, and to be ruled by the directions of his
Master, and this he will have to be meant by baptizing into the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

whence, says he, I infer that if baptism be a Sacrament, and made so by
Christ's institution, and that institution founded only in his positive will,
and the will of Christ be, that baptism be in the name of the Trinity, and
this is when the baptized makes profession of believing in three, to be ruled
by them, and the Apostles practice interprets Christ's rule, no infant that does
not profess faith, is baptized into the name of the Trinity, nor was appointed
to be baptized by Christ, nor did the Apostles baptize them, and therefore they
are not baptized according to Christ's institution, and so no Sacrament to them.

subtle fabric* and great pains taken to pro^ me to affirm tacitly what I
expressly deny: But herein though his pains be great, he has much failed of
the success, it were too long to show it at large, yet the reader that will be
at pains to survey his process, will certainly acknowledge it, if he shall but
remember these two things.

Christ's institution of baptism was not (nor is ever affirmed by me to be) set
down in those words of Mat. 28. that having been long before instituted and
practiced, as appears by plain words Joh. 4.1, 2. Secondly, That though Christ's
will and institution for baptizing infants be not so manifestly expressed in
those words Mat. 28.19. as shall be able by the bare force of the words to
convince any gainsayer, without any other way of evidence or proof added to it,
yet by the Apostles practice of baptizing infants (appearing to us by other
means) it is most evident that they who certainly did not mistake Christ's
meaning, did thus understand and extend his institution and commission. The
truth of this is there made evident. 30. etc. I shall not here repeat it.

infant when he is to be baptized, does, though not by his own voice
personally, yet by his lawful proxies, which the Church accepts in his stead,
profess the believing in three, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, deliver
himself up to three, etc.

Labyrinth there provided for him, if such it appear to be, and discern a
perfect accordance in all the passages, which with such hope of advantage were
so diligently collected by him.

Yea, if the positive will of Christ, be the reason of baptism, they usurp
upon Christ's prerogative who baptize otherwise then Christ has appointed, and
then if the precept of Christ does not necessarily infer infant baptism (which
the Doctor ingenuously acknowledges) it does by manifest consequence deny it,
since he forbids that to be done otherwise then he has appointed when he has
determined how it should be done. The Doctor when he says above, the words, [I
baptize into the name of the Father etc.] must be indispensably used, me thinks
by the same reason should conceive Christ's institution should be unalterably
used in baptizing those only whom he has appointed to be baptized.

viz. that they that baptize infants, baptize no otherwise then Christ
appointed, and the Apostles appear to have understood his appointment. By
Christ's appointment, not meaning particularly his words Mat. 28 but his will
otherwise made known to his disciples, when and in what words soever it was
that he instituted baptism, which must be long before this, even before his
Apostles took upon them to baptize any, which yet they did in great abundance
Joh. 4.1. And of this appointment or institution of batisme by Christ, it is
most true, that if that precept of Christ, whereby he first instituted
baptism, did not indeed comprehend and so necessarily infer infant baptism,
and was so understood to do by the Apostles, it shall consequently be deemed to
deny it. But then herein lies a great fallacy, when from another appointment
of Christ's, viz. that Mat. 28. which I acknowledge not to infer infant
baptism necessarily, he assumes in universum, and reports it as my confession,
that Christ's precept (indefinitely taken, and so extending to all Christ's
precepts at any time) does not necessarily infer infant baptism. Which is
that grand illogical fault in discourse, of inferring an indefinite or
universal conclusion from particular premises.

comparison which he makes betwixt the indispensable use of the words of
baptism Mat. 28. and the as unalterable observation of Christ's institution,
in respect of the persons to be baptized, I willingly grant it, on the
condition praemised, that he mistake not the text, Mat. 28. to be the words of
that institution, wherein Christ defined, who are the persons to be baptized.

commission to the Apostles to go preach to, or disciple all nations, and thus
far extends to point out the persons, viz. that they should (as disciple so)
baptize Gentiles as well as Jews, and again, they are express for the form of
baptism, that it should be in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, but they are not any kind of direction to that other matter of
receiving, and admitting infants or not infants.

practice of their ancestors in the Jewish religion, by the vulgar notion of
baptism, whilst it was familiarly used among the Jews, both to their own and
their proselytes children, and also by Christ's special direction (though the
Gospels, which express not at all the words of the first institution of
baptism, do not set that down) in the time of his preaching among them, some
while before that passage of story related, Joh. 4.1. etc.

Apostles learnt it (and not from Mat. 28.) and we learn it only from the
Apostles, as shall hereafter appear. And so much for his prooemial reasoning.

Sect. 2. Making disciples all one with receiving into discipleship. Baptizing
the act of the Baptist. Instruction subsequent to discipling. The pretended
parallel between Mat. 28. and Mar. 16. (...) John's discipling by preaching
excludes not infants. No more the Apostles, Mat. 10.5. The notation of the word
(...). Mat. 13.52. Act. 14.21. Infants both said to come and to believe.
Instruction subsequent to baptism.
praelusorie (...), he next proceeds to consider, what shift (as he calls it)
the Doctor makes to elude the force of Christ's institution, Mat. 28.19. But I
have already made it evident that that Commission for preaching to, or
discipling all nations (as for the baptizing them, and the particularity of the
form to be used in baptism, etc.) was not the institution of baptism, nor
any intimation on either side, whether infants should be baptized or not; and
so it is manifest how little need I had to use any shift, or artifice to elude
the force of it.

exceptions he must find; And the first is, that though (...) is well rendered,
make disciples, yet (...) is not well paraphrased by, receiving into
discipleship, baptizing them, making this form of baptism the ceremony of
receiving them. For by this, says he, the making disciples is made the same
with receiving them, and baptism the ceremony of receivers into discipleship,
which is as truly an act of the baptized professing, or avouching his
discipleship.

subtlety of a refined nature, making a difference betwixt making disciples,
and receiving into discipleship, or receiving disciples; As if these two were
not perfectly synonymous, and by me evidently used, as such. I shall not
dispute of words, when the matter is clear, and when it is equally to my
purpose which phrase is used, whether making or receiving disciples.

baptism, which I make the ceremony of the Apostles receiving them, that it is
as truly the act of the baptized, this is no subtilty, but gross and visible
enough; For certainly baptism in the active sense (as it is plain I understand
it in that place, where I paraphrase, go and make disciples and baptize) is
not the act of the baptized, but of the baptist; The coming to baptism indeed,
and the undertaking the vow, and making the profession, is the act of the
baptized, either personally, or by his proxy, which in reputation of Law, and
in acceptance of the Church, is his also, but still baptism, or (to remove
all possible mistake) baptizing, (...), Mat. 28.19. is an act of the baptizer
only, and so the ceremony of receiving into discipleship, whomsoever they
thus duly baptize. I hope I need say no more of this.

exception is to those words of mine wherein I say that the making or receiving
disciples, supposes not any precedent instruction, but looks wholly on it as
subsequent. This I there concluded not from the bare negative, because there
was no precedent mention of such instruction, where discipling and baptizing,
were both mentioned, but because in that place, on which the Antipaedobaptist
so much relyes, Mat. 28.19. the [(...) teaching] is expressly mentioned after
discipling and baptizing, and so is in reason to be deemed, and looked on, as
subsequent to both, and so the receiving ad discipulatum refer to that then
future instruction.

baptism 1 Pet. 3.21. did refer that, baptism is (...), seeking to God, as
to the oracle to inquire for the whole future life, no way prerequiring actual
instruction, but coming to Christ and the Church to receive it, and obey it for
the future (and that done in some sort by those that are brought, when they are
not able to come, and by the charity of the Church received there) And this
farther illustrated as by the manner of children brought by parents to School,
without either knowledge of letters, or choice, or so much as wish of
instruction, so by the manner of Christ's disciples being received by him,
particularly of Philip, Joh. 1.44. who was called, and received into
discipleship, as soon as ever Christ met with him, i. e. before he was at all
instructed by him, and so also by the story of the Jews, Exo. 19.8. who
undertook to obey all the Commandments of God, which he should give them, which
yet were not then, but after given them, v. 20. and so lastly by the nature of
proselytisme, which as it is all one with entering into God's covenant and (in
the Christian sense) with coming to Christ and being received to discipleship,
so it is that which children are known to be capable of, not only by that text,
Deuteronomy. 29.10. but by the custom of baptizing infant proselytes among the Jews,
and by Christ's command to suffer them to come unto him, whenever they were
thus brought.

reasons of his dissent, For, 1. says he, that which is expressed in Matthew by,
Go ye therefore and make disciples all nations, is in Mark, Go ye into all the
world and preach the Gospel to every creature, which shows how they should
disciple all nations; Now they who are made disciples by preaching the Gospel
are made disciples by precedent instruction, Ergo, the making or receiving
disciples Mat. 28.19. supposes precedent instruction.

Mark are no otherwise parallel to those in Matthew, then as an Epitome is
parallel to a larger discourse, such we know S. Marks for the most part is, an
abbreviation of S. Matthews Gospel, as in many others, so in this particular,
some passages indeed there are in S. Mark in this place, which are not in S.
Matthew, as shall a non be showed, but in the particular now before us, S. Mark
is, according to wont, more concise; there is no mention in him of baptizing in
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy Ghost, nor consequently
of discipling, of which that was the ceremony, as in S. Matthew there is.

Christ's appointment (...), to preach the Gospel, in S. Mark, does no way
infer the precedent instruction of every single person that was received to
baptism: The phrase signifies to proclaim or promulgate the happy tidings
brought into the world by Christ, grace, and mercy, and eternal felicity to
all that should come into him and take his yoke upon them, and learn of him;
And upon the publishing of this to all the world, to every creature, i. e. to
the Gentiles universally, as well as the Jews, I suppose it is very possible,
that many of them should make all speed to come unto Christ, and come out at
the Apostles preaching, they and their whole households together ((...) as the
oracle commanded in Homer) and to bring their infant children with them, as
they used to do, that became proselytes to the Jews and then the Apostles,
knowing their Masters mind for the receiving of Infants, and that (as from the
institution I suppose them fore-instructed) to baptism, receive them all, and
(as many as interposed no voluntary hindrance) baptize them, and having taken
them into the School of Christ make good provision for the future instruction
of them, as soon as ever they should be capable of it.

deduce from these words, Mat. 28. but to infer from another medium, the
practice of the Apostles, otherwise notified to us: All that I am now to
manifest, is, that this passage has nothing contrary to our hypothesis, but is
perfectly reconcilable with it, and this is done by the scheme thus laid: And
so it is most visible how no force there is in this first reason of exception.

such as the making disciples was Jo. 4.1. such is the making disciples Mat.
28.19. For by the Doctors confession they are all one. But that was by
preaching, as is plain concerning John, Mat. 3.1, 2, 5, 6. and concerning the
Apostles. Mat. 10.5, 6, 7. Ergo.

account last given is fully satisfactory to this exception also; For supposing
the Apostles to publish whithersoever they came, the (...) the good news that
was come into the world by Christ, and the hearers not only to come in
themselves, but to bring their whole families, and so their infant children
with them, there is no difficulty to imagine, that they that had thus made
proclamation, received all, and made all disciples, young and old, that either
came or were brought, and so it being granted that they made disciples by
preaching, preaching being the instrument to draw the parents themselves, and
to move them to bring their children to discipleship, it is still very visible
how children should be discipled, and consequently baptized by them, baptism
being the constant ceremony of discipling. And though I am not able to affirm,
how it was actually in John's baptism, yet this I may say, that as far as can
be discerned or inferred from the phrase in either place, ((...) and (...))
thus it very possibly might be both in John's and in the Apostles baptizing.

John, it is true indeed that his baptism attended his preaching, yet does it
not thence necessarily follow that none were baptized by him but those who
particularly heard and obeyed his preaching; For 1. Why might not those that
heard it, divulge it to others, and bring them before they heard him, to desire
to be baptized, and upon their confessing their sins, and professing amendment,
he baptize them? 2. Why might not those that heard it, or heard of it, give
that heed of it, as to bring all that were dear to them of what age soever, by
that means to secure them from the wrath to come; when Noah preached repentance
to the old world, and upon the decree of sending the flood upon the world of
the ungodly, called all to come into the Ark to him to escape the deluge,
suppose others besides Noah's family had hearkened to his preaching, or suppose
he and his sons had had infant children, can we imagine they would have left
their infants to that certain ruin, and not have taken them into the ark with
them?

John's baptism was answerable to that ark, in respect of that approaching
ruin on the Jews, styled the kingdom of heaven v. 1. and that evidenced to
be a bloody kingdom, explicated by casting into the fire v. 10. And can we
imagine the Jews that believed John and came to his baptism, did not bring
their children with them to save them from the praedicted evils, And then I
profess not to see any reason to render it incredible that John Baptist should
thus receive and baptize those infants (though the Scripture affirming nothing
of it, and tradition, as far as I know, as little, I shall neither affirm nor
believe any thing in it) This only is certain, that among the Jews of that
time infant Children were known to be capable of entering into covenant with God
after this manner, and of being partakers of the benefit of the Covenant by
that means.

Christ himself, who was by his sinlesness, as unqualified for the Repentance
which John preached, as the infants were by their incapacities, did yet come and
was received to John's baptism, v. 13. and then in c^se infants were brought,
why might not they be received also?

Apostles Mat. 10. First, It Is there evident that they were sent to the lost
sheep indefinitely, and sure that phrase comprehends the Lambs also, the infant
children being lost in Adam as well as the grown men, by the addition of their
actual to original sin: And then why should we doubt but the Apostles mission
extended to them also?

preaching, it is just as John's was, to warn them to beware of the imminent
destruction, that vindicative act of Gods kingdom v. 7. that all that should
give ear and heed to them might hasten to get out of that danger by reformation
and new life; and the ruin being impendent to the young as well as old, even
the whole nation, why should not the infant children be rescued from that by
their parents care in bringing them to baptism, and timely engaging them to
fly from the wrath to come, as soon as they should come to understanding,
enjoying in the mean time the benefit of others charity?

preaching though there be no mention of baptizing (and so it was not so fit to
be produced to our present business) yet other things there are appointed to be
done, wherein infants were concerned as well as others, as healing of diseases
etc. and if being incapable of receiving benefit from preaching should be
deemed an obstacle to their being baptized, why should it not to their
receiving of cures? Nay I may add, How should the dead in that place (who sure
were as incapable of hearing or understanding as the tenderest infant) be
capable of being raised by those Apostles, which yet is there affirmed of them,
v. 8.

reason also, and in like manner for the third, which is but repeating the last
branch of this second, that the Apostles were to disciple all nations by the
same way that they discipled the lost sheep of the house of Israel, which was,
says he, by preaching and therefore supposed precedent instruction.

viz. by preaching, to the nations, and receiving all that came in to the
discipleship, whether on their own legs, or in others arms, whole families at
once, the parents, and upon their undertaking their infant children also.

use and notation of the word, which is so to teach as that they learn, and so,
says he, is used Mat. 13.52. (...), is rendered, [instructed] by our last
translators, and can be no otherwise rendered than [made a disciple by teaching]
so Act. 14.21. it is said, Having preached the Gospel to that city, (...) and
having taught or made many disciples.

notation of the word we have formerly said sufficient, that it signifies to
receive ad discipulatum, as into a school of Spiritual instruction, (...) to
make a disciple, and such he is made, who by any motive or means either comes
or is brought into the school, this indeed in order to teaching in the Master,
and to learning in the scholar, and the one so to teach, as that the other
learn, but this subsequent to his being made a disciple, the youth we know
enters into the school, is admitted into the College and University, before he
learns a word there, the instruction or learning is still looked upon as future,
at his entering into discipleship.

Mat. 13.5. only some accidental differences may be observed, it is in the
passive, and in the Aorist in the preter tense, (...) every Scribe which is or
has been entered as a disciple unto the kingdom of heaven, who since his
entrance has been instructed and (as real passives import) received influence,
been really affected and changed by discipleship, still no way supposing that
he was instructed in the learning or mysteries of the kingdom of heaven,
before he was thus admitted a disciple to it; After his admission, there is no
doubt but he does (or ought to) learn, nay being there (...), a Scribe
discipled, a grown man and learned among the Jews, before he came to Christ, I
doubt not but some knowledge he had of it before he entered himself a disciple
(see baptizing of infants, p. 199.) but this not by force of the word (...),
for still a disciple he may be before he learns, and is therefore obliged to
learn, because he has assumed and undertaken to do so, either personally, or
by others susception, by his coming, or being brought to be a disciple.

Act. 14.21. (...)] signifies no more then having received, or initiated, i. e.
(I suppose) by this rite of baptism, made and baptized many disciples, which
though it be there set down as a consequent of the Apostles preaching the
Gospel in that City (for otherwise it were not imaginable that they should
receive any disciples there, they must first proclaim admission to all that
come, before any can be expected either to come, or be brought to them) yet may
it very reasonably be extended to more persons then those that understood their
preaching, viz. to the infant children of their proselytes, brought to them by
their parents and dedicated to Christ.

invalid are his attempts from the notation of the word, and by consequence his
inference from thence (which is set down as his fifth proof) that thereby it may
appear how the Apostles understood the precept of Christ to preach the Gospel
to persons and thereby make them disciples. For although the practice of the
Apostles be indeed the means by which we may discern how they understood
Christ's precept (and those two places cited by Mr. T. from Mat. 13. and Act.
14. do no way belong to that, they tell us not, whether they received infants
to baptism, or not) yet I may very well ward my self from any inconvenience,
which this use of the word (...) in other places can threaten, it being already
vindicated from all necessity that it should be confined to grown men, and not
communicated to infants also.

last proof is by returning to the first again, comparing the words in Matthew
with the parallel place in Mark, Whereby, says he, a disciple and believer
will appear to be the same, the disciple to be baptized in Mat. being in Mark
expressed by the believer, which is put before baptism.

Mark, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, and he that believes
not shall be damned, and so on to the end of the Gospel, is (as even now I
intimated) added by that Evangelist, to the words, as they are set down in
Matthew and so being an addition, cannot be looked on, as exactly parallel to
the words in Matthew, Go, and disciple all nations baptizing them -- And this
we also know is ordinary for one Evangelist to set down more fully, what is
omitted or more shortly set down in another, and S. Mark that in other things
was willing to abbreviate S. Matthew, does now visibly in large; And so the
comparison cannot regularly be made betwixt these two Evangelists words,
something being abbreviated in Mark which was more at large in Matthew, and
something more concisely set down in Matthew, and more largely in Mark. And
then what necessity is there, that Mark not mentioning discipling but
believing: and Matthew mentioning discipling but not believing the discipled
and believers should be deemed the same.

grown men, none can in reason be admitted disciples, which are not also
believers (the ground of which I have set down in the Resol. of the Quaere p.
199.) but of infant children this is not true, for those, though they cannot
come, may yet be brought, and though not upon their own confession, yet by the
susception of others, made capable of the Churches charity, and so may be
disciples without actual or personal belief.

T. his argument had power to infer it, twere that which I might safely avouch,
that infants may be comprehended under the style (...), they that believe and
are baptized; so even now we had it in the express words of Christ, the little
ones (and S. Luke specifies them to be (...) little infants) that believe on
him: i. e. just as they are said elsewhere to come unto him, when they are as
incapable, for want of bodily strength, of personal coming, as for want of
strength of mind or judgment, for personal believing, and yet in respect of
others bringing them to Christ (and so to the Church in baptism) they are by
Christ himself said to do both of these, to come in one place, and to believe
in the other.

believe] in Mark, belongs peculiarly to the grown men and women, who are
called by the preaching of the Gospel, of whom though it be said, that
believing and being baptized they shall be saved, and not believing they shall
be damned, yet it no way follows, that none but such as thus personally
believed, should be baptized, or that being baptized they should not be saved,
but lose all the benefit of their baptism.

He that believes not shall be damned, Infidelity is pitched on, as the thing
peculiarly, that incurs the certain damnation, i. e. the voluntary resisting
the Faith, when it is preached convincingly to them, and of that none are
capable, but those that are arrived to years of understanding. Which as it is
an indication that that ver. and those that follow in S. Mark of believers
casting out devils, etc. v. 17, 18. belong to adulti peculiarly, so it no way
hinders but S. Matthews words being different from them, and supposed to be
precedent to them in Christ's delivery, may comprehend infants also, as such who
are capable of entering into discipleship, and of being brought and presented to
the Apostles by believing parents, This being the way whereby the faith of the
parents may be signally beneficial to the child, in bringing him thus early
into the School, and so to the benediction of Christ, the parents together with
the infant children, as among the Jews so among Christians, entering together
into covenant with God.

T. is willing to find a difference betwixt Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever Christ has commanded them, Mat. 28.20. and the preaching of
the Gospel in S. Mark: thinking by that means to avoid the importunity of that
text in Matthew, which evidently sets baptism before instructing. But this can
avail him nothing, For if by the Gospel in Mark we understand the whole Gospel,
as in reason we must, for that is it which must be preached to every creature
(the Gentile world) then is that directly all one with teaching them to observe
whatsoever he has commanded; But if by preaching the Gospel we mean no more
then, as Mr. T. here says, that Jesus is the Christ, i. e. the proposing him
as a Master, and calling all to come to him as disciples, then this being
supposed precedent to men's coming to discipleship, or bringing their infants to
it (for without this they cannot be expected to come themselves, or to bring
their infants) all the rest is left to follow baptism, and so all particular
Christian instruction is subsequent, not precedent to baptism, an effect of
their discipleship, attending it, no way necessary to prepare for it, which is
the utmost (...), which from that circumstance of that text I undertook to
demonstrate.

Sect. 3. Discipleship before instruction. What knowledge of the Master is
required to discipleship. Two sorts of disciples, Some come, others are brought.
interpretation of Mat. 28. being thus evidenced to have no force or validity
in them against our pretensions, and so indeed his whole fabric demolished,
(that place of S. Mat. being the one main (if not only) ground of
Antipaedobaptists structure) I might well spare the advantages of the 26, 27,
28.. to which he makes some kind of answer in the remainder of his 25 Chapter:
But there is so little weight in his answers that they will be speedily
dispatched.

First then to my 26. he says, that were it all granted me, yet it would no
whit avail to prove that an infant may be a disciple appointed by Christ to be
baptized. To this I reply, that the 26. being most of it spent for the
explaining an hard place 1 Pet. 3.21. concerning baptism, and for assigning
the due notion to (...), a question, or address as to an Oracle, for
instruction for the future life, I pretended not to conclude infant baptism
from thence, nor any more then this, that baptism being the entering of a
disciple, and not praerequiring actual instruction, but consisting in coming to
Christ and his Church to receive it for the future, it is certain that by this
account children are capable of baptism, because they may by the care of their
parents be thus brought early to Christ, and entered into his school by them,
before they themselves have faculties either to desire, or know what is done to
them, the proportion holding in this betwixt infants and other scholars that
are entered by their parents in any school before they know one letter in the
book, or have actual willingness to acquire any knowledge; And this is there
illustrated by the example Philip, Joh. 1.44. and of the Jews, Ex. 19.8. which
have again been mentioned, and are clear evidences, that those may be received
into discipleship which have not yet had precedent instruction.

Let putting to school be as early as the Doctor will imagine, yet none is put
to school till he does know his teacher, and so none is Christ's disciple in
the Scripture language till he know Jesus to be Christ, and take him for his
Lord, which infants being not capable of, they are not disciples, nor to be
baptized according to Christ's appointment.

children being brought to School by the care of their parents, was designed to
show no more then this, that they may be delivered up to be scholars, who as
yet know nothing of what they are to learn, nor have actual willingness to
acquire knowledge, and consequently that entrance into discipleship referres
only to subsequent, supposes not any precedent instruction.

example, though it were supposed of the child that goes to school, that he
knows his teacher, this bare knowledge of the person of his teacher, being
none of the documents which he comes to school to learn, but the good letters
that are professed and taught in the school, nor indeed is it imaginable why a
blind child which is brought to school, or put to an instructor, and so cannot
be deemed to know the Master, before assuetude has acquainted him with him,
should not yet be said, with as full propriety of speech, to come to school, as
he that uses his own eyes as well as feet to direct him thither.

children that are brought to School do not always know their Masters before
their entrance, no not by the most superficial knowledge; Many are brought to
public Schools, who never so much as saw their Masters, till they are by their
parents delivered up into their power and discipline; If this be not plain
enough, then change the similitude from the Schoolmaster to the parent or
guardian, or the very nurse, every one of these are to feed and nourish, and,
as he shall be capable, to instruct the child, and so does Christ in a
Spiritual sense, whosoever is entrusted (by being brought) to him in baptism.
And we know God and Nature does thus bring a child to the parent, to the nourse
or Guardian, when the child knows none of these, nor understands any more of
all these transactions, then the infant does at the font conceive what is done
to it there. And so still this evidenceth the vanity of this answer concerning
the child's knowing his teacher.

imperfect superficial knowledge of the teacher is in no wise worth considering
in this matter; For I shall demand, does such very imperfect knowledge of
Christ, as a Schoolboy has of his teacher, the first hour he comes into the
School, qualify him for discipleship to Christ, or no? If it do, then his
countrymen and kinsmen, before he revealed himself to be the Messiah, and the
Pharisees, which believed not his miracles, were sufficiently qualified, and
then it is evident that those might be admitted to discipleship, which were not
believers, and so all Mr. T. his hypotheses are destroyed, and then infants may
be discipled and baptized, though they be not believers.

the knowing Jesus to be Christ, and taking him for his Lord] this bears no
proportion with the child's bare knowing of his master, but is far above it,
equal to his making it his own choice to have this Master, rather then any
other, and promising exact obedience to him, which is much more then is to be
found in most young scholars, or indeed in any that are brought by their
parents or guardians, who alone are the persons who bear proportion with the
infants brought by others to baptism.

disciples, that they are either such as come, or such as are brought to
School, proselytes of their own choice, or children under the care of others,
of the former sort there are none but such as have some rude imperfect
knowledge of Christ, upon which they make this choice, and without it would not
probably be expected to make it; But for children which as minors in their
guardians hands, have no will of their own, there is no necessity they should
have knowledge to move their will, they may very reasonably be acted by the
will of others, and by their charity be made partakers of those privileges
which are communicated from Christ, in his Church to all true members thereof,
and to that end be discipled and, baptized, entered by this ceremony into the
Church of God, where instruction is to be had, as soon as they are capable of
it, and in the mean while partake of those other advantages, of which their
condition is capable.

Sect. 4. The difference of a disciple and proselyte examined. Christian as
well as Jewish proselytes, Privileges of proselytisme, Disciples of the
Pharisees. The Holy Ghost's not using the word proselyte of Christians,
concludes nothing. Jehovah. (...) Infants qualified for baptism. As for
entering into Covenant Deuteronomy. 29. Gods oath. Infants adjured, Creples capable of
Christ's cures.
answer is brief, that what I say is not right; And for proof, though he begins
with a [For 1.] and so by his form of branching, promises more reasons then
one, yet that first has never a [ Secondly] to follow or back it, and so it is
all resolved into that one, viz. that it is not true that a disciple and a
proselyte are perfectly all one.

difference he can spring betwixt a disciple and a proselyte, whereupon to
found satisfaction for conscience why infants may be proselytes, and as such,
come unto Christ, and yet cannot be made disciples, or received in baptism to
discipleship.

proselyte, says he, notes one that is by birth an alien from the Commonwealth
of Israel, and comes to the Israelites to own their God, and be part of their
policy, and not to be taught, but enjoy privileges with other Jews, whether
Civil or Ecclesiastical.

reason of difference, for besides that I, in that. 27. acknowledged this
accidental difference, that a proselyte denotes a coming from some other nation
(as a disciple does not) adding that this difference had no place in this
matter, where the disciples are specified to be received from all nations;
besides this, I say, it cannot be unknown to Mr. T. that I speak of proselytes
in such a notion as is equally competible to all of what nation soever they
are, that enter into Covenant with God.

proselyte defined, Heb. 11.6. by (...), he that comes to God, thus does a Jew
when he enters into Covenant of obedience to him, and thus did a Gentile when
he undertook the whole law of the Jews, and was therefore (...) and (...) a
proselyte of their covenant, and a proselyte of their righteousness, and such
is every one whether Jew or Gentile, that comes to Christ; and as the two
former of these were made partakers of privileges by this means, particularly
allowed freely to enter into the congregation, and infants as well as grown
men, were thus among them admitted into Covenant; so it is not imaginable why
it should not hold of the Christian proselytes also, nor why the Christian
infants thus received into Covenant by Christ, after the same manner as Jewish
and Gentile Infants were among the ancient people of God, i. e. by baptism,
should not as properly be called proselytes of Christ, though they neither come
from any other nation, nor ever associate themselves with Israelites according
to the flesh.

proselytes coming to the Israelites, that they came not to be taught, but to
enjoy privileges, I cannot divine what motive he had to affirm it, for sure
the infant child that was baptized, and so received into the congregation of
Israel did come to learn the Jewish religion, into which he was thus early
initiated, and that was one special privilege (the rest of the heathen having
not knowledge of these laws,) the immediate end of his proselytisme, yet not
excluding those other ends of enjoying all other privileges both Civil and
Ecclesiastical thereby.

but a disciple of Christ is one that ownes Christ for his teacher and Lord
only for spiritual benefits, I might well acknowledge it, and ask, why then
an infant, who has need of those spiritual benefits, as soon as he is born,
should not be hastened to a participation of them? But it is farther evident,
that spiritual benefits being first and principally designed, other even
secular advantages may very lawfully be respected, and reaped by them that are
thus early brought in, whether as disciples, or proselytes to Christ.

Two sage observations he here adds, 1. That there is no mention of the
disciples of the priests, but of the Pharisees and Sadduces, and I can very
well grant it, who speak not of any lower kind of disciples, but either of God
among the Jews, or of Christ, among us Christians, those being the only
discipleships, to which they were admitted by the ceremony of baptism, the
disciples of the Pharisees and Sadduces being but a subdivision, and
notification of several sects among Jews, as there are different denominations
of Christians (the more the pity) which divide unity, but use not new
baptismes, to discriminate them, I am sure contradict the Apostle if they do.

the holy Ghost does not at any time call Christians Christ's proselytes, but
his disciples, that, says he, we might not confound the notions of these
terms; But I answer, 1. that those texts that express the Christians entering
into discipleship, by coming unto him (of which there are good store) do in
effect call them proselytes, for a proselyte is a Greek noun derived immediately
from the verb (...) to come unto.

New Testament, yet would it not thence follow, that we might not confound the
notions of proselytes and disciples: The word Jehovah is never used by the Holy
Ghost in the New Testament, yet may we not thence conclude, that the notion of
Jehovah and God are diverse: (...), the known style of the Nicene Fathers, is
never found used by the writers of the Bible, yet sure it no way follows
thence, that the notion of that word, and of this phrase [ I and my Father are
one] are different and may not be confounded. It Is pity to lose time on such
fictions of scruple, and difficulty as these.

little ones coming unto Christ, and of their entering into covenant, Deuteronomy.
29.10. is on both sides but a bare denial of that which is competently proved
in that 28. For it is there evident that infant children are and always were
accounted capable of proselytisme and so of being entered disciples, and
particularly of being entered into covenant with God, and so of being baptized,
and there is no reason imaginable, why the infants which were capable of coming
to Christ, were blessed by him were affirmed by him to be qualified for the
kingdom of heaven, should be denied water to be baptized: The holy Ghost being
fallen on the Gentiles that came with Cornelius, Peter durst not deny them
baptism; And with what equity can the Christian Church do it to those, who are
qualified for the receiving pardon of sin, for being blessed by Christ, for being
received into Covenant with him, and may afterward be instructed in all things
which are needful to be learnt, For that still they are unqualified, till by
hearing they own Christ as their Master, this is a begging of the question,
without any the least tender of proof.

entering into covenant, when by the force of Deuteronomy. 29.10. he is forced to yield
it competible to infants, yet he will do his best to escape the conviction
which it offers him, 1. by modifying the sense, then by invalidating my
inference from it.

First, though he yield that they may enter into Covenant, yet this, says he,
but in some sense, by their fathers act engaging them under a curse or oath to
own God as theirs, in which sense the posterity then unborn did enter into
covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.15.

Covenant is entered into by the infants, just as by the rest of them, the wives
and the strangers or proselytes: On their part, Ye stand this day all of you
before the Lord, that thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord; and on
Gods part, that he may establish thee this day for a people.

act of the fathers engaging them under a curse or oath, but only of Gods oath
which he makes to them. v. 12.

adjured, or laid oath or curse upon their children, yet would this make no
difference betwixt their and our entering into Covenant; we by the oath of
baptism which is laid on the child (by him to be performed when he comes to
ability, unless he will forfeit all the benefits of his baptism) do in like
manner adjure our infants, though whilst they remain such, they hear it as
little as the Jewish infants did.

v. 15. he cites that the posterity then unborn thus entered into Covenant,
there is no such word in the text* no mention of [ posterity] or of [ unborn]
but of them only, who were not that day with them, i. e. (I suppose) were at
that time of assmbling absent from the Congregation. I wonder why Mr. T. should
attempt thus to impose upon the reader.

inference (which is this, that by parity of reason, infants may be entered into
discipleship, and accordingly baptized, as well as they then might be entered
into the covenant of God) he simply rejects it, without any farther notice of
his reason again, save only this, that in baptism such a discipleship is
enjoined as is by preaching the Gospel, and they only are disciples that are
believers, and the only are appointed to be baptized, who in their own persons
do enter into Covenant and engage themselves to be Christ's followers, and this
is again but a pitiful petitio principii, a denying our conclusion when the
premises cannot be denied, and so invincibly infer the conclusion, viz. that
those may be brought to and received into discipleship, covenant, baptism,
which in their own persons are not yet able to come to Christ, as those Criples
may be born by others to Christ, who wanted strength to address themselves,
and be as really partakers of his healing miracles, as those who came to him on
their own legs. And so much also for the 25th Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the Apostolical practice in this matter.
Sect. 1. The interpretation of 1 Cor. 7.12. vindicated. (...). Sanctification
used to denote baptism, the use of it in the Fathers and Scripture.
Tertullians testimony: designati Sanctitatis. Origin. Author Quaest: ad
Antiochum. Cyprian. Chrysostom. (...) there, infant children, (...) in the
Epistles. S. Augustines words examined.
positive part of our basis, evidencing the opinion and sense, which the
Apostles had of Christ's institution, and of his intention to include, and not
to exclude infants from baptism.

Apostles sense must be judged by their own usage* and practice, and that is
testified to us two ways, 1. by one considerable remain and indication of it
in S. Paul, 2. By the practice of the first and purest ages of the Church,
receiving infants to baptism, and so testifying the Apostolical usage, and
farther affirming that they received it by tradition from the Apostles.

remain, and indication in S. Paul is in the known place of 1 Cor. 7.12. where
speaking of the believers children he says v. 14* (...). but now are they
holy, i. e. it is the present practice of the Church (that Apostolical Church
in S. Paul's time) to admit to baptism the infant chldren of parents, of whom
one is Christian though not of others.

holy] is there made evident, as by other arguments, so by this, that the
ancient Fathers who knew the sacred dialect, call baptism Sanctification, Eum
qui natus est, baptizandum and sanctificandum, in Cyprian, and (...) to be
sanctified when they have no feeling of it, and (...), let him be sanctified
from the infancy, i. e. baptized then, in Gregory Nazianzen.

testimonies, and the rest which is there produced out of the agreement of the
Jewish style ((...) sanctifications for baptismes, to which agrees Maecarius's
saying of the Jewish baptism, (...), it sanctifies the flesh, Hom. 47. p.
509.) because the main difficulty of the interpretation consists herein, I
shall now add more, one very ancient before any of these (within less then an
100. years after the death of S. John) Tertullian de Anima, c. 39. where
speaking of infants, and saying, ex sanctificato alterutro sexu sanctos
procreari, that when either the father or mother is sanctified (i. e. received
as a believer by baptism into the Church, the children are holy etc. (clear
evidences of the notion of the word) this he there proves by these very words
of this Apostle, Caeterum, inquit, immundi nascuntur, else (so caeterum in
Tertullian's style is known to be put for alioqui or the Greek (...)) were your
children unclean, adding in stead of these other words [but now are they holy]
quasi designatos tamen sanctitatis and per hoc etiam salutis, intelligi volens
fidelium filios, hereby willing that we should understand that the children of
believers are the designed, or the sealed of holiness (in the sense, I
conceive, wherein they that are baptized are by the ancients frequently said
(...) to be sealed) and thereby of salvation also: And all this, says he, thus
urged by the Apostle, ut hujus spei pignora matrimoniis quae retinenda
censuerat, patrocinarentur, that this hope might be a pledge to engage the
believing wife or husband not to part from the unbeliever, And he yet farther
adds (still to the confirming of this interpretation) Alioqui meminerat
Dominicae definitionis, Nisi quis nascatur ex aqua and spiritu, non introibit
in regnum Dei, i. e. non erit Sanctus. Otherwise (or if this argument of the
Apostle had not been sufficient) he would have mentioned the definition of
Christ, that unless one be born of water and the Spirit (i. e. baptized) he
shall not enter into the kingdom of God, i. e. shall not be holy, showing
still of what holiness he understands the Apostles speech, that which the child
of the believer is made partaker of by baptism, concluding, Ita omnis anima
usque eo in Adam censetur donec in Christo recenseatur, tamdiu immunda quamdiu
recenseatur, Every soul is so long enrolled in Adam till it be enrolled anew in
Christ, and is so long unclean till it be thus anew enrolled, which as it
supposes every child of Adam to be impure, till he be thus by baptism made a
child of Gods, a member of Christ, so it gives a full account of that
uncleanesse, and that holiness of which the Apostle speaks the former the state
of a child of Adam unbaptized, the later of him that by baptism is initiated
and matriculated into Christ.

In Romans l. 5.
And to this agrees perfectly that of Origin (of the same age, a very few years
after Tertullian) speaking of the Apostles (from whom, says he, the Church
received by tradition that infants should be baptized) Sciebant enim illi
quibus mysteriorum secreta commissa sunt divinorum, quia essent in omnibus
genuinae sordes peccati, quae per aquam and spiritum ablui deberent, They to
whom the secrets of the divine mysteries or Sacraments were committed, knew
that there are in all the connatural pollutions of sin, which ought to be washed
away by water and the spirit, giving us to understand what uncleanness and
holiness it is, that children are capable of, the uncleanness of their birth
from Adam, and the cleanness or sanctity of Christian baptism.

Athanasius Tom. 2. p. 377. D.
Quaest. ad Antioch. 114. (or whosoever it is under the name of that ancient
Father) where the salvation of the baptized infants is concluded by him upon
force of those two texts, Suffer little children to come unto me; and, now are
your children holy, whereto he there sets parallel, (...) the baptized infants
of believers, as the plain paraphrase of the Apostles words.

Ep. 59. Edit. Pam. p. 80.
Cyprian, together with the 66. Bishops that were in Council with him in their
Epistle to Fidus, where speaking of the baptism of infants and expressly
forbidding that any such should be hindered or kept from it, he brings for proof
of it the words of S. Peter, that the Lord had said unto him that he should
count none common or unclean, where it appears what was that Holy Fathers
notion of common or unclean, such as might be refused baptism, and
consequently they which are not such, but on the contrary (...) clean or holy
(and such says Paul here are the believers children) are to be admitted
thither.

Cyprian Ep. 28. ad Hieron.
S. Augustine speaking says, he made no new decree, but kept most firm the
faith of the Church, and mox natum rite baptizari posse cum suis coepiscopis
censuit, and he and his fellow Bishops resolved that a child might duly be
baptized as soon as born.

Edit. Savil. Tom. 6. p. 854. l. 16.
S. Chrysostom in his (...) to them that were to be baptized, speaking of the
several titles of baptism, applies unto it that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 6.11.
(...), but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified: Ibid. l. 19.
and again, of those that were baptized, (...), the Scripture pronounces them
not only made clean but just and holy also.

Tom 1. p. 27.31
Gregory Nyssene in like manner, Glaphyr: in Exodus l. 2. speaking of him that
deferres baptism to old age, says, (...) etc. he is sanctified indeed, i. e.
baptized, but brings in no profit to God. And Tom. 2.18. C.
Comm: in Is. l. 1. Or. 1. speaking of baptism again, and the sufficiency to
wash away sin, he adds (...) -- But they are once sanctified, i. e. baptized
-- But I need no more such like suffrages.

difficulty consists, and if it be once granted that this is the meaning of [
Now are your children holy] then here is an evidence undeniable of the Apostles
practice of baptizing infants, and consequently an irrefragable testimony of
their sense of Christ's institution, including, not excluding infants.

T. his indevours and pains (so largely taken) to invalidate my conclusion from
this place of the Apostle, and I need not now be farther sollicitous for my
paraphrase on all those 3. verses, wherein he would fain find out some excesses
and defects, some insertions and omissions; If such there were (as I doubt not
to evidence there are none) it would be little for his advantage, as long as
the interpretation of the last words [ but now are they (i. e. your children)
holy] appears to be this, [ but now are your infant children partakers of the
privilege of baptisme] for this one part of that verse concludes all that I
pretend, or he oppugneth: And this I hope is now cleared to be no singular
interpretation of mine, but that which (beside the (...) the rational
importance of the Context concluding it) the style of Scripture and the
uniforme attestation of the antientest writers assign to it, so that there can
be no reason for doubting in it.

exuberancies objected to my paraphrase (and the only one which I can without
impertinence take notice of) that the term [young children of Christians -- ]
is more then is in the text, which has only [your children] which says he,
is not restrained to infancy, I shall briefly remove this exception, 1. By
the authority of Tertullian just now produced, who interpreted it of their
infant children, as appeared both by the express words [ sanctos procreari] and
the [ caeterum immundi nascerentur] and by the occasion of that discourse in
that place, which was the immunda nativitas ethnicorum, the unclean birth of
heathens children, and the unlawfulness of baptizing them, unless one of the
parents were Christian. To which may be added also Nazianzens phrase
forementioned, (...), being sanctified from infancy (for so sure (...)
signifies, (...), a child before or soon after birth, says Hesychius, and
Aristophanes the Grammarian cited by In Iliad. Basil. Ed. p. 944.
Eustathius, (...) a child new born) which in all probability referres to this
place of the Apostle, and so renders, (...) by (...), their children by their
infant children.

general doctrine of the Fathers, when they speak of the faith of parents
profiting their children, meaning always their infant children, brought to
baptism by the faith of their parents, before they are personally capable of
having faith themselves.

inconveniences which must follow in case it be interpreted of any other but
infant children. For suposing them come to years of understanding, and
capacity, they shall then either be supposed to have received the faith or to
remain in infidelity: If they have received the faith and then be baptized, it is
evident that this benefit comes not to them upon any consideration of the faith
of the parent, but upon their own personal profession, and consequently that
these cannot be spoken of by the Apostle in that place, where he makes the
sanctification or baptism of the children a benefit of the believing parents
cohabiting with the unbeliever, and as Tertullian says, patropinium, a plea to
move the believer not to depart. But if they have lived to years and not
received the faith, it is then certain that they may not be baptized at all; And
so it is manifest it must be understood of the infant (incapable) children, and
none else.

T. also excepteth against the paraphrasing of [ holy] by [ admitted to
baptisme] affirming this to be a sense of the word, no where else found. But
this I hope I have cleared already, both from the usage of the word among the
Jewish and first Christian writers, and might farther do it even by this
Apostles dialect, who in his inscriptions of most of his Epistles to the
Churches, calls all those to whom he writes, i. e. the baptized Christians of
those Churches, (...) holy, Romans 1.17. and (...) sanctified, and (...) holy, 1
Cor. 1.2. and again (...) holy, 2 Cor. 1.1. and Ephesians. 1.1. Phil. 1.1: Col. 1.1.
among whom no doubt there were many who were no otherwise holy or sanctified,
then as all baptized Christians are capable of that style. But I shall need
add no more of that to what has been already so largely said.

parts of my interpretation being thus cleared, that their children] were their
babes or infants, and their being holy] their being baptized, it is sure I cannot
be concerned in his conclusion, that he never read or heard any exposition
ancient or modern so expounding as this Doctor or Dictator does, nor do I think
he can show any] I hope now he will alter his mind, and acknowledge that it was
his own fault, that this interpretation seemed so new and strange to him.

Augustine produced by him (it should be, l. 2. de Pecc. Mer. and remiss. c.
26.) to the seeming prejudice of this interpretation, Ac per hoc and illa
sanctificatio cujuscunque modi sit quam in filiis fidelium esse dixit
Apostolus, ad istam de baptismo and peccati origin vel remissione quaestionem
omnino non pertinet] it will easily be reconciled to it, if we but mark what
question it is, that there he speaks of, even that which he had then in hand,
viz. whether baptism were necessary to remission of sins, and entering the
kingdom of heaven.

question in hand appears by the words immediately precedent, which are these
sanctificatio, Catechumen^ si non fuerit baptizat^^, non ei valet ad in^randum
regnum coelorum aut ad peccatorum remissionem, The sanctification of a
Catechumenus (what that is he had mentioned before, Catechumenos secundum
quendam modum suum per signum Christi and orationem impositionis manuum puto
sanctificari, that some kind of sanctification which the unbaptized might have
by prayer and imposition of hands, of which we sometimes read in the ancients,
as has elsewhere been showed) profits him not for the entering the kingdom of
heaven, or obteining remission of sins, unless he be baptized. And therefore
that sanctification of whatsoever kind it is, viz. if it be without baptism,
belongs not, says he, to the question then in hand concerning baptism and the
original and pardon of sin.

Augustines meaning. The adversaries with whom he disputes (the Pelagians) to
maintain the no necessity of baptizing infants for the remission of sins,
made use of that text, and concluded from it the sanctity of the Christian
infant birth, before, and without baptism: To this he answers, without any
strict examination of the importance of that text, that whatsoever
sanctification it can be imagined to be, that the Apostle speaks of, except it
be that of baptism, it cannot avail to the remission of sins, etc. Some
improper kind of sanctification, says he, he may confess, secundum quendam
modum, in him that is not yet baptized, but that without baptism non valet ad
intrandum, is not of force for entering into the kingdom of heaven, and
therefore whatsoever sanctification that is ( viz. Whatsoever without baptism)
it belongs not to his question then before him, and so the Apostles words can
have no force against him.

Augustines meaning in that place, that it is not the holiness of the Christian
infants birth, but of their baptism, which stands them in stead toward the
kingdom of heaven: And then that, as it is no evidence on my side, that he
interpreted that place to the Cor. as I interpret it, so it affirms nothing to
the contrary, but leaves it in medio, having his advantages other ways against
the disputers.

accord with us is evident and his conclusion firm both in that place, and l.
3. de Pecc. mer. and Remiss. c. 12. Illud sine dubitatione tenendum, quaecunque
illa sanctificatio sit, non valere ad Christianos faciendos, atque ad
dimittenda peccata, nisi Christiana atque Ecclesiastica institutione and
Sacramentis ^ffici (...) fidele^. It is to be held without doubting, that
whatsoever that sanctification be* it availes not to the making them Christians
and to the obteining remission of sins, unless by Christian and Ecclesiastical
institution, and by the Sacraments they be made faithful.

paraphrase, It would be too immoderate an excursion to take notice of all his
pretended objections to the former part of it, which concerns the cohabiting of
the believer with the unbeliever, which I assure Mr. T. were easy fully to
answer, and show his mistakes in each particular, if the matter of our present
dispute did require, or would well bear a (...) of that length, or if I thought
it in the least degree useful to the reader, that I should farther explain the
grounds of my paraphrase, then as they are already laid before him, Sect. 31.
etc.

paraphrase taken from the notations of the word (...), has been sanctified]
and (...) (not to, but) by the wife] and by the plain consequents, what know
thou o wife, whether thou shall save thy husband -- are by Mr. T. examined with
an endeavor to confute them, and so to overthrow the whole paraphrase, it may
perhaps be thought useful that I should take a view of those his endeavors,
and therefore that I shall now proceed to do, and shall there meet with by the
way what was most material in his former exceptions against my paraphrase.

Sect. 2. The rendering (...) [hath been sanctified] defended. S. Hieromes
testimony. Enallages must not be made use of without necessity. No advantage
from it here. Feigned instances of Enallage. (...).
evidence taken from the word (...), has been sanctified] referring to some
past known examples and experiences, of this kind (of a wives converting the
husband etc.) he has a double answer, 1. That as my paraphrase expresses it,
it should signify not only that an unbelieving husband has been sanctified,
but also that there is hope they will, and so it should note not only some
example past, but also some to come, of which there can be a less reasonable
account given then of putting it in the present tense in English. 2. That the
Enallage or change of tense is frequent, c. 11.14* (...) in the present tense
for the future, and here (...) for (...) or (...), and in the next verse (...)
in the preter for the present, and so (...) here, not, has been, but is
sanctified, or if in the preter tense, yet that to be understood of a past
thing yet continued, as (...) Joh. 3.18. notes an act still continued in force.

former (the same which he had mentioned before, and excepted against as an
excess in my paraphrase, but both there and here without the least cause;) For
in my paraphrase, I look upon (...) as a verb of the preter tense, and as such
only adapt the sense to it, referring it not to future hopes but to past
experiences or examples; Only because examples are rhetorical syllogismes, and
what has been frequently experimented may also reasonably be hoped, I suppose
that the Apostle so meant these examples, as grounds of hoping the like for the
future, not making this of the future any part of the sense of (...) in the
preter, but explicating the (...) or rational importance (which is somewhat
more then the (...)) of the Apostles speech, and supposing this conclusion to
ly hid under this premisse, as it is ordinary in all discourse to set down the
premises distinctly, leaving the conclusion by every ones reason to be drawn
from thence, without setting it down explicitly.

v. 16. where the argument is pressed, and the conclusion inferred more
explicitly, For what know thou, o wife, whether thou shall save thy husband
-- and the like mentioned in the Paraphrase from 1 Pet. 3.1.

authority of S. Hierome; as for my rendering (...) by the woman (so I find it,
per mulierem, in his 7th Epist. ad Laetam, and so Marianus Victorius in his
Scholia assures us, all the Copies ancient and printed, read it) so also for
this part of my Paraphrase, exemplum refert (says he on the place) quia saepe
contigerit ut lucrifieret vir per mulierem, Vnde and Beatus Petrus ait, ut
siquis non credideret verbo, per mulierum conversationem sine verbo
lucrifierent, id est, cum viderint eas in melius commutatas, cognoscant omnes
Dei legem ita confuetudine inveterata potuisse mutari, He produces an example
because, says he, it has often happened that the husband has been gained by
the wife, according to that of S. Peter, that if any man believe not the word,
he should without the word be gained by the conversation of the wife, that is,
that when they shall see them changed to the better, all may know that the Law
of God might have been taken in exchange for so inveterate a custom.

Ep. 7. ad Laetam, speaking of the like example, Been, says he, feliciterque
expectavimus; Sancta and fidelis domus virum sanctificat infidelem, we have
well and happily expected (i. e. not mist of our expectation) an holy and
faithful house sanctifies an unbeliever, adding his conceit, ipsum Jovem, si
habuisset talem cognationem, potuisse in Christum credere, that Jupiter himself
if he had had such a kindred, might have been brought to the faith of Christ.

As for his 2d answer, I acknowledge such Enallages to be ordinary in the
Hebrew, and sometimes, but more rarely found in the Hebraizing Greeks, or
Hellenists, and consequently that where the context will not bear the sense of
the tense which is used, there may be place for this Grammatical figure, which
yet is not to be made use of unnecessarily.

convincing reason offered, that (...) in the preter tense] could not be born,
I should not then doubt to interpret it by this figure, either in the present
or some other tense: But when (as here it is evident) there is no such
necessity, then 1. I cannot think fit to do so, (it is dangerous to forsake the
literal sense, when it may be commodiously retained, and fly to either a
Rhetorical, or Grammatical figure) and having no motive to do so, I am next to
consider, what is the properest importance of that phrase in that tense wherein
it is used, and then I could not (I believe) have fallen upon any thing more
natural, then that the preter form of speech referred to the past experiences,
etc.

satisfaction to his answer, yet I may in the 2d place ex abundanti add thus
much more, that the utmost that he can pretend to by the enallage (whether of
the preter for the present, or of the preter understood of a past thing yet
continued) is as commodious for my interpretation, as the preter is: For if it
be in the present, then the importance will be, that it is a matter of present
daily experience; if in the past continued, then that it is matter both of past
and present experience that the unbeliever is thus wrought upon by the
believer, and brought into the Church by baptism, and this a just ground of
hope, that so it may be again in any particular instance, and so a competent
motive that the believing wife should abide with the infidel husband, and not
depart as long as he will live peaceably with her, and this sure was S.
Hieromes understanding in the words newly cited, exemplum refert, quia saepe
contigerit etc. the Apostle makes instance, produces example, that this has
(and does) ordinarily come to pass; And to that also exactly agrees the 16th
verse, For how know thou etc.

T. his instances of Euallage, though now I may safely yield them all, and
rather gain then lose by them, I shall yet in the last place add my sense,
that no one of them is any way convincing; that of (...) is not, c. 1. l. 24.
for his passion was now so near approaching, that it might very fitly be
represented as present, and so that be the force of the present tense.

pertinent for certainly [(...)] is not for [(...), was] which is the enallage
of tenses, nor is there any necessity it should be for [(...)] (the enallage of
modes) the rendering is proper, else are your children unclean, and exactly all
one with else were, the change of the mode not changing the sense in this
matter; which was the cause why I followed the English rendering, and made no
change in that translation.

manifestly put in the preter tense for the present, I cannot be convinced of
it, The context will well bear the preter tense yet continued [no Law of Christ
has or does thus inslave her] or the preter tense simply [she by entering the
bonds of marriage has not thus inslaved her self] that she should think her
self bound to do any thing contrary to her religion in order to continuing
with her husband.

Joh. 3.18. I wonder it could be thought fit to be produced to the prejudice of
the preter sense, when the [(...), already] which is present, is an evident
proof of the preter sense, and if it be continued as well as past (he that has
been condemned remaining still under condemnation) this is still perfectly
agreeable to my notion of (...), the unbeliever often has been, and daily is
converted, and brought to baptism by the believer.

first exception, and his two answers to my inference from [(...).]

Sect. 3. The rendering (...) by the woman] defended, (...) for (...) Col. 1.23.
(...) Act. 4. Ireneus no Latin author, (...) Act. 7. Gal. 1.16. 1 Pet. 1.5.
(...) Deuteronomy. 28. (...), Psalm. 68. My proof of the interpretation from the
context.
by the woman] but he [to the woman] as [to] is a note of the dative case, and
so (...) redundant.

because this seems to him the fairest, easiest, and most congruous sense thus
to expound it, The believer may abide with the unbelieving yoke fellow, For
though he be an unbeliever, and in himself unsanctified, yet in or to his wife
he is as if he were sanctified, it is all one in respect of conjugal use, as if
be were sanctified.

reason I have many things to answer, 1. That the very rendering it, is the
begging the question, which is only this (in this matter) whether this be the
fairest, easiest, and most congruous sense, and must not be here supposed, when
it should be proved.

fairest sense, yet if the words bear it not, it must not be affixt to them, if
it be more capable of another; and whether they will bear it or no, is the
question again, on occasion of which this inquiry is made into the use of the
preposition (...), and to suppose again that it will signify [ to] in the
dative sense, before it is proved it will, is a second begging the question, a
paralogisme in stead of a reason.

fairness of the sense (simply taken) is not attempted to be proved, which
yet does stand in great need of it; For beside the redundance, or unusual sense
of (...), some other parts of the rendering are none of the fairest, As 1. the
believer may abide] as if it were simply free to abide or not abide, whereas in
the present case (when the unbeliever is willing to abide with the believer)
the believer is by the Apostle counseled at least, if not commanded (and that
is more then a liberty, that he may) To him the Apostle says (and his sayings
have sure authority with them) (...), let him not put away. Nay the interdict
of Christ belonging to all, but that one case of fornication, Mat. 5. and Mat.
19. it is evident that by force thereof the believing man must not put away the
unbeliever, that is guilty of no more but unbelief; And accordingly the
preface, (...) -- But for the rest (or, for the other questions, v. 1.6.8.10.)
say I, not the Lord] must be applied not to the immediate consequents, of the
believers not putting away the unbeliever, that will stay with him (for that
had been determined by Christ in the Negative) but to v. 15. If the unbelieving
depart, i. e. if the unbeliever wlll not dwell with the believer, except the
believer forsake his, or her religion, what shall be done then? And to that the
Apostles counsel is, that marriage inslaves not the believer so far.

T. his sense, The believer may abide, For if that be it, even when the
unbeliever is willing to abide, then she may also depart, if she rather choose,
which will be found contrary to Christ's precept, and so may not be admitted.

englished (not by is or has been sanctified, but) by [ is as if he were
sanctified] which indeed acknowledges that he is not truly (in any respect)
sanctified, and then sure this will be a strange construction, (...) the
unbeliever (is not sanctified but) is as if he were sanctified, when yet
literally it must be rendered the unbeliever has been, or (to gratify Mr. T.)
is or continues to be sanctified: For what is this but to interpret an
affirmative by interposing a negation, he is sanctified, by he is not? for so
assuredly he is not, if he only be as if he were.

With this let any man compare the interpretation I have given, the unbeliever
has been sanctified by the believer, i. e. examples there are of such as have
been thus converted from their unbelief, and this sense enforced by the
interrogation, v. 16. For what know thou, o woman, whether thou shall save
the man etc. and by S. Peter's aphorism of daily observation, 1 Pet. 3.1. the
husband that obeyes not the word, i. e. the unbeliever, may probably be gained
by the conversation of the wife, and then let him impartially pass judgment,
which is the fairest and easiest rendering.

reason is, because though the Dr. deny it, yet (says he) I aver, that the
notion of (...) for to, as a sign of the dative case, is found more then once
in the New Testament.

proofs offered for the affirmation. And his first proof, is from Mat. 17.12.
(...), This, says he, cannot be eluded, because the same speech is Mar. 9.13.
(...) and rendered by Beza in the former place, fecerunt ei, they did to him, 2.
Whereas the Doctor says (...) is used for (...), upon him or against him, It
had been meet the Doctor should have given one instance at least of such
construction, which, says he, I do not believe he can do.

two ready instances in one verse, Lu. 23.31. (...); If they do these things
(our ordinary English reads in a green tree, but the sense and propriety
directs us to) on the green tree, what shall be done on the dry? here is the
very phrase that is used in that place of Matthew, (...), and then for S.
Marks using (in the parallel place) (...) for (...)] that proves not that
(...) was redundant in S. Matthew, or that it was a bare sign of the dative
case, it being free to S. Mark to use any other expression, different from S.
Matthew, so he retained the sense, as it is clear in this place he does, doing
injuries to him, being all one in effect with upon or against him, though the
phrases are not the same, which no way inferres that when the change of the
phrase changes the sense, it were lawful so to vary it, as in the place we
have in hand ((...)) it is on both sides supposed to do.

conceives cannot be eluded, is Col. 1.23. (...), which was preached to every
creature, and this he proves to be the only rendering* 1. Because (...) to
preach, is commonly with a dative case of the object, and though, 1 Timothy 3.16.
it is (...), yet our translators, and the vulgar, and Beza read it unto the
Gentiles, as if there it noted only a dative case, and if it were among the
Gentiles, there, yet here Col. 1.23. it cannot be so, because the object is in
the singular number, but (...), when it is for among, is joined still with a
noun of the plural: and 2. That which, says he, puts this out of all doubt,
is, that the phrase Col. 1. answers Mar. 15.16. (...).

answer is ready, by observing the exact notation of (...) the whole creation
(as we render it Romans 8.22.) as that signifies the whole, but especially the
Gentile world, and accordingly is expressed by (...) Mat. 28. and farther
explained by (...) the whole world, to which in S. Mark they are appointed to
go, when they were thus to preach the Gospel (...), to this whole creation. Now
of (...) in this notion it is clear, that though it be in the singular number,
yet that has the power of the plural, as the word [ world] and the like, which
every body knows, is a noun of Multitude, and so is creation, when it is thus
taken for the whole created world, meaning this world of men, the nations or
people of the world.

(...)] is most exactly thus to be rendered, preached in, or among the whole
creation, as Gal. 1.16. (...), preach in the nations, or among the Gentiles,
and so 1 Timothy 3.16. also, though the sense being no way altered by rendering it
unto the whole creation, or every creature, and to the Gentiles, it matters
little though it be promiscuously thus rendered in all these places, which yet
must not prescribe for other places, where the sense is so much changed by the
diverse rendering, as in this case (...)] is observable, where therefore the
literal rendering being retained, we are not reasonably to conclude any more
from it, then that literal rendering will afford us. As for the parallel phrase
Mar. 16. that doubtless can prove nothing, 1. Because the places are not, nor
can be thought parallel, 2. Because if they were, (as of Mat. 28. and Mar. 16.
has been granted) yet the parallel lying only in the sense, and that being
all one, whether they preached to or among the Gentiles, this no way concludes
that the phrases are the same, or the (...) in one redundant, which is the
only thing for the proving of which this parallel is produced, but of that I
have formerly spoken.

Act. 4.12. which he cannot yet conceive, but that it is better rendered, to
men, then among men. And his reasons are, 1. Because (...) has most regularly
and consequently a dative case of the person after it. 2. Because if it had
been among men, it had been to be placed after (...), other, there is no other
name among men, given, but being placed after given, it is to be expounded as
referred to given, not to other, and so must be read, to men, not, among men.
3. It seems no good sense, nor true, that Christ was a name given among men,
for though he were among men, yet he was given from above. To all which he
adds the judgment of Irenaeus, l. 3. c. 12. cited by Beza, and a parallel
phrase (...) for (...), Act. 7.44.

case of the person following and governed by it, that is constantly the
dative, but that is no way applicable to this phrase (...), for there the
persons, (...) are governed by the preposition (...), not by (...).

construction by among, is very good, placing it after given, there is no other
name given among men, i. e. no means of salvation afforded by God, and
continued among men.

Christ's being given from above, no way prejudges his being given among men,
both because the benefit of this gift is as a common donative, distributed
among men, and also because this gift is dispenst in form of humane flesh,
Christ is become man, and to be found and seen among men.

Irenaeus, it is strange that neither Mr. T. nor Beza whom he transcribed, should
remember that Irenaeus wrote Greek, and that as the Latin translation [datum
hominibus] is not written by Irenaeus, so there is no question but Irenaeus's
Greek was the same with the text in the Acts, (...), and then the Translator
(barbarous enough through that whole book) is to be reformed by the Author, and
not the Author judged of by the Translator; Or if he were, and Irenaeus's Greek
did really read (...), without [(...)] as the Translator does [ hominibus]
without [ in] then I must resolve, that the copy of the Scripture, which he
followed, did so read before him [(...)] and if so, then what proof can Mr. T.
have from thence that in other places or phrases, where (...) is found in all
copies, it shall be redundant, and signify no more, then if it were not to be
found there?

among the Fathers, thus, the tabernacle of witness was among our Fathers in
the wilderness: It Is pity the reader should be exercised and detained with such
debates as these, with which yet in obedience to Mr. T. I must farther
importune him.

Gal. 1.16. and 2 Pet. 1.5. That Gal. 1. where of God the Apostle says, that
he was pleased to reveal his own son (...), and when I had rendered that by,
or through me, to others, This exposition, says he, makes the Apostle
tautologize ineptly.

undecent expression I wish had been spared, for certainly there was little
temptation for it: why, I pray, might not the Apostle without incurring either
part of that censure, say, God was pleased through me to reveal his son, and
by way of explication, (and withal to denote the designation of that Apostle
to his peculiar province, as the Apostle of the uncircumcision) add, that I
might preach the Gospel to the Gentiles. Certainly every explication of an
obscurer or narrower, by a clearer or larger phrase, is not inept tantologie,
but that which all writers which have desired to speak intelligibly, have
always been full of.

latter part here* of his preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles (he being
peculiarly the Apostle of the Gentiles, as Peter and John were of the Jews
wheresoever dispersed) is more then was pretended to be said by my rendering and
paraphrasing the former part of it; for in that those others had not been
defined, who they were, or limited to the Gentiles.

T. adverted not in his objection, I desire he will now take notice of it. For
that of (...), I need add no more to what I had before said, that it is most
fully rendered thus, unto or over and above your faith superadde virtue, or
fortitude.

Two places, he says, he had formerly produced out of the old Testament, Deuteronomy.
28.60. and 2 Kin. 7.27. and now adds one more, Psalm. 68.18. But besides that
three only places in the whole old Testament, would never infer that so it
must be in this place of the new, there being many more to preponderate for the
contrary, and there being no pretense of necessity that thus it must be here,
besides this, I say, it will be found, that these three will be of no avail to
him.

is not, there be but 20. verse. in that Chapter, and therefore no (...) in the
27th: and for the former we well read it, unto thee, where the 72. reads (...),
in the ordinary way of acception of (...) for (...).

testimony, Psalm. 68.18. of (...), for which says he the Apostle has Ephesians*
4.8. (...), which he takes to be more then enough to refute the Doctor, it is
presently visible that it has no manner of force in it; For though those two
places are perfectly parallel, as to the matter, yet for the expression it is
evidently very different, in one [ thou have received] in the other [ he has
given] and so [(...) for or among men] must of all necessity differ from [(...)
to men] For how could it be sense to fay, thou have received gifts to men? yet
so it must be, to make good Mr. T. his observation, that (...) signifies to, or
is redundant, or the note of a dative case.

triumphs; never less cause to tell others of taking ad randum, when he
himself was so far removed from all appearance of demonstration. And so much
for the Grammatical notation of (...), very unfit to have exercised us thus
long, but that Mr. T. would have it so, and words are the means of conveighing
realities unto us, and mistakes in them (though minute) may be of substantial
importance.

proof produced for my interpretation of the first part of v. 14. which to me
put it out of all doubt, by comparing it with the reason subjoyned, For what
know thou, o wife, whether thou shall save thy husband; or how know thou,
o man, whether thou shall save thy wife?] he comes next to examine, and has
many exceptions against it, all which (without losing time in repeating and
viewing them severally) will be soon dispelled by a right understanding of the
force of the Apostles argument as there I conceive it to ly, Thus v. 14. It is
matter of ordinary observation, that unbelieving husbands have been brought to
the faith and baptism by the believing wife, therefore I now exhort and
counsel the believer not to depart from the unbeliever, in case the unbeliever
be willing to stay, v. 13. for this reason, v. 16. because what has been so
often, may very probably be hoped again, and consequently upon the premises the
believer has ground to hope, that she may in time gain the husband to the
faith, and that, being so fair a reward in her view (the saving or rescuing him
from infidelity, to Christ) may well enforce the counsel of the Apostle, not
to depart from him, as long as, without sin, she is permitted to stay.

v. 16. is not a bare explanation of (...) v. 14. (on which Mr. T. his
exceptions principally depend) but an application of the argument formerly
proposed, but now more signally brought home to them, under the form of [(...)
for what -- ] by this means to reinforce his conclusion of their not departing
for the cause of infidelity: If the reader will but observe what is thus
visible, he will want no more help, to get out of the intricacies, and toiles,
which Mr. T: has here spread for him in this matter, which is in it self so
manifest, as nothing can be added to it, if either the text or my paraphrase
may be permitted to speak for it self.

Sect. 4. Mr. T. his mistake of my sense. The argument a genere ad speciem.
(...) and (...). How the husband is said to be baptized by the wife. (...)
partial washings. The proportion betwixt legal holiness, and baptism.
Difference between relative and real sanctification. The testimonies of the
ancient, for and against my interpretation.
former part of my paraphrase being now ended, I must attend what he has to
say against the latter part of it, that which concerns our matter in hand more
nearly; The words are (...), for else were your children unclean, but now are
they holy, i. e. upon that score it is that Christians children are admitted to
baptism, viz. because by their living in the family with the Christian parent
they probably will (and ought to) be brought up in the faith -- and the Church
(requiring and receiving promise from the parents) reasonably presumes they
will, and so admits them to baptism.

Apostles thus explained in my paraphrase (or if he yet will have it more
plainly thus, The Church upon confidence that the believers children will be
brought up in the faith, receives them to baptism when they are infants; And
upon the same grounds of hope, that your abiding with the unbelieving husband
may in time convert him (as by experience it has often been found) I advise you
not to depart from him, if he will live with you; For what know thou whether
thou shall save thy husband, etc.) Mr. T. has made a shift not to understand,
and substituted another way of arguing in my name, in stead of it, p. 331. And
having done so I must leave him to combat with the shadow of his own creating,
no part of his impression lighting upon that, which alone I profess to be my
meaning in it; which I leave him or the reader to see, in the particulars
proposed by him, but must not now be so impertinent, as to lose time in the
pursuit of them.

reasons produced for my thus interpreting, he next proceeds to examine, and I
must take care to vindicate them. My first reason is, because (...), holy,
noting a relative holiness, a setting apart to God, and the lowest degree of
that imaginable being the initiating into the Church by baptism, this must in
reason be here noted by (...) holy, as all visible professors, Ezr. 9.2. are
the holy seed, and in the Epistles of the Apostles, (...) holy.

it being all granted, confirms not the Doctors exposition, because it is no
good argument a genere ad speciem affirmative, and because infants are not
visible professors.

species is such, that he that has not that, has not any part of the genus,
the argument will thus hold very irrefragably: Suppose that of the Deacon to be
the lowest order of officers of the Church, and that without which there is no
ascending to any higher degree in the ministry, will not then the argument
hold; He has some degree Ecclesiastical upon him, therefore sure he is a
Deacon? Thus sure it is in this matter, the relative holiness belongs to no
person, that is not baptized, baptism is the lowest degree of it, and all
superior degrees of Apostle, Prophet, etc. in the Christian Church are founded
in that, therefore if the infant children be holy, the infant children are
baptized. So again, Baptism is the lowest degree of visible profession,
therefore if these that are said to be holy, are visible professors, then sure
they are baptized; And so there is no force in that whether answer or exception
to my first reason.

Act. 10.14. for those that must not be received into the Church, as on the
other side God's cleansing is God's reputing him fit to be partaker of this
privilege, whereby it appears how fitly, receiving and not receiving to
baptisme] are expressed by [ holy and unclean.]

answers by acknowledging the conclusion, viz. the fitness of the expression,
All his exception is against my pr^misse, the notion of unclean, Act. 10.
which, says he, signifies there not only one out of the Church, but also one
that a Jew might not go in to, or eat with. To this I reply, that my
conclusion being granted, I may safely part with that, which inferred it, as
when I am arrived at my journeys end, I have no farther need, or use of my
horse or guide that brought me thither: Let it be remembered, that [ holy and
unclean] fitly express those that are received, or not received to baptism,
and then I am sure I have not offended against the propriety of the words, by
concluding from this text, that in the Apostles time the believers children
were received to baptism; And if I have as little offended against the
rational importance of the words in that place (as I hope has formerly
appeared that I have) then I hope I am perfectly innocent in inducing my
conclusion.

phrase Act. 10. though now I need not contend, yet I may add, that the notion
of not entering to, and eating with, containing under it this other of not
baptizing (for sure he might not baptize those to whom he might not enter) and
the baptizing Cornelius (and not only entering to him) being the end for which
Peter received that vision, I still adhere that (...) in that places signifies
one peculiarly that must not be received into the Church by baptism; and the
holiness, on the contrary, reception to that privilege.

Hebrew (...) to sanctify, for washing any part of the body, and on occasion
of that, mentioning a conjecture that the use of holiness for baptism might
perhaps intimate that the primitive baptism were not always immersions, but
that sprinkling of some part might be sufficient; he has a reply to each of
these; To the former, that if this reason were good, then the husbands being
sanctified by the wife, must signify his being baptized or washed by her; to
the latter, that I have in my writings so often acknowledged the baptism of the
Jews and Christians to be immersion of the whole body, that I ought to be
ashamed to say the contrary, and that I can hardly believe my self in it.

sanctifications among the Jews to signify washings, do also know that it
has other significations, and that that signification is in each text to be
chosen, which seems most agreeable in all those respects which are to be
considerable in the pitching on any interpretation; Consequently that the
wive's baptizing the husband being a thing absurd, and utterly unheard of in
the Church of God, whether in the Apostles or succeeding ages, this sense may
not reasonably be affixt to it, whereas the baptizing of infants by the
ancients affirmed to be received from the Apostles, it is most reasonable to
understand the words of this, though not of the other (and so to apply the
observation (as it is visible I did) to the latter, not former part of that
verse.

by] and expound [(...) by the woman] of the persuasion, that the woman has
used to bring her husband to baptism, and not of her mystery in baptizing, we
may very conveniently so interpret the former part of the verse also, that by
the woman, (...) the unbelieving husband has been brought to baptism, viz. by
being brought to faith, to which this privilege belongs.

exceptions to my conjecture, founded in the use of (...) sanctifications for
partial not total washings, 1. I answer, that I mention it only as a
conjecture, with a perhaps, and lay no more weight upon it: 2. That for
Christian baptism I no where affirm that it was only by immersion, nor on
the other side that it was always by sprinkling, but disjunctively, either by
one or the other (as by the words cited by him from Prac: Cat: l. 6. Sect. 2.
is clear) supposing indeed that Christ's appointment was not terminated to
either, and so satisfied by either.

reason is taken from the effect of the legal uncleanness, contrary to those
their sanctifications, viz. removing men from the congregation; agreeable to
which it is that those should be called holy, who in the account of God, stood
so, that they might be received into the Church; To this he answers, that it is
said without proof that the uncleanness excluding from, and sanctification
restoring to the tabernacle are proportionable to the notion here given of the
children being excluded or included in the Church, asking, why Cornelius should
be counted out of the Church, being a devout man.

manifest needed no farther proof, for what two things can be more
proportionable, or answerable the one to the other, then the Jews calling
those unclean, and holy, who were excluded from, and restored to the
tabernacle, and the Christians calling them unclean, and holy, that were
excluded from, and received into the Church, the exclusion and reception being
the same on both sides, as also the uncleanness and holiness, and the
proportion lying only betwixt the Jewish tabernacle and the Christian Church,
which surely are very fit parallels as could have been thought on.

question of Cornelius, it is most vain, the whole discourse being not of real
but relative sanctification, and the difference most visible betwixt that
sanctity which was truly in him in respect of his devotion, fearing, praying
etc. and that outward privilege of admission into the congregation of the
Jews, which alone was the thing which in the account of God, or sober men was
denied Cornelius.

sophismes, and in no reason farther to be insisted on, And therefore it was
but necessary that to amuse the reader, he should here add by way of close
that Augustine aid disclaim this interpretation, Hierome and Ambrose gave
another, and so did Tertullian De Anima, c. 39.

other interpretation, nor pretends he that they gave that to which he adheres:
But for Tertullian the most ancient of these, by the place here cited, I am
assured what credit is due to his citations, having set down the words at large
from that c. 39. de Anima and found it perfectly to accord to my interpretation.

Hierome in part (for the former and more difficult part of the verse) the man
has been sanctified, exemplum refert, says he, quia saepe contigerit, just
according to my paraphrase of the place.

Augustine also, l. 2. de Pecc. Mer. and Remiss. c. 26. (which I suppose the
place he means) I have already accounted. And for the Annotations on the
Epistles, which go under S. Ambrose's name, as I have not commodity to examine
them, so they are known and universally acknowledged to be none of S. Ambrose's
writings; And then it is competently evident how little he has gained by this
unseasonable appeal to testimonies.

prevent the force of my allegations, For in that place as an appendix to the
use of the word, holy, among the Jews, I had added the acception of it among
the ancient Christian writers, S. Cyprian, Ep. 59. Eum qui natus est
baptizandum, and sanctificandm, and the two places out of Gregory Nazianzen, of
(...), being sanctified when they are not (through want of years) sensible of
it, and (...), sanctified from infancy. And before he chooses to take notice of
these, he brings forth his names of Fathers too; with what success, we have
seen, and shall not need farther to consider.

testimonies, and to them he has two answers, 1. That for the ancients of the
third or fourth Century, especially for the Latin Doctors, he thinks the
Doctor knows them better then to assert that they knew certainly the sacred
Dialect, adding that few of them had skill in Hebrew or Greek. 2. That if those
Fathers knew the sacred dialect, then not holy but sanctified, must be as much
as baptized, and then the sense is, that the unbeleeving husband is baptized by
the wife.

latter answer was even now satisfied to the full, To the former then I reply,
1. That of the two ancients cited by me, the former was crowned a Martyr within
160 years after the Apostles age, and the latter flourished about 110 years
after him, and so that in respect of their time they are no way incompetent to
testify what was the sacred language, the writers whereof were so lately gone
out of the world.

Greek Doctor, and he agreeing exactly with the other (and more of the same
kind I have now produced in this Rejoinder) there can here be no pretense for
Mr. T. either to prejudice the Latin Doctors skill in this matter, or to say
they had no skill in Greek.

Hebrews were so lately shown to have had of it, there was as little color, or
temptation from the matter in hand, to except against their skill in Hebrew.

ancient Doctors knew as much (the one much more) of Greek as any of the four
whom just now Mr. T. had vouched for the interpreting of the place; and for the
Hebrew S. Hierome, who alone was better skilled in that, concurred with me in
the main part (and basis) of my interpretation.

Corinthians being in Greek, certainly Gregory Nazianzen was as great a
Master in that language, as any that can be pretended fit to be confronted
against him, and with that concurrence, which I have showed he had of Origin,
and others, both Greek and Latin, may be thought worthy to be heeded by Mr. T.
for a matter of no greater weight then his, the interpretation of word,
especially when Mr. T. himself has so lately joined his suffrage in these
plain words, p. 333.
I deny not the fitness of the expressing [receiving to baptisme] by the term
[holy.]

And so much for those exceptions against the latter part of my paraphrase of
that verse, and my reasons for it.

CHAP. IV. An answer to Mr. Tombes's view of my Conclusion and therein the
sense of Antiquity in this Question.
Sect. 1. (...), 1 Cor. 7. infant children. The Jews practice. Their notion of
[holy] Baptism a privilege of believers children, yet is communicated to
others whose guardians are believers. The several sorts of holiness all vainly
mentioned by Mr. T. His denyals of the Conclusion. The place in Tertullian
vindicated. S. Hieromes answer to Paulinus. Institutionis disciplina in
Tertullian. Candidati Damoniorum. A 3d denial of the Conclusion. The use of
baptism to regenerate etc. No prejudice to the founding it in the Jewish
practice. His art of diversion to put off answering of testimonies. The way of
Testimonies insisted on.
paraphrase of this text to the Corinthians, he proceeds to the conclusion
which I deduce from thence, which is no other then my premises, viz. my
confirmation of that interpretation, had regularly inferred, that the infants
of Christian parents were by the Apostles received to baptism.

performances in validating the premises (to which I shall not need to now
advert, having refuted his answers, as they were produced) but by denying the
consequence in case my interpretation were granted, and that upon these
accounts, 1. Because it is not clear that [your children] are [your infants]
the Corinthians having (for ought yet has been showed) other children besides
infants, and the Jews baptizing proselytes, children females under 12. and
males under 13. years old, not according to their will, but of the Father or
Court. 2. Because if the Apostle should by [holy] mean a privilege whereupon
they were baptized he should conceive otherwise then the Jews did, who
conceived all unclean whom they baptized, till by baptism they cleansed them,
and made them holy. 3. Because there is no privilege attributed by the Apostle
to the Christians infants, which would not belong to the infants of heathen, or
if there were yet it might not be baptism.

incidentally answered already, by making it evident, not that the Corinthians
had no other children beside infants (I have no want of such ridiculous
evasions) but that the children which are there spoken of were infant children,
as appeared both by the express words of Tertullian, and the Author of Answers
ad Antiochum, and the agreeableness of Nazianzen's expressions, by the general
doctrine of the Fathers in this matter, and by the inconveniences which were
consequent to the interpreting it of any other but infant children, meaning by
them such as are either strictly infants, new born, or such as are
proportionable to these, having not arrived to maturity of understanding, and
capacity of professing personally for themselves. For this I must refer the
reader to that place-

practice of the Jews, which I acknowledge to be as is here suggested, not to
baptize any proselytes children by their own wills or professions, till they
be, the female at the full age of 12. the male of 13. years, sure it makes
nothing against me, for they that thus baptized the proselytes children, all
under that age, by the profession of others, did also baptize their infant
children in the same manner, and all that I pretend from that place is, that
the believers infants were admitted to baptism, if infants they were, not
doubting but if they were of greater years they were baptized also, if before
they were fit to profess for themselves, then by their parents or the Churches,
but if fit to answer for themselves, then by their own profession.

holy] the Apostle means the privilege of admission to baptism, because in
baptism they were received into the Church, and so made relatively holy; And
the very same was the Jews notion of holiness, when they called baptismes,
Sanctifications, and conceived those that were unclean to be made holy by that
means, This holiness is the term of the motion in both their usages of the
word.

interpretation, that the holiness which belonged to the believers children was
a privilege, and that not common to the unbelievers children, unless they were
by the charity of the Church or some member thereof (having power, and assuming
to make use of that power, to bring them up in the knowledge of their baptismal
vow) brought to baptism, and then those supplied the place of the parents, and
the children equally received the same benefit by that charity, as if their own
parents had done it for them; and there being no reason here offered to the
contrary, but a reference to another place, which I have not commodity to
consult or examine, there is nothing that exacts any farther reply from me.

suggestion, for to prove that if there were a privilege, yet it might not be
baptism, he produces this reason, that baptism according to the fathers
opinion and practice belonged to unbelievers children also, if they were
brought: which being willingly granted, and so the matter cleared, that the
children of believers were to be admitted to baptism, when the very
unbelievers children, if brought and assumed for by others, which were not
their parents were to be admitted, It certainly follows not from thence, that
the believers children were not admitted, or that their admission was not a
privilege of believers children, For so still it was, though by parity of
reason, and by the charity of the Church it was communicated to some others:
viz. those that were brought by friends or guardians, though not by parents,
for so still this privilege belonged not to those unbelievers children, who
lived in their parents power, and were not thus undertaken for by believers.

baptism was a privilege of the believers infants undertaken for by their
parents, and by analogy communicated to those who were undertaken for by
others, whose charity and piety supplied the place of believing parents, but
was not communicated simply or indifferently to all children of unbelievers,
and herein the privilege consisted.

privilege, which he names, belonging to infants, If it be that of real,
actual, inward holiness, I discern not Mr. T. has any kindness to it, (nor
can he without destroying his own hypotheses) and therefore it matters not what
others imagine; If it be federal external holiness, that I suppose to be the
same with baptismal holiness, baptism being the entrance into that Covenant,
And for holiness in hope and expectation, 1. that cannot denote actually holy
(as (...) here notes) unless by holy we mean in the relative sense,
consecration or designation to holiness, and then it is all one with baptism
again, the solemnity of that consecration.

conclusion, he will again resume what he had said without all degree of truth
in the beginning, and yet does it with great incitation, First, says he, it is
false that Christ founded his institution in the Jewish practice.

T. to be no other then a mentiris Bellarmine, or that most inartificiall
thing, the denying a conclusion which had been inferred by competent premises.
And for the reason added to his negation, that it would utterly overthrow all
baptism after the first conversion of progenitors, that has been largely
answered here, and grounds laid for it in the resolution of the Quare, by the
Jewish practice of baptizing the children of natives, as well as of proselytes,
and so of those that are born never so many ages after the first conversion.
And I must not again so often repeat the same thing.

causeless fit of incitation, he farther goes on, 2dly. says he, It is false
that there is any evidence in the Apostles words, 1. Cor. 7.14. of such a
Custom of baptizing Christians and their children. But that I humbly conceive,
is the denying my conclusion again, having all this while labored to clear
this evidence in the tract, and here vindicated it from all objections, which
seemed to have the least force in them: And whereas he here adds no other
reason to his negation, but his own not thinking that ever any of the Fathers
did interpret the Apostles words as this Doctor does, adding that Tertullians
words de Anima, c. 39. are not an exact parallel to the Apostles speech (which
I must suppose I have now showed it is) that Ambrose and Hierome interpret them
of legitimation in birth, Augustine what way soever, not to baptism (of each
of which I have spoken already also) all that I shall need add, is only this.

exactly true, yet it is but a negative argument a testimonio, which never was
availeable in any dispute: 2. That if the Fathers do not fully interpret this
place as I now do, yet I have brought some suffrages and other competent
grounds out of the Fathers for my way of interpreting it: 3. That what he has
said for the invalidating the Testimony out of Tertullian, has certainly no
force in it, as shall now briefly appear by this view of what he says.

the terms candidati sanctitatis, or designati sanctitatis, or candidati fidei
in Hieroms Epis. 153. to Pauliniu, do note not that they were baptized, but
that they were in designation of being believers and baptized, intended to be
holy by the parents, to be bred up to the faith and so baptized. 2. That what
the Doctor talks of Tertullian as saying they were holy, i. e. baptized, ex
seminis praerogativa, it is a manifest mistake, for 1. The holiness he
ascribes to believers children was not only by prerogative of birth but also
ex institutionis disciplina by the discipline of their instruction which is
before baptism. 2. The prerogative of birth the very words of Tertullian show
to be no more but this, that believers children were born without those
idolatrous superstitions which were used in the birth of infidels children,
which he there principally recites.

answer by degrees, 1. By viewing the place in S. Hierom, to which he referres
me for the explication of the phrase, candidati or designati sanctitatis. That
Epistle to Paulinus is hastily written in answer to two questions of Paulinus
his proposing. To the later, being this, quomodo sancti sint qui de fidelibus,
i. e. baptizatis nascantur (which plainly referres the matter to these words of
the Apostles, how the children born of believing parents are holy] he gives a
very short solution, being taken off by the have of the post and the multitude
of other letters, he had to write. All that he is permitted to say is this. De
secundo problemate tuo Tertullianus in libris de monogamia disseruit, asserens
sanctos dici fidelium filios quod quasi candidati sint fidei, and nullis
Idololatriae sordibus polluantur. Simulque considera quod and vasa sacra in
tabernaculo legimus, and caetera quae ad ritum ceremoniarum pertinent, cum
utique sancta esse non possint nisi ea quae sentiunt and venerantur Deum.
Idioma igitur Scripturarum est ut interdum sanctos pro mundis and purificatis
and expiatis nominent, sicut and Betsabee sanctificata dicitur ab immunditia
sua, and ipsum templum sanctuarium nominatur. Of your second problem
Tertullian has discoursed in his Books de monogamia, affirming the children of
believers to be called holy, because they were as it were candidates of Faith,
and not polluted with any of the filth of idolatry. Withal consider that also
we read that the vessels in the tabernacle are holy, and the other things which
belong to the rite of ceremonies, when yet nothing can (really) be holy but
what have sense, and worship God. It is therefore an idiome of the Scriptures
to use the word holy for those that are clean, and purified and expiated, as
Bathseba is said to be sanctified from her uncleanness and the temple is
called the Sanctuary. And so he is abruptly broken off, meaning to have said
much more on that subject, this, as he solemnly protests ( testis est mihi
conscientiae meae Deus) being but the procinctus and exordium, the preparation
and beginning of his interpretation.

perfected his answer to Paulinus's quaere, he would probably have more
perfectly cleared the whole difficulty. As it is, here is nothing in the least
wise to our prejudice, nor to the proving that which Mr. T. undertakes, that
Tertullians words de Anima do not affirm the baptizing of the believers
children.

Tertullian is not the place that S. Hierome referres to, but some other in his
Books de Monog. that one Book which we now have under that title affording us
no such discourse on that subject, as S. Hierom mentions.

Hierom cites out of that (not this) place of Tertullian, is very reconcilable
with what Tertullian says in this place, and with his opinion that the infants
of Christians were baptized, for, says he, they were quasi candidati fidei, as
it were candidates of faith, Candidates were they that stood for any office qui
candida sumpta vest consulatum* praeturam etc. postulabant, who putting on
white garments sued for any office, and so candidates of faith, they that sue,
for this condition in the Church of God, that of (...) believers, to which by
baptism they are assumed, and accordingly were to be brought to the font, like
such candidates, in white garments as they that were to be sanctified, i. e.
baptized, among the Jews, Exodus 16.10. were also to wash their clothes or put
on clean garments.

holy as the vessels of the Temple were holy, though they had no sense, this is
the clear laying of a ground, whereby children may be deemed capable of this
relative holiness, which is to be had by baptism, though as yet they are not
capable (for want of understanding) of inherent holiness.

idiome of Scripture to call them holy, who are cleansed, purified, expiated,
speaking of those legal lustrations or purifications, this gives an account of
S. Paul's using the word in the Christian Church for the Christian lustration,
purification, expiation, i. e. for baptism.

Hierome that he uses promiscuously sancti and sanctificati, and so that gives
us authority to interpret [(...)] in the end of the verse, in the same sense in
which [(...)] is used in the beginning, for those that are brought and received
to baptism. All which are far enough fom serving any of Mr. T. his
interests, and might have inclined him to have omitted that testimony of S.
Hieromes, if he had more maturely considered of it.

T. his rendering of candidati and designati sanctitatis, and candidati fidei,
by being in designation of being believers and baptized, intended to be holy by
the parents, to be bred up to the faith and so baptized, is a most groundless
inconvenient interpretation: For if by holiness and faith be meant inherent
holiness and faith, then baptism it self is the ceremony of consecrating and
designing them to this, and so precedent to that holiness (not subsequent to
it, as Mr. T. sets it) and accordingly in the Church writings the word (...)
believers, is never bestowed on any, though of mature age and knowledge, till
after they be baptized, (...) and (...) illuminate and believers being all one,
promiscuously used for those that have received baptism, in opposition to
catechumeni, those that have not yet attained it: But if holiness and faith be
the relative holiness, then infants being as capable of that as vessels in the
Temple, they might be presently designed and consecrated to that, and not first
bred up in the faith, before they were partakers of it.

children of believers, I willingly grant, are presumed to be by them intended
to be bred up to the faith, but it that intention of theirs bring forth no
present effect, if they do not bring them thus early, and enter them into the
Church by baptism, why should that bare intention of the parents give them the
style of holy or sanctified, or how should these infant children, which may die
before they come to those years, receive any present privilege or benefit, by
that which is thus far removed from them?

what I say from Tertullian, that they were holy, i. e. baptized in seminis
praerogativa, is a mistake, I must answer by viewing of the proofs of his
assertion, First, says he, the holiness was not only by prerogative of
birth, but ex institutionis disciplina. This sure is a strange proof, It is not
so, because it is not only so, It Is certain that Tertullian says they are holy
ex institutionis disciplina, and as certain that they are as much so by
prerogative of their birth, the words are most clear, tam ex seminis
praerogativa quam ex institutionis disciplina, and I that never denied the
second, could not be mistaken in affirming the first.

Tertullian (who did not excel in perspicuity of expressions) meant by
institutionis disciplina. My opinion (gathered from the observation of his
language in other places) is, that he meant the doctrine of baptism instituted
by Christ in his Church; for by this it is that baptism was allowed to those
that were ex alterutro sexu sanctificato procreati, born of parents of which
either of them was Christian.

De Bapt. c. 12. he uses a like phrase tingi disciplina religionis, to be
sprinkled with the discipline of religion, meaning evidently being baptized.

antecedents, thus, The birth of all men by nature brings impurity into the
world with them; the children of heathens have this mightily inhansed to them
by the Superstitions that are used before and at, and soon after their birth,
inviting the devil to come and take possession of them (who is himself very
ready to catch them) and so making them as soon as born, candidatos
daemoniorum, candidates of the devils, ambitious to be admitted thus early into
their service; Thus every one has his genius, i. e. his devil assigned him
from his birth, and so no birth of any heathen can choose but be polluted, Hinc
enim Apostolus -- for from hence, says he, it is that the Apostle affirms
that whosoever is born from either parent Christian, is holy both by
prerogative of seed, and by discipline of institution, i. e. has one
privilege by nature, by his very seed (by being born of a Christian, not an
heathen) that he is not so polluted by their idolatrous ceremonies, and so is
in some degree holy, in that respect, not so polluted as heathen children are;
another privilege he has by the orders and rites, which Christ instituted and
left in his Church, viz. that of reception to baptism, whereby he is
consecrated to God, whereas heathen children are desecrated to devils, and in
that respect also they are called holy by the Apostle, citing that place, 1
Cor. 7. Caeterum, inquit, immundi nascerentur, else were your children unclean,
but now are they holy, adding that the Apostle in those words means, that the
children of believers are designati sanctitatis, that sure must signify that
they are initiated into Christ by the Christian rite or sign or ceremony of
baptism, as those which had the heathenish ceremonies used upon them, were
candidati daemoniorum, candidates of the devils, in the former, thus early
admitted and initiated into their sacra.

discipline of their instruction (the word their is clearly inserted by Mr. T.
and institutio rendered instruction, and so Christ's institution turned into
their instruction) I shall not now need farther to declare, nor to add ought
concerning his other reason taken from the idolatrous Superstitions, without
which they that are born are said to be holy, for how far that has here
place, I have already manifested also.

incitation he yet farther proceeds, 3. Says he, it is false that the Jewish
practice in baptizing proselytes and their children, laid the foundation of
infant baptism: But as this is like the former, a mere denying of my
conclusion, and so against all rules of discourse, in the first place, so is it
not attempted to be proved, save only by the negative argument a testimonio,
Neither the Scripture, says he, gives any hint thereof, nor any of the ancient
Christian writers, no nor any of those the Doctor cites, ever derives it from
the Jewish practice.

deny it, to be so derived, and when the matter it self speaks it and the
agreement between what we find in the Christian Church with what we find among
the Jews, there is no want either of truth or sobriety in my assertion, that
Christ's institution of baptism was founded in the Jewish practice of baptizing
their natives and their proselytes, and that their custom being to baptize
infant children, Christ's institution also being by the Apostles understood to
belong to the infant childrens baptism was in that respect also conformable to
the Jewish copy, and so still the Jewish practice the foundation of the
Christian.

ancient testimonies, shortly pointed at, that they show that the Fathers took
the baptism of infants not to have foundation in the Jewish practice, but in
the conceit they had that baptism did regenerate, give grace and save, and was
necessary for them to enter into the kingdom -- has nothing of weight in it,
For 1. Their conceiting that baptism had this force from Christ's institution,
no way prejudges Christ's founding his institution in the foregoing Jewish
practice.

Fathers conceived the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be useful for the
confirming of our faith, therefore they took that Sacrament not to be sounded
in the postcoenium of the Jews. They conceived imposition of hands to confer
a Character on those that were thus ordained to holy orders, therefore this was
not founded in the Jewish custom of receiving Doctors into the Sanhedrim by
laying on of hands. The foundation of the institution is one thing, and the
benefits of it being instituted is another, and yet both these are found to
belong to the same thing.

baptism did regenerate, and was necessary to enter into the kingdom, as it
is taken by the Fathers from the words of Christ to Nicodemus Joh. 3. Except a
man be born again, v. 3. and that of water -- v. 5. (by baptism) he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God, so was that speech of Christ, taken from the
customary doctrine of the Jews, among whom baptism was said to regenerate,
and to enter into the Church, as that was the portal to the kingdom of God,
and accordingly when Nicodemus seems not to understand it, Christ appeals to
the Jewish doctrine or tradition, Art thou a Ruler, a Master in Israel and
know not these things? and therefore again those persuasions of the Fathers
are far from unreconcileable with that which I have affirmed of the founding
the Christian in the Jewish baptism.

Fathers in their discourses of baptism do ordinarily lay the foundation of it
in Moses or the baptism of the Jews (and so might as well found the baptism
of Christian infants there, the Jews baptism, as has appeared, belonging to
such) has formerly been evidenced from Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 39. (...) --
and so from others also.

women's baptizing among Papists and the allowance thereof formerly among us, of
private baptism, of the use of propounding questions to the infant which he is
pleased to style ridiculous, of the sureties answering in the child's behalf,
and expressing their desire to be baptized into the faith recited, of the
custom of baptizing only at Easter and Whitsontide, of sprinkling or pouring
water on the face, of a confession in the Pract. Cat. that all men were
instructed anciently before they were baptized, is all amast together, if it
might be, to make up one accumulative argument, but is utterly insufficient to
do so. All that he concludes from the mention of all these, is but his own
resolution not to answer the testimonies which I had alleged from the Fathers,
to prove that Infant baptism was an Apostolical tradition. His words are
these, upon the mentioning of those particulars* [ And therefore for the
present I shall put by the answering of the stale and rotten allegations out of
the Fathers for infant baptism brought by the Doctor, because having said so
much.

therefore] I am told the reason why he was willing to mention those other
particulars so causelessly and unseasonably, viz. by way of diversion (as
dextrous persons are wont to do for the removing of difficulties) to put by the
answering of the allegations out of the Fathers.

T. The main issue of the whole dispute must divolve to this, the doctrine of
the ancient Church in this matter, For. 1. baptism being instituted by Christ
long before his crucifixion, and 2. The form wherein he instituted it being
not set down in the Gospels, and so 3. The Apostles practice being our only
guide for the resolving such difficulties as these, whether infants were
admittable or no to baptism (the foundation thereof among the Jews visibly
belonging to infants, but it being still possible that this might be changed in
Christ's institution) it is not now imaginable what way should be open to us of
this age (1600 years after those times) to discern Christ's institution in this
matter, but by the words or actions of (or some kind of intimation from) the
Apostles, how they understood Christ's institution.

Cor. 7. which comes in incidentally, speaking to another matter, and notifies
the Apostles sense by their practice visibly enough, and defines for the
baptizing of infants in those days; But to them that will not acknowledge this
sense of those words, how fair and easy soever, there is but one possible
method remaining in this, as in all other questions of fact (as evidently this
is, whether in the Apostles times and by their appointment children were
received to baptism or no) viz. to appeal to those that could not be ignorant
of this matter, who by succession and tradition, the one from the other, had
the Apostles practice, the interpreter of their sense of Christ's institution,
conveyed and handed down unto them, and are to us, their late posterity, the
only competent witnesses of this matter of fact, and so are in all reason to
decide the controversy, and give a final conclusion to the debate between us.

method in the positive part of the Resolution of that Quaere, I profess to
have laid the most weight upon it (according to the grounds set down in the
first Quare concerning the deciding of such controversies) and consequently
must still insist upon it, and not be put off by Mr. T. his dexterity, and
that in this matter I may not fail of giving the Reader some evidence, I shall
again resume it, and give him a competent series of testimonies, some formerly
mentioned, and now put more into form of evidence, and others added to them,
so as to infer an uniforme concordant tradition of all the ages of the Church
of Christ even since the Apostles times unto this day, for the receiving
infants to baptism; and that shall be the last part of this Reply to Mr. T.
and the Antipadobaptist whose pretensions are the contrary, that infants must
not be thus admitted.

Sect. 2. A Catalogue of Testimonies of the first ages for Infant baptism, and
the Apostolicalness thereof.
Apostle so long insisted on, and vindicated from Mr. T. his exceptions, and by
so ancient a writer as Tertullian etc. applied to this matter.

first Epistle to the Corinthians being written at the end of his three years
stay in Asia Act. 20.31. i. e. An. Chr. 54. I shall there place my first
testimony.

Centurie S. Paul delivered these words, Now are your children holy, i. e. your
children newborn (as appears by the context and Tertullian) are sanctified, as
that signifies baptized, in the style of the New Testament and the ancient
Church, (...) they are vouchsafed the good things that come by baptism, says
the Author of the Respons: ad Orthod: whether that were Justine the Martyr, who
suffered Anno 163. or another very ancient writer under that name; And this of
that Apostle is an evidence of the practice of the first, Apostolical age, soon
after Christ, and is not contradicted by any that wrote in that age.

In the next age after the Apostles flourished S. Irenaeus, said to be martyred
at Lions (the seat of his Bishopric) the 5t of Severus, An. Chr. 197. he had
been an auditor of Polycarpe Bishop of Smyrna (styled by that Church an Ep.
Eccl. Smyr. ap. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15. (...).
Apostolical and Prophetical Doctor) and is by Hieron. Ep. 29. Apostolicorum
temporum vir.
S. Hierome looked on as a man of the Apostolical times, and by Doctrinarum
omnium accuratissimus explorator. Tertul. advers. Valent.
Tertullian as a most accurate searcher of all doctrines, and so is a most
competent witness of the Apostolical doctrine and practice; and thus he speaks
l. 2. advers. har. c. 38. Omnes venit Christus per semet ipsum salvare, omnes
inquam qui per eum renascuntur in Deum, Infantes, and parvulos, and pueros, and
juvenes, and seniores* Christ came to save all by himself, all I say who are
born again unto God by him, Infants and little ones, and children, and young
men and older men, where it is evidently his affirmation, that infants
(expressly) are by Christ regenerate unto God, and that must be in baptism,
that laver of regeneration, and so they are not, in his opinion, excluded from
baptism. And so this is a testimony of the second Century, not found or
praetended to be contradicted by any other of that age.

Irenaeus followed Tertullian in the end of the 2d, and beginning of the 3d
Century, a man of great learning, and a diligent observer and recorder of the
customs and practices of the most ancient Church. And he lib. de Anima c. 39.
affirms it from the Apostle, ex sanctificato alterutro sexu sanctos procreari,
that when either parent is sanctified or believer, i. e. baptized, the children
that are born from them are holy, and this tam ex seminis praerogativa, quam ex
institutionis disciplina, both by praerogative of their seed, and by the
discipline of the institution, i. e. (as has been showed) by baptism, adding
from the same Apostle that delivered those words, 1 Cor. 7.4. that his meaning
was that the children of believers should be understood to be designati
sanctitatis ac per hoc salutis, and evidencing what he means thereby, by the
following words, of Christ's definition, Joh. 3. Unless a man be born of water
and of the Spirit, he shall not enter into the kingdom of God, i. e. non erit
sanctus, shall not be holy, where baptism is manifestly the thing by which
these children are said to attain that sanctity; and more he adds in the
beginning of the next chapter to the same purpose. And so he is a competent
witness for the beginning of that third age, and is not found contradicted by
any other passage in his works, or by any of his time; But on the contrary,

Origin, who died at Tire, An. Chr. 254. has three most irrefragable
testimonies for it; first on Luke Hom. 14. Parvuli baptizantur in remissionem
peccatorum, little ones are baptized into the remission of sins; and quomodo
potest ulla lavacri in parvulis ratio subsistere, nisi juxta illum sensum de
quo paulo aute diximus, Nullus mundus a sorde etc. How can the account of
baptizing little ones bold, but according to that which before was said, none
is clean from pollution, no not if he be but a day old, and per baptismi
sacramentum nativitatis sordes deponuntur, propterea baptizantur and parvuli,
by the sacrament of baptism the pollutions of our birth are put off, and
therefore little ones are baptized.

Secondly, on Leviticus Hom. 8. Requiratur quid causae est cum baptisma
Ecclesiae in remissionem peccatorum detur, secundum Ecclesiae observantiam
etiam parvulis baptismum dari -- Let it be considered what the cause is when
the baptism of the Church is given for the remission of sins, that baptism
should according to the observation (or custom) of the Church be given to
little ones.

Thirdly, on the Epistle to the Romans, l. 5. Ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem
suscepit etiam parvulis baptismum dare -- the Church has received tradition
from the Apostles to give baptism to little ones also, such little ones still
(as by the former words appears) as those of a day old and the like. And so
here is a full concord of testimonies both for the practice of the Church, and
tradition received from the Apostles for baptizing of infants, and so is a
farther evidence of the doctrine of the third age, not contradicted by any of
that time.

Author (under the name of Dionysius Areopagita) de Eccl. Hierarch. For, as by
Biblioth lod. 1
Photius it appears, Theodorus Presbyter about the year 420. debated the
question, whether that writer were Dionysius mentioned in the Acts or no. And
of this no doubt has been made but that he was a very ancient and learned
Author. He therefore in his Edit. Morel. p. 233.
7. chap of Eccles. Hierarch. proposes the question, as that which may seem to
profane persons (i. e. heathens) ridiculous, why (...) children which cannot
yet understand divine things are made partakers of the sacred birth from God,
i. e. p. ^19.
evidently of baptism ((...) concerning the baptizing of infants, says
Maximus his Scholiast) adding to the same head also, that (...), others in
their stead pronounce the abrenunoiations and divine confessions, p. 234.
And his answer is, 1. that (...) many things which are unknown by us why they
are done, have yet causes worthy of God, 2. (...), that we affirm of this the
same things which our divine officers of the Church, being instructed by divine
tradition, have brought down unto us, and again, (...) -- our divine guides (i.
e. the Apostles, (...), says Maximus) considering this, appointed that infants
should thus be admitted according to the sacred manner, nothing can be more
clear then that the Apostolical tradition is by this ancient and elegant writer
vouched for the baptizing of infants, as a sufficient account of that matter,
against the reproaches and scoffs of profane, or heathen men, who deemed it
unreasonable. And so there is a most convincing testimony for that time,
wherein that author wrote, which must needs be in the fourth Century before
Theodorus Presbyters debating the question concerning him, but most probably
more ancient, and so to be placed in this third age.

An. Chr. 248. was S. Cyprian made Bishop of Carthage, and ten years after he
suffered martyrdom, i. e. 158 years after the age of the Apostles. In the year
257 he sat in Council with 66 Bishops (see Justellus in his Preface to the
African Canons p. 21.) and their decrees by way of Synodical Epistle are to be
seen in his Ep. 58. ad Fidum fratrem, which is now among his works. Pamel.
Edit. p. 80. The Council was in answer to some questions about baptism, and
accordingly* he there sets down his own opinion, together with the decrees of
that Council of 66 Bishops which were assembled with him; And so this, as it
is an ancient, so it is more then a single testimony, that of a whole Council
added to it; and yet farther, to increase the authority of it, S. Augustine
cites this Epistle Ep. 28. ad Hieron. l. 3 de Pec^. mer. and Remis. c. 6, 7, 8,
9. l. 4. contr. duas Ep. Pelag. c. 3. l. 2. contr. Julian. c. 3.
more then once, and sets it down almost entire, as a testimony of great weight
against heretics, and so it is cited by S. Hierome also, l. 3. dial. contr:
Pelag.

Epistle the question being proposed by Fidus, whether infants might be
baptized the 2d or 3d day, or whether, as in circumcision the 8th day were not
to be expected, he answers in the name of the Council, Vniversi judicavimus,
it was the resolution or sentence of all, nulli hominum nato misericordiam Dei
and gratiam denegandam, that the mercy and grace of God was not to be denied to
any humane birth, to my child, though never so young, (by that phrase [ mercy
and grace of God] evidently meaning baptism, the rite of conveighing them to
the baptized) adding, that it is not to be thought that this grace which is given
to the baptized, pro atate accipientium vel minor vel major tribuitur, is given
to them in a greater or less degree in respect of the age of the receivers;
and that God as he accepts not the person, so nor the age of any, confirming
this by the words of S. Peter Act. 10. that none was to be called common or
unclean, and that if any were to be kept from baptism, it should rather be
those of full age, who have committed the greater sins, and that seeing those
when they come to the faith are not prohibited baptism, quanto magis prohiberi
non debet infans, qui recens natus nihil peccavit, nisi quod secundum Adam
carnaliter natus contagium mortis antiqua prima nativitate contraxit? qui ad
remissam peccatorum accipiendam hoc ipso facilius accedit, quod illi
remittuntur non propria sed aliena peccata, how much more ought not the infant
to be forbidden, who being new born, has no sin upon him, but that which by
his birth from Adam he has contracted as soon as he was born, who therefore
should more easily be admitted to pardon, because they are not his own, but
others sins which are then remitted to him. Concluding that as none were by the
decree of that Council to be refused baptism, tum magis circa infantes ipsot
and recens natus observandum atque retinendum, so this was the rather to be
observed and retained about infants and new born children.

ancient Father and that Council, and as the occasion of that determination was
not any antipaedobaptist doctrine (there had no such then so much as looked into
the Church, that we can hear of) but a conceit of one, that it should be
deferred to the 8th day, which was as much infancy as the first (and so both
parties were equally contrary to the Antipaedobaptists interests, the
condemned, as well as the Judges) so that it was no new doctrine that was then
decreed, or peculiar to S. Cyprian (who had one singular opinion in the matter
of baptism) appears also both by the concurrence of the whole Council that
convened with him, and by the express words of Saint Augustine Ep. 28. ad
Hieronym: Beatus Cyprianus non aliquod decretum condens novum sed ecclesiae
fidem firmissimam servans -- mox natum rite baptizari posse cum suis quibusdam
coepiscopis censuit, Blessed Cyprian, says he, not making any new decree, but
keeping the faith of the Church most firm, decreed with a set number of his
fellow Bishops, that a child newborn might fitly be baptized. Which shows it
the resolution of that Father also, that baptizing of Infants was the faith of
the Church before Cyprians time, not only the opinion, but the Faith, which
gives it the authority of Christ and his Apostles.

fourth Century, about the year of Christ 370. flourished Gregory Nazianzen,
and dyed in the year 389. who though he be by Mr. T. affirmed to dissuade from
it but in case of necessity by reason of apparent danger of death, p. 339.
will yet give an evident testimony of the doctrine of the Church of that age
in this matter.

Paris Edit. Tom. 1. p. 648.
4th oration written on this subject of Baptism having gone through all the
ages of man (to demonstrate a proposition premised by him, p. 647, D.
(...), that it belongs to every age and sort of life) he at length comes to
the consideration of infancy, in these words, (...). If thou have an infant,
let not iniquity get time, (Just as Tertullian de Any. had observed.)
let it be sanctified (certainly baptized) in infancy, let it in the tender age
be consecrated to Gods spirit, and whereas the heathens use amulets and charms
to secure their children, p. 643. C.
(...), do you give it the Trinity (the Fathers the Son and the Holy Ghost in
baptism) that great and good phylacterie, or preservative. A plain testimony
of the Churches doctrine at that time.

p. 658. A.
same oration he returns to this matter again, (...), what, says he, will you
say concerning those that are yet children, and neither know the loss nor are
sensible of the grace of baptism, shall we also baptize them? And his answer
is (...), Yes by all means, if any danger press, it is better they should be
sanctified (baptized) when they have no sense of it, then that they should die
unsealed, uninitiated, adding for proof of this the (...) (...) circumcision on
the eighth day, which was, says he, (...) an initial seal, and yet (...), used
to those that had no use of reason, and (in a lower degree) the anointing of
the posts, which were insensible also, was yet a means of saving the firstborn.

children, that are not in any danger of death, and of them he gives his
opinion ((...), in the style which S. Paul uses, when he speaks his own sense,
as that is other from the revealed will of Christ) that staying about three
years, at which time they may be taught to answer somewhat, though they
understand it not perfectly, (...), by this means they may be baptized, souls
and bodies, by this great Sacrament of initiation.

prejudges the doctrine and practice of the Church formerly set down, and
approved by him, that infant children, indefinitely considered, might be
baptized, and if danger approached, must, how young soever they were; which is
as contrary to the Antipaedobaptist, and so to Mr. T. as any thing.

private opinion pretending not so much as to any part of the Church of that,
or former ages to authorize it.

state of children being so weak and uncertain, that it is hard to affirm of any
that they are not (for the first three years) in any danger, his counesl for
deferring will hardly be ever practicable to any.

deferring, of which Nazianzen speaks, is most probably to be understood of
those whose parents are newly converted, and themselves doubt whether they
shall be yet baptized or no, for to such he speaks in that place from p. 654. A.

deferring till three years old, if it were allowed, would no way satisfy the
Antipaedobaptists praetensions, and so still the former passages ought be of
force with all, and no heed given to the whispers of Mr. T. and others, as if
this holy Father dissuaded baptism in any age unless in case of danger, when
he clearly says, (...), let him in the tenderest age be baptized and
consecrated to the Spirit.

Century S. Ambrose must be placed, being a writer about the year 380. he in
his 10th Book, Ep. 84. ad Demetriad. Virg. speaking of those that made Adams
sin no otherwise hurtful to posterity, then by the example (exemplo non
transitu no^uisse) he presses it with this principal absurdity, Hinc evacuatio
baptismatis parvulorum, this evacuates the baptism of infants, which should
then be capable of adoption only, but not of pardon.

Luke, by Jordans being driven back, says he, are signified the mysteries of
baptism, per quae in primordia naturae suae qui baptizati fuerint parvuli a
malitia reformantur, by which the little ones that are baptized, are reformed
from their malignity to the first state of their nature.

fifth age, flourished S. Chrysostom, that famous Bishop of Constantinople
whose death is placed in the year of Christ 407. he in his homily to the
Neophyti has these words, (...) for this cause (i. e. because there be so many
benefits of baptism, there recited, ten in number) we baptize children, though
they have not sins.

Pelagians, and consequently vindicated by S. Augustine, The Pelagians urged
them in this form, Hac de causa etiam infantes baptiz^mus, cum non sint
coinquinati peccato, for this cause we baptize infants, when they are not
polluted with sin, understanding it of original sin, but S. Augustine appealing
to the Greek, showed that the right rendering was, quamvis peccata non habentes,
although they had not sins, i. e. propria, their own or actual sins, of which
these infants were not supposed to have any.

Edit. Eton. Tom. 1. p. 328. l. 5.
4th Homily on Genesis, speaking of baptism as of the Christian circumcision,
among other things he affirms of it, (...), it has no determinate time but
it is lawful both in the first age (the childhood, so (...) signifies, with him,
T. 1. p. 322. l. 11. So again. p. 327. l. 42. (...)
else where applied to the time of circumcision on the 8th day, (...) --) and
in the middle, and in old age it self, to receive this circumcision made
without hands.

Centurie, very few years after, if not before Chrysostom, S. Hierome must be
placed, born in the year 342. and deceased in the year 420. And he in Ep. 7. to
Laeta telling her that whilst the child was young and not come to Pythagoras's
Y. the bivium or two ways, the knowledge of good and evil, tam bona ejus quam
mala parentibus imputantur, his good or evil deeds are imputed to the parents,
adds that this must needs be acknowledged, nisi forte existimas Christianorum
filios, si baptisma non receperint, ipsos tantum reos esse peccati, and non
etiam scelus referri ad eos qui dare noluerint, maxim illo tempore quo
contradicere non poterant qui accepturi erant, sicut e regione salus infantum
majorum lucrum est. Unless, says he, you believe that Christians children, if
they receive not baptism, are the only persons that are guilty of the sin,
and that the offense is not charged on them which would not bring them to
baptism, at that time especially, wherein they that were to receive could not
contradict, as on the other side the salvation of infants is the gain of the
elder, adding that the parent which was thus to prepare his child for the Kings
i. e. Christ's embraces, si negligens fuerit, punietur; shall, if he be
negligent therein, be punished.

opposers of Paedobaptisme, I wish Mr. T. who thinks fit to make use of S.
Hieromes name (it now appears how luckily) would be at leisure to consider them.

lib. 3. contr: Pelag. the question being asked by Crito, Quare infantuli
baptizentur, why infants are baptized, the answer is made by Atticus, Vt eis
peccata in baptismate dimittantur, that their sins may be pardoned in baptism,
and again, qui of Adams sin.

Paulinus, we know, was his Contemporarie, and from him we have this
testimony, Ep. 12. Inde parens sacro ducens de font^ sacerdos, Infantes niveos
corpore, cord, habitu -- The Priest brings the infants out of the font white
as snow in body, in heart, in habit.

Augustine, who died in the 30th year of this 5t age, and was the great
champion of the Church against all the invaders of the depositum committed to
it. His passages on this subject are to many to be enumerated, and some of them
have already been set down in the Resol. of the Quaere p. 217. making it the
perpetual doctrine of the whole Church of all ages before him, and expressly
including that of the Apostles.

de Bap: contra Donat. l. 4. c. 23. Quod traditum tenet universitas Ecclesiae
cum parvuli infantes baptizantur, qui certe nondum possunt cord credere ad
justitiam, and ore confiteri ad salutem -- and tamen nullus Christianorum
dixerit eos inaniter baptizari. This is held as tradition by the Universal
Church, when little infants are baptized, which are sure yet unable to believe
with the heart or to confess with the mouth, and yet no Christian will say
that they are baptized to no purpose: (a severe sentence again for the
Antipaedobaptist) adding the Ecclesiastical rule by which to judge of
Apostolical tradition, and evidencing the benefit of infant baptism by the
example of circumcision, that as in Isaac, circumcised the eighth day, the seal
of the righteousness of faith preceded, and the righteousness it self
followed in his riper age by his imitating his Fathers faith, ita and in
baptizatis infantibus praecedit regenerationis Sacramentum, and si Christianam
tenuerint pietatem, sequitur in cord conversio, cujus mysterium praecessit in
corpore, so also in baptized infants the Sacrament of regeneration praecedes,
and if they hold fast Christian piety, conversion in the heart follows, the
mystery whereof had been formerly received in the body.

De verb: Apost. Sermon. 14. being come to handle this subject of the baptism of
infants, he begins thus, sollicitos autem nos facit non ipsa sententia jam olim
in Ecclesia Catholica summa authoritate fundata, sed disputationes quorundam --
The doctrine it self gives us no trouble, being long since founded in the
Catholic Church by the highest authority (that sure must be by Christ's and the
Apostles) but the disputings of some men -- and again, Non enim quaestio est
inter nos and ipsos, utrum parvuli baptizandi sint, Baptizandos esse parvulos
nemo dubitat, quando nec illi hinc dubitant qui ex altera part contradicunt --
the question betwixt them and us is not, whether infants are to be baptized;
Let no man make doubt of this, seeing neither do they doubt of this which
contradict us in the other question concerning the benefit of it.

disputers, Dic mihi, obsecro te, parvulis baptizatis Christus aliquid prodest,
an nil prodest? Necesse est ut dicat prodesse, Premitur mole matris Ecclesiae.
Does Christ profit infants that are baptized, or does he not? He must needs say
that he does profit, he is pressed with the weight of the Church our mother.

authoritate reprimuntur Ecclesiae, si enim dixerint Christum nihil prodesse
baptizatis infantibus, nihil aliud dicunt quam superflue baptizantur infantes.
They are represt by the authority of the Church, for if they say that Christ
profits not infants baptized, they plainly affirm that infants are
superfluously baptized, but this those very heretics (the Pelagians) dicere
non audent, dare not say, and so were feign to secure their hypothesis by
another evasion, viz. that they were baptized not for salvation but for the
kingdom of heaven.

Hoc habet authoritas matris ecclesiae, hoc fundatus veritatis obtinet canon,
contra hoc robur, contra hunc inexpugnabilem murum quisquis arietat ipse
confringitur. Fundata ista res est, ferendus est peccator errans in aliis
quaestionibus -- non tantum progredi debet, ut and fundamentum ipsum ecclesiae
quatere moliatur. This the authority of our mother the Church is possessed of,
this the grounded Canon of truth holds fast; against this fort, this invincible
wall whosoever makes assault, is broken to pieces. This is a grounded thing:
He is to be born with who erres in other questions, but he must not proceed
thus far (as the Antipaedobaptist certainly does) as to endeavor to shake the
very foundation of the Church, i. e. certainly a doctrine laid by the first
planters of the faith, Christ and the Apostles themselves.

Ep. 89. Non est superfluus baptismus parvulorum, ut qui per generationem illi
condemnationi obligati sunt, per regenerationem ab eadem liberentur. The
baptism of infants is not superfluous, that they who by their birth are bound
to that condemnation which came by Adam, should be freed from it by
regeneration, and more to the same purpose in that place.

Enchirid. c. 42. a parvulo recens nato usque ad decrepitum senem, sicut nullus
prohibendus est a baptismo, ita nullus est qui non peccato moriatur in
baptismo. From the infant new born to the decrepit old age, as none is to be
kept from baptism, so there is none who dies not to sin in baptism.

Leo (ad Episc. Aquileg:) who was advanced to the Papacy about the year 440.

Epistle of the Council of Carthage written to Innocentius (made Bishop of Rome
about the year 400.) In which these words we find by way of Decree, Quicunque
negat parvulos per baptismum Christi a perditione liberari and salutem
percipere sempiternam, anathema sit. Whosoever denies that Infants are by the
baptism of Christ freed from perdition and receive eternal life, let him be
anathema.

Innocentius lived (and to the same purpose) was the Milevitan Canon, at which
S. Augustine was present, a Bishop in that Council. This has been set down in
the Resol: of the Quaere, p. 219. and is an evident testimony that this
doctrine was such as Ecclesia Catholica ubique diffusa semper intellexit, the
Catholic Church every where diffused, always understood and asserted, and so
it is that Councels witness of the Apostolicalness of it.

Theodoret also, and Leo (already cited) soon after him, both falling within
the former part of that fifth Centurie, and in every age after this, store
enough. But the question is not, and in any reason cannot be extended to those
times, the clear definitions through all those first ages, being all that could
be required to decide the controversy concerning the matter of fact, whether
it were practiced or not practiced by the Apostles.

deduced them, it is not imaginable what should be now wanting to the
completing of the evidence, when I have only added, that there is no one
testimony of dissent, either pretended or producible from the writings of all
those first ages, nor consequently the least appearance of obstacle, why the
receiving of Infants to baptism should not be resolved the doctrine and
practice of the first and purest ages of the Church, avouched and testified to
be delivered to them by the Apostles of Christ, who could not mistake his
meaning in the Institution.

artifices the Antepaedobaptist can make use of to cast a mist before our eyes,
in the midst of so much light, I can no way divine: sure I am that the
prejudices which Mr. T. has in few words indevoured to infuse (as that some
are counterfeit authors, some suspected, some misinterpreted; that some
maintained infant baptism but in case of danger of death, that others which
avouched this, avouched either Rebaptization or Communion of Infants also) are
all of them unjust and causeless, and have severally and punctually been
prevented in one or both of these discourses, and so there remains not the
least scruple of difficulty, that I can foresee in this matter, to add to the
bulk of this vindication.

God assist it with his blessing to the disabusing those that are seduced, and
regaining them to the ways of Peace.

The End.
ERRATA.
Page. Line. Read. 13 8 then it 17 21 Alphes 20 32 the whiteness 28 ult. (...)
32 17 continuing 21 (...) 40 25 of receiving 42 35 in to 44 11 heed to 48 21 of
pers: 61 13 So Cyrill in- 18 they that 64 20 infants 67 15 crediderit 79 36
after infants add being 80 5 ministry 83 3 then this 84 24 now to 91 2 but if
102 34 to be

The CONTENTS of the several Chapters and Sections contained in this BOOK.
CHAP. I. OF Baptism among the Jews. page 2 Sect. 1. Probations more and less
perfect. The use of Circumcision to this question of Paedobaptisme. As also of
Christ's reception of children. Childrens coming and believing, Mat. 18.
Children sinners. page 2 Sect. 2. The necessity of Paedobaptisme depending on
the positive part of probation. The several sorts of Anabaptists. Tistimonies
the only proof of Institutions. page 6 Sect. 3. The Jews Baptism of natives
as well as Proselytes. Testimonies of their writers in proof thereof. Baptism
among the heathens taken from the Jews. Among both from Noah's flood. The
derivation of Christian from Jewish Baptism how manifested. Christ's answer to
Nicodemus. Baptism (...) to the deluge. Gr. Nazianzen's and Macarius's
testimonies. The Fathers meaning in affirming the Christians baptism to be in
stead of Circumcision. The Lords Supper founded in the Jews Postcoenium, yet
in stead of their Passover. page 8 Sect. 4. The conceits of Pe: Alfunsus and
Schickard of the Jewish baptism. Raf: Alphes: Mr. T. his conclusion not
inferred. The original of the Jewish Baptism (the only doubt) vindicated.
Jacob's injunction to his family. Sanctifications Exodus 19.10. differ from
washing garments. page 17 Sect. 5. Mr. Selden's notion of the Sea. The defense
of my notion of it. Learned men's affirmations to be judged of by their
testimonies. Christ's baptizing of Jews as well as Gentiles, no argument.
Christ's vouching John's baptism to be from heaven, no argument. No more, the
pretended no intimations of it. The no conformity. The proselytes children
baptized, continually, not only at the first conversion. The baptism of a
woman with child, serving for the child also, not argumentative. The Canon of
Neocaesarea about it. page 23 Sect. 6. Lesser inconformities no prejudice. Yet
they do not all hold. Prayer the Christian sacrifice. (...). The rule of
judging in this matter. Baptizing in the name of the Father etc. prescribed by
Christ. So dipping or sprinkling. The Pract. Cat. misreported. Mr. Marshals
covenanting. page 30
CHAP. II. Of Christ's words. Mat. 28.19. page 34 Sect. 1. The Doctors
pretended concessions examined. Christ's institution of baptism not set down
Mat. 28. but necessarily before that time. page 34 Sect. 2. Making disciples
all one with receiving into discipleship. Baptizing the act of the Baptist.
Instruction subsequent to discipling. The pretended parallel between Mat. 28.
and Mar. 16. (...). John's discipling by preaching excludes not infants. No more
the Apostles, Mat. 10.5. The notation of the word (...). Mat. 13.52. Act.
14.21. Infants both said to come and to believe. Instruction subsequent to
baptism. page 40 Sect. 3. Discipleship before instruction. What knowledge of
the Master is required to discipleship. Two sorts of disciples, Some come,
others are brought. page 50 Sect. 4. The difference of a Disciple and Proselyte
examined. Christian as well as Jewish proselytes. Privileges of proselytisme.
Disciples of the Pharisees. The Holy Ghost's not using the word Proselyte of
Christians, concludes nothing. Jehovah. (...). Infants qualified for baptism.
As for entering into Covenant Deuteronomy. 29. Gods oath. Infants adjured. Criples
capable of Christ's cures. page 53
CHAP. III. Of the Apostolical practice in this matter. page 58 Sect. 1. The
interpretation of 1 Cor. 7.12. vindicated. (...). Sanctification used to denote
baptism, the use of it in the Fathers and Scripture. Tertullians testimony:
designati Sanctitatis. Origin. Author Quaest: ad Antiochum. Cyprian.
Chrysostom. (...) there, infant children. (...) in the Epistles. S. Augustines
words examined. page 58 Sect. 2. The rendering (...) [hath been sanctified]
defended. S. Hieromes testimony. Enallages must not be made use of without
necessity. No advantage from it here. Feigned instances of Enallage. (...).
page 66 Sect. 3. The rendering (...) by the woman] defended, (...) for (...)
Col. 1.23. (...) Act. 4. Ireneus no Latin author. (...) Act. 7. Gal. 1.16. 1
Pet. 1.5. (...) Deuteronomy. 28. (...), Psalm. 68. My proof of the interpretation from
the context. page 69 Sect. 4. Mr. T. his mistake of my sense. The argument a
genere ad speciem. (...) and (...). How the husband is said to be baptized by
the wife. (...) partial washings. The proportion betwixt legal holiness, and
baptism. Difference between relative and real sanctification. The testimonies
of the ancient, for and against my interpretation. page 77
CHAP. IV. An answer to Mr. Tombes's view of my Conclusion and therein the
sense of Antiquity in this Question. page 84 Sect. 1. (...), 1 Cor. 7. infant
children. The Jews practice. Their notion of [holy] Baptism a privilege of
believers children, yet is communicated to others whose guardians are believers
The several sorts of holiness all vainly mentioned by Mr. T. His denyals of the
Conclusion. The place in Tertullian vindicated. S. Hieromes answer to Paulinus.
Institutionis disciplina in Tertullian. Candidati Damoniorum. A 3d denial of
the Conclusion. The use of baptism to regenerate etc. No prejudice to the
founding it in the Jewish practice. His art of diversion to put off answering
of testimonies. The way of Testimonies insisted on. page 84 Sect. 2. A
Catalogue of Testimonies of the first ages for Infant baptism, and the
Apostolicalness thereof. page 96

Books written by H. Hammond D. D.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by Henry
Hammond D. D. in fol. 2. The Practical Catechism, with all other English
Treatises of Henry Hammond D. D. in two volumes in 4o 3. Of Fundamentals in a
notion referring to Practice, by H. Hammond D. D. in 12o.
Several Books of Controversies relating to the present times, by the same
Author in two large volumes in 4to viz.
1. Dissertationes quatuor, quibus Episcopatus Iura ex S. Scripturis and
Primaeva Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum*
Authore Henrico Hammond, in 4o. 2. A Vindication of the Dissertations
concerning Episcopacy from the Exceptions offered against them by the London
Ministers in their Ius Divinum Ministerii Evangelici in 4o. 3. An Answer to the
Animadversions on the Dissertations touching Ignatius Epistles and the
Episcopacy in them asserted, subscribed by John Owen servant of Jesus Christ,
in 4o. 4. Of Schism. A Defense of the Church of England, against the
Exceptions of the Romanists, in 12o 5. A Reply to the Cathol. Gent: Answer to
the most material part of the Book of Schism, together with an Account of H.
T. His Appendix to his Manual of Controversies etc. 4o. 6. A Letter of
Resolution of six Quaeries, in 12o. 7. An account of Mr. Cawdreys Triplex
Diatrio. concerning Superstition, Will Worship, and Christmas Festival. New.
THE END.

