LONDON'S Triumphant Holiday.

BEING A brief Relation of the chiefest memorable proceedings, that has
attended his Majesty since his troubles.

With a brief acount of that late happy month of May's actions, in Voting,
Proclaiming, Landing, and his coming to London, to his and this Nation's Royal
and faithful Parliament; being received in great triumph.

With a short, but true acount of his miraculous escape from Worcester, from
that bloodthirsty Tyrant OLIVER CROMWELL, The Murderer of the King his Father,
and the Ruiner of three Kingdoms.

Written by a Faithful Subject and Sufferer for his Majesty CHARLES HAMMOND.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Grove near the Sarazens-Head on Snow-hill without
Newgate. 1660.

LONDON'S Triumphant Holiday.
Being a brief Relation, of the chiefest memorable Proceedings that has
attended his Majesty since his Troubles.
Triumphs has ever been allowed of, and commendable by all Nations under the
Sun, not only of Heathens, but Christians too; so far forth as we do not, in
adoreing the Creature, forget the Creator, as the Herodians did. Solomon says,
there is a time for all things, a time to laugh as well as to weep, a time of
joy as well as sorrow. But let our rejoicing be in the Lord, who always is
working for the best for them that fear him. This great work, or we may,
miraculous wonder, May make the very Atheists of these Times see, there is a
God that governs, that can turn and overturn in a moment; and in a month bring
in a Reformation without blood, which the gods of our own inventions has been
a Reforming (Deforming we may say) these twenty years, sheading Royal and
Innocent Blood to mix with their untempered mortar, and with the bones of
innocent Martyrs, build the walls of their confused Babel; and wasted this
Nations Treasure, to set up a bloody Traitor to Rule over it; who, whilst he
was living, (I am afraid) some loved and served him more than God, or else they
would not have so Deifi'd him on the earth so long after his death; but he was
kept so long, or, as I may say, the Popet of him, for they took twopence a
piece in Westminster to see him, where he lay there in his Hospital Roabs, for
it was bestowed on him by the forced alms of the Country, and they thought to
have had a gathering for it; for the money was borrowed for the present of some
of his voluntary or forced friends, which, I believe, they are all the mourners
that ever was for him: I believe, he did degenerate so from Nature, that his
own wife or children could scarce drop a tear for him; if they did, it was more
for fear of losing their Estates or Honor, more than him. But what should I
relate more of him, it asks whole volumes to declare his wickedness. I shall,
with Gods leave, here relate to you most of the chiefest passages, that has
happened this last memorable month of May, in relation to his Majesty, our most
gracious Sovereign, CHARLES the Second, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, whom God has most wonderfully brought into his own Birthright, which
has been detained from him by bloody Mechanic Rebels.

The first day of this month of May, 1660. he was Voted by both Houses of
Parliament right Heir to the three Kingdoms, it being Tuesday, a remarkable day
in this work. The eighth day following, being Tuesday, he was proclaimed with
great joy and triumph in London, and the like performed in most parts in
England, to the utmost of their powers, So he was proclaimed, and the
Commissioners was with his Majesty in Holland by the next Tuesday, being the
fifteenth day, and the Wednesday after, being the 23d. day, his Majesty set
sail for England, and Tuseday following, being the 29th. day, and his
Birthday, he was entertained in London, with great triumph and joy, which I
shall for the more satisfaction of all you that are his faithful Subjects,
give you a brief and true acount of most of the Royalest entertainment he
received since his landing.

Friday the 25th. his Majesty Landed at Dover, where his Excellency General
Monk fell on his knees to his Majesty, which the King would not suffer, but
took him up, embracing him more like a Father then a Subject; his Majesty
walking with him toward his Coach, where the Mayor and Aldermen, and Mr.
Reding met him; and presents him with a very fair Bible, claspt with gold very
Rich; his Majesty, and the two Dukes; and the Duke of Buckingham, rod in the
Coach, till within two or three miles of Canterbury, and then the King rid with
the two Dukes, the Duke of York on his right hand, and the Duke of Gloucester on
the left, with the General, and the Duke of Buckingham, and diverse others of
the Nobility being come to Canterbury, he was presented by the Recorder, in
behalf of the City, with a very gallant Speech, and a gold Tankerd, as a Token
of their loyalty, the Mayor and Aldermen being present; and the City did
express abundance of joy. The King staying there till Monday morning, where
the King honored the General with that high honor of Knight of the Garter,
the King putting the George about his neck, and the two Dukes put on the
Garter; none ever so highly honored in the solemnisement of that Order before,
as I ever heard of; and confirms him General of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and Master of the Horse, and one of his Prive Council. Diverse others he
knighted, as Alderman Robinson, as ever a faithful Royalist all these times in
London, and Major General Massey, who when he was Governor of Gloucester for
the Parliament, none of the King's party can say, but he was a gallant Enemy,
and had all the Virtues of a Noble Soldier; he was valiant, faithful, and
merciful, paralleled by few of that side, in those times of his Command; and
since has been a faithful Subject, and sufferer for his King; an example for
all faithful Subjects to imitate, to see the Proverb fulfilled, after suffering
comes ease; many more received honor from his Majesty, and I make no doubt,
but they deserved it, or else should not have received it. But these two I
know, and I love to speak no more then I know. But to go forward to his
Majesty's march: on Monday, being the 28th day, he set forward betimes to
Rochester, where he came about four of the clock in the afternone, where he
honored Colonel Gibbons his house, he made that his Court that night, and the
two Dukes with him; after he had a little refresht himself, he went to Chattam,
to see the Ship called the Royal Sovereign, where he was entertained by Mr. Pett,
with a Banquet: so coming back to Rochester, the next morning, was presented to
him a very rich and weighty Basin, and Ewer silver and gilt. About five of the
clock he set forwards, the Roads lind with the Militia Forces of Kent, and
diverse Maids throwing the ways with flowers and herbs, and the Towns hanging
out white sheets. At Dartford Heath a Declaration was presented to his Majesty
for the Officers of the Generals Army, declaring their joy and their
faithfulness to his Majesty. At Black Heath there was a general Randevouz,
where all the Army and all others were drawn up in order, where his Majesty
expressed himself, to the great content of all the Army. There was many
bonfires there, but one great one at Black Heath, where the Maidens had got the
States Arms in the Country to burn, and dansing round about the fire in white,
with Music and a Morisedance, when his Majesty came by, and with a loud voice
through all their Company, cried out, God save the King; which made his Majesty
smile, a thing seldom seen, he always being solid, having a majestic careful
coutenance. So this Royal Army marched to St. George's Fields, where the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen attended to receive him, and presented the Sword to him upon
his knees, which his Majesty took and returned again. A Tent was set up, and a
Banquet of Sweetmeats provided; his Majesty taking a very small Refreshment,
marched on toward Whithall, in this manner as follows. The Militia Forces
made a guard on both sides, from Southwork to the Bridge, all the streets
strowed, and the windows hung with Tapestry and Cloth, according to their
ability, as rich as they could get, and many Garlands hung in the streets, with
the best Flowers; and from London Bridge to Temple Bar, on the one side was the
Train-bands, and on the other side the Companies of every Hall in their
Liveries; raild all the way, and hung with several Colors, according to the
Companies Colors of Cloth. The Conduits running with wine. All the rich
Streamers on one side of the way, with the Arms of the Companies, and the
windows most richly hung with Silk of rich colors, and Tapestry, and Cloth of
Aras. This was the manner of the march, first came Major General Brown, leading
300. stately Gallants, all in Cloth of Silver Dublets, stoutly horst and richly
acouterd. Then came 200. in Velvet Coats, led by my Lord Mainard; then another
Troop, consisting of near 300. in Bust-coats, silver laced sleeves, and green
Scarfs, these led by that loyal and faithful Subject Alderman Robinson; then
another Troop of about 200. with Red and Silver, very richly mounted, led by my
Lord Mordant; after this a Troop Green, eight Footmen, six Trumpets, their
Colors Pinck and Silver, the Footmen Green and Silver, consisting of about
150. another consisting of 250. Gray and Blew Liveries; 30. Footmen, silk and
silver lace, the Colors Sky and Silver; led as I was told, by my Lord of
Oxford; then 300. led by my Lord of Cleveland, most Noble Men, Knights, and
Esquires, the Colors Blew fringed with Gold; then 100. more Black fringed
with Gold. Then came several very rich Troops, commanded by Viscount Harford,
consisting of about 400. Several other commanded by Knights: the Body that came
before his Majesty, of Nobility and Gentry, with the Citizens, and their
servants, well mounted behind in good order, and well acouterd in habit,
Gentlemen's Fellows I believe, consisting of about 3000. and upwards, with
Trumpets sounding, but their Music was drowned with the Shouts and Voice of
the People for joy; yet they were not satisfied with this most rare Show in the
bravery, wished them passed, their desires all longing to see him, whom they
had so long looked for, his Majesty: but after this rich Show of the Country
Galantry, now comes the Citie's Pomp, in a most stately civil manner. Fist,
came a Noise of Trumpets, two with the Kings Arms in their Coats, and a
Kettle-drum; then the Shrief's men about fourscore, in new red Cloaks with
silver lace; after them about 400. Citizens of several Companies, black Velvet
Coats, with gold Chains about their necks; some with rich Pearl Chains, of
great value; every one his Page with his Livery, most richly mounted; after
these came a part of the true Mourners of Zion, being Ministers that has been
true Subjects and sufferers, Doctor Wild, Doctor Warmstree, and about ten more,
such as had endured to the end; no timeservers, nor never changd their Gowns
for Cloaks, these rid in heart (I believe) rejoicing in the Lord, to see the
day of their Redemption here, from those that would have stopped their mouths, if
the Lord had not frustrated their designs; and those Prayers that has been
counted Popery by some, I believe the Lord has heard such Men as these, that
has been termed Baal Priests, by the sons of Belial, has proved as Moseses to
stand in the gap, and by Prayer has stopped Gods Judgments, which we fully have
deserved for our Rebellion, Sacrilege, and Murder; after these came his
Majesty's Life-gard, with Trumpet; and a Kettle-drum, commanded by my Lord
Gerard, led in Divisions by Sr. Gilber Gerard, Colonel Pragues, and two Cornish
Gentlemen, Sir Chichester Wreay, and Major Rosecaron; after them the City
Marshal, his Footmen in green, trimmed with Crimson and White; then the City
Waits; then the two Shriefs, and all the Aldermen in their Scarlet Gowns, their
Footmen laced with silk and gold; then came the Heralds, and two rich Maces,
in rich Coats, and the chief Nobility and Privy Council, all riding brave;
before his Majesty rid the Lord Mayor, bearing the Sword; the Lord General, and
the Duke of Buckingham, all bare-headed; Then you might behold the three
Pearls, of this Nation, his Majesty, and the two Dukes, the Duke of York on his
right hand, and the Duke of Gloucester on the left. Three Pearls they may be
rightly styled, and I hope they will prove of inestimable value to these
Nations; three such Princes, no Kingdom besides ours can parallel in the World
for Brothers: His Majesty endewed with such Virtues, as the worst of his
enemies cannot say, but they are wonderful to behold, in a Prince that has
been so much constrained to see the susperstitious and follies of many strange
Nations, and has never been led away by them, being much endued with piety and
sobriety, mercy and humility; as this day of Triumph you could have beheld no
outward glory in habit, he riding in a plain Sasnit suit, his head only
adorned with certain Falds or Plumes of red and white Feather in his hat, the
Duke of York with red and yellow, the Duke of Gloucester was sprinkled with
several Colors, many of the Noble Men's servants, were in richer habit then
these three Princes, but I believe they were counted more beautiful in the eyes
of the people, then all that passed before, they being so ravished with joy,
some Ladies drapt their fans and hancerchiefs out of the windows, their sense
of seeing being so much filled, it berest them of all other senses for the
present, which made the King smile; he seeing a fan drop out of a Ladies hand
in Paul's Churchyard, as she was shaking it about. In the Strand a many Ladies
had got Rapiers in their hands, and flourisht them out of the windows, as
meaning that now they would fight for him rather than lose him now they had
him. Many other passages which I saw not nor heard not, which I believe did
revive his Majesty's heart, to see his Subjects joy. Also after his Majesty was
passed, came my Lord of Northamton, with a gallant Party of Horse, of all
Gentry, a bout 300. or more, all richly clad and mounted; after them came three
Regiments of the Generals Horse, all armed cap a pe, and though they were not
richly acouter'd, yet 'twas as gallant a sight to see for a Soldier as the
other, and a better sight in service.

That silver Van, flanckt with this Iron Rear,
Three Princes leads, no Nation we need fear:
Renouned George, thy Fame on earth will never dye,
For under God, thou gave this Kingdom's liberty.
His Majesty coming to Temple Bar, all along to Whitehall the Militia Forces
guarded on both sides, and Sr. John Stowell, that great sufferer for his Majesty
met him, with diverse Officers of the Kings Army, being a gallant Party. So the
King coming to White Hall, was entertaind by the House of Lords and Commons,
both presented him with Speeches by the Speakers, declaring their joy for his
so happy arrival, in power and safety, to the three Kingdoms great comfort,
which now they feared not will quickly end in peace and prosperity, to these
almost-ruined Nations, for want of his presence. The day being ended, for it
was seven of the cloch ere his Majesty came to White Hall; when he was safe,
the Pieces went off small and great, from the Tower, and all along the City,
and not a Piece was fired or to be fired before night. Such Bonfires we made,
there was never the like in England; one at the Banck-side six or seven stories
high, and in Westminster, was the States Arms and the Effigies of Crumwell hung
up for all to behold, with torches, and at last burnt in the fire, with great
hollowing and houping, for joy they were rid of this idol, that England had so
much worshipped.

I shall now give you a short but true acount, of the Sufferings of this Prince
before he came to his Kingdom. At his Fathers death, he was at his Sisters
Court the Princess of Orange, whereas the news came unexpected, it came the
harder; for he thought to have heard a fair end of the Treaty, and his Father
settled: He studied then which way to gain his Birthright; many ways he and
his friends tried, but all came to no effect; but the news still that filled his
sorrowful ears, was just so as it came to Io^e, one after another; the
murdering and destroying of his Loyal Subjects the Scots, when they were
treating with him to make him King, they thought to disable him of his best
friends, that they might force him to what they pleased to have. I leave the
World to judge of their innocence, as they pretend from the first beginning of
these times: I pray God make their children more Loyal then the fathers, and
that I hope they can take no exceptions at; pray God the selling of the King,
and the murdering of Montrose, be not laid to the charge of the souls of the
chief actors of it: indeed they did what they could, some of them to settle
him, and did crown him, but I believe, had it not been self ends, God would
have blessed their designs the better at Worcester, where his Majesty was
miraculously deliverd; where his horse was twice shot under him, and could
scarce be invited to leave the Field, when 'twas so near lost, the Highlanders
fighting it out very nobly, but the Scotch Horse but cowardly; his Majesty got
away to a house, had his hair cut off with a knife by my Lord Wilmot, then
takes him to a Wood near Wolverhampton, and in a hollow Oak, and staid there
three days; afterward brought to Mistrisse Lanes, by my Lord Wilmot, and by
her as her Serving-man, was convai'd to Bristol, no body but Mr. Lasted, her
Father in Law knew him, where he was fain to wind up the Jack, he telling the
maid he was a Naylour's son, which causd his Majesty to smile, the wench gave
him such course compliments, which he was very glad to take: afterward
describd by a Butler, but yet a faithful servant to him, and through many
difficulties and dangers, at last got over sea to France, where he declares his
sad misfortune, they bewailing of him, yet joyful he had escaped himself, yet
this joy did not long continue in the Court of France; but this bloody Oliver
never left, till he had hunted him thence, and all the Family, by making a
Peace with France, Mazerein the Cardinal being this Traitors friend, all the
time no great honor he will gain by it now, but let him give more testimony, he
must leave France; then to Holand, to his sister, and staid a while there; then
to Germany, where the Lord still raised Princes to his friends, and at last,
that ever to be loved by this Nation, and that freely, the King of Spain nobly
entertains him, and the Duke of York, who had been a great enemy to him when he
served the King of France, which will be for the shame of France, and honor of
Spain for ever: there this wicked Oliver left not, but like the Devil, never
left any means un-attempted to destroy him, as then he had employed one Captain
Maning, who was near the King, who discoverd all things that was done there to
his Master here; thus the devil, and man, did work to destroy him and this
Nation; but he had too honorable a death, for it so inflamed his Majesty's
true servants, to hear of such a false Traitor amongst them, that he was shot
by one of them before he enterd the Prison: many more most strange and wonderful
trials of patience was there in his travels and sorrowful pilgrimages, before
he attained to that happy Restoration, which God has now blessed him and us
with; whom God still preserve, whom I hope God will by his providence, as he
has done hitherto, answer all the prayers of him and his friends, for him as
remarkable. His Father was murderd on the 30. of January, it faling on a
Tuseday, and ever since he has kept Tuseday as a fast, in memory thereof;
besides, it has been known, many private Devotions, which God has answered: it
was on a Tuseday he was voted by the two Houses of Parliament, King, and
proclaimed King on a Tuseday, and came to White Hall on a Tuseday; therefore it
may encourage all Christians to prayer, for by fervent prayer God answers many
times by the same means, and the same time; and God you see has answered his
prayers: but how many more Fasts and prayers has here been set up, and
Thanksgivings, for shedding of blood, but what can there be expected from
bloodthirsty and cruel men but hipocrisy, which their best Actions was no other.

The brighter still the Sun does shine,
Upon a dunghill with her beams divin,
The more base sents and stinking vapors rise:
I Will leav't to you the verse to paralise.
Blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, Eccles. 10.17. a
lesson very fit and observal for these times; it was taught by him whom none
can deny, but he was the wealthiest and the wisest Prince and Preacher that
ever was before Christ, or since Christ; and none but Christ himself, who was
both King, Priest, and Prophet, had that powerful operation, and knowledge as
he had; and indeed it must needs be for his wisdom from above, read but
Ecclesiastes and his Proverbs, and you shall see and confess, that they must
needs come from the Spirit of God though from his mouth delivered, and we shall
find all true in them; and for this one place which I have quoted by woeful
experience, this our Land can witness for truth, for since this Land has been
governed by them, who by other actions could not, etc. did not show that ever
they were the sons of Gentry, much less of Nobility; and these have been the
Heads and Governors of our poor distressed, and almost ruined Kingdoms these
many years, who maintaind their Prerogatives by perjury, oppression,
sacrilidge, and murder; who did so far deoperate from being nursing Fathers,
and nursing Mothers of Gods Church and people, who has promised that Kings and
Queens shall be, Isa. 49.23. they have not only murdered their Father, that
religious pious Prince, of blessed memory CHARLES the first, but they have as
much as in them lay, like Vipers, eat out the Bowels of their Mother the
Church, and not satisfied with that, but were about to sacrifice her to the
Idols of their own Inventions, and so to destroy her Root and Branch. Not being
contented with what they had got, Kings, Queens, Bishops, Deans, and Chapters
Lands, but did not stick to say openly, if they prevailed, the Church and
Priest too should suffer, as in derision they call them, which they know not
that they deride Christ himself in that title, nay these that cry up so for
Jesus Christ, hated the office and dignity of him, who takes the title of King,
Priest, and Prophet; and truly I believe, that they have been so much against
Papists in their mouths, terming these decent Ordinances of God, that was
maintaind in the Church, to be Popery, it will be proved, and is partly known,
and found by some, that Jesuits have been the chief ringleaders of them; for
those that have been seduced by them, I heartily desire of God that he would
make them see the errors of their ways, by his wonderful works of Providence,
which he has already done in this unheard of Reformation, which he has brough
in with his Word, and not with the Sword, by the power of his Spirit, and not
by the arm of flesh, by turning the hearts of Subjects to their Sovereign, to
submit to him, and not to resist him. God is a God of peace, scatter thou the
people that delight in war, says David, Psalm. 68. he was a man after Gods own
heart, and surely he would not prary so, but that he knew God did not delight
in those that thirsted after blood; if David was startel'd and touched in his
heart, for cutting off the lap of Readiness garment, who sought his life, and yet
he was anointed King too, saying, the Lord keep me from doing that thing unto
my Master, the Lords Anointed to lay my hand upon him, 1 Samuel chap. 23. nor
you never read: that he ever sufferd his soldiers either to do him or his
servants wrong, but to fly and defend themselves. O then, with what impudence
could they justify that most horid unheard of barbarism Murder, that was
committed upon the person of the late King, whose hearts never struck them for
cutting off his head, a deed that they can show no president for since the
Creation of the World, neither by the Laws of God nor the Laws of any Land;
which gilt they would have laid upon the whole Nation, saying, they were chosen
by them; but the Lord that knows the hearts of all men, knows it was odious in
the eyes of most of the Nation, as it is seen at this day; for upon the Prayers
and Cries of his Church and People, has prevailed, and now he is making
inquisition for the innocent blood of that Royal Martyr, and the rest of his
layall Subjects, that has sufferd for him. Where can they fly now from the
face of an angry God; there is no way for them, but to submit themselves to the
mercy of God and the King, for there is no escaping for them, they are so
odious in the eyes of all, that their very intimate Friends will not hide them,
no, nor will take pity on them; no Land-man will secure them, no Seaman will
convey them over Sea; if they do, no Nation will trust them, for they that have
been so unnatural to their own Country, and such Rebels and Traitors to their
own Prince, to murder him; the greatest Tyrant in the World will hate them, and
if they had acted it for him, he would say as Richard the third said to
Banester, when he betrayed his Master, he loved the Treason, but he hated the
Traitor; and if any Prince suffer them to pass through their Country, they
must take it as a greater favor than they deserve. But stay, my Subject tells
me I am about the blessedness of a Land, whose King is the Son of Nobles. O
happy Land have we, whose King is the Son of a Noble, Pious, and Religious
Prince, as ever swayed the Scepter since the Conquest, and this our most dread
Sovereign CHARLES the second, whom God grant long to reign over us.

I believe the worst of his Enemies that ever heard him and saw him in all his
banishment, in the worst of times all say, but he deserves the love both of God
and Man, which the Lord has shown by his most wonderful Restoration to his
Crown and Dignity, which all his loyal Subjects did believe would be, as I
believe those that knows me, has heard me say as much in the worst of times,
yet to be wrought so peaceably, so powerfully, and so suddenly, it is more then
ever could be imagined, that we must all say with the Apostle, St. Paul in the
11. of the Romans, verse. 33. O the deepnesse and the riches both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past
finding out: but Solomon says, Proverbs 16.7. When a man's ways please the
Lord, he makes his very enemies to be at peace with him; as I desire the worst
of his enemies to consider on, (if the Lord has not yet reconciled their
hearts to him), this one place of Scripture, comparing it with the actions and
transactions of our times, we must confess that he is our David of God, and
that his ways has pleased him; for he has made us all which were his
enemies, to be at peace with him. I hope some may perhaps say, that he had
those here that never was enemies to him; I am afraid, if they seriously look
into their own consciences, they shall find, their sins with the rest, filled up
the Measure, that made God pour out his wrath upon us, and so took away so good
a Prince from us, which we were not worthy of: and I shall desire all, and
especially those that were always faithful to his Father and him, and never
none of times-changelings, that now the Lord has done so mercifully for us,
that we may walk answerable to that merry in our conversion from all manner of
wickedness, that his Party has been branded with, and especially these two
sins, which they have been most addicted to, Oaths and Drunkenness; I believe
that many have sworn and drunk healths to him, that never either praid or
fought for him; and let me tell them, whosoever they be, I know the King's
Majesty will be so far from owning them to be his Friends, that he will rank
them with the worst of his Enemies. If we will be counted the Kings Party, or
Caveliers, as they have called us, and that was the worst they could call us,
let us strive to imitate him in all his Virtues, which I believe and am
assured, by the just and true Reports, of those that have known him, and seen
most of his actions since the time of his Banishment; that they say, and
declare, he is endued with all Virtues fit for a Prince, a cherisher of Virtue
and a hater of Vics; and for his mercy, let those that were the worst of his
Enemies declare it; for I know no other will be looked for from me but to
commend him, who under God I desire always may command me. I will be bref with
you, Frst, You that did reckon your selves his friends, send up to Heaven as
many prayers for him as you have drunk his healths on Earth to him: and in the
next, Do as you would be done by, and remember that Petition in the Lords
Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us; and seek no reveng, but remember, vengance is mine and I will repay, says
the Lord: and as you have professed your selves Christians, and God has given
you that faith and patience, to hold it out to the end, and now has given you
your desire, let the World see, that as we hated the Hypocrisy and Tyranny, of
our worse than Egyptian Taskmasters, so we hate the thoughts of them who
always said, often we had had the best of it, how well we should abide, and as
they had a faith without works, let us show our faith by our works, and let our
fruits of the Spirit be Scripture proof with love joy and peace as well as
long-suffering; which when we have performed that, let us perform the rest, or
else we shall show our selves and prove our selves to be fathers of the falce
spirits of these times, or those falce lights which has run up and down this
Land, like those lights that are seen in the night, that leads poor Travelers
out of the way, till it brings them in one filthy quagmire or other, and then
it leaves them; therefore as God has kept us hitherto from following those
false lights: Let our lights so shine before men, that they seeing our good
works may glorify our Father which is in Heaven: And let us walk worthy of
this his great mercy, of restoring us our lawful King, and our Counselors as
at the beginning; and I hope the Lord has a blessing for this Land, in that he
has given us a King, the son of a King to rule over us, whom God preserve with
a long, prosperous, and peaceable reign, and bless all his Councils from the
highest to the lowest, with wisdom and courage, like Iethro's Magistrates,
fearing God, dealing truly, hating covetousness: so ending with that Text, in
the 24. of the Proverbs the 21, and 22. verses, My son fear God and the King,
and meddle not with them that are given to change; for their calamity shall
rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

Thus I have showed you the truth as much as in me lies, of his Majestyes
happy arival and entertainment into London, which I am not able to express,
nor is not to be set forth with pen in a small Volum; for I believe never was
any Prince in the World entertaind with more Joy and Triumph than he was, all
the way from Dover to Whitehall, if the inward Love of their hearts were
agreeable to their expressions and ontward habit, I believe the World could not
parallel more loyal Subjects. To them that were not so, I leave them to
consider the Motto of the Garter, Evil to them that evil thinks.

Convert O Lord, or else confound all those,
That are thine, the King and CHARLS's foes.
Exsurgat Deus, dissipentur inimici.

