A Good Minister of Jesus Christ.

A Funeral SERMON For the Reverend Mr. RICHARD STEEL; A faithful and useful
Minister of the Gospel.

Delivered November. 27. 1692.

By George Hamond, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Sprint at the Bell in Little-Britain, and John
Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey, M DC XCIII.

THE PREFACE, To my Respected, and Beloved Friends, who were the special Charge
of Reverend Mr. Steel.
THere are two Things which gave the Occasion of writing this Preface: 1. That
I may lay before you the Reasons, why I make this particular Address to you. 2.
That I may take this Advantage, to offer some Requests to you.

1. The following Discourse is now exposed to public View, because the Subject
insisted upon in it, is of general Use and Concernment to all who have a due
Sense of Religion, and really look after the Welfare of their precious immortal
Souls. For therein, they are directed how to make a Difference between such as
feed them only with Chaff, or Ashes, and those that break to them the Bread of
Life: Between such as subvert them, and those that build them up in the most
holy Faith: Between such as would engage them in furious Contentions, and those
that endeavor to keep them in the Unity of the Spirit, and Bond of Peace:
Between such as follow cunningly-devised Fables, and speak Lies in Hypocrisy,
and those that rightly divide the Word of Truth. Of what Importance these
things are, the Serious and Considerate will quickly apprehend. But it is
likely that they who are immerst in the Love of the World, or infatuated with
the Pleasures of the Flesh, will despise or ridicule them. If what is therein
offered, shall, by the Blessing of God, make Impression upon any, and prevail
with them to enquire, and search into the holy Will of God, declared in the
Scriptures, touching these Matters, I shall greatly rejoice.

But I think that ye are, in a special manner, concerned to review and ponder
this Sermon, upon those very Grounds that induced me to make this particular
Inscription of it to you; and my Reasons are two.

First; Because it was upon your Invitation and Request (as it was represented
to me) that I undertook the Preaching of my Brother Steel's Funeral Sermon. It
is true, that Application was made to a very Reverend and Excellent Servant of
God, to have performed that Labor of Love, and that I did earnestly importune
him to accept it; but he absolutely refused it. For though he professed his
very great Esteem for the Memory of Mr. Steel, and that he would be ready upon
all Occasions, to show it; yet he concluded, that it was most proper for me to
perform that Service, as being, by the Providence of God, brought into such a
Conjunction with him in the Ministration of the Gospel. Whereby I saw, that
there was no way to change his Resolution, or to invalidate his Reason. This I
now mention to you, that ye may have a plain, tho brief, Account of that
Procedure; and so to prevent, or remove, some Surmises, which, it may be, have
been entertained by such as determine things merely according to their own
Preconceptions or Prejudices. And now, I hope, that none will interpret my
soliciting of that eminent Person to have yielded to that Request which was
made to him, to have proceeded from any Unwillingness in me to afford my
Service (such as it is) toward the solemnizing of my deceased Brother's
Funeral. For to that I was forward enough, both out of that Affection and
Honor which I had for him; and out of the Desire which I had to gratify you;
especially in that which might conduce to the promoting of your Faith, Holiness
and Comfort. Upon the whole, I think my first Reason must be allowed to have
its Weight, That the Motion of Preaching the Sermon, coming from you, it is
fit, that now it should be tendered to you.

The second Reason, why I direct these Papers to you, is, Because as soon as
the Sermon was preached, ye requested me to make it public. In this also I
complied with your Desires, tho not without some Reluctance from my own Temper
and Inclination, which was, and is, never to be forward to thrust out any Thing
of Mine into the World. For I saw there were others far better qualified for
Writing, who have abundantly furnished those that will make use of their
Labors, with great variety of profitable and excellent Books. And let me have
leave to add farther, That tho I complied with your Motion to Print the Sermon,
without much Gainsaying, yet I have been inflexible to the Importunities of
others, in some like Instances. Seeing then, that from first to last, ye have
influenced me in this Undertaking, ye may reasonably claim a special Interest
in the following Discourse. And I doubt not, but ye will kindly accept this
Tender of it to you.

2. Having laid before you the Reasons that moved me to give you a special
Interest in the following Discourse, I shall now subjoin those Requests, which
I desire may be granted by you. I have, ye see, complied with your Proposals:
And I hope ye will show your selves as ductil to my Demands, especially when ye
find that I ask nothing of you, but what your Duty and Concernment obliges you
to yield unto.

1. I entreat you frequently and seriously to revolve in your Minds, and
carefully to recollect those things which ye have heard from, or observed in
your late worthy Pastor, that may, in a more special manner, be instructive or
directive to you in your Faith and Obedience. And that not only what he taught
you in his public Preaching, but also in his Visits and Conferences with you.
For therein, he used to drop something that might more nearly touch your
Circumstances; as by answering your Cases, or by exciting and directing you in
the conscientious Discharge of your Duty toward God and Man.

2. I desire you who are Traders and Dealers in the World, to have frequent
recourse to his Book, entitled, The Tradesman's Calling; and to peruse it, not
only as a Divertisement to entertain your spare-time withal, but to select
those Rules and Directions that are most accommodate to your Employments; and
to observe them, that ye may please God, obtain his Blessing, and be a Credit
to Religion.

3. I recommend to you his Book, entitled, An Antidote against Distractions;
and so to acquaint your selves with it, that it may become come familiar to
you, and leave such Impressions upon you, as may abide in your Hearts, and
actually to excite them, when ye are exercising your selves in Religious Duties.

4. Endeavor to write after his Copy, and to imitate him in Works of Charity
and Mercy, in which he was very abundant, and very prudent.

5. Approve the Sincerity of that Love and Respect which ye professed your
selves to bear to your deceased Pastor, by your Readiness to perform any Office
of Love, Kindness or Assistance to his disconsolate Widow, and his Children, in
any thing wherein ye may gratify them.

6. Maintain Union and Concord among your selves. Let nothing be done through
Strife, or Vainglory, but in Lowliness of Mind; let each esteem other better
than themselves. Look not every Man on his own things, but every Man also on
the things of others. Let this Mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus.

7. My concluding Request to you all, is, Let your Conversation be as becomes
the Gospel of Christ. Be Blameless, and Harmless, the Sons of God, without
Rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as
Lights in the World.

I leave these my Requests with you: And commend you to God, and to the Word of
his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among
them that are sanctified.

Books sold by John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultry.
A Sermon preached on the Thanksgiving-Day at Crosby-Square. By Samuel Slater,
Minister of the Gospel. 4to.

A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Ronolds, Minister of the Gospel. 4to.

Bp. Wilkins of Prayer and Preaching. 8vo.

Addy's Shorthand. 8vo.

Praxis Catholica; Or, The Country-man's universal Remedy; being excellent
Physical Receipts. By Chistopher Pack, Doctor of Physic. 8vo.

A Good Minister OF JESUS CHRIST.
2 Timothy II. 15. Study to show thy self approved into God, a Workman that
needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth.
WE are, this Day, to solemnize the Funeral of a good and faithful Servant of
Jesus Christ, who is now entered into the Joy of his Lord. Wise he was, and
skilful in turning many to Righteousness; and now (as we have good ground to
believe) he shines as the Brightness of the Firmament. He is now no more in
the Land of the Living: and many they are, who will find him wanting. One of
the Pillars is removed out of the Temple of God upon Earth Rev. 3. 12.
. The Ministers of Christ, in and about this City, will quickly be sensible
that there is one of the Watchmen taken away. His desolate Family is full of
Lamentation, because the Covering thereof will no more overshadow it. Some weep
for the loss of their Spiritual Father, who begat them to Christ through the
Gospel: Others miss their Nourisher, who was wont to give them their portion of
Meat in due season. And as for my self, I am deprived of a Brother greatly
honored and beloved by me, whom I always found an helpful and concordant
Fellow Laborer in the Work of the Gospel. On all hands, there are those who
recount their Loss; but to him to die is gain, for he is departed and gone to
Christ, which is best of all.

I need to say no more touching the special Occasion of this Meeting, as being
known to you all, as ye declare by your coming hither in greater Numbers than
usual. But it is likely that some will be disappointed of their Expectation:
for I suppose, that several came to hear an eminent Servant of God, who is
richly furnished with all Kinds of Ministerial Abilities; whereas they now
find, that the Providence of God has laid this Service upon one who is
destitute of those Accomplishments: nevertheless, I shall endeavor, through
the Help of Christ, to speak the Words of Truth and Soberness.

And that ye may know beforehand, what Subject is provided for your Attention,
(and so your Thoughts will be the better fixed) I shall let you understand,
that my Design is to set before you the rough Draught, or Representation of a
good Minister of Jesus Christ, as the Apostle styles him, 1 Timothy 4. 6. And I
think my Choice will be for your Edification: For while I describe such an one,
I shall but hold up to your View a Glass or Mirror, wherein ye may behold the
reflected Portraicture of our deceased Brother. And when ye maturely consider
his Idea, ye cannot but find your Thoughts running into such Issues as these;
He was lately with us; and did we then understand what a Jewel we possessed? He
is now taken away, and are we duly apprehensive of our Loss? It is a common
Instance of our Infirmity, and Inadvertency, that we seldom prize Mercies
according to their proper Worth, Excellency and Usefulness, until we have lost
them; and then it is usual to hear Men breathing out Job's Lamentation, O that
I were as in Months past. Let us then become so wise, as thankfully and
faithfully to improve present Blessings and Advantages, lest our Savior's
Minatory Prediction overtake us; The days will come when ye shall desire to see
one of the days of the Son of Man, and shall not see it. Luke 17. 22.


And now, I shall, without farther prefacing, apply my self to handle the Words
which I read to you. They are directed to Timothy in a way of Admonition or
Advice; Study to show thy self approved unto God. -- But when ye thoroughly
ponder them, ye may perceive, that in them is contained the Delineation of a
good Minister of Jesus Christ, and that drawn by the skilful Hand of the
Apostle Paul, as it was held and guided by the Holy Ghost himself. But, in
framing his Character, he thought it not enough to show himself alone; or by
himself: For he places near him the Image or Picture of a wordy, proud and
wrangling Pretender. Thus, in one Frame, ye often behold the Picture of a
beautiful Person, with a deformed Negro or ugly Satyr standing by him: For
Contraries illustrate one another. In the Canticles, the Church of Christ is
represented as the fairest among Woman, but it is placed as a Lilly among
Thorns Cant. 1. 11. compared with Chap. 2. 2.
. The like Course does the Apostle take here. He sets forth a good Minister of
Jesus Christ in very lively Colors; and withal, he depaints a vainglorious,
contentious Sophister. Neither can we well read the Text, but our Eye will
glance upon the Words which immediately go before it, and those that follow
after it, In which he discovers a bad Minister; that when we compare him with a
good one, and are made sensible of the Contrariety that is between them, we may
cleave to the one, and relinquish the other. The Deformities and malignant
Qualities of a bad Minister, are laid open in the 14th and 16th Verses: the Sum
whereof is this; That a bad Minister is one who strives about Words to no
profit, but to the subverting of the Hearers: and he is one, whose Art and
Occupation lies in profane and vain Bablings, which tend to the increase of
more Ungodliness. We must then allow a little of our time to search out his
Marks and Properties, though very cursorily. And if ye well observe him, he
will quickly discover his Spirit and Temper; for he is a Man of Heat, ready to
strive; but not apt to teach. He has a Torrent of Words, but they are empty
and insignificant. (...)
He is all Tempest and Whirlwind, to rend and tear in pieces; but he is a
Stranger to the Things that make for Peace. But the Servant of the Lord must
not strive; but be gentle unto all Men, apt to teach, patient: In Meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give them
Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25.
. The contentious Wrangler is one who will dispute every thing to the shaking
of the very Foundations of Religion, but would have nothing settled or
determined. It was the grave Aphorism of a Person of great Experience among us,
That the Itch of Disputing, bred the Scab in the Church Sir Henry Wotton;
Disputandi pruritus peperit scabiem Ecclesiae.
. It must needs be very grievous to such as love Truth and Peace, to see so
many Volumes of Controversal Writings, in which the contending Parties do
asperse and damn one another; and yet when the Matter in debate is calmly
stated, it will appear, in several Instances, that it is only a Strife about
Words 1 Timothy 6. 4. -- (...).
that fills up a great part of the Wrangle. And therefore, did we attend unto
that which the Apostle here declares, we might find enough to make a sober
Person to be for ever out of love with all hot and furious Contentions; for he
fixes two black and disgraceful Blots upon them: 1. That these strifes about
Words are unprofitable: They have in them (...): They have nothing in them
that may make a Man wiser or better. And to disparage them the more, he adds,
Titus 3. 9. That they are unprofitable and vain (...).
. Every discreet Person before he engage in any Undertaking of consequence,
will deliberate and consider: Cui bono? What Advantage or Benefit is to be
expected? It is a very serious Question, and fit to be propounded to many
Disputers; To what End do they pester the Church of God with their needless,
unprofitable and vain Controversies, and thereby disorder themselves, and
disturb others? Whatsoever does not edify, is without the Compass of the Charge
and Employment of a good Minister of Jesus Christ. He has Work enough to do
about things necessary and profitable. It Is possible, that some other things
may be lawful; yet if they be not expedient, if they do not edify, he may let
them alone, and not meddle with them 1 Cor. 10. 22. All things are lawful for
me, but all things are not expedient; -- but all things edify not.
. I could heartily wish, that the Apostolical Canon were better observed by us
all, 1 Cor. 14. 26. Let all things be done to edifying.

2. Though it might be sufficient to caution us against Strifes about Words, to
tell us, That they are unprofitable and vain; yet, to beget in us a greater
Aversation to them, the Apostle adds. That they are very mischievous; for they
subvert the Hearers, and will increase to more Ungodliness. The Work of a good
Minister of Jesus Christ, is to build up his Hearers in Knowledge, Faith,
Holiness and Comfort; and to that end, to nourish them with the sound Doctrine
of the Grace of God: Acts 20. 32. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and
to the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up: -- They are then the
Ministers of Satan; who make it their business to subvert their Hearers; To
turn them upside down; as the Word signifies, Matthew. 21. 12. And overthrew the
Tables of the Money Changers (...).
. Satan is half sure to make a Prey of such as he has so unsettled, as that
they have no stable Foundation to bottom upon. When Men become Scepticks in
the Essentials of Religion, they are in the next Disposition to become
Atheists: And such Instruments of Satan as will serve him to subvert their
Hearers, will also lend him their Help aedificare in Gehennam, to build them up
for Hell; and the effectual way to do so, is for them to deride and ridicule
all serious Godliness, and to flatter or harden Men in their vicious Courses;
and then ye may be sure they will be good (or rather bad) Proficients in the
School of the Devil, for they grow worse and worse 2 Timothy 3. 13. (...).
. In brief; It is the Devil who is the greatest Gainer by unprofitable Sermons
and furious Contentions. For, by them, the Spirits of Men are exasperated, the
secure Sinners are hardened, Charity is expelled, Divisions are perpetuated,
edifying Doctrine is excluded, and every evil Work befriended: For where
Envying and Strife are maintained, there will be Confusion and every evil Work
Jam. 3. 16.
.

Having said so much of the bad Minister, whom we could not but take notice of,
the Apostle pointing him out to us, we shall dismiss him, and commend to you
the Apostle's Admonition; 2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a Form of Godliness; but denying
the Power thereof; from such turn away.

And now we shall prosecute the fair and amiable Character of a good Minister
of Jesus Christ, as the Apostle here lays it before Timothy for his Imitation;
q. d. O my Son Timothy, be not thou like unto those Affecters of Vainglory and
Applause, who (by Wit and Sophistry) will undertake to prove and disprove,
whatsoever their Humor or Interest shall prompt them unto. Their Words may be
copious, and well placed; their Periods handsome, and of an artificial
Composure: But what will all this advantage the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness? Nay, you may be sure, their frivolous Disputes and fiery
Contentions, will obstruct it. Therefore do thou (O Man of God) bid defiance to
Pride and Passion; And do thou follow after Righteousness Godliness, Faith,
Love, Patience, Meekness 1 Timothy 6. 11.
: Give Attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine. Take heed to thy
self, and to thy Doctrine, continue in them; for in doing this, thou shall both
save thy self, and them that hear thee 1 Timothy 4. 13, 16.
: And (to sum up all) study to show thy self approved unto God, a Workman that
need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. If thou observe these
things, thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ 1 Timothy 4. 6.
.

That ye may, then, have a more clear and distinct View of such an excellent
Person, as the Apostle here delineates, I shall endeavor to represent him in
his several graceful Properties, as they are laid before us in the Text, e. gr.

1. A good Minister of Jesus Christ, is one who is very studious and
industrious: One that sincerely designs, and sedulously endeavors, with
Fidelity, to discharge that Trust which is reposed in him by God. And he that
does so, may be confident of his Assistance and Blessing in his Work. 1 Timothy 1.
12. I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has enabled me, for that he counted me
faithful, putting me into the Ministry. This Property of a good Minister, may
be extracted out of that Monitory Word which the Apostle here makes use of
(...).
; and is by our Translation rendered Study; by the vulgar Latin, Be very
careful Solicit cura.
: by another, (having an eye to the Primitive Theme) Make haste Aeth. (...),
festino, propero; and from thence comes (...). Sedulo strenue operam navo;
contendo, enitor.
. We may take in all, and then the Sense will be more pregnant, q. d. Lose no
time, but presently set about, and effectually bestir thy self in the Execution
of thy Ministerial Office and Duty. Excite, and preserve in thy self, such an
active and vigorous Frame of Spirit, as stands in opposition to Slothfulness.
Romans 12. 11. Not slothful in Business, fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord
(...).
. From hence we may conclude, Of all Persons in the World, the good Ministers
of Jesus Christ should not be idle or slothful, but studious and industrious in
their proper Work, and persist therein with Alacrity, Activity, and Constancy.

The Reasons that may prevail with them, and engage them hereto, are many and
weighty; e. gr.

1st. They should be furnished with a more than vulgar Measure of sacred
Knowledge, in the Doctrines and Mysteries of the Gospel, that they may declare
the whole Counsel to the Edification of his Church. Moreover, they are set for
the Defense of the Gospel Phil. 1. 17.
: and should endeavor to be able, by sound Doctrine, to exhort, and convince
the Gainsayers, and to stop their Meuths Tit. 1. 9. -- (...). Ver. 11. (...).
. Now, most evident it is, that they who desire to be meetly qualified for such
Undertakings, must give Attendance to Reading: They must meditate on these
things, and give themselves wholly to them, that their Profiting may appear to
all. It would be a great Reproach to Teachers of the Gospel, to be like those
Teachers of the Law, whom the Apostle derides, 1 Timothy 1. 7. Desiring to be
Teachers of the Law, yet understand neither what they say, nor whereof they
affirm. What think ye then will become of the Lazy and Slothful, when the most
Studious and Industrious, out of a deep Sense of their own Imperfections, cry
out, And who is sufficient for these things?

2. A good Minister of Jesus Christ, will feel himself obliged to be studious
and industrious, when he reflects upon that blessed Work, wherein his
Employment lies, The Conversion and Salvation of precious immortal Souls; which
ordinarily, are much concerned in his Sedulity and Fidelity. For though God
does confer his Grace, according to his own Sovereign Will and Pleasure; for it
is not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but of God that shows
Mercy Romans 9. 15.
; and he may choose the foolish Things of the World to confound the Wise; yet
Ministers cannot in Faith, expect that God should give the Increase, unless, on
their part, there be Planting and Watering 1 Cor. 3. 6.
: and that not in a remiss, or unconcerned Manner, but according to the
Apostle's Example; Col. 1. 28, 29. Whom we preach, warning every Man, and
teaching every Man in all Wisdom, that we may present every Man perfect in
Christ Jesus: Whereunto I also labor, striving according to his VVorking,
which works in me mightily.

3. The good Minister of Jesus Christ will see cause enough that he should be
studious and industrious, when his Heart is under due Impressions of that
tremendous Account which he must give to Jesus Christ. For such a time will
certainly come. The Charge which the Apostle gives is terrible as a Clap of
Thunder; 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall judge the Quick and the Dead, at his Appearing, and his Kingdom;
Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort
with all Long suffering and Doctrine. The Negligent will then find, that all
Excuses and Evasions will be rejected and despised. It will avail nothing to
plead, That their other Businesses or Diversions were so many, that they had
neither Time nor Inclination to study or preach the Gospel: for no Pretensions
could secure the unprofitable, slothful Servant, from falling under that
dreadful Sentence, Take the Talent from him: -- Cast the unprofitable Servant
into outer Darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth Cor. 25. 28,
29, 30.
.

This may suffice to have been spoken touching the first Property of a good
Minister of Jesus Christ. He is one that is studious and industrious; that
hastens to his Work with Alacrity, and persists in it with Constancy.

2dly. The second Property of a good Minister of Jesus Christ, is, That he is
one who chooses and pursues a right End, both in his Undertaking and Acting:
He has his Eye always upon the Mark; and all his Studies and Endeavors have a
direct and proper Tendency to it: and that is, That he may approve himself unto
God. What the Apostle prescribed to Timothy, he practiced himself: 2 Cor 5. 9,
10. Wherefore we labor (or endeavor) with an holy Ambition (...); ambimus:
Romans 15. 20. (...).
, that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him: For we must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Two Things the good Minister does
reach after.

(1.) That he may be approved. (2.) That God may ratify his Approbation.
(1.) That he may obtain an Approbation (...).
; and such an one, as is given after Trial: Jam. 1. 12. Blessed is the Man that
endures Temptation (...).
(or Trial); for when he is tried (...).
, he shall receive the Crown of Life. Men are sometimes too rash and
precipitate, in passing their Judgment, and so may take Brass for Gold: But God
searches the Heart, and will never approve any Person whom he has not
thoroughly tried. When Jesse's Sons came before Samuel, he looked upon Eliab, and
said, Surely the Lord's Anointed is before me: But the Lord said unto Samuel,
Look not on his Countenance, nor on the Height of his Stature; because I have
refused him: for the Lord sees not as Man sees; for Man looks on the
outward Appearance, but the Lord looks on the Heart. Happy then are they,
who, notwithstanding their many Defects and Infirmities, can appeal to God for
their Sincerity: Psalm. 17. 3. Thou have proved my Heart, and tried me in the
Night, and shall find nothing; i. e. nothing inconsistent with Uprightness or
Sincerity.

(2.) That God may ratify his Approbation: for it is God who will pass the
final and decisive Sentence: It is not then, he who commends himself, (or is
commended by others) that is approved, but he whom the Lord commends Cor. 2
11. 13.
.

Many are they who are ambitious to purchase the good Opinion and Praise of
Men, and love it more than the Praise of God Joh. 12. 43.
. But of all Persons in the World, it looks worst in a Minister of Jesus Christ
to be Animal gloriae; to hunt after Applause, and to feed upon the Breath of
popular Acclamations. What dismal Effects have sprung from the poisonous Root
of affected Popularity? Therefore the good Minister of Jesus Christ must
fortify himself against the Insinuations of good Report, as well as against the
Vexations of evil Report: and be content to pass through Honor or Dishonor,
evil and good Report; and so support himself with the Approbation of God, and
the Testimony of a good Conscience.

This Clause [study to approve thy self unto God] is well paraphrased by the
Syriac, Let it be thy Care to present thy self before God, with great Integrity
Tibi curae sit sistere teipsum integerrime coram Deo.
. Good Ministers are conscious to themselves of many Infirmities, and bewail
them before the Lord; As their Unskilfulness in explicating the great Mysteries
of the Gospel; the Remissness of their Zeal; their Entanglements, Diversions,
Distractions, and such like: yet it may be a sweet Refreshment, and Relief to
them, that they can say, That they have sincerely desired to serve the Lord in
the Gospel of his Son Jesus Christ.

And great Reason there is, why a good Minister of Jesus Christ should study to
approve himself unto God.

1. Because it is God who entrusts and employs him in the Ministration of the
Gospel: And to him he must give an account of his Stewardship. If the Office of
the Ministry were merely an Humane Constitution, and the Instructions, Rules
and Measures, which Ministers were to be determined by, in the Execution of
their Office, were all of Man's Appointment, then would it be sufficient for
them so to demean and carry themselves therein, as to gain the Approbation of
Men: But if the Office, Work and Rule, be from Heaven, and not of Men, then it
is their Concernment, as well as their Duty, to seek the Approbation of God.
The Apostle's Way of Reasoning in another like Instance, will, I think, guide
us to what we are to conclude in this Case; 2 Timothy ii. 4. No Man that warreth,
entangleth himself with the things of this Life, that he may please him, who
has chosen him to be a Soldier. And may we not argue, a Minori ad Majus, He
that is bound to the Lord Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, under his
Sacramentum Ministeriale, ought not to entangle himself in Matters of a foreign
Nature, especially when they are obstructive to his proper Work; much more, if
inconsistent with it? but he should bend all his Thoughts, Cares and Endeavors
to please him, who has chosen him to be a Minister. When, I say, the Office is
from God, yet that leaves room enough for Men, who have a delegated Power from
Christ (in the ordinary Way) to try the Persons, who are to be admitted to the
Execution of that Office. And having found them fit, to ordain them with
Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of Hands; and so solemnly to invest them
therewith 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5.
. Yet still it must remain unshaken, That Man does not make the Ministry,
neither may Man, by his proper Authority, appoint the Minister his Rule, nor
apportionate his Work: For that belongs to the Lord Christ only; Ephesians. 4. 8, to
ver. 14. When he asscended up on high, he led Captivity captive, and gave Gifts
unto Men: -- And he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work
of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ.

2. A good Minister of Jesus Christ, should study to approve himself unto God;
because, from him alone, he is to receive his full and ultimate Reward. Sad and
miserable would be the Lot of a good Minister of Jesus Christ, if the Favor of
Men and earthly Preferments were all that he might look for after his greatest
Sedulity and Fidelity. The Apostle Paul had, certainly, more in his Eye; for he
professes, that it was something else which kept him from fainting and sinking
under all the Burdens of his Services and Sufferings; and that was, That he
looked not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen;
because the things which are seen, are temporal; but the things which are not
seen, are eternal 2 Cor. 4. 16, -- 18.
. And a great and precious Promise they have to encourage them in their
Labors, and to support them under their Burdens; 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. Feed the
Flock which is among you, (or in as much as in you lies); and when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away.
This may suffice to have been said, touching the second Property of a good
Minister of Jesus Christ; He is one who studies to approve himself unto God.

3dly. His third Property, is, That he is a Workman, that needs not to be
ashamed. There are two Branches in this Part of his Character.

(1.) If you look upon him absolutely; so he is a Workman.

(2.) If ye look also upon the Modification adjoined; so he is a Workman that
needs not to be ashamed.

1. A Workman he must be (...).
; and that Work which he is called unto, is no easy Employment, but very
laborious; for the Word used in the Text, is translated a Labourer; Matthew. 9.
37. The Laborers are few: And Ver. 38. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the
Harvest, that he would send forth Laborers into his Harvest (...): -- (...).
. Neither is his Labor like to some kinds of Recreation; in which Men do but
play, while they take a great deal of Pains: But it is hard Labor, even to
Laffitude and Weariness, to the wasting of their Strength, and exhausting of
their Spirits. For so does the Scripture set forth the Working and Laboring of
the good Ministers of Jesus Christ; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Know them that labor among
you: (...) (...), laboro, fatigor, lassor.
. 1 Timothy 5. 17. -- especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. This ye
may find exemplified in two Instances; The Former is of Christ, when he was
spent and tired out with his Journey, Joh. 4. 6. Jesus therefore being wearied
with his Journey, sat thus on the Well (...).
. The Latter is of the Disciples, who had toiled out themselves all night, Luke
5. 5. Master, we have toiled all night (...).
. These places are produced to show, That a good Minister of Jesus Christ is a
Workman, whose Employment requires very hard Labor; so that he has no time
allowed him for Idleness or Remissness, though some time be indulged to him for
his Relaxation, through his Master's tender Compassion; Mark 6. 31. And he said
unto them, Come your selves apart, and rest awhile: for there were many coming
and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat. However God may deal with
such as stand all the day idle in the Marketplace; yet, doubtless, he will not
endure any Loiterers in his Vineyard, in which even the Figtree, which was
barren, would not be allowed to have a Standing Luke 13. 6, 7.
; much less might the Dresser of the Vineyard expect to be tolerated, if he
brought forth no Fruit. Our Savior told his Apostles, that he had ordained
them, that they should bring forth Fruit: and that Fruit was their converting
of Souls to God, as the Apostle explains it, Romans 1. 13. -- That I may have
some Fruit among you also, as among other Gentiles. The Ministers of Christ may
intercede for the Enlargement of the time of God's Patience toward an
unfruitful People; but then it is upon their Engagement to use double Diligence
in cultivating of them: Luke 13. 8. Lord, let it alone this year also, that I
may dig about it, and dung it.

Thus ye have one of the Apellations by which a good Minister of Jesus Christ
is denominated, that he is a Workman. But because I told you, that my Design
in this Discourse would be to give you some distinct Representation of such an
one, I think it necessary to add some other Titles by which the Spirit of God
does notify him to us, that ye may see him in a clearer Light, and form more
perfect conceptions of him. The good Ministers, then, of Jesus Christ, have two
sorts of Titles conferred upon them:

Some, that set forth their Dignity:

Others, that bind them to their Duty.

In reciting the Former, I shall be very brief: yet may I not silently pass
them over, lest I should be injurious both to them and you.

1. Their Titles that do set forth their Dignity.

Of these I shall mention four only.

(1.) They have the glorious Name of Angels set upon them (...), Legatus,
Nuncius.
; Rev. 1. 20. The seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches. Angels, we
know, are the highest Rank, and most noble Order among all the Creatures: And
they have the Denomination of Angels, because they are the Messengers of the
great God. And such are all good Ministers of Jesus Christ. Ambassadors; 2 Cor.
5. 20. Now then, we are Ambassadors for Christ. Messengers; Hag. 1. 13. Then
said Haggai, the Lord's Messenger in the Lord's Message, to the People. This
Title was not appropriated to him, as a Prophet immediately called and
inspired, but it is communicated to all those who are appointed and authorized
by God to deliver his Messages to his People; Mal. 2. 7. The Priest's Lips
should preserve Knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his Mouth, for he is
the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.

(2.) They are called Elders (...), Seniores.
; Acts 14. 23. When they had ordained the Elders in every Church: Tit. 1. 5.
-- Ordain Elders in every City. The name of Elders was honorable among both
Jews and Gentiles. The Jews dignified their Rulers, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, with the Title of Elders: And so did the Greeks use the same,
to signalize such as were of eminency for their VVorth or Office. For thus does
one of them inform us, We call (says he) those Persons Elders, whom we esteem
the best, or most excellent, and the Ancients (...).
: There are few, who have not heard of the Roman Senate and Senators Senatus
and Senatores.
. And Antiquaries tell us, that the Saxon word Aldermen, has the Signification
of Ancients, or Elder-men.

(3.) They are denominated Guides (...), qui praecundo monstraut viam.
, such as have the Conduct of others, and go before them in the Way of
Religion; Heb. 13. 7. Remember them which have the Rule (or are the Guides)
over you, who have spoken unto you the Word of God. And ver. 17. Obey them
that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your
Souls, as they that must give account. The Ministers of Christ have a Power to
lead, though not to compel Potestatem (...), ducendi; non (...) cogendi.
.

(4.) They are dignified with the Name of Presidents (...).
, such as are over others in the Lord; 1 Timothy 5. 17. The Elders that rule (or
preside) well, account worthy of double Honor.

I shall not farther enlarge upon those Titles that set forth their Dignity;
yet somewhat may be inferred that is obvious to every understanding Observer;
That Men ought to honor those whom God delights to honor. Or, let me lay this
before you, in the Words of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. And we beseech
you, Brethren, know them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord,
and admonish you. To know them (...).
, not only that ye may distinguish them from other Persons, or to salute them
when ye meet them, or to have some friendly Conversation with them; but to
yield them such Observance as may testify that Honor and Obedience which ye
owe to him that sends them, and the Messages which they bring you in his Name,
and clothed with his Authority. And all this must be done not slightly, and out
of Complement, but in Reality and Sincerity. And then, for the Degree of your
esteem of them, it must not be after a low and vulgar rate, but raised to a
double height in Comparison: very highly (...), super ex abundanti
.

Let no Man think that I mentioned these magnificent Titles conferred on the
Ministers of Christ, out of Ostentation or Ambition; for they have learned to
bear Contempt, when cast only upon their Persons, or their outward State in the
World; but yet they are obliged to magnify their Office, when Men do despise or
reproach it. And for this, the Apostle's Example is their Warrant, Romans 11. 13.
-- Inasmuch as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine Office (...).
. They know very well, that they are but earthen Vessels, yet they carry an
inestimable Treasure; Pearls in Oyster-shells, 2 Cor. 4. 7. (...).
. That all the Glory may be ultimately carried up to God: For they preach not
themselves, but Christ Jesus to be the Lord, and themselves your Servants for
Jesus sake.

This may suffice to have been spoken of the Titles that set forth their
Dignity: I shall be a little more copious in those that bind them to their
Duty: And I shall single out such as are of like import with that of a
Workman, mentioned in the Text. As,

1. They are styled Bishops; Acts 20. 28. Take heed to your selves, and to the
Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers. If the Greek word
(...).
had been rendered here, as it is generally in other places, it might have been
translated Bishops. The Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 3. 1. He that desires the
Office of a Bishop, desires a good Work (...).
. The Apostle calls it a Work, not an Honor, says Grotius; or, as another
glosseth, A Work, not a Dignity, or a more delicate and softer kind of Life.
Let such as glory in the Name, do the Work of a Bishop, and all good Men will
pay them due respect. Sure we are, that the Charge that is given them, is very
strict: 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. The Elders which are among you, I exhort, who also am
an Elder: -- Feed the Flock of God, which is among you, taking the Oversight
thereof; -- or doing the Work of a Bishop toward them (...).
. And what the Work of the Primitive Bishop was, the Learned Dr. Hamond has
informed us; It was (says he) the Work of the Bishop, to be the Mouth of the
People, to offer up their Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions and
Thanksgivings to Almighty God. To receive to Baptism those that, upon due
trial, were found meet for it: To administer the Lord's Supper; which, in the
first times of Christianity, was done very frequently: To visit the Sick, and
to pray for them: To stop the Mouths of Gainsayers; to admonish disorderly
Walkers: To cast out the Obstinate and Incorrigible: To receive Penitents into
the Church, after sufficient trial made of their Repentance: To take care of
the Poor, Orphans, Widows and Strangers. And, in short, to attend to all the
Affairs of the Church of God. He that will conscienciously give up himself to
all these Services, will need no other Argument to convince him of the
Labouriousness of that Office.

2. The Ministers of Christ have the Name of Pastors set upon them, as very
directive, to show them their Work and Employment; Ephesians. 4. 11. Some Pastors
and Teachers (...).
: 1 Pet. 5. 2. -- Feed the Flock that is among you (...).
; i. e. Do all things that belong to the Office of a Pastor. The Shepherd's
Work in the literal Sense, is very busy and toilsom. Jacob, who had been long
exercised in it, gives this account of it, Genesis 31. 40. Thus was I in the day,
the Drought consumed me, and the Frost by night; and my Sleep departed from me.
Neither can we suppose, that a Shepherd, in the Metaphorical Sense, should
exonerate himself of all Care, and indulge himself in his Ease. It was never
known that a Title to an Office should discharge a Man from his proper Work and
Employment. We may infer what God requires and expects from those whom he
constitutes Shepherds, whether in a Political, or in an Ecclesiastical Sense,
by the sharp Reproofs and severe Menaces, which he uses against the Negligent:
Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4. Son of Man, prophesy against the Shepherds of Israel;
prophesy, and say unto them, Thus says the Lord against the Shepherds, VVo to
the Shepherds of Israel, that feed themselves: Should not the Shepherds feed
the Flock? The Diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that
which was sick; neither have ye bound up that which was broken; neither have ye
brought again that which was driven away; neither have ye sought that which was
lost: but with Force and with Crueley, have ye ruled them. I should desire no
more of any Man, that thinks a Pastor's Life to be a Life of Ease and
Divertisement, than to make experiment; though it be but among a few, and those
well-disposed People, and he shall quickly find how much his Work will daily
grow upon his hands: To satisfy the Doubting and Scrupulous; To set in joint
the Bones which have been dislocated or broken, by the Falls of such as have
been overtaken or surprised by Sin Gal. 6. 1. -- (...).
. To bear with the Infirmities, Slowness of Capacity, and Untowardness of such
as he labors to instruct: To apply suitable Remedies to their various Spiritual
Distempers: To look after, and bring back such as have gone astray, either
through their own Levity, or the Craftiness of Seducers: With Patience, Pity
and Compassion, to bear with those that oppose themselves. And besides all
this, meekly to treat the Petulant and Exorbitant, and to cicure or tame such
as have altogether broken the Yoke, and burst the Bonds.

3. They are called Servants or Ministers. Sometimes with respect to the
Subject or Matter of their Ministration; and so they are styled Ministers of
the Word; Luke 1. 2. Even as they delivered them to us, which from the
beginning were Eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word (...).
. Sometimes to set forth their Relation to their Lord and Master, to whom, or
in whose Service, they do minister: So they are the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor.
4. 1. Let a Man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ (...).
The Word made use of in the original Greek, translated [Minister] does
primarily signify a Rower, one that does tug and sweat at the Oar The Primitive
Verb is (...), remigo: but in the common Use, it is enlarged, and extended to
signify a Servant in general.
. The Poet could say, That they who handle the Oar, stand in need of two
things; Of God, to help them with a good Wind, and of their own Labor. The
Appellation then of a Rower, being, in a Metaphorical Sense, applied to a
Servant, or Minister of Christ, may admonish him to continue his Care and
Industry without any intermission; for, ordinarily, the Wind and Tide are
against him. And when it is so, if the Rower sit still but a little, his Vessel
may be carried far backward, and he may lose more in one Hour than he can
recover in many. If a Minister be remiss, when false Doctrines, or Immoralities
in Practice, like a Tempest, bear down all before them, such Disorders will
quickly follow, as will not soon or easily be rectified or reformed. Let him
therefore animate himself with the Apostle's Spirit and Resolution, Gal. 2. 5.
To whom we gave place by Subjection, no not for an hour, that the Truth of the
Gospel might continue with you.

4. They are frequently styled Ministers or Servants; but by a Word, differing
very much in the Original from the former, which also does engage them to much
Diligence and hard Labor; and that is, (...). This Word is used sometimes in
the strict Acceptance, and then it is rendered a Deacon; as 1 Timothy 3. 8.
Likewise also must the Deacons be grave -- (...).
. The occasion of erecting that Order in the Church, ye may find recorded in
Acts 6. and their proper Work was, To take care of, and to manage the Stock of
the Church; and this, in ver. 2. is set forth by their serving of Tables (...).
: but the Use of the Word in the larger Acceptance, is far more frequent; to
denote, A Minister of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6. The Minister of God, 2
Cor. 6. 4. A Minister of Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 4. 6. That which I intend by
adding this Appellation, is as a farther Demonstration, That the Calling of a
good Minister requires much Industry and Diligence in those who will discharge
their Duty with Fidelity: for the Verb from which the Word, which we render
[Minister] is derived, does signify to make haste, or to work (...) is from
(...); which Etymologists deduce from (...), Dust; because, they say, such as
run Races or work abroad, do raise the Dust.
.

Thus ye have had an Account of this Property of a good Minister of Jesus
Christ, That he is a Workman: To which, I have added four Titles more of the
same import, because this seems most conspicuous and eminent, in that Character
which the Text sets upon him: And there remains a little more to be spoken
touching that Adjunct, which is added concerning him; For the Apostle did not
satisfy himself with calling him a Workman, but in a way of Illustration or
Amplification, he subjoins, That he is a Workman that need not be ashamed. The
Text has it in one Word, unashamed (...).
; and this leads Interpreters into several ways of explaining the Sense and
Meaning of it. For some understand it actively. A good Minister must be a
wellresolved Person; that no Shame, Disgrace, or Reproaches of Men, should
daunt or discourage him from professing or preaching the Gospel. The Apostle
Paul was well fortified against those Impressions, which Shame might make upon
weaker Minds; for he says, Romans 1. 16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ (...).
, and often mentions his Parrhesia: His speaking openly, with Liberty and
Confidence; as Acts 9. 29. And he spoke boldly in the Name of the Lord Jesus.
-- Acts 13. 46. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, -- (...).
. Neither could all the Calumnies raised against him, nor Injuries done him,
make him ashamed; 2 Timothy 1. 12. For which Cause, I also suffer these things;
nevertheless, I am not ashamed. -- Impudence is, indeed, most hateful in an
evil Matter, and draws down the Wrath of God upon brazen-faced Sinners; Jer. 6.
15. Were they ashamed when they had committed Abomination? nay, they were not
at all ashamed, neither could they blush, therefore they shall fall among them
that fall. -- He has an hard Province who is diepute with Ignorance, when it
is patronized by Impudence. For how shall he instruct, or convince, those who
are not ashamed of Impertinencies, Nonsense, or most gross Absurdities? But
when the Truths of God are to be vindicated, The Faith which was at once
delivered to the Saints, to be contended for, and Holiness to be propugned, the
good Minister of Jesus Christ should be bold as a Lion, and pray earnestly to
God for that Grace which was promised to the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 3. ver. 8,
9. Behold, I have made thy Face strong against their Faces, and thy Forehead
against their Foreheads, as an Adamant; harder than a Flint have I made thy
Forehead. Fear them not, neither be dismayed at their Looks, though they be a
rebellious House. This may suffice for the active Sense; and this way does the
Syriac Version look; Show thy self a Workman, without Confusion: and many of
the Greek Commentators are reported to concur therein.

But there is also a passive Sense, which may well be admitted, and that our
own Translators do prefer, and (as I think) does best suit with the Contexture
of the Apostle's Discourse; That a good Minister should so carry it, in all his
Ministerial Work, that he need not be ashamed. The Apostle does apparently
insist upon that Antithesis which is between a contentious Sophister, who
strives about Words that are unprofitable and vain, and a Workman that needs
not be ashamed. When the Design and Management of a fallacious fiery
Disputation is detected, the Workman has abundant cause to be ashamed, for
his Folly will be made manifest to all Men. But when the good Minister's Work
is most narrowly searched and sifted, he may hold up his Face without spot;
yea, (his Infirmities being graciously covered and pardoned) he may have
confidence, and not be ashamed before Christ at his Coming.

This may suffice for the third Property of a good Minister of Jesus Christ; He
is a Workman that needs not to be ashamed.

4thly. The Character of a good Minister of Jesus Christ, is concluded with
this Property, That he is one who rightly divides the Word of Truth. For the
clearing of this, two Things are to be attended unto, which may be dispatched
with convenient Brevity.

(1.) What is the Subject or Matter about which his principal Study and Labor
is to be employed, and that is, The Word of Truth.

(2.) What is incumbent upon him, with respect to the Word of Truth; and that
is, That he rightly divide it.

1. It is the Word of Truth, in, and about which, the Thoughts and Studies of a
good Minister of Jesus Christ are to be exercised. Not in doubtful
Disputations, nor in the bare Opinions and Dictates of Men, though of great
Reputation and Authority: Much less in framing cunningly devised Fables, or
golden Legends, which may raise in the Ignorant and Credulous, Admiration,
Superstition and Rapture; but in the Considerate and Prudent, Disdain and
Indignation. The Apostle has informed us, How the great Apostasy from the
Christian Faith, was to be managed and carried on, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. -- By giving
heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils; speaking Lies in Hypocrisy:
but the good Minister must firmly and entirely adhere to the Word of Truth. The
great Repository whereof, is the Holy Scripture, which bears upon it that
glorious Inscription, The Scripture of Truth, Dan. 10. 21. (...).
and the Word of Truth, the Gospel of Salvation, Ephesians. 1. 13. and again, The
Word of the Truth of the Gospel. From hence must the good Minister derive,
confirm, and improve all his Doctrine: For the whole Scripture is given by
Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness: That the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good Works. They then offer an intolerable
Affront to the Divine Majesty, who speak wickedly for God, or talk deceitfully
for him, Job 13. 7.

2. What is the proper Work of a good Minister of Christ, wherein he is to be
occupied with reference to this Word of Truth; and that is, rightly to divide
it (...).
; which cannot be understood in a literal, but in a metaphorical Sense. The
Conjectures of Men about the explicating of the Metaphor, have been various.
Some think it spoken in way of Allusion, to the Priest's cutting abroad, and
dividing the Sacrifices into their several Parts, in which they were very
curious and exact. Others conceive, that the Apostle has respect to those
(...).
Sections, into which the Book of the Law was divided by the Jews, in order to
their reading of it in their Synagogues. Others think the Metaphor to be taken
from Mothers or Nurses, who cut the Meat which they give their Children into
small pieces, that they may the better receive and digest it. But not to insist
upon the Critical Part, I think the Sense and Meaning is well expressed by the
vulgar Latin, Rightly handling the Word of Truth Recte tractantem.
; and by the Syriac, Rightly preaching -- Recte praedicantem.
. But if we expect something instructive from the Metaphor made use of, I
suppose it may afford us some light if compare these Passages of Scripture
together. (1.) The Apostle does style the Ministers of Christ, Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. (2.) Our Savior assigns this as one Property of
a good and faithful Steward, who is set over the Household, that he may give to
every one their portion of Meat in due season, Luke 12. 42. (...).
distributing to every one their proper Dimensum, or Allotment: as Exodus 16. 16.
Every Man according to his Eating. Herein then lies much of the good Minister's
Prudence, Care and Tenderness, so to divide the Word of Truth, that every one
may have their proper Portion: He must provide Milk for Babes, and strong Meat
for them that are of full Age, Heb. 5. 13, 14. accommodating his Teaching to
the Necessities and Capacities of the Hearers. In this, their Lord and Master
Christ went before them, and has left them an Example, For he spoke the Word
as the People were able to hear; i. e. to understand, and profit by it; Mar. 4.
33. It is a singular Grace or Mercy that God bestows on his Ministers, The
Tongue of the Learned, that they should speak a Word in season Isaiah 50. 4.
. A Word in season to the Weary, that they may be refreshed: A Word in season
to the Sorrowful, that they may be comforted: A Word to the Doubting, that they
may be settled and established: A Word to the Secure and Impenitent, that they
may be awakened and convinced; and so to others, as their Case and Condition
may require, for then is the Word of Truth rightly divided.

And thus I have endeavored to represent before you the Delineation of a good
Minister of Jesus Christ, according to those four Properties which are
suggested in, and from the Text.

And now, if ye have attended unto, and duly considered that Character which
has been given of a good Minister, I presume that many of you will be
apprehensive, that it was not without reason that I intimated, in the entrance
upon this Discourse, that I should hold up before you a Glass, or Mirror,
wherein ye might see the Portraicture of that good Minister (whose Funeral we,
this Day, solemnize) to be reflected. It would be no difficult Undertaking to
draw the Parallel, and show the Correspondence in every Particular: But that
Performance would require near as much time as that which has been already
filled up: Ye must therefore be contented with such short Recollections, as I
can recover upon the hasty Exercise of my Thoughts.

The reverend and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr. Richard Steel, was born
in Cheshire near Nantwich, on the tenth Day of May, Anno Dom. 1629, and left
this World November the 16th, Anno Dom. 1692, so that he died in the 64th Year
of his Age. Where he had his Education in his younger Years, has not come to
my notice: but I find in the Fasti Oxonienses, That Richard Steel was Master of
Arts of St. John's College in Cambridg, and was Incorporated into the
University of Oxford, March the 27th 1656. He is there mentioned among the
Oxford-Writers; and several of his Printed Works are recited. When he entered
into the sacred Ministry is unknown to me; but after that he was invested
therewith, I am informed that he did exercise it in diverse places, as the
Providence of God disposed of him, until he came to London, which, (as I
conjecture) was about 24 or 25 Years ago: and here he has continued, preaching
the Gospel in and about the City, as God gave him Liberty and Opportunity,
until he put a period both to his Labors and Life. That he did eminently
discharge the Duty of a good Minister, will appear by some few Remarks, whereby
it will be made evident, that he wrote very fairly after that Copy which I have
been decyphering unto you: e. gr.

1. Our Apostle, the more to recommend a good Minister, does show, How unlike
he is to a contentious wrangling Sophister, which lives in the fire of
Disputing and Dividing. But it may be truly said of our worthy Brother, as it
was of Caleb, He was a Man of another Spirit. He hated Contentions and
Divisions; he greatly bewailed them; and used his uttermost Endeavor to
promote Union and Concord. That this was his Temper, is clearly demonstrated by
his Discourse against uncharitable Contentions in the Church of God. Which
Discourse is printed in the 4th Volume of the Casuistical Morning-Exercises,
preached in October 1689, wherein he showed a deep Judgment, and a very prudent
pacifick Spirit.

2. The Apostle describes a good Minister of Jesus Christ, by his Studiousness
and Diligence. In which, it must be concluded, that our deceased Brother was
very exemplary. For his Sermons were composed and written with mature
Digestion, though with much Brevity; which manifest them to have been the
Product of many serious Thoughts; and considering his Constancy in Preaching,
must needs require very hard Study. His Manuscript Notes of his Sermons are
exceeding many, and deserve to be carefully preserved. When we compute the
time, that must necessarily have been spent about his ordinary Labors, we may
judge, that a Person of more than common Seize, had filled it up very
well: Yet he redeemed so much besides, as enabled him to compose and publish
several pious and profitable Treatises. Of which, I think, it may be of good
use to annex a Catalogue: As,

(1.) An Antidote against Distractions; Or, An Endeavor to serve the Church in
the daily Case of Wanderings in the Worship of God. This Treatise came to my
hands before I ever saw the Face of the Author; and I have heard many to bless
God for it, and to profess that they were greatly edified by it. What
Acceptance this Book has found with such as are serious in Religion, may be
estimated by the several Impressions of it. There is one Circumstance more that
relates to it, which may not be passed over, viz. That it was written by Mr.
Steel when he was in Prison in Wales for Nonconformity: Here we find that
exemplified, which was once the Case of St. Paul, 2 Timothy 2. 9. Wherein I
suffer Trouble as an Evil-Doer, even unto Bonds: but the Word of God is not
bound. And as, while he was in Prison, he endeavored to edify the Church of
God by his Writings; so he did also by his Preaching, while he was under
Confinement, seek the Salvation of those who came to hear him. And it is to be
hoped, that it may be said of some of them, as Paul did of Onesimus, that they
were begotten again by him, while he was in Bonds.

(2.) The Husband-man's Calling; showing the Excellencies, Temptations, Graces
and Duties of the Christian Husbandman.

(3.) A plain Discourse of Uprightness; showing the Properties and Privileges
of an upright Man.

(4.) The Trades-man's Calling: A Discourse concerning the Nature, Necessity,
Choice, etc. of a Calling in general; and Directions for the right managing of
the Tradesman's Calling in particular.

(5.) A Discourse of Old Age; Tending to the Instruction, Caution and Comfort
of Aged Persons.

(6.) A Scheme and Abstract of the Christian Religion, Comprised in fifty two
Heads, with the Texts of Scripture on which they are grounded. And some short
Indications, How they were more largely handled.

(7.) Besides his Discourse against uncharitable Contentions, printed among the
Sermons in the 4th Volume of the Casuistical Morning-Exercises; there are also
other Sermons of his printed: As, (1.) The Duties of Husbands and Wives toward
each other, in the Supplement of the Morning-Exercise at Cripple-gate; 1674.
(2.) Believers Right to the Cup in the Lord's Supper: In the Morning-Exercise
against Propery, 1675. (3.) What are the Hindrances and Helps to a good
Memory, in spiritual Things: In the Continuation of the Morning-Exercises,
Questions, and Cases of Conscience, 1683.

These are the Books which were published by our Reverend Brother; by the
diligent Reading whereof, private Christians may, by God's Blessing, be much
improved in their spiritual Growth.

3. A good Minister of Jesus Christ will study to approve himself unto God: And
to do so, we may be assured, was the constant Care and Endeavor of our
deceased Brother. For he was circumspect; unblameable and exemplary in the
whole Course of his Conversation, and the Exercise of his Ministry; who might,
through Grace, have taken up the Apostle's Words, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoyoing
is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly
Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom; but by the Grace of God, we have had our
Conversation in the World. And now, we doubt not, but that God's Approbation
of him, is perfectly assured, by his actual Admission of him into his Presence,
where there is fullness of Joy, and at whose Right Hand are Pleasures for
evermore.

4. A good Minister of Jesus Christ, is a Workman that need not to be ashamed:
His abundant Labors do manifest that he was a constant and diligent Workman;
and the Lord Christ did so assist and help him in his Work, that upon an
impartial Review, he needed not to have been ashamed of it. He had a singular
Faculty of saying much in a little. The Subjects which he discoursed upon, were
practical and profitable. Since our Conjunction, that we labored together in
the Service of Christ, he preached over the Parable of the wise and foolish
Virgins, in Matt. 25. Then he spent a considerable time in resolving many
practical Cases of Conscience, with great Plainness and Perspicuity; both for
Instruction and Satisfaction. His last Undertaking, was to treat of the
Attributes of God. They are a rich Mine of spiritual Treasures; but they are
also a vast and boundless Ocean: Each of them are so large a Field, that the
most searching and illuminated Understanding cannot reach its Limits; yet he
could contract his Discourses, that usually he allotted but one Sermon for each
Attribute. His last Sermon was upon the Goodness of God; which he concluded
with an Exhortation to make a present Choice of God for our God; and his last
Words were close and piercing, fit to make a lasting Impression, [Ye cannot
make a better Choice, and are eternally undone if ye make a worse.] The
Contemplation of the Attributes of God must needs have filled him with
Ravishment, while he viewed them, though but as in a Glass, darkly. But now he
is gone to those Regions of Light and Love, where all Mists are dispelled; and
there he has such a Knowledge of them, as they who are muffled up with
Mortality, cannot comprehend.

5. He was a Pastor, who made it his business to over-see, and seed his Flock.
He desired to know his Sheep by name: He often visited those who were his
pecullar Charge, and endeavored to edify them, with some serious Discourse
about their Soul Concernments, enquiring after their Proficiency; resolving
their Doubts, encouraging and directing them, as their Case did require. He was
careful and exact in observing whether any of them failed in their Attendance
upon the Ordinances of God: especially if he missed any of them at the Lord's
Supper, once or twice, he would be sure to send to them; and (on the first
Opportunity) to enquire of them, What it was that kept them away?

6. As a good Minister of Jesus Christ, he was very dextrous and skilful in
rightly dividing the Word of Truth. In every Sermon he was careful to provide
Milk for Babes, and strong Meat for grown Men. His Style was easy, familiar,
though far from being loose, careless or rustic: But his Matter was always
substantial and weighty; and so, by a rare Composition, his Discourses were
framed and attempered, that the Meanest might learn, and those of higher
Seize, meet with nothing to be naufeated.

7. As in his Preaching he made it appear, That he was richly stored with
Scripture-Knowledg; so in his Praying, he gave evident Proof, That the Spirit
of Grace and Supplication was plentifully poured out upon him: for he performed
that holy Duty orderly, perspicuously, seriously and affectionately, to the
exciting of Devotion in those that joined with him.

These Instances are sufficient to demonstrate, That the Character of a good
Minister of Jesus Christ was truly exemplified in him.

As to the Circumstances of his last Sickness and Death, I have but little to
insist upon, because, I think, that generally all of you were as well
acquainted with them as my self. On the Lord's Day, which was the 13th of this
instant November, he preached in this, Place in the Morning, and at Hogsden in
the Afternoon. On Monday he visited several Friends in London, and seemed to be
as lively and vigorous, as usually he had been for a long time. He had been
afflicted with the Tiffick for many Years, otherwise he was as vegete and
active, as most who arrived at his Years, In the Evening he repaired to a
Friend's House in Cheapside, where he intended to lodge that Night: But finding
himself under great Indisposition, he was carried to his own House in a Coach,
about ten of the Clock. The next Day, he rose, and seemed to be somewhat
revived, but kept his Chamber all that Day. On the Wednesday he continued in
his Bed very faint and shot-breathed. He had the Assistance of a very able
Physician, his intimate Friend, who took the best Method with him that his Art
could direct unto, but our Days are determined, and the number of our Months is
with God, which we cannot pass. He complained not of any Pain, and the use of
his Reason and Senses continued to the very last; and about ten of the Clock at
Night, without any Struggle or Pangs, he quietly gave up the Ghost, finding a
very short and easy Passage to his eternal Rest. Blessed are the Dead which die
in the Lord; yea; says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and
their Works do follow them.

Having given this short Account of our Reverend Brother; I shall address my
self, in a few Words, to those who attended upon his Ministry, and conclude.

1. Be deeply affected with this sharp Dispensation of Providence. Your loving,
laborious and faithful Pastor, is removed from you. He will never more instruct
you, nor pray with you, nor pray particularly for you, (at least, the Scripture
gives no Assurance thereof) yet we may hope, that many Prayers which he put up
in his Lifetime, for his Children, Friends and Hearers, are recorded in Heaven,
and may, in God's due time, bring down Blessings upon them.

2. Many of you do profess, that ye had a very great esteem for him: Now make
it appear, that your Affections were real and radieated. I shall press you with
our Savior's Test, or Trial of his Disciples Love to him, If ye love me, keep
my Commandments: So, if ye sincerely loved your good Minister, let your
Conversations be correspondent to that holy Doctrine which he taught you. To
commend a Preacher, and yet to live contrany to his Doctrine, is to affront and
deride him. An impenitent, unreformed Sinner, who lives in Pride, Earthliness,
Envy, Sensuality and Passionateness, and the like Immoralities, cannot be a
cordial Friend to a faithful Minister. It is the great Honor of a Teacher,
when his Hearers are good Proficients in the School of Christ; but the Ignorant
and Profane, are a Reproach to him. Many will be apt to impute the
Non-proficiency of the Scholar, to the want of Skill or Diligence in the Master.

3. Slack not, but increase your Diligence to promote the Edification and
Salvation of your Souls, now when your Teacher is removed. This will be one
Evidence of your Sincerity, and that ye were acted from an internal, vital
Principle. A living Man moves; and a Clock, or Machin, moves; but there is a
vast Difference between their Motions: The one moves from a vital Principle,
the other only from Springs or Weights. Let it never be said of any of you, as
it was said of Joash, That after the Death of Jehojada, he left the House of
the Lord. Could your Pastor speak to you, I suppose, he might well use the
Words of the Apostle, (which I heartily recommend to you) Phil. 2. 12, 13.
Wherefore; my beloved Brethren, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my
Presence only, but now much more in my Absence; work out your own Salvation
with Fear and Trembling. For it is God that works in you, both to will and to
do, of his good Pleasure.

FINIS.
Books sold by Samuel Sprint, at the Bell in Little-Britain.
THE Vanity of Man's Present State, proved and applied in a Sermon on Psalm. 39.
5. with diverse Sermons of the Saints Communion with God. By Mr. John Wilson.

A Treatise concerning the Lord's Supper, with three Dialogues. By Thomas
Doolittle. The ninth Edition.

Time, and the End of Time, in two Discourses. By John Fox.

Godly Fear; or the Nature and Necessity of Fear, and its Usefulness. By R.
Allen.

The Door of Heaven opened and shut; Or, A Discourse concerning the absolute
Necessity of a timely Preparation for a happy Eternity. By John Fox.

The Anatomical Exercises of Dr. William Harvey; with the Preface of Zachariah
Wood, Physician of Rotterdam. To which is added, Dr. James De-back his
Discourse of the Heart, Physician in Ordinary to the Town of Rotterdam.

Insant-Baptism from Heaven, and not of Men. By Joseph Whiston. In 4 Parts.


