THE LIFE and DEATH OF THAT RENOWNED JOHN FISHER Bishop of Rochester:
Comprising the highest and hidden Transactions of Church and State, in the
reign of King Henry the 8th. with diverse Moral Historical, and Political
Animadversions upon Cardinal Wolsey, Sir Thomas Moor, Martin Luther, with a
full relation of Qu: Katharines Divorce.

Carefully selected from several ancient Records, by THO. BAILY, D. D.

Vivit post funera virtus.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1655.

The Right reverend father in God John Fisher B: of Rochester. John Fisher was
his name of whom you read
Like John ye Baptist this John lost his head.
Both y^ sharp axes, stroke their body's feels
Both their heads danced of, by light payrs of heels.
Read but this book this Fisher through and then
You Will find a fisher, not of fish, but men.




THE LIFE and DEATH OF THAT RENOWNED JOHN FISHER Bishop of Rochester:
Comprising the highest and hidden Transactions of Church and State, in the
reign of King Henry the 8th. with diverse Moral Historical, and Political
Animadversions upon Cardinal Wolsey, Sir Thomas Moor, Martin Luther, with a
full relation of Qu: Katharines Divorce.

Carefully selected from several ancient Records, by THO. BAILY, D. D.

Vivit post funera virtus.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1655.

To my honored Kinsman Mr. John Questall, Merchant in Antwerp.
SIR,
THere are but three reasons inducing an Author to dedicate his Book to any one
man, rather than to another: The first is the patronage of his Work, under the
shelter of some o're-spreading tree, whose arms may happily receive the
suppliant under his protection, and defend it from the storms of persecution.
The second is a willingness in the Author, to express a Gratitude by
Dedication, by reason of some former Courtesies received. And the third is a
fitness in the person to whom he dedicates his book, whereby his dedication
may become suitable to such a Patronage.

The first I never affected, as never believing that the estimation of any
Patron could be o^ sufficient authority to dignifie the patronage, if it had
not that within it self to make it acceptable, according to that expression of
the Father of the English Poets, v^z. I never knew that a Generals Oration
could make an Army either stand or fall, but look how much habitual valor
each man has in himself, so much in act it shows.

The Second I always loved, viz. to be grateful to my friends, and where such
love and gratitude cannot otherwise go or stand upon their own legs on any
ground, they shall both creep on paper; wherefore, most worthy Cousin, having
received so great a benefit (at your hands beyond the Seas) as in my low
condition, not only at once to relieve the Father in his necessity, but also
to add so bountiful a hand in the bringing up of that child, which by you^
special charity is now able to live of it self, to you only do I dedicate
this book as an acknowledgement of all your loving kindnesses.

Nor is the dedication of the History (of this renowned Bishop and Cardinal
elect) to your self altogether improper for you, being a Merchant your self,
he being a Merchants Son, whereby it may appear, that men of your profession
do not altogether bring home, together with your Gold, from Ophir, Apes, and
Peacocks feathers, but sometimes Jewels of Divine verity, and highest
estimation. Thus with my prayers to God for you, and your continuance in his
Grace and Favor, till you reach his Glory, I take leave to rest,

Your most faithful Servant, and poor Kinsman, T. B.

The Life and Death of the most renowned John Fisher, sometimes Bishop of
Rochester.
CHAP. I.
1. The Time and Place of his Birth. 2. How suitable both his Names were with
his Condition. 3. His comparison unto John the Baptist. 4. His temperance in
Diet, and retirement of Life. 5. His Education and Preferment. 6. The countess
of Richmond (the Kings Mother) her great desire of winning him to her service.
7. The great good deeds which she performed by his persuasion.

AT the time, when as the Stars of Heaven frowned upon the Nation, to behold
Innocence, swaying the Scepter of this Land, so misbecomingly; in the seven and
thirtieth year of the Reign of the most Noble (though unfortunate) King Henry
the sixth, and in the year, one thousand, (...) hundred, fifty and nine, after
the time, that a Virgin Daughter had produced her Father, and a Creature, her
Creator: (when the blessed Vine, sprang from the same Grape it bare, and the
root of Iesse shot from the Spring) the Divine Providence brought forth under
succor, whose after growth made it soon known unto the world, how worthily he
received the two Names (which both his Christendom and his Parents had
bestowed upon him, within the Collegi^t Church, and town of Beverly, situate
within the Province of York, about eight score miles distant ( Northwards) from
the head City of the Nation) viz. of John, and FISHER: of John, being so like
unto John the Baptist, who was twice baptized: First, with Water, Secondly,
with Blood: as by the first, he was named John; so by the second, he deserved
to be styled John the Baptist: having so fitly sympathized with the forerunner
of his Savior, by his following Christ; that as like unto the others head,
became both Fountain, and their senseless Trunkes, streamers of Blood, whiles
the Spectators eyes, became Rivers of W^^^^.

The first, his Head was begged of King Herod, at a banquet of Wine, by a
Psaltresse, or woman dancer: by the like light pair of heels, the second John
(of whom we treat) his head was begged of King Henry, whilst he was banqueting,
and making merry at his house of Hanworth.

The first was beheaded on the Birth day of King Herod, the second was beheaded
on the Birth day of King Henry, having that very day, completed the just age,
of five and forty years.

And as the Holy finger of Saint John the Baptist (which pointed to the Lamb,
when he said, Ecce Agnus Dei) was miraculously preserved from corruption, for a
long space of time, after his martyrdom, so the head of this most blessed
martyr, wherewith he so de^cended (and that so manfully) the holy Catholic
Church, and Head of his Mother, was by the like miracle preserved from
corruption a long time (after it was stuck up upon the Bridge of London) with a
fresh and lively color, until such time as by commandment from the King, it
was taken down, and conveyed away from the sight of Men. The first, made a
Wilderness his habitation: The second, turned his Pala^^ into a Wilderness,
and place of solitude* so Austerely curbing his wanton appetite, with the most
spare and Lessian diet, as that he made his Refection to be his Locufts: and so
cooling his infrequent Pleasures with sighs, and sa^cing them with so many
Tears, as that he made the self same bitter sweetings, his wild Honey, the
first wearing only a Girdle, but the second contiually a Shirt of courser
hair. Only in this they may seem to differ in their agreement, the one
diligently preached the coming of Christ to be at hand, giving notice of
Salvation to all that would believe, and be Baptized: the other as diligently
(by his continual Preaching and Writings) giving warning to all his Country
men of Christ's departure from their coasts, (if like the Gergesites, they
preferred their own swine before Salvation.)

Thus did the two Cherubims over the Mercy-seat, which seemed opposite to one
another, yet both of them mutually beholding the same Arc, that stood between
them. These two with contrary faces, mutually beheld the same object, to which
that was but a perspective.

Both these dyed for a cause of Matrimony, the first, for saying to king Herod,
It is not lawful for thee to take thy Brothers Wife: The second, for saying to
King Henry, it is not lawful for thee to put away thy Brothers Wife.

Obj. How shall we reconcile these two assertions, and make both them and their
assertion good and lawful?

Sol. Herod, to whom the first so spoke and reprehended, had taken to his Bed,
his brothers Wife, his Brother living, which was repugnant to the Law of God:
but Henry, to whom the second spoke, as is before rehearsed, only took to Wife
his Brothers Wife, his Brother being dead, having neither issue by, nor
knowledge of her; which by Moses Law, in such like cases, is not forbidden, and
therefore easily dispensed with, according to the rules of Ecclesiastical
authority. And

If this be sufficient to show you how deservedly the name of John, was
bestowed upon the subject of our story at his Christendom, the remainder of
the History will let you see, how worthily he deserved also to be called
Fisher; being indeed (as indeed he was) a true Fisher of Men, as after shall
appear.

His fathers name was Robert Fisher, his State sufficient, his Reputation among
the best, his Condition a Merchant, the place of his abode, within the foresaid
Town of Beverly; a place, where the blessed and glorious Confessor, St. John
of Beverley, Archbishop of York, sometimes lived, and Preached the Gospel:
These we may suppose to be the caus^s why the Father gave unto this Son that
name as a Looking glass unto his eye, a Spur unto his Feet and as Copy for his
Hand; a consideration too much neglected in these our days, as if our names
were only given us for distinction sake, or civil use, and not as obligations
unto Christian piety.

This Robert Fisher, after he had lived many years, in good estimation and
credit amongst his neighbors, dyed, leaving behind him this John Fisher (of
whom we treat) and a younger Son (who bare his Fathers name) both in their
tender age.

Their Mothers name was Anne, who in process of time, married one Wright by
name, by whom she had three Sons, John, Thomas, and Richard, and one
Daughter, which was called Elizabeth, which afterward was a professed Nun in
Dartford; and yet these three Sons, together with a Husband that was living,
no way stood between her, and the Piety which she owed unto the dead, as that
she any way neglected the former two, but gave them the best education (as the
expenses of those L^gacies, which the deceased Parent had provided for them in
that behalf) that could be had; in order whereunto, as soon as ever they were
capable of Learning, they were put to School, and committed to the care and
custody of a Priest, of the said College Church of Beverly (being a Church
which of ancient time has been richly endowed with Land and possessions) there
this John Fisher, among other children, was first taught his letters, and the
rudiments of Grammar; where he continued not many years, but the bladeing of
the Field, soon informed the laboring Husbandman, of the gratefulness of the
Earth, to which he had committed (with so liberal a hand) so great a trust,
which appearing daily more and more, the counsel of his friends at last,
thought it fitting to humor, so much as in them lay, the Genius of so
promising a proficient; insomuch, that like a tender sappling, fitted for
transplantation, he was taken from his nursery to be disposed of, in so fair a
garden of the muses, as was so ancient and so flourishing an University, as is
that Alma matter* which is called Cantabrigia, where he was committed to the
government of one M^. William Melton, a reverend Priest, and grave Divine,
afterward, Master of the College (called Michael house in Cambridg) and
Doctor in Divinity. Under whom, he so profited in few years, that he became
Master of all the Arts, before such time as he had received the degree of
Batchelour, which he received in the year of our Lord, 1488. and his degree of
Master, the third year following: where being suddenly elected Fellow of that
house, he was as shortly after chosen Proctour of the University: in which
space of time, according to the ancient Laws and Statutes of his College, he
took upon him the holy order of Priesthood, and now did the Almond tree begin
to bud; all other Arts and Sciences were but his tools, but this his
occupation: and no wonder it was, that he that went through with his Philosophy
so heavenly, should be so excellent at the heavenly Philosophy; insomuch, that
his Disputations in Divinity (according to the order of the Schools) were
rather Determinations than Disputes; so that in short space, he grew to such
profoundnesse in those he^venly Mysteri^s, that Envy her self, left canv^sing
for Palms, whiles Virtue (her companion) accounted him the flour of all the
University, who in his due time, proceeded to the degrees of Batchelour, and
afterward of Doctor in Divinity: which with no small appl^use he achieved, in
the year of our redemption, 1501.

In which interim, it happened that Doctor Melton (of whom we before have made
some mention) was preferred to the dignity of Chancellor of the Cathedral
Church of York; whereby the mastership of Michael House in Cambridge became
void: Whereunto, by a most free and willing election of all the Fellows of
that house, this man (as the most deserving of all other) was worthily
promoted, who by his acceptance, made the proverb good, Magistratus arguit
virum, for who more fit to play the Master, than he that knew so well, how to
act the Disciple? in which office, he demeaned himself so worthily, that (as a
mirror from whence all Governors of other Houses might well take their
pattern or resemblance) for his worths sake, he was soon after chosen
Vicechancellour: Which office, as if one year had not graced (sufficiently) so
great a worthiness, he was continued in the same office for another year; and
had not his Fame (passing the bounds of the University) spread it self so far
over the whole Realm, as that (at length) it reached the ears of the most
Noble and Virtuous Lady Margaret, Counte^^e of Richmond, Mother to the wife and
sage Prince, Hen. 7. (who hearing of his great Virtue and Learning, never
ceased till she had wrought him to her service) he might have been (where he
was twice together) perpetual dictator: who afterward, mounted the high
capitol of Chancellourship of that University, a dignity, which is able to
adorn the brightest Purple.

But now Vicechancellour-ship, Mastership, and all, must be laid down as at
her feet, who with her knees, requites the courtesy, whiles she kneels unto
him as her Ghostly Father. Remaining in which office, he behaved himself so
temperately, and discre^tly, that both the Countess, and her whole Family,
were altogether governed and directed, by his high wisdom and discretion.
Having by these opportunities lodged much Divinity within his Mistress Soul,
and the Divine himself within her heart, he makes it soon known unto the
world, what love it was, wherewith he p^osecuted so fair an opportunity, viz.
to make his Mistress, a most glorious Queen in Heaven, and himself acceptable
in doing good, improving all that opportunity, not to the advantaging of
himself in worldly honor, but to the inclination of his Mistress mind to
works of Mercy; and finding in her own natural disposition; a liberality and
bountifulness to all sorts of people, his work was only to advise her, that
that bounty should not ru^ne a course, where it might be sure to lose its due
reward; but that it might b^stow it self in deeds of Alms, as to the poor; in
redemption of Captives, in marrying poor and distressed Virgins, reparation of
Bridges, and Highwayes; in many such deeds of Charity he implored her (who
easily was won thereto) to employ so large a Talent as God had given her, that
she might reap plentifully, by sowing much.

Nor did he suffer her to rest thus satisfied with the distribution of such
doles of bread, and worldly food, but at his persuasion also, she erected two
noble and goodly Colleges in Cambridge, to the glory of God, and benefie of
his Church: The one whereof she dedicated to Christ our Savior, and called it
Christ's College, largely endowing the same with store of maintenance, for all
manner of Learning whatsoever; this College, she in her life time beheld built
and finished of Stone and Brick, as it now stands. The other she dedicated to
Saint John the Evangelist; endowing it with like proportion of maintenance, to
the same intent and purpose, but she lived not to see this College finished;
but it was completed after her death, by this good Man, at his own cost and
charges, as hereafter shall be declared.

Also, upon his motion, she ordained a Divinity Lecture in Cambridge, and
another in Oxford, to be openly read in the Schools, for the benefit of such,
as should be Preachers, to the intent, that the dark and hard places of
Scripture, might be opened and expounded; in maintenance whereof, she gave good
store of Land, to be disposed, as stipends to the Readers, and that for ever.
What good cannot such a Man do, who held such keys within his hand, such a
Lady at his feet?

CHAP. II.
1. His preferment to the Bishopric of Rochester. 2. His contentedness with
that small Diocese. 3. His promotion to the high Chancellorship of Cambridge.
4. His care and vigilance in that office. 5. His opposing of Martin Luther. 6.
His excommunicating of Peter de Valence, and his tenderheartednesse therein. 7.
His election to the Master-ship of Queens College.

THese proceedings of his, (together with many other performances of deeds of
Charity procured from others, whereof not any one was ever performed, whereunto
(according to his ability) he did not set his helping hand, together with his
daily Preaching to the people with most careful diligence) gained him so much
love and reverence from all sorts of people, especially from the Bishops, and
all the Clergy in general, that that most worthy and grave Prelate Bishop Fox,
Bishop of Winchester (a man in no small authority and estimation with King
Henry the 7. of whose Council he was) never left so commending of him to the
King upon all occasions (as he saw his time convenient) for his virtuous life,
and perfect sanctity, until such time as (by the death of William Barous,
Bishop of London, Richard Fitz James, Bishop of Rochester, being translated
unto that See, the B^shoprick of Rochester, became void) he found his
opportunity to present this Doctor Fisher, as a fit and worthy Pastor for that
Cure, (nor was it otherwise possible but that so great a glory about the Moon
should borrow (though but by reflection) some small luster from the Sun)
whereupon the King directed his Letters to the Chapter of the Church of
Rochester, to the intent they should elect the nominate within his letter, for
their Bishop; whereunto (without any the least contradiction or negative voice)
they all most willingly assented, which act of theirs, was shortly afterward
confirmed by the Sea Apostolic, by Julius the second, Pope at that time, in
the Month of October, in the year of our redemption, 1504. and of his age. 45.

This sodain^ and unexpected promotion of this holy Man (in regard he never had
been formerly advanced to any other dignity of the Church) caused some to
suspect, and deem it, as a thing that was purchased (either by his Mistress
purse or favor) from the King, her Son, which when it was told unto the
King, his Majesty replied, Indeed the modesty of the Man, together with my
Mothers silence spoke in his behalf, Solemnly protesting, that his Mother
never so much as opened her mouth for him in that particular. And openly
affirming, that the pure Devotion, perfect Sanctity, and great Learning, which
he had observed, and often heard to be in the Man, were the only advocates
that pleaded for him, the truth whereof may be gathered out of the very
Statutes of S. John's College in Cambridge, where he took occasion to praise
(much to the honor of) the King, at whose hands so frankly and so freely, he
received this Donation, The like mention he makes of the Kings bounty, and
liberality toward him, in his Epistle Dedicatory to Richard Fox, Bishop of
Winchester, before the book which he wrote against O^colampadius, where he
makes mention of the King, as his chiefest, and best friend and patron.

So far was this good man from making any means by friends, to be a ^ishop,
that all the friends he had could scarce persuade him to accept the Office,
after that it was granted to him: Which modesty of his, was very much confirmed
by the sequel of his deeds; for at one time after another, being offered the
two great Bishoprics of Lincoln and Ely. he refused both; and from the hands
of Hen. 8. but we may behold him in the foresaid Epistle Dedicatory, not only
satisfying, but enjoying himself with his little shock, where his words have
this beginning. Habeant al^^ proventus pinguiores, etc. Others have larger
Pa^tures, but I have lesser charge of Souls, so that when I shall be called to
an account for both, I shall be the better able to give an account of either.
Not making so high and heavenly an office, a staircase, whereby we climb unto
pre^erment. But so small a B^shoprick, a competent height, whereby he might so
over^ look the plains that were under him, that (in the end) with too large a
prospect, he did not lose his own eyes.

Thus being mounted in the Kings favor, there will not be wanting those, who
will be ready to say concerning such a one, thus shall it be done to the Man
^^om the King honnours; and accordingly, the University of Ca^bridge
(considering with themselves what bene^it they had received already, at his
hand, and what future benefit they might receive) with a greatefull and prudent
mind, and forecast, unanimously chose, and ordained him their high
Chancellor; a Magistracy that has no les^e authority and jurisdiction
(thereunto belonging) than of an Arch Bishop, in causes Spiritual; and of a
high Judge, in causes that are Temporal.

Hitherto we have traced him to his Bishopric, and high dignity of
Chancellorship, of the most renowned University of Cambridge; how he behaved
himself in both these places, we shall leave the mentioning of those
particulars, to the post fu^era of this History, as most proper for them; only
it shall suffice for the present, that his whole life seemed to the world to be
no otherwise, than as if he had used the Church, as if it had been his
Cloister: and his Study, as his Cell: Governing his Family with such
Temperance, Chastity, and Devotion, as if his Palace, for continency, had been
a Mo^nastery, and for Learning an University.

In the year of our Redemption, 1509. it happened that the most wise, and
fortunate King, Hen. 7. departed this life, upon the twentieth day of May,
being upon a Sunday, whereupon he had the opportunity to perform two
acceptable and good Offices, and, both of them deeds of Charity: whereby, he
gained unto himself great applause, and commendation: the one, in comforting
the sorrowful Mother of the King, his Mistress, who seemed to be overwhelmed
with grief, who received great contentment in his consolations. The other, in
edifying the people by his Sermon, which he preached at the Funeral solemnity
of the Kings burial, exhorting them to the imitation of those noble, and
virtuous actions, which they saw to have reigned more over his Passions, than
himself had exercised authority over his Subjects; pouring into every ^are, an
antidote against the fear of Death, and a preservative unto eternal Life.

About the year, 15^7. at the time when this worthy Bishop of Rochester, had
governed his See 12 years, Luther began in Germany, to set up his new found
Doctrine, then (as himself reports) unknown to the world. But the Divine
Providence, who never suffered an Athanasius, a Lyberius, or an Hillary to be
wanting, where there was an Aris risen up to rend, and tear the undesiled
spouse of Christ (his Church) in pieces: nor a Damasus, Gregorius, Basilius, or
a Nazianzen, where there was a Macedonius. Nor a C^lestin, or a Cyrill, where
there was a Nestorius: nor a Leo, where there was an En^yches. Nor an Irenaus,
where there was a Valentine: nor a Tertullian, where there was a Martian: nor
an Origin, where there was a Celsus; nor a Cyprian, where there was a Novatus,
nor a Jerome, where there were Helvidians, Iovinians, Vigilantians, and
Luciferians: nor an Austin, where there was a Donatus, or a Pellagius, did not
suffer such a Leviathan to roll about, and beat the sides of that Ship, into
which Christ entered, out of which he taught; and of which, S. Peter was the
only Master, but that there should be still a Fisher, to oppose and wound the
Monster with such harping irons, as that this Kingdom never was much troubled
with his Doctrines, whiles this good Bishop lived; nor ever could have had its
entrance, till the others Exit brought it in. For,

Hearing how that several of Luther's Books, and Writings, were brought over
by Merchants (whose profession, though it deserves to be ranked among the best
of Educations, yet, like Solomon's Merchants, they sometimes bring home
(together with their Gold from Ophir) Apes, and Peacocks Feathers) and
dispersed among the people (too apt to entertain any new fashion, of their
Souls, as well as of their Bodies) and how the people swallowed down the
novelty, that was so taudred with pretenses: like unto some General (who
hearing of the approach and march of an enemy) hasts to his army: with no less
a cause of vigilance did so great a Champion of the Church hasten to so great a
charge, the University, of which he was their Chancelour, that he might take an
account in what condition the main body of all Learning stood, whereby ability
might be drawn up in the saf^st posture to defend the Faith. But,

No sooner was he come amongst them, but he might perceive t^res to be already
sprung in so fair a Seminary, where so much good seed was sown, For

About the same time, it fell out that Pope Leo the I0. had granted forth a
general and free pardon (commonly called indulgences) according to the ancient
custom and tradition of the Catholic Church, to all Christian people (that
were contrite) through (...) the Provinces of Christendom, which is no
otherwise than an application (by that Ministry) of the superabundant merits of
our blessed Savior (who shed so many, when the least one drop of his most
precious blood was able to have redeemed a thousand worlds) to the soul^s of
true Believers. This Luther formerly having written against, and the Bishop,
and Chancelour of the University, being careful the Students there as well as
others, standing in need of such a remedy, might be partakers of the heavenly
bounty, and causing certain copies of those Pardons to be set up in sundry
places of the University (one where of was fixed upon the School^ gate) A man
without a name came secretly in the night time, and wrote over the Pardon,
which was there fixed, these word, Beatus vir cu^us est nomen Domi^i spes ^jus,
and non resp^xit va^itates and insantas fals^s (istas) thinking the word (
istas) which he had added would have brought the Pope and all his Clergy within
the praemunire of the Statute of Gods Word, for setting up that Pardon, whilst
he forgot the several pun^shments, which are threatened by the same Word, to
all those who shall add or diminish to the book of Life.

In the morning, the school doors being opened, and the Scholars resorting
thither according to their wonted manner, and beholding this strange spectacle,
there needed no Shiboleth to distinguish, C^tholiques were much offended at so
great an abuse of holy Scripture: others approved the fact, and thought it a
fine thing, as they were severally addicted.

The Chancellor having notice hereof, was struck with horror at the no less
boldness, than wickedness of the fact, whereupon he endeavored to find out
the party, by the knowledge of his hand, but that in vain; then he called a
Convocation, where he declared unto them, for what cause they were convened;
lays before them the foulness of the deed, interprets the true meaning of
the abused places of Scripture: explicates the true and wholesome meaning of the
words, pardons and indulgence, ju^tifies the holy use thereof, acquaints them
with the great displeasure that might justly ensue at the hands both of
Almighty, and of the Kings, if so wicked a fact should pass unpunished; tells
how great a discredit it would be to the University, that never had such a spot
upon her breast before; and a^ length, moved the Author (though unknown( to ^
world ^, and conf^ssion of his sin, that he might be forgiven; which if he
would perform within a time prefixed, he assured him in Gods name; but if the
contrary, such remedy should proceed against him, as is (provided in such like
cases) in Gods holy Church, by Christ himself, viz. to be cut off^like rotten
Members) from the Body of Christ's Church, by the censure of Excommunication,
which not being performed at the time prefixed (on the delinquents part) he
called another Convocation (where there was a great Assembly) and fearing the
infection of others, by the obstinacy of one, he betook him to his last remedy,
and taking the Bill of Excommunication in his hand, he began to read it; but
when the words began to sit heavy upon his tongue (according to the weight of
the sentence) the fire of Love (as if within some Limbeck, or beneath a Baln^o
Mariae) kindling within his breast, sent such a stream up into his mind, ^s
suddenly distilled into his eyes, which like an overflowing^ viol reverberates
the stream back again to the heart, till the heart surcharged, sends these
purer spirits of compassion out at his mouth, which could only say, that he
could read no further. Good God! into what compassion did the mildness of such
a nature strike the beholders, who were all of them by this time mollified into
the same affection? insomuch that they all left off without any further
proceedings in the Excommunication for that time.

Nevertheless a third day being appointed for the same purpose, and time
having brought on the day, there was a great multitude of people, where the
Chancellor with a heavy countenance, declared, how that no tidings could be
heard, either of the person, or his Repentance; wherefore now (seeing there was
no other remedy) he thought it necessary and expedient to proceed, and so
arming himself with a severe gravity, as well as he could, he pronounced the
terrible Sentence from the beginning to the end, which being done with a kind
of passionate compassion, he threw the Bill unto the ground, and lifting up his
eyes to Heaven, sat down and wept. Which gesture, and manner of behavior,
both of his mind and body, struck such a ^ea^ into the hearts of all his
hearers, and spectators, that many of them were af^aid the ground would have
opened to have swallowed up the man, but that they hoped he was not there. But
did all these tears fall to the ground? were none of them botled up, whereby
they might become the wine of Angels? Certainly men may repent, as well as
weep by proxy: Tears have their voices in the Parliament with God; and the
same God that washes us so clean with the Laver of Regeneration, by the Faiths
of others, may (by the prerogative of his mercy) call us for the rep^ntance
sake of other men. For,

So it appeared by this D^linquent, who having not the grace as yet bestowed
upon him, of repentance, so many repenting for him, he became repentant* For

Not long after, this miserable wretch (it se^mes, b^ing taken notice of by the
alteration of his countenance, and other changes in the disposition of his
mind, whether he was there in presence, or had only heard with what solemnity
so terrible a Sentence was pronounced against him to be the man) forsaking the
U^ive^s^y, his body carried his mind when it sound no sanctuary (as he
supposed) with the superintended of Ely: a man too much taken notice of to be
too great a favourer of Luthers Doctrine (Dr. Goodrich by name) where no less
the dismal manner of proceeding, than the thing it self, would never out of
his mind, where, notwithstanding, he became a domestique servant to the said
Dr. Goodrich, and had unfolded his mind unto them concerning the premises, yet
they never could persuade him otherwise, but that he had most grievously
offended Almighty God in that particular; openly detesting the deed, as a thing
that was both unadvisedly, and wickedly performed; insomuch that his mind
could never be at rest, until such time, as with his own hands, in the
self-same place, where the former sentence was written, he had blotted out his
sin, and that together by fixing upon the place thi^ other sentence, which
carried healing in every word, Delicta juventutis mea and ignorantias ne
memineris Domine. Remember not Lord my sins, nor the ignorances of my youth;
subscribing thereunto his name, Peter de Valence (who was a Norman by birth,
from whence he came to Cambridge to be a Student, and remained there till he
had committed this fact) whereupon he was absolved, and became a Priest.

There is a great deal of difference in the consideration, which Catholics
do use when they pronounce this terrible sentence, over that which the
Lay-chancellours had with us, when they excommunicated for every threepenny
matter, which was the reason that in the end the people made not a threepenny
matter of their Excommunications.

Thus employing his time, so need^ully required, in healing the sore Breast of
such a Nurse, it happened, that in the year 1525. The: Wilkinson, Dr. in
Divinity (who wasthe second Ma^st^r of Queens College) departed this life,
whereby the Mastership of that College became void, and in regard that the
Chancellor of the University had no house belonging to him, as he was
Chancellor, the Fellows of that College with unanimous consent, chose him to
be their Master, which he thankfully accepted of, whereby he became the third
Master of that house, continuing there the space of three years and odd
months.

CHAP. III.
1. The Recreation of Bishop Fisher. The erection of Colleges. 2. The Lady
Margaret dies and leaves him her Executor. 3. The high E^comium which he
bestows upon her in his Funeral Sermon, made at the solemnities of her
interrement. 4. His faithful^ behavior in so great a trust reposed in him. 5.
His great love unto that College. 6. The praiseworthinesse of the University
of Cambridge.

THat this good man sojourned in those parts, during the time he made it his
recreation to overlook the work of ChristColledge, which was then not fi^ished
which the Lady Margaret had endowed wi^ maintenance for one Master, 12.
Scho^lars, Fellows, and 47. Disciples for ever, to be brought up (as the words
of her Will make mention) in Learning, Virtue, and Cunning: the which College
she only lived to see finished, and so took sanctuary in the holy of holies,
the celestial Jerusalem; after the dissolution of so fair a Temple of the
holy Ghost (as was the Body of so incomparable a Soul) in the year of our
Lord God, 1519. the third of the Calends of July* within the Abbey of S. Peter's
in Westminster. to the great grief and sorrow of all good people but to her own
eternal happiness: who before her departure, made her last Will and Testament,
wherein (together with other Personages of great quality) she made this holy
Bishop (as one in whom she reposed her chiefest trust) one of her Executors:

She was buried with all solemnity, according to the dignity of so great a
person, in the Abbey church at Westminster: at whose Fu^erall Sermon, this most
excellent Bishop threw these flowers upon her Grave, etc. As concerning her
birth, that she was the daughter of John Duke of Somerset, lineally descended
from the most noble Prince, Edward the third, King of England: As for Quality,
that she was a second Martha, both for her Hospitality and Nobility; where
(together with many other of her great Virtues, and incomparable deeds of
Charity; all which he there related, at large, as so many proofs of sanctity)
he had these remarkable passages concerning her, viz. that notwithstanding she
was Princess, who by lineage and affinity, had had thirty Kings and Queens
(besides Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls) within the fourth degree of marriage
supporting her greatness; yet would she often fall so low, as to search and
dress the wounds and sores of poor and distressed people with her own
fingers: performing all this for his sake, who for ours, received so many
wounds: as also when there was an offerture made by diverse Princes to war
against the common enemy of our Faith, she encouraged them thereunto by often
telling them, that upon condition that they would got, she would also go along
with them and be their Laundresse.

The Funerals of this great Lady being ended, and that other College, which
she had willed to be dedicated to S. John the Evangelist, being not yet built,
the rest of her Executors, finding how faithful the good man had been in his
former trust, by a general consent resigned into his hands (by a public
instrument in writing) the whole authority of the disposement of her Leg^cies:
but behold how worthily the dispensation was conferred upon him; for whereas
the Lady Margaret, out of her great bounty and liberality, had given to so
pious a use a portion of Land for the maintenance of one Master, and fifty
Scholars, with all manner of furniture, and Servants requisite to every
Office, in manner and form: This good man did not only bear a portion in the
charge of the same Building, but much augmented the Revenue thereof, with
possession of Land, whereby four Fellowships were founded upon his own account,
and one Reader of an Hebrew Lecture, and another of Greek, together with four
examining Readers, and four under-Readers, to help the Principal; and whereas
he observed the price of Victuals began to rise, he gave wherewith (by weekly
divident) the Fellows commons might be augmented, bequeathing thereunto his
Library of Books (thought to be the best that ever was in Europe) after his
death; together with all his Plate, Hangings, and other Housholdstuffe,
whatsoever to him belonging by a deed of gift in his life time, under his own
hand, and putting the college into possession of the same by Indentures, only
borrowing the same back again to his own use, during his life.

And for a perpetual memory of his hearty good will, and love toward this
College; he caused a little Chapel to be built near unto the high Altar or
the great Chapel, where there was a Tomb set of white Marble ^inely wrought,
where he intended to have laid his bones, if God had not so disposed of him
otherwise, but he was otherwise disposed of, and (as if) because this Martyrs
body was not permitted to be brought among these men, these Fellows brought
their bodies to his Martyrdom; for those famous Martyrs, Mr. Greenwood,
Richard Reynolds, Doctor in Divinity, a professed Monk in Sion, of the rule of
S. Bridget, and Mr. William Exmew, a Carthusian, professed in London: the first
whereof, came out of S. John's College, the other two, came forth of Christ's:
all three, suffering death under King Hen. 8. in the cause of Supremacy, that
they might still be of his foundation, though not of Stone and Mortar, yet of
Blood and Fire.

Out of the first of these two Colleges proceeded (likewise) Ralph Bayn, Bishop
of Lichfield; Thomas Walson, Bishop of Lincoln; John Christoferson, also
Bishop of Chichester; Thomas Bishop Elect of Gloucester, and before that, Abbot
of Leicester, all Catholic Bishops.

Out of the second (also) sprang that most Reverend and Grave Doctor, Nicholas
Heath, Archb shop of York; together with diverse other Grave and Learned
Preachers of the Catholic Faith. And this is to be noted to the honor of that
University, that during the space of so many hundred years, as is between the
laying of the first Stone in this our Bethel: Cambridge was never infected with
any unsound Doctrine, until such time as Regis ad exemplum brought it in; and
Luther's Soul, was transmigrated into Henry the eighth; who ev^r after, never
spoke at a lesser rate, than Si^ volo sic jubeo; who both of them, since their
fall from the Catholic Church, pulled down Reason, and set up Will. And

It is a thing which is most remarkable, that he who goard this University so
much (as it is conceived (the more) for this man's sake of whom we treat, and
the great love sake which they all bore unto his memory) by his placing and
displacing) (...) men and laws he pleased, and all to make way for a new
Religion, in the end, reconc^led himself unto the Catholic Faith; as
appears, by his subscribing to the six Articles of the Roman Catholic
Religion, which was all the difference that was (then) between the two
Churches, in matter of Doctrine, as also by the express words of his last will
and Testament.

So the first unclean beast that ever passed through the Oxens-ford (I mean
Wickliffe by name) afterward chewed the cud, and was sufficiently reconciled
to the Roman Faith, as appears by his Recantation; Living and Dying
conformable to the holy Catholic Church, at his Parsonage of Litterworth (as I
take it) in Northamptonshire: constantly saying Mass unto his dying day. So
that Reformation as it seems was left unto the time of which it is said, Vae
Regn^ euipuer dominatur; woe be to the Kingdom over which a ^hild reigns.

CHAP. IV.
1. The increase of Luthers Doctrine. 2. (...) vigilance to suppress it. 3.
His intention to go to Rome. 4. The occasion of his stay. 5. His brave and
worthy Speech in the Synod of Bishops.

NOw was the time come, wherein God was determined to make trial of his
people; and the storm was not altogether unseen, to ensue by this good man:
for by this time, the people of this Nation had well drank of the intoxications
of Prince Luthers cup: but when he perceived the better sort of people to be so
(like the Nature of Islanders) changeable, and desirous of Novelties, and how
Luthers Doctrine was now come from private whisperings, to open proclamations:
(whereby all authority, either of Pope or Emperor, King, or Bishop, or any
superiority whatsoever, was much vilified and debased, a new way of Salvation
found out, a nearer, readier, and cheaper way to Heaven propounded; and liberty
of conscience promised to all that were Believers in his Gospel, all thinking
him a brave fellow, and who but Luther, that cared neither for Pope, nor
Emperor) this holy Prelate began to look about, and bestir himself; and
questionless had out-rid the storm, had not his hand been taken from the
steerage, and the head. Pilot (when the poor fishers head w^^ off) wilfully
cast away the Ship. For,

Hereupon this good Bishop, first acts the part of a good Chancellor, and set
all right in that University in general, especially in those Colleges,
whereof he had peculiar jurisdiction: where he took an occasion to provide in
the Statutes, that the Fellows of those Houses should so order their Studies,
as that the fourth part of them might be Preachers: so that as soon as one was
gone abroad, another should be ready to succeed in his place, that if it were
possible the young Cubbe might be caught at his first arrival.

Then he returned to his pastoral charge at Rochester; and there, setting his
own Diocese in good order, he fell to Writing, and diligent Preaching,
procuring others (whose abilities were best known unto him) to do the like;
but, perceiving the disease to grew desp^rate, as it had done in Saxony, and
other parts of Germany, and the rest of the Physicians, not so ready to set
thereto their helping hands (as the necessity of the cause required) he not
only called for help from the King, but by his persuasions, and at his
instance, the King himself set upon the head of all those mischiefs, and wrote
a book against Luther, entitled, An asser^on of the seven Sacraments against
Martin Luther. So learned, and so worthy a piece, as that thereby he worthily
deserved the title of D^f^nder of the Faith. Which upon that occasion was given
unto him, by Leo the tenth, then Pope of Rome; which book, was supposed by
diverse to be written by my Lord of Rochester, whereupon he obtained leave from
the King, that he might go to Rome, (as it is conceived, to take farther order
concerning the settlement of those affairs) and having obtained leave likewise
of his Metropolitan, and disposed his household, and ready to set forward in
that expedition, all was dashed, by reason of a Synod of Bishop^ (together with
a Synod of the whole Clergy) which was then called by Cardinal Wolsey, by
reason of his power Legantine, lately conferred on him by the Pope, which stop
to his design, he bare with less reluctance, because he hoped that much good
to the Church, might happily be wrought thereby; but in the end, perceiving the
Synod rather to be made a concourse (whereby to (...) unto the world, the great
authority, wherein the Cardinal was invested, and that he might be seen
sitting in his Pontificality) than for any great good that was intended, he
spoke as follows:

Bishop Fisher his Speech in the Synod.
MAY it not seem displeasing to your Eminence, and the rest of these Grave, and
Reverend Fashers of the Church, that I speak a few words, which I hope may not
be ou^ of season. I had thought that when so many learned men, as substitute
for the Clergy, had been drawn into this body, that some good matters should
have been propounded for the benefit and good of the Church: that the s^andals,
that lie so heavy upon her men, and the disease, which takes such hold on those
advantages, might have been h^reby at once removed, and also remedied; who has
made any the least proposition against the ambition of those men, whose pride
is so offensive, whiles their profession is bunnility? or against the
incontinency of such, as have vowed Chastity? how are the goods of the Church
wasted? the Lands, the Tithes, and other Oblations of the devo^^ an^^stors of
the people (to the great scandal of their posterity) wasted in super sluos,
ri^tous expenses? kew can we exbort our Flo^ks to fly the pomps and vanities of
this wicked world, when we that are Bishops set our minds on nothing more than
that which we forbid? if we should teach according to our doing, how absurdly
would our doctrines sound in the ears of those that should hear^ (...)? and if
we teach (...) thing, and do another, who believes our report? which would
seem to them no otherwise than as if we should throw down with one hand, what
we built with the other: we prtach Humility, Sobriety, contempt of the world,
etc. and the people perceive in the same m^n that preach this D^ct^ine, Pride,
and Haughtiness of wind^, excess in Apparel, and a resignation of our
selves to all worldly pomps and vanities: and what is this otherwise than to
set the people in a stand, whether they shall follow the sight of their own
eyes, or the beli^fe of what they (...). Excuse me reverend Fathers, seeing
herein I blame no man more than I do my self, for sundry times when I have
settled my self to the care of my Flock^ to visit my Diocese, to govern my
Church, to answer the enemies of Christ, suddenly there has come a message to
me from the Court, that I mu^^ attend such a triumph, receive (...) an
Ambassador, what have we to do with Princes Courts? if we are in love with
Majesty, is there a greater excellence than whom we serve? if we are in love
with stately buildings, are there higher roofes than our Cathedrals? if with
Apparel, is there a greater ^rnament than that of Pristhood? or is there
better company than a Communion with the Saints? Truly most reverend Fathers,
what this vanity in temporal things may work in ^ou, I know not; but sure I
am, that in my self I find it to be a great impediment to Devotion: wherefore
I think it necessury (and high time it is) that we, that are the heads, should
begin to give example to the inferior Cl^argy, as to these particulars,
whereby we may all the better be conformable to the Image of God, for in this
trade of life, which we now lead, neither can there be likelihood of
perpetuity (in the same state and condition wherein we now stand) or safety to
the Clergy.

A^te^ that he had uttered these and many other such like words to this effect,
with such a gravity, as well became him, they all seemed to be astonished, by
their silence, and the Cardinals state to become him not so well, seeingm,

CHAP. V.
1. Luther's railing against the King. 2. Fisher writ^th in the Kings behalf.
3. The effect of a Sermon which he preached at S. Paul's cross. 4.
Occolampadius his Doctrine and beginning. Fisher opposes him. 5. The King
leaves off all care of Kingly government, gives himself wholly to sensuality,
6. Lays his whole trust in the C^rdinall. Wolsey's character. 7. His
solicitation for the Bishopric of Toledo, afterward for the Papacy, is
r^fused both.

ABout this time it was that Luther an^ wered the Kings Book, wherein he used
such scur^ilou^ railing, against the King, as is not to be m^ntioned, far
beneath the appro^ement of a sanctified spirit, and the dignity of a sacred
person. Whereupon

This Bishop, (in vindication of the Kings honor, and defense of the truth)
w^it an Apology, whereby he rebuked the Authors vilany, and abuse of a Prince
of so great dignity: the title of which Book was, A defense of the King of
England 's assertion of the Catholic Faith against Martin Luther's Book of
the Captivity of Babylon; which Book he dedicated to his dear friend, and old
acqu^intance, Dr. West, Bishop of Ely.

Shortly afterward, he writ another book entitled, A defense of the holy
order of Priesthood, against Martin Luther.

Upon the Quinquagesima Sunday (which was in the year of our redemption,
1525.) this holy and most learned Bishop preached a most excellent Sermon at S.
Paul's Cross; where Cardinal Wolsey, Legate a latere, with eleven Bishops and
great resort of the Nobility and G^ntry, were present, which was performed with
such fe^veney of faith, zeal^ to the Catholic Church, and force of arguments
(grounded upon Scripture) that one Robert Barnes, an Augustine Friar, and five
more (infected with Lutheranism) were thereby converted and abjured their
Errors, and for their Penance stood openly at St. Paul's Cross.

Upon the Octaves of the Ascension, he preached also another most admirable
Sermon, in the presence of the Cardinal, and all the Bishops etc. wherein he
showed himself a most stout and zealous Champion, and Defender of his Faith,
ta^ing no l^sse the several curers of souls, with n^glig^nce, than the people
with levity.

About this time, ^rose out of Lather's School, one O^colampadius, like a
mighty and fierce Giant, who, as his Master had gone beyond the Church, went
beyond his Master, (or else it had been impossible he could have been reputed
the better Scholar) who denied the real preseuce; him this worthy Champion
sets upon, and with five books (like so many smooth stones taken out of the
River, that does always run with living water) slays the Philistine; which five
books were written in the year of our Lord, 1526. at which time he had governed
the Sea of Rochester twenty years; which books of his, nor any other of his
books that he ever writ, were ever answered.

About this time it was that the King left off the Kingly Occupation (as they
called it) wherein he had governed this Realm with great wisdom and
moderation, whereby he became (as all wise Kings do aim at) beloved at home,
and feared abroad; and addicted himself wholly to sensual pleasure and delight,
leaving the Ministry of his state wholly to the disposition of the Cardinal,
who was a man (though but meanly and obs^urely borne) yet of an excellent wit,
voluble speech, quickness of memory, haugh^inesse of courage, well bred,
sufficiently learned, and one that knew how to behave himself among persons of
the greatest rank and quality, and that in businesses of greatest weight and
importance: who besides, that he was Arch bishop of York, and Bishop of
Winchester at the same time, and Abbot of S. Alb^ns, and had the B^shopricks of
Bath, Woroester, and Hereford, in Farm (at small rents, the Incumbents being
Strangers, and continually living in their own countries, whereby he might
dispose of all presentations and promotions of those Bishoprics as freely as
if they had been his own, and was Legat^ a latere (whereby he might convocate
the Clergy at his pleasure) besides what he received from Italy, by reason of
his dignity of Cardinal) he was also Lord Chancelour of England, whereby, in a
manner, he formerly ruled all under the King (also) in matters temporal; and
to g^ve him his due, he so beh^ved himself in Government, that he won from all
wise men great praise for his indifferency to all sorts of people, whether they
were rich or poor, only his fault was, that he governed himself the worst of
all, for all this was not sufficient, except he was more, and more was nothing,
except he was most of all. For

The Archbishopric of Toledo in Spain being void, he made means unto the
Emperor, Charles the fifth, and to that purpose procured the Kings Letters,
whereby that great dignity might be conferred upon him, but the Emperor noting
his ambition, would in no wise condescend thereto.

That failing, it happened that Pope Leo the tenth died, whereby the Papacy
became void: then he bestirred himself exceedingly, together with all his
friends, and (besides his own Master the King of England) he made means unto
the King of France, who (upon certain grounds moving him thereto) took great
pains in his behalf, but all was disappointed by the Emperor, who had so
wrought with the Conclave of Cardinals, that they elected Cardinal Hadrian
(one who formerly had been Tutor to the Emperor) for their Pope, a man of
singular and rare Virtue and Learning.

CHAP. VI.
1. The Revenge which the Cardinal took against the Empero^^ for withstanding
his ambition^. 2. The Scruple which he put into the Kings head concerning Queen
Katherine: This Scruple the ruin of the Clergy. 3: The King is fallen in love
with Anne Bullein. 4. Her Character. 5. The King resolved to go thorough-stitch
with the Div^rce. 6. The Kings dealing with Fisher in that behalf. Fisher's
answer to the King.

THis lay boiling in the Cardinals stomach so hot, that he never rested till he
had set variance between the King his Master, and the Emperor, which he
performed, by causing the King to enter into a strict league and amity with the
King of Fr^nce, whereby the Emperors occasions were much hindered; and to
aff^ont him the more (together with the fear of a blind Prophecy which was
told him, viz. that a woman should be the confusion of him, and fearing it
might be the Queen ( Katherine) in regard she was Aunt unto the Emperor, whom
he thus purposed to ma^gne, he began to set the straw on fire that was under
her bed; by putting a new Scruple into the Kings head of marrying his Brothers
Wife: wherefore taking his opportunity, when he saw the King best disposed, he
fell into discourse with him of the great unhappiness that was befalne the
nation, and how great a pity it was, he had not issue M^l^ to succeed him in
the Crown of England; whereat the King began to stare upon him, but answered
him not a word, while the Cardinal proceeds to tell him that there might be a
way found out, how with Gods blessing he might have plenty, whereat the King
began to thrust his thumbs under his girdle, and to cry Hob man, hoh, lawfully
begotten Cardinal, lawfully begotten? Yet, lawfully begotten, replied the
Card. I speak no more than what I am able to make good, and justly; whereupon
he began to tell him in plain terms, that the Marriage between him and his
wife (in regard she had been his Brothers) was not lawful, and that it was a
thing which was much spoken of, as well in foreign Nations, as in his own
Realm, and that therefore he was bound in conscience to tell him of it, to the
intent he might consider of it, and inquire further.

The King looking a long time very earnestly upon the Cardinal, as if he had
been greatly dismayed, at last answered him in these mild terme^:

Why, my Lord, you know this Marriage was sufficiently discussed at the
beginning by sundry grave and learned men, and was at last by them concluded to
be good and lawful, which was afterward confirmed and dispensed with by the
Pope himself; and therefore good Father take h^ed what you say in this great
and weighty matter: whereupon they thus parted (for that time) from one another.

Having once broke the Ice, he thus intends to pass thorough the Ford; he
sends for one Dr. John Longland, Bishop of Lincoln, Confessor to the King, a
very timorous man, and one that was afraid to say or do any thing that might
displease the Cardinal, and therefore was there placed as a man wholly for his
purpose: him the Cardinal conjures, that when the King should deal with him
concerning a Scruple of conscience about the marriage of his wife Queen
Katharine, that by any means he should further the same as much as in him lay,
and make it a great matter of Conscience to co-habit with her, being not his
lawful wife; Longland, as he supposed, having given him his lesson, within two
or three days the Cardinal addresseth himself to the King, and after that he
had discussed a while with him concerning the invalidity of the Marriage, he
advises him by all means to resolve on nothing rashly, but to advise with his
ghostly Father, which when he had done, his ghostly Father was not altogether
the man which the Card* took him to be; for when the King advised with him
concerning the business, he put it off from himself, and advised his Majesty
to consult with some other, that were the most learned Bishops, whereupon the
Cardinal had a g^me to play for that, which he thought to have got by slight
of hand; for now the King was pleased to send for the most able Bishops and
Divines that he could think upon; amongst all which there was not any one in
all his kingdom of whom he had a more reverend estimation both for honestly
and learning, than he had of Doctor Fisher Bishop of Rochester, wherefore he
was one of the nominates within the list of summons to a meeting at the
Cardinall's house in Westminster, where after much debatement of the business,
and that the Bishop of Roshester had fully answered and refelled all the
Arguments and Reasons, which were there made and given concerning the validity
of the M^rriage (to the satisfaction of most of the Bishops) he concluded that
there was no cause at all of any question to be made, seeing the marriage
between the King and the Queen was good and lawful from the beginning, and
that therefore it was necessary to remove that scruple from the Kings breast as
soon as possible, and so the Conference was ended.

While the Clergy were all thus dancing about a scruple, in a lofty room led by
the Cardinal, they were not aware of the loose fire which was brought into the
powder, room, which was under them ready, and at last blew them all up: for
just in this nick of time the King was deeply fallen in love with a fair young
Gentlewoman of the Court, then waiting upon the Queen, called Mrs. A. Bullein
(secretly a Lutheran, and the first that ever opened her mouth to advise the K.
to al: eration in Religion) Daughter to Sir Thomas Bullein Knight (who
afterward for his daughters sake was promoted to many high honors and
dignities.) This Mrs. Anno had formerly been brought up in the Court of France,
under the Lady Mary the French Queen, Sister to King Henry, and sometimes wife
of Lewis the 12. King of France, wherd she had learnt much courtly fashion and
behavior, then strange and dainty in the English Court, whereby she far
surpassed all other Lad^es her companions, which so inslamed the Kings mind
(having conceived within himself a possibility of riddance from his old wife,
and probability of having issue Male by this) that inwardly he was resolved to
have her nolens volens, whereupon for the present, he showed her great favor,
and expressed unto her many signs of the love, which she was yet ignorant of,
so that now he was resolved upon a hand gallop in this business.

Insomuch, that when the Cardinal (inscious of his design) made his address
unto him to give him account of the Conference which was between the Bishops,
and had told the King how that all did, and was likely to stick in the Lord of
Rochesten, as the only Remora to that proceeding (supposing that if the King
could take him off, all the rest would follow his judgment) the King (by this
time, desiring nothing more than that the Divorce should take effect) speedily
fell into consulta^ion with the Cardinal, how the Bishop might be won to his
(now) design; the Cardinal advised his Majesty to send for the Bi^^shop, and
to work him to him by fair means and gentle usage; whereupon the King did as
he was advised; for the Bishop being sent for, and come into the Kings
presence, the King treated him with exceeding courtesy and liberality of good
language, and at last took him with him into the long gallery, and there
walking awhile with him, after that he had bestowed many words of praise and
commendation upon him for his great Learning and Virtue, at length (in the
presence of the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, and some Bishops that were there)
he un^olded his mind unto him concerning the business that was in hand,
telling him how sore his Conscience was tormented, and how for that cause he
had secretly consulted with his ghostly Father, and diverse other men, by whom
he was not yet satisfied, and therefore (he said) upon special confidence which
he had in his great learning, he had now made choic^ of him to use his advise
above all others, requiring him to declare his opinion therein freely, whereby
he might be sufficiently instructed in his conscience, and remain no longer in
suspense.

The Bishop hearing all this, ^ell suddenl^ upon his knees, and in that posture
would have delivered his mind unto him, but the King immediately lifted him up
with his own ^ands, and blamed him for so doing, where upon he spoke as
follows.

I beseech your Grace to be of good cheer, and not to disquiet your self one
whit concerning this matter, nor to be dismayed, or troubled at this business;
for there is no heed to be taken of these men, who account themselves so wife,
and do arrogate to themselves more knowledge and learning in Divinity, than had
all the learned Fathers of the Church, and the Divines of Spain and England
(together with the Sea Apostolic) that were in you^ Fathers time, by whose
authority this Marriage was approved, confirmed and dispens^^ with, as good and
lawful: Truly Sir, m^ Sovereign Lord, you rather ought to make (...) a matter
of conscience, than to make any such scruple (in so clear and weighty a matter)
b^ bringing it in question, than to have any the least scruple in your
conscience; and there^fore my advise is, that your Majesty, with all speed, lay
aside those thoughts, and for any peril that may happen to your soul thereby,
let the guilt rest on mine. And this is all that can be said by the loyallest
of Subjects; and whether I have said well herein, or other wise I shall not
refuse to answer any man in you behalf, whether it be privately, or publicly
and I doubt not but there are as many worthy and learned men within your
^Kingdome; which are of my opinion; as on the contrary (if they might be
permitted to speak with freedom) who hold it a very p^rilous and unseemly
thing, that any such thing as ^ Divorce, should be spoken of; to which side I
rather advise your Majesty to incline than to the other; whereat the King
replied not on^ word; for whiles there was so fair a beauty in his eye, his
ears must needs be stopped with the blackest wool: So he departed suddenly,
and never looked favorably upon the Bishop from that time forward.

CHAP. VII.
1: The Cardinal brought into a peck of troubles, by reason of this Soruple. 2.
The King declares himself for Anne of Bullein, and declines the Queens company.
3. The Cardinals s^cret complotting to break off the match with Anne Bullein.

THe King resolving to go thorough stitch with his work, makes it a public
business: And now the Cardinals hic labor was become hoc opus; for the same
thing which was hitherto but secretly handled among the Bishops, was now made
the common subject of discourse to the whole Kingdom: And a convention
hereupon was had not only of the Bishops, but of all the noted and famous
Divines of both the Universities, Cathedrals, and Religious houses within the
Realm, at the Cardinals house at We^minster, where the said business was
debated, argued, and consulted many days together; but the subject was too
knotty for such tools to work upon, and the knot too hard for their untying,
wherefore they dissolved of themselves without dissolution; and now the
Cardinals hoc opus began to be impossible, and voluntas regis, to (...) so
high, as if to that nothing were impossible, for now the King begins to puff
and blow, and to swear MOTHER of God he will have ^^r, declaring it openly to
all the world; whereupon, from more and more, he becomes altogether to decline
his Katharine's company, and to delight himself wholly in the Courtships of his
new Mistress.

In the mean time the Cardinal ( Wolsey) walks the round within his own
Chamber, and with his bitten nails tears ou^ these words by piece-meales from
his mouth, WE WILL HAVE NONE OF THIS ANNE BULLEIN; for we m^st conceive him
wonderfully perplexed, having otherwise designed au allianco for his M^ster
with the French King, by this Divorce, if he could have had his will so to have
revenged himself upon the Emperor; and we cannot imagine the distressed Queen
to be otherwise than implacably, as well as necessitously bent to employ all
her engines to work together, with his ruin, her own preservation. O the just
and secret workings of the Almighty, who often buries us in the (...) pits
which we dig for others! Yet most wonderful it is, to consider what
countermines he had laid, if it had been possi^le to have blown up the Kings
resolution in his new choice, able to have levelled any fortification of a mind
that had been but composed either of Honor, Wisdom, Honesty, or Shame, and
not of what was altogether wilfulness. For first, hearing a common fame of
the incontinency of this Ann of Bullien he sends forth spies in every corner,
to learn out, who had, or who could hear of any that had bin familiar with
her: At last intelligence was brought him, that for a certain, Sir Thomas Wiat
had carnal knowledge of her, whereupon providing himself with sufficient
inst^uction, he sends for Sir Thomas Wiat, and tells him how thus and thus it
appears, that he had bin oftentimes familiar with the Lady Anne Bullein, and
that for ce^teine, the King was at this time resolved to marry her (as soon as
ever the sentence of divorce should be pronounced) and therefore out of the
great love which he ever bare unto him, and care which he had of his welfare,
he thought good to acquaint him with what danger he was in, whereby he might
avoid it by acquainting the King with what was truth, lest afterward such a
thing should come to the Kings ear, and then it would not be all the land, nor
all the life he had in England, that could give his Majesty satisfaction for
concelment of a business of so high concernment.

The Knight replied, Sir, I thank you for the great love and sound advice which
has been always exercised in my affairs: But reverend Sir, if the King be so
in love with her, as you say he is, and the world takes notice of him to be. I
think I cannot be in greater danger than in acquainting the King with such a
business.

If you cannot prove it s^id the Cardinal, you say well, it is a hard matter
to prove that, said the Kn^. it is a harder matter to answer the concealment,
said the Cardinal, of a thing that is so much divulged as this is; and
besides, in this case you can hardly suffer, but you must find many friends;
in the other you will suffer pitilesse, and will will find no man to speak in
your behalf: in this you will be but ingenuous, in the other p^ccant; wherefore
I advise you of two evils to choose the least.

Sir Thomas Wiat, by these persuasions, was resolved to confess all upto the
King, which he plainly did; and with great fear, told him, that she was no fit
wife for him, if he were free: the King commanded him to speak no more upon his
life, ^nor to acquaint any else with what he had told him; so blind is fate.

Nor would the Cardinal attempt to batter so strong a Tower with one Piece,
but he procured a Reserve of Engines, which he thought could not fail; for he
had notice given him how that (for certain) the said Anne Bullein was really
contracted to the Lord Henry Percy, Son and Heir to the Earl of Northumberland
(then a servant waiting upon the Cardinal) whom he immediately caused to
appear before him, and by his ow^ confession, finding the report to be true,
and selemnly performed, he sent for the Countess of Wilt shire, mother to the
said Anne Bullein; and hearing what she could say to the business, which w^^
no less than what the said Percy had said before, he en^ouraged her in the
prosecution, who for some reasons best known unto her self, a^ she said to the
Cardinal, better liked of the Marriage of her daughter with the said Lord
Percy, than if the King should marry her.

The Cardinal finding a backwardness in this Lady, that her daughter should
be wedded to the King; and hearing what fame had formerly spread abro^d
con^erning the Kings former familiarity with her, gu^shed at the cause, and
therefore advised her to go unto the King, and deal freely with him in that
particular, lest hereafter she might otherwise repent.

The Lady takes his advise, and addresses her self to the King, who communing
with him awhile upon that subject, between jest and earnest, she uttered these
words; Sir, For the reverence of god take ^eed what you do, in marrying my
daughter, for if you record your conscience well, she is your own daughter as
well as mine: The King replied, Whose daughter so^ver she is, she shall be my
Wife. But

When she proceeded to acquaint him with the Contract, and told him how that
her daughter and the Lord Percy were already man and wife before God, ^olemnly
contracted in the presence of such and such: the King was exceeding angry, and
swore by his wonted oath that it was not so, and it should not be so, and sent
immediately for the Lady her self to come before him, to whom, as soon as ever
she came into the presence, and before ever she had heard of the business, the
King, with a frowning conntenance said unto her, Is it so Nan, is it so, hoh,
what say thoss to it? To what, said Anne Bullein? Mother of God, said the
King, they say that thou have promised to marry young Per^y: Mrs. Anne nothing
at all abashed, returns him this answer, Sir, When I knew no otherwise but that
it was Lawful for me to make such promises, I must confess I made him some
such promise; but no good subject makes any promises but with this proviso,
that if his Sovereign commands otherwise it shall be lawful for him to obey:
Well said my own Girl, said the King, and turniug himself to the Countess, he
said, I told you that there was no such thing.

Thus you see concerning the first particular, the King cared not who he
married, so that he might be wedded to his own will; and concerning the second,
the King presently after sent for the Cardinal, and him for to undo the former
kno^ with his own teeth, enjoining him to procure his servant to release his
Mistress of her engagement, which he did.

CHAP: VIII.
1. The first occasion of the Cardinals ruin. 2. The King sends diverse
Orators to the Vniversiti^s beyond the Seas to procure their ass^ntments to the
Divorce. 3. The return with satisfaction, but it proves fruitless. 4.
Ambassadors are sent to Rome. 5. The Cardinal aspireth to be Pope. 6. Ho
uses strange means to accomplish the same.

Now it is the Queen^ bed must be taken down, that her palate may be advanced:
but from this time forward, though the Card. was seemingly forward, yet was
covertly slow in the prosecution of the Divorce, which afterward proved to be
his ruin.

Wherefore the King was advised by the Cardinals, and the rest of the bishops
(as the only way of dispatch) to send certain Orators to foreign Universities
(as well as to those at home) and so without any more ado to rest in their
judgments.

The King having made choice of men fi^ for his purpose, gave them
instructions, and sent them several ways to the most renowned Universities of
Christendom, there to dispute the case, viz. whether it was lawful for a man
to marry his brothers wife, or not, without acquainting them with the
particulars, either of the former brothers having no carnal knowledge of the
said wife, or the Popes dispensation thereupon, so that by this slight and
subtil^y they easily obtained determinations from all the Universities, viz.
that it was not lawful; whereupon, not knowing whose case it was, nor the case
it self rightly, the O^atours procured those determinations under the common
S^ales of all the foreign U^iversities, whereupon they returned with great
triumph, to the great contentment of the King, who rewarded them highly for
their pains; and it must not be thought that our Universities at home (though
they only understood the case) should be wiser than all the Universities of
Christendom.

All these S^ales were all delivered into the C^rdinalls hand, with a strict
charge speedily to convene all the Bishops before him, and to determine upon
the business: but this quick fire could not make this sweet malt; for it was
determined (by whose means you may easily guess) that although the
Universities had thus determined under their Seals, yet the business was too
weighty for them to determine thereupon, as of themselv^s, without the
authority of the Sea Apostolic; but they all fell upon this agreement among
themselves, that Orators should be sent with these Seals of the Universities
to Rome, to treat with the Pope for procuring his confirmation therein: thus
the King was should off with another wave from the Shore of his desired purpose.

With much reluct^ncy, and sensibility of the tediousness of the delay, no
other remedy appearing, A mbassadours were dispatched in all have to Rome,
Cl^ment the seventh being Pope at that time: The Ambassadors names were
St^phen Gardener, the Kings Secretary* Sir Francis Brian Knight, one of the
Gentlemen of the Kings Pr^vy Chamber; Sir Gregory de Cassalel, an Italian, and
Mr. P^ter (...) a Venetian, who being arrived at Rome, having propounded the
cause of their coming, and rested themselves there awhile, letters were come
unto them from the King and the^ Cardinal, with further instructions how to
deal with the Pope, and to make all possible dispatch that could be made in
the business: But the Ambassadors were not half so hasty in demanding, as the
Pope was slow in expedition, and that by reason of the Gout, which then
afflicted him (and perhaps of an unwillingnesse of the mind, as well as a
debility of the body) the Emb^ssadours, by the return of their Letters, having
made known unto the King the Popes slownesse, by reason of his great
infirmity, the Cardinal lays hold upon this occasion, and in^ormes the King,
how that if he were Pope, if it should so happen, that the Pope should die, all
should go well and speedily on his side: To this purpose Letters were sent
thick and threefold to Rome, both from the King and Cardinal, with
instructions, that they would the more earnestly and often call upon the Pope
for a final determination, hoping that he would the more easily be drawn
thereto, that he might (by reason of his pain) be rid of their importunity; as
also, that if the Pope should chance to die of this present disease, that (by
all means) they should devise some way or other how the Cardinal of York
should be elected to succeed in his place: and to promise mountains of Gold,
to procure their suffrages in his behalf, and in case they could not prevail,
but that the Cardinals were likely to choose some such man, as was not likely
to further the Ki^gs designs, that they should take up what sums of money
they could upon the Kings credit, and therewith to raise a presidie (as it is
termed both in the King and Cardinals letters) or power of men (and taking with
them such Cardinals as could be brought to favor their purposes) to depart out
of the City into some outplace not far off, and there to make a Schism, in
the behalf of the Cardinal. But there was no need of that advise, for the Pope
recovered health, and lived to finish the business, though contrary to the
Kings expec^^tion, wherefore.

CHAP. IX.
1. Cardinal Camp^ius is sent Legate into England to determine the business of
Divorce. 2. The Ambassadors are returned. 3. Cardinal Wolsey joined in
Commission with the other Cardinal. 4. The Court sits. 5. Couns^ll is assigned
to both the parties. 6. Queen Catharine's speech in her own defense.

TH Ambassadors finding the Pope to be the same man, for slownesse, as he was,
when he was tied by the leg: Requested of his Holiness that he would be
pleased to send a Legate into England with full authority to hear and
determine the business there, according to right, as he should see cause;
which was granted, and accordingly one Laurence Campeius, a well learned man,
and of undaunted courage (to whom the King about ten years before, had given
the Bishopric of Bath at his being in England upon another occasion) was
appointed for that negotiation.

The Ambassadors thus returning with a conclusion of a new b^ginning, the
Kings patience must now rest satisfied with the expectation of the Legates
coming, which after long expectation he arrived here in England, who coming to
Land. was lodged in his own Palace, then called B^th-house; but before his
arrival, a new Comm ssion from the Pope overtooke him at Callis, wherein the
Cardinal of York was joined with him in Commiss^on; and this was procured by
the King, wh^reby (as he thought) his business should be ^a^e to meet with the
fewer rubber.

The Cardinals met, Audience was given, the Commssion was opened, the Place
assigned, the assignement was at the Dominick F^^yers in Lon^on, the King and
Queen were to be close by at their lodgings at Bridewell: The learned Counsel
on both sides were appointed. The King (because he would seem ind^fferent)
willed the Q^eene to choose her Counsel, the Q^eene would choose none at all (as
suspect^ng the indifterency of such as were his own subjects.) Wherefore for
fashion sake these Counselors were assigned her. John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester; Henry Staindish Bishop of St. Alaph: Thomas Abel, Richard
Fetherstor, Edward Powell, all Doctors in Divinity; and of C^vili^ns, and
Canonists, William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury; Cuthbert Tunstall Bishop of
London, Nichol^s West Bish* of Ely, and John Clerk Bishop of Bath (for at
Campeius his arivall he was translated to the Bishopric of Salisbury) on the
Kings part the like number of profound and learned! Doctors, as well Divines,
as Civilians, and Canonists.

Silence being proclaimed in the Court, and the Commission read, the Bishop of
Rochester presented the two Legates with a Book, which he had compiled in
defense of the Marriage, making therewith a grave and learned Oration, wherein
he desired them to take good heed to what they did in so weighty a business,
putting them in mind of the great and manifold dangers, and inconveniences
which were ready to ensue thereupon, not only to this Realm, but to the whole
state of Christendom.

After this Oration was ended, the King was called by name, who answered HERE:
After that the Queen, who made no answer, but rose immediately out of her
chair, and coming about the Court, she kneeled down before ^^he King openly
in the sight of both the Legates, and the whole Court, and spoke as follows.

Sir, I beseech you do me justice and right, and take some pity upon me, for I
am a simple woman, and a stranger born out of your dominions, and have no
friend but you, who now b^ing become my adversary, Alas, what friendship or
assurance of indifterency in ^^y counsel can I find hope to amongst your
subjects? What have I done? Wh^rein have I off^nded you? How have I given you
any occasion of displeasure? Why will you put me from you in this sort? I take
God to my judge I have bin a true, humble, and faithful wife unto you; always
conformable to your will and pleasure: Wherein did I ever contradict, or
gainsay whatever you said? When was I discontented at the thing that pleased
you? Whom did I love but those whom you loved, whether I had cause or not? I
have been your wife this twenty years; you have had diverse Children by me;
when you took me first into your B^d, I take God to be my witness I was a
Virgin, and whether that be true or no, I put it to your conscience. N^w if
there be any just cause that you can allege against me, either of dishouesty,
or the l^ke, I am contented to depart the Realm, and you, with sh^me and
insamy; but if there be no such cause, then I pray you let me have justice at
your hands. The King your Father was in his time of such an excellent wit, as
that for his wi^domes sake he was accounted a second Solomon; and Ferdinand my
Father was reckoned to be one of the wisest Princes that reigned in Spain, for
many years before his days. These being both so wise P^ince^, it is not to b^
doubted but they had gathered unto them as w^se Counselors of both Realms,
as they in their wisdoms thought most meet; and as I take it, there were in
those days, as wise, and learned men in both kingdoms, as there are now to be
found in these our times, who thought the M^rriage between you and I to be good
and la^full; but for this I may thank you my Lord C^rdinall of York (then her
best friend, though she knew it not, or perhaps was secretly advised to be thus
b^tter against him) who having sought to make this di^sention between my Lord
the King and me, because have so often f^und f^ule with your pompous; v^nity,
and aspring mind; yet I do not think that this your malice proceeds from you
merely in respect of my self, but your chief displeasure is against my Nephew
the Emperor, because you could not at his hands attain unto the B^th ^p^ick
of Toledo, which greedily you desired; and after that was by his means put by
the chief and high Bishopric of Rom^, (...) you most ambitiously aspired;
whereat being sore offended, and yet not able to revenge your quarrel upon him,
the heavy burden of your indignation must be laid upon a female weakness, for
no other reason but because she is his Aunt. And these are the manly ways you
take to ease your mind: but God forgive you; wherefore Sir (applying her self
to the King) it seems to me to be no justice that I should stand to the order
of this court, seeing one of my Judges to be so partial; and if I should agree
to stand to the judgment of this Court, what Cou^cellours h^v^ I but such as
are your own Subjects, taken from your own Counsel, to which they are privy,
and perhaps dare not go against it; wherefore I refuse to stand to their advic^
or plea, or any judgment that is here, and do appeal unto the Sea (...),
before our holy Father the Pope, humbly beseeching you by the way of charity,
to sp^re me, till I may know what further course my friends in Spain will
advise me to; and if this may not be granted, then your pleasure be fulfilled.

With that, making a low obeisance to the King, she d^parted the Court, leaving
behind her many ^^d hearts, and weeping eyes, among the which this good Bishop
of Rochester was most compassionate.

After she was perceived to be quite departed from the Court (for it was
supposed that she meant to have returned to her place) the King commanded that
she should be called back again, but she would not in any wise return, saying
to those that were about her, This is no place for me to expect any
indifferency, for they are all agreed what they will do, and the King is
resolved what shall be done. So she departed clear away from the Court, and
never afterward did she appear there any more.

CHAP. X.
1. The good Character which the King gave his Queen (Katharine.) 2. The King
declares his scruple of Consc^ence. 3. Shows the danger the Kingdom is in for
lack of issue Male. 4. His proc^^dings with the Bishops therein.

THe King peroeiving that she was thus departed, spoke unto the Court as
follows:

Forasmuch as the Queen is now gone, I will declare, in her absence, before
you all, that she has ever been to me, as true, obedient, and conformable a
wife, as I could wish, or any man desire to have, as having al^ the virtuous
qualities that ought to be in a woman, of her dignity: she is high born (as the
quality of her conditions do declare) yet of so meek a spirit, as if her
humility had not been acquainted with her birth; so that if I sought all Europe
over, I should never find a better wife; and therefore how willing I would (if
it were lawful) continue her to be my wife ^^ill Death make the separation)
ye^ may all guess: but Conscience, Conscience is such a thing, who can endure
the sting and prick of Conscience, always stinging and pricking wit^in his
breast? Wherefore, my Lords, this woman, this good woman, I say, sometimes
b^ing my broth^rs wife, as ye all know, or have heard, h^^h bred such a scruple
within the secrets of my breast, as daily does torment, cumber, and disquiet my
mind, fearing and mistrusting, that I am in great danger of Gods indignation,
and the rather, because he has sent me no issue Male, but such as died
incontinently after they were born. Thus my Conscience being tossed to and fro
upon these unquiet waves, (almost in despair of having any other issue by her)
it behooves me, I think, to look ^ little further, and to consider now the
welfare of this Realm, and the great danger that it stands in, for lack of a
Prince to succeed me in this office, and therefore I thought good in respect of
the discharging of my conscience, and for the quiet state of this noble Realm,
to attemp^ the Law herein, that is, to know by your good and learned counsel,
whether I might lawfully take another wife, by whom God may send me issue Male,
in case this my first marriage should appear not warrantable; and this is the
only cause for which I have sought thus far unto you, and not for any
displeasure, or disliking of the Queens person, or age, with whom I could be
as well contented to live, and continue (if our marriage may stand with the
Laws of God) as with any woman living: and in this point consists all the
doubt, wherein I would be satisfied by the sound Learning, Wisdom, and
Judgments of you my Lords, the Prelates and Pastors of this Realm, now here
assembled for that purpose; and according to whose determination herein, I am
contented to submit my self, with all obedience; and that I meant not to wade
in so weighty a matter (of my self) without the opinion and judgment of my
Lords spiritual, it may well appear in this, that shortly after the coming of
this scruple into my conscience, I moved it to you, my Lord of Lincoln, my
ghostly Father; and forasmuch as you your self, my Lord, were then in some
doubt, you advised me to ask the counsel of the rest of the Bish^ps,
whereupon^ moved you, my Lord, of Canterbury, first, to have your License
(inasmuch as you were the Metropolitan) to put this matter in question, as I
did to all the rest, the which you all have granted under your Seals, which I
have here to show. That is true, and if it please your Grace, said the Bishop
of Canterbury, and I doubt not but my brethren here will acknowledge the same.
Now you must understand, that the King having won the Archbishop wholly to his
design* the Archbishop had got as many of the Bishops hands unto that Deed as
he could, and set the rest of the Bishops hands thereto, of his own accord,
they both imagining that none would have been so bold as to contradict, or
charge so openly, both the King, and the Archbishop of an untruth: but my Lord
of Rochester, being of an undaunted spirit, and one of the Queens Counsel
assigned (whereby he might deliver his mind the better) knowing the clearness
of his own conscience, said unto the Archbishop, No my Lord; not so, under your
favor, all the Bishops were not so far agreed, for to that instrument you
have neither my hand nor my seal: No, (...), said the King, and with a
^rowning counten^nc^, said to my Lord of Rochester, Look here, Is not this your
hand and seal? showing him the instrument, no forsooth, (said the Bishop) it
is none of my hand nor seal, How say you to that (said the King to my Lord of
Canterbury) Sir, said he^ it is his hand and his seal; No my Lord (said the
Bishop of Rochester) indeed you were in hand with me often for my hand and
seal, as others of my Lords have been; but I always told both you and them, I
would in no wise consent to any such act, for it was much against my conscience
to have any such business called in question, and therefore my h^nd and seal
should never be put to any such instrument, God willing, with a great deal
more, which I said to that purpose, if you remember.

Indeed (said my Lord of Canterbury) it is true, you had such words with me;
but after our talk ended, you were at last contented that I should subscribe
your name, and put your seal thereto, and you would allow the same, as if it
had been your act and deed; then my Lord of Rochester seeing himself so
unjustly charged, said unto the Archbishop, No, no, my Lord, by your ^avour and
license, that had been all one, and that which you charge me with, is not true:
And as he was proceeding in his speech, the King interrupted him saying, Well,
well, my Lord of Rochester, it makes no great matter, we will not stand with
you in argument, you are but one man amongst the rest, if the worst fall out:
but the rest of the Bishops that had bin dealt with in like manner, said not a
word, so that the first encounter on the Queen^ side was not so well performed,
through want of seconds: And this was all that was done for that day.

CHAP. XI.
1. The pleadings of the Counsel on both sides. 2. The d^position of the
several Witness. 3. The honest Plea of Bishop Fisher. 4. The stout Plea of
Doctor Ridley. 5. Cardinal Wol^ey takes him up. 6. The Doctors Reply thereto.

UPon the second meeting there was much matter propounded by the Counsel of
the Kings part, concerning the invalidity of the foresaid marriage from the
beginning* by reason of the carnal copulation there vehemently u^ged to have
bin committed between Prince Arthur the Kings brother, and the present Queen;
but being again as vehemently denied by the Queens Counsel* the whole matter
rested only upon proof: to this purpose diverse witnesses were produced. As

1. Agnes, the old Datchesse of Norfolk, (...) d^posed, that she was present at
the marriage of Prince Arthur, at S^. Paul's in London, and that she saw them
both in bed together the next night after they were married: the Prince being
of the age of fifteen years, and the Princess elder.

2. George, Earl of Shrewsbury, who deposed, as to the celebration of the
Marriage, Decimo septimo Henrici 7. 1501. that he was born at Winchester,
secundo Hen. 7. that he believed Prince Arthur knew the Queen carnally, and was
able so to do, because he knew his wife before she was sixteen.

3. William Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury, that never liked the marriage,
and that he told Hen. 7. as much.

4. Sir William Thomas Knight, who deposed, as to the age of the parties, and
their cohabitation as man and wife five months together, both at London and in
L^dlow.

5. Sir Anthony Poynes as to the age only.

6. Thomas, Marquess of Dorset, as to age, and that he was^of a good sanguine
complexion, and able (as he supposed) for the busin^sse.

7. Robert, Viscount Fir^water, as to the age, and that the next day (after
they had been ^ bed together) he waited on Prince Arthur, whiles he was at
breakfast, where Maurice St. John carved, and the Lord Firzwater was Cupbearer,
where he heard Prince Arthur (upon the said Maurice hi^ asking the Prince how
he had done the last night?) Answer, I have been in Spain the last night.

8. Thomas Lord Darcy, William Lord Montjoy, and Henry Guildford Knights of the
Garter, little to any purpose but what they had heard by public fame.

9. Charles Duke of Suffolk* deposed to the ^ame effect with Mau^i^e S. John,
and that the Prince soon after beg^n to decay in bodily health; which said he,
as the said S. John related, grew by the Prince his lying with the Lady
Katharine.

10. David Owen, as to the age only.

11. Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Lord Treasurer of England, to the same effect with
Maurice S. John, by which words he believed that the Prince carnally knew the
Lady; and because he was of a good complexion and age (as he supposed)
sufficient, having performed the like himself at the same age.

12. Anth: Willoughby Knight. that the morrow after the Marriag^ (in the presence
of diverse witnesses, being in the Privy chamber) the Prince called to the s^id
Willougby, saying, Willoughby, give me a cup of Ale, for I have been in the
midst of Spain the last night.

13. Nicholas Bishop of Ely, that he could say nothing concerning the carnalis
copula, but that he very much doubted it, in regard the Queen often (sub
testimonio conscientiae suae) said to this D^ponent, that she was never
carnally k^own by Prince (...).

These things being (...), the Bishop of Rochester stood up and spoke in this
manner, And all this is no more than what has formerly been deposed, examined,
thoroughly debated, and scanned by the best and l^arnedst Divines and Lawyers
that could possibly be got; which time I do very well remember, and am not
ignoranc of the manner of their proceedings, when and where all the allegations
(in respect of what was then produced to the contrary was a ju^lged vain and
frivolous; whereupon the Marriage was concluded; which Marriage was afterward
approved, and ratified by the Sea Apostoa bque, and that in such large an
lample manner, as that I think it a very hard matter now again to call the
same in question before another Judge.

Then stood up another of the Q^^enes Counsel* Doctor (...) we have heard how
the Queen her self, here in the face of the whole Court, (...) presence and
hearing of the King himself, called the great God of heaven and earth to
witness, that she was a pure Virgin when she first came into the Kings bed, and
how she put it to his conscience, speaking unto him face to face; and if it
were otherwise, we cannot imagine that either the Queen durst so appeal ^^to
him, or the King so spoke unto (if unworthily) would not have contradicted her:
besides, we have here the testimony of a most reverend Father, who has deposed
upon his oath how the Queen had often (...) testimonio (...) said unto him, ^ow
that she never had any carnal knowledge of Prince Ar^hur. Now, my Lords, that
such a ^rolick, or a j^st (as that about a cup of Ale, or the midst o^ Spain,
which together with all the rest that has been said) are but mere
conjectures and presumptions (should stand in competition with so great a
testimony, as a sovereign (...) attestation of her cause upon the (...)
conscience, and that conscience (...) such presumption by its own silence,
(...) to lay aside all reverence which (...) power and authority, as that all
the (...), consultations, (...) of all former powers, even of the Sea
Apostolic it self, should become (...), by your calling this matter again
into (...), is a thing in my conceit ^ost detestable to be rehearsed, and a
great sha^e to this honorable Court to hear ^uch stuff ripped up to no other
purpose but in contempt of former Power, and c^lling the wisdom of our
Ancestors and (...), together with our own, into question and derision.

Whereat Cardinal Wol^ey, that he might not seem to say nothing by saying
something, said unto him (...), D^mine Doctor, magis reverenter: No no, my Lord
(said the Doctor) there belongs no reverence to be given (at all) for an
(...) matter would be unreverently answered. Whereupon

Cardinal Campeius called for Doctor Cuthbert Tunstall, Bish^p of London, and
desired to hear (...), for he was a man of profound judgment and learning*
and one in whose wisdom and honesty the Cardinal rep^sed great confi^ence.
This Tunstall had w^itten a very l^arned Treatise in defense of the (...),
which indeed should have (...) in the Court, but the (...) ^bilities, purposely
sent him upon (...) into Scotland (at the v^ry (...) he should have appeared)
about (...) business, so that he appeared not in Court this second time.

It was conceieved, that had not the Queen appealed unto (...) Marriage had
been confirmed at this (...), as it was afterward by the Pope (...), when it
was too late; but being as it was, all matters of question (...) were clear
laid aside, (...) such things as belonged to Instruction and Information of his
Holiness in (...), were inquired after, and that upon the (...) motion of the
Bishop of Ely, one of the Queens Counsel, whereupon both the ^^gates
determined to hear no further pleadings.

CHAP. XI.
1. The King commanded the two Cardinals to persuade the Queen to (...) her
appeal. 2. Their (...) to his commands. 3. The King grows resolute, and
demands sentence; the Cardinals refuse to give it. 4. The Lor^^ of the
Counsel begin to sto^me. 5 The King to conceive great indignation against the
(...) of Yo^k, (...) the Country. 6. The p^ssage which happened between the
King and Mr. (...).

(...) better, and more honorable for both parties, then to stand to a
public trial in foreign parts.

The Cardinal (to satisfy the Kings comm^nds) pro^ised the uttermost of his
endeavou^s in that behalf, but all in vain; for the Queen st^o^ stoutly to her
Appeal, and would not in any wise be brought to retract her former resolution,
affording them the same reasons as formerly, and requesting them for Charity
sake, to give a simple and he^plesse woman the best advise they could, what was
b^st to be done to the glory of God, the Kings satisfaction, and her own
honor: Whereupon they both returned to their form^r persuasions, and the Queen
to her form^r answers. Thus the Cardinal^s returned well pleas^d, that they
could not conquer her, and the Queen unfortunate that she was not overcome.

The K^^g put off ((...)) from post to pillar grew weary o^ these delays, and
resolute in having a speedy end, he cared not which way, so it were done, and
done it must be, as he would have it: Wh^refore he called another Session, and
in person urged a final Sentence, abd the pro^^edings to be read in Latin,
whe^eupon the^ King Counsel called for judgment; with that Campeius answered
again in Latin, Not so, I will give no Sentence before I have made a relation
of the whole Transactions of these Affairs unto the Pope, whereunto I am
obliged by virtue of the Queens Appeal consi^ ring whose (...) we are, and by
whose authority we here sit. I come not hither for favor, or dread sake to
pleasure any person living, be he King or Subject, neither for any such (...)
will I (...) my Conscience, or disple^se my Go^. I am now an old man, both we^k
and sickly; and should I now put my soul in (...) of Gods (...) time: So the
(...), and nothing more of this nature was done (in England) ever after.

The Lords about the K^^g perceiving the miscarriage of the Kings (...), began
to (...) happened; Mr. Cranmer (^ Master both of all Arts, and cunning how to
(...) and Fellow of Jesus College in Cambridg) being at the same time retired
into that Country with one of his Pupils (by reason of the Sickness then
raging in Cambridge) happened to be in an (...) thereabouts, where some of the
Courtiers were, by reason of the Courts then being at my Lord of Darcy's house,
where (hearing some of the Courtiers relating how discontentedly the King
behaved himself (by reason of those late accidents which had happ^ned ^o cross
to his designs) insomuch that he would hardly suffer any man to come near
him, much less to speak unto him) he spa^e unto them as follows.

(...) and my life against any man living.

One of the Courtiers (hearing this, and knowing it to be a Spe^ch so justly
calculated to the height of that Meridian, and a saying so agreeable to the
Kings temper, as i^ it had taken measure of his mind) said thus unto him, I
^ell the^ Scholar, the King shall (...) what thou have said; and if (...)
words good, for (...) and to speak with the King but it was late in the evening
before he could ^inde his opportunity, but at the l^st he found it; and when he
had related unto the King what such a man had said, and what he would
undertake, the King swore by his wonted o^th, M^ther of God that man h^th the
right Sew by the care; I shall not go to bed until I (...) with him,
comm^nding the same party forthwi^h to depart out of his presen^e, and to bring
Cranmer to him with all speed, the M^ssenger makes have unto the Inn, but Mr.
Cranmer was dep^rted to his friends house two miles off before his return
thither, wherefore the messenger gave strict order to the Inne-keeper that he
should send an Express unto M^. Cranmer to t^ll him that he should not fail
to be at the Court betimes on the morrow, for the King would speak with him:
Back to the Count the M^ssenger r^turnes with this account, whereat the King
was exceeding wroth with the Messenger, and swore that he should find him out
this night if he were above ground* and bring him to him, for he would not
close his eyes until^ he had seen him; with much ado night brought him unto the
King, who brought night upon the Church; for questionless there was the first
platform raised for the Church of Englands downfall.

For after much private conference first had between the King and Mr. Cranmer,
and afterward with his most private Counsel, the most cunning and ab^e men (as
spies) were speedily sent to Rome to pry into the Records, to see in what
state and condition the Clergy of England there stood with the Pope of Rome, as
also what Oaths the Clergy of England did usually there take, and what
Obedience they had promised unto him, etc. and what advantages otherwise might
be picked thence against the Clergy here, whereby to draw them into a Paemunire.

Which things pe^formed, the King returns back again to London with an ocean of
displeasure in his bosom, and a temp^st in his countenance.

Chap. XIII.
1. Both he Queens set against Cardinal Wolsey. 2. Cardinal Campeius departs
the Kingdom. 3. A Parliament is called wherein great complaints are made
against the Clergy. 4. The Bishop of Rochester his Speech in Parliament. 5. The
Commons highly incensed at his Speech, they complain thereof unto the King. 6.
The King questioned the Bishop therefore; the Bishops answer thereupon.

The Cardinal ( Wolsey) had the two Ladies, Catharine that was so near her
setting, and Anne that was so apparent in her rising (though as different as
the two Poles between themselves) both against him; the one discovering, the
other aggravating his offenses; yet, though sometime he had a better friend;
for he proved such a constant enemy to the last, that he became a Martyr for
the former, and such a b^tter adversary (sometimes) to the first, as he became
(afterward) the second's footstool to her Throne; yet neither of them gave
him thanks, which rendered his venom guilty of the nature of the Spiders thus
to be entangled within his own web.

Cardinal Campe^^^s perceiving the King disposed to coffeehouse, takes his
leave of his Maje^^y, and suddenly departs the Realm (after that he had made
his abode here in this kingdom near upon the space of one year) who was no
sooner gone, but a sudden rumor (...), how that he had carried with him vast
^ummes of money of the other Cardinals ^ut of the Realm; (for at that time
Cardinal Wolsey wa^ suspected to (...) the Land, by ^eason of the Kings
displeasure) insomuch that (...) after, and overtaken at Callis* where when
they had searched (...), they scarce found so much money about him as would
serve to defray his ordinary charges to Rome: This the Cardinal Campeius took
heavily, and thereat was m^rvailously discontented; which search for treas^^e
was but a color, for the thing which the King aimed at, was the instrument
which contained the sentence of Divorce (which Campeius had showed unto the
King) in case he had seen cause to put the same in ex^cution, which if the King
had sound out, it is supposed he would have made good play therewith: but he
was deceive^ of his purpose.

Howsoever, in the 22. year of the Kings reign a Parliament was summoned to
begin at London the 3. day of November, and in the year of our Lord 1529. and
accordingly Writs were directed to all the Counties, etc. but withal private
Letters were sent to the most potent men, directing them whom they should
choose; which Letters there were few or none durst disobey, so that there was a
Parliament filled to the Kings hearts desire. And

The regulations of all abuses of the Clergy were referred to the house of
Commons, where s^vere complaints against the whole Clergy, as well as against
particular Clergymen, were daily presented; whereof some the house of Lord
(...) into consideration, and some they (...); which when the Bishop of
Rochester perceived, he spoke as follows.

My Lords, here are certain Bills exhibited against the Cl^^gy, wherein there
are complaints made against the (...), id^^nesse, rap^ciry and cruelty of
Bishops, Abbots, Priests and their Officialls: But my Lords, Are all vicious,
all idle, all ravenous, and ^ruell Priests, or Bishops? And for such as are
such, are there not laws provided alrea^y against such? Is there any abuse that
we do^ not seek to rectifi^? or can there be such a (...), as that there shall
be no (...) their own? and (...) where they have no a^^hority to correc^? If
w^ be not (...) in our Laws, let each man suffer for his d^linquency; or if we
have not power, did (...) with your assistance, and we shall (...) much the
Good as the Goods of the Church, that is look^d after: Truly my Lords, how this
may sound in your (...) I cannot tell* but to me it appears no otherwise, than
as if our holy Mother the Church were to become a bondmaid, and new brought
into servility and (...), and by little and little to be quite banished out of
those dwelling places, which the piety and liberality o^ our forefathers (as
most (...) Benefacto^s) have conferred upon ^er; otherwise to what tends
these (...) and curious Petitions of the Commons? To no other intent or
purpose, but to bring the Clergy into contempt with the Laity, that they may
s^ize their Patrimony. But my Lords, beware of your selves and your (...) now
on fire, teach us to beware our own disasters: where^ore, my Lords, I will tell
you plainly what I think, that except ye resist manfully by your authorit^^^,
this violent heap of mischiefs offered by the Commons, you shall see all
obedience first drawn from the Cle^gie; and secondly from your selves; (...) if
you (...) into the true causes of all these mischiefs which reign among them,
you shall find that they all arise through want of Faith.

This Speech p^eased and displeased diverse of the house of Peers, (...) were
severally inclined or adicted to ^orward, or (...) the Kings design^s; among
the which none (...) thereto, but only the (...)

B^t when the Commons heard of this Speech, they conceived so great displeasure
against the Bishop, that they forthwith sent their Speaker, Mr. Audeley, to
complain on him to the King* and to let his Highness understand how
grievously they thou ^h^ themselves injured ther^by, so as to be so highly
charged for lack of Faith, as if they had been Infidells or Heretics, etc.

The King therefore, to satisfy the Commons, sent for my Lord of Rochester to
come before him; being come, the King demanded of him why he spoke in such
sort; the Bishop answered, that being in counsel he spoke his mind in defense
of the Church, whom he saw daily injured and oppressed by the common people
whose office it was not to judge of her manners, much less to reform them, and
therefore (he said) he thought himself in conscience bound to defend her in all
that lay within his power; nevertheless the King wished him to use his words
more temperately; and that was all, which gave the Commons little satisfaction*

CHAP. XIV.
1. The demand of all the small Abbeys within the Land for the Kings use. 2.
The Bishop of Rochester opposes the demand in the Convocation house. 3. The
minds of the Clergy (before ready to condescend to the proposition^ altered
thereupon. 4. The Bishop of (...) escaped very narrowly from being poisoned at
his dinner. 5. How he escaped another danger from the shot of a cannon. 6. His
departure from the place to Rochester.

IMmediately hereupon the foresaid demand for all the small Abbeys and
Monasteries within the Land (of the value of two hundred pound land and under,
to be given to the King) was revived; and the pretense for such demands of the
Clergy, was in recompense of the great charges and expenses, which the King
was (...), concerning the Divorce which he was put upon by the false and double
dealing of the Cardinal and his Clergy, and therefore it was said to be all
the reason in the world, that the Clergy should satisfy the King again for
the great expenses he had been at; and this was urged with such ^impor^unity;
as if the business had been called upon by sound of Drums and T^umpets: In
conclusion, they all agreed that cert^ine of the Kings Counsel should make
demands hereof to the Co^vocation of the Cl^rgy, which was performed with such
a terrible show of the Kings displeasure (...) them, if they y^ilded not to his
(...), that diverse of the Convocation (sea^^ing the Ki^gs indign^tion, and
hoping by a voluntary condescension in these particulars to save the r^st) were
of a mind to satisfy the King ther^in, which the Bishop of Rochester
perceivi^g, spoke as follows.

My Lords, and the rest of our Brethren here assembled, I pray you to take good
heed to what you do, l^st you do you know not what, and what you cannot do:
for indeed the things that are demanded at our hands, are none of ours to grant
nor theirs to whom we should bestow them, if we should grant them their
desires; but they are the Legacies of those testators, who have given them unto
the Church for ever, under the penalty of a heavy ^urse imposed on all those
who shall any way go about to aliena^ their property from the Church: and
besides, if we should grant these smaller Abbeys, etc. to the King, what should
we do otherwise than show him the way how in time it may be lawful for him to
demand the greater? wherefore the manner of these proceedings puts me in mind
of a ^able, how the Ax (which wanted a handle) came upon a time unto the Wood,
making his m^an to the great Trees, how he wanted a handle to work withal, and
^or that cause he was constrained to sit idle; wherefore he made it his request
unto them, that they would be pleased to grant him one of their small saplings
within the Wood to make him a Handle, who mistrusting no guile, granted him one
of the smaller trees, wherewith he mad^ himself a handle* so becoming a
complete Ax, ^e so fell to work within the same wood that in process of time
there was neither great nor small tree to be found in the place where the wood
stood. And so my Lord, if you grant the King these smaller Monasteries* you do
but make him a handle, whereby at his own pleasure he may ^ut down all the
Cedars within your (...), and then you may thank your selves after ye have
incurred the heavy displeasure of Almighty God.

This Sp^^ch qu^te changed the minds of all those which were formerly bent to
gratify the Kings d^mands herein, so that all was rejected for that time.

After this the Bishop escaped a very great danger, for one R. Rose came into
the Bishops kitchen (being acquainted with the Cook) at his house in Lamb.
M^rsh and having provi^ed a quantity of de^dly poison, whiles the C^ok went
into the buterie to fetch him some drink, he took his opportunity to throw that
poison into a m^ss of Grue^^, which was prepared for the Bishops dinner; and
after he had stayed there awhile, went his way: but so it happened, that when
the Bishop was called unto his dinner, he had no app^tite to any meat, but
wished his servants to fall to, and be of good cheer, and that he would not eat
till toward n^ght: the Servants being set to dinner, they that did eat of that
poisoned dish were miserably infected, whereof one Gentleman, nam^d Mr. Bennet
Carwin, and an old Widow* died suddenly, and the rest never recovered their
healths till their dying day. The person that did this wicked deed, was
afterward, for the same offense, boiled alive in Smithfield, in the 22. year
of K. Henry's reign.

Shortly after this, there happened another great danger to him in this same
house, by reason of a Cannon bullet that was sh^t thorough his house, close by
his study window (where he was used to spend much time in Pr^y^r and holy
Meditations) which made such a horrible noise and clutter, as it went thorough,
that all the house were suddenly amazed; upon enqu^ry made from whence this
mischief should proceed, it was f^und out how that it came from the other si^e
of the River, and out of the E^^le of (...) house, Father to the La^dy Anne
Bullein, which being told unto the Bishop, he cal^ed all his Se^vants before
him, and said unto them, Let a trusse up ou^ baggage and be gone, this is no
place for us to abide in any longer; so he set forwards in his j^urn^y toward
(...).

(...) Co^spiracies were contrived by the K^ng^ consent, or p^ivity, it is not
handsome to determine, being (...) words against him at his table, and
els^where; which words ^xperience tel^ us how too great (...) may often take so
large commission from them, as to attemp^ such things as are beyond the nature
of their warrant.

The Bishop, now come to Rochester, f^ll to his old accustomed manner of
frequent preaching, visiting the Sick, converting the Seduced, and for his
recreation, he would sometimes go and see his workmen whiles they were employed
in the reparation of Rochester (...): upon which he had bestowed great cost;
^ut (...) had not long remained in those pa^ts, but he was robbed almost of all
his Plate by Thieves in the nightime, who brake into his Manor house of
Halling, n^are Rochester, which being perceived in the morning by his Servants,
they were all in great perplexity, and pursued the thieves as well as they
could, and following them thorough the wood, the thieves le^ fall several
pieces of Plate, through the great have which they had made in flying, so that
they brought some of the Plate back ^gain before the Bishop had heard of the
loss of any; but the Bp. coming down to his dinner, perceived an unwonted
kind of heaviness and sadness in their countenances, insomuch that he asked
them what was the matter? they seeming unwilling to relate the story, and
looking upon one another who should begin, he commanded them to inform him of
the cause of such d^straction, assuring them that he was armd for all
adventures (deeming it to be some great matter) but when they had given a full
relation of the whole business, and how they had recovered some of the* Plate
back again; the Bish. replied, if this be all, we have more cause to rejoice
that God has restored to us some, than to be discontented that wicked men have
taken away any for the least favor of God Almighty is more to be esteemed than
all the evil (which the Devil and all his wicked instruments can do unto us)
is to be valued, wherefore let us sit down and be merry, thank God it is no
worse, and look ye better to the rest.

CHAP. XV.
1. The Kings Agents are returned from Rome with sufficient matter of vexation
to the Clergy. 2. The King calls another Parliament. 3. The whole Clergy are
condemned in a praemunire. 4. The King lays hold on that advantage to make
himself head of the Church. 5. The Bishop of Rochester his most admirable
Speech upon that occasion, whereupon the Proposition was rejected. 6. The King
persists in his demand.

BY this time the Kings Agents, which were sent to Rome, were returned with
sufficient matter wherewith to ve^ the whole Clergy; for they had learned our
how that there had been a privilege formerly granted from the Sea of Rome, no
Legate de latere should enter the Realm of England, except he were first sent
for by the King; now it happened that Cardinal Wolsey (either ignorant, or
forgetful of this privilege, or perhaps thinking he might do any thing
without the Kings consent, or procu^ement) procured of, and for himself, the
Power legantine from the Pope that then was; but though the Cardinal had
exercised that authority for the space of diverse years, without the Kings
consent or privity, yet at the length (perceiving his own error, and the
danger he was in (if the Kings favor, which was no inheritance, should chance
to sl^ck its sails) and perhaps how merrily the whe^le of fortune began to
turn about) he so wrought (formerly) with the King, that he procured a
confi^mation thereof under the great Seal of England, as well for that which
was past, as that which was to come, which the King full well remembering,
thought the Cardinal too hard for him; howsoever he was resolved he would be
too hard for the Cardin^ll, and knowing that nothing stood between him and the
mark he aimed a^, but the reduction of this Cardinal to the statuquo wherein
he had him once safe enough, he so deals with a servant then belonging to the
Cardinal, and in great truth about him, that by his means he regained the
foresaid ratification under the great Seal, into his own hands, and then to
work he went. And

Accordingly he summoned another Parliament to beg^n upon the 16. day of
February, in the year of our Lord God 1530. in which Pa^liament diverse heinous
matters were propounded against the ^lergy, as a praeludiu^ of the winds to the
ensuing tempest; then an account was given up in Parliament of 100000 l.
charges which the King had been at to obtain so many inst^uments from foreign
Universities concerning the business of the Divorce: All which expenses they
said the King had been at through the falsehood and dissimulation of the
Cardinal, and certain others of the chief of the Clergy; all which was
demanded of the Clergy, that they should make all good unto the King; but when
this business began to be propounded to the Convocation of Divin^s, it was
there opposed, and especially by the Lord B. of Roche^ster, who said unto the
Kings Orators, that it was not their faults, as they were there the body
representative of the Clergy, that the King had been at any charges at all
concerning that business, for to his knowledge the Clergy were generally
against it, that any such matter should at all be brought in question, and that
if any such faulty persons were amongst them, it is fit they should be
questioned, and compelled to give his Majesty, satisfaction; Whereupon they all
sl^tly denied upon any such score to make any restitution at all.

Then the King (more ^urio^sly than ever) called the whole Clergy into the
Kings Bench, and sued the Cardinal, together with the whole Clergy in a
praemunire, for receiving and acknowledging the power L^gan^ine of the
Cardinal: which objection, whiles the Card, thought with as easy a grace to
w^sh off of him, as the proud Swan to sl^de so much water off of his back (like
the bastard Eagle called Hali^t^^s he was drowned under the waves (because,
like the true Eagle, he poized not his prey before he offered to carry it) by
catching after a Fish, which was heavier than he could carry; and so they were
all condemned upon the Statute of King Richard the second in a praemunire. Thu^
the K. was put into a capacity of imprisoning whom, or as many of them as he
pleased, or to enter into, or upon what goods or possessions of theirs he had a
mind unto: whereupon the Clergy first fallen under the Kings heavy
displeasure, and now not being willing to abide the further danger of his
displeasure under his justice, sued unto him for mercy, declaring unto him
their willingnes^ to pay the 100000 l. upon his indemnity, which the King
promised unto them, excepting the Cardinal and some others. But

The business of the Divorce s^uck so indig^stedly in the Kings stomach, that
before he wo^ld either divorce them from their fears, or marry them to their
former securities, he wished them all to repair unto their house of
Convocation, and there he would propound unto them a business, which if they
would condescend unto, then they should find that he would be unto them a
gracious Prince; which when they were assembled in the place ^ppointed, such a
business was propounded to them, as never was propounded by men since there was
a congregation of mankind, viz. that they should acknowl^dge the King to be
the Supreme Head of the Church which was propounded chi^fly by Mr. Thomas
Audel^y, (who after Sir Thomas Moore had given over his place, was created Lord
Chanc^lour of England) and that with such mix^ure of fair promises, and
threatni^g^ together, that many of the Convocation thought themselves in a
capacity neither of refusing any thing that should be demanded of them by the
King, nor of consul^ing of what was, or was not to be granted; whereupon diverse
of the Convocation upon ^canning of the business, were in a readiness to
promote the Kings design; and few there were that durst open their mouths to
speak their mind^ freely: Wher^upon the Athanasius of the Clergy, this ^^out
Prelate, of whom we treat, thus took the busi^esse into consideration.

My Lords, it is true, we are all under the Kings lash and stan^ in need of the
Kings good favor and clemency; yet this argues not that we should therefore
do that which will render us both ri^iculous and contempti^le to all the
Christian world, and ^issed out from the society of Gods holy Cath^lique
Church; for what good will that be to us to k^^p the p^ss^ssion of our Houses,
Cloisters, and Covents and to lose the Society of the Christian world? to
preserve our Goods and lose our Consciences? Wherefore, my Lords, I pray let us
consider what we do, and what it is we are to grant, the dangers and
inconvenien^^s that will ensue thereupon, or whether it lies in our powers to
grant what the King requires at our hands or whether the King be an apt person
to receive this power* that so we may go groundedly to work and not like men
that had lost all honesty and wit, together with their worldly fo^tune.

As con^erning the first point, v^z. what the Supremacy of the Church is, which
we are to give unto the King: it is to exercise the spiritual Government of
the Church in chief, which according to all that ever I have learned, both in
the Gospel, and through the whole course of Divinity, mainly consists in these
two points.

1. In loosing and binding sinners, according to that which our Savior sai^
unto St. Peter, when he ordained him head of his Church, viz. to thee will I
give the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Now my Lords, can we say unto the
King, tibi, to thee will I give the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven? If you say
I, where is your warrant? if you say no, then you have answered your selves,
that you cannot put such keys into his hands.

Secondly, the Supreme Government of the Church consists in feeding Christ's
Sheep and Lambs, according unto that, when our Savior performed that promise
unto Peter, of making him his universal Sheepherd; by such unlimited
jurisdiction, feed my Lambs, and not only so, but feed those that are the
feeders of those lambs, feed my sheep: Now my Lords, can any of us say unto
the King, Pasce oves?

God has given unto his Church some to be Apostles, some Evangelists, some
Pastors, some Doctors, that they might edify the body of Christ, so that you
must make the King one of these, before you can set him one over these, and
when you have made him one of these supreme Heads of the Church, he must be
such a Head as may be answerable to all the Members of Christ's body; and it is
not the few Ministers of an Island that must constitute a Head over the
Universe, or at least by such example, we must allow as many heads over the
Church, as there are sovereign Powers within Christ's Dominion, and then what
will become of the Supremacy? every Member must have a hea^; attendite vobis,
was not said to Kings, but Bishops.

Secondly, let us consider the inconveniences that will arise upon this Grant;
we cannot grant this unto the King, but we must renounce our unity with the Sea
of Rome; and if there were no further matter in it* than a renouncing of
Clement the seventh (Pope thereof) then the matter were not so great: but in
this we do forsake the first four general Counsels, which none ever forsook,
we renounce all Canonical and Ecclesiastical Laws of the Church of Christ; we
renounce all other Christian Princes; we renounce the Unity of the Christian
World, and so leap out of Peter's ship to be d^owned in the wave of all
Heresies, Sects, Schisms and Divisions. For

The first and general Counsel of Nice acknowledged Silv^ster (the Bishop of
Rome) his authority to be over them, by sending their Decrees to be ratified by
him.

The Counsel of Constantinople did acknowledge Pope (...) to be their chief, by
admitting him to give sentence against the Heretics, M^cidonius, S^bellinus,
and E^nomius.

The Counsel of Ephesus acknowledged Pope Celestin to be their chief Judge, by
admitting his condemnati^n upon the Heretic Ne^torius.

The Counsel of Chalcedon acknowledged Pope Leo to be their chief Head, and
all general Counsels of the World ever acknowledged the Pope of Rome (only)
to be the Supreme Head of the Church, and now shall we acknowledge another
Head, or one Head to be in England, and another in Rome?

Thirdly, We deny all Canonical and Ecclesiastical Laws, which wholly do
depend upon the authority of the Apostolic^ll See of Rome.

Furthly, We renounce the judgment of all other Christian Princes, whether
they be Protestants, or Catholics, I^wes, or Gentiles, for by this argument
Herod must have been head of the Church, of the Jews; Nero must have been head
of the Church of Christ; the Emperor must be head of the Protestant Countries
in Germany, and the Church of Christ must have had never a head till about 300.
years after Christ.

Fifthly, The Kings Majesty is not sus^^ptible of this Donation: Ozias for
meddling with the Priests office, was resisted by Az^rias, thrust out of the
Temple, and told that it belonged not to his o^^ice: now if the Priest spoke
truth in this, then is not the King to meddle in this business; if he spoke
amiss, why did God plagu^ the King with leprosy for this, and not the Priest?

King David, when the Ark of God was in bringing home, did he place himself in
the head of the Priests Order? did he so much as touch the Ark or ex^cute any
the least, properly belonging to the (...)? or did he not rather go before, and
abase himself amongst the people, and s^y that he would become yet more vile,
so that God might be glorified?

All goo^ christi^n Emp^rours have evermore refused (...) authority; for at the
first General counsel of Nice, certain Bills were privily brought unto
Constantine, to be ordered by his authority, but he caused them to be burnt,
saying, Dominus (...) constituit, etc. God has ordained you (Priest^) and has
given you power to be Judges over us, and therefore by right in these things we
are to be ju^ged by you, but you are not to be judged by me.

Valentine, the good Emperor, was required by the Bishops to be but present
with them to reform the heresy of the Arians* but he answered, Forasmuch as I
am one of the M^mbers of (...) Lay People, it is not lawful for me to define
such controvers^^s, but let the Pri^sts, to whom (...) not to separate our
selves from such a one.

If we answer, that the Church of Rome is not of God, but a Malignant Church
then it will ^ollow, that we the inhabitants of this land, have not as yet
received the true faith of Christ; seeing we have not rec^ived any other
Gospel, any other Do^trine, any other Sacraments, than what we have received
from her, as most evidently appears by all the E^cl^siastical Histories:
wherefore if she be a malignant Church, we have been deceived all this while,
and if to renounce the common Father of Christendom, all the G^nerall
Counsels, ^specially the first four, which none renounce, all the C^untr^ys of
Christendom, whether they be (...) Countries or Protestant, be to forsake the
Unity of the Christian world then is the granting of the Supremacy of the
Ch^^ch unto the King, a renouncing of the Unity, (...) of the S^amlesse coat of
Christ in (...) a divid^ng of the Mystical body of Ch^^st (...) Spouse limb
(...), and tail to tail lik^ (...), to set the field of Christ's holy Church
all on (...): and this is it which we are about, wherefore let it be said unto
you in time an not too late, LOOK YOU TO THAT.

This Sp^ech so wrought with the whole Convoc^^^on that all (...) were laid
aside, and such an a^mour of resolution generally put upon the whole body there
assembled, that come what come would, all was rej^cted, and the Kings purpose
for that time clearly frustrated. But the King desi^ted not, notwithstanding
all this but sent his Orators to the Convocation-house, to put them in mind of
the dangers they were in, and to acquaint them with the Kings heavy displeasure
against them, for denying him so reasonable a demand, both which particulars
they aggravated and set forth to the high^st advantage; but it was answered,
that they were sensible enough of that which they had said; and for the Kings
displeasure they were very sorrowful, because they could not help it,
wherefore if they must (they said) suffer, they must be contented.

The King having in vain thus attempted the fury of the wind, in bereaving
these Travelers of this upper Garm^nt of the Church: he now makes trial what
the policy of the Sun will do. Wherefore

The King sent for diverse of the chief leading men of the Convocation, as well
Bishops as others, to come unto him at his Palace of Westminster; at whose
first entrance into his presence, he shines upon them such a gracious look, as
if all the ra^^s of Majesty had been bestowed upon them by that aspect; and
courts them with the sof^^st, mild, and gentlest words, as that p^ssibly he
could use, protesting unto them upon the word of a King* that if they would
acknowledge and (...) him for sup^^me head of the Church of England he would
never, by virtue of that G^ant, ^ssume unto himself any more power, ju^isdict
on, or ^uthority over them, than all other th^Kings of England, his (...), had
forme^^y assumed; neither wou^d he t^ke upon him to p^omulg^, or (...) any new
spiritual Law, or ex^rcise any (...) Jurisdiction, or interm^ddle himself among
them in altering, changing, ord^ring or judging in any sp^ritual business
whatsoever: wherefore (said he) I having made you th^s frank promise, I exp^ct
that you should deal with m^ according^y: and so he dismissed them to consi^er
of this business amongst thems^lv^, and to g^ve his Orators an account thereof
in the house the next morning.

CHAP. XVI.
1. The Bishops consult what course to take. 2. The Bishop of Roch^ster
proposes unt^ them a Parable, Whereupon they all break off in confusion. 3.
The Kings O^ators repair unto the Co^^ocation to know the Clergies fin^
determ^nation in the busin^sse. 4. The Bishop of R^chester's Sp^ech unto the
Kings Orators. 5. The Orators Reply unto the Bishops Speech. 6. The Headship of
the Church gra^te^ unto the King upon conditions, the conditions rejected, at
last accepted of.

THe Bishops, etc. as soon as they were departed the Kings presence, retired
themselves to a place of privacy, to consider with themselves what were best to
be done, and what account and advice they should give unto the rest of the
Clergy: Some of them were apt enough to think the business now pretty fair,
seeing that the King had promised fairly; but because my Lord of Rochester was
the only man that most stickled in this business, they all asked his opinion
herein, in the first place; who soon answered them with this parable, Thus
stands the case my Ma^ters, the Heart upon a tim^ s^id unto the Members of the
Body, let me also be your Head, and I will promise you that I will neither see,
nor hear, nor smell, nor speak, but I will close, and shu^ mine eyes and
ears, and mouth, and nostrills, and will excecute no other offices than a
mere heart should do; whereupon all hopes of reconciliation upon that trust
and w^yes of satis^action was soon nipp'd in the bud, and they all broke off in
confusion with ^^d hearts.

The next day the Orators came to the house of Convocation, to know the
Clergies reso^ution in the business repeating unto the whole house the words
which the day before his Maj. had spoken unto some of them, and that over and
over: and moreover, saying unto them, that if they should now oppose themselves
against his Maj. this business, it must needs declare a great mistr^st^ulnesse
which they had in the Kings words, s^eing he had made unto them so solemn and
high an oath; which words of theirs pressed so home, and followed so close,
with all the specious arguments, and fairest promises that could be imagined,
st^ggered indeed some, but sil^nced all, excepting him who is the subject of
this History, who (after that he had earnestly required of the Lords to take
good heed what they did, and to consider the manifold michiefs and
inconveniences that would ^n^ue unto the whole Church of Christ (if they
should condescend to any such request) applying himself unto the Kings Orators,
he spoke thus unto them.

It is true, the King was graciously pleased to protest thus and thus: What if
the King should alter his mind, where is our remedy? What if the King will
execute the Supremacy, must we sue unto the Head to forbear being Head?
Again, this dignity is invested in him, his Successors will expect the same,
and the Parliament will (questionless) anne^ that dignity to the Crown: What
if a Woman should succeed to the Crown, must she be Head of the Church? What
if an Infant should succeed, can he be Head? This were not only (said he) to
make the Church no Church, but the Scripture no Scripture, and at last Jesus to
be no Christ.

To the which sayings, the Orators replied, that the King had no such meaning*
as he doubted (repeating again his royal Protestation) and further said, that
though the Supremacy were granted unto his M^j^sty simply, and absolutely,
according to his demand; yet it must needs be understood, or so taken, that he
can h^ve no farther power or authority thereby, than quantum per legem Dei
licet; and then if a temporal Prince can have no such authority by Gods Laws
(as his Lor^ship has declared) what needs the forecasting of so many doubts?

The Bishop of Rochester (perceiving the whole house to be much aff^cted with
their manner of pleading, and fearing that they might desert him in the end,
through ^ear and dread of the Kings displeasure) takes hold upon their last
words, and thus speaks unto his Majesti^s Orators.

G^ntlemen, you think that herein we stand too st^ff upon our own legs, but it
is not so, but only in the defense of our own, and your Mother, the holy
Catholic Church, in whose bosom you are, as well as we; and the milk of
whose Breasts it is your p^rts to suck as well as ours, and within whose
bl^ss^d Commu^ion there is but one Salvation, which is common unto all;
wherefore, Gentlemen, let it be your care that our tenderness in this point be
not misconstrued to the King: and now, as to this demand, that his Majesty, and
you all, may plainly see, that we shall (to please his Majesty) do the
u^termost of wha^ lie^ within ou^ power in that (...); let all that which his
Majesty has protested, and so solemnly taken his o^th upon, be ^^cord^d, and
the words quantum per l^g^m (...) be in^erted in the Grant (which is no
otherw^^^ than what the King and you your selves have faithfully promised and
protested) and for my part it shall be granted. Whereupon the Or^tors went away
as well (...), and made a report of all that had happened in the Convocation
house unto the King* whereat the King was highly offended, and said unto them.
Mother of God, you have (...) p^etty prank, I thought to have made fools of
the^^, and now you have so ordered the business, that they are likely to make
a fool of me, as they have done of you already: got unto them again, and let
me have the business p^ssed without any qu^ntum's, or tantum'^; I will have no
quantum's nor no tantum' s in the business, but let it be done. Whereupon,
imme^i^t^ly they returned to the Convocation house, calling and crying ou^ upon
them with open and continual clamor, to have the Grant pass absolutely, and
to credit the Kings honor, who had made unto them so solemn an oath and
protestation, falling into disputation with the Bishops, how far a temporal
Princes power was over the Clergy; but the Bishops soon disputed them into
having nothing else to say, but whosoever would refuse to condescend to the
Kings demands herein, was not worthy to be accounted a true and loving subject,
nor to have the benefit of such a one. After which, nothing could prevail, for
then the Clergy answered with unanimous consent, and full resolution, that
they neither could, nor would, grant unto the King the Suprem^cy of the Church,
without those conditional words quantem per legem Dei licet, and so the
Orators departed, relating unto the King all that had passed, who seeing no
other remedy, accepted it with that condition, granting unto the Clergy a
pardon for their bodies and goods, paying him ^00000 l. which was paid every
penny.

CHAP. XVII.
1. How Campeius related the whole business of the Divorce unto the Pope, and
was blamed for the same. 2. The King send^ two Doctors of the Civil law with
private C^mmissions to treat with the Pope about the Divorce. 3* The Pope
solemnly ratifies the Marriage. 4. The Sentence it self.

BUt we cannot well go on with our History, except we first arive our discourse
within the gates of Rome, to observe what account Cardinal Campeius had given
unto the Pope of all these proceedings, which was no otherwise than what had
passed directly here in England, which being related to his Holiness by the
Cardinal, the Pope blamed him exceedingly, for that he had not overruled Queen
Katharine, to have waved her Appeal, whereby the business might have been
determined within the Kings own Dominious; for which cause-^ake he sent him
thither. So sl^ppery is the g^ound whereon M^nisters of state do set their feet
in any busin^ss^, (...) that his business would do right well, to make a
separation between them by his definitive sentence: the Pope demanded to see
their Commission and Authority which they had to treat with him; they answered,
that the King was by this time grown somewhat unruly, and that therefore what
they did* they did it upon their own score, and for the love-sake which they
bare unto the common good of the (...) Church, and for the peace and unity-^ake
thereof. Then the Pope demanded of them to see the Certificate under the
B^sh^ps (...), whereby it might appear that they had so consented: to which
they answered, that they had no such certificate for the present, but that they
expected such a certific^te daily to come unto them, together with a Commission
to treat with his Holiness. Whereupon his Holiness bad them expe^t.

All this while the King was framing a new Model of a Church, and sent these
men over on purpose, if it were p^ssible, to retard all proceeding at Rome,
until such time, as by a new court of Judicature, under a new Supremacy, the
Marriage should have been adjudged (...), before the Popes (...) of
Ratification (which was feared) should have made it good.

All which policies and workings here in England, you must not imagine them of
Rome to be ignorant of.

Wherefore the Pope takes the best and most substantial advise that could be
given him, and calls unto him, not only his Cardinals, etc. but the most able
Canonists and Divines that could be heard of, and consults with the most famous
Universities, procuring the censures of the most famous men that had written of
this case; among the rest, the two books of the beforementioned D^. Tunstall
Bishop of London, and this out Dr. Fisher Bishop of Rochester; (of which ^ast
book (if you will believe that reverend and famous Clerk, Alphonso de castro)
it is said of him to be the most excellent and learned of all other works) and
at last, after diligent examination of the business, (...) himself in his
Tribunal seat, and open consistory, by assent and counsel of his (...), the
Card^^al^, pronounced this definitive (...) in the cause: The words begin as
follows*

Clemens papa septimus.

Christi nomine invocato, in throno justitiae pro tribunali sedentes, etc.
which in English is thus.



Pope Clement the seventh.

We invocating the name of Christ, and having for our Tribunal the Throne of
Justice, and the glory of the Almighty God only before our eyes; by this our
definitive Sentence (which by the counsel and assent of our venerable
Brethren, the Cardinals of the holy Church of Rome, assembled before us in
consistory) we do in these Writings pronounce, decree, and declare, in the
cause and causes, lawfully devolved upon us, and the Sea Apostolic, by an
Appeal (brought before us) of our welbeloved Daughter in Christ, Catharine,
Queen of England, from the judgments of the Legates, deputed by, and sent from
us, and the sea Apostolic, between the foresaid Queen Catharine, and our
welbeloved Son in Christ, Henry the eight, the most illustrious King of
England, upon the validity and invalidity of the Matrimony between them,
contracted and consummated, and upon other matters more largely deduced in the
acts of such like cause or causes, and committed to our Son Paulus Capissuchus,
then Dean of the Causes of our h^ly Palace* and in his absence to our reverend
Father Symoneta Bishop of Pausa^ia, supplying the place of one of our Aud^tors
of (...) said Palace, to be heard, intrust^d and in our Consistory to be
repor^ed* and by them to us; and the said (...), and maturely discuss^d du^^ng
the time of the matter (...), that the Matrimony co^tract^^ (...) the sa^d
Queen Catharin^ and K. Henry of England, with all (...) of the same, was, and
is, Cano^^call, and of good force, and that they may and ought to enjoy to them
their due effects, and that the ^ss^e between them heretofore born, or
hereafter to be born, was, and shall be, l^gitimate, and that the ^oresa^d King
Henry, ought is, and shall be ^ound and obliged, to cohabit* and dwell with the
said Queen Catharine his lawful wife* and to entreat her with all Husbandly
affection, and Kingly honor; and that the said King Henry is condemned, and by
all remedies of Law is to be restrained, and c^mpelled as we do condemn
constrain, and compel him, to accompl^sh and ^ulfill all, and singular the
premises ^ff^ctually; and that the molestat^o^s and r^fusalls by the foresaid
King Henry, by any manner of ways made to the said Queen Catharine touching
the in^alid^ty of the s^id Matrimony, and always from the beginning were
unlawful, and (...); and that perpetual silence (...) all the foresaid
matters, and (...) of the said Matrimony (...) unto the said Henry, and (...)
it; and that the said King Henry of England be condemned, and we do condemn
him, in the expenses lawfully made before us and our said Brethren, in such
case, on the behalf of the said Queen Catharine; the Taxation of which Expenses
we reserve to our selve till another time: So we have pronounced.

This was published in the Palace of Rome, in open consistory, the 23. of March
in the year of our Lord God, 1534.



Two men must be thanked for this ( Wolsey and Fisher) and these two men must
be met withal, whereby they may receive their payment: for the first, we leave
him to his own story, or some others on his behalf: The second is the subject
of my pen, and how they found out him, the following Chapter must relate.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. The various rumor of the people concerning the Divorce. 2. The History of
the Holy maid of Kent. 3. Div^rs persons of quality executed as traitors
concerning her and the Bishop of Rochester, etc. convicted of misprision of
Treason for the same cause. 4. A new Parliament called. 5. The Marriage between
the King and Queen Katharine pronounced null by Archbishop Cranmer. 6. A new
Oath made and tendered to both houses of Parliament, etc. all take it excepting
the Bishop of Rochester.

AT the time when the Kingdom began to be divided (when the King was about to
make the Divorce between him and his wife, as the first act of his Supremacy)
and to talk too busi^^, some in favor of the King, but most of the Queen: it
happened, that one Elizabeth Barton, a young maiden borne in Kent, at a plac^
called Court, at Street, declared unto sundry persons that she had lately
received certain Visi^ns and Revelations, concerning the Kings proceedings in
this matter of D^vorce; and as she thought, they came from God, and often
falling into a trance* she would declare, how that the Kings (...) away his
wife would be a m^anes to bring in (...) Land, and that (...) (...) his wife,
should never have co^fo^t in any other; that whatsoever he did, yet the
daughter of this Queen should reign; and because he deprived (...) mother* the
(...) Cathol que Church, of so many chi^dren* all his child^^n should die
(...), and himself comfortless, leaving an ^^nominious name and fame (...)
him to the w^rlds end. To this and the like (...) she would ^tter words, which
were too wonderful to proceed ordinarily from so simple a reputed woman.

First, she communicated these V^sions, etc. to one M* Richard Master Parson
of Aldington in Kent, whose Penitent she was. This Al^ington advised her to go
to Mr. Edward Bocking Dr. of D^vinity, and a Monk of Christ-church in
Canterbury; a man that was ^amous, both for Learning and Devotion, who sent for
one Mr. John Deering, another Monk of the same house; all these advised her to
go^ to the Archbishop of Canterbu^y Doctor Warham, and to take his adv^se
therein, and to follow his direction; who (as it was conceived, being conscious
of the great ill-w^ll of the people which he had drawn upon h^mself, by being
so great a furtherer of the D^vorce, and of the inevitable changes and
alterations in Religion, which he then saw evidently to ensue ^^rough his so
much compliance with the King) shortly after discoursed with this Maid, died of
grief.

After whose departure from this life, the King (by virtue of his Supremacy)
appointed ^ranmer to be Archb^shop of Canterbury. This woman's fame did so
spread it self abroad over the whole Kingdom, as that she was resorted unto by
multitudes of people, and called by them the holy Maid of K^nt, whose virtues
were exceedingly ex^olled by the preachings of Mr. Henry Gold Bachelour in
Divinity, and a learned man; Father Hugh Rich Warden of the ^riars Observants
in Canterbu^y, and Richard Risby of the same house; and having gone her
Perambulation to the Charter House of London, and Sheane, thence to the Nunnery
of Sion, and thence to the Friars of Richmond, Canterbury, and Greenwich, at
last she came to the King himself and before him declared her mind fully and
plainly (with whom, as she had quiet audience, so she had peaceable departure)
at last she came unto the Bishop of Rochester, Dr: John Adeson his Chaplain,
and Dr. Thomas Bell, sometimes the Queens Chaplain, who, as a rarity,
admitted her to come before them to hear what she would say, as all men else
had done; and now (and not till now) was this business looked upon as a matter
of dangerous consequence: the Kings Counsel were called together to consult
about it, who were divided amongst themselves concerning her; some were for
letting her alone, as knowing not what to make of her; others were for rigor
and cruelty to be showed against her: in the end forbearance was laid aside,
and severity was to take its place, which sentenced it to be a traitorous
conspiracy between the Maid and some that were chief of the Clergy, to bring
the King and his Government into contempt, and hatred with his people, whereby
to encourage them to tumults and insurrections: wherefore the King sent for his
Judges, and certain others which were servient to the Law, and propounded the
case unto them, acquainting them with that which every one had done, desiring
to know their opinions therein: who sitting in long consultation, at last they
made result, that Elizabeth Barton, Edward Bockings, John Deering Monks.
Richard Masters, Henry Gold Priests. Hugh Rich, and Richard Risby Friars
Minors, where all by the Law in case of high Treason, that my Lord of
Rochester, Dr. Adeston, Dr. Abel, etc. because they were not the first
contrivers of the Matter, but concealers of the Thing, were only in the case
of misprision of Treason, viz. loss of Goods, and imprisonment of their
Bodies, during the Kings pleasure: and thus the King got the opinion of the
Judges, but not so home (it was conceived) as he expected.

This being done, all the forementioned persons, opin'd to be within the case
of high Treason, were attached and carried to Lambeth before the new
Archbishop ( Cranmer) where, after they had been examined by him, and others
of the Commissioners, and charged with Treason, Fiction, and Hypocrisy,
Fa^sehood, Dissimulation, and Conspiracy, Tumults, Rebellion, and Insurrection:
they were all sent to the Tower. Thus the King got the parties into prison.
Which being done,

The King called a Parliament in the 25* year of his reign, to be held at
Westminster upon the 15. day of January, where they were all attainted of high
Treason, the Maid judged to b^ hanged and head^d at Tyburne, the rest to be
hanged and qu^rtered alive; the Bishop of Rochester, Dr. Ad^son, Dr. Abel
Thomas, Register to the Archdeacon of Cant. and E^ward Thwaites Gent. convicted
of misprision of Treason; of which conviction (being it was no more) the Bishop
of Rochester for that time, got himself cleared, paying unto the King three
hundred pounds.

A little before this Parliament sat, the Archbishop of Canterbury (Cranmer)
had decreed (which decree was made at Dunstable) that the foresaid marriage
solemnized between the King and the Lady Katharine, was clearly and absolutely
against the Laws of Almighty God, and that it ought to be accepted, reputed,
and taken as of no value or effect, but utterly void to all intents and
purposes; and that the Marriage which was to be had and solemniz^d between the
King and the Lady Anne Bullein, ought to be taken as undoubtedly true, si^cere,
and perfect; which Marriage (carrying with it the sovereign imfortunity of all
second Marriages) being completed, the same Parliament enacted a Statu^e,
which declared the establishment of the Kings succession in the imperial
Crown, to be upon the issue which he was to have by the present Queen Anne,
ratifying whatsoever the foresaid Archbishop of Canterbury had decreed, and
disinheriting the issue which the King had by the foresaid Lady Katharine, from
all title to the foresaid Crown and Government; or that if any person of what
state and condition soever, shall, by writing, printing, or any exterior Act
or Deed, procure, or do any thing to the prejudice, slander, disturbance, or
de^ogation of the said Matrimony, or the issue growing of the same, every such
person shall be deemed and adjudged as an high Traitor, and suffer such
punishment as in case of high Treason is provided; and for the better keeping
of this Act, the Kings Majesty, together with his Counselors, of their own
authority, framed an O^th upon the breaking up of this Parliament (which was
upon the 30. day of Ma^ch) and tendered it the same day to all the Lords, both
spiritual and temporal, as likewise to all the Commons, and was to be tendered
to whom the Commissioners (for the same purpose) should call before them, the
words of which Oath were these, viz.

Ye shall swear to bear Faith, Truth, and all Obedience, only to the Kings
Majesty, and to his heirs of his body, and of his most dear and entirely
beloved wife Queen Anne, begotten, and to be begotten, and further to the
heirs of our Sovereign Lord, according to the limitation made in the Statute,
for surety of his succession in the Crown of this Realm, mentioned and
contained, and not to any other within this Realm, nor to any other foreign
Authority, or Potentate whatsoever: and in case any Oath be made, or has been
made by you, to any person or persons, that then ye do repute the same as
vain, and annihilate, and that to your cunning, wit, and utmost endeavors, ye
shall observe, keep, maintain, and defend the said Act of Succession: all the
whole effects and intents thereof, and all other Acts and Statutes, made in
confirmation and for ex^cution of the same, or any thing therein contained: and
this ye shall do against all manner of persons, of what estate, dignity,
degree, or condition soever they be; and in no wise do, or attempt, nor to your
power suffer to be done, or attempted, directly, any thing, or things, privily,
or openly, to the let, hindrance, danger, or derogation thereof; or if any part
of the same, by any manner of means, or any manner of pretenses: So help you
God, and all his Saints, and the holy Evangelist.

Which Oath, all the Lords, both spiritual and temporal, took, except the
Bishop of Rochester, who absolutely refused it: So the Parliament was ended. But

The said Bishop had not been 4 days quiet within his Palace of Rochester, but
a Letter came to him from the Archbishop of Canterbury, together with other of
the Commissioners, willing him personally to appear before them in the said
Archbishops house, by a certain day expressed within the Letter, all excuses
set a part. And

CHAP. XIX.
1. The Bishop of Rochester summoned to appear before the Archbishop of
Canterbury. 2. Sir Thomas M^or, and Dr. Wilson committed for refusing the Oath.
3. The Bishop of Rochester sent to the Tower for the same cause. 4. A
Parliament is called, wherein the Bishops imprisonment was voted lawful. 5.
The Supremacy of the Church conferred upon the King, etc. by Act of P^^liament,
absolutely* and w^^^out the fo^mer clause. 6. An Act (...) Parliament making i^
treason to deny the King to be supreme head of the Church.

NOw was the thing come to pass, which was nothing terrible to him, because it
was foreseen: wherefore he first makes his Will, and leaves several L^gacies
to diverse persons and uses, as to Michael house in Cambridge, where he received
his Education, to St. John's College, to the Poor, to some of his (...) to all
his Servants, whom he leaves weeping behind him, whiles the rest followed him
(lam^nting his condition) in his journey toward Lambeth. Passing thorough the
City of Rochester, there were a mult^tude of people gathered together, both
citizens and countrymen, to whom he gave his benediction, riding by them all
the while b^^eheaded: some crying, that they should never see him again; others
denouncing woes unto them that were the oc^asions of his troubles; others
crying out against the wickedness of the times, and all of them lamenting and
bewailing that which was their misery, and his glory: Thus he passed on his
way till he came to Suitors hill, twenty miles from Rochester, on the top
whereof, he rested himself, descending from his horse* and causing to be
brought before him such victuals as he had caused to be brought thither for
that purpose: he said, he would now make use of his time, and dine in the open
air while as he might: after which dinner he cheerfully took his horse, and
came to London the same night.

The day of his appearance being come, he presented himself before the
Archbishop of Canterbury (at Lambeth) the Lord Audely Chancelour of England,
Thomas Cromwell the Kings Secretary, and the rest of the Commissioners,
authorized under the great Seal of England, to call before them whom they
pleased, and to tender unto them the foresaid Oath (then sitting at Lambeth)
where, at the same tune, the Bishop met with Sir Thomas Moore, who welcomed and
saluted the Bishop in these terms, Well met my Lord, I hope we shall meet in
Heaven: to which the Bishop replied, This should be the way, Sir Thomas, for it
is a very strait gate we are in. There had been Doctor Wilson, sometime the
Kings Confessor, who, together with Sir Thomas Moore, had both of them refused
the Oath a little before the Bishops coming, for which the Knight was committed
for the present to the custody of the Abbot of Westminster, as the Doctor had
been formerly committed to the Tower of London; at which time also, the Clergy
of London were warned to appear about the same business, who all of them took
the Oath at the same time: Then was it that the Bishop of R^chester was called
before the Archb^shop, etc. who (putting the B^sh^p in remembrance of the Act
which was made by the late Parliament (which had provided an O^th to be
administered to all persons within this R^alm, concerning the establ^shment of
the Succession, etc.) how all the Lords, both spiritual and temporal, had
taken the said Oath, only himself excepted, how grievo^sly his Majesty was
offended with him therefore, how he had g^ven strict charge to himself and the
rest of the Commissioners, to call him before them, and to tender unto him the
Oath once more, presented unto him the Oath, laying it before him, and demanded
of him what he would say thereto: the good man p^rusing it awhile requested
that he might have some tim^ to consid^r upon it; the Commissioners consulting
with themselves awhile, granted him five days to consider upon it, and so
dismissing him for the present: whence he departed to his own house in Lambeth
Marsh.

During which small time of his abode there, there came diverse of h^s friends,
rather to take their leaves of, th^n to v^sit him: among which, one Mr. Seton,
and Mr. Bransby, Substitutes of the Masters and Fellows of the two C^l^edges,
to which he had showed himself so much their friend, partly to salute him in
the name of the two Societies, and partly to desire his confirmation of their
Statutes under his Seal which he had drawn long before; but the Bishop desired
to have some further time to consider of them, as he intended; alas, said the
two G^^tlemen, we fear your time is now too short to read them before you go to
prison; It is no matter, said the Bishop, then I will read them in prison: that
will hardly be permitted (said the Trustees) if you come once there; then Gods
will be done (said the Bishop) for I shall hardly be drawn to put my seal to
that which I have not well considered of; howsoever (said he) if the worst
should happen, there is Mr. Cowper (a worthy reverend man, and a Bachelour in
Divinity) that has the copy of the same Statutes, which I have, if I do not,
or cannot, according to my desire, peruse them, I will give it you under my
Seal, that if you like them that shall be unto you a confirmation; for I am
p^rswaded, that one time or other, those Statutes will take place; and
accordingly it happened, for when this Master Cowper (long after the imprisonment
and death of the Bishop of Rochester, and the change and alteration of the
times, which had made Religion, Lords, and Laws, all new) commi^ted this Book
of Statutes to the custody of one M. T: Watson (a man that afterward came to
great honor and estimation for his profound learning, and was afterward
elected to the Mastership o^ S. John's College, and afterward to the
Bishopric of London who (as the Bishop of Rochester foretold) restored them to
the house, who admitted them as their only Laws whereby they were wholly
governed, during the reign of Queen Mary.

The time being come when the good Bishop was to give an account of the
Premises, he presen^ed himself before the Comm^ssioners, ^cqu^inting them how
that he had perused the Oath with as good deliberation as he could: but as they
had framed it, he could not (with any safety to his own conscience) subscribe
thereto, except they would give him leave to alter it in some particulars,
whereby his own conscience might be the better satisfied: The King pleased,
and his actions rather justified, and Warranted by Law.

To this they all made answer, that the King would not in any wise permit that
the Oath should admit any exceptions or alterations whatsoever, and (s^^d the
Bishop of Canterbury) you must answer directly* whether you will, or you will
not subscribe; then (said the Bishop of Rochester) if you will needs have me
answer directly, my answer is, that foasmuch as my own conscience cannot be
satisfied, I absolutely refuse the Oath. Whereupon he was immediately sent to
the Tower of London, which was upon Tuesday, the 26. of April in the year of
our Lord God, 1534. and upon the 25. year of the Kings reign, being the last of
his reign for that year.

Thus the Remora to the Kings proceedings (in this kind) being removed, the
Ship went merrily along; for all things being fitted for a Parliament, there
was a Parliament which was ^itted for all things immediately called, upon the
26. year of the Kings reign, and upon the 23. day of November. which wrought
above nine wonders, lasting but fifteen days, wherein the Bishop of
Rochester's imprisonment was voted lawful, and all other men their
imprisonments good and lawful, that should refuse to take the foresaid Oath
(which authority before was wanting) also another Statute was ^nacted, whereby
the Supremacy of the Church of England was given unto the King* his Heirs and
Successors, to have and enjoy the same, as a title and style to his imperial
Crown, with all Honors, Jurisdictions, Authorities, and Privileges thereunto
belonging, with full power and authority, as himself lists, to visit,
repress, redress, reform, order, correct, restrain, and amend all Heresies,
Abuses, Errors, and Offenses, whatsoever they were, as fully and as amply as
the same might, or ought to be, done, or corrected, by any spiritual authority
or jurisdiction whatsoever, and that without the clause or condition of quantum
per legem Dei lieet, which was as contrary to the Kings promise to the
Convocation-house, as it was answerable to what the good Bishop forewarned the
Cl^rgie of, whiles he (...) amongst them. And thus whiles the King acted the
Pope, the Bishop became a Prophet.

This Act being once passed, the King required them to pass another Act, viz.
That if any manner of Person whatsoever, should, by word or deed, presume to
deny the title of Supremacy, that then every such person so offending, should
be reputed and adjudged as an high Traitor, and suffer and abide such losses
and pains, as in ^ases of high Treason is provided.

CHAP. XX.
1. The King sends diverse learned Bishops to persuade with the Bishop of
Rochester to take the Oath. 2. The Bishop of Rochester answers unto the
Bishops. 3. Sir Thomas Moore committed to the same prison. 4. The comfort which
they received in each other. 5. Their lettters intercepted, and the Bishops man
committed to close prison therefore. 6. The simple, yet m^rry question, which
he ^ade thereupon. 7. The Lord Chancelour with diverse other great Lords sent by
the King to persuade the Bishop.

BUt when that business came to be discussed in the Parliament House, the
Commons themselves began to think it a very hard Law, an^ full of rigor; for
(said they) a man may chance to say such a thing by way of discourse, or such a
word may fall from a man negligently, or unawares; all of them as yet not
otherwise able but to think it a strange thing, that a man should die for
saying the King was not the head of the Church: which debate held them many
days; at last the King sent them word, that except it could be proved that the
party spoke it maliciously, the Statute should not be of any force to condemn:
So the word MALICIOVSLY was put in, and it passed currently, which afterward
served to as much purpose, as the words Quantum per legem Dei licet. And

During the Bishops hard and close imprisonment, the King (as he had at several
other times so done) sent diverse of the Privi^-councel (as well Bishops as
others) to persuade the Bishop of Rochester to take the oath of Succ^ssion:
after that the Bishop had suffered a great deal of Rhetorique to come from
them* he thus spoke unto them:

My very good friends, and some of you my old acquaintance, I know you wish me
no hurt, but a great deal of good; and I do believe, that upon the terms you
speak of, might have the Kings favor as much as ever. Wherefore, If you can
answer me to one question, I will p^rform all your desires. What Is that my
Lord, said one, and all of them? It is this, said the Bishop, What will it gain
a man to win the whole world, and to lose his own soul? Whereupon, after some
little talk, to no purpose, they all left him; some of them wishing (for their
own security) that either they had him in the same danger that they were in,
or else that they were endued with the same constancy of mind that he was of:
Now the same God which refused him comfort in his Visitants, sent him the
consolation of a fellow Sufferer, which was Sir Thomas Moore, the fame of the
world, who was now sent to the same prison where he was, and for the same
cause; whereat he seemed to conceive no small joy; to whom, as soon as
opportunity would give leave, he sent (by his man) his most loving and heartly
commendations, and received the like from him: between whom (to their comforts)
there passed sundry Letters for a while* until such time that there was notice
taken thereof, and one of their Letters intercept^d, and carried to the K^ng^
Council; which being read, although there was not in any part of (...) least
part of evil, yet was it taken in ^vil part; and a great charge was given unto
their Keepers to restrain them from that lib^rty.

The B^sh^ps man being clapped up ^ close prisoner, and threatened to be hanged
(for carrying L^tters to Sir Thomas Moore) asked the Keeper if there were
another Act of Parliament come forth, whereby a man should be hanged for
serving his Master? Which coming from a man that was so noted for simplicity,
set them into such ^ laughter, that after a little examination, as how many
Letters he had carried, etc. he was set at liberty, with a strict charge given
him, that he should carry no more Letters.

After the King had tried all other ways, he sent the Lord Chancelour Audely,
together with the Duke of Suffolk, the Earl of Wiltshire, Secretary Cromwell,
and diverse others of the Council, to the Bishop of Roch^ster, to certify him
of the new Law that was lately made concerning the Kings Supremacy, and the
penalty thereof to them that should gainsay it, or withstand it; and to know,
in his Maj^sty's name, whether he would acknowledge it (as the rest of the
Lords, both spiritual and temporal, had done) or not: to which the Bishop,
after some pause, replied unto them, My Lords, you present before me a
two-edged sword for if I should answer you with a disacknowledgement of the
Kings Supremacy, that would be my death; and if I should a^knowledge the same*
perhaps contrary to my own conscience, that would be assuredly unto me worse
than death; wherefore I make it my humble request unto you, that you would
bear with my silence, for I shall not make any direct answer to it at all.
Whereupon the Commissioners were nothing satisfied, but urged him more and more
to answer one way or other, directly telling him how displeasing such kind of
shiftings will appear unto his M^j^sty, how much the King was formerly
displeased with his correspondence with S^r Thomas Moore; wherefore, said the
Lord C^ancelour, if you should now thus use him, you would exasperate his
grievous indignation against you more and more, and give him just cause to
think that ye deal more stubbornly with him, than well becomes the duty of a
good Subject.

To which the Bishop replied, That as concerning the Letters which had passed
between him and Sir Thomas Moor, he wish^d with all his heart they were now to
be read; which if they were (said he) they would declare more innocence than
hurt on our behalf, most of them being only friendly salutations, and
encouragements to patience. Indeed I was a little curious (knowing the great
learning and profound w^t that is in the man) to know what answer he had made
to the questions which were asked him concerning the Statute, which answers he
sent unto me, as I had sent unto him mine: And this is all the conspiracy that
was between us, upon that conscience which I suffer for, and will suffer ^
thousand deaths, before ever it shall be called upon by me to justify the
least untruth: And whereas you tell me, that his Majesty will be much
displeased with me for this doubtful kind of answer: truly, my Lords, no man
shall be more sorry for the Kings displeasure, than he that tells you he is
s^rry to displease the King: but when the case so stands, that (in speaking) I
cannot please him, except I displease Almighty God, I hope his M^j^sty will be
well satisfied with my silence.

Then said Mr. Cromwell, Wherein do you (more than other men, who have
satisfi^d the Kings desires herein) think you shall displ^ase Almighty God?
Because (said the B^sh^op) I know how my own conscience dictates to me but do
not how another may inform him. If your conscience be so settled, said my Lord
Chancelour, I doubt not but you can give us some good reasons for it. Ind^e^ my
Lord (said the Bishop) I think I am able to give your Lordships reasons that
p^rhaps may seem sufficient why my conscience stands affected as it does and
could be well contented that you hear them, could I declare my mind with
safety, and without offense unto his Majesty, and his Laws. After which not a
word more was spoken for that time; but calling for the Lieutenant, they
re-delivered him unto his custody, giving the Lieutenant a strict charge that
no further conference, or messages, should pass between him and Sir Thomas
Moore, or any other*

All which being related to the King upon their return to Court, the King
swore they were all fools, and asked them if there were not more ways to the
wood than one: they told his Majesty that they had tried all the wai^s that
they could find or think upon, advising his Majo to send some of his own Coat
unto him, to persuade him further, as thinking it more proper for them: but the
King swore Mother of God, both Moore and he should take the Oath, or he would
know why they should not, and they should make them do it, or he would see
better reasons why they could not; wishing them to see his face no more, until
it were done.

CHAP. XXI.
1. The notable slights which the Council used to procure the two Prisoners
(Fisher and Moore) to take the Oath. 2. The King sends the most grave and
learned Bishops unto him. 3. How the Bishops Man set upon his Master to
persuade him, after such time as the Bishops were gone, and could not pr^vaile
with him. 4. Bishop Fisher is created Cardinal by Paul the third, Pope of
Rome. 5. The Cardinals Hat was sent as far as Callis. 6. The King sends to
stop it from coming any further.

THe Lords were by this time put to their trump^, and to use their wits, how
they might bring this thing to pass: wherefore the next morning they sent for
Sir Thomas Moore to come to Court, and after they had kept them there three
houre^ waiting upon them, they admitted him into their presence, and causing
the Door to be close shut, they discoursed with him about half an hour, the
main subject of the discourse being to persuade him to conformity, and
compliance with the King in these demands, and to assure him how gracio^sly
(thereupon) he should be received into the Kings favor, and accustomed good
opinion of him: but all being in vain, he was de^ained in s^fe custody within
the Court, and a strict charg^ was given that he should not speak with any man
and that none should be permitted to speak to him. This being done, it was
given out, that Sir Thomas Moor had taken the O^th, so that all men believed
it. This done, they sent for the Bishop of Rochester the same day, and urged
him very sor^ly to take the Oath of Supremacy, saying, that he (resting himself
wholly upon Sir Thomas Moore, by whose persuasion he stood out so st^fly
against the King) had now no reason but to do as he had done, who showing him
now the way, they all exp^cted him to do no otherw^se than to fo^low the good
example which he had given him, and be received unto the like grace and favor
with the King, as his fellow-prisoner was at that time received: the good
Bishop hearing as much before, and now those Lords justifying as much as he had
heard, believed no less, an^ seemed to be much troubled thereat, and sorrowful
for his sake; ^ut in the end, he thus spoke unto the Lords, My Lords, I
confess I am a little perplexed at that which you now tell me, which is no
more than what I have heard already am exceeding sorrowful that that courage
should row be wanting to him which I once thought never would have failed him
and that constancy had not been an addition to all his other great and singular
virtues: But I am not a fit man to blame him, in regard I was never assaul^^d
with those strong temptations (...) of and childr^^n) the which, it (...)
lodgings; and it was likewise given out, that the Bishop had subscribed to, and
taken the oath of Supremacy, and that he was then conducted to the King to
kiss his hand.

In this interim, it happened that Mrs. Margaret Roper, (the darling daughter to
Sir Thomas Moore, one that had much access unto the Lords by reason of her
great friends and manifold perfections) was at the same time at the Council
door, with a Petition in her hand, thinking to deliver it unto the Lords in
the behalf of her Father, to procure him more enlargement within the Tower,
than what he formerly had enjoyed; and hearing of her Fathers being there, was
resolved to inform her self of the event of that days Conference; which the
Lord Chancellor Audely perceiving, and knowing her business, went out unto
her, and thus thought to persuade how the daughters thimble might prick a
needle into the fathers conscience, viz. Mrs. Roper, I am sorry I can do you
no more service, in that which you so earnestly solicit in your fathers
behalf: truly Mrs. Roper your father is to blame to be so obstinate, and
self-willed, in a business wherein no man in the whole Realm stands out but
only he, and a blind Bishop, and yet that bishop was not so blind, but at
the la^^, with much ado, we have brought him to see his own error; with that
Mrs. Margaret gave a spring for joy, and asked him, Are you sure that my Lord
of Rochester has taken the Oath? Yes, said the Lord Chancellor; and more than
that, he is now with the King, and you will see him at liberty, and in great
favor with the King; then I will warrant you, said the poor Gentlewoman, that
my Father will not hold out: Go, said the Lord Chancelour, and persuade your
Father (that he do not) before he be brought before us; for I wish him well,
and it is a great pity that such a man as he should be cast away. Away goes
Mrs. Margaret to her father, but could not be admitted to speak with him; back
she comes to the L. Chan. and procures his warrant of admittance: in she comes
unto her father, and tells him all that she heard with a great deal of
confidence; when her father had heard all that she would say, he only answered
her with a soft voice, peace daughter, my L. of Rochester has not taken the
Oath: yes indeed father, it is so, said his daughtter, for my L. Chancellor told
me as much with his own mouth, who wishes you well, and my L. of Rochest. is
at liberty, and is now with the K. and in great favor: Away, away, you fool,
said Sir Tho: Moore, thou are not used to these s^^ights, I know the tricks of
them all, they think to take me in a Poppet snatch, but they are deceived; and
I tell thee more, if the Bishop had taken the Oath, yet it should never be
taken by me: A Bishop is a correcter of Vice, but no president for Sin. After
they had had much talk to this, and no purpose, Sir Thomas Moore was sent for
to appear before the Lords, where he was no sooner entered the Room, but they
all called upon him to do as my Lord of Rochester had done before him; all of
them using no other arguments, but my Lord of Rochester, my Lord of Rochester,
as my Lord of Rochester had showed him a good example; Sir Thomas Moor asked
them where my Lord of Rochester was? saying, that if he could but speak with my
Lord of Rochester, it may be his motives might induce him to take the Oath;
they told him that my L. of Roch. was where he might also be, viz. with the
King, if that he would do but as he has done: May I not speak with him, said
Sir Thomas Moor, before I take this Oath? They answered, that he should speak
with him as soon as ever he had taken it, but to speak with him before, was not
so proper, because then it would be said he pinned his judgment upon another
sleeve, neither would they wish him to desire it, in regard that the King would
then have cause to thank the Bishop, and not him, for such his condescension;
and besides, that would be too great a sl^ghting of us that are here, in that
you will not take our words for such a business: I pray you then, said Sir
Thomas Moore, let me see his hand, if he have subscr^bed: That said the
Chancelour, is carried also with him to the King: Then let me tell you, said
Sir Thomas Moore, that I do not believe that my Lord of Rochester has either
subscribed his hand, or taken the Oath; and if he had done both, I could do
neither. Whereupon they were both sent back to the Tower.

The King (seeing these engines would not hold) betook himself to the advice
which the Lords had formerly given him, and he re^used to take, viz. of sending
unto him men of his own Coat, to persuade with him in this business;
wherefore he sent for Dr. Stokesly Bishop of London; St^phen Gardener Bishop of
Winchester; Dr. Tunstall Bishop of Durham, and commanded them to repair
immediately unto their Brother of Rochester, and see what they could do, and
see they did it; for he would have it done. These men (knowing there was no
mercy to be had, if they did not do their uttermost endeavor, at the least to
give the King all manner of satisfaction herein) went to the Tower and dealt
heartily with the Bishop in that business.

But before I will tell you what answer the Bishop made unto their
importunities therein (that you may the better know the miseries of those
times) you shall first understand that these very men (after that this good man
was dead and rotten) perceiving this Supremacy to exercise its authority more
and more, until at last it came to alteration of their Religion in point of
Doctrine) would often weep most bitterly, and careless of themselves, w^sh
that they had stuck to their Brother Fisher, and not to have left him wholly to
^^mself, as wickedly they did, and not only so, bu^ they would preach the same
openly in their Pulpits, and upon all other occasions, and times of meeting,
and that before the Lords of the (...), and sometimes in the Kings hearing,
which d^^w great commiseration from their hearers, and at last the King
himself to serious animadversions of what he had (...), and at last to a
rectification of what he (...) he had done amiss, by his (...) enjoy^^g of the
six maine Articl^s of (...) R^lig^on (which these Bishops (...)) to be
propounded unto al^ his Subjects and to be subscribed unto, in which Religion
the K. died, and in the reign of K. E^w. 6. (when (...) Supremacy was held in a
(...) over a child's head, being then (...) before the Kings Commissioners, and
(...) urged to proceed according to the fruits of those times) they did not
only recant their former doings, but suffered themselves to be d^prived of so
great dignities, and to endure the same prison, where, for the space of five
years, they had no other comfort but the expectation of that Martyrdom, which
might be an expiation to them of those errors, which fear and worldly vanity,
had caus^d them to run into; which resignation of themselves so willingly into
the hands of Almighty God, was answered with a me^cy, which restored them unto
their former liberties, dignities, and honors, in the beginning of the reign
of Qu. Mary. But to return to my former story.

When the^e men had persuaded the good Bishop all they could, to do what their
own conscience tol^ them should not have been done, the good B^sh^p made them
this reply.

My Lords, (...) not (...) me so much to be urged so sorely ^n a (...) of this
nature* as it does wound me grievously that I should be urged by you, whom it
concerns as much as (...) I (...) but defend your cause, whiles you so plead
against your selves; it would (...) become us all to stick together in
repressing the violences and injuries, which daily are obtruded upon our holy
mother the Catholic Church, whom we have all in common, than thus divided
amongst our selves to help on the mischief: but I see judgment is begun at the
house of God; and I see no hope, if we fall, that the rest will stand; you see
we are besieged on every side, and the fort is betrayed by those who should
defend it: and since We have made no better resistance. We are not the men that
shall see an end of these calamities: wherefore I pray leave me to Almighty
god, in whom only there is comfort, which no man can deprive me of; and for
that you have so often told me of the Kings heavy displeasure agasnst me, I
pray remember my duty to his Grace, and tell him, I had rather exercise the
duty that I owe unto his Grace, in praying for him, than in pleasing him in
this kind. So they departed from him with heavy hearts, and fad countenances,
and never came unto him any more.

Within a while after, that the Bishops were thus gone, the poor fellow (his
man) that waited upon him, being somewhat simple, and hearing all the
discourse, began to take his Master in hand, thinking he had not got reason
enough to speak thus unto his Lord and Master, Alas my Lord, why should you
stick (said he) with the King, more than the rest of the Bishops, which are
learned and godly men? Doubt ye not he requires no more of you, but only that
you would say he is Head of the Church; and methinks that is no great matter;
for your Lordship may still think as you please: whereat the Bishop fell into
such a fit of laughter, that he little thought he sh^^ld have laughed so much
so long as he had a day to live: but the man taking courage at this, began to
prosecute his begun discourse in a manner which he thought more serious, which
the Bishop cut short with this composure of jest and e^rnest, Tush, tush, thou
art but a fool, and knows but little what belongs to this business; but
hereafter thou may know more. Alas poor fellow, I know thou love me, and
speak this out of simplicity and love together; but I tell thee, it is not
only for the Supremacy that I am thus tossed and tumbled* but also for another
Oath (meaning the Oath of Succession) which if I would have sworn unto, I
believe I should never have been much questioned for the Supremacy; nor is it
for these two that I stand out, but for the ensuing evils, that must
necessarily follow hereupon: And this thou may say another day thou have
heard me speak. when I am dead and gone.

Upon the 21. of May, and in the year of our Lord 1535: Paul the third, Pope
of Rome (hearing the fame of this good Bishops constancy, and sufferings, in
defense of the Catholic Church) at the solemn creation of Cardinals in Rome,
in the first year of his consec^ation (among diverse other worthy and famous
men) he nominated this good Bishop Fisher for one that should be made a
Cardinal, where, upon the same day before specified, he also was entitled,
Sanct. To. Ecclesiae tituli Sancti vit. pretriter Cardinalis. This the Pope did
for his great worth, and merits sake, thinking that by reason of the dignity
and advancement of so high a degree of eminence, that either the King would use
him with more clemency for his dignity sake, or else that he might thereby heap
further trouble and danger upon the King, if notwithstanding that dignity, he
continued such his displeasure against him: and this was it that clean threw
him over the perch, and brought him a fiery chariot to his journies end,
whirled by all the furious winds of rage and madness; for upon the sending of
the Cardinals Hat to him from Rome, which was intended to have been p^rformed
with the greatest ceremony that ever any Hat was sent from thence (taking no
notice of the condition he was in) whereby it was conceived, that the King
would reflect within himself, and take some heed how he offended so great a
body as had the Universe for its Dimension: but it fell out otherwise, for
Harry the 8. (for all the other Kings were called Henry's) with his dagger, was
resolved to go thorough^ stitch with what he had begun; wherefore, as soon as
ever he had intelligence hereof, he sent immediately to Callis to stop the
favor of the Pope, from coming any further into his Dominions, until his
pleasure therein was further known, which was done accordingly.

CHAP. XXII.
1. The K. sends his Secretary to the Bp. to know of him, that in case the Pope
should send unto him a Cardinals Hat, whether he would accept of it, or not.
2. The Bishops answer thereunto. 3. The King highly offended with his answer.
4. A notable, but most wicked policy, to entrap the Bishop within Delinquency.
5. A Commission to enquire and determine Treasons. 6. Three Monks of the
Charter House executed.

IMmediately hereupon, the King sent Mr: Thomas Cromwell his Secretary, to this
good Father, thus in prison, to advertise him what was done, and to hear what
he would say thereto; who (being come into the Prisoners chamber) after some
other conference had passed between them, concerning diverse other businesses,
he said unto him, My Lord of Rochester, what would you say if the Pope should
send you a Cardialls Hat, would you accept of it? whereat the Bishop of
Roch^ster replied, Sir I know my self to be so far unworthy of any such
dignity, that I think of nothing less; but if any such thing should happen,
assure your self I should improve that favor to the best advantage that I
could, in assisting the holy Catholic Church of Christ, and in that respect I
would receive it upon my knees.

Mr. Cromwell making a report of this answer (afterward) to the King, the King
said with great indignation, Yea, Is he yet so lusty? Well, let the Pope send
him a Hat when he will, Mother of God he shall wear it on his shoulders then,
for I will leave him never a head to set it on.

And now was this impregnable piece of Constancy, and strong so ^ of I^nocence,
surrounded on every side, by the most watchful eyes, and diligent enquiry, how
a breach may be made into it by the battery of the new Law, for prejudice to
enter. In order to which Machination it was resolved upon (after that the
blessed man had continued a prisoner (within the Tower) the space of a whole
year, and somewhat more) that one Mr. Richard Rich (then Solicitor general,
and a man in great trust about the King) should be sent unto the Bishop, as
from the King, upon some secret message, to be imparted to him on his Majesty's
behalf; which Message was to this effect, viz. that he had a great secret to
impart unto him from the King, which was a case of Conscience; for, said he,
the truth is, my Lord, that though you are looked upon (as you now look upon
your self) as a man utterly forlorn, yet I must tell you, and not as from my
self, but as a thing uttered to you by the Kings express commands, that there
is no man within the Kings dominions, that he looks upon, as a more able man,
or a man upon whose honesty and upright dealings he will more rely, than on
your self, and what you shall be pleased to say in that b^halfe; wherefore he
bids me tell you, that you should speak your mind boldly and freely unto me,
as to himself, concerning the busin^sse of Supremacy, protesting upon his
royal word, and the dignity of a King, that if he should tell him plainly it
were unlawful, he would never undertake it: And one thing more (said he) he
wished me to acquaint you with, which is, that you may see how far his royal
heart, and pious inclination, is from the exercise of any unjust or illegal
jurisdiction thereby, that if you will but acknowledge his Supremacy, you your
self shall be his Vicar general over his whole Dominions, to see that nothing
shall be put in execution, but what shall be agreeable both to the (...) of
God, and good men's liking: (...) (says he) the K. thinks that whiles (...)
people acknowledge any other Head besides himsel^^, his Crown ^its not safe
nor rightly upon his own: Wherefore I pray, my Lord, since the King has been
so (...) pleased to open his breast unto you in these particulars, that you
will answer the respect with an ingenuity that shall be (...) to such high
favor, and that without any the least suspicion of any ^raud or guile intended
to your good Lordship, either by him or me.

The poor Bishop thinking he had assurance enough in conscience, when for
Conscience Sake his opinion was required in such and such matters, answered
thus freely.

Worthy Sir, As to those high Commendations which his MAJESTY (by your own
mouth) is pleased to give me, I think them higher than what deservedly can
stoop so low to take into due consideration; so mean worth as that which every
one must look to find, that makes true search into me; however, according to
the ability and faithfulness which is resident in this poor piece of earth, I
shall answer freely, and without fear of any other intentions toward me, than
what is just and honorable.

As to the business of Supremacy I must needs tell his Majesty, as I have
often told him heretofore, and would so tell him, if I were to die this present
hour, that it is utterly unlawful; and therefore I would not wish his Majesty
to take any such power or title upon him, as he loves his own soul, and the
good of his posterity; for it will be such a president as none will follow,
whiles all will wonder at it, and will never leave this Land till it lies
bu^ied with the first power that first assumed it: And to what purpose were it
to make me his Vicar general of his whole Dominions, to see that nothing were
done contrary to the Laws of God, when nothing is more contrary to Gods Law,
than that I should be so?

And as to his Majesty's conception of his Crown, not sitting rightly upon his
head, whiles his people (as so many half Subjects) own any other head besi^e
himself; I must tell you, my Lord, that such a kind of headship is no more
prejudicial to the temporal Supremacy, than judgment (which is the top of
the soul) is inconvenient to the intellects: for I must tell you (my Lord)
there were never any greater stays, or supporters to any Crown, than were your
English Catholics all along unto the Crown of England, and that even against
all, or any the least encroachment offered or attempted to be made, even by the
Bishop of Rome himself, Stat. King Rich. 2.
as you shall find in the Statute Laws of King Richard the second, where you
shall find (in many businesses wherein the Pope of Rome himself was
interessed) the Roman Catholics flatly denying the Crown of England (which
they averred stoutly immediately to be subject unto none but God, and to other
in all things touching the regality of the said Crown) to be subject to the
Pope of Rome, and yet the very same Parliament (said the Bishop) at the same
time acknowledged the Bishop of Rome (in respect of his spiritual
jurisdiction) to be their most holy Father. And

This the Author assures the Reader to be taken notice of by Bishop Bilso^, ^.
Bills. in his true difference between Christian and Antichri^^ian Rebellion.
part 3. page 243. 244.
where he brings in this Parliament (consisting then altogether of Roman
Catholics) thus expressing their loyalti^^ to their Sovereign Prince, viz. We
will be with our said Sovereign Lord the King, and his said Crown, and his
R^gality in cases aforesaid, and in all other cases attempted against him, his
Crown and Dignity, in all points to live and di^.

Nor will I only bring in your Protestant Bishops, but also your Protestant
Chronologies of latest Editions averring the same, viz. Holinshead, Hol. in his
second volume of the last edition, p^ 309. b. line 66.
where you may find how in the reign of King Edward the first, all the Lords
(then Catholics, assembled a^ Lincoln in Parliament, in the name of all the
Estates) did answer the Pope's right to judge etc. viz. that they would not
consent that their King should do any thing that should tend to the
disinh^riting of the right of the Crown of England, Holins. ib. page 310. line
2.
and that it was never known (wherefore never practiced) that the King of this
Land had answered, or ought to answer, for their Rights in the same Realm,
before any Judge, Ecclesiastical, or Secular. And

Yet notwithstanding all this, in their special Letter writ to the same Pope (
Boniface) at the same time they thus wrote unto him.

Boniface, Ibid. p. 30. a. line 11.
by Gods providence, high Bishop of the holy Roman, and universal Church,
styling themselves his devout Sons, where (notwithstanding all this) it
consisted with their Devotion, further, to affirm, that the King of England
ought not to answer for any of their Rights in the said Realm, or for any of
their Temporalties before any Judge Ecclesiastical, by reason of the free
pre-eminence of the Estate of the Royal Dignity, and Custom kept without
breach at all times, and after full treaty and deliberation, Ibid. page 310. a.
l. 11.
it was consistent likewise with their devotion, to make it their common
argument and unanimous consent Ibid. page 310. a. l. 14.
(which agreement they said should be without fail in time to come) that their
foresaid Lord the King, Ibid. page 311. a. l. 2.
ought not by any means, to answer in judgment, nor send any Proctors to the
Popes presence; Ibid. page 311. a. l. 9.
especially seeing that the premises tended manifestly to the disinheriting of
the Crown of England, and also to the hurting of the Liberties and Laws of
their Fathers, and the duties of their Oath made, which (said they) we will
maintain with all our power, and defend with all our strength, and will not
suffer our foresaid Lord the King, to do or attempt the premises, being so
unaccustomed, and before not heard of.

Nor will we only bring you your own Chronicles, Annotations upon the R^^m.
(...). cap. 13. 2. An. in 1 Pet. cap. 2. 13.
but our own Annotations upon our own Testaments, where you shall find
Catholics acknowleging themselves bound in conscience to obey their Emperors
and Governors, though they were Heathens and Persecutors.

Our greatest Champions, Bell. li. de ^aic^s. c. 10. and 11.
where you shall find Bellarmine himself maintaining how that the Laws of
Magistrates do bind even the consciences of Christians.

Our strict^st Casuists, of Dr. Keilison in his Survey printed 1603. p. 480.
where you shall find them averring how that Faith is not necessary to
Jurisdiction, and that Authority cannot be lost by the loss of Faith.

Your own Protestant Apology for the Church of Rome, Tract. 3. sect. 5. written
by I. Brer^ly An. 1608.
though writ by us, yet made by you, where you shall find the Roman Catholics
acknowledging themselves indissolubly bound by all Laws (Humane and Divine) in
the highest degree of all earthly Allegiance, to the present temporal
Government, notwithstanding at the same time, the Magistracy was adverse unto
them in matters of Religion, and heavy upon them by reason of the same.

Our own submissions and protestations (in the vindication of our Loyalty to
the temporal Magistrate) as the declared will of God in that behalf, where you
shall find us quoting all these several texts of Scripture out of the Word of
God, to the same purpose, Exo. 22, 28
how that we ought not to speak evil of our Governors, Act. 23. 5.
though they should perscecute us, Eccl. 10. 20
nor so much as to think amiss of them, Romans 13. 2.
but to be subject to them, Romans 13. 5.
and that not only for necessity, but for conscience sake, lest otherwise we
should be damned.

Where should a man find better Subjects? and yet these are the men who have
been traduced all along, as inconsistent with politic Government. And why
should the same Loyalty be suspected at any time, still to remain within the
same breasts, since that their Religion, Laws, (both Civil and
Ecclesiastical) Custom, Provision for the future, present Practice, Oaths
and Protestations, all along, evermore obliging them to such Obedience,
especially whereas at this present, all other sorts and sects of christian
Religion (excepting those who are for all sorts and sects) appear against the
present Government, like Aries, Scorpio, Leo, Sagitarius, etc. as if they would
all, and every one of them, wound each part and member of this body politic;
the Roman Catholics, like Pisces (the Emblem of the Fisherman) are contented
to remain quiet under foot.

And this digression from the Subject we have in hand, I have presumed to make,
whereby the courteous Reader may be more cour^eous, if he please, to Roman
Catholics, seeing they have no such ugly features in their faces, as their
adversaries would have them have, when the vizards are taken off, which they
have clapped upon their faces; and therefore let not (hereafter) a few
discolored, powder-spi^ited, and inconsiderate men (among so many thousands
(of the same Religion, and better quality) that were then ignorant of, and
afterward detesting the design as diabolical) blow up a whole cause, so
universal, or contract any tragical, or immoderate application, for some
few's sake, against the whole, any more than equity her self shall think it
reason, that one Devil shall be able to prejudice the dignity of the twelve
Apostles, since that there has not been all along (which way soever the
Government was adicted to one or other Religion) more faithful, peaceable, and
loyal Subjects, than were the Roman Catholics excepting an exception which
makes, but never marres a general rule.

What if this good Bishop had lived to see how in the days of Queen Elizabeth,
when she first took ^upon her the government of this Land (although that
Catholics were then the chiefest Ministers, both in Church and State, and had
(at that time) the government of both settled in that course, and therefore
questionless were sufficient to have used any indirect, or sorcible means, if
such kind of loyalty had been consistent with their Religion, to have impugn^d
that alteration in Religion, then evidently foreseen to ensue) how the
Catholic Bishops (although she was a Princess of a contrary Religion) were
so far from holding their crosirers over, Hol. vol 3. An. Eliz. 26. p. 1358
Ib. p. 1360. b. line 26. Ib l. 26. Ib. l. 35. Ib. l. 40.
that they set the Crown upon her head (insomuch) that they are commended by
Holinsheaa for peaceable and quiet Bishops) and the Catholic and temporal
Lord there by him recorded to be so far from opposing themselves against her
interest, Ib. l. 53. 54. etc.
as that they are there said to offer her Majesty in her defense to impugn
and resist any foreign force, though it should come from the Pope himself,
insomuch that they (also) are there commended by Holinshead himself for Loyalty
and Obedience, and had seen how the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, himself,
Holi^s. ubi supra, p. 1170. 2. l. 35. 36.
and Chancellor of England (a Catholic Bishop) how instead of inveighing
against her, or casting forth Libells against her Authority (as Archbishop
Cranmer did against Queen Mary, her entrance into the Government) he made a
public oration in her behalf, to persuade the people to Obedience, and
acknowledge of her Highness just Power and Authority, insomuch that the said
Archbishops faithfulness was left to the commendation of a Protestant Bishop,
Goodwin in his Catalogue of Bishops.
adverse to him in his Religion, how all the Catholic Lords, and Catholic
Bishops, repaired with all speed to London, to proclaim her Queen, Hol. ubi
supra, p. 1170. l. 15*
who not long after, turned them all out of their several Offices and
Bishoprics. And

On the contrary, how when Qu. Mary was to be invested in her right, As the
Suffolk people, S^ow in his Annals. p. ^ 1046.
Protestants would not receive her as their Queen, but upon Conditions; nor
assist her without Indentures; nor acknowledge her but upon such and such
terms; S^ow An* printed 1592. p. 1039. and 1045.
how War was waged against her by the Duke of Northumberland, a Protestant
Duke; bills spread abroad, and several treacherous practices contrived against
her, and her Right and Dignity, Stow. An. p. 1046.
by Archbishop Cranmer, a Protestant Archbishop (for which he was afterward
arraigned and condemned of high Treason) what great commotions and
insurrections were made against her by Wiat upon the score of Religion; Stow.
An. p. 1047.
how Towns and Castles were taken and held out against her by Stafford; Stow.
ubi supra, page 1039. p. 1058.
how daggers were thrown at, and gunnes shot off, at the Priests of her
Religion, whiles they were preaching at Paul's Cross, insomuch that it is
notorioslny evident, that there were more open Rebellions during the five years
of her short government, than during the four and forty years of her late
Majesty's after-reigne, and yet these, and such like men as these, are
accounted Martyrs, whiles we only suffered Martyrdom.

Had this good Bishop, I say, lived to have seen, and to have observed all
these particulars, how much more able would he have been to have answered
Master Rich his Objection (from his Majesty) concerning the inconsistency of
the Pope of Rome's spiritual, with his temporal Supremacy; but now both the
Fish and the F^sher himself, is caught within the Net that was laid for him;
for Mr. Rich was no sooner departed from him, but immediately after the King
commanded a Commission to be drawn, and given to Mr. Audely his Lord
Chancellor, and certain other persons commissionated under his great Seal,
to enquire and determine Treasons; which Commission was dated the first day of
June, in the 27. year of the Kings reign, against which time the Kings
learned Council, among the rest, had drawn up an Indictment of high Treason
against the Bishop of Rochester, and three Monks of the Charter House of
London, whose names were William Exmew, Humphrey Midlemore, and Schastian
Nudigate. This Indictment was not long in finding; for on St. Barnaby's day
(the Apostl^) being the 11. of June; it was presented to the Commissioners
sitting in the Kings Bench at Westminster: whereupon the Carthusians were
shortly after arraigned, and condemned; and having sentence of high Treason
pronounced upon them, they were all three put to death at Tyburne, the 19. day
of June next following, all in their Religious habits.

But this good Bishop of Rochester (now Cardinal, if it be lawful to call him
so) chanced at that time to be very sick, insomuch that he had likely to have
saved the Commissioners, and diverse others a great deal of pains, which
afterward they bestowed upon him, and it is conceived would willingly have
spared, wherefore the King sent unto him his own Physicians to administer unto
him, to his great charges (as I have it in my Record) to the value of fifty
pounds, only that he might be e^served for fu^ther ^riall. In the mean time,
lest any conveyance might be made of his good remaining at Roch^^ter, or
elsewhere in Kent, the King sent one Sir Richard Morison of his Privy chamber,
and one Gostwick together with diverse other Commissioners, down into that
Country, to make seizure of all his moveable goods that they could find
there; who being come unto Rochester, according to their Commission entered his
house, and the first thing which they did, they turned out all his Servants,
then they fell to rifling his goods, whereof the chief part of them were taken
for the Kings use, the rest they took for themselves; then they came into his
Library, which they found so replenished, and with such kind of Books, as it
was thought the like was not to be found again in the possession of any one
private man in Christendom; with which they ^russed up, and filled 32. great
fats, or pipes, besides those that were imbezel'd away, spoiled, and scattered;
and whereas many years before he had made a deed of gift of all these books,
and other his housholdstuffe, to the College of St. Iohne in Cambridge (as in
the beginning of this History it was mentioned) two frauds were committed in
this tr^spasse; the College were bereaved of their gif^, and the Bishop of his
purpose, yet both found out a way, through gratitude, to a reception; for the
College accepted the good will for the deed, and the Almighty received the
giver for his good will: and whereas a sum of money of 3001. was given by a
Predecessor of the Bishop, to remain as a D^positum for ever to the said See
of Rochester, in the custody of the Bishop for the time being, against any
occasion that might happen to the Bishopric; to which this good Bishop had
added one hundred pounds out of his own purse, with this inscription upon a
labell which hung out at the bags mouth, Tu quoque fac simile, and
notwithstanding* that there was there written, in an old character upon the
inside of the Chest, Let no man offer to lay hands on this, for it is the
Churches Treasure: yet they swept it all away. And

I cannot omit (as a Scaene of mirth in this sad Tragedy) to relate unto you
one merry passage, which happened in this quaerendum, There was a wooden coffer
strongly girded about with hoops of iron, and double l^cked, which stood in his
Oratory, where commonly no man came but himself, for it was his secret place of
Prayer. This Coffer thus fenced about, and in so private a place, and close
unto him, every man believed verily that some great Treasure had been stored up
in that same Coffer, wherefore, because no indirect dealing might be used in
defrauding the King in a matter of so great cons^quence a^ this was thought to
be, wherefore witnesses were solemnly called to be present, so the Coffer was
broken up before them, and much pains was taken in ^breaking up the Coffer;
but when it was open, they found within it, instead of gold and silver, which
they looked for, a shirt of hair, and two or three whips, wherewith he used
full often to punish himself, as some of his Chaplaine^ and Servants have often
reported, that were near about him, and curiously marked his doings; and other
treasure than that found they none at all. But when report was made to him in
his prison of the opening of that coff^r, he was very sorry for it, and said,
that if have had not made him forget that, and many things else, ^^ose things
had not been to be found there at that time.

After this good Bishop was recovered to some better strength, by the help of
his Physicians, and that he was more able to be carried abroad, he was on
Thursday the 17. of June, brought to the Kings Bench at Westminster, from the
Tower, with a huge number of Holberts, Bills, and other weapons, about him, and
the Ax of the Tower born before him with the edge from him, as the manner is;
and because he was not yet so well recovered that he was able to walk by land
all the way on foot, he rode part of the way on horseback in a black cloth
gown, and the rest he was carried by water, for that he was not well able to
ride thorough for weakness. As soon as he was come to Westminster, he was
there pres^nted at the Bar before the said Commissioners, being all set ready
in their places against his coming, whose names were these, Sir Thomas Audely
Knight, Lord Chancellor of England* Charles Duke of Suffolk, H^nry Earl of
Comberland, Thomas Earl of Wiltshire, Thomas Cromwell Secretary, Sir John
Fitz. James Chief Justice of England, Sir John Baldwin Chief Justice of the
Commonpleas, Sir William Pawlet, Sir Richard Lyster Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, Sir John Port, Sir John Spilman, and Sir Walter late Justices of the
Kings Bench, and Sir Anthony Fitzherbert one of the Justices of the
Commonpleas. Being thus presented before these Commissi^ners, he was commanded,
by the name of John Fisher late of Rochester, Clerk, otherwise called John
Fisher Bishop of Rochester, to hold up his hand, which he did, with a most
cheerful countenance and rare constancy: then was his Indictment read, which
was very long and full of words; but the effect of it was thus, that he
maliciously, treacherously, and fals^ly, had said these words, The King our
sovereign Lord, is not Supreme head in the earth, of the Church of England:
and b^ing read to the end, it was asked him, whether he was guilty of this
Treason, or no? whereunto he pleaded, Not guilty. Then was a Jury of twelve men
(being Freeholders of Middlesex) called to try this Issue, whose names were
these, Sir Hugh Vaughan Knight, Sir Walter Langford Knight, Thomas Burbage,
John Nudygate, William Brown, John Hewes, Jasper Leak, John Palmer, Richard
Henry Young, Henry Lodisman, John Elrington, and George Heveningham, Esquires,
These twelve men being sworn to try whether the prisoner were guilty of this
Treason or no, at last came forth to g^ve evidence against him Mr Rich, the
secret and close Messenger that passed between the King and him, as ye have
read before, who openly, in the presence of the Judges, and all the people
there assembled, deposed and swore, that he heard the Prisoner say in plain
words, within the Tower of London, that he believed in his conscience, and by
his learning he assuredly knew, that the King neither was, nor by right, could
be Supreme head in earth of the Church of Engl. When this blessed Father heard
the accusations of this most wretched and false person, contrary to his former
oath and promise, he was not a little astonished thereat; wherefore he said to
him in this menner: Mr. R^ch, I cannot but mervaile to hear you come in, and
bear witness against me of these words, knowing in what secret manner you
came to me; but suppose I so said unto you, yet in that saying I committed no
Treason; for upon what occasion, and for what cause it might be said, your self
does know right well, and therefore being now urged (said he) by this occasion,
to open somewhat of this matter, I shall desire, my Lords, and others here, to
take a little patience in hearing what I shall say for my self.

This man ( meaning Mr. Rich) came to me from the King, as he said, on a secret
message with commendations from his Grace, declaring at large what a good
opinion his Majesty had of me, and how sorry he was of my trouble, with many
more words than are here needful to be recited, because they tended so much to
my praise, as I was not only ashamed to hear them, but also knew right well
that I could no way deserve them; at last he broke with me of the matter of the
Kings Supremacy, lately granted unto him by Act of Parliament, to the which he
said, although all the Bishops in the Realm have consented, except your self
alone, and also the whole Court of Parliament, both spiritual and temporal,
except a very few; yet he told me, that the King, for better satisfaction of
his own conscience, had sent him unto me in this s^cret manner, to know my
full opinion in the matter: for the great aff^^nce he had in me more than any
other: he ad^ed further, that if I would herein frankly and freely advertise
his Maj. my knowledge, that upon certificate of my misliking, he was very like
to retract much of his former doings, and make satisfaction for the same, in
case I should so advertise him: when I had heard all his message, and
considered a little upon his words, I put him in mind of the new Act of
Parliament, which standing in force as it does against all them that shall
di^^ctly say, or do any thing that is against it, might thereby ^ndanger me
very much, in case I should utter unto him any thing that were offensive
against the Law: to that he told me, that the King willed him to assure me on
his honor, and in the word of a King, that whatever I should say unto him by
this his secret messenger, I should abide no danger no peril for it, neither
that any advntage should be taken against me for the same, no, although my
words were never so directly against the Statutes seeing it was but a
declaration of my mind secretly to him, as to his own person: and for the
messenger himself, he gave me his faithful promise that he would never utter
my words in this matter to any man living, but to the King alone: Now
therefore, my Lords, quoth he, seeing it pleased the Kings Majesty to send to
me thus secretly, under the pr^tence of plain and true meaning, to know my
poor advice and opinion in these his weighty and great affairs, which I most
gladly w^^ and ever will be, willing to send him in; meth^nks it is very hard
in justice to hear the m^ssengers Accusation, and to allow the same as a
sufficie^^ testimony against me in case f Treason. ^o this the messenger made
no direct answer; but (neither denying his words as false, nor confessing them
as true) said, that whatever he had said unto him on the K^^gs behalf, he said
no more than his Maj^ty commanded; and, said he, if I had said to you in such
sor^ as you have d^clared, I would gladly know what discharge this is to you in
Law against his Majesty, for so directly speaking against the Statute; whereat
some of the Judges taking quick hold one after another, said, that this
message, or promise from the King to him, neither could, nor did, by rigor of
the Law, discharge him; but in (...) claring of his mind and conscience
agai^^^ the Supremacy, yea, though it were at the Kings own commandment or
request, he committed Treason by the Statute, and nothing can discharge him
from death but the Kings pardon.

This good Father perceiving the small account made of his words, and the
favorable credit given to his accuser, might then easily ^inde in which door
the wind blew, wherefore directing his speeches to the Lords his Judges, he
said, yet I pray you my Lords consider, that by all equ^ty, justice, worldly
honesty, and courteous dealing, I cannot (as the ^ase stands) be directly
charged therewith, as with Treason, though I had spoken the words indeed, the
same being not spoken maliciously but in the way of advice and counsel, when
it was requested of me by the King himself, and that favor the very words of
the Statute do give me, being made only against such as shall maliciously
gainsay the Kings Supremacy, and none other: wherefore, although by r^gour of
Law, you may take occasion thus to condemn me, yet I hope you cannot find Law,
except you add rigor to th^^ law to cast me down, which herein I hope I have
not deserved. To which it was answered by some of the Judges, that the word
m^l^ciously is but a supe^^^^ous and void wo^d, for if a man speak against the
Kings Supremacy by any manner of means, t^a^ sp^ak^ng^^ to be understood, and
taken in Law, as (...).

My Lords, said he, if the Law be so understood, then it is a hard exposition,
and (as I take it) contrary to the meaning of the^ that made the Law. But then
let me demand this question, whether a single testimony of one man may be
admitted as sufficient to prove me guilty of treason for speaking these words,
or no? and whether my answer, Negatively, may not be accepted against his
Affirmative to my avail and benefit, or no? To that the Judges and Lawyers
answered (that being the Kings case) it rested much in conscience and
di^ecretion of the Jury, and as they, upon the evidence given before them,
shall find it, you are either to be acquitted, or else by ju^gement to be
condemned. The Jury having heard all this s^^ple Evidence, d^parted (according
to the order) into a secret place, there to agree upon the Verdict; (...) ^ore
they w^nt from the place, the case was so aggravated to them by my Lord (...),
making it so heinous and dang^rous a treason, that they easily perceived what
verdict they must return; others heap such danger upon their own heads, as
none of them were willing to undergo; some other of the Co^^^ssioners charged
this most reverend man with obstinacy and s^^gula^ity, alleging, that he being
but one man, did presumptuously stand against that which was in the great
Counsel of Parliament ag^^d upon, and finally was consented unto by all the
B^sh^ps of this Realm, saving himself alone. But to that he answered, that
indeed he might well be accounted singular, if he alone should stand in this
matter (as they said) but having on his part the rest of the Bishops in
Chr^ttendorme far surmounting the number of the Bishops of Engl. he, said they,
could not justly account him singular. And having on his part all the
Catholics and Bishops of the world from Christ's Ascension, till now, joined
with the whole consent of Christ's univer^all Church, I must needs, said he,
account mine own part far the surer: and as for O^stin^cy, which is likewise
obje^^^^ (...) me, I have no way to clear my self thereof, but my own solemn
word and promise to the contrary, if ye please to beli^ve, it, or (...), if
that will not serve, I am (...) the same by my oath. Thus in effect he answered
their obj^ctions, though with many (...) words, both wisely and profound^y
uttered, and that with a mervailous, courageous, and rare constancy, insomuch
as many of his hearers, yea some of his Judges, lamented so grievously, that
their inward sorrow in all sides, was expressed by the outward ^eares in their
eyes, to perceive such a famous and rever^nd man in danger to be condemned to
cruel death, upon so weak ^vidence given by such an accuser, contrary to all
faith and promise of the King himself. But all pity, mercy, and righ^, being
set aside, ugour, cruelty, and malice, took place; for the twelve men being
shor^ly returned from their consu^tation, Verdict was given that he was (...)
of the ^reason, which although they thus did, upon the menacing and threatening
words of the Commissioners, the Kings learned Council, yet was it (no (...))
(...) ^ore against their conscience, as some o^ them would after report, to
their dying days, only for safety of their goods and liv^s* which they were
we^l ^ssured to lose, in case they had acquitted him. After the Verdict thus
given by the twelve m^n, the Lord Chancellor commanding (...) to be kept* said
unto the Prisoner in this ^ort, My Lord of Roch^ster, you have been here
arraigned of high ^reason, and putting your self to the trial of twelv^men
you have pleaded not guilty, an^ (...) notwithstanding have found you guilty in
their (...); wherefore, if you have any more to say for your self, you are now
to be (...) Judgment according to the (...) and course of Law. Then said this
blessed Father again, Truly my Lord, if that which I have before spoken be not
sufficient, I have no more to say, but only to desire Almighty God to forgive
them that have thus condemned me, for I think they know not what they have
done. Then my L Chancellor framing himself to a solemnity in countenance,
proclaimed sentence of death upon him, in manner and form following; You shall
be led to the place from whence you came, and from thence shall be drawn
through the city to the place of execution at Tyborne, where your body shall be
hanged by the neck, half alive you shall be cut down and thrown to the
ground, your bowels to he taken out of your body before you, being alive, your
head to be smitten off, and your body to be divided into four quarters, and
after your head and quarters to be set up, where the King shall apoint; And God
have mercy upon your soul.

After the pronouncing of this cruel sertence, the Lieutenant of the Tower,
with his band of men, stood ready to receive and carry him back again to his
prison. Before his departure he desired audience of the Commissioners for a few
words, which being granted, he said thus in effect, My Lords, I am here
condemned before you of high Treason, for denial of the Kings Supremacy over
the Church of England, but by what order of Justice I l^ave to God, who is the
search^r both of the Kings Majesty's conscience and yours. Nevertheless, being
found guilty (as it is termed) I am* and must be, consented with all that God
shall send* to whose will I wholly refer and submit my self. And now to tell
you more plainly my mind, touching this matter of the Kings Supremacy, I think
indeed, and always have thought, and do now lastly affirm, that his Grace
cannot justly claim any such Supremacy over the Church of God, as he now
takes upon him, neither has it ever been seen or heard of, that any temporal
Prince, before his days, has presumed to that dignity: wherefore if the King
will now adventure himself in proceeding in this strange and unwonted case, no
doubt but he shall deeply incur the gri^vous displeasure of Almighty God, to
the great damage of his own soul, and of many others, and to the utter ruin
of this Realm, committed to his charge, whereof will ensu^ some sharp
punishment at his hand: wherefore I pray God his Grace may remember himself in
time, and hearken to good counsel, for the preserva^ion of himself and his
Realm, and the quietness of all Christendom. Which words being ended, he was
conveyed back again to the Tower of London, part on foot, and part on
horseback, with a number of men, bearing holberts and other weapons about him,
as was before at his coming to raignment: And when he was come to the Tow^r
(...) he turned him back to all his tra^^^ (...) had thus conducted him forward
and (...) and said unto them, My Master^, I thank you all for the great labor
and pains (...) with me this day, I am not able to give you any thing in
recompense, for I have nothing left; and therefore I pray you accept in good
part my hearty thanks. And this he (...) with so lu^ty a courag^, so amiable a
countenance, and with so fresh and lively a color, as he seemed rather ^o have
come from some great feast, or banquet, than from his arraignment, showing by
all his gesture, and outward countenance, nothing else but joy and gladness.

Thus being after his condemnation, the space of three or four days, in his
prison, he occupi^d himself in continual p^ayer most fervently; and although
he looked daily for death, yet could ye not have perceived him one whit
dismayed thereat, neither in word nor countenance, but still continued his
former trade of constancy and patience, and that rather with a more joyful,
cheer, and free mind than ever he had done before, which appeared well, by
this chance that I will tell you: There happened a false rumor to rise suddenly
among the people, that he should b^ brought to his execution by a certain day*
whereupon his Cook, that was wont to dres^ his dinner, and carry it daily unto
him, hearing, among others, of this Ex^cution, dressed him no dinner at all
that day, wherefore at the ^^ook's next repair unto him* he demanded the cause
why he b^ought him not his dinner as he was wont to do: Sir, said the Cook, it
was commonly talked all the town over, that you should have died that day, and
therefore I thought it but in vain to dress any thing for you. Well said he,
merrily unto him again, for all that report thou see me yet alive; and
therefore whatsoever news thou shall hear of me, hereafter let me no more
lack my dinner, but make it ready as thou art wont to do; and if thou see me
dead when thou come, then eat it thy self: but I promise thee, if I be
alive, I mind, by Gods grace, to eat never a bit the less.

Thus while this blessed Bishop lay daily expecting the hour of h^s death, the
King (who no less desired his death than himself looked for it) caused at last
a writ of Execution to be made, and brought to Sir Edmond Walsingham Lieutenant
of the Tower. Bu^ where by his Judgment at Westminster he was condemned (as ye
have read before) to Drawing, Hanging, and Quartering, as Traitors always use
to be, yet was he spared from that cruel execution, wherefore order was taken
that he should be led no further than Tower Hill, and there to have his Head
struck off.

After the Lieutenant had received this bloody writ, he called unto him
certain persons, whose service and presence was to be used in that business,
commanding them to be ready against the next day in the morning: and because
that was very late in the night, and the Prisoner asleep, he was loath to
disease him of his rest for that time; and so in the morning before five of the
clock, he came to him in his chamber in the Bell tower, finding him yet asl^ep
in his bed, and waked him, sh^wing him that he was come to him on a message
from the King, and after some circumstance used with persuasion, that he should
remember himself to be an old man, and that for age he could not, by course of
Nature, live long; he told him at last, that he was come to signify unto him,
that the Kings pleasure was he should suffer death that forenoone. Well (quoth
this blessed Father) if this be your errand, you bring me no great news, for I
have long time looked for this message; I most humbly thank his Majesty, that
it pleases him to rid me from all this worldly business, and I thank you also
for your tidings. But I pray you Mr. Li^utenant (said he) when is mine hour
that I must go hence? your hour (said the Lieutenant) must be nine of the
clock: and what hour is it now (said he?) it is now about five (said the
Lieutenant.) Well then (said he) let me, by your patience, sleep an hour or
two, for I have slept very little this night. And yet to tell you the truth,
not for any fear of Death (I thank God) but by reason of my great infirmity
and weakness. The Kings further pleasure is (said the Lieutenant) that you
should use as little speech as may be, especially any thing touching his
Majesty, whereby the people should have any cause to think of him or his
proceedings, otherwise than well: For that (said he) you shall see me order my
self, as by Gods grace, neither the King nor any man else, shall have occasion
to m^st^ke of my words. With which answer the Lieutenant departed from him, and
so the Prisoner falling again to rest, sl^p^ soundly two hours and more. And
after h^ was waked, he called to his man to help him up: but first of all he
commanded him to take away the shirt of hair (which accustomably he wore on
his back) and to convey it privlly out of the house, and instead thereof to lay
him forth a clean white sh^^^, and all the best apa^rel he had, as cleanly
brushed as may be: and as he was in arraying (...)

About nine of the Clock the Lieutenant came again to his prisoner and finding
him almost (...), said that he was come now for him. I will wait upon you
straight (said he) as fast as this thin body of mine will give me leave. Then
said he to his man, reach me my (...) ^ppet to put about my neck. O my Lord,
said the Lieutenant, what need you be so careful for your health for this
little t^me, being (as your self knows) not much above an hour? I think no
otherwise (said this blessed Father) but yet in the mean time I will keep my
self as well as I can, till the very time of my execution: for I tell you
truth, though I have (I thank our Lord) a very good desire, and a w^lling
mind, to die at this present, an^ so trust of his infinite mercy and
goodness, he will continue it, yet will I not willingly hinder my health, in
the mean^t me* one minute of an hour, but still prolong the same as long as I
can by such reasonable ways and means as Almighty God has provided f^r me.
With that taking a little book in his hand, which was a N. Test. lying by him,
he made a Cross on his forehead, and went out of (...) door with the (...),
being to weak that he was scarce able to go down stairs: wherefore at the
(...) foo^ he was taken up in a chair between two of the (...) and carried to
the Tower gate, with a great number of weapons about him to be delivered to the
Sher^ffs of London for execution. And as they were come to the uttermost
pr^cinct of the liberty of the Tower, they rested there with him a space, till
such time as one was sent before to know in what readiness the Sheriffs were
to receive him: during which space he rose out of his chair, and standing on
his feet leaded his shoulder to the wall, and lifting his eyes toward (...),
opened his little book in his hand, and said, O Lord, this is the last time
that ^ver I shall open this book, let some comfortable place now chance unto
me, whereby I thy poor servant may glorisie thee in this my last house; and
with that, looking into the book, the first thing that came to his sight were
these words, Haec est ^utem vita aeterna* ut cognoscant (...), solum verum
Deum, and quem (...) Iesum Christum. Ego te glorificavi sup^r terram, opi^us
consummavi quod dedists mihi ut faciam: Et nunc clarific^tu me, (...) apud
(...) (...) etc. and with that he shut the book together, and said, Here is
even learning enough for me to my lives end. And so the S^eriff. being ready
for him, he was taken up again among certain of the Sheriffs men, with a new*
and much greater company of weapons than was before, and carried to the
Scaffold on the Towerhill, otherwise called East-^smith^^^lt himself praying
all the way, and recording upon the words which he before had read; and when he
was come to the foot of the Scaffold, they that carried him offered to help him
up the stairs. But then (said he) nay Masters, seeing I am come so far lee
me alone, and ye shall see me shift for my self well enough, and so went up the
stairs without any help, so lively, that it was mervail^ to them th^^ knew
before of his debility and weakness; but as he was mounting up the stairs,
the South-east Sun shined very bright in his face, whereupon he said to
himself these words, lifting up his hands: Accedite ad eum, and illuminamini,
and facies vestrae non consundentur. By that time he was upon the Scaffold it
was about ten of the clock, where the Executioner being ready to do his
office, kneeled down to him (as the fashion is) and asked him forgiveness: I
forgive thee (said he) with all my heart, and I trust thou shall see me
overcome thi^ storm lustily. Then was his Gown and Tippet taken from him, and
he stood in his Doublet and Hose, in sight of all the people, whereof was no
small number assembled to see this Execution: there was to be seen a long*
lean, and slender body, having on it little other substance besides skin and
bones, insomuch as most part of the beholders mervailed much to see a living
man so far consumed, for he seemed a very Image of Death, and as it were
Death in a man's shape, using a man's voice; and therefore it was thought the
King was something cruel to put such a man to death, being so near his end,
and to kill that which was dying already, except it were for pity sake to rid
him of his pain.

When the innocent and holy Man was come upon the Scaffold, he spoke to the
people in effect as follows:

Christian people, I am come hither to die for the faith of Christ's holy
Catholic Church, and I thank God hitherto my stomach has served me very well
thereunto* so that yet I have not feared death; wherefore I desire you all to
help and assist with your prayers, that at the very point and instant of deaths
stroke* I may in that very moment stand steadfast, without fainting in any one
point of the Cathol. Faith^free from any fear. And I beseech Almighty God of
his infinite goodness, to save the King and this Realm and that it may please
him to bold his hand over it, and s^nd the King good Council.

These, or the like words he spoke, with such a cheerful countenance, such a
stou^ and constant courage, and such a reverend gravity, that he appeared to
all men, not only void of Fear, but also glad of Death. Besides this, he
uttered his words so distinctly, and with so loud and clear a voice, that the
people were astonished thereat, and noted it for a miraculous thing, to hear
so plain and audible a voice come from so weak and sickly an old body, for the
youngest man in that presence, being in good and perfect health, could not have
spoken to be better heard and perceived, than he was. Then after these few
words by him uttered, he kneeled down on both, his knees and said certain
Prayers, among which one was the Hymn of Te Deum Laudamus, to the end, and the
Psalm In te Domine Speravi. Then came the Executioner, and bound a handkercheif
about his eyes; and so this holy Father lifting up his hands and heart toward
heaven, said a few prayers which were not long, but fervent, and devout: which
being ended, he laid his head down on the middle of a little block, where the
Executioner being ready, with a sharp and heavy Ax cut asunder his slender neck
at one blow, which bled so abundantly, that many wondered to see so much blood
issu^ out of so slender and lean a body.

As concerning the Head, the Executioner put it into a bag, and carried it away
with him, meaning to have set it on the Bridge that night, as he was commanded.
The Lady Anne Bullein (who was the chief cause of this holy man's death) had a
certain desire to see the head before it was set up; whereupon, being brought
unto her, she beheld it a space, and at last, contemptuously, said these or the
like words: Is this the head that so often exclaimed against me? I trust it
shall never do no more harm: and with that, striking it upon the mouth with the
back of her hand, hurt one of her fingers upon a tooth that stuck somewhat more
out than the rest did, which finger after grew sore, and putting her to pain
many days after, was nevertheless cured at last, with much difficulty. But
after it was healed, the mark of the hurt place remained to be seen when her
own head was not to be seen upon her shoulders.

This may seem strange, as a rare example of cruel boldness in that sex, which
by nature is fearful, and cannot behold such spectacles, and therefore argues
(no doubt) a wonderful malice which she, by likelihood, bare to the holy man
living, that could thus cruelly use his head, being dead. Then the Executioner
stripping the body of his shirt and all his clothes, he departed thence,
leaving the headless carcass naked upon the Scaffold, where it remained after
that sort for the most part of that day, saving that one for pity and humanity
sake, cast a little straw over his privities; and about eight of the clock in
the evening commandment came from the Kings Commissioners to such as watched
about the dead body (for it was still watched with many halberds and weapons)
that they should cause it to be buried. Whereupon two of the watchers took it
upon a holbert between them, and so carried it to a Churchyard there hard by,
called Alh: Barkin, where on the Northside of the Church hard by the wall, they
dug a grave with their halberds, and therein, without any reverence, tumbled
the body of this holy, Prelate, all naked and flat upon his belly, without
either shirt, or other accustomed thing belonging to a christian man's burial,
and so covered quickly with earth. And this was done on the day of St. Albane
the Pro^omartyr of England, being Tuesday the 22. of June in the year of ou^
redemption 1535. and in the 27. year of the Kings reign, after he had lived
full threescore and sixteen years, nine months and odd days.

The next day after his burying, the head being parboyled, was pricked upon a
pole and set on high upon London Bridge, among the rest of the holy Carthusians
heads that suffered death lately before him. And here I cannot omit to declare
unto you the miraculous sight of this head, which after it had stood up the
space of fourteen days upon the bridge, could not be perceived to wast nor
consume, neither for the weather, which then was very hot, neither for the
parboyling in hot water, but grew daily fresher and fresher, so that in his
lifetime he never looked so well, for his cheeks being beautified with a
comely red, the face looked as though it had beholden the people passing by,
and would have spoken to them, which many took for a miracle, that Almighty God
was pleased to show above the course of nature, in this preserving the fresh
and lively color in his face, surp^ssing the color he had being alive,
whereby was noted to the world the innocence and holiness of this blessed
Father, that thus innocently was content to lose his head in defense of his
Mother, the holy Catholic Church of Christ; wherefore the people coming daily
to see this strange sight, the passage over the bridge was so stopped with
their going and coming, that almost neither cart nor horse could pass: and
therefore at the end of fourteen days this Executioner was commanded to throw
down the head in the nightime into the R^ver of Thames, and in the place
thereof was set the head of the most blessed and constant Martyr, Sir Thomas
Moore, his Companion and fellow in all his troubles, who suffered his passion
the 6. day of July next following.

And touching the place of his burial in Barkin Church yard, it was well
observed at that time by diverse worthy persons of the nations of Italy, Spain
and France, that were then abiding in the Realm, and more diligently noted and
wrote the course of things, and with less fear and suspicion then any of the
Kings subjects might or durst do, that for the space of seven years after
his burial, there grew neither leaf nor grass upon his grave, but the earth
still remained as bare as though it had been continually occupied and trodden.

When by common fame this bloody Execution was blown and spread abroad,
straight way the name of King Henry begun to grow odious among all good people,
not only in his own Realm at home, but also among all foreign Princes and
Nations abroad through Christendom, insomuch that Paul the third, then Pope of
Rome, with great grief signified these doings by several Letters to all the
Christian Princes, openly detesting the outrage of King Henry, in committing
such a wicked and manifest injury, not only against the freedom and
privilege of the Church of Rome, but also against the whole state of Christ's
universal Church, for the which, in short space after, he pronounced the
terrible sentence of Excommunication against him.

Likewise the most noble and christian Emperor Charles the fifth, at such time
as Sir Thomas Moore was beheaded, and word th^^eof brought to him, sent
speedily for Sir Thomas Eliot the Kings Ambassador, there (...) with him, and
asked him whether he heard any such news, or no; who answered him that he
heard no such thing: yes, said the Emperor, it is true, and too true, that Sir
Thomas Moore is now executed to death, as a good Bishop has lately been
before: and with that, giving a sigh, said, alas, what meant the K. to kill two
such man? for, said he, the Bishop was such a one, as for all purposes, I think
the King had not the like agai^^^ in all his R^alm, neither yet was to be
matched through Christendom, so that (said he) the King your Master has in
killing that Bishop, killed at one blow all the Bishops in England. And Sir
Thomas Moore (said he) was well known for a man of such profound wisdom,
cunning, and virtue, that if he had been toward me, as he was toward the King
your Master, I had rather have lost the best City in all my Dominion than such
a man.

And in like manner King Francis the French King (though in some respects a man
to be wished otherwise than he was, yet) talking on a time with Sir John Wallop
the Kings Ambassador, of those two blessed men, told him plainly, that either
the King his master had a very hard heart, that could put to death two such
worthy men, as the like (...) within his Realm, whereof K. (...) advertised,
took it very ill at the (...) King Francis, for (...) of him, saying, that he
had done nothing but that himself was first made privy to it.

In statute of his body, he was tall and comely, exceeding the common and
middle sort of men; for he was to the quantity of fix foot in height, and being
therewith very slender and lean, was nevertheless upright and well formed,
straight backed, big joyn^ed, and strongly sinewed, his hair by (...) black,
though in his later time, through age and imprisonment, turned to hoarinesse,
or rather to whiteness, his eye large and round, neither full black nor full
gray, but of a mixed color between both, his forehead smooth and large, his
nose of a good and even proportion, somewhat wide mouthed and big jaw'd, as one
ordained to utt^r much speech, wherein was, notwithstanding, a certain
com^linesse, his skin somewhat tawny, mixed with many blew vein^, his face,
hands, and all his body, so bare of flesh, as is almost ineredible, which came
(rather as may be thought) by the great abstinence and penance he used upon
himself many years together, even from his youth. In his countenance he bare
such a rev^rend gravity, and therewith in his doings exercised such discre^t
severity, that not only of his equals, but even of his Superiors he was
honored and feared; in speech he was very mild, temperate, and modest, saving
in matters of God and his Charge, which then began to trouble the world, and
therein he would be earnest above his accustomed order; but vainly, or without
cause, he would never speak, neither was his ordinary talk of common worldly
matters, but rather of Divinity and high power of God, of the Joys of Heaven,
and the Pains of Hell, of the glorious death of Martyrs, and strait I fe of
Confessors, with such like virtuous and pro^itable talk, which he always
uttered with such a heavenly grace, that his words were always a great
edifying to his hearers; he had such a continual impression of death in his
heart, that his mouth never ceased to utter the inward thoughts of his mind,
not only in all times of his exercise, but also at his meals; for he would
always say, that the remembrance of Death came never out of season: and of his
own end, he would now and then (as occasion of speech was given) cast out such
words, as though he had some foreknowledge of the manner of his death; for
diverse of his Chaplains and household servants have reported, that long before
his death they have heard him say, that he should not die in his bed; but
always in speaking thereof, he would utter his words with such a cheerful
countenance, as they might easily perceive him rather to conceive joy, than
sorrow thereat: in study he was very laborious and painful; in preaching
assiduous, ever beating down heresies and vice; in prayer most fervent and
devout; in fasting, abstinence, and pun^shing of his lean body, rigorous,
without measure. And generally in all things belonging to the care and charge
of a true Bishop, he was to all the Bishops of England, living in his days,
the very mirror and lantherne of light.

One that was Dean of Rochester many years together, named Mr. Philips, in the
days of King Edward the sixth, when certain Commissioners were coming toward
him to search his house for books, he, for ^eare, burned a large volume, which
this holy Bishop had compiled, containing in it the whole story and matter of
D^vorce, which volume he gave him with his own hand a little before his
trouble; for the loss whereof the Deane would many times after lament, and
wish the book whole again, upon condition he had not one groat to live on.

Pope Paul the third writing (as before is said) to the Princes of Christendom
of the dealings of King Henry against this goodly man, wrote, among others, one
Letter to Ferdinando King of Romans, which I my self have seen and read. In
this Letter, after great complaint made of King Henry for killing of such a
man, whom be before, for his great sanctity and virtue, had enrolled in the
number and society of the Cardinal, hoping thereby that all should have turned
to his better safety and deliverance, because that dignity in all places has
ever been acounted sacred, yet now falling ou: otherwise, he takes occasion to
compare the doing^ of King Henry the eight to the doing; of his Progenitors K.
Hen. 2. and this holy Father he compares, or rather prefers, to the holy
Martyr St. Thomas of Canterbury, saying, that his King Henry did not only
(...) the imp^ety of that King, but also went far beyond him, for where he
slew one, this sl^w many. St. Thomas defended the right of one particular
Church, this of the Universal; that King killed an Archbishop, but this King
has put to death a Cardinal of the holy Church of Rom^; that King exiled St.
Thomas by long banishment, but this King tormented this holy man by long and
hard imprisonment; he sent unto S. Thomas certain hired men to kill him, to
this was ^ssig^ed only a hungman; he caused St. Thomas to be sl^in by a
forcible death, but this by a shameful torment has killed the holy man of God;
he (in conc^usion) sought to purge himself before Alexander the third, and
laying the fault upon others, did with humility, take upon him such (...), as
was to him enjoined by the Bishop of Rome; but this with a most obstinate
^inde, defended his own horrible fact, showing himself not only unwilling to
do penance, but also b^cometh a stubborn and rebellious enemy against the
Church of Rome.

Then consider what that man of happy memory (Cardinal Poole) wr^teth of him
in sundry places of his works, who in his life^ time both knew him, and was
familiarly acquainted with him, but specially in that book which he wrote to
King Henry the eight, entitled Pro Ecclesiasticae Vnitatis def^^sione, wherein
he extolleth the name of this blessed Prelate, with words according to his
great worthiness, saying to the King, that if an Abassadour had bee^ to be
sent from earth to heaven, there could not among all the Bishops and Clergy so
sit a man be chosen as he, for what other man (says he) have ye presently, or
of many years past had comparably with him in sanctity, learning, wisdom, and
careful diligence in the office and duty of a Bishop? of whom ye may justly,
above all other N^tions, glory and rejoice, that if all the corners of
Christendom were narrowly sought, there could not be found out any one man
that in all things did accomplish the parts and degrees of a Bishop equ^l with
him. Further in the same place he laudeth him highly for his great travail and
care in the education of youth, especially of the young Students in the
U^iversity of Cambr. for that by his only mean and motion, that noble and
right vertu^us L^dy Margaret, Countess of Richmond and Derby, sometimes his
Mistress, erected two famous Colleges in that University (as before in this
History has been declared) wherein young Scholars receive great comfort
toward their instruction in Learning unto which number himself became also a
very (...) and Father, and being after chosen by the whole consent of the
University to the room of their high Chancellor, he b^^ame no less careful
over them than over the slock of his Diocese. All which, with many other high
praises, this most virtuous, learned, and high-borne Cardinal set down very
bountifully of him.

Likewise blessed Sir T. Moor, his companion and fellow in adversity and
trouble, upon occasion of talk, ministered unto him by his daughter Mrs. Roper,
about refusing the oath by my L. of Roch. and himself, says in a certain
Epistle to his ^^id daughter, that he has had him in such a reverend
estimation, as for his wisdom, learning, and long approved virtue together, he
reckons in this Realm no one man to be matched or compared with him.

Furthermore, the renouned B. of Nuceria, and most el^quent Historiographer of
our time, P. Iovius, although he lacks no commendation of him throughout all
his whole History, yet in one place specially he says, that upon the
acceptance of his great charge of a B^shoprick, he became so vigilant over his
stock the space of many years together, that he was to be wondered at, not only
of his own country people at home, but also of all other outward nations: then
he greatly reverenceth him for his constant piety, in defending the Marriage
between K. Hen. and his lawful wife Q. ^ath, and for withstanding the Kings
wilful mind in taking upon him so absurdly the name and title of supreme head
of the Church, for the which he did not refuse even in his old age, to suffer
the loss of liberty, livings, life, and all.

Then weigh what is said of him by that most eloquent and learned Father
Stanstau^ Hosmes, Bishop of Warima in Poland, and Cardinal of Rome, in his
book of Confutation against Brentius the Heretic, his words being thus,
Fatemur and nos Br^nti, etc. wherein he shows very notably, how, although in
all ages Heretics have lift up themselves against the Church of God, yet has
he not forsaken or left her destitute at any time.

Neither has God in these our unfortunate days, failed his Church; for
whereas you Lutherans are broken forth, and from you are sprung Zuinglius,
Munserans, or Patimontans, and a number of Heretics mo God has produced
against you into the battle, many worthy men endued with singular wit, and
excellent learning, by whom your raging madness might be suppressed and put
down. Among whom especially, and by name, was that famous holy man John, Bishop
of Rochester, who, in defense of the Faith, and Catholic Church of Christ,
never stuck for the loss of his life, and the shedding of his blood.

Finally, whosoever shall read of Cocleus, Wycelleas, Eckius, and others
learned writings of Ger^any, of the worthy Bishop and eloquent Writer, Osorius,
of Alphonsus d^ Castro, and others of Spain and Portugal, besides a number of
such other learned Fathers of many Nations, whereof some lived in his own
days, and some since, shall easily perceive that he was a man for his profound
learning, and rare virtue, highly reverenced and esteemed thoroughout all
Christendom.

And no doubt but if his writings and doings be well compared, ye shall find
him most like those holy Fathers and Doctors, that in the Primitive Church laid
the very first ground and foundation of our belief, upon the which we have
since rested and stayed our selves, whom to describe wholly and fully unto you,
according to his worthiness, I will not take upon me, neither am able to do ^,
yea were I as elequent as Cic^ro, or as witty and subtle as Aristotle, as
copious as Demosthenes, or as profound in Philosophy as Plato, such, and so
innumerable were his singular virtues.

But herein I will content my self with the general commendation, which all
the famous Universities of Divinity in Europe do give this learned man, by
calling him blessed Martyr, and alleging his works for great authority. Thus
much I may also say, that unto Iustus his predecessor, the first Bishop of
Rochester, he was a just and true Successor; the place of his birth he does
greatly beautify with the glorious Bishop St. John of Beverly; to the Country
of Kent, where he was Bishop, he is an ornament with St. Thomas of Canterbury;
in gravity of his writing he is to be reverenced with Saint Bede; for stout
defending the right and liberty of the holy Church, against the power of
Princes, he is not inferior to the blessed Bishop St. Ambrose, and St.
C^rysostome; in praying for his enemies and persecutors he resembles holy St.
Stephen; in constancy and stoutnesse of his Martyrdom he was a second Cyprian,
and in the manner of his death to John the Baptist.

And now we shall observe the wonderful working of Almighty God, whose
judgments are secret and strange in our sight, much to be marked and noted in
him and his adherents; for as God of his own nature is patient and long
suffering, because he expectth the amendment of our sinful lives: so is he
also just in his doings, and pun^sheth grievously, when no amendment is
endeavored, as now may well be perceived by those perceive by those persons
that were persecuters of this blessed man; for they escaped not the danger of
his heavy hand, as shall be declared unto you.

As first, to begin with the King himself, In quo quis peccat in ^o punitur,
the Almighty (commonly) makes rods for our own sins, wherewith he often
punishes those that offend him, as here most notably it is to be observed in
the three fold manner of his displeasure, which accused him to be so cru^^l to
this good man, that nothing but the punes of Death could satisfy his ir^full
indignation: As first for resisting his so inord (...) of changing wives.
Secondly for his refusal to take the Oath of Succession, and his constant
disapprovement of the unlawful cou^ses which he took to procure unto himself
(...) male. Thirdly for withstanding his Supremacy in causes E^clesisticall.
These were the three causes of his displeasure, which like a Trident he st^uck
into the breast of Innocence* whiles the three^ pointed Scept^r made their
several entries within his own bo^ome; for the first, he that robbed so many
breasts of the possession of so great joy and happiness in being his through
his desire of change, found change a robbery to his own hearts contentment in
so many wives, which lawfully were none of his, for of the six bells whereon he
rung this change, two of them were repudiate, two beheaded, one wittingly
killed, and the last so displeasing to him, as he had determined to have sent
her to the Tower so far onward in her way to her Predecessors fates, had not
his approaching death caused her to survive.

As to the second, viz. the unlawful means which he took to have succession by
his issue male, those females who he illegitimated, succeeded, and his issue
male deceased, that they might succeed.

As to the third, viz. his assuming (and taken upon him) the Supremacy of the
Church (whose doings herein were neither approved by the Roman party (as
monstrous in their opinions) nor by the Lutherans and Zuingl^ans as different
from theirs) but what the holy Martyrs conjectured; thereupon it came to pass,
for, said he in the Convocation-house, (when this business was in scanning)
the King desires that we would make him head of the Church; his successors will
expect to be the like: what if his Successor should chance to be a child, or a
woman, how shall we be governed by such? and accordingly the Almighty, to show
us the ridiculousnesse of the usurpation, left him none but women and a child
to succeed him in that office; women that could not speak, and a child that
knew not how in the Church of God, till at the length he had neither male nor
female to sit any more upon the Throne than in the Chair, Death having made all
their hands (issueless) as unapt to sway the Scepter, as improper for the Keys.

Lastly, I shall produce before your eyes, his last will and Testan^ent, with
some observations upon the same.

Henrici Octavi Testamentum.
IN nomine Dei, gloriosaeque and benedictae virginis Mariae dominae nostrae,
totiusque sanctae societatis caelictum, nos Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae,
Franciae and Hiberniae, defensor fidei; and in terris immediate sub Deo
supremum caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hiberniae, ejus nominis octavus:
revocantes in memoriam magna dona and beneficia omnipotentis Dei nobis collata
in hac vita transitoria, ipsi submisse himilimas reddimus gratias, agnoscentes
nos ipsos protinus insufficientes ex ulla part ad eadem beneficia promerenda
aut compensenda: quin potius metuentes ne illa non digna receperimus:
perpendentes ulterius apud nos ipsos, esse nos (ut and totum genus humanum)
mortales, in peccato natos; cernentes nihilominus and sperantes, omnem
Christianam creaturam in hoc transitorio miseroque mundo viventem sub Deo,
(dummodo in fide stabilita conetu^ and exerceat in hac vita si tempus habuerit,
talia charitatis and pietatis opera quae scriptura injungit, quaeque ad Dei
honorem and beneplacitum faciunt) ordinatam esse ut per Christi passionem
salvetur, and ad ae^srnam vitam pertingat, de quorum numero veraciter,
confidimus nos ipsos per Dei gratiam existere: Considerantes etiam unamquamque
creaturam quanto fuerit sublimior statu, honor, and auctoritate in hoc
saeculo, tanto esse obstrict orem, aut amer Deum, eique serviat, and gratias
agat, tantoque diligentius conari deberi ut bona opera charitatis faciat, ad
laude^, honorem and gloriam omnipotentis Dei; memoria etiam repetentes,
dignitatem, honorem, regnum, and gubernationem, ad quae nos vocavit omnipotens
Deus in hoc mundo* quoque haec, nos ipsi nec ulla alia mortalis creatura
noverit tempus aut locum quando vel ubi placebit omnipotenti Deo nos ex hoc
transitorio saeculo evocare: Idcirco volentes and meditantes per Dei gratiam,
ante nostrum ex eodum mundo transitum, disponere and ordinare nostram ultimam
mentem, voluntatem and testamentum, eo modo quo confidimus gratum fore
omnipotenti Deo, unico salvatori nostro Jesu Christo, and toti societati coeli
ad satisfactionem etiam omnium piorum fratrum in terra, adhuc integra
perfectaque mente adhaerentes totaliter rectae fidei Christi ejusque doctrinae,
poenirentes de veteri detestabilique vita, habentes perfectam voluntatem and
mentem per ejus gratiam nunquam ab ea deflectere, quamdiu ulla memoria,
spiritus aut interior cognitio fuerit in hoc nostro mortali corpore, humilime
and cordialissime commendamus and legamus anima^ nostra^ omnipotenti Deo, qui
eam in su^ persona redemit pretioso corpore and sanguine suo in tempore
passionis suae, and in pleniorem ejus rei memoriam relequit hic nobiscum in
ecclesia sua militante consecrationem, and administratonem pretiosi corporis
and sanguinis sui, ad consolationem nostram non mediocrem, si nos etiam ita
gratanter accipimus, sicut ille gratanter, and quantum ex hominum part est,
immerenter, ad nostrum, non secu^ bonum illam ordinavit.

Instanter e^iam rogamus and obsecramus beatam virginem Mariam, Dei matrem,
totamque sanctam societatem coeli, ut continuo p^o nobis and nobiscum precentur
quam diu in hoc mundo vivimus and in nostro transitu de illo, ut citius
pertingamus ad vitam aeternam quam and speramus and vendicamus ex Christi
passione, and verbo, quantum ad corpus meum, quod quando inde anima
discesserit, manebit eadaver, atque ita ad vilem materiam unde factum fuerat,
redibit: nisi locus and dignitas ad quam nos vocavit Deus, impediret; and ^ ne
notemur quasi violatores humanitatis, and bonarum consuetudinum, quando legi
Dei non contrariantur: contenti sane essemus ut quovis in loco ^^peliretur
Christianae sepulturae con su^^o, quantumvis v^lis foret: cinis enim est
duntaxat, and in cinerem reverretur: Nihilominus, quia non libenter volumus
populo nostro videri injuriam facere dignitati, ad quam Deus immeritos nos
vocavit, contenti sumus and per hanc nostram ultimam voluntatem ac testamentum
volumus and ordinamus, quod hocce corpus nostrum terrae mandetur, and
scpeliatur in choro collegii nostri de Windesor, in medio spatio inter stalla,
and summum altar, quodque fiat and collocetur, quam primum commode possit post
decessum nostrum per exequutores nostros, and nostris sumptibus and expensis
(si tamen per nos ipsos, in vita nostra non fiat) honorabile monumentu^ in quo
ossa nostra requiescant guod monumentu^ jam pene consummatu^ est, cum cancellis
seu cratibus pulchris circumpositis: in quo etiam monumento, volumus ossa, and
corpus fidelis, and dilectae, conjugis nost^^^ reginae Janae simul poni: utque
projudeatur, ordinetur and fiat expensis sumptibusque nostris, aut exequutorum
nostrorum si tamen in nostra vita non fiat) conveniens altar reverenter
ornatum and instructum omnibus requesitis and necessariis ad missas quotidianas
ibidem decendas perpetuo, donec mundus perseverat. Volumus insuper ut sepulchra
and altaria regis Henrici sexti and Regis Edwardi quarti, abavunculi and avi
nostri fiant forma augustiori magisque principali and regali risdem in locis in
quibus nunc sunt, idque nostris sumptibus and expensis, and insuper voluntas
nostra and specialiter desideramus atque requitimus, ut ubi and quandocunque
placuerit Deo nos vocare ex hoc mundo transitorio ad infinitam misericordiam,
and gratiam suam, sive ultra Maria aut in quocunque loco extra nostrum Angliae
Regnum vel intra ipsum exequutores nostri quam primum commode poterunt curent
omne genus servitii divini, quod pro defunctis fieri solet pro nobis etiam
celebrari idque in proximo maximeque commodo loco, respectu illius in quo nos
ex hac vita caduca decedere contigerit. Volumus praeterea ut quandocunque and
ubicunque placuerit Deo nos vocare ex misera vita ista ad infinitam
misericordiam and gratiam suam, sive intra regnum sive extra ipsum, exequutores
nostri quam poterunt pio, convenienti et celeri modo ordinent and procurent,
corpus nostrum transferri and portari atque convehi ad praedictum collegium
nostrum Windesorae, quoque servicium Placebo and Dirige, cum concione, and
missa postero mane, nostris sumptibus and expensis devote celebretur, and
solemniter observetur* ut ibi terra mandetur and sepuliatur in loco disignato
pro sepulchro seu monumento, ad eum finem faciendo: and haec omnia ut fiant
devotissimo, quo fieri poterunt modo.

Volumus and injungimus executoribus nostris, quatenus disponant and per viam
eleemosinae distribuant pauperimis maximeque indigentibus personis quae
inveniri poterunt (exclusis tamen, quantum ratio postulat, mendicis ordinariis)
idque quam brevissimo intervallo post nostrum de hac vita transitoria
discessum, summam mill marcarum legalis monetae Angliae, partim quidem eodem
ipso in loco, in quo placuerit Deo nos ad suam misericordiam evocare; partim in
itinere, partim in loco ipso sepulturae nostiae secundum quod ipsi discretius
judicaverint ut populum cui hec nostrae elemosinae tribuentur, moneant, ut Deum
ex cord precentur propeccatis nostris and salute animae nostrae.

Item volumus, ut quanta commode fieri poterit celeritate post nostrum ex hoc
mundo transitum si in vita nostra id non fiat) Decanus and canonici liberae
capellae nost^ae intra castrum Windesorae habeant in maneriis, terris
tenementis and spiritualibus promotinibus ad annum valorem lexcentarum
librarum, ultra omnes alias expensas, iisdem assecuratum, successoribus eorum
in perpetuum, sub his conditionibus sequentibus and pro debita ad impletionem
omnium conditionum inibi contentarum, per formam indentaturae chirographo
nostro subsignatae, quae transigetur per viam pacti and contractus in eundem
sinem inter nos and praedictos decanum and canonicos in vita nostra, viz.
praed^cti D^canus and canonici ^orumque succ^ssores in perpetuum habebunt
paratos duos presbi^eros qui Missas dicunt ad prae^atum Altar in loco superius
designato collocandum: and post decesrum nostrum celebrabunt quatuor solemnes
obitus, pro nobis in praedicto Collegio Windeso^ae, curabuntque solemnem
concionem haberi: and in unoquoque praedictorum obituum pauperibus donent december
libras (i. centum francos) quotannis in perpetuum, donent tredecim pauperibus,
qui vocabuntur equites pauperes unicuique duod^cim donarios (hoc est december
asses per diem, and semel per singulos annos unicuique togam talarem panni
albi, habentem in pectore acupictam periscelidem seu garteria^ cum cruce D.
Georgii in scuto inclusam intra periscelidem and mantellam panni rubei: ut uni
ex^llis tredecim, qui constituetur caput and rector aliorum, tres libras fex
solidos and octo denarios ( i. 33. Froncos and sex asses) ultra supraque
predictos unicujusque diei duodecim denarios: u^que omni dominica totius anni
in perpetuu^ curent haberi concionem in castro Windesorae, sicut in praefata
indentatura, and contractu before and particularius exprimetur. Volentes and
onerantes and requirentes filium nostrum principem Edvardum, omnesque
Ex^quutor^s nostros and consulati^s postea nominandos, omnesque haeredes
nostios and successores, qui hujus regni reges (...) sunt, sicut se noverint
responsuros coram Deo in tremendo judici^ die, quat^nus ipsi, and unusquisq^
^psorum p^ovideant, ut praed^cta indentatura and assecuratio, inter nos and
predictos decanum and canonicos transigenda and omnia in e^s contenta, debite
ma^dentur exequutioni. Observentur, and custodiantur in perpetuum, juxta hand
extremam voluntatem nostram atque testamentum, etc.

Reliquam testamenti partem in qua de successione disponebatur summatim recitat
Sanderus in hunc modum: ut Edvardus filius ex Iana Seimera, nove^ natus annos
primas omnium regnandi vices acciperit, secundas Maria ^x Catharina, tertias
Elizabetha, ex Anna Bulleina postea his deficientibus ad illos transire
successio ad quos jure co^muni pertineret. Deinde impuberi filio sedecim
constituit tutores and curatores pari potestate, cosque magna ex part
Catholicos, velut aristocratia quadam monarchiam temperans. Demum valde
mandavit ut filius in fide catholica educaretur, excepto primatus titulo, quem
ei reliquit and ut regnum ab haeresibus purgatum teneretur.

HE that had made void so many men's wills, had his own made void in every
par^icular. All those sixteen Counselors which he had appointed to governt the
Kingdom in his Son^ minority, either by threatening, exclusion, or
imprisonment, were all of them forc^d to give way to one, who wholly took upon
him the government of the whole Kingdom; and he that took such care that his
Son should have none to be of his Council but such as should be Catholics,
had his will so performed, that there was one who took care that no Catholic
should come (...) him; and when the heads of these gainsayers of his will were
cut off, his Son was l^ft in tuition of such hands, as it was verily beli^ved,
made his Son away, that they might set up one upon his thron^, in opposition to
his own Daughter; the Religion wherein his Son was bred and commanded to be
brought up in, was changed, his Laws abrogated; and he that took so many
unlawful courses to obtain issue, had so many children, who all of them died
issu^l^sse.

Next to the King I shall observe the punishment of Almighty God, which lighted
neavily upon the Q^. ( Anne Bullein) the chief and principal cause of all this
wofu^ Tragedy, who in a short space was suddenly thrown down from the top of
all her high D^gnity and Honor (whose Glory was exalted upon this man's ruin)
and for a most vil^ and abominable Incest committed with her own brother,
condemned and accused to be worthy of death by her own father, together with
diverse others of her own kindred, and the Nobility then sitting in judgment,
who, not long before, were her Idolaters, and she their Idol; whereupon she
was executed at Tower hill, her head being stricken off* of whose loss the
King himself took such sorrow, that the very next day after she was dead, he
mourned for her in a Wedding garment.

Next to the Queen we will call to mind M. Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury, who of his own power, without any other warrant or authority,
pronounced the sentence of Divorce between the King and Queen (being
calculated to the height of that Meridian) and afterward called this holy man
before him, and cast him into prison for refusing the two new Oaths, the one of
the Kings new Marriage* the other of the new Supremacy, from whence he was
never delivered, till death rid him of all worldly (...).

This Archbishop lived till he was condemned for a traitor, because he spread
certain seditious Libels amongst the people, and assisted the Duke of
Nort^umberland in his Rebellion (in the behalf of the Lady Jane) against his
lawful Sovereign. But forasmuch as this was done in Qu^en Mary her days, and
the Clergy had somewhat else to say to him, they burned him as a Heretic.

As for Mr. Rich, the Kings Soliciter, and the Dequoy to this good man, who
gave such strange and injurious testimony against him at his arr^ignment, he
lived to be deposed from all his high places and preferments, and fell into
deep disgrace, not only with the King his Master, but with those who
afterward sat at the stern in the young Kings time, insomuch that affiction
brought him to understand, and the knowledge of himself to true repentance, so
that it is to be believed that he escaped without any further punishment than
the clipping of his wings whilst he was alive, and the singing of his qody
when he was dead: for his dead body being laid into a coffi^, seared and
imbalmed, c^rtain candles that were set upon the hearse, through the watchers
negligence, or absence, fell down, and took hold first on the clothes, and
then upon the coffin, till at length came unto the se^rcloaths, that before any
man could come unto the rescue, the fire was pre^^y onward in his way, to have
deceived the worms.

Lastly, we shall conclude with Mr. Cromwell, a shrewd enemy to this good man,
and a great Agent in this business; a man in whose behalf the Archb^shop of
Canterbury thus writ in his behalf in his Letter to the King, after his
troubles had beginning. viz. -- A man that was so advanced by your Majesty,
whose surety was only by your Majesty, who loved your Majesty no less than
God, who studied always to set forward whatsoever was your Maj^sties will and
pleasure, who cared for no man's displeasure to serve your Majesty's, who was
such a servant, in my judgment, in wisdom, diligenc^, faithfulness, and
experience, as no Prince in this Realm ever had the like, who was so vigilant
to preserve your Majesty from all treasons, that few could be so secretly
conceived but he detected the same in the beginning; such a man, that if the
noble Princes of memory, King John, Henry the second, Richard the second, had
had such a Counselor about them, I suppose they should never have been so
treacherously abandoned and overthrown, as those good Princes were. Who shall
your Grace trust hereafter, if you mistrust him? Alas, I bewail and lament
your Grace's chance herein* I wot not whom your Grace may trust, etc.

And for this fidelity, ability, and good service, advanced successively to the
d^gnities of the Master of the Rolls, Biron, Lord Privy Seal, Knight of the
G^rter, Earl of Essex Lord high Chamberlain of England, and higher than all
this, V^car general of the Church of ENGLAND, by virtue of which Office he
took place above them, who were Metropolitanes of all England, and yet
notw^thstanding he was arrested at the Council ^^ble of high Treason by the
Duke of Norfolk, when he least suspected any such desig^e, committed to the
Tower, brought ^hence unto the Hill, and (without being permitted to plead for
himself) there beheaded without any more ado. But the strangest thing of all,
is, that he that was the King^ Vicegerent in spiritual causes should be
accused for an Heretic, and that made one of the causes of his death, and
that that was such a great enemy to the Catholiqu^s (kicking down all the
Religious houses of the L^nd, and grinded the Religious together with the
rubb^sh under his feet) should at his death openly profess^ that he would die
in the Catholic faith.

Thus we see Gods justice in the d^struction of the Churches enemies; who
knows but that he may help her to such friends, though not such as may restore
her her own Jewels, yet such as may heal her of her Wounds? And who knows
but that it may be aff^cted by the same name, sithenc^ the Almighty has
communicated so great a secret unto mortals, as that there should be such a
salve made known to them, whereby the same weapon that made the Wound, should
work the Cure?

Oliva Vera is not so hard to be construed; Oliv^rus, as that it may not be
believed, that a Prophet, rather than a Her^uld, gave the Common F^ther of
Christendom^, the now Pope of Rome (Innocent the tenth) such Ensigns of his
Nobility ( viz. ^ dove holding an Olive branch in her mouth) since it falls
short in nothing of being both a Prophecy, and fulfilled, but only his
Highness running into her arms, whose Emblem of innocence bears him already
in her mouth.

FINIS.

