THE ANTIPODES, OR REFORMATION WITH THE HEELS UPWARD. BEING A compendious
Narrative or Discovery, of the great hypocrisy of of our pretending Reformers,
the treacherous enslaving practices of a traiterous Party in the House of
Commons, contrary to their solemn Protestations, frequent Declarations,
declared Duties, and the known Laws of the Land, etc, WHEREBY Both the
Commonalty and Soldiery may plainly discover, that what was formerly by them
adjudged Tyranny and Oppression in others; is now practiced and maintained to
be Justice and Equity in themselves; and that notwithstanding they pretended
Liberty, they intended Slavery, both to the King, His Posterity, and People.

Isaiah 59.7, 8. Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed
innocent blood: their thought are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction
is in their paths. The way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment in
their goings: They have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes therein, shall
not know peace.

OXFORD Printed and published for the information of the oppressed Commons of
England. 1647.

THE ANTIPODES, OR REFORMATION with the heels upward.
IT cannot be forgoten, that at the first coming together of this Parliament,
there were many burdens, and multitudes of oppressions and iniustices done by
persons in trust and authority; to the great dishonor of the King, and damage
of the Kingdom; all which were in the Parliaments Remonstrance largely
explained, and laid down in diverse heads or branches, viz. 1. That Proiects and
Monopolies were granted, and a general burden brought upon the Kingdom, for
the enriching of particular persons. 2. That persons were protected from due
process at law, by the power of great ones, the guilty acquitted, and innocent
condemned. 3. That the Law was not the security, but the ruin of the People 4.
That illegal and unnecessary taxes, as Ship Money, and others, (contrary to
Law and the Subjects liberty) were imposed. 5. That several free men were
illegally dis-infranchised of their liberties, and imprisoned, without any
indictment, or testimony of fact committed. 6. That many others were
stigmatized, fined, and banished, for endeavoring the maintenance of the Laws
and liberties of the Kingdom. 7. That many were forced to swear to answer to
interrogatories against themselves, etc.


These and many other great grievous oppressions lay upon the pore people of
England, until such time as this Parliament (in the infancy and innocence
thereof) did both declare against them, and endeavor to bring the authors to
condign punishment, for the performance whereof they entered into a solemn
Covenant, wherein they engaged the whole Kingdom with them.

In pursuance of which engagement, the Lords and Commons by several
Declarations and Ordinances improved their interest in the People often
declaring unto them the urgent necessity of assisting them; and often calling
the great God of Heaven and Earth to witness that what they then aimed at was
only the removing the King from his evil Councillors, and bringing
Delinquents to trial, and securing the peace and liberty of the Subject; and
that if after all their reproaches from their enemies, and slightfull
discouragements from friends, they could but obtain the desired end before
mentioned, they should rejoice in their sufferings, and think that to be a
sufficient reward of all their labors.

And further, that they might the better work upon the affection of the
People, they in a Declaration Jan. 30. 1643. declared as follows. We place
not our confidence in our own strength, but in God almighty, the Lord of Hosis,
who will not leave nor forsake his People: it is his own truth and cause we
maintain the exaltation of the Kingdom of his Son, and the preservation of
his Church, and of this whole Island from utter ruin, is our aim, and the end
we have before our eyes.

Upon these and the like grounds, we resolve with courage and constancy unto
the end to do our parts; and the Lord who has ^i^red up out spirits, displayed
his Banner, and given the alarm, do that which seems him good.

And this Declaration we make not from any presumption in the strength of our
Armies; but from the sense of that duty which is required, and expected from
the high places and relations wherein we stand, etc. Having after long and
grave consultations resolved and decreed, never to lay down Arms, till truth
and Peace by the blessing of God be settled in this Kingdom upon a firm
foundation, for the present and future Generations* which shall be esteemed of
us a sufficient, yea abundant reward of all that we can do or suffer in this
cause.

Oh that too many members of the Houses of Parliament had not forgot
themselves! Or that they would remember, that the al-seeing God, (who knew
their hearrs, and hates hypocrisy) will surely require the due performance of
their solemn engagements at their hands; and that they cannot now expect the
continuance of his blessing upon them, since they have neglected to pay their
vows unto God* perform their declared duty to the Kingdom, whereunto they
engaged themselves, and called him as a witness, as if their iniquity were not
sufficient, unless proclaimed in the face of Jehovah. Hear oh Heavens, and
tremble oh Earth; Oh England stand amazed! many of your trustees have conceived
wickedness, they promised liberty, but behold slavery; they pretended Justice,
but behold oppression; they pretended Reformation, but behold deformation; they
pleaded law, but have lost conscience; they pretended purity, but behold
hypocrisy; Justice is turned backward, Treason is countenanced, and truth
discouraged, your oppressors honored, your friends despised; your seeming
safety, is become your certain sickness, and what will you do in the end
thereof? Believe it Countrymen and fellow Soldiers, our condition is much
worse then at the beginning, for then we knew our sickness, and remedy, but
now such are our distempers, that we may more easily know them then cure them*
it is their privilege is our bondage, their power our pestilence, their rights
our poverty, their wills our law, their smiles our safety their frowns our
ruin; and though by the free Commons chosen servants, yet by their usurpations
become Masters, ney Kings; commanding both King and People without control;
because they cannot make a Law they will keep none.

Consider all your former sufferings, being compared ye will find that these
Egyptian Taskmasters do much exceed in cruelty; remember the vast expense of
blood and treasure you have laid out for them to keep them quiet, see the
improvement of it, see what oppressions they have eased you off, ney rather
have not doubled:

1. If all proiectors be proclaimed enemies, what makes Sir Henry Vane senior
in the House of Commons?

2. If it be a crime destructive to the Law and liberty of the People for
persons to be examined from the due course of law and Justice, as the
Parliament have often declared, against the King, how comes it to pass that
Manchester, Clotworthy, Waller, Hollis, and Barwis, and many other accused of
Treason and other misdemeanors against the State, are protected by virtue of a
never before heard of privilege, and their accusers imprisoned, to the ruin
of themselves and families; Oh England, England, what will become of thee, when
thy fellow subjects exercise soveraignity, and thou like a silly sheep delights
to have it so?

3. If the working the Law like a nose of wax, and making it speak what the
designed would have it, be a practice distructive to the law and liberty of the
People what are* and have been the Votes Orders, and practices of their
Committees, who derive a power from the Parliament, and they from the Law, for
all their extraiudiciall practices and illegal proceedings in the examinations
censures and sentences passed upon their fellow Commoners, answering all pleas
with their power; and silencing all disputes, with this one affirmative, we
that are the makers of a Law, are best able to judge of the sense and and
meaning of the Law; and so if they say stealing is but borrowing, drunkenness
is but good fellowship, whoring a trick of youth: treason or breach of trust,
but a mistake, or misunderstanding; we are bound to believe it because they
say so; let ignorance be the mother of devotion, and then oh brave Laws, a
brave Parliament; such as is the Tree, such will be the fruit, and then farewell
to liberty, and welcome slavery: stoop, stoop poor England to the yoke of
subjection; be a servant to thy servant, and let it be reported in future ages,
that thou brokest the bonds of thy Sovereign, and became a slave to thy equals.

4. If the imposing illegal taxes in the Parliament sense, be destructive to
the law and liberty of the People, pray how comes it to pass that so many
Ordinances for Tithes of all other, that Antichristian and soul murdering
edict, with many other subject devouring Votes; has within these few years
passed for current coin and good law amongst us.

4. If it be a distructive practice to imprison free men without indictment or
testimony of fact, committed by three witnesses, which the Law of the Kingdom
requires. How comes it to pass that so many faithful servants of God and the
Kingdom, have been so long imprisoned, some a year, some two, some more;
merely for discharge of their duties to God and the Kingdom; in discovering
the treasons and deceitful practices of such as endeavored the Kingdoms
ruin; what makes Lilburne, Overton, Musgrave, Booth, and many more in the
Tower, Fleet, Newgate, Gate House, VVhite-Lyon, every prison having some
sufferers for the Kingdoms cause in it, who are high unto famishing; Oh
England England, if thou suffer thy self thus to be enslaved by thy servants,
thou will prove a bye-word to all Nations, and not deserve the pity of any:
Rouse up thy self, and rush upon thy adversaries; let them know that though
thou have been long patient, yet thou both dare and know how to call them
to account for all their actions, let them know that thou art sensible of those
vast sums or thy treasure they have received, and shared amongst them, and
make them fear and tremble; look back upon their Declarations, have they not
covenanted, and caused you to Covenant, and lift up your hands to the most high
God, to preserve the Privileges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the
People? (not by their Privileges to destroy your Liberties) To preserve and
defend the King in his Person and authority, and not to usurp his power, and
imprison his Person, to discover and discountenance evil doers, not to protect
and defend them, to bring them to alegall trial as malefactors, not to empower
them as Judges of their accusers; have they not declared that this was the
ground of their undertaking, and that the Reformation of the Church, and
preservation of the Law, (viz,) mercy and truth, Justice and Judgment, was the
only thing they aimed at; having resolved never to lay down arms till this
was effected, with many heavy imprecations, desiring the Lord no longer to
continue his blessing upon them, then they designed his glory and the good of
this poor Kingdom; now Countrymen and fellow Soldiers see whether the Lord
has not justly weighed them in his Balance; see if he has not met with them
in their secret iniquity; they trusted in their wisdom, and it turned to
foolishness; they boasted in their strength and confederacy; but the Horses of
Egypt are flesh and not spirit; their confidence shall prove a snare, and the
pit they dug for others they will fall into themselves; they have ceased to
do what was pleasing to the Lord; they sought themselves and forgot the holy
one of Israel.

In the time of their necessity they promised fair, but having obtained their
ends as they vainly Imagine the case is altered: See the forementioned
Declaration.

Although every man is to hope for the principal reward of his service from
God, who rewards every one according to his works, yet we find our selves
bound in conscience and equity to declare, that besides those who have the
public faith engaged to them for their security, such as since the beginning
have done valliantly, and dealt faithfully in the cause, and such as have
chosen rather to suffer the spoiling of their goods, then to assist the Enemy,
or to take arms against their Religion and Country, and shall continue
constant in the same cause of doing or suffering unto the end, shall be
according to their merrits taken into public notice and consideration, their
losses so far as may be repaired, and themselves honored and rewarded by such
means and ways as we trust God in his providence shall afford, so that no man
that has been eminent in action, or has suffered any notable loss for the
public, shall be neglected or slighted, but one way or other shall be
thankfully remembered to his own honor, and the good of his posterity.

Here is a plentiful seed time, but a slender harvest; large promises but few
performances; they confess themselves bound in conscience and equity to
promise; but not to perform; fellow Soldiers this belongs particularly to
you, that you have been both faithful and valliant, if they should say the
contrary, the Kingdom, your enemies, nay their own consciences would give
them the lie; but where is your reward? They are not at leisure yet, they will
when you are dis-banded, they cannot do it altogether; no, one after another,
as fast as they can get power; you shall have it may be clean straw and a
stone-wall, a stigmatized name of Rogue, Anabaptist, Brownist, etc. alack
alack, they have been so liberal to their fellow members (who lost J confess
great losses) some Towns through treachery, others Cities through couardice,
others stole one day, and was robbed the next* it is fit they should have
thousands for their faithful service, and it is pity such Masters should have
better servants, but as for you, alas alas, you are Sectaries, Schismatickes,
you made too much have, you bring the King to soon, to call them to accoumpt,
they must reign a little longer, and rather then they will want work, they will
begin with you, what care they what the King, Kingdom, or People suffer,
provided they be secured; Therefore gentlemen and fellow Soldiers, now while
you have Power improve it, remember the end of your taking up arms was to
defend the Kings Majesty, and to bring offenders to trial, let them be of
which side they will, without limitation, and accordingly let them know that
you expect and will have every member whether of the Lords or Commons, who
stands charged with any crime, to be delivered up to the ttyell of the Law to
be acpuitted or condemned; and that His Majesty be invested in His just power,
and that the great Taxes and burdens be removed, the Soldiers of all Armies,
that be or has been under command of this present Parliament, in point of
Arrears be satisfied, a general act of oblivion passed for both parties, so
far as law and justice will allow; mitigated it being a most unmercifull act
for the fathers crime to ruin whole families. That there be an account given
of all moneys received upon the several Ordinances of Parliament, and of the
disposal thereof; That the public debts be paid by a general tax, equally
laid upon all sorts and degrees of people according to their estate, (if there
be not enough found in bank in the lands of Parliament men, Committee men and
the like.)

That the Militia be put into faithful hands; and not continued in the
disposal of your and the Kingdoms enemies --

That corruptions in courts of justice be examined, reformed, and reduced to
the premitive institution.

That the illegal and extraiudiciall fees of Judges, Lawyers, and Jaylors may
be regulated.

That a Declaration be published to the Kingdom with speed by all the
faithful Knights and Burgesses in the House of Commons, against the illegal
proceedings of that traiterous party, and that they protest against them; to
the end the Kingdom may be informed who are their enemies, lest the good and
bad (being unknown) perish together.

That the just privileges of the Parliament may be by Declaration made
manifest to the Kingdom, and the Kingdom not inslaved by an unknown and
unlimitted privilege.

That the House of Commons be hence forward, not like a close Committee, but a
free Court of Judicature, always open to receive the Petitions of the
respective Counties and Corporations, by whom they are trusted, and to execute
Justice and Judgment without delay or partiallity; and that it be also
declared (as formerly) to be the liberty of the people to Petition; and the
duty of Parliaments to receive and relieve them.

That every Member of that house, against whom any charge has been or shall be
brought, be forthwith suspended the house, and secured, as has been the
practice of former Parliaments, and not protected and abetted.

That all ways that has been used by any Member of Parliament, or any other
Agents for them, either in Scotland or elsewhere for the raising of forces
against the Army, be speedily declared against by both Houses, and the Kingdom
enabled by their Militia to oppose all such forces, whether from abroad or at
home.

That sufficient care be taken for the liberty and protection of those which
cannot submit unto the external worship of the nation; though otherwise
conformable to the civil power and authority thereof.

This is that which must be the foundation of your peace if it be lasting, and
if you disband before this be obtained, you may say farewell, liberty, peace,
and all that outward comfort which you may justly challenge as your
Birthright, both by the law of God, and fundamental Institution of this
Kingdom.

And you poor Commons of England, unless you seriously and suddenly lay your
condition to heart, and as one man rise up for the vindicating of your selves
against those which have abused and daily endeavor to inslave you, and if you
do not now take this opportunity inioyning with and assisting of this Army,
who has been faithful in delivering you from one enemy, and have now again
undertaken to stand in the gap, and to be your protectors and restorers, J say
if you shall now dissent them, know assuredly, that you do hammer out a yoke
for your own necks, which will pierce the lives, liberties, and estates, of
your selves and posterities, and when your sufferings bring you sorrow, you may
not happily find deliverers.

You see they confess, in case the Body representative deceive their trust,
the body politic has power to preserve itself, Book Decl. page 207. Here
is warrant sufficient, up therefore and be doing, and the Lord who is wisdom
and strength make you both wise and valiant. Farewell.

This is the Counsel of him that will not only prescribe, but endeavor the
obtaining the same with the hazard of his life and fortunes. I. H.

FINIS.

