The Beauty of Holiness; OR A DESCRIPTION OF THE Excellency, Amiablenes,
Comfort and Content which is to be found in Ways of PURITY and HOLINESS.

Where you have that Glorious Attribute of GODS HOLINESS exactly set forth;
Together with the absolute Necessity of our resembling Him therein; Also all
the Scruples, Cavils and Obj^ctions (of any weight) which are made by the
Atheists, Worldlings and Libertines of our Time, against the Power of
Godliness, Refelled and Answered: Many Texts of Scripture cleared, The Marrow
of most of our Modern Divines (in reference to this Subject) collected, with
References to such as clear any Branch more fully; many incident Cases
resolved, and Knots untied, etc.

The Second Edition, with Additions of many useful enlargements, and a short
Catechism framed for the weaker sort.

By THO. HALL B. D. and Pastor of Kings-Norton.

1 Samuel 2. 2. There is none Holy as the Lord. Exodus 15. 11. Who is like unto
thee? Glorious in Holiness! London, Printed by Evan Tyler for John Brown at
the gilded Acorn in Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

Reverendissimo viro Domino Henrico Langly S. T. Dri, Collegii Pembrochiensis,
apud Oxonienses, Magistro Vigilantissimo; D. Petro Jerzey Academiae Procuratori
dignissimo, eruditis Sociis, una cum florentibus ibidem Musarum alumnis,
Omnigenam felicitatem a felicitatis Authore.
POst velitationes nonnullas Polemicas (ornatissimi viri, mihique multis
nominibus observandi) ad (...) revertor. Litium est plus satis, nec sunt
litigandi ista, sed orandi tempora. Nolim itaque a me crustulum aliquod aut
mulsum expectetis. Theologum ago, non Oratorem; veritatem quaero, non umbras,
insisto rebus non verbis; mihi prodesse propositum, non mellitis verborum
globulis decipere: malim enim rubeat impietas quam rideat, lugeat quam exultet.
Medicus non jucundior, sed utilior eligitur, ad quem sanitatis causa
concurritur, non voluptatis: Lachrymae auditorum sunt lauds nostrae. Attendite
itaque quaeso, est res magna, attendite, est res vestra, atque ita vestra ut
attingat vitam, non hanc fluentem punctulo, sed illam sine fine duraturam:
Opusculi enim hujus subjectum est profundum, augustum, arduum; de Deo dicturus
laboriosae tractat plenum opus aleae, quod ingenium summum and industriam
(quantum fieri possit) accuratam meretur: quodsi in alio Metaphysicae capite a
vero impruden aberraveris, audies heterodoxus; si de Deo, haereticus; error
iste periculum ferat, hic pernitiem, ut quam Barlow Exercit. Metaph
scitissime clarissimus ille nofter, and acutissimus Metaphysicus. At licet de
Deo cognoscenda pro merito non exponamus, tamen pro modulo cognitionem Deitatis
qui non assequatur perfectam, possit aliquam: modestos nostros conatus amat
Deus, and defectus vel ignoscat benign, vel suppleat.

Ad vos vero quod attinet (viri, Patres and Fratres) pergite quo pede
caepistis, Spartam quam nacti estis, hanc and ornate. Sint (...)


Senioribus actualiter, junioribus vero potentia and virtualiter commissa est,
non ovium sed animarum cura, quae quanta sit paucis sed emphaticis indicat
verbis Apostolus, Heb. Oportet tim re ac trem^ propter mo lem ac m^ nitudine^
curae. Ch 1
13. 27. Obedite ductoribus vestris. Quare? 1. Quia vigilant, idque non pro
corporibus, sed animabus vestris. 2. Quia rationem earum Deo reddi^uri sint.
Quodsi Patriarcha Jacob qui pecudibus praeerat, oves rationis expertes pascens,
and hominibus rationem redditurus, noctes transegit in^omnes, aestum and frigus
perpessus est, ne ulla pecudum illarum periret: quanto magis Scholarum and
Academiarum Doctores, non animalibus ratione carentibus praefectos, and non
hominibus sed Deo rationem reddituros, decet vigilare pro adolescentibus, quos
Christus non auro vel argento, sed Act. Ap. 20. 28.
proprio sibi sanguine acquisivit? Animarum itaque salutem (...) nullum enim
omnipotenti. Deo tale est sacrificium, O quam gloriosum est ^egnum in ^uocum
Chri^o doctore ^octorum reg^ant omnes ^ncti, full ^ent omnes doctores ut ^ellae,
ut soles (...) perpetuas ^ternitates! Lap.
quale est Zelus animarum; tales splendebunt tanquam stellae non solum in hoc
seculo, verum etiam in futuro. (Dan. 12* 3.) Sancti quos Dei cognitio ad vitae
sanctitatem allicit, talem habebunt splendorem, quale firmamentum syderibus
illuminatum; qui vero ad vitae sanctitatem alienae salutis procurandae studium
adjunxerint, ut alios ad pietatem sanamque doctrinam instituant, erunt quasi
coelestia lumina quorum splendorem nulla extinguet aut obscurabit aeternitas.
Quaerit Aquinas, utrum doctus sanctus, and simplex sanctus eandem mercedem
habeant? Textus hic nodum solvit, scilicet tantum esse inter eruditam
sanctitatem and sanctam rusticitatem quantum inter stellarum and firmamenti
splendorem. Ideoque S. S. posuit ad majorem consolationem etiam inter beatos
discrimen, ut majora illis eveniant gaudia, qui multum hic pro Christo
sudavere, and magna subiere pericula, ne molestiarum pertaesi a Deo ad mundum
hunc immundum deficerent. Estote itaque (florentissimi Academici) veritatis
hyperaspistae, haeresium mallei, sanctimoniae specula, Ecclesiae antemuralia,
gregi denique exemplaria: efficacior enim est operis quam oris vox, (...) est
optima Rhetorica, Realis magis movet quam verbalis concio.

Ad vos vero (juvenes selectissimi) quod attinet, omnes ingenii nervos studiis
intendite; mediocria enim ingenia diligentia plus semper effecerint, quam sine
ea etiam summa. Notus est Apologus concertationis inter Testudinem and Aquilam,
quarum illa iter de quo certabatur prius confecit quam haec, quia incessus
assiduitate alterius moras and diverticula praevertit. Ingenium instar ferri
usu splendescit, and exercitatione aptitudinem atque amplitudinem acquirit ad
maxima quaeque subeunda. Iuveniles porro cupiditates ceu pestem quandam
devitate, cordis concupiscentias coercete, carnis illecebras repellite,
voluptates denique mundanas fortiter, firmiter, contundite, reprimite. Temporis
opportunitates pro virili redimite; maximum enim talentum opportunitas, qua
amissa amittuntur omnia. Creatoris Spiritus ve stros matutine Deo consecretis,
oculos, ^erebrum, succum and sanguinem lento et impendatis Martyrio. a Lap.
vestri diebus juventutis vestrae recordamini; quo citius, eo melius; quippe
quod a juventute pendeat reliqua vita; quales enim sumus juvenes, tales erimus
plerumque senes. Vel a mundanis, imo vel a bestiis and avibus sapientiam hanc
ediscite; faber ferrarius cum candet ferrum, tundit: Agricola sementis tempus
ad amussim observat. Vel ciconia in caelo novit stata tempora; formica cibum
aestate comparat; anni breves; quae discenda, multa. Hoc itaque agite, -- Vos o
quibus integer aevi
Sanguis inest, solidaeque suo stant robore vires. Virg.


Ita fortis Deus virtute and spiritu* suo Est illa praesentia Dei non illa
communis repletiva, sed peculiaris gratiae. Pareus.
erit vobiscum, non paucis diebus, sed omnibus: prius mundus hic desinet quam
Christi vobiscum desinet praesentia: ille erit vobiscum in periculis protector,
in persecutionibus consolator, in laboribus adjutor, in dubiis director, omnia
difficilia vobis reddet facilia. Forti itaque simus animo, alacriterque munus
illud Ministerii obeamus: ob infirmitates nostras ne trepidemus, sed in
potestate Christi confidamus; ille in hoc opere nos non derelinquet, non ad hoc
ut nihil patiamur, sed quod multo majus est, praestiturus, ut nulla saevientium
crudelitate superemur: Deo enim praesente, auxiliante, defendente, quis
nocebit, impediet, opprimet? Nil nunc nisi vota supersunt.
Vespera jam venit; nobiscum Christ maneto:
Extingui lucem ne patiare tuam.


2. Humiles estote. Melior est humilis rusticus qui Deo servit, quam superbus
philosophus: Vnde quam saepissime prodiere errores magni nisi ex magnis and
superbis ingeniis*

3. In rebus adiaphoris sitis modesti, graves, inculpati, Quae nugae in Musae
omnes sunt Virgins, Apollo temperantiae and castitatis praeses, ad (...) 2. 12.
populo, crimen in clero. Vivamus igitur Temperanter erga nosmetipsos, just
erga proximum, and pie erga Deum.

Haec tria perpetuo meditare adverbia Pauli;
Haec tria sint vitae regula sancta tuae.
Sint vestes, gestus, capilli, etc. ad decorum compositi; eo nomine ad calcem
operis mihi fuit in animo (...) de comis adjicere, ad stateram sanctuarii
pensiculatam; in se quidem satis perspicua est and facilis, nisi maxima eorum
pars qui se Christianos profitentur, ad tegendam hanc superbiae sarcinam,
subtilitates nescio quas quaererent and confingerent. Horum sophismata,
speciossima quadam veritatis larva tecta, quam vere detexerim, penes pium and
prudentem lectorem esto judicium; aliorum censuras minime moror.

Minor su^ qua^cui possit ce^sura nocere.

Si plura adhuc desideretis, Authors quaeso consulite Marginales, e quibus vix
unam decerpsi lineam, ibi (...) accipietis (...), pressum, coagitatum and
superfluens.

Sed manum de tabula. Chartaceum hoc munusculum (viri vere venerandi) quasi
pignus aliquod amoris and gratitudinis. (...), (propter Gratiam illam a vobis
et ab alma matre Academia tam unanimiter tam gratis sine Prece vel Pretio, mihi
concessam) quam libentissime, quam humillime vobis dico, dedico. Beneplacitum
Dei inhabitantis rubum benedicat vobis, sit soli illuminationis, soli
consolationis, and scuto protectionis; det vobis gratiam in hac vita, and
gloriam in futura. Ita precatur, and (dum in vivis fuerit) precabitur Collega
vester and (...) in vinea Domini

E Museo meo Norton-Regis in agro Vigorn. Jan. 29. 1652. THO. HALL.

To my Beloved PARISHIONERS AND Much Honored FRIENDS, The Inhabitants of
Kingsnorton, Mosely, and Withal: The Upper and the Nether Springs, the
blessings of this life, and of a better.
Men, Fathers, and Brethren.
I Have often thought with much delight on that If we had stood at Gods elbow
when he bounded out the Nations and appointed the times and seasons that men
should live in, we should not have known (unless when Christ and his Apostles
lived) in what ago or place we should have chosen to have lived in, in respect
of the Gospel, more then in this Kingdom wherein we live. M. Tho. Goodwin,
Pris^a juven^ alios, ego nunc me^deni quenatu^ Gratulator. Ovid.
Soul-refreshing Text, [Acts 17. 26.] Where the Apostle tells us, that God has
determined the times which we should live in, and has fore-appointed the
bounds of our habitations: It Is matter of singular comfort in all conditions,
to consider, That the most wise God has decreed before ever I or thou were
born into the world, the Time when we should be born, and the Place where we
should live: We came not into the world by chance or fortune; nor do the places
we dwell in, fall to us by hap or hazard; but there is a sweet hand of
providence God would have his people to remember these things. See an excellent
place Deuteronomy. 32. 7, to 15 See more Ca^yll on Job 9. 24. p. 322.
that orders all, and a gracious God who has decreed that we should be born in
this blessed age, and best of times in respect of glorious light and means
(though we have made them the worst by our wretched abuse of them) and has
also allotted us the best Nation in the world to dwell in, and has given to us
in special, above most people in the Land, the fairest dwellings, and sweetest
habitations, even a little Canaan flowing with Milk and Honey, enriched with
many You have within your selves, three ministers, a free School, A Court
Baron, A Charter, Rich Pastures, etc.
Privileges, which many of our Neighbors round about us want; all which call
for our Thankfulness and Obedience, remembering that they that have much, of
them shall be much required. The Lord might have brought us forth in times of
Popery, superstition, ignorance and profanesse; he might have planted us
amongst Heathens and Infidels, who worship the devil for their God: It Is his
free distinguishing love that has made the difference, since we are by nature
as vile as the vilest. I desire therefore to quicken my self and you to a
grateful consideration of the loving kindness of the Lord, who has cast our
lot in the very best of Times and Places, when he might have allotted us the
very worst, and have done us no wrong. For my one particular, I think I have as
great cause Plurimum refert qui fueris antea, quique nuno sis scire, ne
ferocias, neve quenquam despicias. Wolphius.
as any, to admire the goodness of the Lord herein; that when I came from the
University a foe and not a friend to his truth and people, having been trained
up under Dr Lushington, an Atheistical, Arminian, Popish Tutor, and now a
Socinian and a See M. Baxters Saints Rest. 2 part p. 301, 302.
Mortalist: yet then the Lord of his own free grace brought me amongst you, My
first Tutor in Bal. Col. starved me, but this poisoned me: yet the Lord has
made a medicine of this poison, making me the more to love his truth, and also
his people, whom out of ignorance I opposed under the notion of Puritans.
and set me at the feet of Learned, Pious, Orthodox Divines, who instructed me
in the way of the Lord, and where the foundation of that little I have was
laid. To you therefore by way of Thankfulness do I Dedicate this Treatise; it
has been Preached in your ear; it now presents it self to your eye, that by
often Reading and Meditation on it, you may the better understand, remember and
practice that purity and Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.
Remember therefore what you have received, and heard, and hold fast and repent;
for it is not a bare speculative, notionall knowledge of these things which will
make you happy; but it must be an affective, practical, experimental
knowledge, so as to love, fear, desire and obey this most holy God. We must
begin our heaven here, there we shall be taken up for ever, with the
contemplation, admiration and praise of this our God who is glorious in
holiness: Prayer will then cease, but Praise and Love will endure for ever.

This is the chief end wherefore we Nostrum est sancta vita sanctificare
sanctitatem divinam, omnaeesque ad eandem exhortari, it aque sanctissimum Dei
nomen and gloriam apud omnes toto orb propagare. a Lap.
came into the world, viz. That by a pure, inoffensive conversation we might
bring glory to God, do good to others, and so spread his praise (what in us
lies) over all the world. Get public spirits now in these days of public
calamity; be zealous for Gods glory, valiant for his truth, resolute against
sin, and sharp against errors: Watch always over your selves, and over your
families; be industrious in catechizing and teaching your children and servants
the way of the Lord: by so doing you may propagate piety to posterity; for when
you have taught your children, they will teach their children, and their
children will teach the succeeding generations. Thus 2 Timothy, 1. 5. Magnum est
Dei beneficium pios nancisciparentes, ac praesertim matrem, a qua pene tota
filiorum educatio pendet. a Lap.
Lois Timothy' s Grandmother taught his Mother Eunice, she instructs Timothy,
and Timothy taught the Church, etc. Dye cloth in the wool, and the color will
be better and more durable. Teach children when they are young, and when they
are old they will savor of it, Prove. 22. 6.

Off with those deformed long-locks, those badges of Pride and vanity which See
my Treatise against long hair.
you have been so often warned of; imprison the truth no longer, hate not to be
reformed, lest the Lord put fire into the bush, and by some Fever, Pox, etc.
become your barbar, as he has been to some amongst us to their sorrow, etc.
What I here prescribe to you, it has been my study and endeavor (though in
great weakness and many infirmities) to practice amongst you. I have not laid
such burdens upon you, as I would not touch my self; my desire has been to
Preach to you vita and voce, by Practice as well as Precept. The Subject that I
present you with is one of the highest and choicest subjects in Divinity.
Justification and sanctification are the two main Pillars in the house of our
God, whereupon the whole building stands: I have therefore handled this
Attribute of Gods Holiness the more fully, 1. Because'tis omitted by the most
Zanchy, M. Will. Burton, M. Stock, D. Preston, etc. omit it wholly.
Learned, who yet treat fully and excellently on all the rest of the
Attributes. 2. A right understanding of this Attribute, will give us light into
all the rest; for what is said of Gods Holiness, is also true of his Wisdom,
Power, Mercy, Justice, etc. they are all in him Essentially, Eminently,
Originally, Causally, Formally and Finally. 3 As the knowledge of God in his
Attributes is one of the sweetest, choicest and most necessary kinds of
knowledge; so of all the Attributes, this of his transcendent Purity deserves
our most solemn and serious Meditation; it being (as I may so say) the
Attribute of all Sanctitas est attributum Dei nobilissimum, ob quod ipse
adoratione, omnique veneratione, obsequio, and cultu est dignissimus. a Lap.
Gods Atributes; he is Holy in his Mercy, Holy in his Justice, etc. and that
wherein the Lord himself glories most, and therefore is so often styled, The Holy
One of Israel; and is said to be Glorious in Holiness, etc. This Tract (such
as it is) I leave with you as a star to direct you in your way to Canaan, as
a friend to comfort you in your spiritual distresses, as a Counselor to
teach you and your children after you, what is that good and pleasing Cum
omnibus Christi ecclesiis, omnibus quibus possumus modis teneamur consulere;
tum maxim obligamur illi Ecclesiae quacum Deus nos conjunxit, ac ad quam nos
secreta sua providentia destinavit and vocavit. Rollos. Tota supellex mca est
charace a.
will of God, and as a perpetual monument of my care and desire of your
eternal welfare, you being that people to which the Lord has more especially
called me, and amongst whom he has by an Almighty hand of providence for many
years together protected me.

I have no better Legacy (now that I am going out of the world) to bequeath
unto you then this. Gold I have none, and Silver I have but little (besides I
have made mine own hands the Executors of that little) Omnia mea mecum porto,
but such as I have I give unto you, viz. a spiritual Legacy, which by the
blessing of God upon it, may prove better to you then mountains of Gold and
Silver. You have been in my heart to live and to die with you: This four and
twenty years have I been your servant in your School, in your Chapel and
Parish Church; and have continued with you in the midst of many dangers,
tentations and difficulties, when I could have had double and treble your Means
with peace and freedom; but it is work that I prize, not wages; I seek not yours
but you. I have coveted no man's silver or gold, or apparel, yea your selves
know that these hands of mine have ministered to my necessities; and that I have
kept my self in a single condition that I might every way be the fitter for
your service. But so long as you strive to walk answerable to the Gospel, and
show forth the power of it in your conversations, being willing to submit unto
Christ's yoke in this day of his power, I am resolved that nothing shall
separate us but death.

This Treatise has cost me some pains and study, and to tell you the truth, I
like it the better; we should not offer to God and his Church of that which
cost us nothing: It Is the diligent hand which God delights to bless, when the
idle shall be clothed with rags of discredit and discomfort: You have here the
sum and substance of many Sermons. Read, digest and Practice them, for they
are matters of Eternity, which will do you good for ever; when Riches fail, and
Friends fail, when Trades fail, and strength fails, yet Piety, where it is in
the power of it, is ^verlasting Riches, enduring Substance, a never fading
Treasure, having the promise both of the blessings of this life and that which
is to come: Keep this therefore whatever else you lose; Buy it at any rate* but
part with it at no rate; be like Pherecides the Athenian, who held the Ship on
the shore with both hands; one being cut off, he held it with the other; and
both being cut off, he held with his teeth. Resolve to part with all rather
then part with purity: Say to it as Ruth did to Naomi, (Ruth 1. 16, 17.)
Whether thou go, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy people
shall be my people, and thy God my God: Where thou die will I die, and there
will I be buried; The Lord do so to me and more also; if ought but death part
thee and me.

These things the Lord who is rich in Mercy vouchsafe to give you; he bless
you with the dews of Heaven, and the fatness of the earth; with the blessings
of his right hand, and of his left; he make you to abound yet more and more in
knowledge and in all judgment, that ye may approve the things that are
excellent, that ye may be sincere and without offense till the day of Christ,
being filled with the fruits, of righteousness unto his praise. This is, and
ever shall be the Prayer of

Your affectionate Pastor and hearty Well-wisher Tho. Hall.
Kingsnorton Jan. 30. 1652.
Imprimatur, Nov. 20. 1652. Edm. Calamy.

THE BEAUTY OF HOLINESS.
1 PET, 2. 16. Be ye Holy, for I am holy.
TO study the salvation of men's Souls, as it is one of Omnium divino um est
d^ssimu, (...) Deo in con(...) er^ntium; qui puro amore pro universoru s^lute
laborant, recte Deitormes and divini, imo divinissimi ^cupantur. Dionys. Are.
opag.
the highest and hardest works that we can undertake, so it is a work most
pleasing unto God; making us to resemble him, who delights in the prosperity of
his people, and is willing that all should be saved and come to the knowledge
of the Truth. Now since none can attain to this Salvation without
Sanctification; no happiness without Holiness; I have been at some pains to set
forth the Grace of Graces in its lively colors, to make us out of love with
sin, and in love with Purity and Holiness, which is the Pulchritudo haec non
est carnalis, sedspiritualis.
beauty of families, the strength of Cities, the walls and bulwarks of a Nation,
the Crown of the Church Militant, and the glory of the Church Triumphant: It is
the streets of gold in the holy City, the rich pavement of the heavenly
Jerusalem, (Rev. 21. 10, 11, 18, 19, 20, 2^, 27.) which renders the Church Fair
as the moon, glorious Pulchritudo habet vim magneticam and affectiva^, ita ut
trahit secum amore^, admiratione^, desiderium, Alsted.
as the sun, and terrible like an Army with banners, Cant. 6. 10. This is that
beautiful grace which has an attractive virtue in it to draw our love,
desires and affections after it. What Plato said of his moral virtue, is most
true of this Theological grace Twere able to make Persecutors, Professors;
Drunkards, Puritans; and the most sensual Epicure to become a mortified Saint.
Bolton, Direct. for Walk. p. 373. (...).
, if it could be seen with bodily eyes, it would be beloved of all. Hence the
Apostle joins purity and loveliness together, Phil, 4. 8. Whatsoever things are
pure and lovely, meditate and think on them till you be in love with them.
Light, beauty, excellency, are the object of our desires; now in holiness is
all this and much more; look what are the greatest earthly See the glory and
beauty of Holiness fully and sweetly set forth by Dr. Raynolds, Ps. 110. 3 p
349, etc.
excellencies, they are but shadows to the beauty of holiness. This is that
fairness and beauty so often mentioned, 1 Chronicles. 16. 29. Psalm. 45. 11, and 50.
2. and 1. 10, 3. and so highly commended, Cant. 1. 10, 11. and 4. 1. and 6. 1.
and 7. 1. Ezekiel 16. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

There is no beauty like that beauty which makes us like unto God; as sin is a
deformity, a blot, a most dishonorable, filthy thing, and debaseth the
creature; so grace puts a luster upon a man, and upon all his accomplishments;
it makes the face to shine, as Moses his did when he came from seeing God in
ihe Mount. In a word, Holiness is the Glory of God, the beauty of Angels, the
excellency of man, the ornament of all Societies, without which they are but
dens of devils, and cages of unclean birds. What Austin said of Righteonsnes,
is most true of Holiness: Remota sanctitate, quid sunt regna nisi latrocinia?
Take away piety, and what is the world but a sty o^ filth? So that holiness is
not only our duty, but our glory; it is both our work and wages, such
employment is our high preferment. Without this, if a man had the wisdom of
Solomon, the strength of Sampson, the riches of Craesus, the eloquence of
Apollos, and all the moral accomplishments of Cato, Fabritius, etc. yet he
must baptize them all Ichabod, There is no glory in them. It Is this that has
made all Gods servants so famous in their generations; it was not their riches,
parts, descent, etc. but their piety, they were holy men fearing God, and
walking in sincerity before him; this kept their names green and flourishing,
when the names of profane, unholy men, does rot and perish. Thus have I given
you a glimpse of the beauty of Holiness, to quicken your desires after that
which follows.

The scope of the Text is briefly this: Peter exhorting the faithful to
sanctity and sincerity of conversatio^, uses an argument draw^ from their
Adoption, ver. 14. Ye are the children of God, therefore it becomes you like
dutiful children to obey the commands of your heavenly father; that as he who
has called you is holy, and has chosen you out of the world to be his own
peculiar people, so it concerns you who are his children to rese^ble him in the
beauties In omni conversatione (i) ut nulla sit pars vitae, quae non (...)
bonnm sanctitatis odorem redol^at. Call v. in loc.
of holiness; and that not for a day or a week, but through the whole course
of your lives, in all manner of conversation; (i.) in all things, in all
places, at all times, and in all companies.

In the Text there is

First, A duty commanded, Be holy.

Secondly, A double reason to enforce it.

1. Because it is written: It is no new thing, no humane invention, but it was
long since commanded by God in his written word, that his people should be
holy, because their God was holy; alluding to Levit. 11. 44. and 19. 2. and 20.
7, 26. and 21. 8.

2. Because the God whom we serve is holy; and what should a holy God do with
wicked and u^holy servants? His holiness is both the Rule and Reason of our
holness.

1. We must be boly [As] he is holy, Sicut, (...). VD Reynol. Sinful. of sin,
p. 410, to 423.
by way of Analogy and Similitude, though not by way of Equality; He is our
pattern whom we must imitate, and strive to resemble, as the drop resembles the
vast Ocean.

2. He also is the reason and motive of our holiness, therefore we must be
holy, (...)[, quia, says the Text] Because our God is holy. It is he who has
separated Vos mei est^s, ergo a gentium pollutionibus abstinete. Calv.
us from the p^anc of the world, to be his own p^culiar; therefore we must not
fashion our selves like unto them, but we must walk as a people whom God has
chosen for himself.

Ob. By this command it appears (say Liberam voluntatem n nobis argu^t
provocatio ad acquirendam sanctitatem. Lorinus,
Papists and Arminians) that we have free will to get holiness of our selves;
why else (say they) does the Lord command us to be holy, and to purify our
selves, 1 John 3. 3. if it be not in our power?

A. 1. It Is not in the power of any man Sine Christo ad Christum pervenire
impossible est, Rollac.
to convert or sanctify himself: It is Gods prerogative Royal to be the Lord
that sanctifies us, Lev. 20. 8. None can come to him without drawing, John 6.
44. which implies our backwardness and great indisposition to the best things.
We are not only sick, but dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. 1. and what Velle, posse,
facere, principium, progressum and complementu^ omnis bon^, divinum danum
agnoscimus, Cypr.
power has a dead man to raise himself? It is God that must work in us both to
will and to do; for without him we can do nothing, Phil. 2. 12, 13. John 15. 5.
2 Cor. 3. 5. James 1. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man, 1. Non est capax
(says Beza) is not capable of spiritual things, they are above his capacity;
Nil dat quod non habet. 2. They are foolishness in his judgment. 3. He knows
them not; how then can he desire them? Nihil volitum nisi prius cognitum. 4.
They are spiritually discerned, but he is carnal, and wants spiritual sight. So
that you have four strong reasons in one verse against that spreading error of
Free Will.

2. It does not follow, because the Lord commands and exhorts us to be holy,
therefore we may gain it by our own strength; for

1. The Lord requires this of us, to put us in mind of our original
perfection; he calls for that which he gave us, but we have lost; he created
Adam in holiness, Genesis 1. 27. Eccles. 7. ult. We being all in lumbis Adami,
Adams posterity, God may justly demand that of us which once he gave us.

2. He does it to humble us, that seeing our own weakness and inability, we may
sue unto him for strength. These precepts show us not what we are, but what we
should be; they show us our Duty, and not our Ability.

3. These exhortations are not in vain, for they are a means by which God works
in us these things that he commands; there is Latens (...), a secret power of
the Spirit which goes along Dei d^re eit fa^.
with every command and exhortation to make it effectual in the hearts of the
Elect. When Christ bid Lazarus arise, there went a virtue along with that Call,
which made him to arise. Christ S S. non solum monet, s^ movet voluntat^m.
commands Thomas to believe, and immediately he believes, John 20. 27, 28. What
God bids them do, he makes them willing and able in some measure for to do.

4. As for that place, 1 John 3. 3. it speaks of a Regenerate man, one that
has faith and hope in him, and so has virtue from Christ to purify himself.

5. Yet we must not sit still like stocks and sots, and say Christ must do all;
we must do nothing, say the Sea them fully confuted. M. A^burges U^d. Legis, p.
86. Daven^nt. Determine. (...). 9.
Antinomians, but when the Lord calls we must answer, as the Church promises,
Cant. 1. 4. Draw me; what then? I will not go, but run after thee. Our wills
must concur with Gods will. Paul was not disobedient to the heavenly vision.
Acts 26. 19. Christ's sheep, when they hear his voice must follow him, John 10.
4.

The Text being cleared, two observations naturally flow from it.

That our God is an holy God. Dect. 1. 2.


Seeing our God is holy, therefore we that are his people must be holy also.

I shall treat only of the former, the later will fall in with the Application.

For the better explication of the point I will show you how the Lord may be
said to be holy.

Our God is holy 1. Essentially. 2. Eminently. 3. Originally. 4. Operatively.

First, God is essentially Holy, Holiness is 1. Essential^ter. Sanct^ ^ei est
(...) al^s, (...) ^s, ill^m (...), ar^ypa; ^ostra vero ac(...), dependens*
(...), ectypa. Alsteed,
his very Essence, it is himself, it is not a quality or accident that may be
separated from him. Holiness in Angels and men is a Quality and an An accident
is that which may be added to a substance, and after ^e taken from it, and yet
the substance re ma^n still
Accident, their Essence may remain though their Holiness be lost; but Gods
Holiness is so essential and connaturall to him that he may as soon cease to
be as cease to be Holy, Hence

1 He is constantly Holy; what is natural is constant; he is holy, yesterday,
to day and for ever; he ever was, is, and will be holy, Rev. 4. 8. He Is holy in
Heaven and holy in earth, holy and righteous Ver^ ac proprie. De^s est Sanctus
(i.) un versa^i perfectis^maque; justitia iust^s, in quo nihil vi^j, nihil in
^qui, nihil ^ali ess^ p^t est, eo^ pl^nus maiest^te. Zanchy.
in hell it self, holy in his word, and holy in his works; he never sinned, nor
can sin; the righteous Lord will do no iniquity; he is always just, righteous,
pure, good, and loves it in his people, he delights in such as study purity,
they are men after his own heart.

2. He delights in Holiness; what is natural is pleasing and delightful; God
delights to show himself to his people by this Attribute, hence he is so often
by way of Eminency called The Holy One of Israel, (i.) Isreal's most eminent and
glorious God; and by way of distinction from all other Gods he is called The
Holy One, none like him, Isa. 27. 7. and 41. 20. and 43. 15. Psa. 87. 18. Luke
1. 49. Angels have a created Holiness, and man inherent; both are said to be
holy, but it is analogically, by way of similitude and resemblance of Gods
Holiness; they are not essentially so as God is: We borrow our Holiness, and
have it only by derivation and participation from God; but it is his nature to
be so; he has it in and of himself; it is in him perfectly but in us
imperfectly. Men may be holy, but they are not holiness; their nature may be
sanctified, but Holiness is not their nature; but God is essentially and
naturally so, when ours is but Derivative and Relative: So that as it is an
aggravation of our sin and misery, that we are not only sinful in our
thoughts, words, and works, but our very nature is corrupt and sinful; So it is
the high glory of our God that he is not only Holy in his Word, Works, and
Decrees, but he is essentially and naturally so.

Secondly, God is eminently, infinitely, Eminenter. S. Dei est infinita and
intensive and exsensive. Lessius de Pe^f. Div. l. 8. c. 2.
transcendently Holy, hence he is said to be glorious in Holiness, Exodus 15.
11. because the glory of God does most appear in this Attribute; yea, it is the
beauty of all his Attributes, without which his wisdom would be but subtlety,
his justice cruelty, and his mercy foolish pity. Holiness is in him in the
highest degree without measure, Cum Deussie prima causa effectiva omnium,
eminentiori modo oportet omnium perfectiones habere, Aquinas.
he is an infinite Sea of Holiness, without either bank or bottom; had I the
tongue of Men and Angels, and should I preach a thousand years of Gods
transcendent Purity, yet there would be something still to be said of it,
because it is infinite, incomprehensible, unsearchable, our shallow
apprehensions are not able to sound the depth of it, our created understandings
being limited, are not capable of such an infinite vision. He is that thrice
Holy, one whom the very Scraphims adore, crying, Isa. 6. 3. Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God of Hosts. S. S. S. (i.) long san^issimus. Piscat. Nulla v^rborum
el^gantia, p^rsp cu^tas nulla Deum exco^digno exprimat, cum ea sit superlativa.
There is no Attribute that God more Glories in then in this; hence we never
read of any Attribute that is thrice, together repeated, but this only, we
never read that God is called Mercy, Mercy, Mercy, or Justice, Justice,
Justice, etc. But he is called Holy, Holy, Holy, D^i talis excellentia, ut vel
elaboratam ranscendat (...) Barlow Metaph. Exercit. 3.
to show his transcendent Holiness. What is said of his Greatness is most
true of his Holiness, Psalm. 143. 3. it is unsearchable and past finding out;
it is beyond the hearts imagination or the S. Creaturae ad illam puritatem
comparata, est instar n^li, and ^lut impuritas (...), Lessius.
tongues expression. Consider all the Holiness and Excellency that is in the
creature, all that and ten thousand times more is in God infinities infinite,
transcendently and super-superlatively. The Holiness that is in men it is
finite, imperfect, limited, a drop in comparison of this Sea, as a beam to the
Sun, or a shadow to the substance. Our Holiness compared with Gods, is not so
much as one little sand to a vast Mountain; hence the Holiness of the very
Angels compared with Gods Holiness is chargeable with folly, Job 4. 18. So
true is that of Hanna in her Song, 1 Samuel 2. 2. there is none Holy as the Lord
(i.) none infinitely, absolutely, independently, uncreatedly Holy, but he. As
he is so wise that all the wisdom of the creature compared with his, is folly;
and so strong, that all the power in the creature compared with his, weakness;
so he is so holy, that all holiness compared with his, is unholinesse; all
purityimpurity, and as a filthy rag: what Christ said of his Goodness, is most
true of his Holiness, Luke 18. 19. there is none good (i.) absolutely,
infinitely good but God: so there is none absolutely and infinitely Holy but
the Lord; hence the Heavenly Qui^e si^g, Revel. 15. 4. Thou only art Holy.

Abominable is the Pride of the Pope, who assumes to himself the Title of Thus
that petty Pope o^ Patriarch of ^anterb. owned the Title of Sanctissime Pater*
and pleaded for it. Pryn Archb. Trial.
Most Holy Father, exalting himself above Christ, who is stilled (...), Papa
vero (...). this shows that he is the Antichrist, that man of sin, exalting
himself above all that is God, 2 These. 2. 4. for none is most Holy but God
only, Originali^er, causaliter, radiraliter, exemplariter, finaliter et
fundamentaliter.
who is a jealous God, and will not suffer his glory to be given to another,
Isa. 42. 8.

Thirdly God is originally, causally, radically, and fundamentally Holy; he is
S. est proprietas Dei essentialis qua natura eius ^nundissima, castissima and
purissima est, ab omni vitio, labe, iniquitate and impuritate maxim abhorrens.
Origo fons and cansa omnis munditiei, castitatis and puritatis in creaturis,
Raven. S. Dei comprehendit omnem iustitiam, bonitatem, aequitatem. Rivet.
Sanctitas in Scripturis justitia vocari ^olet. Lessius.
the efficient, formal exemplary and final cause of all Holiness; he is the
rock and fountain from whence it flows; what is in the creature comes from him,
and must lead us like a River to this Sea; Lord, if there be this in the
creature, what is in thee? He is the Original of it; all Holiness is in him,
and none can be had but from him alone. He is not only holy perse, and in se,
but extra se: he is holy formaliter and effective. Holy in himself, and making
others holy; it is he that forms and frames, that works and infuseth it in us;
none can make the heart holy but he that made it; a man may sooner make a man
then make him holy. It is God only that can enlighten our understandings,
enliven our affections, quicken our dead wills, and set the whole man in a holy
frame.

Fourthly, God is holy operatively, in all his works and administrations, Deuteronomy.
32. 4. he is just in distributing rewards S. Dei es^ summa omninm virtutum in
Deo, integrit^s and persecti^. Raven.
to the good, and punishment to the wicked, Rev. 4, 7. He is holy, just, and
true. Holiness is the Righteousness of God in all his ways, Psa. 145. 17.
the Lord is righteous in all his ways; what is that? and holy in all his
works: the latter part expounds the former.

CHAP. II. The Use and Application of this Point is manifold.
1. IT serves for information, and that six ways.

1. It informs us, that the God whom Vid. Lactan. de ^alsa Rel. l. c. 9. 10.
11. Their gods were men that died, yea, the worst of men, Preston on the
Attributes, Omnes Dij gentium daemonia. p. 81. etc.
we serve is the only true God; there is none Holy as the Lord, none
essentially, eminently, infinitely, and originally Holy but our God: all other
Gods are Idols, false and filthy dunghill-Gods.

1. The Gods which the Heathen worshipped, what were they but unclean beasts?
their Jove an abominable whoremaster, a Parricide, a Sodomite: Mars a murderer,
Mercury a thief, Venus a harlot, Bacch^us a drunkard, Apollo killed his
Catamit^e, [formosum puerum dum amat, violat, Lactan.]

2. Ma^omet whom the Turks adore See 17. good use^ tha^ we may make of the
Alcoran. R^se T^. of the Alcoran in the end.
and worship, what was he but an ignorant, ^ate, vicious, cruel Pagan and
Sorcerer? the grand Impostor of the greatest part of the world, corrupt both in
his life and doctrine, his Alcoran full of B^asphemies, Heresies, Libertinism,
and Lies.

3. The Pope whom the Papists adore as their God, observing his superstitious
commands before Gods righteous ones, what is he but that man of sin? even a man
compounded of iniquity, directly opposite to Christ, who is the Holy One by way
of Eminency. Platina See more Whites way to the true Church, p. 417. 18.
Dominus Deus noster Papa. Glos. v. Prideaux Sermon. on 1 Pet. 5, 6, 7.
(one of their own) tells us of 13. Popes that were Adulterers, three
commonbrothelers, four incestuous ones, eleven Sodomites, seven Whore-masters
and Erectors of Stews, where every whore pays weekly a Julian penny to the
Pope, which many years amounts to forty thousand Ducats etc. yet these are they
whom their flatterers have styled Gods.

Now how should we admire the riches of Gods free grace in revealing himself
to us, yet hiding himself from ^he greatest part of the world! he has not
dealt so with every Nation, the Heathen have no knowledge of his Law: Oh how
many millions of men perish in their Heathenism, Turcism, Idolatry and
ignorance! It is his free distinguishing love that has made any difference
between us and the vilest Pagan in the world, who are by nature as vile as
they. So that as the sight of some ugly, monstrous creature, should make the
beholder praise God that he was not so: so the hearing and seeing of Gods
judgments on others, should quicken us to thankfulness who enjoy the glorious
light of the Gospel, and behold the truth in the beauty of Holiness.

Secondly, It informs us, that God cannot be the Author of sin. He is Holiness
Cum sis ipsa Sanctitas, sum tibi displicit omne peccatum. Lessius. See
Resbury Ser. 6. p. 100.
it self, a God of purer eyes then to behold iniquity; he cannot look upon sin
but with a vindictive eye, Heb, 1. 13. He is a God that takes no pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with him, he hates all the workers of
inquity, as the Psalmist excellently, Psa. 5. 4, 5. He forbids sin, he hates
sin, he punishes for sin, therefore he cannot be a patron of sin. True, he
permits it, but he never commands or approves of it, as appears, James 1. 13. 1
John 2. 16. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Romans 1. 18. yea Ambrose Med^a, p. 256.
he sees the sins of his own people and is angry with them, 2 Samuel 11. ult.
Rev. 2. 4, etc. Away Rutherf. ag. Antinom. 2. part. chap. 25 and 29 and 31.
then with that Blasphemous V. Rutherf. ag. Antino. 2. part. p 169 and 219.
Tenent of some Sectaries of our times, who say, that God is the Author not of
those actions alone, in and with which sin is, but of the very Pravity, Ataxy,
Anomy, Irregularity and sinfulness it self which is in them; yea God has more
hand in men's sinfulness then themselves. Now the Lord rebuke thee. Men and
Devils are the Authors of sin; but God is so essentially and transcendently
holy, that (with reverence be it spoken) he may as soon cease to be God, as
cease to be Actio in peccato qua naturalis a Deo; qua vitiosa ab homine.
good and holy, delighting in sin. He is indeed the Author of the action, but
not of the obliquity and sinfulness of the action; he hates that with an
infinite Walae^ loci p. 231. and ubi plura.
hatred, as being most opposite to himself, and to his pure Law. Sin is
directly contrary to his nature; he is The holy Deus est amator sanctitatis,
and acer rimus omnis immund^^^^ oser, ^ibel.
One, and sin is The unholy thing: Sin would destroy God, it is Dei-cidium,
therefore God will destroy both it, and such as delight in it.

Thirdly, It informs us of the sad condition of all such as are enemies to the
power of purity and holiness. It should be matter of lamentation to us, to see
the gross profaneness and Lioertinism that still abounds, notwithstanding all
the powerful Preaching, direful judgments, glorious mercies, and fatherly
corrections that we have had: To this end we must

1. Lament the impurity of our own hearts and lives: He can never truly mourn
for the sins of others, that has not first mourned for his own sin. When we
consider the depravation of our natures, our indisposednesse to the Homo es^
inversus decalogus. Job. 11. 12.
best things, what a contrariety is in them to Gods nature, it must make us to
loath sin, and our selves for sin, Ezekiel. 36. 31.

2. Then must we lament for that profaneness which like a Leprosy has
overspread the Land: It is not sufficient that we mourn for our own sins, but
God expects that his people should lay to heart the sins and abominations of
T^um est quod ti^i non dist^licet. 1 Cor. 5.
the times they live in; else we become accessory to those sins. We have six
excellent examples to encourage us to this duty.

1. Jeremiah 13. 17. weeps in secret for the sins of the people.

2. Lots righteous soul is vexed and grieved for the sins of Sodom, 2 Pet. 2.
8. Observe 1. The greatness of his grief; he was tormented like a man on a
(...). torqueor, equuleo imponi.
wrack, as the word signifies. 2. It was free; he wracked and vexed himself for
their sins. 3. It was cordial, his soul was vexed. 4. Constant, from day to day.

3. David's eyes run down with rivers of tears, and his soul was grieved because
of the transgressors, Psalm. 119. 53, 136, 158. he sheds not a tear or two, but
rivers of tears; and why? not for his own troubles or persecutions, but for the
sins of others.

4. Christ wept over Jerusalem for not knowing the day of their visitation,
Luke 19. 41, 42. and mourns f^ the hardness of their hearts, who could not
mourn for thmselves, Mark 3. 5.

5. Paul, (...), (a) irritabatur, excandescebat, maerore afficie^atur; talis
fuit perturbatio qualis est in morbis parox^smus. Are (...) tius.
Acts 17. 16. is troubled at the Idolatry of the Athenians, and weeps, Phil. 3.
18. to consider the sad condition both of the Seducers and the seduced.

6. The two witnesses prophecy in *sackcloth, mourning to see so many
bewitched with Antichrists delusions, Externo habitu vili et sord do sunt
testaturi amaritudinem et dolorem a^imi sui ob vastitatem ecclesiae, et
horribilem mundi coecitatem. Paraeus.
Rev: 11. 3. Such mourners are dear to God; he has a special respect unto
them, and care over them in times of common calamity, Ezekiel. 9. 4. They mourn
not for worldly losses, but for the abominations of the Land; not for
punishment, but for sin; not for one or two sins, but for All the abominations;
these must be marked for mercy in the midst of misery. God has an Ark for
righteous Noah, a Zoar for Lot, a grave to hide mourning Josiah from evil to
come, a Prison to hide mourning Jeremiah in, when merry Jerusalem is taken, and
the Kings eyes put out, Ier. 39. 6, 7, 11, 12, etc. And if ever this duty If we
cannot mend the things that are amiss, yet mourn. Dalachrymulam. Dulce and
deco^um est pro patria flere. Disputare malumus quam vivere. Nimium alterca^do
amittitur and pietas and veritas. See M. Ant. Burgess Ser. 22. and Ser. 51.
were in season, it is now, when sin like a flood has overspread the Land, and
holiness is turned into hollowness and hypocrisy; Piety is vanished into
Disputes; we are now all for disputing, pious living is out of date: We have
wrangled so long about niceties and vanities, that verity and sanctity are
almost banished. What Job 28. 12, 13. speaks of wisdom, may be applied to
sanctification; where shall purity be found, and where is the place of
sanctity? Our families say it is not in us, our Towns and Cities say it is not
in us, our Counties and Courts say, we know it not: It is fled to heaven and
has left the earth. The holiness and integrity of men is invisible, but their
wickedness and impiety is visible. Drunkenness, swearing, forswearing, cursing,
lying, whoredom, adultery, blasphemy, heresy, pride, divisions,
censoriousness, covetousness, oppression, atheism, malice, envy, hypocrisy,
bribery, extortion, cruelty, idolatry, apostasy, gluttony, profanation of
Sabbaths and all holy things, ignorance, ingratitude, murder, incorrigibleness,
unrighteousness, barrenness under the means of grace, contempt of the Gospel,
contempt of holy Magistrates, contempt of holy Ministers, contempt of the power
of godliness, neutrality and lukewarmness, superstition and will worship;
besides a numberless number of Anabaptists, Sicut in sentinam profundi maris
colluviones omnium sordium; sic in mores nostrorum quasi ex omni mundo vitia
fluxerum. Salvian.
Arminians, Socinians, Familists, Separatists, Arrians, Antinomians,
Mortalists, Enthusiasts, Perfectists, etc. Our Land is become the very sink of
all abominations, a sign we are fallen into the last and worst times, of which
this is one character amongst those nineteen ^ins of the last times, men shall
be unholy, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Amongst us you may find the Drunkness of
the Dutch, the lust of the French, the Italians ambition, the Spaniards
treachery, the Lap-landers witchcraft, the coveteousnes of the Jew, the cruelty
of the Turk, and the Monsters of Munster, etc.

Of these unholy ones there are four sorts.

First, Some are openly profane, they have neither good outside, nor good
inside; they have neither good hearts, Hi dicuntur Christiani ad contumelia^
Christi. Salv.
nor good hands; but are open swearers, open drunkards, open heretics; Gods
holy Sabbaths they mispend, his holy Name they blaspheme, his holy word they
scorn, his holy Sacraments they defile, his holy ones they persecute and
revile: they declare their sin like Sodom, they hide it not, Isa. 3. 9. woe unto
them, for they have rewarded evil to themselves. God will one day b^ terror to
all such profane wretches who instead of confessing, do profess their sin,
without either fear or shame. These are directly opposite to the most holy God,
and he to them; they abhor him and he abhorrs them, Zach. 11. 8. Mal, Quam
vis Deus propter immensitate^ essenti^ non poss^recedere reipsa, recedit t^men
tum ^ffectu, tum ^ffectu, quia odit tale ^abitaculum. Lessius.
4. 1. God loathes such an habitation, he will not dwell in such a swinesty and
brothel of uncleanness; he will not pour the oil of grace into such fusty
vessels, nor his precious balsom into such nasty sinks; the most holy God will
have no communion with any but holy ones. What Solomon says of the froward, is
most true of all the wicked, Prove. 3. 32. they are an abomination to the Lord;
not only abominable, but abomination it self in the abstract; therefore he cast
the Angels from heaven, Adam out of Paradise, drowned the old world, fired
Sodom, ruined Jerusalem. A wicked man's heart is nidus diaboli, a den for devils
to dwell in; the pure Spirit of God loves to dwell in a pure house: Holiness
becomes his house for ever; and therefore if we will have his Spirit for our
guest, we must keep our selves pure, not only from the blots, but also from the
spots of the world, James 1. 27. for if rotten and unsavory speeches do grieve
Gods Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 29. unholy actions will much more.

I would advise such to consider,

1. That if such as profess Religion, pray, read, hear the Word, observe the
Sabbath, etc. may yet come short of heaven; what will be their condition who do
none of these things? If the figtree that had leaves of profession, were
cursed: what will become of those that have neither leaves nor fruit, neither
form nor power, neither show nor substance; but are impure without, and impute
within? If Herod who 1. Heard John Baptist, though he was a sharp reprover of
sin. 2. He heard him gladly. 3. He reformed many things, Mark 6. 20. but not
all; he abstained from some sins, though he lived in others; yet if he missed
of heaven, what think thouwill thy end be who railest on such Ministers as
sharply reprove sin, neither hear them gladly, nor reformest any thing?
How many of our people fall short of See how far a reprobate may go. Perkins on
Mat. 7. 21, p. 244. etc.
those that fall short of heaven; that never confess their sin with Pharaoh,
nor weep with Esau, nor desire Gods Samuels to pray for them, as Saul did, nor
M. Ant. Burgess in his last Ser. p. 13. Ser. 3. and Ser. 21. and Ser. 90.
be zealous, as Iehu, nor repent, as Judas, nor tremble with Felix, nor are
almost persuaded with Agrippa, not have good desires with Balaam, nor humble
themselves with Ahab, etc. and yet all these were reprobates, and came short of
heaven.

2. Consider, That this thy wickedness makes thee like the devil, who is
called by way of Eminency, The unclean spirit, Math. 10. 1. 26. and 12. 43. as
being in himself most foul and unclean, and making it his chief delight to
provoke and stir up others to uncleanness, and so is directly opposite to
the most holy and pure God.

3. Consider, That whilst thou live in thy wickedness, there is no hope of
heaven; God has expressly told thee that no unrighteous person shall inherit
his Kingdom; no fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, drunkards, coveteous, etc.
1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Ephesians. 5. 5. no unclean person can come there, Rev. 21. 8,
27. (...), there is, a double negative, they shall in no wise enter. Heaven is
an inheritance undefiled, 1 Pet. 1. 4. It is Gods holy mountain, where he does
more especially manifest his presence and glory; such a pure place and presence
will not brook an impure sinner. Most men would have happiness, but they
regard not holiness; they would be glorified Saints in heaven, but not
mortified Saints on earth: Like Balaam, they would dye the death of the
righteous (Numb. 23. 10.) but not live their lives: They would go to heaven
with their sins; but if no unclean beast might come near the Mount lest it
died; and if a King will not suffer such as have the plague running on them to
come nigh his Court-Royal, where then will those beasts appear that have the
plague of sin running on them, and reigning in them? Who ever hopes for heaven
and happiness, Non est via ad regnum sine primitiis reg^; nec sperare potest
coeleste regnum cui neque super propriam datur regnare concupiscenti^m. Bernard.
must tread the path of holiness, or he will never come there. 1 John 3. 2, 3.
He that has this hope, (viz.) of attaining glory with Christ hereafter, must
first resemble Christ in purity here; as Christ died for sin, so he must dye
unto sin; for if we be in the flesh, we cannot please God, Romans 8. 8. and if
flesh and blood, (i.) the weakness of our nature cannot inherit glory, 1 Cor.
15. 50. how much less can corrupt nature!

Obi. Though our lives be wicked, yet we have as good hearts, and as good
minds and meanings as the purest of them all.

Ans. The emptiest barrels sound loudest; Saul boasts that he had kept the
commandments of the Lord, when he had broke them. Thy wicked life See M. Ant.
Burgess, Ser. 92. page 543. etc.
shows clearly the wickedness of thy heart; thy evil fruit shows that thy root
is evil; for a good tree cannot but bring forth good fruit; and if thy heart
were so good, thy life would be better; where the fountain is sweet, the
streams cannot be bitter; therefore deceive not thy self; for if thy life be
wicked, thy heart is a thousand times more wicked; and if thy actions be
naught, thy spirit is worse.

Obi. If the Lord be angry, we must bear it as well as we can; we hope yet to
escape, for he is merciful, etc.

Ans. Bear it? Alas! there is no enduring Gods wrath, it rends the rocks, melts
the mountains, makes the devils tremble and roar like the sea, and shrike for
fear. Hence the Lord tells his people Ezekiel. 22. 14. that their hearts could not
endure, nor their hands be strong in the day when he should bring his
judgments on them. If we cannot bear the V. Baxter Saints Rest, part. 2. chapter
4. sect. 10.
pangs of a rotten tooth, or a broken bone, how shall we endure the terrors of
the Lord, when they shall seize on all the powers both of body and soul?

2. Presume not of Gods mercy; for See more, Harsnet on Repent p. 318 etc.
Brooks his Remedies against Satan's d^vices, p. 52, etc.
as he is merciful to them that fear him, so he is just in punishing those
that rebel against him, and has said he will not be merciful to such as
offend of malicious wickedness, Psalm. 59. 5. though Burgess Ser. 59.
he be gracious to the penitent, yet he will by no means acquit the wicked,
Nihil est deterius quam pacem sperare ^ul (...) bellum gerimus cum Deo, and
illum promittere nobisquietum quem lacess^ mus peccato. Calv.
Exodus 34. 6, 7. Dreadful is that place; none like it in all the book of God,
against all impenitent, presumptuous sinners, that cry Peace, peace, and bless
themselves in their wickedness, adding drunkenness to thirst, and sin to sin;
What will the Lord do to such a one? Deuteronomy. God cannot satisfy himself in
threatening this heinous sin, as if the very naming of it had enraged his
jealousy. Trap. in loc.
29. 19, 20, 21. 1. The Lord will not spare him. 2. His anger and jealousy
shall smoke against him. 3. All the curses which are written in this Book shall
lie upon him. 4. Yet more, God shall blot out his name from under heaven. 5.
The Lord shall separate him unto evil.

A second sort of wicked, unholy persons Second sort. See D. Preston on 2 Timothy
3. 5.
are formal professors, mere outside Christians, who have a form of
godliness, but are strangers to the life and power of it; they have fine
words, but filthy deeds; like Pharaoh King of Egypt, ox, and prae^erea nihil.
Nihil prodest nomen sanctum sine moribus. q. vita a professione discordans ab
roga^ illustris tituli honorem. Salv.
who is said to be a Noise, (i.) nothing but words; he promises much, but
performs nothing, Jer. 46. 17. Like the profane Jews, they cry The Temple of
the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, yet for all that they will steal, murder,
commit adultery, swear fasly, and bow (for an advantage) to any Baal, Jer. 7.
9, 10. They make great shows, and come to hear the Prophets of the Lord, when
it is only to Hear, but they will not Do; with their mouths they praise, but
their heart goes after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 31. These Buts spoil
all: It is said of Naaman that he was a valiant man, But he was a leper; so
many are men of fine Parts, But they are proud, But they are covetous, But they
are censorious, always prying into the lives of others, Domi talpae, ^ris
oculati.
neglecting their own, etc. These walk as if they had been trained up in
Machiavells School, who tells men, they need not much care for virtue it self,
but for the appearence only in the eyes of the world, because the fame and
credit of virtue is an help, but the practice of it is a cumber. But sure if
the shadow be so good, the substance is better; if the very name of piety be a
praise, how Si bonum est bonum apparere, melius est bonum esse. Chrysostom. Nihil
t^m provocat Deum (qui est sanctitas) ad abominatione^ peccantis, sicut
hypocrisis, quae est simulatio sanctitatis. Wickli^.
great is the praise of real holiness! Counterfeit holiness is a
God-provoking sin; such feigned sanctity is double iniquity. The Scribes and
Pharisees could cleanse the outside, but within they were full of wickedness;
all their care was. Non ut fi^t, sed ut videantur, not to be, but to seem holy.
Hence Christ denounces such woes against them, Mat. 23. 25, etc.

We must not rest in outside holiness, but pray with David for a clean heart
and inside, Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me a clean heart, (i.) a heart freed 1.
From the guilt of sin, by faith in Christ's merits, Act. 15. 9. 2. From the
power and dominion of sin, by the spirit of sanctification. The heart is the
fountain, Pro. 4. 23. and the treasury, Matthew. 12. 35. If it be pure, all will
be pure: It is Gods Throne, his chair of State, the place of his special
residence (for God has but two Thrones, the highest Heavens and the lowest
hearts, Isa, 66. 1, 2.) therefore it must be kept as the Sanctum Sanctorum, for
He that defiles the Temple of God, him will God destroy: A faithful servant
will be careful to keep that room pure and neat, which he knows his Master
most delights in.

Obi. We live civilly, and therefore we hope we may be saved without sanctity.

Ans. So did the Scribes and Pharisees, who excelled the most of our civil
honest men, yet are now in hell, Matthew. 5. 20. How careful were they to shun
gross sins, as drunkenness, theft, fornication, idolatry, murder, extortion;
how strict in their company, they would have no familiarity with Publicans and
sinners, Matthew. 9. 11. and 11. 19. How unblameable were they in their outward
conversation? Phil. 3. 6. In the sight of men they were blameless; What strict
observers of the Sabbath? Luke 13. 14. How much in Fasting, Prayer, Alms,
Matthew. 6. 2. etc. How exact in their Tything, even to Mint and cummin, Luke 18.
12. Matthew. 23. 23. yet because it was but outward and hypocritical, they lost
all. Civility rested in, is but a beautiful abomination, a smooth way to hell;
and though such may be praised by men, yet are they but an abomination in the
sight of God. Let a man be the civilest and best natured man in the world, yet
without sanctification and a change, they are still in the flesh, and so cannot
please God. Many Heathens have been just and civil, yet for want of sanctity
fell short of glory. If ever therefore we would be saved, we must get our
civility sanctified, adding holiness to our righteousness, having respect to
All Gods Commandments, Luke 1. 75. Titus 2. 11, 12. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6.

Thirdly, A third sort of unholy ones, A thirdsort, Neuters. As the King of
Navarre said to Beza, Quod Pelago se non ita commissurus esset, quin, quando
liberet, pedem refer possit. Adams in vit. Bez.
are Neuters and Lukewarm persons, that are neither hot nor cold, but content
themselves with a Laodicean, middle temper, they are afraid of being too holy,
too forward, too precise; they will notlanch too far in the cause of Christ,
lest they should not get back again; they are John's indifferent, partly for
Christ, and partly for the world; partly for God, and partly for Idols; like
the Samaritans that feared the Lord, yet served their Idols too, 2 King. 17.
33, 34, 41. Like Ephraim, that was as a cake half-baked, Hos. 7. 8. irresolute,
and neutral, half an Isralite, and half a Pagan; see what follows, v. 9.
Strangers have devoured his strength. This is Englands sin, we are not valiant
for the Truth, we are all for Self; there is indeed a form and profession of
Religion amongst us; but where is the zeal, the life, the power? Is it not
hated by the most amongst us? Is not he that in the sincerity and simplicity of
his heart refrains from evil made a prey? And will not the Lord visit for these
things? Did he spue the Church of Laodicea out o^ his mouth for their want of
zeal? and d^ we think he will spare us who delay the building of his house, and
prefer ou^ own work before his? There are seve^ considerations which I shall
commen^ to such.

1. Consider, God accounts such Neuters as open enemies; however me^ esteem of
them, or they many thin^ of themselves, yet Christ tells us that (...) we be not
with him, we are against him, Matthew. 12, 30. It is not sufficien^ that thou
do not oppose piety, bu^ unless thou promote it in thy place and calling
according to thy power, tho^ art an enemy to it. Edom stood neutral^ in the day
of his brothers calamity (...) Obadiah 11, 12. God tells him that h^ esteemed
him as an open enemy, and threatens to punish him for it, v. 18.

2. Christ prefers open enemies before them, Rev. 3. 15, 16. I wish thou were
hot or cold, q. d. I wish thou were resolved one way or other; for I had rather
thou were any thing then what Fervidumesse est cor integrum, d lectione Dei et
proximi flagrans habere. Paraeus.
thou art; open hostility is not so displeasing to me as this neutrality: I had
rather thou were a Pagan, a Heathen, a Turk, etc. then a lukewarm Christian;
because it is easier to convert a Heathen, a Publican and open sinner, because
they sin through simple ignorance; they have no apology for themselves, and are
sooner convinced; but the Lukewarm person is not simply ignorant, T^dus est qu^
inter v^u tes et vitia fluctuat, quique ex v^ tute quidem vivere, et pecca^a
vitare vellet, sed certamen cum v^tiis et v^rtutis labo e^ refugit. Lyran.
nor yet zealous and fervent according to that he knows, and therefore is more
hardly wrought upon. Christ does not simply wish that they were, open enemies,
but in comparison of Lukewarmnesse. A zealous Papist is more hopeful then a
dead Protestant: such often prove admirable instruments, as Paul a fiery
persecutor, after becomes a zealous Preacher. Luther a S^ito me allquando
fuisse Mon^um, and pap^stant insa^issimum. Luth in Praefat. Tom 1.
blind, zealous, mad Papist, after becomes an excellent pillar in the house of
God.

3. Consider, Neuters are the people of Gods curse. The men of Meroz were
cursed for their neutralizing; they did not hurt Gods people, yet because they
did not help them, Curse ye Meroz, Judge. 5. 23. Maledicendo maledicite, Heb.
Cursing curse ye Meroz, (i.) Let him be surely, bitterly, all-over accursed:
Why so? Because they came not to the help of the Lord, (i.) to the help of his
people; for the Lord takes the kindness which is showed to his people as done
to himself, Numb. 31. 2, 3. Matthew. 25. 40.

Obi. The enemy is mighty in men, in arms, wisdom, authority, strength and
parts.

Ans. Therefore curse Meroz, because they have dishonored me by their base
fear and unbelief, and durst not come to the help of the Lord against the
mighty. Christ exceedingly loathes and dislikes such a temper, and therefore
Uomitus hic significat Deum exe^rari tepidos; sicut execramur id quod os
evomuit. 2. ^d fieri violentia magna sicut fit vomitus. a Lop.
threatens to spue them out; the punishment is suitable to the sin; a foul sin
must be thrown into a foul place; and as a man loathes his vomit, and cannot
endure the sight or sent of it, so God will reject those persons and Nations
that are not zealous for his glory; they are a burden to him, and he is not at
ease till he cast them up.

4. Neuters are in a worse condition (...). Thucyd^d. Such as are in a middle
condition a^e assoyled (if not slain) on both sides.
then any other men, because they are hated of all sides. God hates them
because they halt and are not fully for him, and therefore he threatens to
punish such as swear by the Lord and by Malcom too, Zeph. 1. 5. And the devil
hates them, because they are not fully for him. Good men hate them because of
their badnesse and backwardness; and evil men hate them because they pretend
to goodness. Thus are they justly hated of all sides, who are truly of no side.

5. He is a spiritual coward, and so must answer for disheartning others. 2 Timothy 4. 16. When Paul came to answer before Nero, all men forsook him. I pray
God (said he) it be not laid to their charge: They were obnoxious to a curse,
though it were not presently executed.

6. They shall have no comfort when times of refreshing come; no dividing of
the spoils; God will do his own work without them, deliverance shall come some
other way, when they and theirs shall perish.

7. It is contrary to our National Covenant, so solemnly sworn before the Lord,
Art. 6. We vow against detestable indifferency and neutrality in the Cause of
God. If the good man perform his Covenants which tend to his hurt, Psalm. 15. 4.
much more should we perform the Covenants which tend to our good. Oh then let
us serve the Lord truly and totally, without halting or halving: God will have
all or none at all. Like Caleb, let us be men of other spirits (differing from
the sordid spirits of the men of the world) following the Lord fully, Numb. 14.
24. Let us cleave to the Lord and his ways with full purpose and resolution of
heart, Act. 11. 23. As David danced before the Ark with all his might, 2 Samuel
6. 14. so let us pray fervently, hear attentively, observe Gods Sabbaths
cheerfully, follow our Callings diligently; For if we do these things, we shall
neve be moved. Fourth sort, Scorners at purity.


A fourth sort are such as scorn at purity, and make a mock at holiness. When
Christ did but set his face as though he would go to Jerusalem, the Samaritans
hated him, Luke 9. 51. So let a man begin to resolve against sin, and to cross
the corruptions of the age he, lives in, and presently he shall hear, This is
one of the holy Bretnren, a Puritan, a Precisian, a Presbyterian, a Roundhead,
(...) Hypocrite, a Saint forsooth. As it was said of simplicity, that --
Simplicit^s, cujus ^on au^o ^re nomen. Iuven.
it was almost a reproach to name it, so it is almost a crime to mention
sanctity in this profane age; or to use the title of holy Brethren, and the
Brotherhood, though the Apostle uses both, Heb. 4. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Not long
since it was a step to preferment to rail upon Pauper Lutherus (...) fecit
divites,
Puritans; as many by railing at Luther got riches; and others by reviling
Calvin got Deaneries, Bishopriks and Cardinals Caps, according to the distich,
Sis fur, sis nebulo, sycophanta, and turpis adulter,
Calvinum ferias fulmine, magnus eris.
Be thief, adulterer, be sycophant or knave,
If Calvin thou can smite, thou shall be brave.


But if the Lord plagued the spies for raising an evil report on the Land of
Canaan, Numb. 14. 36, 37. let them not think to escape the hand of justice,
that raise slanders on purity, which is the way to the celestial Canaan. Let
such consider these five things.

1. In scoffing at pure ones, they scoff Benignissimus and p^issimus Deus
communem sibi cum serv^s suis and (...) and cont^meliam facit, etc. Salvian l,
8. p. 292.
at God; he takes the injuries done to them, as done to himself; Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou Me? As Solomon says of the poor, Prove. 17. 5. He that
mocks the poor, derides him that made him; so he that mocks the pure, derides
him that made him so: and did ever any mock at God and prosper? Let the
potsheards strive with the potsheards of the earth, but woe to him that striveth
with his Maker, Isa. 45. 9.

2. Thou art come to the highest degree of wickedness: To want purity is
dangerous; but to scorn at it is most dangerous: Hence David sets them in the
devils highest form, and makes them Doctors of the chair, Psalm. 1. 1. who sit
in the seat of scorners. These are vassals of Satan, vessels of wrath, sons of
Belial, enemies to God and to all goodness.

3. Consider, Whom do thou scorn? Are they not the people of God? thy best
friends? thou farest the better for them every day; the tares are spared for
the wheats sake, and were their number once accomplished, the worlds frame would
soon flame about thy ears; they are a people near and dear to God; by their
prayers they either keep off judgments, or get them sanctified, and therefore
woe to the world when God takes them away: When Noah was shipped, then came the
flood: When Lot was safe, Sodom is destroyed: When Luther was dead, the wars
began in Germany. Many esteem the godly no better then a pack of precise fools,
but they know that wicked men are fools, and the time is at hand when
themselves shall confess it. There is a Canonical truth in that Apocryphal
Impii hic rerum evdentia suaque jactura et* damno convict, serio sed
seroagnescunt vanitatem s^a (...), honorum et voluptatum, quod cio evanescant,
etc. a Lap. i^ locum.
Text, Wisd, 5. 4. to 10. This is he whom we had sometime in derision and a
proverb of reproach; we fools counted his life madness, and his end to be
without honor; how is he mumbred amongst the children of God, and his lot
among the Saints? etc. what has pride profited us? or what good has riches
with our vaunting brought us? All these things are past away like a shadow, and
as a post that hasted by, etc. This ere long will be your language.

4. Consider, Thou may need their prayers ere thou die: A Pharaoh in
trouble may beg for the prayers of a Moses. Yea, have we not known some in our
own time, that have been notorious scorners at Puritans, yet upon their
deathbeds have desired their prayers, and have confessed if any go to heaven, it
is such as they?

5. Consider, That God is King of Saints, Rev. 15. 3. therefore he will defend
Quamvis nulli sint excubatores qui defendant Jerusalem, nulli sint mili^es
praesid^arij, nulli denique custodes, ego tamen unus sufficiam. q. non modo ero
murus ad hosts arcendos, sed ero ign^s ad incutiendum terrorem. Calvin. See
more Caryll Job 8. 20. p. 122, 124. and Ball on Faith, p. 258.
them, and offend their enemies; he will be a wall of fire round about them,
Zach, 2. 5. He tenders them as the apple of his eye: They are the Sign^t on his
right hand; His portion; Deuteronomy 32. 9. Isa 19. 25. Joel 2. 17. Psalm 33. 12.
His pleasa at portion; His inheritance; His ^wels; he accounts of all the
world but as ^umber and dross in comparison of them. Hence he threatens to
ruin all such as do oppose and persecute them, Jer. 2. 3. God has made
Jerusalem a burdensome stone, a cup of poison, a hearth of fire among the wood,
a torch of fire in a sheaf to consume her enemies, Zach. 12. 2, 3, 6. Beware
then of hurting them, lest fire proceed out of their mouths and devour you,
Rev. 11. 5. not material fire, but spiritual fire; by their prayers they bring
down judgments on their incorrigible enemies. God will ruin those Powers,
that go about to ruin his people. Pharaoh that would destroy Israel, was
destroyed himself: Daniels accusers that thought to have torn him in pieces
with lions, were themselves torn in pieces by these lions. Dan. 6. 24. Hence
the Lord doubles and trebles the threatening [Isa. 8, 9, 10.] to show the
certainty of it; ye shall be broken, broken, broken, [vahettu, vahettu,
vahettu,] ye shall be thrown down, thrown down, thrown down, or, confounded,
confounded, confounded, (i.) certainly, suddenly, irrecoverably confounded;
and why so? v. 20. for God is with us; and if he be for us, who can be against
us? The proud of the world look upon the people of God as a company of poor,
weak, silly people, whom they can trample on at pleasure: It is true the people
of God simply considered in themselves, are the weakest society in the world,
they cannot shift for themselves as the world ^an: Hence they are compared to a
Dove, a Sheep, a Vine, a Widow, etc. but consider them in relation to their
God, and so they are the strongest society in the world; excellent is that,
Jer. 50. 33, 34. The people of God were oppressed by their enemies, they held
them fast and would not let them go, but their Redeemer is strong, who will
plead their cause, etc. Woe then to England for the injuries which are done to
real Saints and zealous Christians. In other Nations and Religions the more
zealous a man is, the more he is prized; but with us if a man be zealous for
the In hoc scelus res devoluta est, ut nisi quis malus fuerit, salv^es esse non
possit. Salvian. l. 5.
doctrine and discipline of Christ, and cannot bear them that are evil, etc, he
is presently made a prey, etc. Let such know, God will not take it at their
hands; he that reproved Kings and Potentates for wronging his people, will not
spare peasants and inferior persons, Psalm. 105. 12, 13, 14.

Fourthly, It may inform us, If our God be so holy and pure, then his worship
also must be pure. What should a pure God do with an impure and mixed worship?
he will have no plowing with an Ox and an Ass; he hates a Linsey-Wolsey Aut
undique religionem toll, aut usquequaque conserva. Cicero. Phil. 2.
Religion, Deuteronomy. 22. 10, 11. There is no serving him and Idols too, Josh. 24.
19. He tells these Idolaters, Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy and a
jealous God, that can endure no corrivall in his worship. He will De Deo nit
sine Deo.
have all done there according to the pattern; we must set up nothing in his
worship without the warrant of his Word, Matthew. 28. 20. Whatsoever he commands,
not whatsoever men command, must we observe to do. Gods Courts are Courts of
holiness, and therefore no uncleanness must be set up there, Isa. 62. 9. Away
then with all Popish trash on the one hand, and with all those new coined ways
of Arminianism, Socinianism, Anabaptism, etc. on the other hand; that one
question will non plus them all, Isa. 1. 12. Quis haec efflagitavit? Who has
required these things at your hands?

Fifthly, It informs us that the persons Cum Deus sit ipsa puritas, in suis
cultoribus summa^ animi puritatem, Reverentiam and attentionem requirit: non
enim summae puritati potest placere nisi quod purum est. Lessius.
must be pure: As the worship must be pure, so must the worshippers; The God of
purity must have pure servants, the fountain of holiness will have none but
holy followers. It is a disgrace to an eminent holy man to have a bastard lay
claim to him. Psalm. 50. 16. To the wicked says God, What have thou to do to
declare my Statutes? When ever we come to worship this glorious God, we must
wash our hands in innocence, Psalm. 26. 6 and purge our families from sin, as
Jacob did his from Idols before he went to Bethel, Genesis 35. 1, 2, 3. The people
must be sanctified and prepared, before the Lord will deliver his holy Law unto
them; then and not tell then does God speak, Exodus 19. 14, 15. compared with 20.
1. He will not take a wicked man by the hand. What communion has light with
darkness, Purity with impurity, Virtue with vice, beauty with deformity, life
with death, or the chiefest good with the foulest evil? There must be always a
purging of our hearts from sin before we draw nigh to God in praying, hearing,
Sacraments, etc. else the Lord will abhor both us and our duties, and will
answer us according to our Idols, Ezekiel 14. 3, 4. Under the Law, if any man came
to offer a sacrifice with his uncleanness on him, he must be cut off; there
must be washing and cleansing before he came; so in all our approaches to God
in duty, there must be not only a habitual, but also an actual fitting and
preparing of our selves for the work. Therefore when James (4. 8.) had
commanded us to draw nigh to God, he presently adds, Cleanse your hands ye
sinners, and purify your hearts. Our hearts are not fit to See more Harsnet on
Repent. p. 193. etc.
serve the living God, till they be purged from dead works, Heb. 9. 14, God
will not vouchsafe to reason with us, nor to have any communion with us, till
we have first washed our selves and made us clean, Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18. Then come
let us reason together. The Lord will be worshipped in the beauty of holiness
Sanctitati exosum est omne peccatum: ut Deus sanctitatem sum amat, ita
peccatum sum odit. Les.
or not at all, Psalm. 96. 9. there is no pleasing him without it, and none that
ever had it in truth but pleased him.

Obi. We are justified; What need we then care for sanctification? Christ has
redeemed us; therefore now we may live as we list, we may sing and be merry;
for Christ sees no sin in us, etc.

Ans. We must show the truth of our justification by our sanctification; for
Frustra de fide gloriantur, qui fidem sanctitate non ornant. Sibel.
where the one goes before, the other always follows; they are inseparable:
When the tree is good, it cannot but bring forth good fruit. Where Christ is
Obedienta Christi non tollit obedientiam Christianam. Thesit Cantab. 1652. See
seven Arguments for this, and al objections answered by M. Ant, Burgess in his
last Sermon, Ser. 9, 10, 11, 12 13, 14. and M. Bedford, ag. Antinomians. Chap.
5. p. 41. and M. Baxter S. Rest. p. 20.
made righteousness, to them he is made sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Where he
forgives sin, there he cleanses from sin, 1. John 1. 9. 1 Cor. 6, 11. Where he
pardons sin, there he gives power against sin; he first drowns and then subdues
them, Micah 7. 19. according to those promises, Jer. 31, 33, 34. with 33. 8.
Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. As the effect always follows the cause, light the sun, and
fruit springs from the root, so sanctification ever attends on justification.
Where Gods Spirit dwells, it is never idle, but is always changing us into the
image of God from glory to glory, working in us a detestation of sin, with a
love and delight in newness of life.

This is matter of singular Consolation to many gracious souls, who doubt of
their justification, and yet they show it by the fruits of sanctification; they
walk humbly with their God, they have respect to all his Commandments, they
hate every false way, they are fearful to offend, careful to please; they
desire not only pardon for sin (which a carnal man out of self-love may do) but
also power against sin; they would be sanctified as well as justified, they
desire as freely to forgo their sins, as they desire God should forgive them;
and to part with them, as to have them pardoned: they would be freed not only
from the evil, but from the filth of sin; not only from the damnation, but also
from the dominion of sin. When we see a man walk and move, we conclude he
lives; when we see a tree bear fruit, though it be but small, we conclude there
is life in the root, it is not yet dead; and therefore who ever thou art that
find the graces of Gods Spirit wrought in thy soul, though they be but weak,
yet if they be there in truth and sincerity, thou may with comfort conclude
that thou art justified; for though works of Sani hominis act ones non sunt
sanitatis causae, sed indicia
sanctification be not meritorious causes of our salvation, yet they are signs
and evidences of it; so love and good works are not causes of our
justification, but Non a Part ante, sed a Part post.
signs of a man that is justified; Christ only is the way by which we come,
good works are signs that we are in that way: Hence the Apostle exhorts us to
give all diligence to get assurance by doing the things named, 1 Pet. 1, 5, 6,
7. with 10. and blessedness is pronounced to the doers of Gods commands, Rev.
22, 14. Psalm. 15. 1, 2. and the sentence at the day of judgment of absolution
or condemnation will be pronounced according to our works, because they best
show our faith or infidelity, Matthew. 25. so 1 John 3. 14. 2 Timothy 2. 19. The
foundation (i.) Gods decree of election stands firm and sure, so that his elect
shall never fall away. But how shall we know that we are such? By the effects,
if you be such as call on the name of the Lord, and 2. depart from sin; these
may be a foundation evidentiall, as 1 Timothy 6. 19. Though Christ only be a
foundation fundamental. So that I conclude, It is a safe and sure way to
labor after assurance of our interest in Christ, by the fruits of
sanctification; it is safe reasoning from the Effects to the Causes; Here is
heat, therefore there is some fire; the trees flourish, therefore the spring is
come; here is light, then the sun is risen; here is good fruit growing,
therefore the tree is good; here are spiritual desires, spiritual affections,
spiritual ends and aims, spiritual acts and operations, therefore here is
spiritual life. These marks may See 20 Arguments for this. Baxter. cc. p. 74,
75.
contribute much to our Consolation, though nothing to our Justification.

Obi. The Spirit will witness and assure us of our salvation, though we want
these Marks.

Ans. It is a mere delusion to talk o^ the Spirits witnessing, when men live
remisly and walk contrary to the word: The spirit of the devil, and the spirit
of delusion may speak peace to them, but Gods Word and spirit never will, they
never speak peace to presumptuous sinners, nor to unmortified, carnal, loose
professors.

Away then with those profane Libertines, Familists, Antinomians, etc. These
would be wiser then James or John, who make works of sanctification evidences
of our justification, James 2. 1 Ioh. 2, 3, 4, 5. See twelve convincing
Arguments for the Necessity of works of holiness. Mr. Ant Burgess. Vindic.
Legis p. ^0, 11, etc. Ru^erf. ag. Antinom. 2. part chapter 38. p. 30. and 61. and
77. and. 81. See Ruthers. ag. Antinom. 2, part. chapter 43. p. 46.
of our times, who under pretense of crying up justification, do cry down
sanctification: They would have Christ for a Savior, but not for a sanctifier;
they would have him for a Jesus to save them but not for a Lord to rule them;
as a Priest to mediate for them, but not as a Prophet to teach them, or a King
to ^eign over them. They separate what God has joined; but they must know that
he will not be Jesus to save, where he may not be Lord to rule, Heb. 5. 9. He
will not justify the persons, when he may not sanctify their natures. It is
therefore a very dangerous error to separate or confound justification and
sanctification, as our Antinomians do, whereas they are two distinct things,
and differ in many particulars, as you may see in B. Ushers Body of Divinity,
p. 202. (...) (...) Rem. ag. Satan's Devices, p, 205. etc. We must not expect
our Rest here. Baxter Saints Rest, p. 559.
and Sibelius on Jude v. 1. p. 40.

2 As for your singing, comfort, joy and merriment, you are too hasty; we are
yet but in the fight, the warfare is not ended; he that puts on his armor,
must not glory as he that puts it off: We are but in the way, we are not yet at
home; and therefore let none be mistaken; this world is the place of duty, of
weeping, wrestling, watching, striving, running, fighting, etc. Heaven is the
place of resting, singing, comfort and rejoicing; there all tears shall be
wiped from our eyes, all fears taken from our souls; there shall be no working,
watching, praying; there is no Temple there. But he that has all joy in this
life, must look for none in another, Luke. 6. 25. and 16. 25. It is far
better to want comfort, then grace; for comfort is not essential to holiness;
though usually it attend it, See Love, Degrees of growth, p. 143, etc.
yet God for good ends may hide comfort from the eyes of his dearest servants
here.

3. Whereas you think that God does not see your sins; you must know, that if
you do truly belong to him, he takes more special notice of your sins; for he
is more especially present amongst his people, he walks in the midst of the
golden Christus in medio Ecclesiae prvoidentia sua praesto adest, omnia coram
intuetur, fidem, diligen iam probat, praem^is compensat; ignaviam et
praevaricationem aversatur, poenis ulciscitur. Pareus.
Candlesticks, Rev. 2. 1. to behold their holiness and obedience to reward it;
to behold their sin and disobedience to punish it: He is the holy One in the
midst of his people, Hos. 11. 9. therefore his people must keep themselves from
every evil thing, and suffer no iniquity to reign either in themselves or in
their dwellings: For it is the sins of Gods own people that do most displease
him, they are as it were the only sins, as Jer. 32. 30. God takes no notice of
the sins of Criminosior est culpa ubi ^onestior status: Si honcratior est
persona peccantis, peccati quoque mayor invidia. Sal. de Gub. l. 4. p. 128.
others, in comparison of the sins of his own people. 1. Because they are a
people near to him, they are his spouse, his sons and daughters, his
houshould-servants, and so their sins do more dishonor him; the world will
conclude, that the Master cannot be good that has such wicked followers. 2.
Their sins are Quomodo bonus Magister est, cuius tam malos videmus esse
discipulos? Salv. l 4. mihi p. 141.
more scandalous, and cause Gods Name to be blasphemed by the enemies of
Religion, 1 Samuel 12. 14. Romans 2. 24. Ezekiel. 36. 20. 3. Their sins are committed
against greater means, and greater mercies, Grave and luctuosum est; ipsa Dei
Eoclesia quae in omnibus esse debet placatrix Dei, quid est aliud quam
exacerbatrix? Sal. de Gub. l. 3. p. 87.
against greater light and knowledge, against the motions of Gods Spirit and
cheeks of conscience, etc. Wothen to Antinomians that bid men after adultery
and theft, rejoice, for God loves not heaviness, etc. See them fully confuted,
Rutherf. against Antinom. part. 2. chapter 32. chapter 37, 38, 39.

Sixthly and lastly, It informs us, That our Religion is the old and true
Religigion; that Religion which teaches men the way to obtain Gods Image,
which consists in Holiness and Righteousness, See M. Ienkyn on Jude, 6. p.
468.
that is the old and the true Religion; but our Religion only teaches this.
Our Religion is as old as Adam, whom God created after his own Image in
Righteousness* and Holiness; so that as Righteousness and Holiness is elder
then sin and wickedness; so is our Religion then all other Religions; Popery
is a new and See D. Halls old Religion
false Religion; instead of sanctification it sets up Ceremonies, and calls for
outside worship, and bodily exercise which profits little; and instead of
regeneration and renewing of our corrupt nature, it pleads for nature, as but
half-dead and wounded only, and needs but a little reviving and strengthening.

CHAP. III.
THe second use is for Instruction, Sanctitati d^betur reverentia. Les. I^e
(...) ab (...), colo, ^en ror; q. d. ^b puritatem cole^dus and ^nera ^us. A Lap.
and that ten ways.

1. We learn to adore and admire the transcendent purity of God, which appears
in all his Attributes. Excellency calls for reverence and admiration; we admire
great Princes and Potentates when we see them in their glorious Robes, stately
Palaces, and honorable attendance; and shall we not admire the glory of the
King of Kings, before whom the Angels stand with reverence and fear? It is mere
Atheism to forget the Lord days without number, and to have him seldom in our
thoughts; when we can pass over his glorious works of mercy, power,
providence, and justice, without due observation. 'Twill be our wisdom to eye
and observe When there be divisions, ruins, plunde^ings ^n a Kingdom, the^e i^
a wheel in those wheels, a providence that acts and orders them. Green^.
his holiness and wisdom in all those cross workings of providence, both
toward our selves and the Nations: He has a wheel in the wheels, Ezekiel. 1. 16.
When we think the wheels go backward, he can make them go forward; and those
ways which we think will ruin the Nations, he can make them a means to raise
them; this is the way to true wisdom, and to understand the loving kindness of
the Lord, Psalm. 107. 43. This is the principal end why God created man (viz.)
that he might acknowledge and set forth his praise in the world, and declare
his glorious holiness and excellency. This is the work of the Angels in
heaven, Isa. 6. 3. they cry, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts; and this is
the work of all Gods people through the world, Rev. 4. 8. The sum of all that
which the Catholic Church dispersed over all the world does, is to sing and
agnize the sanctity and holiness of the great God; it is their constant
employment; they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, which is, and is to come. Then we are said to sanctify
him, not by adding any holiness to him, but declaratively, when we proclaim
his holiness, and acknowledge it both in our hearts and lives, this he
accounts as a sanctifying o^ his great* Name. We should therefore set apart
so^e time to meditate on Gods absolute perfection and excellency, we should
admire him and commend him to our selves, till we can expe^ntally say with
David. Ps. 86. 8. Among the Gods there is none like thee O Lord! We should
glory in him; and when the world boasts of their houses, lands, riches,
friends, etc. do thou make thy boast of the Lord, and challenge them all to
show such a Lord and Master of such transcendent purity and perfection as thy
God is of.

2. If the Lord be thus glorious in holiness, then we should set our
affections on him; love him, fear him, desire him and trust in him. We must
love him with all our heart, with the highest inten^ion of affection, prizing
his favor Intensive and appretiative, Affectu and Effectu, super, omnia
desiderabilia desideremus eum. Les.
above ten thousand worlds. We may and must love holy men, and the better any
man is the more we must love him; but there is none holy as the Lord, therefore
we must love none equally with him: We may love the drop, and love the sea; but
our love to the drop must not be equal with our love to the sea. We must love
God simply for himself, and other things in relation to him. The more excellent
any thing is, the greater object it is of our desire: now Gods excellency is
infinite, and therefore he is an object worthy of our choicest See more
Burrou^s Gracious spi. p. 285, 286, etc.
love and veneration.

3. Do want purity? thou see whither thou must go for it; even to God who
is the fountain of holiness. Whither should we go for water but to the sea? or
for light, but to the sun? All purity is in God, and none to be had out of him:
So that what James (1. 5.) says of wisdom, is true of sanctification, If any
man lack it, let him ask it of God, who gives to all men liberally and upbra
death none, either for present defects, or former failings. Go not to men, go
not to creatures, who are cisterns, broken ^
cisterns; but go to God, who is a fountain, a living fountain, having all
excellencies in himself, originally and abundantly. The diseased woman spent
all she had upon Physicians, yet remained uncured till she came to Christ,
Mark. 5. 25, 26. Hence the Lord to encourage us to the work has promised,
Ezekiel. 36. 25, etc. that from all our Idols, and from all our filthiness he
will cleanse us: But we must not then sit still, and think to have such a
jewel without some pains; we must beg it, and beg it earnestly at Gods hand,
who has said he will be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them,
v. 37. Spare to speak and you shall never speed; You must ask for holiness
before ever you can have it: if asking will not do, you must seek more
earnestly; if seeking will not do, Matthew. 7. 7.
you must knock with violence till God hear you; it is a gradation and implies
fervor of spirit; it is not a simple repetition Hac vis grata D^o est. Tertul.
; God loves to see his people impor^unate for spiritual blessings.

4. Do find any purity wrought in thy soul? Know to whom thou must ascribe
it, even to the God of holiness. James 1. 17. Every good and perfect gift
Naturae depravationem no: potest reparare, n^sae author naaturae. Fabritius ^
comes from above. Purity grows not in natures garden, we do not gather such
grapes of thorns; and therefore if thou find any measure of sanctification in
truth begun in thy soul, praise the holy One of Israel for it, Psalm. 71. 22.
99. 9. He has given thee that which will stand thee in more stead, then if he
had given thee all the Kingdoms of the world.

5. Do see holiness in others? Oh let not thine eye be evil because Gods is
Omnes plurimi (...) e^s qui lu^ cent luce ha^ mundana; quanti igitur faciendi
qui lucenl caelestiilla luce! Roll loc. in Ioh. 7. 36.
good, but love it, prize it, honor it for the givers sake: we should be so
far from envying, that we should wish that all the Lords people were holy.
Have thou a son, a daughter, a servant, a neighbor, that begin to make
conscience of their ways? do not censure them vex them, hinder and upbraid
them, like the Pharisees, that would neither go to heaven themselves, nor
suffer others: but pray for them, comfort, quicken and encourage them in the
way and work of the Lord; it will not repent you when you come into your
Kingdom. To rejoice in the holiness of others makes us like the Angels of
heaven; when envying at the graces of others, makes us like the devils in hell.

6. This may humble us in all our approaches to this high and holy One; Dei
cognitio gignit in nobis humilitatem; videt hic quantum distet a Deo, quam
parum, imo quam nihil sit. A Lap.
when we seriously consider his absolute purity and our impurity; his
righteousness, and our unrighteousness; his Majesty, and our misery; this
will make us little in our own eyes, and to come with fear and trembling before
him: Many when they come to pray, hear, etc. they come as to a Fair or to a
Market, to see and to be seen; they sleep when they should hear, they dress
and pray, wash and pray, work and pray; durst they do thus to a Prince? Did
people but consider into what a presence they come, when they come to Gods
Ordinances, they would quake and tremble when they come: And if so holy a man
as Moses did exceedingly quake and tremble when he came near the Lord, Heb. 12.
21. And when the Seraphims proclaimed the thrice holy God, Isaiah cries
presently, Woe is me, for I am undone; though he were an holy man, and free from
the gross sins of the time, yet the sense of his original uncleanness made
him faint, when he had but a glimpse of this most holy God. Oh then, How
dreadful will the sight of this Holy, Holy, Holy One be to such as lie still
in the dreggs of nature, mere lumps of sin and masses of uncleanness!

7. Do not murmurre at his dispensations toward thy self, or the Church of
God; for he is perfectly holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his works;
he is holiness it self, and can do no iniquity. Hence we are commanded to
praise him for his holiness, Psalm. 99. 3. Let the people praise thy great and
terrible Name; Why? for it is holy: q. d. Though the Lord be great in power,
and terrible in his dispensations to us, yet they all call for praise, because
in them all he does manifest himself to be holy, just and righteous in all his
ways and works toward us: Upon this account we ought to exalt him, Psalm. 99.
4, 5, 9. Exalt the Lord. Why so? for he is holy in all his administrations to
his people: and therefore when thou art brought low, do not murmur, but let thy
soul keep silence to Jehovah, for he is the righteous Lord, and can do no
iniquity. Carnal fathers may chastise according to their pleasure, but he for
our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10 Say then
in the midst of all thy trials, with David, Psalm. 119. 137. Righteous art thou
Lord, and just are thy judgments: for though they may be secret, yet they are
always just: And this upheld David when he was in distress, and cried night
and day, but the Lord heard not, Psalm. 22. 1, 2. yet v 3: But thou art holy;
thou art righteous and just in thy dealings with me, therefore I submit to thy
dispensations cheerfully.

8. Beware of offending so holy a God. It aggravates a man's sin to abuse some
eminent holy man, that is just and upright in all his ways, ever doing us
good, and tender over us: But for sinful man to abuse and provoke the most
high and holy God, who never wronged us, but renews his mercy every morning,
etc. is a very sad aggravation of our sin; especially considering the baseness
of him that offends, and the excellenty of him that is offended. When David
would show the great indignity offered to him, he tells us that the base
dru^kards made songs and ballads of him; And Job complains of the injuries that
were done to him by base and worthless persons: There might be some comparison
between David and Job, and those that abused them; but who art thou base sinful
dust and ashes, that set thy self against thy God, thy Maker, whom miriads
of Angels reverence and adore? This is that which makes thy sins objectively
infinite, because committed against a God of infinite Majesty and Holiness;
and therefore let none presume to sin against him, for he hates sin wherever he
finds it; even where he loves the person, yet he will punish their iniquity, as
we see in Moses, Aaron, Eli, Hezekiah, David, Solomon, Sampson, Jonah, Zachary,
etc. their sins are more displeasing: The indignities of a friend go nearer to
us then the abuses of an enemy: It troubled David, Psalm. 55. Lo thus was I
wounded in the house of my friend. And the Lord complains, Isa. 1. that he had
nourished and brought up children, and lo they had rebelled against him. As
Caesar said to his son, when he came with the rest and wounded him, What? and
thou my son Brutus, art thou one that woundest me too? Relations abused turn to
the greatest fury: If Gods own will be so bold as to sin, God will be so bold
as to let the world see that he will punish them for their sin. Weeds in the
wilderness we can bear with, but not in our gardens. Dung is good in our
fields, but not so in our Parlours. God calls his Church Jehovah Shammah, Ezekiel.
48. ult. The Lord is there. So long as his people walk answerable to their
principles and privileges, the Lord is there to assist, protect and comfort
them, to plead their cause, and fight their battles for them, making their
enemies to submit unto them, Psalm. 81. 12, 13. But if his people rebel against
him, he will be terrible in the assembly of his Saints: Judgment shall begin
at his house, Ezekiel. 9. 6. and those whom he has known above others, shall be
pu^ished before others, Amos 3. 2.

9. Choose him for your portion, get interest It Is said of T. Aquinas that as he
was kneeling at prayer, he heard a voice, saying, Been de me scr^psisti Thoma;
quam ergo mercedem accipies? resp* Thomas, Nullam, Domine, n^si Teipsum.
and propriety in him; have him and you have all. He that has the Mine cannot
want gold; and he that has God for his God, cannot want goods, riches, grace,
etc. because all these are in God eminently and transcendently; he is God
All-sufficient, Genesis 17. 1. able to satisfy all the desires of our souls;
finite things cannot satisfy our infinite desires; he has made our hearts for
himself, and none but he that made them can satisfy them: True happiness and
contentedness is to be found in him alone. Choose him for your Lord and Master,
become servants Persectio creaturae est parere crea* tori.
to him, prefer his service before all the Crowns and Kingdoms of the world.
The greater the Prince, the more noble the service. It is more noble to be
tenant to this thrice holy God, then to be King of all the world: as it is more
noble to be the Princes favorite, then to be shepherd of a flock of sheep.
This made that famous Bucholtzer to tell his friends who blamed him for
stooping so low as to teach a School, that he preferred that service before a
kingdom. Let us spend our selves and all we have for his honor, we cannot
serve a better Master. As Christ was Totus in nostros suus expensus, wholly
laid out for us, so it is but reason that we should wholly lay out our selves
for him again.

10. Imitate God: It Is his will that we should resemble him in the beauties of
holiness. We are apt to imitate Regis ad exemplum, etc.
great men, especially if they can advance us: Oh that we would imitate the
great God, and learn to be holy because he is holy. Naturally man desires to
be like God, and therefore the serpent uses this argument to persuade our
first Parents to eat of the Similitudo moris, ratio amor^s. Aquinas 1. 2. q.
99. art. 2.
forbidden fruit, because they should be like unto God, and so in a better
condition; for the more like unto God we are, the better, and the more he
delights in us; I may truly say, Taste of this commanded fruit of holiness, and
ye shall be like unto God, and live with him for ever. Children are apt to
imi^ate their fathers: God is our holy father, Tanto quisq Deo sim lior, quanto
ab immu^ditia mundior. August.
John 17. 11. and if we will be his ^ons and daughters, we must imitate ^im in
purity, and follow him as dear ^hildren, Ephesians. 51. It Is the excellency Quo
quis est sanctior timem iorque Dei, ^o etiam maiori Deum amore complectitur.
Zanchy. Quo quid similius Deo, eo mel^us.
^f the creature to resemble its Creator; ^e more like to him, the better. Let
us ^rite after this Copy, make him our ^ule, and we shall never go astray. If
^en be to study an Art, they will choose ^e best and choicest Author for their
^itation. Those that would be excel^t Orators do propound to them^ves a Cicero,
or a Demosthenes for ^eir pattern. None holy as the Lord, ^d therefore none so
fit a pattern for Deus vult nos imita^i non ejus omnipotentiam, omniscientiam,
etc. sed bonitatem and sanctitatem. A Lap.
to imitate as He. Gods other Artri^es of Omnipotency, Eternity, Sim^city, etc.
call for Adoration, Reve^ce and Admiration, but his holi^sse calls for our
imitation, Be ye holy, (...) I am holy.

CHAP. IV.
THe third Use for Consolation. Here is singular Consolation (...) all such as
are pure in heart, in wor^ and works; that have not only a for^ but the power
and practice of god^ nesse appearing in the whole course (...) Whatsoever
filthor du^g of scorn, reproach or sla^der, the s^avingers of this world can
^ake out of the ke^nell of their mal^cious hearts, is fair and good enough to
cast in the face of Gods people.
their conversations. You must a^ now for persecution. See this Text fully
opened, Bur. Moses choice, p. 14, etc.
2 Timothy 3. 12. (...) that will live godly must suffer persec^on. You must look
to be hated even (...) all, Luke 21. 17, 18, 19. You shall be (...) ted of all
men for my Name sake. Lu^ warmness may march quietly on, (...) zeal and the
power of purity ever me^ with opposition and hatred, not a lig^ toothlesse
hatred, as appears Luke (...) 22. It Is not a hatred of passion, bu^ nature,
their nature must be chang^ H^rsnet no Rep. p. 472, etc.
else the enmity will be irreconcilab^ 2. Of all men, you must expect ha^ many
times from father, mother, b^thren, sisters, and natural friends, not ^ly from
wickedmen, but even from p^fessors and Christians in name, they (...) hate
Christians indeed: As the greatest enmity many times is between F^gulus ^ulo ^v
(...) and (...). Ordo s^ult tanquam (...) co^stat ex quibus^m quasi ant (...),
(...) th^ta ornament a sun^t (...). Aug. de Civi. De^, l, 11 c. 18.
men of the same profession; you must ^ook to have your brethren hate you, Isa.
66. 5. and to be accounted as monsters, and that in Israel, Isa. 8. 18. The
Priests were the greatest enemies to Ie^emiah (26. 11. 16.) Christ was betrayed
^y one of his own disciples; and Paul ^y false brethren that seemed zealous of
the word, Acts. 21. 20. 27. and 13. 15. Yea from all men without exception,
^oth from friends and foes, we must ex^ect persecution. And this is a good C^om
mund^. (...) t^aliquem, id argumento est, quod vere (...) est. Rollo^.
^ign that we are not of this world, therefor the world hates us, John 15. 18.
But ^ur comfort is, that though men hate and curse us, and cast us out, yet God
^ath pronounced us blessed, Psalm. 119. (...). and Matthew. 5. 8. The Lord will be
a ^anctuary of defense to all those that ^anctifie his Name, Isa. 8. 13, 14. He
will ^ceive us, though men forsake us, 2 Cor. (...). 9. and will appear to our
comfort, ^hen our enemies shall be ashamed, Isa. ^6. 5. and 65. 13, 14, 15.

1. Let it comfort you that you are not ^one; all Gods Saints have gone before
^ee this way: The holiest men have met with most opposition: The devil shoots
his arrows at the whitest marks. Holy David is made the drunkards song. Holy
Job a byword and reproach, both to friends and foes. Holy Jeremiah is a
derision to the people, and that all the day long, Lam. 3. 14. Paul is a
babier. Christ has a devil. The Saints are fools, Isa. 35. 8. Thus you see
your company.

2. Give losers leave to talk: Esteem Male de me l^quuntur, sed mali. Sen.
Nihil moror S^quid ab ^mprobis de me improbe dicitur. Cicero.
it a small matter to be judged of them* 1 Cor. 4. 3. Wear their scoffs and
reproaches as a Crown, in token (...) triumph; out of an holy pride thou mu^
learn to contemn contemners, and resolve to be more vile; for if you cannon
endure the Tongue of Ishmael, ho^ will you endure the sword of Esau? (...) you
cannot lose Names, how w^ you loose your lives for Christ Ride^ rident^s,
contemnit contemptores; prima virtus Christiani est contemnere et contemni.
Hiero^. Lucta crescit fides, et sit ardentior.
You must not be ashamed or afraid (...) profess Christ and his truth, and the
before a sinful generation, Man 8. 38. Rev. 21. 8. To profess hi^ in a time
of peace, amongst professo^ every rotten-hearted hypocrite will (...) it: But,
with Lot, to be good in Sodo^ with Job in the Land of Uz; with E^jah to be
zealous in the days of Jezebel; and with Zachary and Elizabeth, to Non malos
nunquam vidisse, sed inter malos continenter v^xisse, laudandum est. Cicero.
be righteous in the days of a bloody Herod, this puts you upon the trial
indeed: And if the Saints have professed Christ amidst his foes, shall we be
ashamed of him amongst his friends? -- Sed tu sus principe duro Temporibusque
malis ausus es esse bonus. Martial l. 12. ep. 6.
If they have served him in times of danger with the hazard of their lives, as
Joseph in Pharaohs Court; Obadiah in the Court of wicked Ahab; a good Abijah in
the house of wicked Jeroboam; a zealous Nehemiah in the Court of an Heathenish
Artaxerxes: a righteous Melchisedek in the midst of an Idolatrous Canaan; a
faithful Ezra (8. 21.) that will keep a fast, and serve his God at the river
Ahavah, about three miles from Babylon. A Church in Babylon, 1 Pet. 5. 13. and
Saints in bloody Nero's Court, Phil. 4. 23. and some in Pergamus where Satan
reigned, Rev. 2. 13. And shall we draw back in a time of peace, when the Gospel
is publicly professed? If this be the worst they can say of thee, that thou
art one that labourest for purity, and keep thy self unspotted of the
world, so that thy enemies have nothing against thee but for the matter of thy
God, Dan. 6. 5. happy art thou that thus suffer for well-doing; the Spirit
of glory rests on thee, 1 Pet. 3. 13, 14. Matthew. 5. 11, 12. Blessed are ye when
men thus revile you, not for unrighteousness, but for righteousness sake.
Stinking weeds sometimes make good medicines, and some discords interlaced do
grace the music: It Is good for every man to have a faithful friend, No music
without discord.
or a deadly foe.

3. Consider, God takes the indignities that are done to thee, as done to
himself. God and his people have common friends and common foes, Genesis 12. Cum
servus Dei a quoquam laed^tur, ma^estas divina violatur. Salv. l. 8. mihi p,
192, etc. Ubiplura.
3. Such as succor them, succor him, Matthew. 25. 40. and such as wrong them,
wrong him. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? says Christ, when he was only
persecuting his poor Saints. A Master counts himself abused, when his faithful
servants are abused.

4. Know your privileges, and rejoice in them; thou have bought the field, now
dig it, and see what treasure thou can find there. Every Saint and servant
of God is sure of four things,

1. Thou art sure of Protection. 2. Of Provision. 3. Of Supportation. 4. Of
Exaltation. See more Privileges, Bi^lds Marrow. p. 300, etc.

1. Thou art sure of Protection: The Lord himself is King of Saints, he will
suffer none to hurt thee, but will reprove even Kings for thy sake; He has
promised to keep the feet of His Saints, 1 Samuel 2. 9, 10. He will direct their
affections, and protect them in their ways, when those that oppose them shall
be overwhelmed with misery, and put to silence in the grave. He will never
leave them nor forsake them, they shall be preserved for ever, Ps. 37. 28. and
97. 10. Prove. 2. 8. Isa. 41. 10, 11, 14, 15. All No vessels of gold are so
precious to men, as Gods people are to him. D. Tailor. fol. p. 484.
his Saints are in the hand of his powerful protection, Deuteronomy. 33* 3. as we see
in Noah, Lo^, Abraham, Job, David Paul, and all the Saints. He is the holy God,
and therefore will defend his holy ones, and will pity them in their
distresses, Hos. 11. 9. and will avenge their blood upon their enemies, Rev. 6,
10.

2. Provision. Piety has the promise of temporal as well as spiritual
blessings, 1 Timothy 4. 8. If we first seek Gods Kingdom, we need not cark and
care for food, raiment, health and wealth, v. Praefat. Piscatoris ad 1
Chronicoro^*
etc. all these shall be cast upon us as an over- plus into the bargain. Full
is that promise, Psalm. 132. 13, 14, 15, 16. If fathers must provide for their
children, much more will God provide for his: The lions may lack and suffer
hunger, but such as fear the Lord shall lack nothing that may be for their
good. He that feeds ravens takes care for sparrows, and is so bountiful to the
wicked which are his enemies, will never suffer his children to want. He has
given us Christ, and with him all things: We need not doubt of crusts, since he
has promised a Kingdom, Luke. 12. Qui dabtt regnum, non do it viaticum? Aug.
31.

3. Supportation. The Lord will uphold your spirits in times of trial; the
righteous shall be bold as lions. Uprightness Magnas vires babet pietas. Luth.
Psalm. 46.
breeds boldness; and The holiest men make the happiest Martyrs. David has a
heart like a lion. Paul beholds the Council undauntedly. Holy Nehemiah (6.
11.) will not fly. Piety makes men invincible and iuvulnerable. When friends
forsake, and riches fail, when head and heart fails, yet our holiness will not
forsake us, but will go with us to heaven.

4. Exaltation, Exalt piety, and it will exalt thee. God is yours in a more
special propriety, Psalm. 144. ult. Happy is that people whose God is the Lord.
He is Sancti sunt (...) Dei (1) portio sel^, res rara et (...), t^saurus
Ire^io, us, cimelium prae(...). a Lap.
Lord of all, but he is your God, and you are his peculiar people above all the
world: All the world is but lumoer, you are his treasure; others are his
creatures, but you are his first fruits, Ier. 2. 3. Holy ones are near and dear
to God; no man loves his jewels so as the Lord loves the^, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. P. 148.
14. Mal. 3. 17

Holiness exalts men both in this life, and in the life to come.

1. In this life; They bring judgments on their enemies, Ps. 149. 5. to 10.
there is an honor given to all the Saints, and only to the Saints, to execute
vengeance on the Heathen, To bind their Kings in chains, and Nobles with
fetters of iron, ((...).) by their prayers, censures and denouncing Gods
judgments against wicked men, they shall bind them in fetters, and slay them
with a two-edged sword, Dan. 7. 22. This honor have all the Saints, to
conquer, overcome, and subdue their enemies.

2. At the day of judgment Christ will be glorious and made mavelous in his
Saints. 2 These. 1. 10. and though the wicked for a time here may trample them
under foot and contemn them; yet the time is at hand when they s^all judge
their judges, Matthew. 19. 28. Luke. 22. 28. Luke. 22. 30. 1. Cor. 6. 2. 3. Know
ye not that the Saints shall judge the world? The poor Saints, whom the world
now esteem as dung and dirt, yet shall one day sit with Christ on his Throne to
judge their enemies; and though now they scorn them, yet then shall they behold
them with horror and amazement, and cry to be hid from them from the sight of
them.

Yea they shall not only Judge their fellow creatures, but they shall sit as
Judges on the Apostate Angels also. 1 Cor. 6. 3. not they that shall judge men
or Angels Authoritatively by pronouncing the sentence of condemnation on them
which is proper to Christ the Judge; but as astipulators, they shall assent and
approve of Christ's Judgment as righteous. Christ as Judge shall pronounce the
sentence Go ye cursed: the Saints assent and say, Righteous art thou Lord
Christ, just are thy judgments.

Obj. I am sensible of so much corruption (says the gracious soul) and see so
much fi^th and uncleanesse in my self, that I question whether I have any
holiness in me at all. etc.

Ans, The holiest men are most sensible See this doubt fully and sweetly
answered in M. Ant. Burgess last Ser. S, 65. p. 40^.
of their own unholinesse: It Is a sign of some purity, when we can unfeignedly
lament our own impurity; corruption will not complain of corruption, neither
will nature complain of nature; there must be some grace begun in the soul
before we can lament the loathsomenesse of sin; how long may one live with a
natural man, and yet he never once complain of his uncleanness, though helie
in the dregs of sin? and therefore let not the sight and sense of thy sin
discourage thee (I wish there were more sick of thy disease) but rather
encourage thee to fly unto Christ, who is a fountain, not sealed, but opened;
not for one or two sins, but infinitely, for sin and fer uncleanness, Zach.
13. 1. You must therefore know for your comfort that there is a twofold
holiness.

The first is a legal holiness, which is a perfect conformity to the law of
God, and so only Adam in the state of innocence, and Christ were perfectly
holy: There is no perfect holiness to be found in us here, as the Sea them
confuted, (...), The ol, l 1. C 26. These. 10. p. 682. Sanctif. est duplex, 1.
Re, and sic babetur perfect tantum in Patria, in caelo. (...). Spe, and sic
babetur ^n via, i^perfecte tantum in hac vita.
Anabaptists dream; perfection is reserved for heaven; there indeed we shall
sin no more.

Secondly, There is an Evangelicall holiness; when we truly desire and
endeavor to please God in all things, lamenting our impurity, striving against
our corruptions, and hate every false way, etc. this is true sanctification,
though it be not perfect, for as all our S. inchoata est vera* licet non
absoluta. Daven. See Dovvnams Warfar fol. 289, etc.
graces, so our sanctification in this life is imperfect. Hence the purest
Saints on earth have made sad complaints of their own uncleanness, as Job 9.
20. and 42. Psalm 38. 4. and 51. Isa. 64. Romans 7. Yet in Gods acceptance they
are Saints still, and are so ^alled in Scripture, from the better part: A corn
field though it have some weeds in it, yet we call it a A part praestantiori
fit denominatio.
corn field still; and white paper though it have some blots on it, yet we call
it white still, from the greater and the better part. So that there are not
only Saints in heaven, but also Saints on earth, as appears, Psalm. 16. 3. 116.
15. and the Apostle writ to Saints at Ephesus, Corinth, Collosse, etc. And'tis
observed that the godly are called Saints in Scripture at least fourscore
times: And theyare called Saints in this life for three respects.

1. Segregatione. 2. Imputatione. 3. Inchoatione.
1. By segregation; God of his free grace has separated them for himself from
amongst the wicked and profane of the world. Christi sanctitas impuritatis
nostrae est open rculu^^ Innocens affligitur ut nox^us liberetur, ut re^ dimatur
servus, occiditur filius. Sib. 1.


2. By imputation; Christ's absolute holiness is imputed to them for holiness,
and their sins are imputed unto him, 1 Cor. 1. 30. By his blood we are
cleansed from all our sins, 1 Pet. 3. 18

3. By inchoation; that sanctification which is begun in thee here, shall be
perfected in heaven; and though we cannot be holy perfectly, yet if we can be
holy sincerely, in desire and endeavor, tisacceptable with God, who measures
Voluntas (...) est homo, nihil aliud sumus quam voluntate. Aug.
us by our wills and sincere desire, rather then our deeds: The will is the
man, and that we are, which we desire to be. Let us then strive after
perfection in the use of all holy means, as fasting, prayer, hearing,
meditation, selfe-examination, etc. and then in Gods due time he will bring
forth judgment into victory, and make the work of sanctification prevalent
over corruption.

2. You must know that there is difference in Saints; to some God gives ten
talents, and there he looks for ten again; to some but one, and there expects
no more then he gives; where he bestows much, he looks for much. Some ground
brought forth an hundred fold, some sixty, some thirty, yet all good ground.
Some God calls forth to greater service, and more eminent employment, and to
these he gives a greater measure of sanctification Paulus infirmos non
excludite numero sanctorum, q. opus suum Deus bic inchoat tantum in uobis;
paulatim vero per gradus and inrementa perficit. Calvin.


3. Know for thy comfort that there are degrees in sanctification as well as in
faith and other graces; as faith has its weakness and infancy, so has
sanctification: It is graduall and grows by degrees, from a weak and low degree
to a strong perfect man. Weakness and holiness may well subsist together; the
Disciples were willing, yet the flesh was weak: And David often begs for
quickening, Psalm. 119. In the mean time thou have a perfection of parts, though
not of degrees and measure, as a child is a perfect man in all the parts of a
man, though not in the quantity of any part.

Be thankful then for what thou have, and still seek after more, and then all
thy imperfections shall be covered with the perfect righteousness of Christ,
etc. we must indeed strive, endeavor, and aspire after the greatest
perfection. Psalm. 119. 5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes!
but since in this life we cannot attain it, we must Suspirare, groan and
grieve. The Law says, thou shall not lust: now when we find that we do lust,
we must sigh and say with the Apostle, Wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me? Romans 7. an Heroic spirit wishes it could do more then it can, and
gieves when it cannot do what it ought to do.

Quest. But why does not God san^ifie us perfectly, but by degrees, pur^ing out
our corruption by little and ^ittle?

Ans. God could cure us perfectly of ^ll our sins, and purge us from them in a
moment; but for good ends he will not do it.

1. For the greater exaltation of his free grace, to make us more sensible what
he has done for us, that we might have no cause of glorying in our selves, but
might give all the glory unto God from whom we have all.

2. To humble us and keep us low in our own eyes: He could have driven out all
the Candan^es before the people of Israel, but he left some still amongst them
to vex them, to humble them and make them more watchful. The Lord could free
us from all those remainders of sin that are in us, but in his wisdom he sees
it best for us to have these clogs of corruption still about us, to wean us
from this world, and make us long for heaven, where we shall be for ever free
from these fetters of sin, and Audeo dicere, superbis utile esse cadere (...)
aliquod aper^m p^eatum, u^ae sibi displic^ant, qui iam sibi plaoendo
ceciderant. Aug. de Civil. Dei, 1. 14. c. 13.
to keep us low. 'Twas better with Peter falling and watching, then presuming;
and therefore Saint Austin concludes, that falls into sin are good to humble
proud persons.

3. To out us of our selves, and to make us fly unto Christ for help. The sight
and sense of Paul's native impurity drove him to Christ, and made him so
thankful unto God for him, Romans 7. The Lord is pleased to distill his grace by
drops into us, that he may often hear of us, as Paul that had a messenger of
Satan to buffet him, prays often; God loves to have us come with new prayers and
praises to him.

Obj. I fear I have no purity (say many weak Christians) because I have not
those parts and abilities that others have; I cannot pray, nor speak for
Religion, as such and such can etc.

Ans. Grace is one thing, and gifts are See more a fully M. Ant. Burgess late
Ser. p. 110. Ser. 20. and Ser. 65.
another; the least measure of grace is better then the greatest measure of
gifts; many have grace who cannot define it, and many that can define it have
it not. Parts (though they are ornaments, and not to be despised, yet) are they
but common gifts; are probate, a Judas, Demas may have an excellent memory,
singular elocution, a quick wit, a nimble invention, etc. He may be able to
prayfor outward expression far beyond a child of God. The Devil has parts
and natural abilities beyond all the men in the world. Christianity is a matter
of grace, rather then of gifts; of obedience then of parts; those may be
allotted to wicked men, but purity in sincerity, is a special gift of God. We
have more gifts then formerly, but less grace; abundance of Ignis qui in
parentibus fuit calidus, in nobis luci^ (...)*
knowledge; but where is the zeal, the piety, the practice? We have more
science, but less conscience; we have the light of former times, but not their
heat. Most of our Professors are all for parts and gifts; these bring applause
and praise, but grace and piety humble men, and make them contemptible in the
eye of the proud world: And this is that great root of pride, division and
error that so much abound amongst us; men are all for gifts, these puff men
up, make them censorious, self-conceited, and enemies to the power of
godliness; Who greater enemies to Christ then the Scribes and Phar^sees? Who
opposed Paul more then the Athenian Philosophers? in so much that no Church was
founded at Athens, though it had the name through the world for famous wits and
learning* See more Love Ser. Growth in Gr. p. 160 to 176.
Some men are rich in gifts, but poor in grace; others are strong in grace, yet
have but weak gifts; of the two, ou^ greatest care should be for grace, which
is that one thing necessary: And then for gifts, be they more or less, be
contented with them, be thankful for them, and improve them. Piety is lovely in
it self, though the parts and person of him that has it be but poor and low.
Many proud and profane wretches be all for parts and the praise of men (no
matter for piety) hence they often go to the devil himself that they may get a
name for gtfts and abilities. I fear many of our seducing speakers are tainted
in this kind. Vain fools! to get the praise of men, lose the praise of God: to
win men's applause, get Gods displeasure; to get the shadow, lose the substance:
when we should prize a dram of grace before many pounds of gifts, a mite of
sincerity, before many talents of hypocrisy, as we prize a little pearl before
thousand pebbles, a little Gold before much earth. Grace will endure when See
more Bur. Gracious Spir. p. 219. etc.
gifts are gone; this will bring thee to heaven, when the
great-gifted-gracelesse men, with all their gifts and unsanctified abilities
shall be cast into hell.

Tender consciences have many other scruples about their sanctification which
they may see fully Answered in Scudders daily Walking, chap. 16. sect. 6. p.
626, 660, etc. and M. Wall None but Christ, chap. 27. p. 339, to 384.

CHAP. V.
THe fourth Use is for Examination. If ever Examination were needful, it is
here: If you take but farthings, you will try them; you are more careful about
silver, but most exact in trying gold: This is (as I may say) the golden grace,
the grace of our graces, without which all moral virtues are but canorae
nugae, glorious trifles. Sanctification is a radical, fundamental grace. Now
an error in the foundation is most dangerous, and destroys the building. This
cannot hurt thee; for if upon trial thou find that thou have it, thou have
cause to be thankful, and to admire the riches of Gods free grace and love
that he should pass by thousands more wise, more rich, more noble and able to
have done him better service, and yet should look on thee in thy low and lost
condition. 2. If upon trial thou find the want of it, then give no rest to
thine eyes, nor take comfort in any thing till thou have obtained it: And
because many do willingly deceive themselves, taking bleareyed Leah for a
beautiful Rachel, a false sanctification for a true; I shall therefore 1. show
you What it is not. 2. What it is.

1. It is not an external, federall, visible See the several acceptations of
this word in those elaborate Sermon. of M. Ant. Burg^ss, Ser 62. and 64. and Ser.
19. and 28. and 45. and 57, 58.
holiness, when by virtue of the external Covenant all the Lords people are
said to be holy: Thousands have this that shall never see God; a Simon Magus
may be baptized, and yet be in the gall of bitterness still. He is not a Jew
that is one outwardly; it is not Under those two Synechdochically all ou^ward
privilege are comprehended.
circumcision which comprehended the privileges of the Jew, nor uncircumcision
which comprehended the privileges of the Gentiles, with all their wealth,
wisdom, nobility, birth, etc. it is none of these which God regards, but it is
the New Creature he delights in, Gal. 5. 6.

2. It is not civility or moral righteousness; civility is one thing,
sanctification is another; that is a moral, common virtue; this is a special,
saving grace; that a Heathen may have, he may be just, righteous, sober, civil;
but this is a grace peculiar to the people of God. 2. The civil man looks only
to the outward act, but the sanctified man looks also to the inward man. 3.
Civility comes by education, sanctification by grace. 4. Civility stands in
negatives, not to hurt, not to steal; but sanctity in doing good, as well as
eschewing evil. 5. Civility looks only to the second Table, sanctification to
both. Thus you have a fivefold difference between sanctity and civility.

3. It is not an opinionative, hypocritica^ holiness, such as the Pharisees
had, who conceited they were holy, because they fasted, prayed, gave alms,
etc. though it were but externally and hypocritically: Thus many amongst our
selves, because they frequent duties, they conclude themselves to be holy, not
considering that duty and profaneness may stand together. Men may perform all
the duties of Religion, and obtain a great measure of illumination, so that in
their own opinions, and conceits they may think themselves holy, and in the
judgment of charity may be thought to be so by others, Heb. 10. 29. and yet be
nothing, as Judas, Simon Magus, and those Heb. 6. 4 Hypocrita dicuntur
sanctisicatiaequivoce (i.) respectu externae vocationis and professionis;
proprie vero soli electi intus renovantur, ver^que and univoce sanctificantur.
Tilen.
that had an external sanctification in outward profession, common
illumination, and some slight reformation. Not that I speak against duties or
ordinances (for I know that such as God has decreed to the end, he has
decreed them to the use of means to bring them to that end) but against resting
in the bare performance of them, or idolizing them.

4. There is a real, internal, qualitative holiness, and this is that
holiness which we are to seek after; it is not shows or shadows, it is nothing
but real holiness which can satisfy a gracious soul. This is no superficial,
slight alteration, but Ephesians. 1. 19 (...), supereminens illa magnitudo, V.
Leigh in locum.
God by his Almighty power alters the very bent and resolution of the soul a
quite contrary way; he sets not up a bare foorm of holiness, but infuseth life
and power; he puts to the exceeding greatness of his power to work it; it is
harder to create a new heart, then a new world; for in that God would meet with
no opposition, it is but speaking the word, and is is done, Psalm. 33. 6. By the
word of the Lord were the heavens made: but in the work of Regeneration, the
devil, sin, and the world oppose. 2 The creation of heaven is but fingerwork,
Psalm. 8. 3. but the restoration and renovation of man calls for Gods arm, Luke
1. 51. and mighty power to crucifi^ corruption, and to enable us to duties of
obedience, 1 Cor. 4. 20. By this grace we are said to be partakers of the * Non
trans(...) naturae humanae in divina, sed participatione donoru^; quibus
conformes efficimur divinae naturae. Paraeus.
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. (i.) Analogically and by way of similitude, when
we partake of those graces which make us like unto God, when we are just,
patient, merciful, pure as God is, when we love what he loves, and hate what
his soul abhorres; this is the image of God in us, and by these God becomes (as
it were) visible in man. Hence sanctification (say some) is nothing else but
the conformity of our hearts and lives to Gods will. It is a created quality
(say Sanctitas est congruentia nostra cum lege Dei. Les. S. est Realis mutatio
hominis ^a turpitudine peccati, in puritatem ^maginis Dei, Alsted.
others) of pureness in the Saints, whereby they resemble God, being pure and
severed in part from the mixture of sin and corruption: So much the word Kadash
implies, one separated from a common to a Divine use; because holiness
consists in a separation from sin and a dedication to God, 1 Pet. 1. 14. 15.
not fashioning your selves according to your former lusts in your ignorance;
What then? But as he who has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner
of conversation. Hence some make this moral See more Mr. (...). Iud^ 2. p. 26,
^7.
holiness to be two fold;

1. Privative, (i.) an immunity and purity from sin.

2. Positive, which is, 1. Grace in the habit. 2. (...) i^ the act, when ^
God is known, feared, served, (...); and sin is hate^ and eschewed; when there
is the root of (...) in the hear^ and the fruit of righteousn^ (...) then is a
person or people truly (...) the utensiles in the Law were (...) holy, when
they were set apart from (...) other service to God alone; so a (...) said to
be holy, (...) his heart and li^ are separated from all by-ends and aims, and
they are wholly devoted unto God. Holiness is a kind of spiritual (...)
Purus, (...), (...), ab us^ commu^ ad a vinum separatus. Rivet.
chastity, when the soul is consecrated to God, and goes not a whoring after
the vanities of the world. Hence the Saints are called Virgins, for their
purity and spiritual chastity, Cant. 1. 3. Matthew. 25. 1. Rev. 14. 4. The
Apostle describing the holiness of Christ, shows us clearly what holiness is,
Heb. 7. 26. Christ our High Priest is holy. What Is that? he is harmless,
undefiled, separated from sinners. We see then that sanctity consists in
discretion, distinction and discrimination from common use by way of exaltation
and pre-eminence. Hence the Lord describing his own people, calls them a people
separated and severed from the wicked of the world, to be an holy people to
himself, Levit. 20. 24. 25. Psalm. 4. 4. The Lord has set apart for himself the
man that is godly; therefore when the Lord calls his people to sanctity, he calls
to an holy separation, 2 Cor. 6. 17. 18. Come out from amongst them and be ye
separate. God will have his people to Non requirit ut loca infidelium deserant
fideles, unde nulla contamintio est, sed vt a superstitosis ritibus, ac
sceleratis illorum moribus separentur Muscut.
show their sanctity by a discriminative manner of living, since the Lord has
discriminated and severed them from the base people of the world, who lie like
beasts tumbling in their own filth, 1 Job. 5. 18, 19. to be his own peculiar
people; therefore they must have different lives, different ways, and
different aims from the men of the world: though they live in the world, yet
must they not live like the world, but must do such excellent things as the
world cannot do; this Christ expects from his, Matthew. 5. 47. What do ye more
then * See this excellently enlarged by M. Bur. (...) tious Spi. p. 189, etc
others? implying that his disciples must do more then heathens, more then
civil men, more then formalists or hypocrites.

Yet that I may make it clear to every capacity what sanctification is, I shall
define it, and explain all parts of it in order, because it tends much to the
right understanding of this point. Yet we must not rest in a bare notional Opto
magis sentire sanctification^, quam scire ejus defini^ tionem.
knowledge of the definition of sanctification, but we must labor to find the
virtue and power of it in our hearts and lives.

Def. Sanctification is a grace of the Spirit, wrought in all Believers,
whereby they are purified daily more and more from their native corruption, and
are restored to the Image of God, daily dying to sin, and living to
righteousness.

1. It is a grace, gift or work of the Spirit: sanctity grows not in natures
See Ienkyn on Jude. 1. p. 48^ etc.
garden, but it is a quality or infused gift of the Spirit, who is therefore
called the Spirit of sanctification, Romans 1. 4. It washes and cleanses us. 1
Cor. 6. 11. By it God takes away men's stony, stubborn, rebellious hearts, and
gives them hearts of flesh, (i.) melting, flexible, obedient hearts. Hence the
Spirit is compared to

Fire. Water. Wind.
1. To 8ee more Dr. R^ynolds on the Sacrament. chapter 19. p. 183, to 187.
Fire, Matthew. 3. 11. Isa. 4. 4. because it inlightens our minds, purges and
refineth us from the dross of sin, and inflames our cold hearts with a zeal
for Gods glory.

2. To Water, for its cleansing nature, it makes our barren hearts fruitful,
it refreshes us, it cools and pacifieth the scorched conscience, Isa. 44, 3, 4.

3. To the Wind, See Sibbs in locum.
Cant. 4. 16. which is 1. Free, it blows where it lists, John 3. 8. 2. It
dries up dirty ground. 3. It helps and drives us on in our journey.

4. It cools and comforts in a time of heat.

5. It purges the chaff from the wheat.

6. It melts hard ice, Psalm. 147. 17. 18.

7. It purifies the air. 8. It increases the heat of fire. All these
operatitions has the sanctifying Spirit of God on the souls of his people. It
is free^y given, it dries up the unclean lusts of their hearts, it helps them
in their way to heaven, it cools and comforts troubled conscien^s, etc.

II. It is not wrought in every soul, but only in the hearts of believers.
Faith is the internal, isntrumental cause; by it we apply Christ to our
selves for our sanctification. All believers more or less are sanctified; it
is the nature of faith where it dwells, to purify the heart, Acts 15. 9.

III. The subject or seat of our sanctification is the Sea that excellent Tract
of M. Ambrose on the new birth, p. 9, 10, 11, etc.
whole man, body, soul and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 1 These. 5. 23. Hence the spouse
of Christ is said to be fair in all parts; eyes, hair, teeth, lips, temples,
Cant. 4. 1, to 8. They are sanctified throughout in every part, though every
part be not throughout sanctified; as sin has defiled and corrupted all the
powers and parts of soul and body, so all must be renewed and sanctified. Burnt
offerings must be whole, not a head or a leg, but all must be sacrificed, Levit.
1. 8, 9. Not that the substance of our bodies or souls are changed, but the
qualities; corruption is purged out, and (...). non est mutatio naturae, sed
qualitatum; non mutat substantiam, sed corruptione^; non in nihilum, sed in
ordinem redigit affectus; siquis natura fit (...), non tollit tristitia^ sed
moderatur, etc. Sibel. (...) Iuda^. p. 41.
grace is planted in its stead; our understandings which before were darkened,
now they are light in the Lord; our judgments are rectified, 1 Cor. 2. 15. our
memories are renewed and made more retentive of the best things; our wills are
flexible and conformable to Gods will; our affections are subdued and set on
right objects, Gal. 5. 24.

2. The body and all its members are sanctified and renewed; sin does not
reign there, Romans 6. 12, 19. Its become a Temple for Gods Spirit to dwell in,
all its members are become servants of righteousness unto holiness.

3. The actions and outward conversation: Nee satis est cor sanctificatum esse,
nisi tota nostra vita and externa conversatio internae sanctitatis animi sit
signaculum. Sibel. M, Ant. Burgess Ser. 115.
Our words and works which before were vain and sinful, are now sweet and
savoury, tending to Gods glory and the good of others. So that all such as are
truly sanctified, are wholly sanctified; Old things are past away, and all
become new; new minds, new memories, new judgments, new affections, new
desires, new fears, new love, new joy, new sorrow, new food, new raiment, new
language, new company, new ends and aims, etc. He now answers as the young
penitent man in Ambrose answered the courting Minion, Cur non respicis, ego
sum? Hearken, it is I, Sed ego non sum ego. Though you be still the same woman,
yet I am not the same man. As an old Alehouse while a drunken tenant lived
there, 'twas never empty of drunkards, thieves, whores, etc. But now an honest
tenant is come in, down goes the sign, and when old guests call, there is no
room for them, for there is another man dwells there.

Now the parts of sanctification are two;

1. Mortification or dying to sin; by the Robur, tyran^s and vires peccati
debilitantur, and paulatim abolentur. Si^
spirit they mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8. 13. Col. 3. 3, 5, 9. 10.
The death of Christ is the death of their sin; sin is an underling in the soul,
it reigns not there. This is called in Scripture, a pulling out of the eyes, a
cutting off the hands, a keeping under our bodies, denying our selves, purging
out the old leaven, putting off the old man.

2. Vivification or living unto righteousness; Genera^ unius est destruction
alterius. Aust
when Gods Image is restored, and we are made conformable to his will, so that
what pleases him, pleases See both these parts fully handled ^n Mr. Dovvnams,
Warf. p. 285 and Mr. Ienkyn on Jude 1. p. 21. to 46.
us; and what is displeasing to him, is displeasing to us; they do not only fly
evil, but they do good, they have their part in the first resurrection,
therefore the second death shall have no power over them, Rev. 20. 6. They draw
virtue from Christ's resurrection whereby they rise from sin to newness of life
Colos. 3. 9. 10. Romans 6. 10. 11.

Now I come more particularly to the signs of sanctification, and these call
for our more special observation; they are seven.

1 Sign. A holy man has an holy heart, he first makes clean the inside, The
heart wins all the Cards, yea though it be the knave of Clubs with all his
Ceremonies, Latimer.
he knows that God delights most in a pure heart, and commands us to keep that
clean, Isa. 1. 18. Jer. 4. 14. and 13. ult. Prove. 23. 26. James 4. 8. therefore
his greatcare and desire is to keep it pure as becomes the Temple of God. The
hypocrite is all for external holiness, to be seen of men; the Pharisees
could cleanse the outside, but within they were full of wickedness, therefore
Christ denounces such woes against them, Matthew. 23. 25. 26. Amaziah did much,
but lost all, because his heart was rotten, 2. Chron. 25. 2. it ruined him, v.
14, 15, 16. True holiness is a plain and an even thing, without false-hood,
guile, perverseness of spirit, or starting aside; it has one end, one rule,
one way, one heart; when hypocrites and double minded men, they pretend to God,
but follow the world. If ever then we would be truly holy, we must put in
practice the council of the Lord, Ezekiel, 18. 31. We must cast away with an holy
indignation, not lay them aside for a time, 2. Not some, but All our
transgressions, great, small, profitable, pleasing etc. 3. Get a new heart, A
morte temporali, and spirituali Deus solutionem promittit, modo de puriori
vivendi ratione serio medi^ tentur. Sanct. in loco.
sanctification must begin within; if the heart be changed, the outward man
will soon follow. 4 A motive from the danger, Why will ye endanger the ^ternall
salvation of your souls by resisting the motions of Gods holy Spirit

2. His language is pure. When the man is changed, his language is changed, God
gives to pure men a pure language, Zeph. 3. 9. He is now a good Qualis vir
^alis oration Loquere (...), t^ videam.
man, and therefore out of the good ^reasure of his heart he brings forth
good things, as the wicked man out of ^he evil treasure of his heart brings
forth swearing, cursing, lying, slandering, etc. Matthew. 12. 34. 35. You may
guess at a man by his talk, a rotten man will have rotten talk, Ephesians. 4. 13.
a gracious man has gracious language.

3. His ways are pure; not only his Burgess last Ser. Ser. 94.
words, but his works are holy: A hypocrite may have fine words, but his
Hypocrita odit peccatum non qua peccatum, sed qua morbum and poenam.
works are naught; he may hate sin as it makes him sick, or poor, etc. but not
as it is sin and displeasing to God; he hates not sin, but he loves not
burning. A man's works and walking discover what he is; a swine is known by his
delighting in dirty puddles; but a sheep loves fair pastures. A holy man loves
to keep communion with God by constant prayer, but the profane man will not
once call on him, Psalm. 14. 4. for prayer will either make him leave sin, or
sin will make him leave praying. He is jealous over himself, fearful to
offend, shuns the occasions of sin, willing in all things to live honestly,
hating See more Harsnet. on Repent. p. 125, to 145, etc.
not one, but every false way; he is universal in his obedience, he does not
pick and choose his way, but makes it his daily exercise to keep a conscience
void of offense both toward Go^ and man: He adds righteousness to his
holiness, and holiness to his righteousness, and so follows the Lord fully,
Psalm. 15. 2. Luke 1. 6. Acts 13. 22. and 24. 16. He is habitually holy, Act^o
una non denomina^ (...). Neq. sanctisicatio uno atqaltero* ^ene vel malefacto
est metienda, sed totius vitae (...); is sibonus fuerit, cor sanctisicatum
esse, nullus dubita. Sibel
holiness is his trade; a wicked man may do a work that is materially good,
but as it comes from him it it abominable: What Saint John says of goodness,
is most true of holiness, 3 John 11 He that does good [out of an habit and
principle of goodnesse] is of God, but he that does evil [habitually as his
trade] has not seen God. Godliness is the good man's exercise, 1 Timothy 4. 7.
the bent and resolution of his soul is, not willingly to sin against God in any
thing, he chooses misery rather then iniquity, and affliction rather then
sin. A pure heart and a purpose to sin can never subsist together; for what
is holiness but an exact obedience to Gods commands, True hatred is (...)
against the whole kind. Arist. He that hates one sin as it is sin, will hate
all. Quatenus ipsum includit de ^mni.
and that 1. Extensive, to themall. 2. Intensive, with the high estintention of
our affections, with all our heart, mind and might; for he that willingly
breaks one commandment, does habitually and dispositively break them all, and
when a temptation comes he will stick at none, James 2. 10, 11. It Is true in
many things we offend all, James 3. 2, through frailty and infirmity, but not
deliberately and wilfully; yea sins of weakness and infirmity are grievous to
a gracious soul, that weariness in duty though not of duty, that indisposition
and heaviness which cleaves to them in the best things (which a natural man
takes no notice of yet) is better unto them. Many good souls doubt of their
sanctification, but if thou find in thy self an unfeined hatred of All sin,
both of gross sin in thy actions, and of lesser sins in thy affections, know
undoubtedly that thou art sanctified, and shall be saved, 1 John 5. 18.

4. He loves pure ordinances, plain powerful preaching, zealous praying,
quickening conference, etc. these are delightful to him; a pure heart loves
(...) In quo adulterando nullus intercessit dolus: Hereticie nim gypsum lacte
miscent a Lap.
the pure and sincere milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2. 2. It Is a sign a man is
rotten when he cannot endure a plain downright Micajah because he tells them the
truth, such men are evil and therefore cannot, endure the light Ioh 3. 19

5. By your love to pure ones; Saints will love Saints; sheep delight in the
company of sheep and not of swine. David a Saint delights in Saints, Psalm. 16.
3 Paul when changed, changes his company and and joins himself to the Saints,
Acts 9. 26. Yet it is not every love to a Saint that argues a Saint, but pure
and sincere love, which is known by these three signs,

1. It is a love to [All] the Saints, he loves a poor Saint as well as a rich
one, he loves a Saint in rags, as well as a Saint in glorious robes, a Job on
the dunghill as well as a David on the throne, Ephesians. 1. 15. Colos. 1. 4. they
love not one or two of the Brethren, Eti^msi Lutherus millies me diabolum
vocet, ego tamen illum insignem Dei servnm agnosco. Calvin* Let Luther hate me
and in his wrath call me devil a thousand times. yet will I love him and
acknowledge him a most precious servant of God said meck Calvin.
but the Brotherhood, even the whole society and fraternity, the whole Church
of God, such as they never saw, yea though they may differ from them in some
small matters, and it may be have mis-called them and wronged them, yet if they
have grounds to judge them Saints, they can pass by all and pray for the^, and
readily forgive them 2. He loves the Saints simply because saints, for their
piety more the^ for their parts: true love is spiritual and springs from
spiritual considerations; they love the pure for their purity, and the
sincere, for their sincerity; but carnal love has carnal ends, they love the
godly for their riches, honor, wisdom, kindred, bounty, etc. they hate them
solely for their piety, such and such were excellent men if they were not
Puritans and Roundheads, etc.

3. He can prefer them before his natural kindred which are wicked, as Christ
did, Matthew. 12. 47. etc. In all Cognatio carnalis post^abenda spirituali.
Paraeus.
their relations they prize piety: they prefer a godly wife, a godly child, a
godly servant, a godly Magistrate, a godly Minister, before any other. [If any
would see more, let him peruse Dyke on the Sacrament, chap. 13. Downham on the
Sacrament, chap. 10. Sheffeild on Conscience, chap. 14. Wall None but Christ,
chap. 21.] M. Ant. Burgess 120. Ser. Ser. 18.

6. Holy men will labor to make others Bonum est' sui diffusivum.
holy, they love not to eat their spiritual morsels alone: like the sun they do
(what in them lies) to give light to all, like a sweet perfume they refresh
such as come near them. Holy Abraham will teach his family the way of the Lord,
Andrew finding Christ, brings Simon; Philip brings Nathaniel; the woman of
Samaria brings her neighbors, John 1. 41, 43, 45. etc. As wicked men draw
others to wickedness, so the Sea more Dyke Quenching the Spi. p. 42, etc.
godly say as Paul to Agryppa, Acts 26. 29. I would to God that not only thou,
but also all that hear me this day, were both almost and altogether such as I
am.

7. Holy men are humble men; the more holy, the more humility; none see
Fundamentu^ sanctitatis est humilitas Cyprian.
their own nakedness, nothingnesse wants and weakness so much as they; as all
the graces of Gods Spirit are humbling graces, so holiness especially: Hence
Paul a holy man, yet in his own esteem the least of Saints, the chiefest of
sinners: Job abhorres himself; David is a worm; Isaiah thinks himself undone,
Moses is meek. Bradford in his own estimation, is miserrimus peccator, a very
hypocrite, a most hard-hearted, unthankful sinner, a very painted hypocrite,
etc. They durst never call themselves Saints, The close walking people, The
godly party, The spiritual ones, etc. It is the property of proud and subtle
heretics to paint with two colors, that they may not easily be discerned,
Romans 16. 18. 1. They glory that they are the servants of God, when they only
serve their own belly. 2. They use good words and fair speeches to deceive the
simple: These silken men have silken words; nothing but free grace, pure
Churches, pure Ordinances, pure Gospel, all blessings: Thus they insinuate
themselves with such gentleness, mecknesse, soberness, that one would See
more Gell^spy Miscellan. e^. 13
think that God and goodness were confined to such a people; but pull off the
vizard, and there appears a proud Antinomian, a loose Anabaptist, a licentious
A^ian, a blasphemous Socinian, etc. In brief, take this Character of one that
is truly Holy. He is one that understands his own absolute emptines, and
Christ's absolute fullnes; he denies his own best works, and relyes solely upon
Christ for salvation; he leaves nothing undone which Gods word reveals, uses
all means for the increase of his Graces; he is not cast down by failings as
utterly dejected, nor exalted by performances, as more accepted with God; but
looks at sin past with shame, at sin present with sorrow, on the world with
contempt; the Gospels credit is his aim, Gods glory his end; he silenceth
some, shameth others, shines out to all, etc.

He that would see more signs of holiness, let him peruse Dr. Preston on the
New Creature, Ser. 9. Dr. Tailor on New Creat. p. 46, 47. Ambrose his Media, p.
10, etc. M. Ant. Burgess Ser. 53. and Ser. 63.

CHAP. VI.
THe fifth Use is for Exhortation.

1. To those that want holiness; seek it and seek it earnestly, be diligent,
give all diligence to get it, fill heaven Q^ae (...) magna magne.
and earth with cries for it, resolve to give no rest to the temples of thy
head till thou have attained it; let God see that thou art in earnest, and that
this is the greatest and chiefest desire of thy soul, and then he cannot, he
will not deny thee. Learn of the wise Merchant, who seeking for goodly Pearls,
and finding one of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it,
Mat. 13. 45. Piety is a Pearl of more worth (...). Stobaeus.
then all the pearls in the world, a man may be loaded with them (as it is
said Queen Mary was on the day of her Coronation, so that her head could not
bear them) and yet be miserable; but piety has the promise, and makes men
venerable, not only in the eyes of good men, Psalm. 15. 4. but even in the eyes
of a wicked Nebuchadnezzar, Darius, Herod, etc. Yea when we are thus glorious
within, God himself will delight in us, and greatly desire our beauty, Psalm.
45. 11.

Oh then let us labor for pure affections and pure actions, let purity dwell
in our houses, and be engraven even on our ordinary actions of eating,
drinking, recreations, etc. It was prophesied that in Gospel Times holiness
should abound, Zach. 14, 20, 21. it must be imprinted on the pots we drink in,
and plates that we eat on, the houses we dwell in, the riches we possess, yea
the horse-bridles, the instruments of war and labor, our garments and attire
must have holiness written on them, we must have an eye to Gods glory in them
all; but alas! upon the houses and furniture of most, we may write violence and
cruelty; upon their dishes and cups, oppression and luxury; upon their apparel
and attire, pride and profaneness, etc, But we have not so learned Christ;
our piety must so shine before men, that they may see it: It is not sufficient
that we have it in us, but the power and life of it must appear in our lives.
As the Apostle says of moderation, Phil. 4. 5. it must be so apparent, that it
may be known, not to one or two, but to All, both friends and foes, both good
and bad; so our sanctification must not lie concealed in our breasts, but it
must be See more D. Reynolds Hos 14. 5, 6. p. 37, 38.
made visible in our lives, we must be burning and shining lights, carrying
about us convincing lives, that we may win many to God.

Now to quicken thee, consider these fo ur things:

1. Consider seriously who it is that calls on thee and entreats thee to be
holy; is it not the great and the mighty God? he whose frowns make rocks to
rend, and Princes quake and tremble? he whose thou art in all relations? should
but a mortal man, a friend entreat thee to observe some rules and directions
which might tend to thy bodily health, how readily would thou obey him? and
shall the great God become a suppliant unto thee (whose bare commands were
sufficient to move thee, and who will have his will on thee whether thou will
or no) shall the most high condescend so low as to stoop to thee, and his grace
(as twere) kneel to thee for entertainment? and have thou a face to deny him?

2. Yet consider to what he calls thee, it is not to sin, it is not to
destruction, it is not to any thing that should hurt thee, that is the devils
work; but he calls thee to holiness, and so to happiness, that it may be well
with thee and with thine for ever. Now should the meanest person in the world
desire thee to do such or such a thing as would do thee good for ever, would
thou not hearken to him? And shall the great God entreat thee to be holy that
thou may be happy, and can thou reject his entreaties?

3. Yet thirdly, Consider from what he calls thee; Not from any thing that might
comfort thee, but only from sin, which is the greatest evil; to himself, which
is the chiefest good; he calls thee from hell to heaven, from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to himself. Now did you but know the horror
and ugliness of sin, with the terrors and torments that attend it, God and
man should not then stand thus entreating of you to forsake it.

4. Yet consider the rationality and reasonableness of Gods commands. Reason
should rule and command reasonable creatures (for though the ways of Religion
be above reason, yet they are not contrary to reason, for there is the greatest
reason in the world for them.) Now there are clear, full, convincing reasons
(enough to move a rock, had it but reason to understand them) to persuade us to
be holy; Reasons from God, reasons from his word, reasons from his mercies,
reasons from his judgments, reasons from heaven, reasons from hell, and above
all, reasons from the blood of Christ; sit down but one hour and consider what
thy sin cost thy Savior, bring but one such an argument for thy sins, and
hold them fast for ever. Thus we see what convincing reasons there are why we
should See more in M. Ant. Burgess 120. Ser. Ser. 60. p. 373.
be holy; yet it is not sufficient that we have holiness, but

2. We must grow in holiness, we must go forward from one degree of holiness
to another, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, See Trapp on this place.
2 Cor. 7. 1. We must strive after perfection, going from strength to strength:
as an infant grows from one age to another; and as the seed which is cast into
the ground comes to perfection by degrees, Mark. 4. 28. so we must all be
graduates, taking our degrees in the school of Christ, growing up into him, not
in some, but in all the graces of his Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 13. He that is holy,
must be holy still, Revel. 22. 11. proceeding and persevering therein. Keep it
and preserve it, for it is your life: What we say of modesty, Perit, ^ui ^eriit
pietas.
is most true of piety, Lose it and you lose all. God has made many gracious
promises that his people shall grow stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9. Psalm. 92.
12. Hos. 14. 5, 6, 7. When others fall, yet they shall not be moved, but shall
enjoy peace of conscience, sweet contentment, communion with God here, and the
blessed vision of him for ever. Oh then let us suffer this word of exhortation
to work upon our hearts; let us not out-sit all the entreaties of God, nor
despise this day of our visitation, least the Lord in wrath should seal up thy
condemnation, and say, Let him Ezekiel. 24. 13.
that is filthy be filthy still; since I would have cleansed them, but they
would not Ezekiel. 24. 13.
be cleansed, therefore they shall never be cleansed; but as they would live,
so shall they die in their sins: Since I have tried all conclusions to better
them, but in vain, therefore my spirit shall no more contend with them. They
could not say Nay to a tempter, but they could say Nay to Me; they could not
resist a temptation from a drunkard or some lewd companion, but the least hint
or call from them is readily obeyed; but My Spirit must be denied, My
invitations rejected, and a very base lust preferred before it; therefore My
Spirit shall no more contend with you, but I will forsake you, and then Hosea
9. 17. Woe unto them when I depart from them.

It will be our wisdom then to pursue this Royal game with an holy eagerness
for fear we should miss of it, and though it fly from us, yet let us still
pursue it; many run, but it is on a false sent, they neither pursue peace nor
holiness, when they should with diligence pursue both: For as in temporals, so
in spirituals, it is the diligent that makes rich. Hence we are commanded not
barely to seek, but to follow holiness, nor simply Heb. 12. 14. (...), sectam.
(...) persequimini. Metaph. sig^ singular studium sanctitatis obtinendae.
to follow it, but to pursue it, as the Hound does the Hare, eagerly,
delightfully, unweariedly; or as the cruel persecutor, who will never rest till
he has taken him whom he pursues. We must look for much opposition in this
way; the devil he will raise a thousand discouragementts, our own lazy corrupt
hearts will cry out of lions in the way, Prove. 22. 13. and the world will raise
mountains of dangers and difficulties, etc. but all these will but heighten
heroic spirits; As that valiant soldier, when one told him of a vast Army
coming against him, answered, The greater their number, the more glorious unto
plus Tori^ refeglemus, quonirm eo plures auperabimus.
will the victory be. A gracious spirit knows not what discourage^ent means;
Jacob will lose all rather then lose the blessing, Genesis 32. 24. He came for a
blessing, Christ says to us as Alexander said to one of his name; Aut nomen
depone, aut fortiterpugna.
and he is resolved to have it ere God and he part; and therefore he tells him
plainly, I will not let thee go until thou bless me; though God crush him,
lame him, shrink his sinews, and bi^ him leave his hold, yet he hold, the
faster, and is resolved to lose sinews and bones, life and limbs rather then
los^ the blessing: See the issue; for this God does not blame him, but highly
commends him, and calls him Israel, (i.) a Prince and prevailer with God, and
over men also, ver. 28. so that Esau instead of killing him does kiss him. Thus
we see it is good to be zealous in a good thing.

Many are the objections and Cavils which are made against holiness, which now
come in order to be handled.

CHAP. VII.
Where are Answers to all tho Cavils, Scruples, Scriptures and Objections (that
are of any weight) raised by carnal men against the power of Godliness.

The first Objection.
Obj. IF we be thus holy and strict, we may The flesh never w^ excuses.
beggar our selves, endanger our states, and lose all, etc.

Ans. It Is not piety but impiety that ^eggars men; it is not godliness, but the
want of it that has undone thousands* Do we not daily see many Earls, Lords,
Gentlemen, etc. that had fair Estates, Such are doubly undone, they are undone
and lose all here and hereafter to.
yet by whoredom, pride, idleness, cruelty, oppression, drunkenness, etc.
they have wasted all and brought themselves to miserable ends? when God has
blessed the low estate of his people, and made their little increase unto a
thousand. Let not therefore Satan deceive you with his delusions; for it is not
holiness but wickedness that brings beggary and ruin; according to the
threatening, Deuteronomy. 28. 15, to 68. If men will not obey the Commandments of the
Lord, what then? Shall they prosper and have riches? No, but they shall be
cursed in the City, and cursed in the field, cursed in body, soul, wife,
children and estate, etc. Lo here what sin and wickedness brings! Yea, but
what if we be an holy, obedient people, may not these curses light upon us
also? Oh no; for God has promised to bless them in their bodies, souls, goods
and God often in his dispensations makes a great difference between Israel and
Egypt. Exodus 11. 5. 7
good name, Deuteronomy. 28. 1, to 15. and therefore the Lord to take off this
scandal which the wicked are so apt to lay upon his ways, has made many
gracious promises to uphold our hearts; as Matthew. 6. 33. If we first seek his
Kingdom, *See Gat^kers Ser, on that Text.
when then? shall we be beggared? No, but all these things, viz. Food, raiment,
health, and wealth, and all Virtus omnia in sehabet, omnia adsunt bona, quem
penes est vi^tus. Plautus.
temporal blessings, so far as shall be good for us, shall be freely cast upon
us as an over- plus into the bargain. So Prove. 22. 4. Isa. 1. 19. Psalm. 34. 10.
Matthew. 5. 5, Romans 8. 32. Heb. 13. 5. Job. 22. 21, to 30. Acquaint thy self with
God, and be at peace with him. Ob. So we may beggar our selves. No, but good
shall come to thee, and thou shall lay up gold as dust, and shall have plenty
of silver.

2. The Lord has fulfilled these See Gataker. Ser. on Genesis 22. 10. fol. p.
299, etc
promises to his people so far as has been good for them. Thus godly Abraham
and Lot were rich, Genesis 13. 1. to M. Ant. Burgess, Ser. 107
7. and 24. 35, etc. Jacob had at first but a staff, yet increase, to two
bands, Genesis 32. 10. Holy Job a very wealthy man, Job 1. 3. David a great King
and full of riches. Iehosaphat walking in Gods ways, has riches and honor in
abundance, 2 Chronicles. 17. 4, 5, 6. V. Aug de^ Civit. Dei, l. 5. c. 24, 25, 26.
Constantinu^ Imperator.
The Christian Emperors, that preserved Religion, did flourish and had riches
in abundance. Piety both brings and blesses riches: When the Ark came to the
house of Obed Edom, it non supplicantem Daemonibus, sed ipsum v^rum Deum
colen^em, tantis terrenis implevit muneribus, quanta op^are nullus aderet. Id.
ibid.
brought a blessing with it: Piety teaches men how to order their affairs with
discretion, quickens us to diligence in our vocations and callings, breeds
contentment, and so is great gain. 1 Timothy 6. 6. Godliness with contentment is
gain, yea great gain, none like it; for other things may be good for something,
but godliness (...) illa piorum maximis opibus est praeserenda. Pauper est
ille quicum multa habeat, plura desider^t: nos contemnere malumus opes, quam
contie^. Min. Felix.
is profitable to all things, having the promise of this life, and that which
is to come; it brings both inward and outward, temporal and eternal blessings.
It takes not away our riches, but our confidence in them, and makes us look on
them as loss and dung in comparison of Christ, Phil. 3. 8. So that I do not
know a more compendious way to riches and honor, then to be truly pious: What
advanced Joseph, Nehemiah, David, Daniel, etc. but their piety and fidelity?
The devil has taught men a proverb, That piety and plain dealing is a jewel,
but he that uses it shall die a beggar; when all these were pious and
plain-dealing men, yet died in Riches, and Honor.

3. Show me that godly man that ever could say that real godliness did hurt
him even in his temporals; let any good man when he comes to die, cast up all
his losses on the one hand, and see how God has made up all in some better way
on the other hand, and then he may well conclude, Godliness is to Per vincul^
cresco.
me great gain. Though Job lost all, yet his latter end was better then his
beginning. It Is David's observation, and he never saw it fail in his time, *
Psalm. See the large Annot.
37. 25. I have been young and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous
for saken, nor his seed begging bread. If any be extremely poor the fault
usually lies in the Professor, and not in the Profession; either they are idle,
or hypocritical and neglect their callings, or breed their children idly, or
delight in fine fare, etc. Some reigning corruption usually brings this misery
on them.

4. I Answer by way of concession. Pauper^s di^ cimur, haec non est infamia
nostra, sed gloria: animus enim ut luxu solvitur, ita frugalitate firmatur.
Min. Fell. Mat. 19. 29.
Suppose thou should lose all by professing Christ and his truth, yet the
Lord is able to give thee much more then that, 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. The way to save
all, is to venture all for Christ: He that will thus lose his goods, shall save
them, yea he shall have an hundred fold in this life. God will supply all thy
wants; and for Centuplicia, (i.) multiplicia. Si non eodem genere, tamenvalore,
non possessione, sed usu. Perde te ne pereas, Salv. Ob. Captivi sunt. Sol. Hoc
ess^t miserrimum, s^ aliquo du^i (...), ubi D^um suum non invenerunt; tres
pueri fu^runt in cap ivitate, fuit Daniel, fuere Prop^ae, Nec Deus defuit
consolator. Aug. See Mr. Aut. Burgess, Sermon. 31. Non est p^na, militia est,
fortitudo enim infirmitatibus rob^ratur, and ^alamitas saep^us discipl^a
v^rtutis est. Min. Felix.
thy temporal estate, it may be thou shall have more then ever thou had, or
ever should have had in thy natural condition. However, God by his Spirit
will make an in ward supply of all thy losses, with such peace, joy,
contentment, etc. as shall be better to thee then a thousand lives or livings.
Oh that men were thoroughly convinced of this truth, that we never lose by
serving God: We may lose by serving the world and by serving men, as Cardinal
Wcolsey complained, Had I been but as careful to please God, as I was to
please my Sovereign, I had never come to this miserable end.

5. It Is one thing to be poor, and another thing to be overcome of poverty; for
Gods dearest servants for their trial (especially in times of common calamity;
for these temporal blessings are promised but conditionally, so far as may
make for Gods glory and the good of his people) may be brough low; they may be
as having nothing, and yet possessing all things, 2 Cor. 5. 9. 10. He will give
them contentment with their little, and such swet joy in the sense of his
favor, that shall far excel the Harvest and Vintage See this O^. more fully
answ. Pembl^ Ser. styled The Benefit of Gods service, in ^ol. p. 671. 8^ Bur.
Moses Choice, p. 114, etc. Spiritus Calvinianus, Spiritus Melancho^cus.
of all the ungodly.

The second Objection.
Obj. THis will make us sad and melancholy; we shall never see merry day more
if once we tread this path, farewell delights and pleasures for ever, etc.

Ans. This is a mere slander which the devil and his agents have raised to
affright men from piety. But you must know that wisdoms ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, Prove. 3. 17. No joy like the joy of
a good conscience, which is a continual feast, Prove. 15. 15. A feast at home,
and a feast abroad; a feast in prosperity, and a feast in adversity, etc. in so
much that Gods servants in their deepest distresses and darkest tentations, in
their prisons and dungeons have had more comfort and joy then all their enemies
in their Princely Palaces. God allows us to be merry, but not mad and
dissolute. Grace does not abolish, but rectify Lae^emur iu^ giter, ^do
innocenter, Sa lv. Rel^ est laeta, non dissoluta.
our joy, it brings it in to order, and sets it on right objects; it turns out
carnal into spiritual mirth; God does not envy our delights, only he would we
an us from low, base, beastly sensual pleasures; nor does he directily call
for fraeuum duntaxat aff^ctibus injicit, ne a via pietatis exorbitent. Sibel.
these, but only so far as they are inconsistent with thy eternal good. If a
Physician should persuade thee to forbear such and such dishes as tend to
Mutantur gaudia, non tolluntur, See Bur. Moses Choice, c. 15 p. 181, to 211. M.
A. Burg. Ser, 70.
the impairing of thy health, will thou not obey him for the good of thy body?
And shall God not persuade thee to forbear such things as tend to the hurt of
thy soul? Is it not more pleasure to obey God, then obey sin and Satan? Yea
do not Gods servants find more joy and comfort in their penetentiall tears,
then the wicked do in their greatest merrriments? For as piety brings the
greatest sorrow for sin, so it brings the greatest consolation; and where
sin in the sight and sense of it See more Bolton Direct. for Walking, p. 154.
to 380. and comfort to (...)* consc^. p. 204 etc
abounds, their comfort abounds much more. Gods Spirit is a Spirit of
consolation, though it lay its foundation in humiliation.

2. It Is not piety but sin and impiety that fills the soul full of sadness,
horrou^, amazement and despair: witness Adam See Sibbs Ser* on Isa. 256 p 26,
27
when he had sinned, Ca^n, Saul, Judas, etc. As piety is the pathway to peace
Isa, 32. 17. Psalm. 119. 165. Gal, 6. 16. so impiety and sin brings terror
and disquietment. Were people more zealous, and religious, they would have more
peace and comfort both in their temporals and spirituals.

3. Many to shun melancholy (as they The checks of conscience caused by the
word or works of God are commonly counte^ fits of melancholy, and when such
qualmes come over their hearts, a pair^ of Cards or Tables, or merry company is
sought to dr^ve them away: fearful is this sin, and such as is a forerunner
of a Reprobate mind. D. Slatyr on Rom, 1. 19.
call it) (i.) when the Spirit of God stirs their consciences, and would
convince them of sin, that he might fit them for mercy; to shun this
Preparative to grace (which the blind world calls melancholy) they run
themselves on many rocks, they run to drunken companions, gaming, idleness,
etc. yea for fear of melancholy run almost mad, and bring themselves into a
thousand sorrows; they omit holy duties, forsake holy company, cast away good
books, neglect closet prayer, meditation, self-examination, etc. Thus to avoid
a misery, they run into a mischief, and to avoid affliction, run into sin,
and bring that sadness which they fled from upon themselves in a more
desperate, irrecoverable manner: of two evils we should choose the least; and if
it cannot otherwise be avoided, better undergo ten thousand melancholies, then
the least sin, etc.

The third Objection.
Obj. SHould I be thus pure and precise, I should lose my friends, and may make
them all against me, etc.

Ans. 1. By thy wickedness, rudeness and profaneness thou may make father
and mother and friends against thee; for as when a man's ways please the Lord,
he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him; so when our ways are
dissolute and displeasing unto God, he makes even our best friends to be at
variance with us.

2. He that will be Christ's disciple, must be ready (in affection at least)
when the Lord shall call him, to forsake father and mother, and wife, and
children, etc. not simply, but when they come in competition with Christ and
his honor: if Christ should call thee to him, thou must say with Jerome, Though
my father should lie in my way, and my mother should hang about my neck, I
would go over my father, and shake off my mother, and run unto Christ. Levi
in Gods cause knew neither father nor mother, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. The Spouse of Christ
must forget her own people, and her fathers house, then shall the King desire
her beauty, Psalm, 45. 10, 11.

3. Admit thou do lose carnal friends, See more fully M. A. Burgess, Ser. 71.
yet thou shall have spiritual friends, better and truer friends: Thou shall
have God for thy friend, his Angels for thy guardians, and all his servants
through the world on thy side, with all their prayers and labors. Change (we
say) is no robbery, but this change is thy rich advantage.

The fourth Objection.
Obj. SHould I walk so strictly, I might shorten my life, and bring diseases
upon my self, etc.

Ans. Many by their wickedness have shortened their days; some by gluttony
and drunkenness, others by whores consume the radical moistute, get the pox,
consumptions, etc. God has said that bloody and deceitful men shall not live
out half their days, Psalm. 55. ult. A wicked man never lives out half his
days; for either he is cut off before he has lived half the course of nature,
or he is cut off before he has lived a quarter True, some wicked men live
long, but no wicked man can promise himself long life, because he is undrethe
curse. Stock. In a Religious life are joys not sensual, wholesome fears,
Noble hopes, sweet sorrows, contemplations of heavenly things, continual
renovations etc. all which are very powerful to prolong life. L. Uirulam Not.
Hist. Temperantia sanitatis and longaevitatis matter.
of the course of his desires. So then it is not men's piety, but their impiety
which shortens their days.

2. Piety prolongs our days, the promise runs only to the obedient, Deuteronomy. 6.
2. and 30. 19, 20. Psalm. 34. 12. Prove. 1, 2. 16. and 22. 4. They honor God
with their godly lives, and therefore God will prolong their lives; God will
not thrust them out of their dwellings that pay their rent so well. Besides,
piety teaches us temperance in eating and drinking, moderation in our
passions, anger, sadness, fear, etc. which in the excess infeeble the
spirits, dry up the bones, and shorten our days: but piety makes us peaceable,
patient, pleasant, and so is a means to prolong our life, Pro. 15. 13.

3. We may not prize or prefer our lives before the glory of God, when our
life comes in competition with Godly Beza was so healthful that he never kept
his bed one day, nor ever knew what headache meant.
Christ, Religion, and a good conscience; then he that will save his life (by
denying Christ and his cause) shall lose it. In such cases we must not only
part with our goods, but with our lives for Christ, who parted with his for us:
Hence Rev. 12. 11. the Sants loved not their lives unto the death; and Forti
nihei timendu^ praeter scelus Aristot. Licitum est jeiuniis and vigi^liis,
carnemdomare, ut spiritus pareat, etiamsi vita brevius hoc pactofiniatur: sed
non licet macerationes eas assumere per se ea intention ut vita citius
finiatur. Alsteed CC. cap. 18. Cui astipulatur Salvian l. 1. p 14 etc. Non
retarduit pium Danielis animum ab instituta orandi consuetudino aut Magistratus
amplissimi, aut vitae periculum. Sanctius.
Paul counted not his life dear for Christ Acts. 20. 24. and 21. 13. Better die
honorably, then live basely and unusefully. We may not refuse the confessing
of Christ and his truth when we are called to it, nor omit the necessary duties
of Gods worship for fear of shortning our days. Daniel, 6. 10. had rather lose
his life, then lose his communion with God by prayer. David and Christ wasted
and consumed themselves in the zealous service of God. John 2. 17. and happy
are all those that die of such consumptions; we should emulate their conditions.

The fifth Objection.
Obj. WOuld you have us neglect our callings, and give up our selves only to
reading, prayer, meditation, etc. does not God command every one to provide for
his own? etc.

Ans. Though God command us six days to labor, and in the sweat of our
Subordinata non pugnant,
brows to eat our bread, yet our general calling is no hinderance, but a great
furtherance to our particular calling. Been orasse est been studuisse. Luth.
Prayer and provender hinders no man. The oyling of the wheels does not hinder
the going of them; nor is the whetting of the tithe (though the work stop for a
time) any impediment to the workman. Religious duties in the power See Satakers
Ser. on Mat. 6. 33. fol p. 49
of them, do not hinder our earthly affairs, but greatly further them, bringing
Gods blessing on our labors, without which all our toil is but vain. Psalm.
127. 1, 2. And though we should have success and outward comfort in abundance,
yet they are no blessings to us without prayer, 1 Timothy 4, 5. Refugiendae est
ampla possessio, ne consequatur profunda perditio; impedimenta haec sunt, non
adjumenta; ^nera non subsidia, etc. Salv.


2. Suppose you should lose in your temporal estate by spending your time
discreetly in Religious duties; yet you have done wisely; for whilst the
Martha's of the world are cumbred about many things, thou with Mary have chosen
the better part, Luke. 10. 41. 42. thou have parted with dross for gold, Multo
lovior est praese^s te^^itas, quam aeterna paupertas. Salv*
with chaff for wheat, and have lost temporals to gain eternals.

3. Neither yet have you lost your temporals by so doing; for if God see it
good for thee, he can give thee much more then that: We serve a bountiful
Master who observes what our duties cost us, what hazards we run, what loss we
undergo, and will abundantly reward us. Away then with all excuses, We cannot
spare time, we have much work and great employment; the more need to pray that
God would bless it. 2. Had not David and Daniel great employment, the one
being King over a great people, and the other next to the King? yet they could
spare time to pray three times a day at least. You can find time for all your
great employments, to eat, drink, sleep; and can you find none for praying?

4. True it is, parents are commanded to provide for their children, but then
it must be moderately, justly, discreetly, religiously; else if you provide
excessively for them by covetousness Quae (...) est o miserrimi! ut haeredes
alios faciatis, vos ipsos exh^redetis; ut alios relinquatis vel brevi divites,
vos ipsos aeterna mendicitate damnetis? Salv*
and cruelty, thou providest a curse for them in stead of a blessing: And is
not that parent mad that to provide for his childrens bodies, will damn his own
soul? to gain temporal riches for them, will lose eternal himself; If you
would get portions for your children, train them up religiously, for piety is
an enduring portion, it is lasting, yea everlasting riches: It Is not houses,
lands, silver, gold, riches, that God commands parents to provide, but the
principal thing with God requires, is, that children be taught his ways;
Psalm. 78. 5. 6, 7. and brought up in his nurture and fear, Ephesians. 6. 4. and
therefore great is the folly of most parents of our time, who intend to leave
hundreds to their children, and yet grudge to bestow one hundred in the
breeding of them: Alas, what will it profit thee or thine to gain all the
world, if your souls be damned?

The sixth Objection.
Obj. SAnctification is hard to be attained; many difficulties and dangers must
be undergone, many duties performed, many sins to be subdued, etc. many lions
lie in our way.

Ans. It Is granted, real sanctity is no Nisi duris non ^tur ad regnum. Math.
7. 14.
easy thing; all excellent things are hardly come by; the Lord in his See more
M. Ant. Burgess Ser. 33. p. 194 and. 430. Cito data vi^seunt.
wisdom foresaw, that things easily gotten would be soon forgotten; what is
hardly come by, we prize the more.

2. Yet the comfort is, it is nor impossible; Gods sevants have attained it, as
Job, David, Daniel Samuel, Paul, etc. God is the same still, as readyto give
his grace Sanctitas est obvia, sed requirentibu^.
(to such as seek it in sincerity) as ever.

3. It is easy to a willing mind; the hardness lies in our own rebellious
wills; it is not so much our cannot as our will not that undoes us; you will not
believe, Nolle in causa est, non posse praetenditur. Sen.
repent, obey, and then you cry you cannot, when the truth is you will not: All
Gods commands seem harsh and hard to wicked and unwilling men. Mavult quilibet
improbus execrari legem quam emendare mentem; praecep^a odisse quam vitia.
Salvian.
Quotgenera praeceptorum, tot adversariorum; if God command liberality, the
Covetous man is angry; if Humility, the Proud; if Purity, the Profane. Get
that cursed enmity out of thy heart, and then the good word and way of God will
never displease thee. Non lenti sed violenti. Curristas, non quaeristas amat
Deus. Luth, It Is the Runner, not the Questioner that God delights in.
What Solomon says of knowledge Pro. 14. 6. that it is easy to him that
understands, is most true of holiness, it is easy to him that understands the
worth of it, and is resolved to pursue it with an holy violence, Matthew. 11. 12.
It is the violent, and not the somnolent and lazy, that get the Kingdom.
Besides custom will make hard (...) pari^
things easy and delightful; you shall also have Gods spirit to assist and
strengthen you in the work; and when your hearts are once spiritualized, Christ
yoke will be easy and his burden light. And therefore tell not me of lions,
Amor n^scit ^fficultates. See Brooks Remed. ag. Sat. Dev. p. 185. and p. 63.
and p. 195. Invia virtuti nulla est via.
dangers and difficulties in the way; true love knows no difficulties, Cant. 8.
6, 7, Jacob will have the blessing though he lose his limbs. The womah of
Canaan will have no nay, though Christ deny her, delay to help her, and at last
gives her a reproachful answer, and calls her Dog, yet she picks encouragement
out of that discouragement, and at last prevails. The Martyrs went as joyfully
to their stakes, as many do to their marriages. Nothing is hard to a valiant
spirit; what though lions come against us, since we have Christ who is the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah for us? No matter what the duty or the lesson be, if
Christ be our Teacher.

3. The comfort and content that we shall find in paths of holiness, will pay
for all our pains; for as Religion brings the greatest trials, so it bring s
the greatest consolations; and as your afflictions abound, your comforts shall
abound much more: as the waters r^se, so the Ark rose with them. Who then Fnis
dat amabilitatem and facilitate^ medii^, Stalius Axiem. p. 170.
would not with Sampson encounter with lions, when there is honey in the belly
of them? A great reward makes hard things sweet and easy; piety has
Consequentur tum vitam longam, tu^ jucundam and felicem. Oecolamp.
the promise, Job. 36. 11. If we obey and serve the Lord [in purity and
sincerity] he tells us the benefit, we shall spend our days in prosperity, and
our years in pleasures.

The seventh Objection.
Obj. I Fear I shall never persevere in holiness, and then it is better never
to begin, etc. See Leighon the promises, p. 362. etc.


Ans. Duty is our part, success is Gods; we must walk in paths of piety, and
then commit both our selves and all our ways to him, who has promised to make
an everlasting Covenant with us, and to plant his fear in our hearts that we
Iudi^ium (i) justitiam sive fidem and sanctitatem Evangelica^ ad victor am. a
Lap.
shall never depart from him. Ier. 32. 39, 40. But our place of defense shall
be the munitions of rocks* Isa, 33. 15, 16. and though thy grace be but weak,
yet if it be sincere, he has promised to support and strengthen it, till he
bring In te stas and non stas. Aug.
forth judgment into victory, and make sanctification triumphant over all
corruptions, Matthew. 12. 20. Did we stand by our own strength, we migh justly
fear; for in his own strength shall no man be strong, 1 Samuel 2. 9. but we are
kept by the mighty power of God, who is El-shaddi, Allmighty, Allsufficient;
whose eyes run to and fro through the whole earth to show himself strong in
the behalf of those whose hearts are perfect wirh him, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.

2. Remember, that we are never stronger then when we are most weak in our own
apprehensions. When Paul was most weak in himself, then was he most strong in
God, 2. Cor. 12. 10. not only by an intrinsecall disposition, that we are then
more inclined to seek strength, but indeed by a spiritual capacity; Christ is
more prepared to bestow strength, when we are sensible of our own weakness. In
Q. Mary's time the trembling Christians proved the valiantest Martyrs, when
self-confident ones miscarried.

The eight objection.
Obj. BUt if we should give our selves up to purity and preciseness, this
would debase our spirits, destroy our parts, make us silly, dejected,
unsociable, mel^ncholcik* and pusillanimous, etc. Nil nisi grande aliquod
bonum, quod a Nerone damnatum. Justus est veluti speculum virtutis; ejus mores,
verba and facta, mores corruptos impiorum ost endunt and damnant. a Lap. F. des
non tollit, sed extollit rationem. V. L. Virulam Advancement of Learn. Chap. 2,
3, 6. Sanctitas non onerat, sed ornat no^ Sal.


Ans. What? more Buts yet? Surely piety is some excellent thing that the devil
and his factors do so much oppose it. They labor to lay it low, and to bring
an odium upon it, because it is above their reach, and brings their baseness
into disgrace: like the Fox in the Fable that despised the grapes which he
could not come at.

2. Piety does not destroy our parts but does raise and rectify them: it does
not abolish, but refine and consolidate them; whereas before our wit and parts,
were set on vanity, now they are set on right objects. Grace spiritualizeth
our abilities, and directs them to right objects and right ends. Mettle in a
wild colt is good; but when that mettle is regulated, and made serviceable,
it is far more excellent.

Religion is so far from debasing, that it heigh tens men's spirits; in so
much as none can be truly valorous, but such as are truly Religious. It is the
guilt of sin that debaseth and enfeebles men's spirits; it is the wicked that
fly before they be pursued, when the righteous are ^old as lions. Pro. 28. 21.
If Iethro's Magistrates will be men of courage, Et neseit remeare leo. Men's
^onfidens, bilaris, magnanima, q. Deo nixa. a Lap.
they must be men fearing God, Exodus 18. 21. None so bold as this Religious
coward. Psalm. 112. 5. 6. David a pious man, a man that wept much for his own
and others sins; yet who more valiant then David? 1 Samuel 30. 6. Psalm. 3. 6. and
23. 4. What brave Courtiers, what wise Counselors, what raised and noble
spirits had Joseph, Nehemiah, Daniel, Pueri and mulierculae nostrae, cruc^s,
and tor^e^ta, seras et omnes suppli^iorum terriculas, insuperata patientia
dolore^ illudunt. Min Faelix.
etc. What an Army of valiant Martyrs do we read of? Heb. 11. no tortures nor
terrors could separate them from Christ. What an heroic spirit had Luther,
that contemned the contempts of all the world, and being called to Worms,
would go thither though there were as many devils there as there were tiles on
the houses? Paul will to Jerusalem though bonds and afflictions Nil praeter
peccatum timeo. ^iety raises those spirits which are too low; humbles them
that are too high; where it finds any hard thing it sofens it; where any soft,
it hardens it.
abide him there. Elijah dares tell Ahab to his face that it is he that
troubles Israel, and Micajah can tell him that he shall not prosper. John
Baptist dares reprove an Herod and if the Emperesse threaten Chrysostom he can
tell her, That he has learned to fear nothing but sin.

If any would see this Cavil more ^ully Answered; let him peruse M. Buroughs
Gracious Spirit, chap. 6. p. 130, 133, 135. where he shall find five Reas. why
godliness raisethmens parts, etc.

The ninth Objection.
Obj. COuld we see an harmony and unity amongst Professors, we should gladly
join with them in ways of piety; but we see so many Sects and Schisms, so many
Blasphemies and Heresies abounding, that till they be all agreed, we will not
come near them; we see unity in other Religions: but none amongst Professors.

Ans. He that will be of no Religion till he see a perfect unity in the Church,
may be in hell ere that day come; for whilst there are good men and bad, yea
whilst there is flesh and spirit in the same man, there will be contentions and
oppositions. There ever has been, is, and will be Heresies and, Schisms
(though it is true the Magistrate should not tolerate them) in the Church of
God. Yea it is not only there May be, but there Must be, not only Schisms and
lesser rents, but Heresies and such Tenants as strike at the very Foundations
of Religion; and why is all this? That they that are approved might be made
manifest and their sincerity appear in their constancy. 1 Cor. 11. 19. Schisms
will creep in to disturb the Churches unity, heresies to corrupt the doctrine;
but God will so dispose ofall, that the issue shall be prosperous. D. Prideaux
Ser. on 1 Cor. 11. 19


God suffers false Prophets to come in amongst us, to try and prove us, that
men may see who are for Christ, and who for Baal, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. There will be a
Jannes and a Jambres to oppose Moses, and an Hananael against the Prophet
Jeremiah. View all the Acts of the Apostles, and see what uproars attended the
Preaching of the Gospel; for though the Gospel per se in it self bring that
peace which passes all understanding, yet per accidens, accidentally meeting
with men's corruptions, it causes tumults; in so much that there are sometimes
dissentions amongst Gods own people, as between Peter and Paul. Gal. 2. 11. and
Paul and Barnabas, though they were holy men and Apostles, Acts 15. 39. So
Luther and Zuinglius, etc.

Now these divisions must not make us cast off Religion (he was never sound
that will forsake Christ's Church for them) but make us more careful what we
receive, 1 These. 5. 21. When we come to a Market and hear of Pickpurses, we do
not run from the Market because of them, but we are mo^ watchful because we
hear of so many varlets abroad: So though our divisions be great, and the
errors amongst us many (which is our grief) yet if they were ten thousand times
more, they would be no ground for us to dislike Religion, but only be matter of
caution to us, to make us walk more humbly and watchfully before the Lord.

II. Whereas you say there is unity in other Religions, unity amongst Turks,
Jews, Papists, etc. I answer.

1. It is no wonder all is at peace amongst them, because the devil who is the
strong man keeps house there; the devil is wiser then to disturb his own.
Unitas, 1. Satanica. 2. Ethnica. 3. Belluina. 4. Iscariotica. 5. Tyrannica. 6.
Herodiana. 7. Ventris causa. Illyricus. See Whitcs Way. p. 154. Mortons Apol.
P. 1. p. 300.
Illyricus has observed a sevenfold unity in the Papacy. 1 A divellish. 2.
Heathenish. 3. A beastly. 4. A traiterous. 5. A tyrannical. 6. An Herodian;
and 7. A selfish unity. This they make one chief mark of their Church; but
unity without verity, can be no note of a true Church; for there may be unity
amongst a company of thieves; the Jews with one consent cry Crucify him, and
all the world was mad after the beast, Rev. 13. 16.

2. Recrimination is no purgation; their accusing us will not excuse them; for
were we fuller of divisions then we Quis tuleris Gracch^s? etc.
be, yet they are the unfittest of any to accuse us; for who knows not that
their erroneous Religion abounds with divisions? Pappus has observed 237
differences amongst them; and Bishop Hall in his Peace of Rome, 300. The
Thomists are against the Scotists, and they against the Occamtsts; the
Dominicans against the Franciscans; yea Pope against Pope; what one has set
up, another has pulled down: they differ not only in V. Paraei (...), Bernards
^ag. p. 1^8.
circumstantials, but in fundamentals, about God, about Christ, Scripture,
Angels, Original sin, Free Will, Predestination, Justification, Antichrist,
Images, the Pope, the Church, the Sacraments, etc.

3. Yet must we labor after unity, and bury our own private opinions as low as
hell, and not broach them in a season that calls so much for union; for though
heresies and scandals will arise, See more Bur. Moses Choice, p. 295. etc. and
p. 308, 309.
yet woe to those that raise them. Let us walk humbly, keep the bounds of our
callings, receive the truth in love, etc. So shall Gods spirit lead us into all
truth, and preserve us from Soul ^estroying errors.

The tenth Objection.
Obj. WE see many of your holy ones as vile as any; they can for a need lie,
cozen, dissemble, be drunk, covetous, cruel, Whore, etc.

Ans. If there be any such that cause Religion to be evil spoken of (as there
are too many in all paces) yet Vitiu^ (...), non transit in (...).


1. You must know that this is the fault of the Professor, and not of the
Profession: It is the fault of the Person, and not of the Religion. The
principles of our Religion give no toleration of Stews, no profanation of the
Sabbath by gaming, dancing, etc. but teach all men to live soberly, godlily,
and righteously, to do to all men as we would be done by; wine in it self is
good, though some abuse it to drunkennes^e; and our Religion in it self is
good, though some profane persons abuse it to licentiousness.

2. We must not condemn all for some; there was Judas an hypocrite amongst the
Apostles; it does not follow that therefore all the Apostles were hypocri^es.
Suppose one of thy kinsmen were a thief, a drunkard, etc. it does not follow
that all are so. You would count him a simple man that should judge of London
by the sinks and filthy gutters that are there, and should overlook the
curious building, etc. Yet thus do many in Religion, they overlook such as are
truly-godly; and if there be any profane scandalous person, they cast their
eye presently on him; like beetles that fly over all the fine flowers, and if
there be any dung they creep in that: Or like flies that pass over the sound
places, and light on that which is galled. Be not thou offended to see tares
amongst the wheat, and hypocrites in the Church; it ever has been so, and will
be so to the end of the world. Christ's Church on earth is a mixed society; there
will be some false brethren amongst them, some that are carnal and cause Gods
name to be blasphemed, Romans 2. 24. only we should be careful to give no just
cause of offense, remembering that of Solomon, Pro. 25. 26. The righteous
falling before the wicked, are as a corrupt and troubled spring: (i.) They
offend and poison many, and do much mischief.

The eleventh Objection.
Obj. THese precise ones are the troublers of our Israel, enemies to Caesar,
pestilent fellows movers of sedition, mad men, such as turn the world
up-sidedown, etc.

Ans. This has been an old slander of the devil and his agents against the
people of God, as appears, Mark 3. 21. John See Watsons Charter chap. 15. p.
778 Si Tiberius non ascendit ad maenia, si Nilus non ascendit in arva, etc.
Statim Christianos ad leones. Tertul. Apolog. c. 40. See Prideau^. Ser. on Luke
7. 35. p. 5.
10 20. Acts 26. 24. 1 King. 18. 17. and 2 Kings 9. 11. Amos 7, 10. John 19.
12. Acts 17 6, 7. and 24. 5. Ier. 18. 18. and 37. 13, 14, 15. and 38. 4. Thus
they dealt with the Primitive Christians, if any calamity fell on the land,
presently they cried Away with the Christians to the Lions, they are the cause
of all this misery.

2. These must know, that it is not Religion, but the want of it which breeds
uproars and tumults in the nations: It is not the godly, but the ungodly, the
swearer, the drunkard, the Sabbath-prophaner, the covetous Achan, Idolatrous
Jeroboam, wicked Ahab, unclean Zimri and Cozbi; these, these are they that
trouble Israel, that bring plagues and calamities on a Land, these are those
Ps. 1. 1. Rashang, homos inquietus, turbulentu. V. Leigh Crit.
Reshagnaims, those turbulent ones which disquiet the places where they come.
As for the godly, they are of those that are peaceable in our Israel, they are
endued with the wisdom that is from above, which is first pure, and then
peaceable, James 3. 17. They are peaceable in themselves, and labor to make
and preserve peace amongst others. See Bur. Gracious Spi. p. 137, etc,
They are the pillars of a Land, the equites cataphracti, the chariots and
horsemen, the strength and glory of a Land: As Sampsons strength lay in his
hair; so the Governors of Judah shall one day say, In the inhabitants of
Jerusalem is our strength, Zech. 12. 5. They are a blessing to families, Cities
and Nations: God blessed the house of Pharaoh for Joseph's sake; he spared
Israel at the prayers of one Moses; ten righteous persons had preserved Sodom.
Paul has all the souls given him which were in the ship, Acts 27. 24. yea one
holy man may be a means to save a whole Island fromdestruction, Job 22. ult.

It is ignorance and wickedness that makes people rude and rebellious; but
where Religion comes in the power of it, and men obey not for fear, but for
conscience sake, no better subjects then those in the world; none more faithful
to their trust, none pray more for their Superiors, nor pay their just dues
more freely and fully to them; these are those that will venture their lives and
estates for their honor, when such as serve them for their own ends will leave
them and forsake them. And though for the present the righteous may be
condemned as traitors, and the wicked exalted to the Throne, yet in Gods due
time he will clear the innocence of his servants as the light; there shall be a
resurrection of their Names as well as of Bodies: Then David shall appear to be
innocent David, and Saul a bloody man; then shall we clearly discern between
the righteous and the wicked, between him that fear^th the Lord, and him that
fears him not.

Those that would see any more Cavils raised against sanctity by the world, the
flesh and the devil, fully answered; let them peruse two excellent Books which
I shall commend to the serious study of ^ll young Divines, viz. Dyke o^ the
(...) of man's Heart, and M. Downha^s warfar, especially p. 287, etc. and Mr.
Timothy Rogers his good news from Heaven.

Since I finished this Tract, there came to my hands an excellent piece styled
Precious Remedies against Satan's devices, by M. Brooks; where you have many
more Cavils fully and learnedly answered* As also those Elaborate and
Soul-searching Sermons of M. Anthony Burgess, Ser. 44. p. 270.

CHAP. VIII.
I Am come now unto the Motives: There is a great indisposition in ou^ natures
to purity, and therefore we had need of all incitements that possibly may be,
to quicken us to it.

1. The first Motive is drawn from the necessity of it; Holiness is absolutely
1. Motive.
necessary to salvation; a man may be saved without riches, honor, etc. Bu^ no
man can be saved without holiness*

2. It is necessary Necessitate praecepti, it is no indifferent thing; it is
not actu^ elicitus, sed imperatus; it is no free and voluntary action of our
own, but a duty commanded and enjoined by Go^ under severest penalties, and
therefore we are necessarily bound to the ^ractice of it. This is the will of
God, even our sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. It is his will Iacienda sunt nobis
quaecunq^ Deus praecipit; etsi non statim videamus quorsum ^vasura sunt;
clausis tamen oculis debemus eum ducem sequi Roll. in Ioh.
emphatically (i.) it is that which God does more especially require of us, and
therefore it must be done intuitae voluntatis, simply because he commands it;
we must not stand questioning Gods commands, but obey them; when once we
understand what is that acceptable will of God, we must presently do it. This
is motive sufficient to a gracious soul, if there were no more, as the Lord
said to Joshua (1. 9,) Be strong and of good courage; h^ve not I commanded
thee? q. d. This is ground sufficient to make thee courageous, because I have
commanded thee to be so: so this is sufficient to make us f^y sin, and study
purity, because our God commands that it should be so.

2. Necessitate medii. Holiness is the way to happiness; it is via ad regnum,
the way to the Kingdom, though not V^a caelo, v^a sanctitatis* Isa. ^5. 8.
the cause of reigning; it is necessary as a qualification, though not as a
meritorious cause of heaven: No unclean thing Licet non si^ causa merito(...)
gloriae, est tamen causa dispositiva, qu a idoneiredd imur ad gloriam
recipiendam. Alsted.
can come there. If the earth groan under profane wretches, and the Land be
ready to spue them out, Levit. 18. 28* (...) Job thought the wicked unfit to
sit with the dogs of his flock, and if God See Harsnet, on Rep. p. 42. to 50.
and p. 308. etc.
abhor their persons, prayers and praises here; can we think that he will
receive such into his Kingdom? and if the Virgins that stood before the Persian
Monarchs must first be perfumed and prepared before they come into their
presence, Hest. 5. 1. surely then the Kings daughter must be gloriously arraied
before she be brought into the presence of the King of Kings, Psalm. 45 13. 14.
Such as wait on Princes, must be arraied accordingly, Mat. 11. 8. else they
disparage their Master, when they follow him with loathsome rags. How often has
the Lord told us that there is no enjoying the beatificall vision of his face
in glory, without this? See D. Preston on the New Covenant. Ser. 20. p 313.
Deus Se ip^um vidend^ (...) in verbo s^o in ^c vita, et visio^e gloriasa i^
futura. Rivet.
Psalm. 24. 3. 4. Matthew. 5. 8. Heb. 12. 14. without holiness no man shall see
God to his comfort. Sin draws a vail over our hearts and eyes, so that we
cannot see God in his word, nor see him in his works; we cannot discern the
mysteries of Religion here, no^ obtain the fruition of the glorious vision of
his face for ever. So that hol^nesse and happiness fall both under Decre; ^he
whom God has decree^ to salvation as the end, he has decreed to holiness
leading to that end, 2 These. 2. 13. The Kingdom of Grace is the suburbs to the
Kingdom of Glory; and he that will not go through the suburbs, shall never come
into the City of the New Jerusalem; it is an holy Mount which none but holy
ones can ascend: it is only he that has his fruits in holiness, whose end
shall be everlasting life, Romans 6. 22. it is only such as walk in white here,
that shall be clothed with white hereafter, Revel 19. 8. Sanctity is the
pathway to glory; they differ only in degree; the one is the seed, the other
is the flower. Grace is glory militant, and glory is grace triumphant: Hence it
is called glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Sanctificatio id ^itur glorificatio inchoati^e,
quatenus futura glorificationis est praelu^ium. We^leb.
Romans 8. 30. whom he justified, them he glorified; but where is sanctification?
it is included in glorification, for sanctification is glory begun, and
glorification is sanctification consummate.

3. There is a necessity of sanctification in respect of Christ our Head, who
Ubi sanctificatio? includitur in ^ne. Paraeus.
is called by way of eminency The holy and the just one, Mark 1. 24. Isa. 54.
5. Revel. 7. Cant. 5. 10. Christ is white ^or holiness, and red in respect of
his wounds and sufferings. Now all believers Debet tantae ^obilitutis ad qua^
nos extulit, cogitatio sanctimoniae ac puritatis studiu^ in nobis acu^re.
Calvin.
have ^ear communion with Christ, they are made one with him, flesh of his
flesh, Heb. 2. 11. Both he that sanctifies (i.) Christ, and they that are
sanctified (i.) the servants of Christ, are all one; hence the Church is called
Christ. 1 Cor. 12. 12. Now Christ was every way holy and undefiled, Heb. 7. 26.
and we must in some measure be conformable to him in sanctification, as well as
in suffering, Rom 8. 29. For if the Head be of gold, the menbers must not be of
brass; an holy Head and unholy members will never agree.

4. In respect of the Church and people of God to whom we are united, See
Randal on the Church, lect. 4. p. 62. Sancti, non sanct^tate inna^a, sed
sanctitate don^ta,
they are holy.

1. The Church triumphant in heaven, to whom we are allied, is holy* they are a
company of just men, whose spirits are made perfect, Heb. 12. 22.

2. The Church Militant is an holy Nist vitae sanctimoni^ Christianum ^e
ostendas, (...) s^re quide^ in ^cclesia poteris, sed ex ^atamen non eris. Calv.
society; hence they are called holy Brethren, Heb. 3. 1. and an holy Nation, 1
Pet. 2. 9. Saints of the most high, Dan. 7. 18, 21, 22. and the People of his
holiness, Isa. 63* 18. Men may make shows, and be outward members of the
Church, but they shall never be true and sound members of it without holiness.

5. The work to which we are called, calls for holiness.

1. Our prayers must be holy, and must come from holy persons, Psalm. 66. 18.
God hears not sinners, Ioh. 9. 31. we must lift up pure hands in prayer.

2. Before we hear, there must be purging, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. James 1. 21. The
vessel must be pure, or it will mar the liquor Sincerum est nifi vas.
that is put into it.

3. The Sacraments call for holy ones. Sancta sanctis, Holy things must be
given to holy ones. It is to the pure only that all things are pure, Titus 1.
ult. when all the duties of religion without it are but as the cutting off of a
dogs neck, Isa. 66. 3.

6. Our sanctification is one special evidence of our Title to all the favors
of God. Non q. ^ramus sed ut essemus. Nullum electionis evi^ dentius (...).


1. It is an evidence of our election. God has chosen us, not because we were,
but that we might be holy, E^es. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 2. All the elect of God are
holy, Colos. 3. 12. His electing includes, but never excludes purity or good
works; and therefore they that Electio non excludit, sed includit sanctitatem
and studium bo^orum operum tanqu^ effectum and infallibile signum. Alst.
would be sure of their election, must begin at sanctification, and by wor^ of
holiness make their calling and election sure; 2 Pet. 1. 10. The devi^
separates the means from the end, and would persuade men that if they be
elected, they shall be saved, let them live as they list; but all those whom
God has elected to happiness as the end, he has also elected to holiness as
the way to that end.

2. It Is an evidence of our vocation. Whom God calls by his word and Spirit, he
calls to holiness and not to sin, 1 These. 4. 7. 2. Cor. 1. 1. 2. Ro^* 1. 7.

3. It Is the end and evidence of our redemption. Christ gave himself for us,
That he might redee^ u^ from a^ iniquity, and purify to himself a peculia^
people ^ealous of good works, Titus 2. 14* Luke 1. 74, 75. Ephesians. 5. 26. Col.
(...) 21, 22. John 17. 19. 1 Pet. 2. 24.

4. By this we shall have a comfortable evidence of our justification for all
those whom God justifies, the (...) ever sanctifies; thou (...) not (...) doubt
of thy justification, if thou find the fruit of it, which is sanctification;
this is always an inseparable property of a child of God, yea it is essential
to him, that it is impossible to be Gods child without it. In the Apostles
times there were some that boafted of their faith, and of their justification,
and yet neglected sanctification; to whom both James and John reply, and bid
them make it apparent by their works of holiness and obedience; else they were
but liars and deceivers, James 2. 1 John. 2. 3. 4. yea Christ himself (who was
no legal Preacher) shows us what persons have title to blessedness, even
such as show their justification by the fruits of sanctification (viz.) Poverty
of spirit, mourning, meekness, purity, mercy, peace, etc.

Away then with Saltmarsh and all Saltmarsh Free Grace, p. 97. to 190. See him
confuted by M. Gataker.
the rabble of Antinomians, who cry down all acts of Preparation, Qualification
and evidence of works; they cry down all sense of sin and humiliation for it as
legal, and tell us of short work; it is but believe and be saved; it is but
looking on Christ, and salvation is in thy soul. This is quickly said indeed,
but it is not so quickly done: It is easy to say I can build a house, it is
but laying the foundations, rearing the walls, and covering it with aroof, and
the house is made: but he that will build indeed, shall find much hewing,
squaring, cost and labor, etc. And if it be such easy work to be saved, why
are we commanded to Ask, seek, knock, strive, wrestle, run and workout our
salvation with fear and trembling, denying our selves, and taking up our cross
daily etc. Those are so fully confuted by the leaned Gellaspy Miscellan. chapter
21. p. 246. etc
Scotchman, that I shall only send you to him for fuller satifaction.

7. The life of A seventh Motive.
holiness is 1 An honorable life. 2. A comfortable life. 3. An easy life. 4.
A peaceable life. 5. A safe life. 6. A gainful life. 7, An excellent life.



First, It Is an honorable life. Such Deo servire est regnare.
do not live but reign; they are spiritual Kings, and reign not only over men
and devils, but also over their own corruptions, which is the highest and
hardest conquest, Prove 16. 32. It is the honor of men's honors; let Omnibus
ornatibus ornamen o est, sin^ qua nihil tam ornatum es^ quod ornare possit.
Salv. Ecclesiae se membrum esse, magis quam in terris regnare gaudebat. Aug.
deCivit. Dei, l. 5. c. 26 Regum purpuras and ardentes diadematum gemmas pietas
condecorat.
them be Gentlement, Lords, Kings, etc. yet if they be holy men, and men
fearing God, this title is far beyond all the rest; and therefore Theodosius
rejoiced more in that he was a member of the Church, then head of the Empire.
This does not take away, but add to our Honors; if a man be a Lord, this
makes him a Lord indeed; if a Gentleman, this makes him more then a Gentleman,
as Paul said of Onesimus, Philemon 16. receive him now as a Servant, yea above
a Servant; whilst he was carnal he was a Servant: but now he is a Convert he
is more then a Servant, even a Spiritual King. These are the truly Honorable
and Right Worshipful of the world; all wicked men (how Tanta est miseria hujus
temporis, ut nullus habeatur mag^ nobilis quam qui est plurimum dives, Salv, de
Gub. l. 3. Bonus etiamsi serviat, liber est; malus aute^ etiamsi regnet, servus
est, nec unius bominis, sed quod gravius est, tot dominoru^ quot vitioru^. Aug.
de Civitate. Deil. 4 Chap 3.
rich or great soever) are but dross and dung in Gods esteem, Psalm. 119. 119.
as witches children, the seed of the adulteress and the whore, Isa. 57. 3. He
looks on them as brass, iron, lead, reprobate silver, Ier, 6. 28. 30. vile
persons, Psalm. 15. 4. Dan. 11. 21. children of the devil, John 8. 44. It Is piety
that brings praise both in Loq. non de genere, sed de virtute ac pietate. Beza.
Ille vere nobilis qui dedignatur servire vitiis. Chrysostom. Nobilisgenere,
Sanctitate nobilior, as Jerome said of Paul.
the sight of God and man, Isa 43. 4. This made the Bereans more noble (...)
generosiores, better born and bred, of a more generous disposition, because
they received the Word with all readiness of mind. This made Jabez more
honorable then his brethrtn, 1 Chronicles. 4. 9, 10. These are Gods Segullah, his
choice and chief treasure, Exodus 19. 5. his peculiar people, Titus 2. 14. of
the blood Royal, nobly descended, sons and daughters of the most high God,
heirs of glory; their memorials shall be blessed, and their names flourish,
when the names of Hinc (...), quasi (...) veneranuus, a Lap. The pious man is
the only (...). See more in that excellent Treatise of Mr. Burgess, called the
Saints Treasury, on Ex. 15. 11. p. 24. etc.
all wicked profane wretches (who have purchased Titles with their purses, and
not by their virtues) shall rot and perish. It is not riches, pedigree, fine
houses, fine clothes, etc. that can make men honorable; that is but a begging
of fame; but piety commands esteem even in the consciences of those that cannot
practice it themselves; The intemperate man cannot but approve and reverence
the temperate; the cruel worldling commends the merciful, liberal man; and
the time-serving Politician cannot but admire the Ea vis est verae virtutis, ut
etiam regibus sit formidabi^is. Eras.
constant persevering Christian, etc. Holiness is a beautiful thing; it
carries a majesty in the face of it; even those that oppose it, cannot but
admire it; These are they that honor God, and therefore he will honor them;
God has more honor from one holy man, then from ten thousand others; hence
they are called his glory, Isa. 4. 5. they put a luster on Religion, and will
either convert men, as Justin Martyr confesses, That the pious lives of the
Primitive Christians were a means to win him Ut nibilma li de ^obis nis^
mentiendo loquantur. Hieron.
to Christiany: or else convince them, that they shall have nothing justly to
speak against them. What has made the godly so famous in their generations but
their godliness? Doubtless we had never heard of Joseph, Moses, Job, Samuel,
David, Hezekiah, Josiah, Ruth, Abigail, Hester, etc. had it not been for their
pie^y. It can be no disparagement theu for great men to be good men; many
think it a debasement to pray in their families, to go to lectures, to delight
in the society of humble Christians. etc. such Si quis ex nobilibus con verti
ad Dec um caeperit, statim hono rem nobilitatis amittit. Salvian, de Gub. l. 4.
p. 113, etc. Omnes pari sort nascimur, sola virtute distinguimur. Min. Felix.
must know, were they greater then they be, that piety, is no debasement, but
an ornament, not only our duty, but our glory, far excelling any natural
birth or descent whatsoever, and that in four particulars. 1. That is but
carnal, this is spiritual. 2. That is but mortal, this is immortal. 3. That
is but earthly, this is heavenly. 4. A man may be loaded with such honors, and
yet go to hell, as Esau, Saul, Ahab, Iezabel, etc. but whosoever is Nihil
pretiosius vel magnificentius sanctitate in qua relucet spiritus Dei claritas.
Riv.
truly sanctified, shall truly be saved, 1. Pet. 1. 3. 4. If Holiness be our
glory in Heaven, why should any esteem it a dishonor to them on earth? and if
it be the Glory of our Creator, must it not needs be the honor and happiness
of the Creature?

2. This fits men for honourabe employment; no man is fit for Government till
he have grace. A filthy unclean vessel, is fit sor nor use till it be
cleansed; a man must first purge himself from his youthful sins, from
education sins, customary sins, beloved sins, etc. then and never till then
shall he be a vessel of honor, sanctified and fit for the masters use, and
prepared for every good work; then they can fast or feast, pray and praise God,
do and suffer, be abased and abound, etc. Now they are fitted, not for one, but
for every good work, 2. Tim. 2. 21. 22.

Such are fit for Government Magisteriall. Ministerial. Martial, and
Domestical.

1. This qualifies men for Magistracy See 9. reas. why great men should be good
men. Bur. Gracious spi. chapter 11. p. 200, etc.
; he must be one that fears God, and hates sin in himself, or he can never with
a good conscience punish it in another. How can he punish another for swearing,
drunkenness, Sabbath-prophaning, etc. that is guilty of those sins himself?
The holiest men ever make the happiest Governors: it is observed that the best
times that ever Israel had, were under their wisest and holiest Kings, as
David, Hezechiah, etc.

2. It fits men for the Ministry; first a man must be sanctified, and then he
shall be a vessel of honor fit for the Masters use. God loves to do his work
by instruments that are like himself; he can make wicked men to do him service;
but the most holy delights especially to do his work by holy men; then it
prospers and goes on to purpose. God will be sanctified of all his nigh ones,
Levit. 10. 3. Now Sanctitatem mea demonstrabo puniendo illos propter peccata.
Piscat.
Ministers of all men draw nearest to God, and therefore they must sanctify
themselves, lest the Lord break forth upon them, Exodus 19. 22. They must be
clean that bear the vessels of the Lord, Isa. 52. 11. Levit. 21. 6. 23. It Is
their office to tell Iabob of his sins; but with what face can that Minister
Medicus ulceribus scatens, haud idoneus aliis curdn^is. Bowls.
reprove another for covetousness, malice, drunkenness, etc. when himsell is
guilty of those very crimes? or if he should reprove them, can a reproof coming
from such a man be prevailing? will they not say, Physician, cure thy self. He
that will pull the moat out of his brothers eye, had need to have no beam in
his own.

Most young Ministers are all for Learning, Arts, Sciences, Languages, etc.
It Is true these are excellent ornaments, very needful and useful in their
proper places; but sanctity is far beyond them all; for a man may be saved
See Downams Warfar. p. 394. and 398, etc.
without Learning, but no man can be saved without sanctification; this is that
one thing necessary, without which no man shall see How much better is it to be
a good Christian, then a good Philosopher! though both may well stand together
if they be rightly ranked. Prideaux Ser. Luke 7. 35. p. 11.
God. The devil is a great scholar, and has great abilities, but because they
be not sanctified to him, he is still a devil and damned spirit. Learning in a
wicked man is like a pearl in a toads head, like wine in a poisoned vessel,
like sugar in a dunghill, or like a sword in a mad man's hand, with which he
does abundance of mischief. A dram of holiness is Eruditio in malo homine male
habitat. See M. Ant. Burgess Ser. 105. p. 611. Surgunt indecti and raipunt
caelum, and nos cum nostris doctrinis detru dimur in gehenna^. Aug. See Brooks
Remed. ag. Sat. etc. p. 358, etc.
better then a world of learning; the poorest, unlettered holy man, is in a
far better condition then the greatest Bellarmine, or dissolute scholar
whatsoever: these will arise and get heaven, when thou with all thy learning
shall be thrown to hell; as Austin said of his mother and other good women,
Mulier oulaeist aelachrymis suis caelum nobis praeripiunt; when we have done
all we can which our learning, these women with their Tears will get heaven
before us. Two sins there are which are more directy opposite to holiness;
drunkenness and fornication; these See Brooks Remed ag. Sat. etc. p. 358. etc.
are odious in any, but most abominable in a Minister; such as are given up to
them, seldom repent; they are Peccata maximae adhaerentiae, sins that stick
close, and are hardly left; they besot men and take away their hearts. Hos. 4.
11. These bring reproach on Religion, and make it stink in the nostrils of men;
as Jacob complained of Simeon and Levi, Genesis 34. 30. Ye have troubled me and
made me stink amongst the inhabitants of the Land. This makes so many Ministers
to err, Isa. 28. 7. and therefore the Lord did forbid the Priests and Levites
the use of wine and strong drink upon pain of death, when they were to come
into the Congregation to execute their office. V. Bowels Pastor Evangel. l. i.
c. 7. p. 42, 43.
Levit. 10. 9, 10, 11. The Nazarites by their profession were to study the Law
of God; to this end they must abstain from wine and strong drink which might
trouble their brain, S. Austin spends a whole book in exhorting Ministers to
chastity. Aug. l. de Singularitate Clericorum.
stir up lust, or any way unfit them for so sacred employment, Numb. 6. 3.
And the Apostle makes this one ingredient of a good Minister, he must be
temperate, sober, not given to drink wine, 1 Timothy 3. 3. 4. 5. Titus 1. 7. Of
all sorts of scandalous Ministers none like the drunkard and the whoremonger;
who ever is spared, yet let these be cast out as unsavory salt. Adams in vita
Luth. p. 151.
This made Luther so seriously to exhort the Students of the University of
Wittemberg to fly fornication; otherwise he professes he would fly from them.

3. Holiness qualifies a man for Military employment. No man can Estote mundi,
ut sitis intropidi. Aug.
be truly valourours, but he that is truly Religious. The guilt of sin will
daunt the stoutest spirit in the day of battle; it makes men timorous, and fly
at the shaking of a leaf, Levit 26. 36. Of all men soldiers had need to be
pious men (though usually they are the most Grotius de Iur. Belli, etc. Prolog.
p. 1.
impious.) They that carry their lives in their hands, had need to carry
holiness in their hearts, that so they may be assured of a better life before
they leave this. Hence the Lord commands the Camp should be holy, that he might
see no uncleaness there, See an excellent Ser. of M. Reynerson that Text.
Deuteronomy. 23, 9, to 15. War is an execution of Gods wrath upon men for sin;
and how can he punish Cum bellu^ sit vindicta publica, minime decet eos qui
hanc suscipiunt, esse iis qui castipentur indigniores. Wol phius.
another, when himself is guilty of the same sin? Non prospere pugnant
adversus malos qui ipsi sunt mali: He that is wicked himself, can expect no
success in fighting against the wicked.

4. It qualifies a man for domestical employment, it fits him for the
government of a family. Holy David will not only see to the Commonwealth, but
he has also a care of his family, Psalm. 101. He walks not only in Gods house,
but in his own house with a perfect heart; he prays there, and praises God
there. 2 Samuel 6. 20. Joshua (24. 15.) will not serve God alone, but he and his
house will serve the Lord. He can never be truly tender of the souls of his
wife, children, servants, etc. that is careless Morbido capite, nihil sanum
est, neque ullum omnino membrum officio suo fungitur, ubi quod est principale
non constat. Salv.
of his own; and therefore it concerns Governous to be holy, that they may
teach their children and servants the way of the Lord, as Abraham did, Genesis 18.
19. The great profaneness that is in the Land, springs principally from the
profane Governors of families; for they usually swear, and their children
learn of them to swear; they be enemies to the power of godliness, and their
children are like the^. When Diogenes saw a child offending, he ran and beat
the father: the fathers and mothers of our time would be beaten for most of the
offenses of their children, they being one way or another accessory unto them.
O that all Governors Infans tibi est? ne ansa^ and occasione^ arripiat
improbitas; ab infantia Sanctitate imbuatur, ab ipsis unguiculis Spiritui
con^retur. Nazian. Orat. 40.
then would labor for grace, and teach it to others! how might they propagate
piety to posterity for many generations for if thou teach thy children the way
of the Lord, then they will teach their children, and so on. As Timothy's
grandmother taught his mother, and his mother taught him, and he taught the
Church, etc.

Secondly, A holy life is a comfortable life. When all earthly comforts are
dead and gone, yet this is the singular comfort of a godly man that Bonae menli
calamitas omnis occasio est virtutis, nec malum putat, sed exercitium
patientiae, et pro eo Deo gratias agit. Drexel.
he has a God to go to. Job 16. 20. Are his friends dead? yet the Lord lives,
Psalm. 18. 46. Has he lost his riches? yet the Lord will be to him instead of
gold, and he shall have plenty of silver. Job, 22, 25, Does his head fail, and
heart fail? yet the Lord will be the strength of his heart, and his portion
forever. Psalm. 73. 26. In a word, if he be in any want, it is but going to his
father and make it known to him, and it is supplied. Phil. 4. 6. 7. In nothing
be careful, with a care of diffidence; an excessive, unbeleeving, vexing,
tormenting care, when men's hearts are rent in sunder with cares; this is
forbidden, (...), tear not your hearts in pieces with care: But a care of
diligence we may use, a moderate, wise, providentiall care, when we are
industrious in those callings wherein God has set us, 2. Cor 2. 14. 1 Timothy 5.
8. Our great work is to pray for what we want, and to give thanks Quoties
impetimur aliqua tentatione, statim ad oratione^, tanqua^ ad sacru^ asylu^
refugiamus. Calvin.
for what we enjoy, and then in nothing to be careful; but if our enemies
encompasse us, it is but making our requests to God, as David did, Psalm. 86. 2.
Preserve me Lord, for I am holy. Lo this is the privilege of those holy ones
whom God will honor! This honor have all and only his Saints: As for the
wicked, it is not so with them; when they fall into trouble, they are the most
uncomfortable men in the world, when the good man is most comfortable, like
those foul which are fattest in frosty weather; he sees a good hand of
providence turning all to his good; what ever befalls him or what ever he lose,
yet say to the righteous, Nihil accidere bono viro mali potest; adversi aliquid
fateor, nihil mali. Sen.
it shall be well with him, Isa. 3. 10. We all desire comfortable lives; lo
this is the way, Fly from sin, and fight the good fight: for godly actions are
seeds of joy, and godly people are the most comfortable people in the Sea more
Gross Inducements to Christ. Chap. 25. Bolton in his Epist. Dedicat. to true
Happiness in the End of it.
world, and have the greatest grounds of comfort, as having a sweet possession,
and a large Reversion.

Thirdly, It Is an easy life. True, to a carnal heart, and to a wicked
unwilling spirit, no life so tedious; they esteem holy humble walking with God
a bondage, not a privilege: but to a regenerate man, whose nature is changed,
it is very pleasant. Romans 7. 22. It is as natural to him to pray, believe
Suave jugu^ jugu^ Christi. See more Hildersham on Psalm. 51. Lect. 47. P. 235.
obey etc. as to a wicked man to swear, drink, whore, etc. Christ's yoke is
easy to an humbled meekned soul, Matthew. 11. 28. 29. The yoke of Christ's
Doctrine, his yoke of Discipline and Affliction are all easy, sweet and
pleasant; the yoke of the devil, and the yoke of the world are iron yokes,
unreasonable, cruel, tyrannical yokes, they bind heavy burdens, and
grievous to be born. Matthew. 23. 4. But Christ's yoke of holiness and obedience
is easy, in five respects.

1. Comparatively, in comparison of the devils yoke, and the slavery of sin; no
work so toilsome as the devils drudgery, to lie drinking night and day, to lie
tumbling in their own vomit and filth, to quarrel, fight, cut and kill one
another etc. none undergo such pains, no thresher toils like these slaves of
the devil. But Christ's yoke is easy, compared with this; For it is more easy
and pleasant to live soberly in the use of the creatures, and so enjoy our
selves, our friends and comforts, then to lie drunken and be fit for nothing.
Is it not more easy and delightful to follow those vocations and callings
wherein God has set us, and so to improve our times and talents for our
Masters honor, then thus sinfully to mispend our precious time and those
talents of health, wealth, peace, etc. and so destroy both body, soul, goods,
and good name?

2. It is easy to such as have been accustomed to it; to a young beginner at
first these ways may seem hard and harsh, till he have been habituated and
accustomed to them, as David could not go in Saul's armor, because he was
unaccustomed to it. A trade at first seems irksome to a young beginner, but
after he has learnt the Art and Mystery of it, it is pleasant; when holy ways
are become natural, they are no burdens: for what we do naturally, we do
delightfully and easily; he now does good as freely and readily as as once he
did sin.

3. It is easy, because we have Iugum dicitur quod duo jumenta juncta sub^unt
a Lap.
Gods Spirit to help us in the work: A yoke carried by two is easy. Christ
draws in this yoke with us, and bears the heavier part of the yoke for us, and
by his Spirit strengthens us to bear it.

4. It is easy to such as have an eye to Nihil Christi iugo gloriosius.
the recompense of reward. Great honors and great rewards make hard things
light and easy. What is all our obedience or sufferings to that eternal
weight of glory? 2 Cor. 4. 17.

5. It is easy to such as love Gods ways. Love makes hard things easy; it is
oil to the joints, it adds wings Am ^nti nihil est diff cile, amatori fervido
ju^um estleviss^mu^.
to the soul and makes it speedily to fly the way of Gods commands; they are
not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. Abraham loved God, and he is ready to sacrifice his
son at his command. Jacob loved Rachel, and therefore his seven hard years of
labors and servitude seemed to him but as a few days.

Fourthly, It is a peaceable life. Purity breeds peace, as sin does troubles.
When the conscience is once See Sheffield on Conscience, chap. 3. etc.
purified, usually it is pacified. Hence peace is called the quiet fruit of
righteousness, Heb. 12. 11. This is a never fading, well-grounded peace, a
peace that shall never be taken from them, John 14. 27. It may for a time be
eclipsed by Quo quis est sanctior, hoc plerunque afflictior.
tentations, afflictions, desertions, but never totally lost: They shall have
perfect peace, Isa. 26. 3. They shall have Peace Peace, Heb. (i.) a Rarae
immuvitatis est a nemine turbari, a nemine laedi posse.
constant peace; and abundance of peace, all manner of peace; peace external,
peace internal, peace eternal. This is heaven upon earth, the singular
privilege of all the godly, to Arcem quietiss^mam (...), quisquis se totum ad
divinam voluntatem con^ormat. Caelum extra caelum repe^sti, Drexel. Heliotrop.
enjoy a sweet serenity and calm within, when all the world about them is in an
uproar, Psalm. 46. Prove. 1. ult. They are gotten into that upper region, where
no storms nor tempests breed.

Fifthly, it is a safe life, he thatwalks holily and uprightly, walks safely,
Prove. 10. 19. They receive the truth in love, and therefore God will not give
them up to the errors of the time; they walk humbly with him, and therefore he
will reveal his secrets to them; they have an Unction (i) the holy Spirit of
God, which shall teachthem all things, and shall lead them into all truth.
Astor unsanctified hypocrites, they may fall totally and finally; there is no
sin so vile but they may run into it, no error so damnable but they may swallow
it; they have no foundation, and therefore they know not when or wherethey
shall stay. The best preservative that I know against the errors of the times,
is, to be not Almost but Altogether through Christians, following the Lord
fully, professing Religion in the power of it, and then we have Gods promise
that we shall never be moved. Psalm. 15. ult.

Sixthly, It Is a gainful life, This is argumentum cogens, a prevailing
argument. Piety says to us as Balak did to Balaam, Number. 22. 37. See Bifeilas
Marrow, p. 403, etc
Men are all for gain, yet care not for godliness which is the greatest gain.
What is said of Homer, That he by his learning had given more men their living,
then either Sylla, Caesar or Augustus ever did, notwithstanding their great
gifts, is most true of piety; How many has it raised from the dust to great
dignity and honor? as Joseph, David, Hester, etc. Hence the Apostle calls
godliness 1. Pietas est quaestus. 2. Ingens quaestus. 3. Talis quaestus
quipart ex se (...). Scultet. Amiserunt Sancti omnia quaehabebant; Nunquid
fidem^? nunquid pietatem? nunquid interioris hominis b^na? hae sunt opes
Christianoru^, pietas quaestus ingens. Aug.
[in the power of it, not in the fo^m] great gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. (i) no gain
like it. Bodily exercise may do something (if rightly used) toward the
preserving of the health, and taming of the flesh, but godliness is profitable
to all things, 1 Timothy, 4. 8. nothing to be compared unto it; it brings with it
contentment, joy, peace, pardon of sin, power against sin, boldness at the
throne of grace, and freedom from condemnation. All the gain and riches in the
world cannot purchase one of these. Piety has the promise of all things, both
temporal, spiritual and eternal; it procures the blessing and gives us a
true Right to it also, and that doubles the mercy; for a wicked man may have
good things, but they are not good to him, because he has but a civil right to
them, when the godly have a sanctified right; the blessing of the Lord makes
them rich, and he adds no sorrow with it, God gives to his, wealth without woe,
store without sore, gold without guilt. Trapp in loc.
Prove. 10. 22. They have no sting of conscience with their riches. We should
therefore plead for piety and make apologies for it: What bringsmen gain, they
will plead for that, and cannot endure that it should be spoken against, Acts
19. 24. 25. Demetrius made shrines for Diana; these brought no small gain to
the craftsmen, by it they got their wealth. Paul opposed their silver Trade;
but how were they affected with it? the Text tells us, v. 28. 34. they were 1.
Full of wrath, 2. They cried out. 3. Not one or two, but all of them. 4. Not
dividedly but unanimously, with one voice. 5. Not for a moment, but for the
space of two hours, they cry, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. If these were so
violent for false and base gain, how zealous should we be for the true gain? If
they plead and cry out so as they will hear See the gain of Godliness more
fully set forth, M. Gataker Ser. in Folio. p. 127.
nothing against their Diana; much more should we plead for piety which only
brings true profit, and in defense of it outcry all the outcries in the world
against it. The more Pure and refined any thing is, the better it is. Refined
gold, Silver, Wine etc. is prized by all. The Heathen saw some excellency in
this, which made them so much to praise Moral virtue, which has some shadow of
holiness. Hol nesse is the most admirable of all things in the world, as far
surpassing wit and learning and riches, and otherearthly vanities as learning
surpasses ignorance, and wealth beggary, Whatly New birth, p. 22.


Seventhly, It is the most excellent life. Piety makes men to excel their
wicked and profane neighbors, Prove. 12. 26. What makes Gods people more
excellent then the men os the world? it is not riches, strength, outward
beauty, etc. it is only their piety. The wicked live the life of nature, but
these live the life of grace; they have grace to direct them, grace to renew
them, grace to strengthen and comfort them; so that there is no life like
theirs: For as the life of a man excels the life of a Beast, so the life of a
gracious man excels the life of a natural man, etc. See more fully Topsals
Preface to the Book of Ruth; and Master Baxters Saints Rest, 4. Part Sect 4. p.
56.

Now lay all these Motives together, and then put the question to your selves,
as Saul did to the people in another case, 1 Samuel 21. 7. Can the son of Jesse
give you fields and vineyards, and Ratione homines iumentis, religione homines
bominibus antestant, Boet. See more Will. Burton Sermon. on Prove. 7. 1. p. 372.
etc,
made you all Captains of Thousands, and Captains of Hundreds? So say I, Can
the world give you peace, joy, contentment in all conditions? Can your riches,
houses, carnal friends, etc. give you comfort when you come to die, or will
they not rather like false friends then leave you and forsake you? But
holiness like a faithful friend will never leave you nor forsake you, but in
the very pangs of death will yield you comfort. Isa. 38. 1. 3. and at last
Vestite vos seri^ p^obitatis, byssino sanctitatis, purpura pudicitiae, etc.
Tertul. de cultu faem. c. 9
bring you to everlasting happiness. Oh then let us cloth our selves with the
silk of honesty, with the lawn of sanctity, and the purple of chastity, Et
taliter pigmentatae Deum habebitis amatorem, So shall the King of Kings See
twelve Motives more in Bifield on 1 Pet. 1. 15. p. 123.
take pleasure in our beauty, and we shall be lovely in his eye for ever.

CHAP. IX.
IF any now seeing the necessity and excellency of holiness, shall cry out as
those, Acts 2. 37. Men and Brethren, What must we do that may be holy?

A. The Means to attain it, are The means. If you would see more Direct. peruse
Bifields Marrow. p. 448, etc.
plain and easy to those that have hearts to practice them.

1. You must pray unto God for it; it is his Prerogative Royal to be The Lord
that sanctifies us. Ezekiel. 20. 12. He is both the Author and the finisher of
it; and though he has promised to bestow it on us, Ezekiel. 37. 25. 26. yet v.
37. he will for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them.
You must ask if ever you would have; Spare to speak and you shall never speed.
What the Apostle says of wisdom, is true of sanctification, James 1. 5. If
any one lack it, let him ask it of God. Spread your uncleanness, and lament it
before the Lord, cry as the Leper, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me
clean: Oh when shall it once be? Lord, thou know that the way of man is not
in himself, but it is thou who art the heart-making, that must be to me the
heart-mending God, etc. It is therefore observed that the men of most prayer,
have been the men of most holiness; as Moses, Samuel, Job, Daniel, Paul, etc.
True it is we must use all other means, but without prayer they are all but
vain: This must come in the Rear of all, and be added to all other means that
they may become effectual. When the Apostle had directed the Ephesians to put
on the whole armor of God, he adds in the close of all, Praying always,
etc. Ephesians. 6. 18. This is like Goliahs sword, none like that; and therefore
Gods servants being sensible of their own uncleanness, by prayer have made out
unto God for it. Psalm. 19. 12. Cleanse me from secret sins. And 51. 10. Create
in me a clean heart. And 119. 133. Order my steps aright, and let no iniquity
have dominion over me. And Paul prays for his Thessalonians that God would
sanctify them wholly. 1 These. 5. 23. Nor is it all praying or seeking that
will prevail;

But we must seek it. 1 Early. 2 Earnestly. 3 Constantly.

And to encourage you, know, That none ever sought God thus, but he was found
of him. Many ask, but it is amiss; either they seek it not early in their
youth, or they seek it not zealously and earnestly with their whole heart, or
they cannot wait, but give over presently; no wonder if such ask and have not,
because they thus askamiss.

1 Then, you must seek a gracious frame of spirit, See eight Reas. for this.
Gatakers Ser. on Matthew. 6. 33. fol. p. 43. etc.
early, in the morning of thy youth, whilst the day of thy visitation lasts; to
such the promise runs, Pro. 8. 17. They thatseek me early shall See more fully
M. Ant. Burgess Ser. 75.
find me. There are certain seasons of grace when the Lord makes tenders and
offers of grace to the soul; happy those that observe those seasons, and know
in this their day the things that concern their everlasting peace! There is a
time when the Lord will be found of his people; observe that season and improve
it; seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him whilst he is near, Isa.
6. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the evil days come.
Fly betimes from the lusts of youth, such as pride, fornication,
self-confidence, rashness, sensuality, voluptuousness, etc. 2 Timothy 2, 22. God
takes it kindly when young persons will so far deny themselves that they can
follow him through a wilderness of temptations and oppositions in a Land that
is not sown. A hypocrite may follow him in a Land that is sown with pleasures,
profits, honors, etc. but to follow him in the want and loss of these, argues
some sincerity, and makes us dear to God. Jeremy 2. 2. I remember the kindness
of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the
wilderness in a Land that was not sown. It was Josiahs commendation that when
he was but sixteen years old he began to seek and serve the Lord, 2 Chro. 34.
1. 3. And Obadiah feared the Lord from his youth, 1 King. 18, 12. You must be
good young, if you would be good long. Seldom does a devil in youth prove a
Saint in years; the time of conversion (as one well observes) is usually
between 18. and 28. and he that mispends that flower of his time is seldom
good. The devil indeed has a Proverb, A young Saint and an old devil: But Gods
Spirit tells us the contrary, Prove. 22. 6. Train up a child Angelicus juvenis
senibus Satanizat in annis.
in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it. Train
up a child virtuously, and usually he will See Child's Patrimony, chapter 2. Harsnet
on Rep. p. 260, and 278, etc.
continue. Youth is our seed time; our harvest, and our hopes depend upon our
care and diligence in this plowing and sowing season. Every thing is
Opportunitas^ plurimum potest in qualibet re. Bulling.
most beautiful and successful in its season: David's blessed man brings forth
(fructum suum in tempore suo) his fruit in due season, and therefore all that
he does, prospers, Psalm. 1. 3. Whilst then the day of thy youth, the day of
health, and the day of grace lasts, whilst God stands knocking at the door of
thy heart by the motions of his Spirit, speedily entertain him, embrace his
motions, suffer thy self to be led by his Spirit in ways of obedience;
resolve with David that God shall be thy God, and that thou will seek him
early, Psalm. 63. 1. Let it be your first work to seek his Kingdom; else if you
delay and Diaboli vox est, Da peccato quod praesens est, Deo quod futuru^:
peccato floremaetatis, Deo reliquias. Daven.
put off God from day to day, your hearts will be hardened, your sin increased,
Gods wrath provoked, and Satan encouraged. Learn wisdom then of the men of the
world; the Mariner observes his wind and tide, the Lawyer his Term, the Chapman
his market, the Husband man his seasons; yea the Stork and the Crane and the
Swallow know the time of their coming, and the laborious Be loses no fair
seasons. Consider that time Nullus dum per caelum licuit otio perit dies. Pliny.
it self is short, but the seasons of grace are shorter, and if you lose them,
you lose all. This ruined Jerusalem, because she knew not the day of her
visitation See, Madens, Sermon. on Luke 19. p. 148, etc. Gros Inducements to
Christ. p. 25. 26.
Luke. 19. 44. Yea many that seek after heaven shall miss of it, because they
seek too late, Luke, 13. 24, God has allotted to every man that lives in the
boso^ of his Church a certain time for repentance, and he that neglects that
time, and comes not in to Christ then, can never be saved; and therefore be
sure ever to second the Spirits motions with obedience; lest if the Lord call
and you will not hear, the time come when you shall cry and shall not be heard,
Prove. 1, 24., etc.

2. Seek it earnestly, with all thy heart and with all thy might, with the
highest intention of affection; they are only wrestling Jacobs that become
prevailing Isreal's. Importunity will do much, it made an unjust Judge to do
justice: no man ever sought God with his whole heart but he found him, Deuteronomy. 4.
29. Ier. 29. 13. 2 Chronicles. 15. 15. God has made many gracious promises that he
will sanctify and cleanse us; urge them in thy prayers, beseech him to
remember the word which he has spoken to his servants, wherein he has caused
us to trust, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27. Zach. 14. 20, 21. Obad, 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Go unto Christ, in him is a fullness of holiness, to answer for our
unholinesse; Christ is the Magazine and Storehouse of all grace; in him is not
only a fullness of Plenitudo abundantiae. Plenitudo redundantiae.
Abundance, but a fullness of Redundance, an overflowing fullness for me and
thee, and for all that come unto him.

3. Seek it constantly, never give over, Non cepisse sed perfeciss^ virtutis
est.
but wait still; in due time we shall reap if we faint not; do not limit the
holy One of Israel to thy time; consider how long thou did make him wait on
thee before thou heardst him: and then should thou die in this waiting
condition, yet thou art blessed. Deo confisi nunquam ^onfvsi.
Isa, 30. 18. Hold on thy suit take no denial; the comfort thou will meet with
in the end, will abundatly recompense all thy waiting; and though hope deferred
may make thy heart sick, yet when it comes it will be as a Tree of Life, Prove.
13. 12.

II. If ever you would be holy, you must take heed of offending and grieving
Gods holy Spirit by your sins; for sanctification is the most proper work of
the Spirit, and therefore he is called the holy Spirit; for as the Father
Elects, and the Son Redeems, so the holy Ghost does most properly sanctify, 1
Pet. 1. 2. Titus 3. 4, 5. It Is the Spirit that must inlighten, enliven,
strengthen, quicken, convince us of our spiritual See more Sibbs fount s^aled
p, 112, etc.
nakedness, blindness, poverty and misery; it must enable us to all Duties,
and make all Ordinances effectual; and therefore as you love the In amore
sempe^ cau^ t^la; nemo enim melius diligit, quam qui maxim^ veretur offen^
d^re. Salv.
Spirit of God, and tender your own salvation, quench not the motions of Gods
Spirit in your souls; when it would convince you of sin, and humble you, do not
drink nor drive away those pangs of the New Birth, but obey its motions;
surrender up all the keys of thy soul unto him, let him rule in thee and over
thee, and suffer thy self to be led by it, and it will assure thee of thy
Adoption.

III. Attend upon the Preaching See M Ant. Burg. Sers 83,
of the holy word of God; it is the ordinary means by which the Spirit of
sanctification is conveyed into our souls, Act. 10. 44. Whilst Peter was
preaching, the holy Ghost fell on those that heard the Word. Gods Spirit
breaths not in an Alehouse, or in a Playhouse, but in the ordinances; they
are the vehiculum Spiritus, the Spirits chariot, God will be found in his own
way and means; and therefore we should sit in the winds way, and though for the
present we find not that comfort we expect, yet let us wait Lex
sanctifi^ationem promovet, q. ^ominem ad peccati agni^ionem adducit, Wendel. I.
1. c. 26. Harsnet, on Rep. p. 65. to 124.
still; the lame man that lay long at the Pool of Bethesda, at last was cured.
Attend then to the whole Word of God; to the Law as well as to the Gospel; let
its terrors humble thee, and out thee of thy self, that so the Gospel may
comfort thee: For Gods usual method is to bring men to heaven by The Preaching
of the Law not only preparatively, but (being blessed by God) instrumentally
works the conversion of men.
the gates of hell. First to bring men to mount Sinai, and then to mount Sion;
first to mount Ebal the mount of cursing, and then to mount Gerizim the mount
of blessing; first the Spirit of bondage to convince men of sin and make them
fear, and then the Spirit of adoption, to cry Abba Father, By the M. Ant.
Burgess, Vindie. Legis, p. 195. and 261.
assistance of the Spirit, the Word will be a sword to kill our corruptions,
and a glass to discover our selves unto our selves; for though moral truths
may adorn the soul, yet it is only Divine truth that purifies it, Psalm. 119. 9.
John 17. 17.

Nor is it all hearing that brings sanctification, Quicquid recipitur, id ad
modu^ recipientis recipitur. Si vas est putidu^, ci que vinu^ infundas optimu^,
fiet putidu^. a Lap.
but 1. You must hear Preparedly; the heart must be cleansed and purged from
sin before we can hear with profit, 1 Pet. 2. 1. 2. James 1. 21. Ezra 7. 10.
Eccles. 5. 1 John 11. 13. Plowing must go before sowing Ier. 4. 3. We must
humble our selves in our closets before we hear, that we may come with an
appetite and desire after the Word. The very cause of so little profiting,
after so long Preaching, V. Zepperi de ar^e concionandi. l. 5. c. 1, 2. etc.
is unprepared hearing; this accidentally makes the Word to harden men, and
makes them worse, Isa. 6. 9. 10. They Will come and hear, but like Rachel they will
bring their idols with them, Genesis 31. 19. Most men come as to a Market or Fair,
without any inward preparation; but did they but know the transcendent purity
of that God before whom they stand, and the weightinesse of the duty which
they are about, then would they come with fear and trembling, and take heed how
they hear. Observe how terribly God threatens all careless unprepared persons,
Respo^debo ei non vcrhis, aut oraculis sed stimulis, and stagellis quae
belluarum disciplina est. Sanct. in loc.
Ezekiel. 14. 7. 8. He that sets up his Idols in his heart, and comes t^inquire of
me, I will set my face against that man, and will make him a proverb, and will
cut him off from the midst of my people.

2. You must hear Attentively and Intentively, with the greatest care and
diligence, Isa. 55. 2. 3. Prove, 5. 1. 2. Acts. 16. 14. Luke 19. ult. Consider,
thy Heating is for Eternity; every Sermon will do you good or hurt for ever;
without attention we lose all, be the Preacher never so powerful, and his
Doctrine never so good.

3. You must hear Retentively, and remember it Heedfully, lock it up as a
jewel of special concernment. hide it in your heart, as David did, Psalm. 119.
11. and Mary, Luke 2. 51, This is commanded, Deuteronomy. 11. 18. Job 22. 22. John 15.
20.

4. You must Rcceive the Word. 1. Understandingly. 2. Beleevingly. 3.
Reverentially. 4. Obedientially. 5. Affectionately



It Is a mercy, and there is some hopes of people when they come and hear. 2. It
is a greater mercy to hear and approve of the truth delivered, but the greatest
mercy is to receive it into our hearts with love, and to bid it welcome into
our souls, be it for humiliation or consolation. There must be no carping or
cavilling at its sharpest reproofs, but we must receive all with a Benedictus
Dominus, 1 Samuel 25. Blessed be the Lord, blessed be his servants, and blessed
be their counsel: There must be a promptness and readiness in us thus to
receive it, as the Beroans did, Act. 17. 11. 1 These. 2. 13. It is not bare
hearing, but receiving, eating, digesting the Word, which will make it to us
the joy and rejoicing of our souls, Jer. 15. 16.

1. We must receive it Understandingly. Unless we understand what we hear, all
is lost. Hence Christ calls on Audire and non intelligere est negligere.
the multitude to hear and understand. Matthew. 15. 10. and not barely to read or
hear but to search out the meaning (...), scrutamini, nee legite ^antum, sed
attento a^mo expendite. Grotius.
of the Scriptures, John 5. 39. we must be able to hear with a judgment of
discretion, trying all things and holding fast what is good, 1 These. 5. 22.

2. Receive it Beleivingly. We must by faith apply the truths delivered to our
selves particularly. It is not sufficient we believe the doctrine to be true,
but we must apply it, Job. 5. 27. A plaster unapplied will never cure; by
faith it must be ingrafted into ourhearts, James. 1. 21. Unbelief hinders the
power of the Word, and bars the heart against it, so that it cannot profit
us, Heb. 4. 2.

3. Receive it Reverentially and Meekly. You must bring humble and meek hearts
to this Ordinance; such only are fit scholars for God, Psalm. 25. 9. To this end
we must set our selves as in Gods presence, and hearken as if God himself did
speak; look not so much on the Minister, as on God in him, whole Ambassador he
is; when the Minister threatens, think you heard God himsel threatening you;
and when the Minister comforts the humbled, think that thou hear God himself
comforting thee; for Christ preaches In and By us; and when our preaching
agrees with Gods Word, it is as the Word of God himself. He that hears you,
hears me; when we speak, God speaks, Luke. 10. 16. Dan. 9. 10. Exodus 16. 7, 8.
John 1. 23. Luke 1. 70. 1 These. 2. 13. 2 Cor. 5. 20. The words of an Ambassador
are esteemed as the words of him that sent him. Excellent is that of Cornelius
Act. 10. 33. though a soldier and a gteat man, yet he sets himself, as in
Prompti and parati sumus audire, et facere, and facere quaecunqu^ ex Deo iusse^
ris. a Lap.
Gods presence, to hear All things that God should speak. This made Jacob come
with fear, when he had said, Surely the Lord is in this place, Genesis 28. 16.
then v. 17. he was afraid and said, How dreadful is this place!

4, Obedientially. We must resolve before we come to obey whatsoever God by his
Ministers shall command us, be it never so cross to flesh and blood, be it for
humiliation or consolation; be it to cut off a right hand; or pull out a right
eye; you must resolve to do it: If God will be pleased to teach you his ways,
you must resolve that you will walk in his paths, Isa. 2, 3. You must answer as
they did, Ier. 42. 5, 6. Whether it be good or whether it be evil, we will obey
the voice of the Lord. If the Ita formatos esse decet piorum animos, ut Deo
sine exceptione obediant: sive imperet quod adversatur eorum animo, sive alio
quam velint trahat. Calvin.
Lord will vouchsafe to draw us, we must resolve to run after him, Cant. 1. 4.
Psalm. 119. 33, 34. So soon as ever the Lord commands, we must presently obey,
Psalm. 95. Whilst it is to day, before to morrow come, hear his voice. When God
calls, Samuel presently answers, Here am I, 1 Samuel 3. 10. As soon as ever God
commanded David to seek his face, his heart presently eccho's, Thy face Lord
will I seek, Psalm. 27. 8.

5. We must receive the Word Affectionately. Our hearts must be affected with
joy, sorrow, love, desire; we must not only bring habitual preparation, but
there must be also a stirring up, and an acting of the graces of the Spirit in
the act of hearing: When we hear of the terrors of the Law, we must tremble and
fear, Acts 2. 37. Josiahs heart melts at the hearing of the Law, 2 Chronicles. 34.
27. God highly prizeth such a frame of spirit, when we tremble not only at his
judgments, but at his very word, Isa. 66. 2, 2. When we hear of the promises,
we must rejoice in them. Job 23. 12. Psalm. 19. 10. Ier. 15, 16. The Primitive
Christians heard the Word with gladness, Acts 2. 41, etc. See more Prestons
Elegant description of Life and D. p. 168.


This right receiving of the whole Word of God, is a special means of our
sanctification, which made me willing to press it the more fully. See Gatakers
Ser. on Mark 13. 37. p. 88, etc.


IV. Delight in the company of Saints, make them thy bosom companions; for as
he that walks with wise men shall be wiser: so he that walks with good men
shall be better: they will help thee by their prayers, by their counsel, and by
their example. Communion with Saints is a soul-inriching mercy; one living coal
makes another burn: Saul being amongst the Prophets fell to prophecy. Barnab
as a good man and full of the holy Ghost, brings in many to the Lord, Acts 11.
23, 24. A man that is full of spirit, quickens men's spirits. See Brooks Remed.
p. 157, etc.


Away then with all profane company; what communion has light with darkness?
what comfort can Gods people find in their society with Atheists, Fornicators,
Drunkards, Apostates, There is a kind of venom and poison in the society of
godless people, which grows like a gangrene, etc.
etc. Therefore the Lord in Scripture so often commands his people to forsake
such company, Ephesians. 5. 7. 11. 2 These. 3. 14. Rev. 18. 4. for it is impossible
for any man to be godly long, that Harsnet on Rep. p. 391. etc. Burgess 120.
Ser. p. 450, etc.
delights in ungodly company, and that does electively make them his companions.

V. Get afflictions sanctified. Christ's blood does sanctify us Meritoriously,
1 Ioh. 1. 7. God by his Spirit Efficiently, and afflictions Instrumentally;
they are excellent means to soften and meeken the proud heart of man, they help
to discover our selves unto our selves, they teach us many good lessons, See
twenty good lessons which afflictions teach us, M, Cases Correction,
Instruction, p. 5, etc. Traps Lovetokens.
Psalm. 94. 12. They help to purge out our dross, and make us partakers of Gods
holiness, Heb. 12. 10. They are his pru^ing knives to blood us, and his
Physic to purge us that we may bring forth more fruit, John 15. 2. They are
Gods fire wherewith he purifieth his gold, Si fortes fuerint, sancti esse vix
poss^t, Salv.
Zach. 13. 9. In his wisdom he sees it is best for us to be kept low,
considering how hard it is for weak man to be Great and Good, to be High and
Holy.

VI, and lastly, He that will be holy, or would preserve his holiness, must be
frequent in that soul-inriching duty of self-examinatio^; he must daily search
and try his ways, purging out that old leaven of sin which infects and
enfeebles Nihil magi^ enervat spiritualem poten^iam quam peccatum, nec ad
sapien^ p^ualia sappetitum mag^ Wickli^e.
the soul, he must search for it as for a traitor, and having found it, he must
nor spare it, but must kill and crucify it without mercy; for the sparing of
sin undoes the sinner: He must fully and freely confess and forsake his sin,
and then he shall find mercy, Prove. 28. 13. And since a right confession of
sin is a special means to attain sanctification, according to that promise, 1
Ioh. 1. 9. If we confess our sins [sincerely and seriously] God can not then
in justice but pardon such penitents, and cleanse them from their sins; I shall
briefly set down Modus rei cadit sub praecept. ut loq. Scholast. the manner of
a thing is commanded as well as the matter. Bonum non est nisi been fiat. Jer.
48. 10. though it be the work of the Lord, yet he is cursed that does it
negligently.
some directions for it, and so conclude. It Is not every confession of sin that
brings pardon, but he that will rightly confess his sin must observe these
seven Rules.

He must confess his sins 1. Freely. 2. Fully. 3. Speedily. 4. Sincerely. 5.
Affectionately. 6. Beleevingly. 7. Reformingly.

All these are the ingredients of a sound confession. 1. We must confess our
sins Freely without compulsion, when we are in health, in our youth, in peace
and prosperity. Free Will offerings are most pleasing to God; it is the best
honey which flows from the comb without crushing, and the best wine that flows
from the grape with least pressing. Compulsive duty is no duty in Gods esteem:
A Pharaoh never confesses his sin till he comes to the rack: A Saul till he is
like to lose his Kingdom: A Balaam till he sees an Angel ready to slay him; nor
will a Judas cry Peccavi, till the pangs of hell surprise him. But the godly
are drawn by Gods goodness, rather then driven by his greatness; they are
free and forward to give glory to God, and take shame to themselves in the
confession of their sins, as Nehemiah, Ezra, Job, David, Paul, etc.

2. Fully. We must not hide any one sin that we know of; for every sin is a
thief and traitor to the soul, and being concealed (though it should be but a
little one in thy esteem, yet) may unbolt the door for greater. Hiding of sin
hinders men's prosperity in body, soul, goods and good name, Non prospe rabitur;
(...) (i.) gravi poena afficietur qui peccata dissimulat.
Pro. 28. 13. there must be no denying of our sins, like the harlot, Prove. 30.
20. no pleading for them, no excusing them, or laying them on others. 1. Not on
God, as Adam did, Genesis 3. 12. He tempts no man to sin, James 1. 13. Augmentum
reatus est innocentiam iactare post culpam, Salv.
2. Not on Satan, he may entice thee, but he cannot force thee. 3. Not on men,
as Aaron did, Exodus 32. 22. and Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 21. We must not extenuate or
lessen them, but aggravate them by all circumstances to make them odious to our
selves, 2 Samuel 24. 10.

Quis, quid, ubi, per quos, quoties, cur, quomodo, quando Peccati gravitas
augetur circumstantiis.

Peccasti dices, ut sit confessio vera. Alsteed.
We must make full, plain, and particular confessions of all our known sins,
great and small, original and actual. They that would have pardon must confess
All their iniquity, and All their trespasses, Levit. 26. 40. and 19. 21. the
more particular the better; as Paul confesses he was a persecutor, a
blasphemer and a reviler, 1 Timothy 1. 13. especially we must confess and bewail
our darling sin, the sins of our complexions, callings, education, etc.

3. Speedily. The sooner we fall to Mora trahit periculum. vulnera clan^ a plus
cruc^ant. Greg.
confession, the better. If a man have drunk poison, the sooner it is vomited
up, the better it is for him. While sin is fresh and green, there is some
tenderness and sense in us; but our heard hearts are like iron, let them cool
and they are hardly wrought upon. A disease that is chronicall and old, is
harder to cure then a new one, Jer. 13. 23. Can a Blackmore change his skin?
etc.

4. Sincerely and cordially. Our outward confessions and expressions must come
from inward impressions of grace upon the soul. Most men's confessions Iu Iabris
non in fibris nat^.
are mere words; God is nigh to their mouths, but far from their reins, Jer.
12. 2. Isa. 29. 13. and though in words they speak much against their sins, yet
their hearts love them dearly, and they will in no wise part with them. Such
men's confessions will be their condemnations; out of their own mouths will God
condemn them, and give them their portion with the hypocrites. Hypocritical
confessions be they never so eloquent or excellent for words, are mere
abominations; our confessions must be the voice of our hearts, rather then of
our tongues; for as in all duties, so especially when we come before the Lord
to acknowledge and confess our sins, there must be all plainness and
sincerity without doubting or hypocrisy; cold, careless, customary
confessions do more provoke God often times then the sin it self. If a child
should come and tell his father what he had done against him without any
remorse or sorrow, he would take it rather for a profession then any true
confession of his fault. God often punishes such formal confessors, by giving
them up more greedily to sin: as Pharaoh, after he had made a verbal
confession of his sin, was worse after, Exodus 9. 27. yet v. 34. he sinned yet
more, and hardened his heart against the Lord.

5. Affectionately, with sorrow hatred, shame, etc.

1. Our hearts must be full of sorrow and deep humiliation under the sight and
sense of sin; every sin must be as a sword in our bosoms, we must be sensible
of the burden and bitterness of it: This made Peter weep bitterly. When David
resolved to confess his iniquity, he presently adds, and I will be sorry for
my sin, Psalm. 38. 18. Where this sorrow is, though a man be not able to
express himself in words, yet God accepts of the affection.

2. In our confessions there must be an hatred and loathing of sin, it must
work an indignation in us, Hos. 14. 8. 2 Cor. 7. 11. Job. 40. 4. and 42. 6. his
sin made him to abhor himself; We must fall out with our sins, before God
will fall in love with us.

3. We must confess our sins with shame. When we consider the number and
nature of our sins, what a tender, bountiful and gracious God we have sinned
against, 'how long we have rebelled against him, and yet he has spared us: now
must we take shame to our selves, and be even confouded under the sense of our
sins, as Ezra 9. 6. Ier. 31. 18, 19. Dan. 9. 7. Ezekiel. 16. 61. Now he cares not
for his own reputation; so God may be glorified, he is content to be a based;
so God may be magnified, he is content to be nullified. This holy shame is a
sign of ingenuity, and of a good temper of Pudor est (...) colorvtirutis. Diog.
spirit: We are ashamed to be found doing any base thing; sin is the basest of
evils, and therefore we should be ashamed and confounded before God at the
remembrance of all those base lusts which have reigned in us and over us: God
loves to see us thus loathing our selves, Ier. 31. 18. 20. And if the Sun and
Moon be ashamed of our sins, Isa. 24. 23. Ier. 50. 12. and the apostasy of
Christians puts Christ to shame, Heb. 6. 6. should not we then be ashamed of
sin which makes the very creature blush, and puts Christ to shame? Oh let our
hearts be full of grief, and our faces filled with shame for all our
abominations! yet let it not be the shame of a thief when he is taken, Ier. 2.
26. because of disgrace and loss of credit; but let it be a filial shame,
from a sight and sense o^ the loathsomeness of sin, it being offensivum Dei,
aversivum a Deo, odious to God, and hurtful to our selves; such shame is our
glory. Woe then to all imprudent, frontlesse men, whose life is a trade of sin,
and they mere workers of iniquity, yet have brows of brass, and whores
foreheads that cannot blush: God will not bear long with such, Isa. 3. 9, 10.
and 48. 4. Ier. 3. 3. and 6. 15. and 8. 12. Impudency proclaims impudency, when
men are so far from shame, that they think it a shame and disgrace not to sin
and swear, and go like Ruffians, these are come to the height of sin, and are
sinners that know no shame, Zeph. 3. 5.

6. Beleevingly; hoping and waiting for mercy and Pardon. We must be humbled,
but not despair: David had sinned greatly, yet he believes i^ Gods mercy, and
begs for pardon, Psalm. 51. Judas indeed confessed, but without hope of pardon,
and therefore hangs himself; but the sorrow of the godly is mixed with faith,
and his confession with believing that his sins are pardonable, and God will
yet show him mercy. Ezra 10. 2. Yet there is hope for this thing.

7. Reformingly. True confession is joined with Reformation; he does not only
confession his Ignorance, Atheism, Worldliness, Hypocrisy, etc. but he
likewise forsakes them, and resolves against them, Prev. 28. 13. Confession of
sin and the confusion of sin go together in his soul; he desires as freely to
forego his sin, as he desires it should be forgiven. The Ephesian Converts
confess their sin, and then burn their books, Act. 19. 18, 19. The wicked
sometimes confess, but they never forsake their sin, but after confession they
return whith the dog to his vomit. Saul confesses with tears, that David was
more righteous then he, yet after that persecutes him again. Pharaoh confesses
the Lord is righteous; I have sinned; yet after persecutes Israel again. But
the godly ever join Reformation with Consession.

In a word then, we see there must be See twenty ex^e. consider. to keep us
from sin. Bolton comfaffl. consc. ch 49 (...). 10, etc. Peccatum est deformitas
and pravaricatio legis divinae, direct contrarium sanctitati, quae est con^o
mitas voluntat^ nostrae cum lege divina. a Lap.
an abhorring of all sin by such as would attain to sanctification: for
sanctity and sin approved of cannot subsist together, though sanctity and sin
^ated and lamented may. Sin and sanctity are directly opposite; for sanctity
is our conformity to Gods will, and sin is a deformity and transgressing of
it: Yet some sin nes are more directly opposite to it, and therefore we must
more especially watch against them: As

1. Drunkenness is a beastly, swinish Vt omnium amnium confluxus in oceanum,
sic omnium vitiorum in hoc vitium.
sin, a fit stie for the devil, but Gods holy Spirit abhorres such a dwelling.

2. Idolatry, it is spiritual adultery, and breaks the Covenant; they forsake
the Holy one of Israel, to follow Idols, therefore God will forsake them.

3. Fornication is a sin most directly opposite to sanctification; it is made
a part of our sanctification to fly from it, 1 These. 4. 3. This is the will of
God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication: It is a
sin not to be once named amongst Saints but with detestation, Ephesians. 5. 3, 4,
5. Our bodies must be kept chaste and pure, as becomes the Hujus templi
aedituus and custos est pudicitia, quae nibil immundum aut prophanum inferri
sinit, ne Deus ille qui inhabitet inquinatam sedem offensus relinquat. Tertul.
Temples of the holy Ghost; for he that defiles the temple of God, him will God
destroy; and if men and Magistrates will suffer it to go unpunished, yet the
God of heaven will not, Heb. 13. 4. Whoremongers and adulterers he will judge.
It Is not so light a sin as profane men imagine; it is a God-provoking sin;
where fornication and adultery reign, the plagues of God are ever at the door;
this sin helped to bring the flood upon the old world, Genesis 6. 2, 3. 7. this
sin cut off three and twenty thousand of the Israelites, 1 Cor. 10. 8. This
brought sad afflictions on David, 2 Samuel 12, etc. It is a sin that blinds the
judgment, Hos. 4. 11. transforms men into beasts, enseebles the body,
emasculates Ecclus. 19. 2*
the mind, shortens the days, Prove. 5. 11. spends the radical moisture,
breeds foul diseases, consumes the estate, Prove. 6. 26. and 29. 3. Luke 15. 13.
30. bars men from heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. and casts them into hell, Prove. 9.
ult. Rev. 21. 8. The miseries which attend Breve est quid dele^tat, aeternu^
quod torquet.
this sin, I find summed up in this Tetrastich.

Faemina, corpus, opes, animum, vim, lumina, vocem,
Referente S^yro C. C. p. 475.
Polluit, annihilat, necat, eripit, orbat, acerbat,
Occiditque animan, consortia, faedera, famam,
Debilitat, perdit socios, aufertque fideles.
Oh then let the diresull plagues which attend this sin, and which we see daily
to be executed on those that practice it, make us not only go or run, but with
all speed fly from it, as we would from the devil, who is The unclean spirit,
and delights to draw men to uncleanness. It is the Apostles precept, 1 Cor. 6.
18. Flee fornication: and Alia vitia pugnando, sola libido sugi endo vincitur;
fugiendo faeminas, objecta, occasiones libidinis a Lap.
to this end flee the occasions of it, and inducements to it, as idleness,
drunkenness, gluttony and pampering of the body, familiarity with suspicious
persons, neglect of fasting and prayer, neglect of watching over our hearts,
senses, ways and words, etc. He that will shun a sin, must shun the
occasions of that sin; else we tempt God, and he will never deliver us from the
Vitare peccata, est vitare occasiones peccati. Reg. See more Brooks Kem. ag.
Sat. dev. p. 86, etc. to 95. Gataker Ser. on Mark 13. 37. p. 79.
sin, but leave us up to it because of our negligence. It is a true saying, He
that will no evil do, must do nothing that belongs thereto. Shun the occasions,
and God will preserve you from the sin.

[See the foulness of this sin, and the plagues that attend it, fully set
forth by M. John Downam in his Treatise against Whoredom, p. 1. 8, etc. and M.
Hildersham on John 4. Lect. 15. p. 66. to 87. and ten Aggravations of it, by D.
Ier. Tailor, Holy Living, p. 83, etc.]

Thus have I at last brought you to Mount Nebo, and from thence given you a
glimpse of the Heavenly Canaan: it is not bare speculation which will bring
usthither: there must be practice. To know these things is necessary, but
without Doing them they will do us no good. It is not praising but Practicing
of holiness, which will bring us to the God of holiness. Let us then make it
our great work, 1. To get inward sanctification, get our hearts renewed. 2. Let
us show the truth of this inward holiness, by our holy words, holy works, and
holy walking; and then know for thy comfort, whoever thou art, be thou
afflicted, tempted, poor, despised, etc. yet if thou thus continue to walk in
the way of holiness, thou shall certainly at last arrive at the haven of
happiness; having thy fruit in holiness, God himself has told thee, that thy
end shall be everlasting life. To which holiness and happiness,
sanctification and salvation, he of his own free mercy bring us, who has so
dearly bought us, even Jesus Christ the Righteous.

Amen.
Amen.
FINIS.
A Divine EMBLEM, tending to raise our hearts to a Divine love of the most
holy God.
QVARLES EMBLEMS Lib. 5. Embl. 6. 1
I Love (and have some cause to love) the earth;
She i^ my makers creature, therefore Good;
She is my mother, for She gave me birth;
She is my tender Nurse, she gives me food:
But what is a Creature, Lord, compared with Thee?
Or what is my mother or my Nurse to me?
2
I love the Air, her dainty sweets refresh
My drooping soul, and to new sweets invite me;
Her shril mouthed Quire sustain me with their flesh,
And with their Polyphonian notes delight me:
But what is the Air, or all the sweets that she
Can bless my soul withal, compared to Thee?
3
I love the Sea, she is my fellow Creature;
My careful Purveyor; she provides me store;
She walls me round, she makes my diet greater;
She waf^s my treasure from a foreign shore:
But Lord of Oceans when compared with Thee,
What is the Ocean, or her wealth to me?
4
To heavens high City I direct my Journey,
Whose spingled Suburbs entertain mine eye:
Mine eye by contemplations great Attorney,
Transcends ^he Crystal pavement of the sky.
But what is heaven, great God compared to Thee?
Without thy presence Heaven's no Heaven to me.
5
Without thy presence Earth gives no Refection.
Without thy presence Sea affords no Treasure:
Without thy presence Ay'rs a rank Infection.
Without thy presence Heaven it sel'fs no Pleasure:
If not possessed, if not enjoyed by Thee,
What Is Earth or Sea, or Air, or Heaven to me?
6
The hightest Honors that the World can boast,
Are subjects far too low for my desire:
The brightest beams of glory are (at most)
But dying sparkles of thy living fires,
The proudest flames that earth can kindle, be
But nightly Glowworms if compared to Thee.
7
Without thy presence, Wealth are bags of Cares;
Wisdom but Folly, Joy disquiet Sadness,
Friendship is Treason, and Desights are Snares;
Pleasures but Pain, and Mirth but pleasing Madness;
Without thee Lord, things be not what they be,
Nor have they being, when compared with Thee.
8
In having all things, and not Thee, what have I?
Not having Thee, what have my labors got?
Let me enjoy but Thee, what farther crave I?
And having Thee alone, what have I not?
I wish nor Sea, nor Land, nor would I be
Possessed of Heaven, Heaven unpossest of Thee.
FINIS.

