The Pulpit Guarded With XVII ARGUMENTS PROVING The Unlawfulness, Sinfulness
and Danger of suffering Private persons to take upon them Public Preaching,
and expounding the Scriptures without a Call; as being contrary to the Word of
God, contrary to the practice of all Reformed Churches, contrary to the Three
and twentieth Article of Religion, contrary to two Ordinances of Parliament,
and contrary to the Judgment of a whole Jury of learned, judicious, pious
Divines, both Foreign and Domestic.

Occasioned by a DISPUTE at Henly in Arden in Warwickshire, Aug. 20. 1650.

Against
Lawrence Williams, a Nailor-Publike-Preacher. Tho. Palmer, a Baker-Preacher.
Tho. Hind, a Plough-Wright-Publike-Preacher. Henry Oaks, a Weaver-Preacher.
Hum. Rogers, (lately) a Bakers boy-Publike-Preacher.
Here you have all their Arguments (never yet compiled in one Tract) refelled
and answered many Texts of Scripture cleared, the Quintessence and Marrow of
most of our Modern Authors (in reference to this Controversy) collected, with
References to such Authors as clear any Doubt more fully; many incident Cases
resolved, the utmost extent of Laymens using their Gifts in Eleven Particulars
demonstrated, and above Thirty Objections answered.

In the close are added Six ARGUMENTS, to prove our Ministers free from
Antichristianism.

2 Timothy 3. 9. They shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest
unto all men. Genesis 49. 6. O my soul, come not thou unto their secret: unto
their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united. Isa. 28. 15. Ye have made lies
your refuge, and under falsehood have ye hid your selves. Veritas impugnata
magis elucet. Bern. Composed and compiled by a friend to Truth and Peace.

London, Printed by I. Cottrel, for E. Blackmore, at the Angel in Paul's
Churchyard. 1651.

Ornatissimo viro, Amico amicissimo, necnon Patri celeberrimo, Dno IOHANNI
PRAPP, Pastori de BELLO-VADO, (...).
LIcet Epistolas scribo rarissimus, ad Te tamen, ad Te inquam (insignissime
Pater, Moderator mitissime, (...)) non possum literas non exarare. Munusculum
hoc levidense, and pingui (ut aiunt) Minerve contextum, tanquam (...) meae erga
Te observantiae, quarn libentissime and lubentissime emitto. Ad te haec
scripsi, non propterte: lege hac ad te haec veniunt, ut castigentur, ut
emerdentur, ut er^^torum poenas and ungue and oboliscis luant: quisquis mihi
ho^ crimini dederi^, ipse crimine inscitiae non carebit. Tute enim clarus, quod
praeclara feceris, clarior quod multa protuleris, clarissimus prop^er (...)
long lateque notissimam. Libellulos tuos vidit mu^dus, Com. in N. T. V. T.
dignissimi qui vel in arce Minervoe collocentur singuli.

Digna legi scribis, facis and dignissima scribi;
Scripta probant doctum te t^a, facta probum.
Sed quid ago? Epistolam volui non Panegyrin; neque si voluissem, aut etiam
possem, permittit tua modestia, etc.

Invitus in hanc arenam descendi, vocatus, imo propalam provocatus fui; mihi
venit in mentem Heroicum illud Lutheri, Verbum Dei injuriam patitur, and ego
qui literis eo vocatus sum me conferam; haec est dies quam fecit Dominus;
vocatus ego v^nio, vocatus ingredior, in nomine Domini nostri Jesu Christi,
etiamsi scirem tot esse diabolos Wormaliae, quot sunt tegulae aedium tectis.

Crescit amor fidei, quantum ipsa perecula crescunt. Forti itaque simus animo,
Psalm. 46.
licet montes dimoveantur in ima maria, and terra locum commutaret,
succumbendum tamen non est, quia Deus robur suis, auxilium in angustiis
praesentissimum.

-- Illos
Sifractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidos ferient ruinae.
Hor.
Pertimescendum ^on est, Christum enim ferimus, and veritatem Christi; si
ruimus nos, ruit and Christus. In monte Jehova providebitur: cum duplicantur
lateres, Moses venit; eadem manus Omnipotens quae coelum fecit, Ecclesiam
fulsit suam. Christus tenet Stellas in dextr sua manu, manus vero est (...)
praesertim dextra, in hac tenet Christus Stellas susuas, hac potentia dat
pastores and dirigit, confortat contra inferni portas, mundi plagas, and
confirmat: hos amat, hos tuetur in hisce propugnandis summa ei est cura, summa
potestas. Probe nosti Epistolam Lutheri languescenti Melancthoni, etc. Nolite
(inquit ille) timere, estote fortes and laeti, nihil soliciti. Dominus prope
adest. Agant quicquid possunt Henrici, Episcopi, atque adeo Turca and ipse
Satan; nos filii regni sumus, qui consputum illum and occisum salvatorem
colimu^ and expectamus.

Haeretici raro longaevi, hujusmodi non diu splendent meteora, nullum fictum
est diuturnum: testis rex iste Leydensis Becold, testis Cnipperdolingus, testis
Phifer, testis Muncer, etc. Perfregit Deus capita cetorum, praegrandia balaenae
capita, depit cibo ipsi populo per deserta proficiscenti, cibo mentis, non
dentis, fidei non palati. Nonnullas hic offendes facetias; neminem, ut opinor,
offendent hi sales, nisi qui ipsi salem non habent.

-- Ridentem dicere verum
Quid vetat?
Hor.
Nonne fervens ille Elias irridet cultores Baal? 1 Reg. 28. 27. Job 12. 2.
Nonne justus ille Job (...) usus est in ami^os dolosos? Nonne gravissimus ille
Calvinus Reliquiis Pontificiis animum relaxavit suum? Ut velitatio itaque non
sit omnino frigida, sales aliquando innoxios adhibui, nec est cur mihi vitio
detur, si quando seriis delassatum animum, ludicris reficiam, cum apud Hesiodum
rideat and maximus ille (...). Spero tamen me sic ad vivum monstra ista
Anabapt. depicturum, ut unicuique ea e^iam eminus animadvertere and cavere
liceat. Durissimam suscepi provinciam, and in immen sum quoddam stupendorum
deliriorum mare pene demergor; vetas est illa Oratoris querela, Proveniebant
Oratores novi, stulti adolesce^tuli.

Proveniunt hac nostr a tempestate, non Oratores, sed Aratores novi, stulti
fabri ferrarii, aerarii, lignarii, rastris quam rostris aptiores. Pistores,
nunc Pastores, Textores, and Tonsores, Sutores and Sartores, Coquinarii and
Cupedinarii, Milites and Mul^^res, Puelluli and Puellulae, etc. necnon quam
plurimi alii ejusdem furfuris, quos vulgo vocamus Gifted Brethren. Hem! lingua
utendum est belluina, ne bell^ae istae nos dilacerent. Dotati sane and donandi
rude. Rude? imo sude, verberibus quam verbis, Argumentis bacillinis quam
Aristotelicis digniores. Calvin Opusc.
Rem acu tetigit insignis ille Calvinus, Haereticorum malleus. Quan^a hinc
nascitur and nascetur malorum Ilias facile est conjecturam facere: Sunt in hac
infelici Secta nonnulli atque ii praecipue qui doctores agere volunt, qui
superbia and arrogantia praeoccupati in omnibus quae ipsis propo^untur,
caligant: aut pervicacia potius and obsti^a^a malitia cl^udunt oculos, ne
claram lucem cum eis proponitur, intueri possint, ita ut cum eis rationibus
agere, quo in viam reducantur, sit operam ludere; nisi quod saltem haec
utilitas redit, cum boni impudentiam eorum deploratam vident, sese ab eis
semovent, and tanquam venenum lethale effugiunt. Hos nulla Occidet litera; de
hujusmohi homunculis salse Epigrammat.

Tu been cavisti ne te ulla occidere possit
Litera, nam nota est litera nulla tibi.
Libemus and libremus eorum dogma, quod si ad veritatis calculum revocetur,
apparebit mere esse umbratile, and Chimaera Chimaerissima. En pro thesauro
carbones, pro amphora urceus! In lucem haec traxisse, est vicisse. Creant sibi
subitos ministors, and uno momento factos, ut divellant Ecclesiam, populum
distrahant, caetusque ineant inter se contrarios, ne Dei nomen uno omnium
consensu, and e^ qua decet concord a invocetur. Inclamant, vociferantur,
Universitates vestrae sunt universae pestes, Ergo versae sint universae:
Seminaria Pietatis? I Am impietatis and nequitiae; fontes Divinitatis, vel
potius Humanitatis, ut oggannivit Carbonarius quidam, Collyer against the
Ministry, etc. ^p. 17, etc.
carbone notandus. Talibus malis magis prolixi gemitus, quam prolixi libri
debentur.

Quid multa? (...), ut fummatim omnia perstringam melliflua illa Bernardi
querela. Clerici nostri habitu milites, questu clericos, actu neutrum exhibent;
Bern. lib. 4. d^ consider.
nam neque ut milites pugnant, neque ut clerici Evangelizant, cujus ordinis
sunt? Cum utrumque esse cupiunt, utrumque confundunt, etc. O miserandam sponsam
talibus creditam paranymphis! etc. Sed hic sigendum est Baculum. Macte tua
virtute Pater, sie itur ad astra. Perge, ut caepi^ti, labascentem adjuvare
Ecclesiam, nec blateratorum aut Sciolorum aculeos reformides; nunquam caruere
invidi a egregii fortesque conatus. Sed quid facem Soil? Facere laudanda quam
audire laudata maluisses. In summ^ vive dum vivis, sis Carbo and Lampas; Carbo
tibi, Lampas aliis. Vive Deo, vive Ecclesiae, vive tuis. Prolixitatem jam
excusarem meam, ni id agendo fierem prolixior. Deus opt. max. te servet
incolumem, una cum prosapia tua peracuta. Ita precatur,

E Musaeo meo Norton-Regis in agro Wigorn. Ian. 1. 1651. (...), Tuus Tho. Hall.

To my beloved Parishioners, and approved friends, the inhabitants of
Kings-Norton, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
My dearly beloved in the Lord,
MY hearts desire and Prayer for you is, that you might be saved: and since
none can attain to Happiness, but such as walk in the way of Holiness; Isa. 35.
8. Heb. 12. 14.
my desire is, that you may be kept pure and holy, not only from those gross
blots which abound in this degenerate generation, but also from the spots of
the times, such as Separation, Independency, etc. It Is your glory and my
comfort, that when other people by their Pride and Censoriousness, by their
Sects and Schisms are a daily vexation and heartbreaking to their Ministers,
yet you have been unanimous, though you be a great body, and many of you a
knowing people, having enjoyed the means in one part of the Parish for almost
fifty years together, and that by a succession of very eminent and able
Divines, conformable non-conformists, conformable to the Canon of the Scripture
( Gal. 6. 16. (...)) though not to the Bishops Canons: Where the Lord raise ^p
that valiant and Religious Knight Sir Richard Greavis, who by his wisdom and
courage sheltred these Reverend Ministers from those Episcopal storms which
otherwise had fallen upon them. I have found you also a very tractable people;
few families but have submitted to examination before the Sacrament, and have
freely sent in some hundreds of your children and servants to that end. You
have begun well; persevere, that no man get your Crown from you. I have now
served you above three Prentiships; and as Jacob said of himself, Few and evil
had his days been, so mine have been few, but full of trials, internal and
external. So soon as I began to exercise, my refusing to read the Book of
Sports on the Sabbath endangered me. That luster of years which I spent at
Mosely, I was threatened by the Episcopal party for Nonconform^ty; since I came
to you, I have suffered deeply by the Cavaliering party; often times plundered,
five times their prisoner; often cursed, accused, threatened, etc. Yet the Lord
delivered me out of all, and has made my latter end better then my beginning.
It Is now my Motto, Per vincula cresco. We never lose by serving or suffering
for Christ. And now at last I have been set upon by the Sectaries, who
sometimes have spoken to me in the middle of Sermon, sometimes after, sometimes
challenge me to dispute, etc. But my comfort is, that he that has delivered me
from the paw of the Lion, will also deliver me from every evil work, of evil
and ungodly men.

Now I beseech you by all the mercies of God, Feb. 23. There were three Sermons
in a house in the Parish, by a Long Cutler, a Na^lor, and a Milner.
by all the pains and service amongst you, and sufferings for you; that you all
mind the same things; let there be no divisions, no Sects nor Schisms found
amongst you; but labor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.
An ignorant and uncha^echised person is a fit prey for the devil. When m^n are
children in knowledge, then they are tosse^ too and fro wi^h every wind of
Doctrine.
Paul's farewell to his Corinthians, shall be mine to you, 2 Cor. 13. 11.
Finally, brethren, farewell: ^e perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in Peace; and the God of love and Peace shall be with you.

And since errors are so rife amongst us, Epnes. 4. 14. Levit. 13. 44.
and some begin to creep in amongst you, to draw you from the public
Ordinances; I shall give you a little preventing Physic.

1 Get your judgments rightly informed: the Understanding is the eye and Guide
of the soul; if that be corrupt, and mislead you, you must needs fall into the
ditch: if a disease get the brain, it is hardly cured; hence the learned
observe, that corruption in judgment is worse then corruption in manners,
especially when the mind has been enlightened with the knowledge of the truth.
Leprosy in the head, was of all other Leprosies the most dangerous and
destructive, and he was to be pronounced utterly unclean: he was unclean if he
had the Leprosy in his hands or feet; but if 'twere in his head, then he was
utterly unclean.

2 Be Real Christians; think it not sufficient that you are Christians in Name,
and have a form of godliness, but be Christians indeed, and walk in the power
of godliness; be Nathanaels, Israelites indeed; then, and never till then, you
are worth beholding and admiring, Ioh. 1. 47. Behold, Many become i^ matters of
Religion mere S cep^^ks, because they would not (...) Practicks, S. Ward.
an Israelite indeed, etc. The reason why so many fall away, is, they were
formalists, never humbled under the sight and sense of their sins, never
received the truth in love, 2 These. 2. 10, 11. but lived in Pride, Hypocrisy,
barren under the means of grace, and therefore God gives them up to strong
delusions, to believe lies: in his just judgment he punishes one sin with
another: when men be ungrateful, unfruitful, unanswerable to Times and Means,
not walking worthy of the Gospel, then God gives them up to Heretical and
soul-damning ways and Errors: if Ahab will not hearken to Micaiah a true
Prophet, he shall be deluded by lying spirits; if the Gentiles when they know
God by the light of nature, will not glorify him as God, Romans 1. 21, 24, etc.
in giving that honor and respect to him which they could not but apprehend to
be due to the divine Majesty, Anabaptism* Socinianism, Armin^anism, etc amee
scourges to plague formal Pro^essors, and rotten hypocrites
etc. God will give them up to vile affections; so punishing the breach of the
first Table, by giving them up to the violation of the second.

3 Get meek and humble spirits; these the Lord has promised to teach his way,
when spiritual Pride is punished with a fall: those highflown Heresies which
abound amongst us, whence come they but from Pride? Non est hodie sciens q^i
novitates non invenit.
Hunt not after novelties, neither be wise above that which is written.

4 Let your principal care be about practical fundamental points, such as
Faith, Obedience, a good Conscience, how you may mortify your special
corruptions, and crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts; study how
you may live soberly in the use of the creature, Religiously toward God,
Righteously and justly in all your dealings with the sons of men; for if you do
these things, you shall never fall: and that you may do them, is, and shall be
the Prayer of him who is the weakest of all his Brethren, and the meanest in
his fathers house, even

From my study in Kings-Norton March 3. 1650. Your servant, T. H.

To the Lay-Preachers at Henly, Warwick, A^lcester, etc. and to all their
Factors, Favorers, Followers, and Abettors, etc. Truth and Peace.
BRethren for so in the judgment of charity I cannot but call you, though
withal I must tell you that you are erring Brethren, and such as are troubled
with the Falling Sickness; a disease very common in these last and worst times.
Had you fallen forward, you might have gained by your fall: to fall backward is
more dangerous; 1 S^m. 4. 18.
as we see in old Eli, who fell backward, brake his neck, and died. But, which
is worst of all, you are fallen backward into one of the most dangerous paths
that men can fall into; viz. the way of the Anabaptists who are (as Sleid.
Comment, l. 5. and l. 10.
Histories tell us) a turbulent Sect, subverters of the very foundations of
States, ( viz. Magistracy and Ministry) Satan's factors, his Seedsmen to sow
Errors and Heresies in the Nations; Simpson. Hist. p. 443.
and how fruitful they have been in this kind, Spanheim. Eng. wa^ning by
G^rmanies (...), p. 45, 46.
we have sad experience amongst us. Heresy is of a spreading nature: sow but
a few Tares, and they quickly overspread the whole field: with fair words, and
fine speeches, they deceive the si^ple; with plaistred words they parget over
the matter: like the Whore of Babylon, 2 Pet. 2. 3. (...) Rev. 17.
that has a golden cup to hold out to her followers.

And that the world may see I do them no wrong, I shall present you with a
Looking-glass (collected out of approved Authors) wherein you may clearly see
the wrinkles and deformities, the deliriums and delusions of that deluded Sect;
that by their fall, we may learn to tremble, and fear, lest we also be tempted,
and led away with the errors of the wicked.

A Looking-Glass for Anabaptists.
THeir first Tenent is, Hudson against Ellis* p. 259.
That Infant Baptism is a childish, needless thing; Bri^sly for paedobapt. p.
9, etc.
and that none must be baptized til he come to a perfect Age, and can make a
confession of his faith; That Infant Baptism came from the Pope and the Devil.

2. That all Gifted-persons may preach without Ordination.

3. That God reveals his will, not only by the written Word, but also by
Dreams and Vixfas est credere visis S^pe Satan tali in lumine luce nocet*
Visions; which they believe more then the Word. They deny all consequences
from Scripture, though never so clear; requiring express, A^steed, Tom. 1. p.
1392.
Syllabical Scripture.

4. That the Saints in this life are pure, Baylis's Disswas. 2 part. p. 36, 37.
and p. 12, 13 Simpson hist. p. 443.
without spot, and need not use that Petition, Forgive us our sins.

5. No man can with a good conscience exercise the office of a Magistrate under
the New Testament.

6. They are rigid Seperatists; Bellum rusticorum in univers^ Germania supra
600000 homines sustulit.
they separate themselves from all Reformed Churches.

7. They are tumultuous: They raised tumults in Germany, and filled it with the
fire of Sedition, to the loss of six hundred thousand men, says Alsteed. Their
doctrine being seditious, Alst. Tom. 4. p. mi^i, 1998. Sleid. Com. l. 5. and 10.
their lives are answerable. God punishes unmortified, ungodly lives, with
base and loose Opinions.

8. They deny Original sin to be in Infants, Marshals Ser. for Inf. B. p. 6, 7.
that so they might overthrow Baptism.

9. They hold Free Will by nature in spiritual things.

10. That a man may have more wives then one.

11. That clothes discover sin; therefore they being as perfect and pure as
Adam in his innocence, ought to go naked.

12. That Christ died intentionally for all.

13. No Christian ought with a safe conscience take an Oath, Bayl^'s Dissw^.
part. 2 p. 32.
nor by O^th promise fidelity to a M^gistrate.

14. That a Christian cannot with a safe conscience possess any thing proper to
himself; but he must let all be common.

15. That wives of a contrary Religion may be put away, and then it is lawful to
take others.

16. Universities, Humane Arts and Learning, they cry down as needless; They
burnt all books save the Bible.

17. That it is unlawful to go to Law:

18. Wars are unuseful, Rutherf. again. Antinomians, p. 10, 11.
or any use of the Sword.

19. That Preaching, Praying, Sacraments, singing of Psalms, and all
Ordinances, are Legal. The Spirit is all.

20. The Magistrate must compel none in matters of Religion; but must tolerate
all.

21. That the Father, son, and Holy Ghost are not Three distinct Persons, and
in Essence one God.

22. That the soul sleeps when it parts from the body, Brinsly Antid. ag.
Blasph. p. 14, 15.
and neither goes to heaven or Hell till the day of Judgment; Rutherf. ag.
Antinom. p. 9. 10*
and that the souls of men are but terrestrial vapors, like the life of
beasts, perishing with the body*

23. That Christ has removed the Law, and now the pure Gospel is our only
Rule.

24. The Old Testament is abrogate and useless; and at least, Bayly's Dissw. p
31.
they prefer their New Lights before the Gospel.

25. That the Saints are freed by Christ from all Laws, Covenants, Vows,
Paying of Tithes, or Debts.

26. After Rebaptization they cannot sin.

27 We may dissemble our Religion, deny Christ before men, so we keep the truth
in our hearts: God delights not in our blood, nor requires that we die for the
Truth.

28 The Scripture is to be turned into Allegories.

29. Heaven and Hell are nowhere but within a man. En epulum Diaboli!


30. They give a Supreme and Independent power, -- Sic, sic glomerantur in unum*
in ^ll Ecclesiastical causes and Censures, to their single Congregations,
Innumer ^ pestes Erebi. Claud.
etc.

Thus you have a taste out of a full Sea, whereby you may see that Anabaptists
are no such harmless creatures as some imagine.

He that desires to see more of their errors, let him peruse Mr. Edwards
Gangrene. part. 1. p. 15, Eng. Warning by Germans woe, p. 26, 27.
etc. and especially Mr. Baxter against Tombs, p. 138, 139, etc. and the
learned Spanhemius, with whose words I shall conclude this point.

Out of all that has been said, it is evident how needful it is both for
Church and Commonwealth to join the labor of the Universities with that of the
Church, for the confutation of Anabaptists; and with united hearts and hands
endeavor to hinder this doctrine, which brings so certain destruction to
Church, Commonwealth, and our own souls: both that the consciences as yet
addicted to the Truth, may not be drawn into Deceit and Error* by their fair
shows and counterfeit vizard of Innocence, Holiness and Simplicity; and that
those who have hitherto been deceived, either by the flattery of the Sectaries,
or the whited face of the Sect, may be stirred up in the fear of God, to take
this matter into serious meditation; and consider with themselves, how many
horrible and pernicious Tenants, and how hurtful ^oth to That bloody and
abominable War in Germany was occasioned by lewd Anabapt. Preachers, of whom
Muncer was chief.
public and private quietness, lie hidden, as it were behind a Curtain, under
this simple name of Anabaptists. To whom we wish from the Lord, with all our
hearts, the knowledge, love, and practice of that Truth, which by the special
Grace of God is preserved in the Orthodox Churches; Luther wrote against his
murder and ^ischief, Sleid. ^. 5.
and therewithal, both present and perpetual happiness. Neither go we about to
stir up the Magistrate against these men, nor would we have any force offered
to their consciences; but think those means only ought to be used, which may
conduce to the information of those that err* the reproving of their Errors,
and confirmation of the truth, ^o far as it may stand with Christian Prudence
and Charity. Thus he.

Obj. But you will say as Hazael; Are we dogs, that we should hold such errors
as these? The old Anabaptists peradventure might hold them; but we abhor them:
we hold but this one Tenent, viz. That all Gifted-Brethren may preach; and we
hope there is no great hurt in that.

Answ. We find by sad experience, that the Anabaptists in England have
equalized* yea, super-superlatively exceeded, in gross errors, their
predecessors in Germany. B^yli's Dissw. 2. part. p. 47, 48.
This I could easily prove but that two very moderate, pious, and judicious
Divines have saved me that labor. Baxter against Tombs, p. 147, etc.


2. Whereas you say you hold but one of these Tenants; I must tell you, that I
never yet knew the man that had but one error: if the Devil can but draw you
into one, he will quickly lead you into more; as in Logic, grant but one
absurdity, and an hundred will follow. He that says Yea to the Devil in a
little, shall not say Nay when he pleases. He that tumbleth down the hill of
Error, will never leave tumbling, till he come to the bottom. Evil men and
seducers shall wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13. and 2. 16, 17.
deceiving and being deceived. How many (once seemingly-precious souls) are now
led away with the Errors of the Time; and that such desperate ones, that,
without a miracle of mercy, there is little hope of their recovery! As Goodness
is gradual, so is Wickedness; and as no man attains to perfection in Virtue,
Nemo repent (...) turp^ssimu^.
suddenly; so neither in Vice. It Is a Proverb amongst the Naturalists, that
except a Serpent do eat a Serpent, it cannot become a Dragon. A man must first
swallow many poisonous Tenants, before he can become a ripe and complete
Anabaptist. I shall give you a doleful instance of the fall of a friend of
mine, a man of excellent parts, of strict life, and pious conversation; a
carefu observer of the Sabbath one that trained up his children and family in
the way of the Lord; able to speak excellently in defense of Sabhaths,
Ordinances, Trinity, Baptism, etc. yet now is fallen from all, most fearfully and
obstinately, and is become a Socinian, an Arminian, and what not? 'I is time
for us to fear, when Professors shall turn Blasphemers; and those that prized
and pleaded for Ordinances, shall now abhor them. When the Cedar falls, Zac^^.
11* 2.
let the Fir Tree howl.

How many of these errors are yours* your selves best know; I can accuse you
but of one; and if you persist in that, assure your self Satan will not let you
rest there. Justi^ia peccati (...), Aug.
Sin is modest at first, and desires but a little; but he that is unfaithful in
a little, will be unfaithful in much. You se^ your danger 'twill be your
wisdom, not to trust to your own strength but deny all self-conceits,
self-willedness, selfends (for self-seeking is self-undoing; but self-denial, A
me, me salva Domine. Aug. Calvin Opus^. p. 470. V^nes Ser. ag. Heresy, p. 10.
is self-saving.) Pray with that good man, Deliver me, O Lord, from that evil
man my self.

Obj. We bring Scripture for what we hold.

Answ. So did the Devil, when he disputed against Christ: he wrested and
misalledged Scriptures. I would know what Error is there that comes abroad
without Verbum Domini, the Word of the Lord in the mouth of it: Arrians,
Arminians, Anabaptists, all plead Scripture for what they hold; but falsely, and
mis-interpreted.

Obj. This Tract is unseasonable at this time.

Answ. Then you must be blamed, who put me on such unseasonable work. But, in
my judgment, 'twas never more seasonable then now: For if Physic be
seasonable when the Patient is sick, and a plaster seasonable when the sore is
ripe; this Tract cannot be unseasonable, since the disease is Epidemical, and
like a Morphew, has over spread the face of the whole Kingdom. A judicious
Divine has well observed, that it is never in season to speak, till, 1. We have
a Call; 2. till we are rightly informed of the thing in question: 3. though we
do know the state of the question, yet there must be suitable preparation. Vos
dum argumentis prosequor, non probris insector, quia in hoc abteroc^rtaminis
genere vincere, est vinci: praeclare olim Artexerxes rex militi, hostem
convitiis proscindentio, Non ut maledicas (...) alo (inquit) sed ut pugnes. Dr.
Morton.
I had the first, and have labored for the rest, being bound by the National
Covenant, so solemnly sworn and taken, in my Place and Calling to labor the
extirpation of Error, and Heresy, etc.

I have forborne all gall and bitterness, and have tempered my sharpest reproofs
with love and meekness: all my pills I have rolled in Sugar, that they might go
down the better. 'Twas Recreationwork, and I was willing it should be pleasant,
(take not that with the left hand, which is offered you with the right) though
I might justly have come with the rod of sharpness, considering the pride,
censoriousness, ignorance and untruth that I met with from you: For though you
want the Latin, yet some of you want not a Lying- tongue; witness he that
openly affirmed, Melancthon, Calvin, Bucer, Beza, approved of Lay-preachers.
Yet I pity and spare you, and have dipped all my Nails in Oil, that they might
drive the better; and have driven them up to the head, and clencht them with
Arguments, that they might not stir; and steeled them with Scripture, that they
might last; and have used variety of Nails, that if some should chance to go
awry, to blunt, or turn crooked yet others might hold; and O that they might be
as Nails fastened by the Masters of the Assembly, to keep us steadfast and
unmovable in the truth!

My Record is on high, that I have not done any thing out of envy, spleen, or
passion, against the persons or parts of any: I can freely wish that all the
Lords people were Prophets; and that those private persons that have gifts,
would use them more in their Families and Spheres then they do. It troubles not
me to see Christ preached, but it troubles me to see him dishonored, by
Antinomians, Arminians, Anabaptists, Familists, etc. who under pretense of
preaching Christ, preach their own fancies. Nor do we fear the loss of our
employment: the Foyl sets off the Jewel; and Bunglers make Workmen more
esteemed: and when I speak against preaching-Artificers yet I speak not against
their Arts, but against their usurpations of another Office. There is not the
poorest servant that washes pots, in whom I shall see but aliquid Christi, any
thing of Christ, but I shall love and honor them, and esteem them as my
fellow servants and Brethren of the Church of God; remembering it is God that
gives us our several Callings; and a Scavenger may honor God in his place, as
well as a Minister in his.

Philip King of Macedon, being troubled with two dissolute Subjects, Alterum e
Macedonia fugere alterum persequi jussi^.
he made one to run out of the Kingdom, and the other to drive him; and so was
shut of both. Authority has wisely provided Banishment for some of your Sects;
but I shall rather desire your Repentance. Culpam pertinaciter tueri, cu^pa est
altera.
Only add not Obstinacy to your Folly, lest it prove your ruin. This is
finis operis, the end of the work, though not finis operantis, the end you aim
it: for as Piety has the promise, and brings its reward with it; and though no
man should recompense the good we do, yet doing good is recompense it self: So
every evil work brings its punishment with it; and though no man should punish
it, yet the evil we do is punishment it self.

Read all, before you censure; for one part helps to uphold the other, like
stones in an A^ch. If this little Tract cannot satisfy, yet you have
references to learned men that will. All the imperfecti^ns, weaknesses, etc. I
own as mine; let not the Truth suffer for them. Consider, 'twas work redeemed
from a double Calling, from rest and Recreations. There is no man can judg^ so
me only of me, my work and pains, but I shall desire to judge my self yet
lower, (...) knowing more by my self then he does, Job 31. 35, 36. as Jerome
said to Austin:

Quod signum est majoris gloriae, omnes Hae^e^ici ^e detestantur.


or can; and though mine adversary should write a book against me full of lies
and reproaches, yet would I wear it as a Crown, in token of triumph; esteeming
reproaches for Christ greater riches then the treasure of the world.

To conclude, if any shall reap any satisfaction by this Tract, they may
accidentally thank you: if your Cause receive any hurt, you may thank your
selves, who called me to the work.

It has cost me some pains and study: as Demosthenes said of his Enthymems,
they did olere lucernam; so does this savor of some reading: But so it may be
useful to the Church of God, I have enough, I have now used all means to do you
good, by Preaching, Praying, Disputing, and now by Writing; if none of these
means can reclaim you, but you will walk on in the bypath of Separation,
Anabaptism etc. yet I have discharged my duty; and my ^oul shall weep in secret
for your pride, mine eyes shall drop down tears. This is the desire and
resolution of

Your Friend and servant in the service of Christ, THO. HALL.

A List of those Authors whose Works are cited and made use of in this Treatise.
A
Abbot against Separat. A Lapide. Al^teed. Ames. Annota^ions on the Bible.
Answer to Spencer. Antidote against Lay-preach. Apollonius. Aretius. Augustine
de H^res.
B.
Ball. Baine. Bailey. Baxter. Bellarmine Bernard Bernard of Batcombe B^za Bowls
Brinsly Bullinger Burges Byfield
C.
Calvin Chemnitius Cheynel.
D.
Davenant De* Loque a Frenchman Dell Diodati Dithmar Dixon Doway Bible.
E.
Edwards.
F.
Field of the Church.
G.
Greenhill.
H.
Hall against Seperat. Harmony of Confessions.
J.
Jacksons Johnsons Junius.
L.
Lavater Leigh. Dr. Love Sir H. Lynd.
M.
P. Martyr Mayer Mornay Dr. Morton Moulin Musculus.
N.
Nalton.
O.
Owen Oxford Account.
P.
Pareus. Paget Perkins Piscator Prideaux.
R.
Rathband Ricraft Robinson Rollock Rutherford.
S.
Seaman Sleiden Smith on the Creed. Spanheim. Simpson Hi^t. Synopsis purioris
The.
T.
Tailor on Tit: Thompson concio ad Cler. Thorndike Topsel Trap.
V.
Dr. Vines. Vind* of Presbytery.
W.
Willet. Workman.
Z.
Zanchy Zepper.
IMPRIMATUR.

Feb. 3. 1650. Edm. Calamy.

The Thesis discussed was this*
That Private persons (though they be gifted, yet) may not Preach in a
constituted Church without a Call.
The Vide Socin. Tract. de Ecclesia.
Arminians, Socinians, Anabaptists, Libertines, Separatists, etc. Affirm.

We, with all the Reformed Churches in Christendom, Catech. Racoviens. c. 21.
etc. Deny. Thcop. Nicolaid. in defens. Socin. cap. 7.


IN the handling of this Controversy, I shall observe this Method.

1 I will briefly explain the Terms, as they lie in Order: I shall have
occasion to enlarge upon them in the Answers. Vide Ruth^^f. Du^ R^ght of
Presbyt. p. 271 the 2. part.


2 I shall confirm the Thesis with diverse Reasons and A^guments drawn from the
Word of God. Anabaptistae omnes sumunt sibi praedicandi offi ium. Gajtius, p.
20.


3 I shall answer all those Objections which (in my little reading) I have met
withal.

First, By Private persons, I mean such as the Apostle calls the Flock, the
people of God, Hearers, such as must obey their Teachers in the Lord, etc.

The Scripture is clear, that some in the Church are Superiors, some
Inferiors; some are as Eyes, some Ears, Some Feet; and as in the body Natural,
some members are for more honorable employment, some less honorable, but all
useful in their proper places. This is fully set forth, 1 C^r. 12. from v. 4 to
30.

These private persons we call (only for distinction sake) Laymen, Vide Hom.
Disput p. 111. Mr. Fry, though he approve not of this distinction, yet he uses
it for distinction sake. Fry ag. Clerg. p. 52.
as being contra-distinct to Ministers and Preachers, who are men in office:
and if we thus use the term, not as opposed to Clergy, (for all the godly are
called Gods Clergy, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Not lording it over Gods heritage, (...).
or Clergy) God is their Lot and Portion, and the Church is his) but to
Ministry, and to a man that is a Preacher in Office; so it cannot be
offensive: for Laicus is only one (...) of the people. Hence a Pride. fascicul.
controvers. p. 217. and Iunius contra Bell. de Cler. l. 2. c. 7. Paul was a man
of strong parts, great learning, and rare abilities, yet pleads his Call, Gal.
1. 1 Col. 1. 23. 25. Apolloni. p. 76.
learned man distinguishes thus: 1. There is Clerus Ecclesia, and Clerus
Ecclesiae. Clerus Ecclesia est sors Domini, quae omnes includit fideles, 1 Pet.
5. 3. Rev. 2. 6. 2. Clerus Ecclesiae sunt certae inter fideles personae
segregatae and legitime vocatae ad munus ministerii; ut Act. 13. 2. Titus 1. 5.

Secondly, though gifted, (though excellently gifted, so that they excel many
Ministers in Praying, Elocution, Learning, etc and other abilities) yet without
a Call they may not Preach, as will appear by the ensuing Discourse: for if
bare gifts were sufficient to make a Minister, how many women in this Kingdom
(who are forbidden preaching, yet) would be Preachers!

Two things are required in every Minister. 1. (...).
Gifts, abilities and endowments both of Life and Learning, fit for so high and
so holy a Calling. 2. (...).
Power and authority from the Church to exercise those Gifts. Gifts qualify;
but the Churches Ordination gives authority for execution. Dona dant
aptitudinem, Ecclesia vero executionem.

But though gifted persons may not preach without a Call, Vide Owen, Duty of
Pastors and People, p. 49. etc.
yet they may and must use their gifts in their private Families, and for the
good of their Brethren. I shall show them how far they may go without
offense.

1. They may and must read the Word to their families, because it is expressly
commanded, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8. 9. Genesis 18. 19. Col. 3. 16.

2. Privately and occasionally they may reprove an offending brother. This
likewise is commanded, Levit. 19. 17. They must exhort, admonish, and comfort
one another, Heb. 3. 13. 2 These. 3. 14, 15. Mal. 3. 16. Thus the righteous feed
many, Prove. 20. 22. They must in all gentleness and meekness support the
weak, and set him in joint again that falls through infirmity, Gal. 6. 2. Job
2. 11. and instruct others, Acts 18. 26.

3. They must pray one for another, Jam. 5. 16. and may, as occasion requires,
add private fasting in their families, Esth. 4. 16. Nehem. 1. 4. Acts 12. 12.

4 They may meet together to confer one with another, Luke 24. 14, 15.

5 They may examine and A Synod is Judex judicandus; and Congregations are to
examine with a judgment of discretion what is sent from them Unusquisque in
domo sua est Episcopus. Aug.
try the Doctrine which they hear, provided it be done soberly in humility,
and orderly. The Bereans are commended for this, Act. 17. 11.

6 Private persons must encourage each other to the public worship of God,
Isa. 2. 3.

7 They may catechize their families. David and Bathsheba instruct young
Solomon, Prove. 4. 4. and 31. 1. Lois and Eunice teach Timothy betimes, 2 Timothy
1. 5, and 3. 15.

8 They must set up discipline in their family. So did David, Psalm. 101. 2. I^b
1. 5. Deuteronomy. 21. 18. to 22.

9 They may sing Psalms in their houses, Col. 3. 16.

10. Not only men, but women also may instruct their families, catechize
Children and Servants, yea, and perform other Family Duties, in case the
Husband be absent, or not able, or not willing to discharge them, etc. And thus
a Priscilla, in a private way, may communicate her knowledge to a learned
Apollos; and as a very M. Brinsley in his Looking-glass for good women, p. 32.
Reverend Divine has excellently set forth.

11. A private godly man, endowed with the knowledge of the Languages, Arts,
etc. may, for the benefit of his family, give the sense of a Text, and
interpret Scripture; yet may not take upon him the Function of Preaching
without a Call. D Hall, C. C. Dec. 3. Cas. 10.
See this Case fully debated by that judicious Casuist.

Object. If private men may exhort, admonish, etc. then they may preach
likewise.

Answ. Anon sequitur; it does not follow: for private exhortation is commanded
to private persons, but Preaching is forbidden them.

2 There Is a great difference between private Exhortation and Preaching, though
materially they may be the same. e. g. The Pastor rebukes Drunkenness as an
Officer and public Watchman, ex officio specialis delegationis,
authoritatively, by the power of the Keys: but the private Christian rebukes
Drunkenness ex communi officit charitatis, privately and occasionally, without
any Pastoral charge; not authoritatively, as one in Office. Thus the Watchman
gives warning, the Common soldier does the same; the Schoolmaster teaches
one lesson, the School fellow teaches the same: the one, by virtue of his
Office; the other, of common Charity. But the Pastor does rebuke sin, not
only out of common Charity, but by virtue of his Office; not only privately,
but publicly, by a Pastoral obligation. Thus we see both use their Gifts, but
it is in their own Sphere: the Pastor publicly, as an Officer; the private
Christian in a private way of edification.

Others object, Object.
That many young Scholars, and some private men of singular abilities, Yates
Plea for Prophesying. page 71. 72.
that intend the Ministry, do preach before Ordination. So did the Sons of
the Prophets, say they, 1 Samuel 19. 20. They likewise urge, 1 King. 20. 35. and
2 King. 2. 7. and 4. 1.

This block must be removed before I can proceed.
I answer, Answ.
that your Argument is not ad idem: because the sons of the Prophets, and such
as are trained up for the Ministry, do preach, ergo, every gifted brother may
preach; it will not follow.

For, 1. These young men and sons of the Prophets are educated, fitted, and set
apart for the Ministry, and so are in the way to the Ministry, and not
altogether out of Office; but may be said to be Ministers vertualiter*
inchoative and dispositive, licet non actualiter and realiter; as the kernel is
said to be a tree potentia, licet non actu.

But it is not thus with Artificers, Naylors, Tailors, etc. they never were
educated, fitted, or set apart for the Ministry, as these are; therefore they
may not do what these may doc.

2 Their Preaching is for Preparation and Trial, per modum probationis, as
Probationers and Expectants; and that before Pastors and Elders, Vide Rutherf.
who can judge of their gifts, and must try before they trust* laying hands
upon no man suddenly, Dae Right of Presbyt. p. 281. and 305.
but as the Apostle commands, I Tim. 3. 10. Let them first be proved, and then
Minister: though we cannot expect perfection, yet there must be some fit
proportion for so great work, which co^sists in three things. I. In Sanitate
Doctrinae. 2. In Sanctitate vitae. 3. In Facultate docendi. His Doctrine must
be sound, his life holy, besides a natural dexterity for Teaching. How can
these be seen and known, but by Preaching?

But the Preaching of Artificers, etc. is not for Trial; for then they should
go preach before Ministers who can judge of their abilities; but as Gifted
Brethren they preach without a Call to giftlesse persons.

Thus I have showed how far private persons may go, and have not willingly or
wittingly concealed one tittle of their right: it will be their wisdom* so to
use private duties, as that the public be not hindered or neglected, and the
Ministry in no wise slighted, as the Apostle excellently commands both, I
These. 5. 11, 12, 13. They must edify one another* and prize their Ministers.

Thirdly, The third term to be explained, is, Preaching. And here we must
distinguish, before we can define. Preaching may be taken, Prius distinguendum,
antequam definiendum: Qui been distinguir, been docet.
1. Largely, for any declaration of Gods Wisdom, Power, Goodness; and thus
every creature may be called a Preacher: thus the Heavens Preach. Psa 19. 1.
Coeli praedicant gloriam Dei. Thus reading the Word may be called Preaching.
But the question is not (as a Mr. Ant. Burges on Mar. 1. 2, 3.
Reverend Divine well observes, in that remarkable Sermon) whether reading in
some sense may not be called preaching (taking preaching for any declaration of
Gods truth:) but whether it be Ministerial preaching; whether when the Apostle
says, He must divide Gods word aright, he means no more then to read: Dr.
Pocklington (that Popish ^riest) would fain prove Reading to be ^re^ching
Sunday no Sab. p. 30, 31, 32
Whether when he says, Who is sufficient for these things! he means, who is
able to read? When he says, Give thy self to study, that thy profiting may
appear to all men, he means that all men may see thou read better then
thou did. Thus he.

But take it strictly and properly, and then Preaching is thus defined. It Is an
action of a Minister, soundly interpreting and opening the sense of Scripture
by Scripture, in an authoritative way, applying it to the use of the hearers,
by doctrine, Exhortation, Rebuke and Comfort. This is the duty and formal act
of the Ministry; it is a Pastoral act, and is not common to every gifted
Brother of the flock.

Fourthly, In a constituted Church. The Church must be considered under a
double Notion.

1 There is Ecclesia constituta, a constituted, reformed, settled, planted
Church: Cum versemur in constitutis Ecclesis in quibus auditur vera doctrina,
ordinem set vare debemus, ut omnia ^iant (...). nam immediatae vocatio Deus tum
^titur, cum vel Ecclesia nulla est constitutave olim constituta, degeneravit.
Aretius Prob. par. 3. p. 25 Vide Wi^^^t in Levit. 8. Q. 15. p 132. Pet. Mart.
in 1 Cor. 16. p. 452. b.
and here none may preach but such as are proved and authorized by the
Presbytery, 1 Timothy 3. 10. and 4. 14. and 5, 22. and 2. 2, 3. Where the Rule is
set (as in our Church) there men must not flee to extraordinaries, but walk
according to the ordinary Rule which God has appointed.

2 There is Ecclesia constituenda, a Church to be planted, settled,
constituted; as amongst Heathens, Turks, Infidells: and here, where no
Ordination can be had, gifted persons (in such extraordinary cases) may preach:
That may be done in the infancy of a Church, which may not be suffered when the
Church is grown to maturity: That may be suffered in the Planting of a Church,
which may not be suffered when a Church is Planted, and the Rule set. A
positive Law may yield in a case of Necessity, Matthew. 12. 3, 4. g Laicus
tractet spiritualia ex charitate and necessitate, deficiente Clerico, non
ratione officii Pride. fa^cicul. p. 217.
Where no Ministers can be had, there gifted men may preach: but in a settled
Church, we must follow the ordinary way.

2 In a collapsed and corrupted state of the Church, when the ordinary Pastors
are persecuted, banished, or slain, then God calls such as have gifts to supply
that defect: but when the Church is settled and restored, then they must to the
Rule. When there was no King in Israel every man did what seemed good in his
own eyes; Apollon. considerat. c. 6. Q 2. S. 4.
it does not follow that therefore they might do so when they had a King.

In a general disorder men respect not always the formalities of Order Mornay
Du Plessis of the Church, chapter 12. p. 362, 363. etc.
says the Noble Mornay.

Fifthly, Without a Call. No man may take this Office upon him without a Call,
either ordinary or Extraordinary, A third way is not to be found in Scripture.
Mediate or Immediate.

^ Some were called Extraordinarily and Immediately by God himself; as the
Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists: Elisha is called from the Plough, Amos
from the Stals, the Apostles from their Nets. And of these under the
New Testament, there are three sorts.

I. Apostles: These were called by Christ immediately and extraordinarily, Vide
Leigh on Rom 12. 6,
and they showed it by their extraordinary gifts and abilities with which
Christ endowed them. They were universal Ministers, appointed by Christ to
preach the Word through the world: they were twelve especially: their Office was
Temporary, being ordained for the propagation of the Gospel. These are now
ceased.

II. Prophets: These had a gift of foretelling things to come; as Agabus
fore-tels a famine, Act. 11. 28. and the four daughters of Philip, Act 21. 9.

2 In those times they had a singular gift and faculty in expounding* and
interpreting prophetical Scripture, in opening hard places, and fitly applying
to their hearers for their edification.

3 They were endowed with Languages, because the Church was to be gathered out
of all Nations. These were temporary and to endure only for that time.

III. Evangelists, who were Coadjutors and Helpers of the Apostles in preaching
the Gospel, and for the most part did attend on them, and watered what they had
planted; they were of two sorts. 1. Some were called immediately, as Philip,
who was called by the instinct of the Spirit, Act. 8. 39, 40. 2 Others were
called by the Apostles; as Timothy, Titus, Mark, Tychicus, Sylvanus. These
latter were most frequent, yet were but Temporary.

Those Ministers which are ordinary and perpetual, are of two sorts; Pastors
and Teachers. 1. Pastors, to see to the manners of the Flock, to preach the
Gospel, deliver the Sacraments, direct them in their practice. See their duty,
Act. 20. 1 Timothy 3. 2 Pet. 5. 2, 3. 2. Teachers and Doctors, whose Office is
plainly and soundly to expound the Scriptures, that the people might have the
right sense and understanding of them: and being endued with Tongues, Arts, and
Sciences, they are to clear the Truth from corruptions of Heretics. That
these are two distinct Officers, is clear from Roman^ 12. 4, 8. He that
reaches, let him wait on teaching; and he that ^xhorteth, on exhortation;
Vide Cottons way of the Churches, p. 11, 12. he speaks fully to this point.
And Zanchy on Ephesians. 4. 11.
which argues a difference of their functions, by the distinctions of their
proper actions.

These Officers are called by ordinary means, and endowed with ordinary gifts,
and must endure in the Church to the Th^^ Mr. Fry is deceived, who judges by
many probable fig^^s, that our Kingdom is even ^t an end. Fry, on the Clergy,
p. 50 and our interest is dying, p. 60,
end of the world, Mat. 28. 20. Ephesians. 4. 13. Til the house be built and
finished, the workmen are not dismissed; til all the Saints be gathered, the
Ministry cannot ceafe. Many are afraid the Ministry will be rooted up: let
Pastors and People do their duty, Isa. 29. 15, 16. 17. out of which the Lord
will frame a vessel of honor to himself.
and then their turning of things up side down shall be but as the Potters clay.

Now if our Gifted Brethren are called, then it is either Ordinarily or
Extraordinarily. If extraordinarily, then they are either Apostles, Prophets,
or Evangelists: but these were temporary and are ceased. If Ordinarily, then
they are either Pastors or Teachers: if so, then they are men in Office; but
that themselves deny: for they say they preach not as Officers, but as Gifted
Brethren, etc. This is such a Preacher as we never read of in all the Book of
God, as I shall (God willing) make clear by the ensuing Arguments,

The sum of them all is thus much: That a man out of Office, though endowed
with Gifts, yet cannot authoritatively expound the Scripture, and apply it to
the people, in a settled, constituted Church, without an external Call of the
Church, authorizing and enabling him thereunto.

The Arguments against the Preaching of Gifted Brethren.
The first Argument.
If God were angry with those in the time of the Law that did usurp the Priests
Office, A Damno.
then he (being JEHOVAH, the same for ever) will be angry with those in the time
of the Gospel that do usurp the Ministers Office?

But God was angry with those in the time of the Law that did usurp the
Priests Office:

Ergo, He will be angry with those in the Gospel that do usurp the Ministers
Office.

The Major is clear from the Immutability of Gods nature, Heb. 13. 8 He is the
same yesterday, etc. Look what sin he hated formerly, the same he hates still.

The Minor I proved by Induction thus:

1. 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7.
The Lord was angry with Vzzah, and smote him dead for meddling with the Arc,
which none might touch but the Priests, Numb. 4. 15.

Vzzah's intention was good, ( viz.) to stay the Arc from falling; for the
Oxen stumbled and shook it: Vzzah lays hold on it, for fear it should have
fallen. (He had better have ventured the Falling, then the Fingering of the
Arc.) For this, the Lord strikes him dead in the place. A notable example of
Gods displeasure against those that transgress the bounds of their Callings. 1 Samuel 13. 12, 13. Saul will offer Sacrifice: the work was good in it self; but
in Saul, who had no call to it, 'was impious and unla^ full.
As our Savior says to Apostates, Remember Lots Wife: so I say to all
usurpers and intruders into the Ministers Office, Remember, Oh remember Vzzah!
His rashness was his ruin; and and his presumption (though it is conceived he
might be a good man, and did not intend any ill, yet) in usurping the Priefts
office, 'twas his death: for, to make an action Morally good, these
Circumstances must be observed: Rectus, Recta, Recte.

1 The person must be Rectus, truly Godly.

2 He must do Recta, such acts as be agreeable to the Rule.

3 He must do them Recte, in a right manner: and here Vzzah, with our Gifted
Brethren, fail.

That of the Schoolmen holds here. Quod intrinsie and ex natura su^ malum est,
nunquam been fieri potest, etiamsi fit ob bonum finem, ut furari, mentiri.
Requia circumstantie extrin^icae and accidentales non mutant intrinsicam rei
naturam and essentiam.

The Lord smote Vzziah the King with a Leprosy, for presuming to burn Incense
in the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. to 20.
which belonged to the Priests, and was their Office.

3. But most remarkable is Gods hand on Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, (...)
Numb. 16. 3. to 39. who thrust themselves into the Priests Office, and would
offer Incense themselves, and that upon this ground, because all the
Congregation was holy: ver. 3. Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the
Congregation are holy, every one of them, etc. and therefore they may approach
unto God, and offer their sacrifices themselves: and just like many amongst us,
that cry up the Saints; The people are holy, and the Lord is amongst them; and
therefore, why may not they preach as well as these black-coats? etc.

But remember the end of these men, who thought to Level both Magistracy and
Ministry, v. 10. 13. and cried down Moses and Aaron; the Lord showed a
dreadful Judgment on them and their consorts; Why? ver. 40. To be a memorial
to the Children of Israel, By this most famous S^hism, and terrible punishment
thereof al are warned to keep Order, Unity and peace within the Church of God,
and in no wise to communicate with Heretics or Schism^ticks, in the act of
Heresy or Sch^sm. Doway Annot. Mr. J. Brinsley. The arraignm. of Schism. p. 55.
that no stranger, which is not of the seed of Aaron, come near to offer
incense before the Lord, that be be not as Korah and his company. It Is
dangerous for men to preach without a Call; and it is dangerous for people to
hear such: by so doing, you give a tacit and interpretive approbation of
their exorbitancies, and so make your selves accessory to their sin. Not onley
Korah, but his companions perish with him: the earth it self, as not able, or
not willing to bear so great an evil, (as this rent, division, and separation
was) cleaves a sunder, (one division punished with another) and swallows up
some of the authors of it; fire from Heaven consuming the residue. Never such
a Judgment do we read of in all the Scriptures executed upon any sin, as
this. It Is the observation of a Pious and judicious Divine of our age, in an
excellent Tract against Separation, That private persons may become accessory
not only by yielding Maintenance or Countenance; but even by affording their
presence, in an ordinary and constant way, at such meetings, where by the open
profession and practice of Separation, there is a flag of defiance held forth
to the rest of the Churches.

I come now to the Answer which the Gifted Brethren (as they call themselves)
gave to this Argument.

First, I called for the Naylor, a public preacher, with whom I had an open
Challenge before a full Congregation, to dispute and defend what I had delivered
against private Persons public Preaching. I mention this the rather, that the
world way see I take no pleasure in disputes of this Nature; but was
constrained to defend the truth I taught.) But not a word of answer could I get
from the Naylor, with all my Hammering; ( hic nec (...) nec (...) quidem ad
rem;) he was even as dumb and deaf as a door nail: So we left him to his
Anvile, as being fitter for that then the Pulpit.

But they had gained an Achilles, T. P. and he, as soon as ever he heard of a
Syllogism, cries out, No Syllogisms, we no Logic.

I Replied, that Logic was nothing but Reason brought into Method and Form,
and therefore he could not with Reason deny it.

At last, after a many dark speeches, and Pro the sauro carpones, pro Junone
Nubem. In fr^ticoso gaudet auceps, Piscator in turbido, fur in tenebris.
Verborum ambigutate and obscuris in volucris sese occultant, ne foeditas eorum
appareat. Calvin advers. Libertin^s.
cloudy words, little or nothing to the purpose, (as the man that was shearing
his Hoggs, complained, there was a great Cry, but a little Wool) he granted
this First Argument, and acknowledged its truth. Then I proceed to a Second.

The second Argument.
If none may preach but such as are sent, 2* A Vocatione and Missione.
then every Gifted Brother may not preach.

But none may preach but such as are sent:

Ergo, every Gifted Brother may not preach.

The Minor was denied: Men might preach, though they were not sent.

I proved the contrary, Hinc pater, neminem esse audiendum, nisi legitime
mit^atur ad praedicandum a De A Lap. Smith on the Crced, p. 342.
from Romans 10. 15. How shall they preach, except they be sent? The
Interrogation is a strong Negation: q. d. They cannot preach authoritatively,
without a Mission and Commission from God. Well they may preach as Usurpers,
but not as God's Ambassadors. Hence the Lord so often reproves them for
Impostors and False Prophets, that preach without authority and sending, Ier.
14. 14. and 23. 21. and 27. 15. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they run; I
have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied. So that he is not only a False
Prophet that teaches Lies, but he also that teaches without a Commission or
Calling, (as a judicious Divine well observes) sive vera praedicet, sive falsa;
whether he preach true or false. D. Vines Sermon. against Herefies, on 2 Pet. 2.
1. p. 9, 10, etc.
The Question is not in) what he teaches, but by what warrant: it is no asking
what they teach, since they have no Calling to teach. Faith comes by hearing
a sent Preacher, and not an Intruder: and therefore Isaiah (Chap. 6. 8.) will
not stir til God give him a Commission, and bid him Go. Paul does not preach
til Christ bid him Arise and Go, Act. 9. Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 3. S. 10, 11.
Bowls Pastor Evang. p. 1. and 81. Him. Disput. p. 112.
The Father thrusts forth Laborers Matthew. 9. 38. The Son gives Pastors and
Teachers, Ephesians. 4 11. and, the Holy Ghost makes them Overseers, Act. 13. 3, 4.
and 20. 28.

Great is the presumption of those who are self-called, and make themselves
preachers: those are bolder then Zanchy in 4 Praecept. p. 652 Ames Medul. I, 1.
cap. 53.
the Priests and Prophets in the Old Testament, or Christ and his Apostles in
the New Testament; who never preached til they were sent.

This Mission implies three things. 1. Election by the Church, 2. Probation and
Examination by the Presbytery, (for, the spirit of the Prophets is subject to
the Prophets) whether sound in Doctrine, of godly Life, and apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 10. 3. A Separation by Ordination of the Presbytery, when by the
Word, and Prayer, and Imposition of hands, he has power given him to preach
the Word, and administer the Sacraments, Acts 13. 1, 2. and 14. 23. 1 Timothy 4.
14. Tit. 1. 5. So that a Divine Call or Mission to preach, must precede
Preaching: for none can preach savingly, with a good conscience, and hope of
success, unless Divinely sent and called.

Object. There is one great Objection lies against this Truth, viz. That
Gifting is Sending: all gifted persons are sent, Gifts being the seal of
Mission. Preaching is not so much an act of Office, as of Gifts. Gifts, and
Talents carry with them Letters Patents of Commission to trade with them, etc.

Answ. Gifts are one thing, and Sending is another: there are thousands It Is
not a man's able parts which makes ^im the Steward of any of your houses, but
your committing the Keys into his hand Not Abilities, but a commission, make an
Ambassador. Dr. Vines.
in the Kingdom which are gifted; yet may not, dare not Preach; Praching being
a formal act of Pastors who are sent, Romans 10. 14, 15. None may preach (though
singularly gifted) in a constituted Church without authoritative sending.
Barnabas and Saul had singular gifts, yet must be ordained notwithstanding,
Acts 13. 1, 2.

And if bare Gifts be a sufficient Call, it must of necessity follow, that all
that have gifts are called to preach: then gifted Boys must preach; as the
little Gifted Boy now at Stafford preaches Redemption against the baptizing of
Infants, etc. for now they begin to boast, that out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings their foes shall be confounded. 2. Then gifted women, Vide Rutherf.
Due Right of Presbyt. p. 269. and 273, 274, 275.
who have better gifts then many of these Preachers, must also preach (as some
of them hold and Edwards Gangraena, Part 1. p. 29. Among all the confusion and
disorder in Church Matters, both of Opiniens and ^ractices, all forts of
Mechanics taking upon them to preach and baptize; as Smiths, Tailors,
Shoo-makers, Pedlers, Weavers, etc. there are also some women^ preachers in our
times, who keep constant Lectures, preaching weekly to many men and women, both
in Lin* colnshire and London, etc.
practice) though the Apostle permit not a woman to speak in the Church, but
to keep silence.

There is one place which fully cleares this scruple, Antidote against
Lay-preaching, p. 18.
Matthew. 10. 1. 5. where Christ distinguishes Gifting of men, from
Authoritative Sending. Verse. 1. he gifts them; Verse. 5. he sends them, and
gives them their Commission, Go. We may not confound what the Word
distinguishes.

Briefly, there are two things that must concur to the making of a Minister.

First, Gifts, abilities, and qualifications both of Life and Learning, fit for
so high and holy a Calling: and these consist of many branches, as a learned
Divine of our age well observes. ^rid. Ser. Lat. p. 29.
Opus est hic intellectu tam verborum quam rerum; opus est judicio, quod
abstrusa eruat ^bscura illustret, ambigua distinguat, diversa conferat,
hyperbata (si tulerit occasio) disponat, and reponat ordinata serie. Bernard
against S^paration, p. 132.
Requiritur demum memoria and lingua, jugi excitata praxi ut praecepta
retineantur, and efferantur in bonum publicum. Ista perficiunt constant lectio,
penetrans meditatio, fida and tempestiva collatio. Perkins Treat. of calling,
p. 760. etc.


Thus you see there are more Gifts required in a Minister then the world
dreams of; Vide Autidote against Lay-preaching p. 12. 13. etc. Am^s C. G. l.
4. c. 25. Quaest. 2.
as Arts, Sciences; Latin, Greek, Hebrew; Reading, Meditation, Conference,
utterance, Memory, etc. besides Temperance, Humility, Piety, Gravity,
Mortification, Self-denial in many lawful liberties which others may take etc.

Secondly, He must have power and ld tantum possumus, quod jure possumus To
teach i^ the Church, is an act of power and authority.
authority given him from the Presbytery to exercise those Gifts: he must not
run before he is sent, but must have an Outward Call as well as an Inward, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Christ himself was sent, and he sent his disciples John 20. 21,
22, 23. As my Father has sent me, so send I you. These mysteries must be
committed only to faithful men, who are able to teach others, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
they must be Scribes instructed for the Kingdom of God, etc. Matthew 13. 52.
Antidote against Lay-preaching. p. 15. 1^.
Else, as one well observes, In tam praepostera disciplinae ruina tot essent
sensus, quot capita, tot dissensus, quot sensus, and plures procul dubio
Praedicantes loquacissimi, Pride. Orat 8.
quam Auditores humanissimi.

All Preachers are sent either by God, or by the Devil: they that cannot prove
their Call from God, may know who sends them. Al^erius esse non sunt nisi
diabol, quae Dei non sunt. Tert.
Tertullian shall tell them, What is not of God comes from the Devil. I shall
conclude this point with the words of a Dr. Vines Ser. on 2 Pet. 2. 1. p. 11.
etc.
Reverend and Learned man. It has been generally received in the Church, that
both Matter and Form, Mission and Vision, Gifts and Calling, must concur to
the constitution of him who exercises a public Ministry. For even our Lord
Jesus Christ, in whom all fullness dwells, glorified not himself to be made a
High Priest, but was The very having of learning either a quiredly or
i^^piredly, is not sufficient to authorize preaching without a special call.
Antid. ag. Lay-preaching. p. 22 etc. Though thou be able to teach thy brother,
and thy brother thee, yet neither of you ought Ministerially to do so, till
thereunto you have (as the Apostles) a specia^cal. Idem ibid.
called of God as Aaron was, Heb. 5. 45. And the rule is there given, that no
man takes (...), an honor or office to himself, whatsoever be his parts or
abilities. And the Apostle says not. How shall they (...), publicly preach
the Word. without gifts and abilities? but, except they be sent, Romans 10. 15.
It must not be denied, but that every member in the body has (...), his proper
office, Romans 12. 4, 5. whereby it may contribute to the good and edification of
the whole. The Word of God that dwells in any, ought to diffuse it self for
the benefit of others, in their families, relations, and conversations. The
talent which God has given to every one, is to be put forth to use. The
Samaritane-woman may call out her neighbors to Christ, and the Shepherds may
spread abroad what they have heard of him, though they be but shepherds, and
neither Priests nor Levites; Bell. de Eccles. Milit.
but every star in his own Orb or Sphere. Diversa est ratio membri and
instrumenti publici; there is a difference between a private member of the
Church, and a public instrument: For all the Freemen of this City or
Corporation are not Aldermen: and the edification of the body by Ministers, and
by membership, are plainly distinguished, Ephesians. 4. 11. and 16.

If every Phaeton that thinks himself able,
may drive the Chariot of the Sun, no wonder if the world be set on fire. I
should not doubt to say, that as in some cases, Omnis homo miles; against a
sudden assaulter or invader, every man is a soldier: so, as the case may be,
Omnis Christianus Evangelista; every Christian is an Evangelist; Socrates, l.
1. c. 15. 16.
as Edesius and Frumentius published the Gospel to the Indies, and the woman to
the Iberians; Theodor. l. 1. c. 23.
as the Ecclesiastical History reports, etc. Thus he.

It Is for Wolves and false Prophets to be self-called, and to come of their
own accord: True Prophets are always sent; as Moses, Isaiah, Amos, the
Levites, Christ and his Apostles, etc. but false ones John 20. 8. All that com^
before me etc.
Come; they are not Sent.

But what said the Gifted Brother to this Argument? Altum silentium! not a
word; the brightness of this truth shone so strongly in his face, that he was
fain to Face about, and desire of the Mr. Jo. Trap. These men comemeerly to
dispute not to see, or be convinced.
Reverend Moderator, that he might first urge his own Arguments, and I should
have liberty to urge mine after; which being granted him, e postico discedit,
having finished his own Arguments, he never staid to hear mine, but left his
followers (of which we had more then a good many) to shift for themselves, etc.

Goliath being non-plust, vanquished and fled, I set upon the multitude, and with
this following Argument Routed them all.

The third Argument.
If all that have gifts may preach, then all that have gifts may Baptize.

But all that have gifts (say you) may Preach:

Ergo, All that have gifts may Baptize.

Here the gifted Brethren (for I know not what else to call them: should I call
them Lay-preachers, it may be twould be offensive:) denied the sequel of the
major: For though private persons might preach as gifted men, yet none might
Baptize but Officers. And herein they agree with Mr. Robinson and the
Independents, who confess, that none may Baptize but men in Office.

To this I replied thus,

What Christ has joined together none may separate.

But Christ has joined Preaching and Baptizing: Divino praecepto intonante,
obediendum est non disputandum. Aug. Cottons Keys, p. 20. c. 5.


Therefore none may separate them.

He that has the power of Preaching, to him Christ has given the power of
Baptizing.

Q. But where say they, do you prove this?

A. I answer, Matthew. 28. 19. Go, Preach and Baptize, where, that Christ speaks
not only to the Apostles, And his way of the Churches in New England, c. 4. f.
2. p. 67.
but also to all ordinary Pastors, their successors, is clear, verse 30. Lo, I
am with you, etc. He speaks it to such Officers as were to remain in the
Church to the end of the world.

Here I called again for an answer; but the gifted Brethren wanted the gift:
They were like men in a Net; they could neither go forward nor backward, but
like Cuckowes they still sung one and the same song, viz. Though they might
Preach as gifted Brethren, yet none but men in Office might Baptize.

I Replied, If they had power to do the one, they had power to do the other;
which I proved thus.

Those that have power to do the greater work, have power to do the less.
Preaching is the great work, and Baptizing the less. Here the Apostle prefers
Preaching before Baptism, It is a harder work to Preach, then to Baptize
Infants.
1 Cor. 1. 17. Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel, (i.
e.) comparatively; not so much to Baptize, as to Preach.

Now if none may Baptize without a Call, then, a fortiori, it concludes more
strongly that none may Preach without a Call: If I may not do the less without
a Call, surely I may not do the greater uncalled.

2 See whas Vide p. 17.
absurdities follow this absurd Tenent: For, if men may Preach without a Call,
then they may Baptize without a Call; and if they may Baptize, they may deliver
the Lords Supper, and Church censures, etc.

Then gifted Boys, and gifted Women, and gifted Midwives, may Preach and
Baptize; and if all gifted persons be sent, it will necessarily follow.

I proceed now to those Arguments which I could not prosecute in public for
want of time, and by reason of Mihi est cordi Aug. illud, statui nihil de hac
^e agere cum Antagonistis nisi per literas ub^ nullus turbarum tumultus. Aug.
Tumult.

The fourth Argument. A pari.

If no Priest or Prophet might offer Sacrifice under the Law without a Call,
then ( a foriori) none may preach the Word, or deliver the Sacrament under the
Gospel without a Call.

But no man might offer Sacrifice under the Law without a Call: Ergo.

That no man might offer Sacrifice under the Law but a Priest, and one in
Office, Vide Willet in Levit. 8. Doct. 3. p. 142. Lev. 8. 31, 33. V. Pride.
Orat. 8. totaliter. Synopsis Purioris Theo. p. 563.
is clear, Exodus 28 1. Numb. 18. 22, 23. the Levites, not the Children of
Israel, must do the service of the Tabernacle. And 2 Chronicles. 23. 13. for a man
not in office to have offered Sacrifice, had been death. God is the same still,
and hates presumption now, as much as ever: and though he punish not with such
visible external judgments as he did under the Law, as stoning etc. yet he
punishes with spiritual judgments, which are sorer; as Pride,
Self-confidence, Apostacy, strong delusions, the stone in the heart, etc.

2. Preaching is as great a work, if not a greater, then Sacrificing; and the
Sacraments of the New Testament, more excellent then the Sacrifices of the Old:
hence ( A Rule. Minimum maximi, majus est maximo minimi.
Matthew. 11. 11. Christ prefers the least Minister of the Gospel before John,
because he preached Christ more fully, more clearly then he did. And if neither
Christ nor Aaron, Aaron was not only gisted inwardly, but separated and called
outwardly.
(who were so richly gifted) would take upon them the Priesthood without a
Call, Heb. 5. 4, 5. No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is
called of God, as Aaron was: so Christ glorified not himself to be made an
High Priest, but his Father calls him; he did not call himself: How great then
is the rashness and presumption of those who fraud ulently and violently
assume this Office to themselves, without an ordinary Call! It Is a note of a
False Prophet, and a Wolf, he comes without a Call, Acts 20. 29. Many creep
into the Ministry at some window or back-doore, like a thief; as Jude (verse.
4.) complains of some that were ( (...). subrepo, furtim intro.
) crept in amongst them: and 2 Timothy 3. 6. Of this sort are they that CREEP into
houses, and lead captive silly women, etc. We have many Sects now abroad,
Ranters, Seekers, Shakers, Quakers, and now Creepers, such as creep into
Pulpits, and creep to Conventicles, deceiving others, and being deceived
themselves. From such turn away. The dignity of a Minister stands in three
things: 1. that he is G^ds Ambassador: 2. that by his commission he is sent to
Gods people, who are the only worthies of the world: 3. that a great part of
the efffi^acie of the Word rests by Gods appointment upon him and his Office.
Byfield, in Col. 1.
A true Minister preaches in God's Name, by virtue of a Call from God: he
dares not teach without it. Hence Paul, to show the truth of his Apostleship,
and that he was no Impostor, often mentions his Call, Gal. 1. 1. Col. 1. 23, 25.

There are many Reasons to convince men of the necessity of a Call to this
sacred Function.

1. Reas. Without it, all their Preaching and Baptizing is a mere Nullity:
Ames C. C. l4. c. 25. Q. 7. S. 4. m^hi p. 215. To preach is the duty of a
public Offic^r, not of a g^fted Brother, It Is mere usurpation to take up a
publ^ck O^fice, not being an Officer.
As a man that usurpes the office of an Ambassador without the Princes
Commission, (though happily he may deliver his mind better then a real
Ambassador, yet) he declares but his own fancies, and not the Princes mind;
and so not only loses his labor, but also endangereth his neck for his
presumption. He cannot speak as from God, because he has no Call or Authority
from him so to do.

2. He can expect no Success, because he is not in Gods way: God will be found
of us only in his own way, and there he will protect us, Psalm. 91. Ut qui se
absque vocatione gerit pro legato ad princip^m, pro impossore hibetur: Ita qui
se absque voctione in (...) erit impostor est, imo fur and latro.
Such as have a Call from God, may expect his blessing, ass^stance, and
deliverance: and this sweetens all our sufferings. Joh. 10. 8. Par.
That we are in Gods way. The knowledge of a Call to a work, will help a man
through the difficulties of the work, (as a Bur H s. 1. 1. p. 9. 10.
sweet Divine observes:) to such that text is full of encouragement, Isa. 42. 6.
I the Lord have called thee in righteousness. What follows? I will hold thy
hand, and will keep thee, etc.

3 People cannot hear such a one with comfort and profit if they be not
persuaded that God has sent him, Romans 10. 14. Such as choose and call
themselves, labor in vain, because they have no promise of a blessang from
God: He may justly say to them, Let him that sent you, protect you; let him
that called you, bless your labors. To this agrees that of the learned Bucan.
Magna semper fec^runt, qui Deo vocante docuerunt. Lut. Buea^. loci 42. Q 33. P.
535. etc.
A Call (says he) to the Ministry is very necessary, 1. In respect of Gods
glory; 2. The honor of the Ministry: 3. for the peace and comfort of the
conscience of the Ministers themselves: 4. That the people may know they have
lawful Ministers, and so may obey their Ministry, etc.

4 God will have all things done according to that Rule and Order which himself
has prescribed. Now Gods Method and Order is this: 1. To call and separate men
for the Ministry. 2. And then Preach. The principal Call is from God; the
manifestation and declaration of it is from the Church: and such are said to be
made by the Holy Ghost, though men ordain them, Acts 20. 28. and if upon trial
they approve of thee, and bid thee Go, it is as effectual a Call, as if God from
heaven should call thee. Bell Sermon. Isa. 54.
As one of your own says of the Ministry, He that pretends to be taught
without the Word, is not taught of God, but of the Devil: So he that pretends
he is called of God, without and against the Rule of the Word, is not called of
God, but of the Devil. True, many in our days boast of the Spirit; it moves
them, it calls them, Jude 19. You have two notes of such as have not the Spirit:
They are, 1. Separatists, (...) segregantes seipsos ab eccles^^ and coetu
sidelium. A L^p.
dividing and separating themselves from the true Church of Christ, renouncing
their Communion, forsaking their Assemblies like Apostates, and so cast off
public Ordinances.

2 Sensualists, following the dictates of corrupt nature and carnal reason,
forsaking their Callings, and giving themselves up to idleness, ease, and
carnal delights, etc. These have not the Spirit, unless it be the spirit of
delusion.

The fifth Argument. Ab absurdo.

From the Absurdities which would follow, if this were once granted; though I
should be loath to dispute with these men from such a Topic: for they are men
of large swallows, and surpass the man I have read of, Qui toto devorato Bove
defecit; in cauda; who having swallowed an Ox: could not get down the tail: but
these men will swallow head, horns, and tail, skin and bones, and yet make no
bones on it. Arminianism, Socinianism, Anabaptism, etc. all goes down be it
never so rotten. Yet I shall take a little pains (if it may be) to convince them.

1 Absurdity. If bare gifts be a sufficient Call to an Office, Vide Ruther^.
Due Right of Presbyt. p. 275.
this would confound all Callings and Societies. For then Samuel, who had a
Physical and natural power to kill Agag, had a sufficient call to authorize him
to kill him. Then an ability to discharge the Office of the high Priest in a man
of the Tribe of Judah, were a good Call for one so gifted to thrust himself
into Aarons chair, which God tied only to Levies Tribe.

Then every Soldier that has a Commanders gift, may be a Commander, and a
General without a Call. Concesso uno ab^urdo, consequentur mill. Error is
prolifical: grant one, and the Dev^l will lead you to a thousand; open but one
gap in the hedge, and way is made for all the wild heasts to enter, etc.
Then he that has gifts for Magistracy, may be a Magistrate, and execute
justice on malefactors without a Call. Then a Lawyer having a Judges gift, may
step up into the Judges feat, and sentence men without a Call. And he that has
gifts to be a Parliament Man, may be a Parliament Man without a Call, etc. Et
sic in infinitum. Then farewell Magistrates, Ministers, Judges, Parliaments,
etc. If every man may execute these Offices without a Call, what need we any of
them? Austin writing upon John, tells a story of a certain man that was of an
opinion, that the Devil did make the Fly, and not God; says one to him, If the
Devil made Flies, then the Devil made Worms, and God did not make them; for
they are living creatures as well as Worms. True, said he, the Devil did make
Worms. But, said the other, If the Devil did make Worms, then he made Birds,
Beasts, Man. He granted all. Thus, says Austin, by denying God in the Fly, he
came to deny God in Man, and to deny the whole Creation.

2 Then every Gifted Boy, and every Gifted Woman, should be Preachers.

3 Then all that have Gifts to Baptize, and deliver the Lords Supper, may
Baptize and deliver the Lords Supper.

4 This would open a flood-gate to all Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies: For
in the Scriptures are many things ^ard to be understood, which many wrest (for
want of judgment) to their own destruction. We have had woeful experience of
this, since Artificers, Soldiers, Women, etc. have turned Preachers. I never
heard but one of this New Tribe of Gad, and that was a Soldier, Lieutenant
Phelps (as I remember he called himself) a Dipper, etc. (for I never yet knew
the man that had but one Error.) His Sermon was as full of errors, as a Dog is
full of Fleas: Universal Redemption, Free Will, Dipping, against Baptizing, etc.

5 Then all vainglorious Hypocrites (who think they have gifts beyond all
others) would turn Preachers: the emptiest barrels make the lowdest sound, the
worst metal the greatest noise, and the lightest ears of Corn hold their heads
highest.

6 Then the Church, which is Christ's mystical Body, would be monstrous, all
Eye, all Ear, all Head: contrary to that of the Apostle, who tells us the Church
is not one member but many, 1 Cor. 12. 14. 15. etc. And v. 28, 29. Christ has
set some (not all) in the Church Apostles. And then asks the Question, Are
all Apostles? Are all Prephets? etc. The Interrogation is a strong Negation.

7 If this be tolerated, it will make both Ministers and Ministry contemptible,
both the Preaching and the Preachers vile. 'Twas Ieroboams sin* 1 King. 13. 33.
He made of the lowest of the people Priests of the High Places: whosoever
would, be consecrated him, and ^e became a Priest. But mark what follows, v.
34. This thing became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to destroy it, and
cut it off from the face of the earth.

The toleration of such Irregularities, is not so small an Error as some
imagine.

The sixth Argument.
Every Preacher must be able (in some good measure above ordinary Christians)
not only to divide the Word aright, (2 Timothy 12. 15) soundly to interpret and
give the true sense and meaning, applying Mal. 2. 7.
the same to edification: Mat. 13. 52.
But he must be able also to convince gainsayers, Act. 18. 24, 25.
as Tit. 1. 9.

But every Gifted Tradesman, Naylor, Tailor, etc. is not able to divide the
Word aright, nor to convince a learned adversary and gainsayer:

Ergo,

The Major is clear of it self.

The Minor I prove thus:

Those that want learning both Human and Divine, cannot be sound
Interpreters, nor solid Disputants.

But most of our Gifted Artificers want Learning both Human and Divine:

Ergo.

Obj. We have the Translations (say they) and by them we can help our selves.

A. Translations are excellent helps; Mr. Ant. Burges Sermon on Mark 1. p. 18.
Dulcius ex ipso font libuntur aquae. Workman against Lay prea. p. 21, 22.
yet in regard of the Emphasis and fullness of the Original, we may say as the
Queen of S^eba did to Solomon, That which she heard was nothing to the glory
which she saw. Then came in error and superstition, when it was Heresy, or
atleast suspicion of it, to understand the Greek and Hebrew. What miserable
wrackings and rentings of Texts have come into the world, through ignorance and
want of understanding the Languages, not only in the latter, but especially in
former times, is fully declared by that Dr* Hal Cases of conscienc^. Ca. 10.
Dec. 3. p. 351. to 371.
Learned Casuist. I shall only add the Friar that would prove God made ten
Worlds, from the words of Christ, Annon december facti sunt mundi? and he that
would prove that Melchizedecke offered Salt with Bread, because he read in the
Text, Rex Salem, (i. e.) King of Peace, were Sir John Lack-Latines.

I would willingly know of such as contemn human Learning and the Languages,
how they would expound and reconcile differences in these following Texts,
without Learning.

1 How will you interpret that place, Job 1. 5. It may be my Sons have sinned,
and blessed God? So it is in the Original; Vide Caryl on Job 1. p. 7 3.
Benedixerint, non maledixerint.

A. Here Is need of Rhetoric; this is (...), an Euphemismus; when we put a
good name on a bad thing. (So 1 King. 21. 10.) The Scripture in loathing a
vice, omits its name, and sets down the contrary virtue.

2. 1 Cor. 11. 25. Hic calix est sanguis; This cup is my blood. The Cup is not
Christ's Blood.

A. Calix. i. e. vinum in calice; continens, pro re conteta. Met. subj.

3. When there is difference in Translations; Vide D. Pride. fascic. controvers*
p. 237. etc.
as Ephesians. 5. 16. the Geneva reads Redeeming the season; ours, Redeeming the
time. Which of these is most genuine?

A. The former; because the word in the Original is not (...), but (...),
opportunitas temporis, not spatium temporis.

So Ephesians. 4. 32. The Popish Translation reads it, H^c est magnum Sacramentum;
but ours, This is a great Mystery. Which is the truest? Ours, because it agrees
with the Original, (...).

The Socinians deny the Deity of the Holy Ghost, and that up on this ground,
Because he is called the gift of God.

He that is the gift of God, is not God.
But the Holy Ghost is the gift of God. Luke 11. 13.
A. Here is need of Rhetoric. Spanheim.
The Spirit is often in Scripture put for the gifts of the Spirit; D^b. 74.
Meton-effici. Qui dedit Pe^rum Piscatorem, dedit Cypriarnm Rhetorem.
So 1 Thessalonians: 5. 19. Quench not the Spirit; i. e. the gifts of the spirit.
Faith, Hope, Love. Hence, what Luke calls the Spirit; Matthew. 7. 11. calls good
things.

Thus we see how needful Arts and Languages be. Hence the holy Ghost commends
Learning in the Saints: The excellency and (...) fullness of humane Le^ruing is
fully proved by convincing A gu^^e^ts, and all objections (...), in A retius,
Probl. par. 2. p. 62. etc.
Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty both in
word and deed, Acts 7. 22. Daniel and his companions had skill in all learning
and wisdom, Dan. 1. 4, 17. Apollos was eloquent, and mighty in the Scriptures.
Paul could speak Languages more then they all; and often makes use of his
Human Learning: He cites Epimenides the Poet to convince the Cretians, Titus
1. 12. and Aratus, Acts 17. 28. Menander, 1 Cor. 15. 33. and uses Syriack and
Hebrew terms, as Abba, etc. Hence we read in Scriptures of the Schools of
the Prophets, and Colleges erected, where the Sons of the Prophets were
trained up in Learning, It Is not Phil^sophy, but the abuse of Ph^losophy, which
Paul condemns Col. 2. 8.
and studied the Laws of God, that they might be fitted to teach others; as at
Naioth, 1 Samuel 18. 19, 20. Jericho and Bethel, Schools of the Prophets, 2 King.
2. 3, 5.

How shall a man be able to preserve the Truth in its purity, V. Davenant in
l^cum
against Heretics, without Learning? How shall a man be able to Analize and
open many obscure phrases in Scripture, without Logic, Rhetoric, Tongues?
etc. as a Bowls Pastor Eya^ p. 71. etc.
Reverend Divine, in an excellent Tract, does fully declare.

Great is the pride and wantonness of this age, to tread all that Learning
under foot, Pride. Conc. 1. de Sap. Egypt. Trapp Common place Arts p. 709.
without which the knowledge of the Scripture is not to be had, upon humane
endeavors: to undervalue the abilities of a learned age, in comparison of the
boldness of Mechanic persons, in spending the mouth without sense underneath*
seems to be the wantonness of this time, for after ages to admire: But for
private persons against public Order, and the Unity of the Church* to call
Assemblies, and to exercise their pretended abilities in such Assemblies as
public Order forbids, Thorndyke of Relig. Assemb. p. 424.
is neither more nor less then Schism. Let them that do it advise at whose
door the sin of that Schism lies; as a learned man complains.

Obj. We see many private Christians of eminent parts called to the Ministry
that want the Languages, yet do much good in their places.

Ans. Many private Christians that are called to public service, by pains and
industry have gained the Languages, and some insight into the Arts, etc. and
those that want them, lament their defect (they do not contemn them as
needless and useless, but) would give much for the attaining of them; and
they reverence such as have them.

True, a man may be a Minister, and yet want these; but he is a defective and
lame one: a man is a Man, though he have but one leg, or one arm; but he is not
so complete a man as he that has two: and when he comes to wrestle with an
adversary, he finds his wants, etc.

To conclude, Arts, and Sciences are requisite for a Divine, Dithmar Ethic. p.
12. 13.
non necessitate absoluta, as if a man could attain no knowledge in Divinity
without them; sed necessitate expedientiae, and (...). Site Aquinas, Theologia
non accipit sua principia ab aliis scientiis, tanquam a superioribus; sed
utimur illis tanquam inferioribus and ancillis.

The Seventh Argument.
From the sinfulness of it.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin* Heb. 11. 6.
But whatsoever we do, if we do it not by virtue of some Command or Call, is
not of faith:
Ergo, It Is sin.
A man must have some warrant from the Word, to assure him of a Call, before he
can do it in faith. Hence Christ refuses to divide the inheritance, Luke 12.
14. Who made me a judge? q. d. 'I is not within the compass of my Calling.

Now what Command or Call our gifted Brethren have to Preach, I shall examine in
the Answers to their Objections.

The Eighth Argument.
If none may Preach but such as be ordained, then every gifted person may not
preach.

But none may preach but such as be ordained, Ruthers. Due Right of Presbyt. p
491. par. 1 Sewan's Diatrib. p. 14. 16. and 29.
Tit. 1. 5. I will that thou ordain Elders,

What need Paul leave Titus in Crete to ordain men, if every gifted brother
may preach without Ordination? Men may not run and ordain themselves; but upon
Trial, being found sufficient and fit, must be Ordained. In a constituted
Church, Ordination is always necessary. The Apostles would have none to preach
but Ordained men. They must be Elders in Office before they preach, as
appears. Acts 13. 23. Separate Barnabas and Saul for the work of the
Ministry. Acts 14. 23. and 15. 22. They ordained them Elders in every Church
with prayer and fasting, Presbyterio competit examen, ordinario and inauguratio.
1 Timothy 4. 14. and 5. 22. and 2. 22. and 1. 3. 10. And this was to continue in
the persons succeeding them for ever, as appears by the charge imposed on
Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. It must endure till the coming of Christ; which
could not be in Tymothies own person, but in his successors.

The Ninth Argument.
If no man might be an inferior Church Officer or Deacon without a Call, A
minori.
and Ordination from the Church, Then ( a fortiori) no man may be a Preacher
and superior Church Officer without a Call and Ordination.

The Antecedent is clear, from Act. 6. 2, 5, 6. Therefore the Consequent must
needs be granted.

2 If in the Commonwealth none may intrude into another Calling, but must
proceed in an orderly way, and first serve an Apprenticeship, Then much less
may any intrude into the Ministers Calling; but he must first proceed in an
orderly way, and be first qualified and fitted for it.

To this agrees that complaint of Hierome, Hieron. Epist. ad Paulinum.
That men are incapable of other Arts and Sciences without a Call; only in
Divinity, every man is bold to interpret Scripture. Sola Scripturarum est ars
quam sibi vendicant. Hanc garr^l^ anus, hanc delirus senex, hanc sophista
verbosus, hanc universi praesumunt, lacerant, docent antequam discunt, etc. The
prattling old woman, the doting old man, the brabling Sophister, and the
generality of men, tear the Scriptures, and presume to teach before they have
learned themselves. Where he does not condemn the reading of the Scripture by
all sorts, but only presumptuous ignorant reading and expounding by such as
taught before they had learned themselves. Hie^on, in Col. 3. 16. ^aici non
sufficienter, sed abundanter verbum D^ihabere debent.
For elsewhere he commends the reading of the Scriptures by Laymen, and would
have it dwell in them not only sufficiently, but abundantly. So Chrysostom. Hom. 9*
in Epist. ad Coloss. Audite seculares, comparata vobis Biblia: Ye men of the
world, get you Bibles. Read, but read with prayer, Pium and prudentem lectorem
requirit S. Scripture.
with humility, with piety, prudence, and fear. This Spiritual Word calls for a
Spiritual Reader. It Is only a gracious heart that can discern these Mysteries.

The tenth Argument.
If every man must study to be quiet, do his own work, and keep the bounds of
his proper Calling; Then private men may not be Pulpitmen.

But the Apostle commands, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. that every man (...) contendatis,
sancta sc. quadam aemulatione. B^za.
study to be quiet, yea, seek after quietness with a kind of holy emulation,
esteeming it an honor to be of a meek, quiet, calm, contented temper, and
peaceable conversation. As Basil said to the Emperors steward mis-interpreting
Scripture to defend Arrianism, as some of you do to defend Arminianism; Tuum
est pulmentum Caesari praeparare, non Evangelium exponere.
But how shall they attain this? By doing (...), our own things, i. e. that
which comes within the compass of our general or particular Calling. Hence the
Apostle condemns such as are busybodies in another man's Diocese, 1 Pet. 4.
15. Let no man suffer as a busie-body. -- Tractent Fabrilia Fabri.

Let the Naylor keep to his Hammer, the Husbandman his Plough, the Tailor to
his Shears, the Baker to his Kneading-trough, the Milner to his Toll, the
Tanner to his Hides, and the Soldier to his Arms, etc. They must not leap
from the Shop to the Pulpit, from the Army to the Ministry, from the Blue
Apron to the Black Gown, etc. But if ever men would have comfort, If thou be a
cleaver of wood, to thy w^^ge and ax^; if a hind, to thy Masters plough: but
meddle not with Gods affairs, lest he break out upon thee, and destroy thee.
Dr. Parry pref. to Ursin. Catech*
let them keep the bounds and limits of their particular Callings. God has set
every Calling its bounds, which none may pass. Superiors must govern;
Inferiors Obey, and be Governed: Ministers must study and Preach; People must
hear and obey, etc. As in an Army, the General appoints every man his place and
station; one in the Front, another in the Rear, etc. there he must abide
against the enemy; there he must live and dye: so it is in Human Societies;
the great Lord General has appointed to every man his particular Calling, and
in doing it he must live and dye.

The Apostle makes this ^lear, 1 Cor. 7. 20. Let every man abide in the same
Calling wherein he was called: every man must continue and even dwell in that
particular Function to which he is called. God abhors Ataxy, and disorderly
confounding of those Callings which he has separated.

Q. Whether a man may change his Calling?

A. He may not lightly, or for any base end of his own, change it: but if he
can find a clear and just Call, he may.

Q. But when has a man a Call?

A. 1. When he is called from one Calling to another immediately by God, as
Elisha from the Plow, Amos from the Herds, to be Prophets, etc. or immediately
by the Church of God, when upon the improvement of Gifts they are called (they
must not be their own Judges, and call themselves) by those whom Christ has
authorized, to some higher place in Church or Commonwealth. Thus he that used
the Office of a Deacon well, was promoted to the Ministry, 1 Timothy 3. 13. A
diligent man (as one well observes) stays not long in a low place. Thus a
private man may come to be a Magistrate; a Physician, a Minister, etc.

2 When the Calling that a man has will not maintain his family, then the
Artificer may either change his Calling, as the Artificer may become an
Husbandman, etc. or add another calling to his own, to support his family.
2. That he may not be burdensome to others. Thus Paul preached and made Tents,
that he might not be burdensome to the Church of God, Act. 18. 3.

Obj. If Paul kept a double Calling (say they) why may not we Nayl and Preach,
Patch and Preach, Weave and Preach? etc.

A. You may not argue ad idem: for there is a great difference between you and
Paul.

1 He had much learning, and great abilities; you have no learning, and mean
abilities.

2 He was an Apostle, had an extraordinary measure of the Spirit; had his
learning given; 1 Timothy 4. 13. 14* 15.
we gotten: He by Revelation, and inspiration, we by industry and study,
Reading, Meditation, etc. Yea Paul himself had his Parchments. Hence, in
T^mo^^y, he commands all Ministers to give attendance to reading, to
meditation, and to give himself wholly to them.

The work of the Ministry is a most laborious work, O^us vel humeris Ang^li
cis form^dancum.
(being rightly followed) insomuch that the Apostle puts a (...) on it, W^o is
sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16. Every man is not fit to be a Carver
to a King: there are many qualifications required of a Minister, 1 Timothy 3. 1.
etc. Titus 1. 5, 6, 7. Act. 20. 17, 28. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. Mal. 2. 7.

3. The work of the Ministry is a distinct Calling has dist^nct Offices and
duties belonging to it and distinct promises made to it* Vide Robinsons Plea
for Prophes. p. 1, 2.
Mat. 16. 19. and 18. 18. John 20. 21, 23. The power of the Keys is not given
to the whole Church, but one Peter and his successors, Ministers of the Gospel.

4. The Apostle labors, 1. That he might not be burdensome to the Church of
Thessalonica, which was poor 2 These. 3. 8. He takes double pains, Act. 20. 34.
2. That he might stop the mouths of the false Prophets, who would have accused
him for making advantage of the Gospel. 3. That he might be an example of
industry.

5. It Is confessed by all godly Divines, that a man may keep two Callings: if
they be subordinate and subservient one to another, furthering, not hindering
each other, and be no way offensive, but rather adorning our profession (if God
give strength and ability, and it be done out of Conscience, not Covetousness;
to advance Gods glory, not our selves; for the common good, more then our own)
we may with comfort undertake them. Antidote p. 19 etc.
Thus, to tutor and teach children, is subservient to our Ministry, and
furthers it; we enrich our selves with Arts and Languages, and benefit others.
Thus Samuel a Prophet had a School of young Prophets at Ramah, and Elisha at
Gilgal, 1 Samuel 19. 20. 2 King 4. 38.

But Baking and Preaching, Nayling and Preaching, Patching and Preaching and
that by men of little abilities, will not hold. A Minister must not entangle
himself with the affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2. 4. Christ would not meddle
with secular affairs. Luke 12. 14. Who made me a Judge? Yea* works of Humanity
must give place to Preaching, as burying the dead bidding farewell, Luke 9. 59.
because the practice of the one hindered the other. The Apostles would not
serve Tables, that they might give themselves to Prayer and Preaching, Act. 6.
4. And if we must give our selves wholly to Reading, where is the Nayling? etc.

The eleventh Argument.
They which have no promise from God of Divine assistance, cannot comfortably
or successfully undertake a work.

But private persons turning Preachers (without a Call) have no promise of
Divine assistance:

Ergo, They cannot comfortably and successfully undertake that work.

The Major is undeniable. Priorem prolixitatem b^evitate compensari.


The Minor is grounded on Mat. 28. 20. Lo, I am with you, etc. The promise is
made there to Apostles and their successors; therefore when they meet with any
opposition, they comfort themselves by their Call: God sent them, Ergo.

The the twelfth Argument.
That way which breeds disorder, Error and confusion, is not the way of God.

But toleration of private persons out of Office to expound and interpret
Scripture in public, is a way that breeds disorder, Error and confusion.

Ergo. It Is not of God.

The Major is clear from 1 Cor. 14. 33, 40. God is not the Author of confusion,
but the God of Order; and blames his people because they did not things
according to Order, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. What is a Church without Order, but a
little Hell above ground? V^i ordo nullus, horror sempite^ nus. Where Order is
wanting, it fills a Kingdom with Sedition, Confusion, Errors, Blasphemies and
Heresies. Ubi ordo dominatur, ibi splendiscit pulchritudo. Nazian.
Order is the beauty of Churches. Hence God has set an Order in the sensible
Creatures; Order in the insensible, among the Stars; Order in the Rational,
Order in Heaven; yea, there is some kind of Order in Hell; there is Beelzebub a
Prince of Devils; and some harmony, his kingdom is not divided. The Church is
never so terrible to her adversaries, as when every one in it keeps his station
and bounds which God has set him; Can^* 6. 4.
then she is terrible as an Army with Banners, as L. G. Cromwell in a Reply to
the Scots (who were troubled that men in civil employment should usurp the
calling of the Ministry) tells them, that an approbation from men has Order
in it, and may do well, etc.

2, For the Minor, that toleration of such uncalled Preachers breeds Error,
it is proved by woeful experience in this Kingdom, and in New England: Mistress
Hutchinson, under a coulourable pretext of repeating Sermons, held a weekly
exercise. whereby in a little time she had impoysoned a considerable part of
that Plantation with most dangerous and damnable Errors and Blasphemies. Hence
the Arminians, Socinians and Anabaptists plead for this, as a way to uphold
their Errors, and destroy Truth,

The Thirteenth Argument.
If the Church be Gods house and Family, then no man may presume to exercise
any Function there, without a Call from God.

But the Church is Gods House,, 1 Pet. 4. 17.

That God should rule and appoint Officers in his own house, is but reason.
Hence the Apostle tells us he was Col. 1. 23, 25.
made a Minister of the Church; but how? Not according to his own presumption,
but (...), juxta dispensationem Dei; according to the houshoud-dispensation of
God: I am made a Minister, I did not make my self. It Is little better then
Merum est sacrilegium si quis non vocatus a Deo in Domum Dei irruat. Danaeus
loci. p, 203.
Sacrilege so to do.

The fourteenth Argument.
From the Rise of it. Ab Origin.


That which springs from pride and self-conceitedness, cannot be good, ( Qualis
causa, talis effectus; an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit.)

But this kind of Preaching springs from pride and self-conceitedness: Ergo, It
cannot be good.

The Major none will deny.

The Minor is clear. That this usurpation of another man's Office without a
Call, comes from P^ide, appears by their actions: (we judge of Springs by their
streams, and of trees by their fruit:) if I see a man intrude into the judges
Seat, and take upon him the Office of a Judge without a Call, I say the man is
Proud and self-conceited.

Obj. We have Gifts; and it is no Pride to use our Gifts.

A. We must first distinguish of Gifts: some are Real; and those that have
these, are so modest and humble, that they must be thrust into the Ministry.
2. Those that have imaginary Gifts, are often most forward: it is the dry Keck and
scratching Bramble that desires the rule, Judge. 9. 15.

2. The using of Gifts is twofold; Regular or Irregular: this latter springs
from Pride.

The fifteenth Argument.
If Christ at his Ascension gave only [ some] to be Pastors and Teachers, then
all gifted men may not be Teachers.

B^t Christ at his Ascension gave only [ some] to be Pastors and Teachers,
Vine Berna^d against Separat, p. 92, 93.
Ephesians. 4 11. And 1 Cor. 22. 28, 29. He has set [some] in the Church, etc. Are
all Apostles? etc This would confound Pastors and People, Teachers and Hearers;
when Christ himself distinguishes between a righteous man (though gifted) and
a Prophet in Office, Mat. 10. 42. So that the Calling of a Minister is not
common to all, but only to some ( id est) such as Christ sends: for as all the
body is not eye, so all the body of Christ is not a Minister, whose Office is
to be in the mystical body, as the eye is in the natural.

The sixteenth Argument.
That which has neither Precept nor President, Baylies Disswasive from the
Errors of, etc. 1. part, p. 175, 176. etc.
is neither commanded not commended in the Word of God, may not be tolerated in
the Church of God. Ricraft Looking-glass, p. 11. Heb. 5. 4.


But this kind of Preaching by gifted Brethren; has neither Precept nor
President in all the Word of God:

Ergo, It may not be tolerated in the Church of God.

We never read in all the Old and New Testament of any that took this Office,
V. Synops. Pur. Theolog. p. 564.
but that he was called either Mediately or Immediately, Ordinarily or
Extraordinarily. his newfound Officer, a gifted Preacher out of Office, is not
to be found in the Bible, etc.

I have but one Argument more, and then I come to examine the proofs.

The seventeenth Argument.
From the Practice of all Reformed Churches. Forsitan hae^ aliquis (nam sunt
qu^que) parva v^cebat.


That which is condemned by all the Churches of God, and is contrary to their
Practice, ought not to be tolerated in our Church.

But this practice of private men's Preaching without a Call, is condemned by
all the Churches of God, At quae non presunt singul^, juncta juvant. Ovid.
and is contrary to their Practice. Ergo.

For the Major, that the Practice and custom of the Church of God ought to be
regarded by us, appears by that Apostolical phrase, 1 Cor. 11. 16. We have no
such custom, nor the Churches of God. And 1 Cor. 10. 32. we are forbidden
giving offense either to Jew or Gentile, or the Church of God.

For the Minor, (lest any should think that I am singular in this point, and
write out of affection more then judgment) I will call forth all Reformed
Churches, and Impannel a Jury of good old Orthodox Divines, who have witnessed
with one consent against this Newfound creature, This way cannot be offensive
to any, since it has been long since practiced by two very learned and godly
Divines, M. W. Burton in his second Sermon of the Arraignment of the man of the
earth, p. 22. and M. B^rnard Isle of Ma^^, who pro^es the lawfulness of such
pleadings, in fine lib.
the Lay-prophet.

And because I would not err, Nathan caught David by an allegory; and Christ
himself often taught by Parables.
I will proceed in a fair Legal way of trial, and will,

1. Arraign the Prisoner at the Bar, being taken captive by Sat^n.
2. I will impannel the Jury, and produce Evidence against him.
The Indictment.
Lay-Prophet, thou art here indicted, by the name of Lay-prophet of the City of
Amsterdam in the County of Babel, for that thou, contrary to the Peace of our
Sovereign Lord and Savior, his Crown and Dignity, have usurped another man's
Office, and thereby have brought Disorder, Anarchy, and Confusion into the
Church of God, together weth a Bastard-brood of Arrians* Arminians-Socinians
Anti-Trinitarians* Anti-Nomians, Anti-Sabbattarians, Anti-Scripturists,
Anabaptists, Mortalists, Familists, Separatists, Millenaries, Enthusiasts,
Seekers, Shakers, Quakers, Ranters, Libertines, Erastians, Scepticks,
Independents, etc.

J. What say thou? Art thou guilty, or not guilty?


P. Not guilty, my Lord.


J. By whom will thou be tried?


P. By the Independents, my Lord.


J. Alas, the wiser and better sort of those know no such creature, neither
will they own thee.


P. Then, my Lord, I appeal to the Sententia a non judice suo lata, nullo est
ipso jure, ut log. Iurisc^ns.
Anabaptists and Libertines.


J. These are thy l fellow prisoners, and so can be no fit Judges in this Case.


P. My Lord, if there be no Remedy; I am content to be tried by the Jury.
Testes ex ^inu non sunt admittendi, Vt loq. Iuriscons.



J. Thou have well said: thou shall have a full, a fair, and free hearing.
Crier* call the Jury.


1. Call in Reformed Churches. Vous avez Reformed Churches, A Jury against Lay
preachers.
Call the French Church.


J. What can you say against the prisoner at the Bar? V. Moulins Buckler of
Faith, p. 353, etc.



Fr. Chapter My Lord, we believe that it is not lawful for any man upon his own
authority to take upon him the Government of the Church; but that every one
ought to be admitted thereto by a lawful Election, Harm. of Cons. Engl. p. 25^.
etc.
so near as may be, and so long as the Lord gives leave, etc. And we detest
all those Fanatical spirits, who, as much as in them lie^h, desire that both
this Sacred Ministry or preaching of the Word, and Administration of the
Sacraments, were utterly abolished.


J. Call the Church of Scotland. Vous avez the Church of Scotland.


P. My Lord, I except against this Church; they are Presbyterians, and they
never prophecy good to such Prophets as we are.


J. But you will acknowledge them to be a Reformed Church?


P. Yes* my Lord.


J. You must needs; for He would often say, that Presbyterial Government (...)
Haereticorum Malleus, A hammer to ^eat down Heresies.
King James gloryed that he was King of one of the purest Churches in
Christendom. And for their Government by Presbyteries, it is the way of all
Reformed Churches, and that we are bound by Covenant to labor for, as appears
by that learned and excellent vindication of the Presbyterial Government,
published by the Ministers and Elders in London, November. 2. 1649 Where this
Government is proved to be of Divine Right, the cavils made against it fully
answered, and its excellency above the Congregational way demonstrated.
Vindication of Presb. p. 18, 19, etc.
It Is the honor of that Nation in the sight of the Nations, that by the
blessing of God on this Government, Est Ecclesiae Scoticanae privilegium rarum
prae multis, in quo ejus nomen apud oae^eros fuit celebre, q^od circiter annos
plus 54. sine Schismate, nedum Haeresi, unitatem cum puritate doctrinae
retinuerit. Synt Confess. in praef. p. 6.
they were kept Pure and Peaceable for many years together.

Since you have acknowledged it to be a Reformed Church, let us hear what you
can say against the prisoner at the Bar.


Chapter Scotl. My Lord, we allow ^one to preach with us, but Pastors and the sons
of the Pr^phets, and such who aim at the holy Ministry; and that authority
Ecclesiastical must warrant them, is clear by our Law and practice.


J. You have spoken well and to the purpose. Call the rest of the Reformed
Churches; the Church of Helvetia, Bohemia, Ausperg, etc. What can you say
against this newfound Officer?


Ref. Chapter We do all with one consent condemn all those which run of their own
accord, being neither chosen, Sent, nor ordained.


J. Are there any more? Yes, my Lord, there is the Church of England, Assembly
at Edinburgh Assembly at Glascow.
which will testify much against them.


J. What can you say against the prisoner at the Bar?


Chapter of Engl. My Lord, they have foully wronged and abused me diverse ways; See
more, Seaman, D^atrabe p. 6. Propos. 3.
they have made me loathsome in the sight of the Nations, and have broached
many destructive Errors; so that I am become a proverb and astonishment to the
Churches round about me. Whilst my sons spoke trembling and durst not usurp,
Vide Harm. of Con^es. Engl. p. 236, 246, 258, 26^, 267.
they were exalted; but since they have offended in this kind, they are dead.

1. They have offered violence to my Public Confession, Ha^. 13. 1.
where I told them that the Minister must lawfully, Harm. cons* p. 255.
duly, and orderly be preferred to that Office, and that no man has power to
wrest himself into the holy Ministry at his own pleasure. Wherefore these
persons do us the greater wrong, which have nothing so common in their mouths,
as that we do nothing orderly and comely, but all things troublesomely and
without order, and that we allow every man to be a Priest, to be a Teacher, and
to be an Interpreter of the Scriptures.


J. Can you say any more against them?


Chapter Engl. Yes, my Lord, they have broken the 23 Article, Art. 23. amongst the
39.
where I told them, that it is not lawful for any man to take upon him the
Office of public Preaching or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation
before he be lawfully called and sent to execute the same; and those we ought
to judge lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and called to this work by
men who have public Authority given to them in the Congregation, to call and
send Ministers into the Lords Vineyard.


J. This is to the purpose: Have you yet any more say?


Chapter Eng. Yes, my Lord, I have two Ordinances of Parliament against them; the
first was


April 26. 1645.
IT is this day Ordained and Declared by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, That no person be admitted to Preach, who is not Ordained a
Minister either in this or some other Reformed Church, except such as intending
the Ministry shall be allowed for the the trial of their gifts, by those who
shall be appointed thereunto by both Houses of Parliament.

It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That
this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published, and sent to Sir Tho.
Fairfax, with an earnest desire and recommendation from both Houses, that he
take care that this Ordinance may be duly observed in the Army; And that if any
shall transgress this Ordinance, that he make speedy representation thereof to
both Houses, that the ^ffenders may receive condign punishment for their
contempts, etc. So the ordin-^or Ordination, p. 2. No man ought to take upon
him the Office of ^ Minister, till he be lawfully called and ordained
thereunto, etc.


December. 31. 1646.
THe Commons assembled in Parliament do declare, That they do dislike, and will
proceed against all such persons as shall take upon them to Preach or expound
the Scriptures in any Church, or Chapel, or any other public place, except
they be ordained either here or in some other Reformed Church, as it is already
prohi^ited in an Order of both Houses of 26 of April, 1645. And likewise
against all such Ministers, or others, as shall publish or maintain by
Preaching, Writing, Printing, or any other way, any thing against, or in
derogation of Church Government which is now established by the Authority of
both Houses of Parliament; And also against all and every person or persons who
shall willingly and purposely interrupt or disturb a Preacher, who is in the
public Exercise of his Function. And all Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs,
Majors, Baylisfs, and other head-Officers of Corporations, and all Officers of
the Army, are to take notice of this Declaration, and by all lawful ways and
means to prevent offenses of this kind, and to apprehend the Offenders, and
give notice hereof to this House, that thereupon course may be speedily taken
for a due punishment to be inflicted on them.

J. Have you any more evidence besides these Ordinances, to batter the Tower of
Babel?


^h. Yes, my Lord, I have one more, and then I have done; and that is the
solemn League and Covenant.


J. Crier, call solemn League and Covenant.


Crier. Solemn League and Covenant, come in and give evidence against the
Prisoner at the Bar.


Cov. My Lord, I cannot come in.


J. No, who keeps you out?


Cov. My Lord, here is a crowd of Libertines, Anabaptists, Sectaries etc. that
hinder me.


J. Crier, make way for the Covenant to come in.


Pr. My Lord, I except against this Witness above all the rest; for it is only
a Scottish Covenant, a useless thing, like an old Almanac out of date good for
little, that is expired, and binds no longer.


J. Do you know what you say? How can you call it a Scottish covenant, when
'twas ratified, framed, sealed, and confirmed by both Kingdoms?

Secondly, For its duration; The matter of it is such, that we are bound all
the days of our lives to observe zealously and constantly against all
opposition, V Rut^erford against Tole^at. chap. 22. p. 249. etc.
etc. Art. 6. I suppose every good man thinks himself bound to preserve the
purity of Religion, to extirpate Heresy and profaneness in his place and
calling, to endeavor Reformation in himself and others, etc. not only till
our Enemies were subdued and overcome, but these are Duties to be practiced
all our days: A well grounded Covenant (and such was this) is a sure, Caryl,
Ser. (...) 9.
firm, irrevocable Act; It Is eternitati sacrum, as a very Reverend Divine
affirms.


P: But wherein have I broken the Covenant?


Cov: My Lord, he has broken me well nigh-in every branch. 1 Br: They vowed
Reformation and now they bring in Deformation; we vowed Uniformitie, and these
bring in Multiformitie; we vowed for Discipline, these hinder it.

In the 2 Branch, we vow to root up Heresy, Schism, profaneness, and
whatsoever shall be contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of godlyness, etc.
but these are Satan's Seeds-men, that sow the Tares of Error, Heresy and
profaneness in the Kingdom, etc.


J: We clearly see that all the Churches of God are against Lay-preachers; yet
for the better and fuller convincing and convicting of them, let us hear what
further Evidence you have against them.


Crier: Here Is renowned Zanchy to testify against them.


J: What is your judgment of these men?


Z: I esteem that Anabaptisticall Tenent of permitting all to teach in the
Church, Est dogma seditiosum and diabolicum, dogma Anabap^isticum de hominibus
sine discrimine permittendis functionem Eccle^iasticam suscipere, and in
Ecclesia d^cere.
to be a seditious and devilish Tenent.

Thirdly, let us hear what the learned Apollonius can say to this purpose.

My Lord, our Judgment is, that none may publicly in the Church-Assembly of
the Faithful, preach the Word of God, in the Name of Christ and of God, but
he who is sent by a Divine Calling for that work, etc. And this he testifies
to be the practice of the Belgic Church.

Fourthly, Hear Reverend Beza on 1 Cor: 14. 29, 30, 31. The Apostle speaks not
of any in the Congregation promiscuously, Zanchy in 4, Praecept. l. 1. c. 19
mihi p 702 Appolon. Engl. p. 73. and 83.
but of Prophets lawfully called to instruct the Church of God; therefore they
are not to be hearkened to, who from hence do gather that any in the Assembly
may speak in the Church, etc.


Pris: These are strangers and of another Nation; Bezala^ge Annot.
but there is no solid Divines of our own Kingdom that ever writ against us.


J: We shall clear that presently; 1 Call Renowned Perkins, a man famous both
at home and abroad, on Isay 6, Whom shall I send? thus he speaks: Perkins* 3
vol. On Isa. 6. p. 441
the Lord would teach us, that no man is to undertake this Function, unless God
call and send him; therefore here are condemned the profane fancies of the
Anabaptists, and all like them, who think that any man upon a private motion
may step forth and undertake the Duties of a Prophet, to preach and to expound,
etc.

Object: But, say they, these motions come from Gods Spirit.

Answ: Surely they can say little for themselves, who cannot say so much:
Nullus teme^e ocu^ detur re^entino cuipi ^m and extraordina^io* (...)* tui, q^o
vix qu^^ quam est in Ec^l^sia periculo^ius. B^za
. but that cannot serve their turn; for if we say Nay, but they are from the
Devil, or at least from your own vanity and pride, how can they disprove it?
And might not the Prophet have alleged this, and that with a better pretense
and color then they? yet he stays till God here call him; even so all good
Ministers are to stay Gods calling.

And mark how he concludes: These men deserve both the censure of the Church
and the Sword of the Magistrate, who dare so boldly offer and obtrude their own
fancies and dreams, as extraordinary motions of Gods Spirit: It Is a dange^ous
thing to ^ay our (...) at Gods door, and father them upon him.
Thus he.

And that I may drive this nail to the head, let us hear what the Sages of
latter times have said. 1 You shall have the Judgment of On ^oh 4. 28 p. 248.
Mr. Hildersham, the Oracle and honor of his time. A Master of a Family (says
he) when he reads a chapter in his Family, may give notes, and observe what he
learneth out of it, for his own and their instruction; yea, he may ask his
Family also what they learn and observe out of that they read (for, Rom: 15. 4.
whatsoever is written, for our learning it is written;) yet may he not take
upon him to interpret Scripture, or to teach any thing out of them to his
Family, but what he has learned from the public Ministry. Say a man have
been trained up in Schools of learning, and have never so great gifts and
fitness to exercise a public Office of the Church, yet may he not take upon
him to minister, till he first be proved, 1 Timothy: 3. 10. much less may a private
Christian take upon him to Analyze or interpret (which is the most difficult
thing, and requires most skill of any thing that belongs to the work of the
Ministry) not being approved to have such a gift.

What Qualifications he requires in a Minister, for brevities sake, I shall
refer you to his elaborate Lectures on Psalm: 51. p. 166, 167.

2 That I may leave these men without excuse, Hear what the acute Dr. Love
says in his Sermon. Isa. 21. 12. p. 10, 11, 12, etc. having showed that it is the
watchmans proper charge to watch, and no man must serve in that charge but who
is there set by God, either immediately or mediatly, etc. he shows that Laymen
may teach and instruct their Families at home, in the fundamental grounds of
Piety and Religion, such as they understand: God forbid I should open my mouth
against it; nay, let my mouth be for ever shut, when it shall not be ready to
open it self in approbation of it, and exhortation to it, etc. But for the
public charge, the Pulpit, that is the Chayr of Moses, let Nadab and Abihu
take heed how they approach unto it, there to offer up the strange fire of
their preposterous zeal, lest fire come down from heaven and so devour them,
etc. God is my witness, I speak not this out of any Spirit of Pride or
contempt of the Gifts or Persons of others, be they never so mean, much less
out of any Spirit of Envy at their parts, be they never so great.

I can say (I trust) with Moses, and in the Spirit of Moses, that is, in the
Spirit of meekness Would God that all the Lords People were Prophets and that
the Lord would put his Spirit upon them. But we must give God leave to be the
orderer of his own Ordinances, who being the God of Order, will doubtless
revenge the breach of Order; and we must take leave to call upon men to keep
their Callings, not to touch the Mount lest they die; Quam quisque norit artem;
in the fear of God let every man hold him to his Trade. Ne suitor ultra
crepidam: Let not the Tailor, instead of a Garment, cut out a Text, and it may
be with some stolen shreds patch up a Sermon; let him not mistake the Lords
Board for a Shop-board. No, let not every man as he list venture to be a
Watchman, or meddle with the Watchmans charge. Surely, if this be suffered we
shall all suffer; God will never take it at our hands. He quarrelled once,
that the meanest or lowest of the People were made Priests by Jeroboam, though
the truth is, that service was only for Calves, at the best but golden Calves.
What is it then for the meanest of the People to make themselves ministers of
God? nay, not themselves neither; Ministers of God they will be; yet neither so
made by God nor Man: it is easy then to guess from whence they come, and by
what Spirit they are led. Act. 19. 13, 1*
These are not Vigils, but Noctambulones; disturbers of the Watch, not
Watchmen; These are not led by the Spirit, but scared with Spirits: Like the
seven sons of Sceva, that without Commission would conjure out ^ll Spirits, etc.

3 Hear the judgment of reverend Dr. Seaman in his Diatrib: Propos: 4. The
practice of those in these days, who commonly Preach, and receive maintenance
for so doing, refusing or neglecting to be ordained, is not to be justified
by Scripture, or by the Doctrine of, or approved example in any of the reformed
Churches; but forbidden in their Books of Discipline, and condemned by their
Divines, as the opinion and practice of Anabaptists, Libertines, Arminians and
Socinians: and for clearing of this, he cites many Authors.


Pris: My Lord, these are Presbyterians and rigid men, and therefore I except
against their Testimony.


Judge. Had they been Sectaries, or some Ignis fatuus, some newlight-men, you
might justly have excepted against them; but since they are (as you say)
Presbyterians, that is, men that stand for Government, yea that Government
which all reformed Churches practice, and would have O^der in the Church of
God, their Testimony is so much the more solid and valid.

2. Whereas you call them rigid men, it does not appear by their speeches; they
speak the words of sobriety and truth: but the truth is, he that deals with
such rigid sharp thorns as some of you are, Sam. 23. 6, 7.
had need to be fenced with iron and the staff of a Spear.

But yet that I may leave no stone unturned, nor any means unattempted to
convince you, I shall produce the Testimonies of more moderate men, and some of
them of your own way.

1 Hear what rev^rend Mr. Greenhill says, in his elaborate Lect: on Ezekiel: 2.
3. p. 228, 229.

Christ has given Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, to be standing Officers
in the Church, and their Callings we acknowledge holy and lawful; but all
others are of humane institution, and so unholy and unwholesome for the Church.
Again, he gives gifts and graces to men, and then sends them; The Spirit
entered into Ezekiel, and then I send thee: he has the power of sending; it
depends on his will, and that is sacred; he would not put in an insufficient
or corrupt man, upon any terms; and therefore he has set Rules and Laws to
show what men he would have in those hol^ Functions, etc.

2 Hear what reverend Mr. Brinsly says in that seasonable and learned Sermon:
^ looking-glass or good women ^. 21. and 26.
as for private persons, Teaching-Bretheren (as they are called) I dare give no
allowance to the public exercise of their gift (as they call it) for which I
know no Warrant that they have either from God or Man, unless it be in case
of necessity, which (blessed be God) is not our case.

Again, private Christians, how great soever their abilities be, yet may not
exercise their gifts in a public way to the public edification of the
Church; much less may they intermeddle with the Government of the Church. What
can be more fully said to this point?

Judge: Have you any more Evidence? Yes, my L. we have one more, and that is
judicious M. Cotton.


Pris: My Lord, he is a New England man, and is of our Judgment, ( viz:) That
all gifted-Bretheren may Preach.


I: Call in Mr. Cotton: Vo^^ avez Mr. Cotton: Do you approve of these men's
Preaching? Speak out that we may hear you.


Mr. Cotton: My Lord, I have fully declared my judgment against it, in my
Treatise called the Keys of the Kingdom, p. 20. where I speak thus: Though all
might Prophecy (in the Church of Corinth, as having extraordinary gifts for
it) yet the like liberty is not allowed to them that want the like gifts. In
the Church of Israel, none besides the Priests and Levites did ordinarily
Prophecy, either in the Temple or in the Synagogues, unless they were either
furnished with extraordinary gifts of Prophecy, (as the Prophets of Israel
were) or were set apart and trained up to prepare for such a Calling. When Amos
was forbidden by the High Priest of Bethel to Prophecy at Bethel, Amos does
not allege nor plead the liberty of an Israelite to Prophecy in the holy
assemblies, but alleges only his extraordinary Calling, Amos 7. 14 15, etc.


J. Here Is Evidence sufficient. Lay-Prophet thou see thy self condemned both
by God and Man, by Friend and Foe; and therefore now I shall proceed to pass
Sentence on thee.


Crier. My Lord we desire your patience but to hear one witness more, and
then we have done.


J. Who is that?


C. It Is learned M. Ainsworth.


P. My Lord, he is a rigid Separatist, and one of our way.


J. His Testimony will be the stronger against you. what can you say, Mr.
Ainsworth, against the Prisoner at the Bar?


A. My Lord, I cannot more fitly compare him, than to Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.


J. Why, what did they?


A. Numb: 16. 3. The presumption of their own holiness, brought them to
ambition and affectation of the Priesthood, an honor which no man should take
to himself but he that is called of God, as Aaron was, Heb: 5. 4. Again, on v:
10. To usurp, affect, or seek this Office of Priesthood without the calling of
God, was a great sin against divine Order and Authority, severely punished here
in Korah and his company.


J. Have you called a full Jury? Peter Martyr on 1 Cor. 16. 15 urg^ th eight
Arguments against Laypr^aching, and answers 11. Objections.



Cr. My Lord, I think so; if please you we'll call them over.


J. Do so.


Cr. Answer to your Names. Reformed Churches, one: Zanchy, two; Apollonius,
three; Beza, four; Perkins, five; Hildersham, six; Dr. Love, seven; Dr. Seaman,
eight; Mr. Grenhill, nine; Mr. Brinsly, ten; Mr. Cotton, eleven; Mr. Ainsworth,
twelve: Good men and true.


Jury: My Lord, you have heard our evidence against the Prisoner at the Bar;
we now crave Justice against him.


J: What would you have done to him?


Jury: My Lord, Igne charitatis sunt comburendi, Luth. Dr. Cheynel, on the
^rinity, p 463. etc. Mr. Leigh Treat. of Divinity, Prologom in fine. Rutherf.
against Tolerat. p 383.
some of them offend through weakness, and are Seduced, these we would have
burnt. How? With the fire of Love; these are to be pitied, prayed for,
admonished, and all good means used to win them.

2 Others offend through wilfulness, and are Seducers; who though they be
convinced, yet will not be convinced; but walk turbulently, disorderly,
troubling both Church and State with their errors: These we would have more
severely dealt withal.


J: You have said well, and therefore I shall now proceed to Sentence.

Lay-Prophet, Thou have been indicted by the name of Lay-Prophet, for bringing
Disorder and Confusion into the Church of God; Thou have been found Guilty, and
art Condemned both by God and Man; by all Reformed Churches; by most learned
and judicious Divines, both Foreign and Domestic; by Friends and Foes: and
therefore I adjudge thee to perpetual silence, that thou no more disturb the
Peace of this Church and State, lest Justice do arrest thee.


Diluuntur Sophismata: OR, An Answer to all the Cavils, Scruples, Scriptures,
Objections and Arguments, which are brought in defense of Lay-Preachers.
The first Objection.
GENESIS 18. 19. The Lord commends Abraham for teaching his Family: Ergo, Private
persons may be Preachers: (This was a long Cutlers Argument; and it is like
their Logic.)

Answ. The Answer is easy: it is one thing to instruct ones Family, and another
thing to Preach: a private Person that has Gifts, may use them in the teaching
of his Family the way of the Lord, (as Abraham did) because he is commanded so
to do; but he has no command for Preaching. This is all that can be gathered
out of this place, as appears by our large Annotations on the place. That which
is here said of Abraham, should be done by every father of a Family, who is so
Religiously to order his household, as to make it like unto a Church, etc.

2 Should we grant that Abraham did teach publicly, Abraham wa^ a King, a
Prie^ a Prophet in (...) own Fam^ly. Dr. Cheyne^ Ser. on Genesis 1. p. 1. 1.
yet it will not be any advantage to you; for Abraham was one of the
Patriarchs, and so was called by God immediately; for the Patriarchs were the
Prophets and Teachers of their age, and the Lord for that end prolonged their
lives, that they might be lights of the World. Besides, Abraham is expressly
called a Prophet, Genesis 20. 7. Which title is never given to a mere private man,
in all the Scripture, but only to one in Office.

Now let us see how this hangs together: Because Abraham (who was a man that had
singular familiarity with God, was a Patriarch, a Prophet, and one immediately
called by God) did teach: Therefore, every Naylor, Tailor, Artificer, etc. that
is neither Patriarch, Prophet, nor has any Call either Mediate or Immediate,
may be a Preacher.

The second Objection.
From Numb: 11. 25. to 30. Eldad and Medad Prophesied; Vide Robinson against
Yates, p. 34 etc.
and Moses wishes that all the Lords people were Prophets: Ergo, All that have
Gifts may Prophecy and Preach.

Answ: Ainsworth on Numb. 11 25. Subter^ugere conantes illud ^nus, in lucom
protracti f^erunt per signum, miraculosum, atque ita ad illud munus vocat i
atque constituti sun^. piscat. fuit do number temporale. V. caiv in loco.
1 If the prophesying of the seventy Elders were extraordinary, then it will
not any way help you, who are to walk in an ordinary way; but that their
prophesying (what ever it were) was extraordinary, is confessed on all sides;
even Mr. Robinson grants it; and M. Ainsworth acknowledges it to have been a
temporary Gift and Miracle, for confirmation of their Office, and continued but
for that day, as Saul's did, 1 Samuel: 10. 6, 11. So then they Prophesied by an
extraordinary instinct and impulsion of the Spirit, who both Gifted them and
Called them.

Now let our gifted-Artificers show us how they are endowed (as these were)
with an extraordinary Spirit of Prophecy, and we shall be so far from
envying them, that we shall gladly hear them. But alas, we find that instead
of an extraordinary Spirit of Prophecy, they are led by an ordinary Spirit of
delusion, etc.

2 The Spirit of Prophecy here spoken of, was a Spirit of Government, as
appears by the context, verse 16. 17. Moses being not able to bear the burden
of government alone, the Lord sen^s him helpers, seventy Elders, men furnished
with his Spirit; these the Lord Calls extraordinarily to assist Moses in the
work of government: hence the Lord takes of Non idem numero, sed specie, i. e.
aliquid spirhul ^uo simile pr^^ucam. A Lap. Trapp in locum (...) Prophetasse,
aliquid de eo q^. (...) ebat ad gub^^nati (...) p^li and ex instincta dei
lauds Dei (...). Lap.
the Spirit of Moses, and gives to these seventy Judges; i. e. the Lord gave
the same of wisdom and judgment to them, as he did to Moses: This done they
Prophecy verse: 25, id est, they publish Gods praises, and have a Spirit of
government put upon them, whereby they utter prudential things concerning the
government of the people: for, as an acute Commentator observes, they
Prophesied, nec praedicendo, nec praedicando; but by uttering grave and wise
sentences, Apothegms or couns^ls (as Moses did) concerning the public affairs
of Israel; by political and prudential speaking of things ap e^tay^ing to
Government: So that this is not meant of salvifical teaching others, but a
political discoursing unto others: Thus he.

This Spirit of Prophecy did include five things, as a Lapide observes: 1
Prudentiam regendi. 2 Doctrinam and cons^^ium ad dubia tam juris and justitiae,
quam ceremoniarum and religionis, aliaque quael^^et resolvenda. 3 Occultorum
cognitionem ad decidendas lices and causas occultas. 4 Propriae fu^urorum
praenotionem, ad ea vel accersenda, vel praecavenda and arcenda a populo. 5 Dei
lauds and hymnos, u^ Saul dici^ur Prophetasse, cum quasi Enthusiasmo actus Dei
lauds cecinit, 1 Samuel 10.

3 Moses his wish is not that all might Preach; but that God would give his
People his Spirit, that they might be able to rule: q. d. Oh that the Lords
People had a Spirit of Government put upon them, that so they might know how to
behave themselves toward their God, and toward those seventy Elders which the
Lord had extraordinarily designed for that purpose! Neither does he simply
desire that all might Prophecy, but that all were Prophets, i. e. gifted and
called for such employment: so that his wish implies that none might Prophecy
till they are Prophets and men in Office; so that this place, take it which way
you pl^ase, makes against Lay^mens Preaching. As first, because those that were
called extraordinarily, did Prophecy, Ergo, Such as are not called ordinarily
may Preach. Secondly, Because the Lord gave a Spirit of Government to these
seventy, that they might be able to utter Prudentiall sayings, Ergo, Artificers
may Preach. Thirdly, Because Moses wishes that all the Lords People were
Prophets, i. e. men in Office, and so might Prophecy, Ergo, Laymen who never
were called to be Prophets, might Prophecy, etc. These things hang together
tanquam arena sine calce, like ropes of sand; and come as near together as St.
Germans Lips, which were nine miles asunder.

The third Objection.
From 2 Chronicles: 17. 7, 8, 9. and 2 Chronicles: 19. 6. to 11. and 29. 45, etc. Here
(says Mr. Robinson against Yates, p. 38.) are most pithy and excellent Sermons
of King Jehosaphat and Hezekiah, both to the Judges and the Levies. Besides he
sent his Princes to teach in the Cities of Judah. Now if Jehosaphat and his
Princes taught* (who were not men in Office) then private gifted persons may
also teach, though they be not called, nor in Office.

Answ: I shall white two Walls with one Brush, and answer to both these
Objections under one head. Una fidelia duos parietes dealbalo.


1 A: As I did before, page: 5. distinguish of Preachig so I must now of
Teaching.

Teaching in Scripture is taken two ways. 1 Sometimes largly for a Fathers
teaching of his Children, a Master his Servants: thus Gen: 18. 19. Abraham
teaches his Family; and the Lord commands Fathers to teach their Children,
Deuteronomy: 4. 10. and 6. 7. and 11. 19. Thus Kings and Princes are to teach their
inferiors, by quickening them, and exhorting them to do their Duties in their
places thus Judges at an Assize exhort both Pastors and People to live quietly
and Godlily in their particular callings; yet this is not Preaching properly so
called: for all Teaching is not P^eaching; (...)
a Master teaches his Scholar, and a Father his Child yet does not Preach.
Thus Iehosaphat makes a general exhortation to the Judges and Levites, to be
faithful in the discharge of their Places as Judges on the Bench use to do;
yet this is not Preaching, neither is it so called: read but the Text, and it
will clear it self, 2 Chronicles: 19. 6, 7. Iehosaphat 1 Exhorts the Judges to be
impartial and sin^^ere: v: 8, 9, 10. He exhorts the Levites to fidelity and
sincerity; to this end he sets up a Presbytery and appeals, v: 10, 11. For in
Jerusalem they had a high State or Council of Sanedrim, to which all appeals
were made from inferior Courts, and to which all causes of difficulty were
referred, both for Ecclesiastical and Civil affairs: a notable place against
Independency.

Thus did the Princes teach: they did not take upon them to be expounders of
the Law, or usurp the Priests Office; they did not Preach Sermon-wise, or in
the same manner as the Levites did: else why does Iehosaphat send Levites to
teach the Word of the Lord, if the Princes might or could have supplied their
Office?

2 Take Teaching strictly for a Pastoral act, and so none but Priests, If
Kings and Princes might be Pastors and Teache^s, they should be Papes to carry
both Swords, temporal^ and spiritual. to all. Ruth. We may not so expound
Scri^^ure* as to make (...) contradict it self, or to con^ound distinct
^allings. Amiae semper Scripturarumlites.
Levites and Prophets may Teach: and thus the Levites are said to Teach, v: 8,
9. And they i. e. the Priests and Levites, which Iehosaphat sent, taught the
People; How? Not as the Princes in a general exhortation, but, v: 9. they have
the Book of the Law of the Lord with them; It they expound, and out of it they
teach the People: And see two excellent fruits and effects of their Teaching,
v: 10. The fear of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms round about, so that
they made no War against Iehosaphat. Oh that Magistrates would promote the
Ministry! this would be a means to preserve our Peace, and free us from the
fear of Enemies. 2. Exalting and encouraging a faithful Ministry, is a means
to bless and increase our temporalls, v: 12, And Iehosaphat waxed great
exceedingly, and built Castles and Cities of stone: he had Riches in abundance.

We must distinguish between Regal Teaching and Ministerial Teaching. Kings
teach in a civil, coactive, commanding way: but Pastors in a Ministerial
Pastoral way, as men in Office.

3. The Princes teach Efficienter, i. e. by causing the Levites to do their
duty. He set Princes to teach, i. e. to see the people taught, says a Reverend
Divine; Hildersham (...), Joh. 4 p 247 V. Large Annot. on Bible. Princ pum
illorum officium non erat docere: sed id intelligendum est de procuratione
docendiqua procurabant u^ d^cerent Levitae* sua praesenti^ authoritatem illis
conciliantes apud populum, cum que ad illos audi^ndos coh^rtantes.
Formaliter, they taught not by themselves in their own persons (for Magistracy
and Minestery are two distinct Callings, and have distinct duties, upon which
there must be no encroachments; yet one may be helpful to another, in suo
genere, for the good of both) but by the Levites, who expounded the Law, the
Princes only accompanied them, and by their civil authority did countenance
and assist them in preaching: now it is a rule Quod quis per alium facit id per
se facere videtur; What I command my servant to do I am said to do my self.
So Christ is said to baptize, but 'twas by his Disciples; ^or he baptized none
himself, Ioh: 4. 1. Hence Iunius in loc. reads it thus: Shalac lesarau; Misit
cum praefectis suis Levitas ad docendum: Iehosaphat sent with his Princes
Levites to teach; he sent them to take care that the Levites should do their
Office in that time of Apostacy.

4 I answer by way of Concession; Dato, sed non concesso: suppose we should
give you that which we do not grant you; viz. That the Princes did Preach;
Piscat. in loc.
yet here is a vast difference between them and our gifted-brethren: V Rutherf.
for,

1 These Princes were sent to teach, Due Right of p. 282. etc.
by the Magistrates command, but our Iehosaphats have by many Acts and
Ordinances prohibited our gifted-Brethrens preaching.


2 These were Princes, and so men of choice breeding, of rare abilities, able
to teach: what is this to our Naylors, Tailors, etc. who have no such breeding
nor abilities.

3 They had Levites to join with them, who were men in Office: But you (many of
you) scorn at Ministers, nickname them, and revile them. as Antichristian,
Baals-Priests, Legalists, troublers of Israel, their Calling Antichristian, V.
Rathbard. against Sepa^at. p. 68 V. Col^iers (...) books against both Trinity
Ministry.
and their maintenance Antichristian, etc. here is convitiorum plaustra, whole
loads. Let such know that Christ takes the indignities done to his Ambassadors
as done to himself: He that despises you, despises me: We are often commanded
to love our Ministers, yea to have them in singular love, to count them worthy
of double honor, not to rebuke an Elder, but to entreat him as a Father, 1 Timothy: 5. 1. And the Lord gives a special caveat, that we take heed that we
forsake not the Levite as long as we live upon the Earth, Deuteronomy: 12. 19. How
contrary to these Precepts do many in our times walk, who hate not so much
the person as the Function; and rail upon us not for personal failings, but
because we are Ministers: Let such learn of those Princes to countenance and
assist the Levites, if they would prosper.

4 Admit they did Preach, (...)
yet 'twas but once, and that in a time of extraordinary reformation, when the
Church was in a collapsed condition, and the People fell to Idolatry.

Now let us gather up all, and see what wild conclusions our opposites draw from
hence.

1 Because Kings and Judges may exhort Magistrates and Ministers to do their
duties Ergo Lay^men may Preach.

2 Because Princes go with the Levites, to countenance and assist them, Engo*
Gifted-brethren may go against Levites, to ruin and overthrow them.

3 Because Princes teach in a collapsed Church, when the People were fallen to
Idolatry, Ergo, Lay-Prophets may teach in a constituted Church, where all the
rags and relics of Idolatry are ruined.

These are Arguments a baculo ad angulum: Because my staff stands in the
corner, Ergo,'twill rain to morrow, etc.

The fourth Objection.
From 1 Samuel: 10. 5, 6. Saul did Prophecy and his servants did Prophecy, 1 Samuel 19. 20, 21.

Answ. This was extaordinary, as being a supernatural work of the Spirit* and
not an Office: (...)
Saul by the instinct of the Spirit prayseth God, and thereby was confirmed in
his Kingly Calling; and for confirmation of him in that Office the Spirit of
the Lord came upon him; and so his servants for a time were transported with
divine raptures, as in an ecstasy, and joined with the sons of the Prophets in
pra^sing God with Psalms and Songs* and speaking of Divine matters; and were so
transported with a Spirit of Prophecy, like the Prophets, that they forgot
their business, which was to take David.

Here Is no Preaching to others* no usurping the Levites Office; but all
extraordinary; which makes nothing for your usurped Ordinary Teaching.

The fifth Objection.
The example of Elisha called from the Plough, 1 King 19. 19. And Amos (chap.
7. 14. 15.) from the Stalls.

Answ: These were called extraordinarily, Extraordinarium non facit regulam
commun^m.
and showed it by their extraordinary gifts in the discharge of their places
and Callings; and therefore Amos when he was forbid to Preach, does not plead
that he was a Gifted-man, ^^can loci, p. 340. etc.
but pleades and proves his extraordinary Call, and that he was sent of God to
Preach his Word, Amos 7. 15. V. Owen Duty of pastors and People, p. 33. 34, etc.
The Lord took me as I followed the Flock, and bid me go, Prophecy; I did
not runn on my own Head, nor Call my self, but the Lord gave me my
Commission.

A sixth Objection.
Joel 2. 28. Where the Lord promises in the Gospel t^mes to pour out his
Spirit upon all flesh, and their sons and daughters should Prophecy, etc. And
Isa: 54. 13. All thy children shall be taught of God, Jer: 31. 33, 34. Joh: 6.
45.

Answ: The Scripture is the best Interpreter of it self; and one place,
compared, Optimus interpres seriptura^^st scriptura.
helps to illustrate another: If we look into Acts 2. 16, 17, 18. it will
illustrate this place; there Luke applies this Text in Joel to the days of the
Messiah, P^ophet a ^ic donum h^guarum, ali^qu^^^ SS charisma^^ significat.
(...) Lap.
when Christ should p^ur out his Spirit abundantly, and that upon all sorts of
People, without distinction of Nations, or conditions of Persons, be they never
so mean, never so low and contemptible, be they sons or servants, male or
female, bond or free, rich or poor, Jews or Gentiles: Yet I will pour on them,
says God, and that abundantly, not only Dona gratis data, common gifts, as the
gift of Tongues and Languages, the gift of working Miracles, the Spirit of
Prophecy and Divine revelation, whereby they shall be able ex tempore,
without study, to expound prophetic Scripture, and foretell things to come, as
Agabus did, and the four daughters of Philip; Their old men by divine Dreams
should foretell things to come, and their young men should see Divine and
Prophetic Visions, etc. Acts 19. 6. and 21. 9. 1 cor: 14.

But I will also give them Dona gratum facientia, my special Grace, as the
Spirit of illumination, Sanctification, Regeneration, Faith, Love, Obedience; I
will teach all Believers, all my Elect, of what Age, Sex or condition soever,
this precious and more excellent way.

This Promise was fullfilled initially, and in part, See this more fully
cleared in that clear little T^act* Antidor. against Lay Preach. p. 22.
Acts 2. 11, 17. when at the Feast of Pentecost, Christ did pour out the Spirit
abundantly on the Apostles, and they spoke variety of Languages; but it is now
fulfilled in all the elect, to whom God gives his Spirit abundantly, yet with
this difference; formerly, they had extraordinary gifts of the Spirit; but now,
ordinary.

So then we see these words are only a promise, but no precept for
Lay-preaching: Now to argue thus; Because in the Primitive times God endowed
Believers with an extraordinary measure of the Spirit; so that they could
Prophecy ex tempore; therefore men that want now this extraordinary gift may
turn Preachers.

2 Because the Lord promises to bless his People, not only with temporal but
Spiritual blessings, Ergo, They must all Preach and use their gifts in public.

3 Because the Lord promises to pour his Spirit on his handmaids (they did
Prophecy and foretell things to come in the Primitive times) therefore women
(who are forbidden yet) now may Preach, etc. This is Naylors, Logic and smells
very strong of the Anvile.

As for these promises, Ier: 31. 34, etc. the sum of them is but thus much,
viz. that in the days of the Gospel, Gods people shall by his Spirit have a
more full and clear unders^anding of divine Mysteries, that there shall not
need so much labor in teaching them, as formerly with little fruit: for now
they shall all be taught of God.

Allegations out of the New Testament for Lay-Preaching, Answered.
The first Allegation.
FRom the example of Christ: If he disputed in the Temple, and preached in the
Synagogues without a Call: R^ binson ag. (...). p. 38.
then Laymen, that have gifts, may likewise preach without a Call: and this is
the Argum^nt of their Achilles; If it were (says he) the received order in
Israel, of old, for men out of Office, to speak and teach in public, how was
Jesus the son of Mary admitted to dispute in the Temple with the Doctors, Luke
2. 42, 46. and to teach and preach in the Synagogues so commonly as he did?
Matthew. 9. 35. Luke 4. 16, 17.

Answ: All Christ's actions are not for our imitation; he did many things which
we may not, Vivendum est ^egibu^, non (...) Weems. ^^^ewith Syn. ^art 1. p.
266.
cannot do; we must live by Rules, and be led by them, and not follow any
ones example against or besides the Rule; for that which was lawful in Christ
to do, may be unlawful in us.

2. It Is true Christ disputed with the Doctors at twelve years old, but he did
not preach to them. Disputing is one thing and Preaching is another.

3 Christ was called extraordinarily, and sent by his Father to Preach glad
tidings to the meek. H^e pro^sus ex^r^ordinarium ^uit. Beza ^nnot. Maj. in 1
Cor. 14. 29. V. Beza in loc.
Ioh: 20. 21. As my Father sent me: (who sends our Lay-Prophets, I have told
you before;) and the People took him for a Teacher sent of God; for it was a
faishion amongst the Jews (as reverend Diodate on the place observes) that if
any one did come to their Ecclesiastical meetings, who was known to have some
gift of understanding in the holy Scripture, Joh. 3. 2. we know that thou art
a Teacher come from God, etc.
which was read every Sabbath day, Act: 13. 27. and 15. 21. they would entreat
him to make them partakers of it for their common Edification. So that it
appears that the People took him for a Prophet, a famous Prophet.

Luk: 4. 14. 15. Galilae and alij, propter doctrinam and miracula caeperun^
p^aeclare, h^norific^ seu gl^riose de ipso se^tire and I^qui, magnam ip si
(...) tribuere, ac cum revetentia in singul^ri honor ipsem habere.
There went out a fame of him through all the Regions round about, and he
taught in their Synagogues, being glorified of all, both for his Doctrine and
his Miracles; and this was the ground of that liberty granted him in the
Synagogue.

Now let our Artificers and Lay-Prophets show such a life, such Doctrine, such
Miracles as Christ, and I know no man will envy their Teaching.

4 The Question still will be, whether Christ ta^ght publicly before he was
thirty, and before he was baptized, or after? The most received and approved
opinion is, that he did not observe this custom of public Preaching in the
Synagogues, till the time of his Ministry, Ioh: 18. 20 This the Learned gather
from Luke 4. 14. that Jesus (after his Baptism) returned in the power of the
Spirit to preach in Galilee, Chemnit. in loc. etc. p. 451.
(...), (i. e.) in potentia, robore, vi spiritus q. d. Jesus a baptizmo potenti
impulsu Spiritus S. reversus est in Galilaeam, etc. ^ Lap. And it is improbable
that Christ would Preach all these Sermons from Matthew: V. A Lap. in Luc. 4. 61.
4. to Matthew: 13. before he entered on the Ministry (which they must grant
that hold this opinion: Stella in Luci 4. p. 151.
) for he Preached at Capernaum and Galilee, and the places adjacent, and after
comes to Nazareth, Matthew: 13. 54. Luk: 4. 16. he was bred there, and so his
low and private kind of life being known to them, he comes last to them.

5 Let us grant it, Rutherf. Due right, p 286. Gal. 6. 16. (...).
that 'twas the practice of the Jewish Church to admit all gifted Artificers,
etc. to Preach; yet this corrupt and irregular practice of theirs, can be no
president to us, who are to walk by Rule, and the Canon of the word, and not by
such disordered examples.

The second Allegation.
Secondly, Robinsons Pl^a, p. 39.
They allege the example of the Apostles, Mat: 10. 1, 5, 6, who Preached
before they were sent; and the 70 Disciples Preach, yet were not men in Office,
Luke 10.

Answ: The Apostles were men in Office and not Lay-Preachers. 1 They had their
Call from the first election of Christ. 2 They had Commission from him before
his Resurrection: Matthew: 10. 7. he gives them power; v: 5, 16. he sends them
and commands to go. True, they had a larger Commission granted after Christ's
resurrection; then it is Go to all Nations, Matthew: 28. 19. before 'twas, Rather
go to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel; they had a further confirmation
after, and greater measure of Gods Spirit to lead them into all truth; As a
Justice of Peace may be put into Office, and yet receive a further
confirmation; yea, See this point mo^e ^ully debated by R^ve ^end Mr. (...). p.
^87, etc.
and a greater means to perform his place.

3 Christ calls them Apostles before his resurrection, Matthew: 10. 2. Now the
names of the twelve Apostles were these.

4 The power of the Keys was committed to them, both Doctrine and Discipline,
Ioh: 20. 23.

5 Which strikes the nayl dead, ^oh. 42.
They had power to Baptize, which no man out of O^fice has, our Brethren
themselves being Judges.

2 That the 70 Disciples were Pastors in Office, is clear, Luk: 10. Christ
appointed other seventy also and sent them out: As he had before sent forth
the twelve, (...), de^igno, (...), and constituo, (...) eigh.
now also he sends forth these, and Satan falls like Lightning before their
powerful Preaching, v: 17, 18. So that Ch^ists appointing these was a
designation to a public Office, as the Original signifies, V. Leigh's
comment (...) N T Luk 10. (...) Ruthe^f. p. ^^2.
a creating and ordering of them, as that pious and industrious Critic, to
whom the Church of God owes very much, has well observed.

The third Allegation.
Obj: The Scribes and Pharisees were not Pastors in Office, yet they Preached,
Ergo, private-gifted. Brethren may Preach.

A^s^: (...)
You do w^ll to rank your selves amongst Scribes and Pharisees* l^ke Lettice,
like Lips; R^m acu tetigistis; you have hit the nayl on the head: since you can
have no help from true Apostles, now you flee to false ones. This is Petitio
principii, a beggarly begging of that which is to be proved.

1. You must prove that the Scribes and Pharisees were not Pastors in Office.
So we did (say you) at the Disputation, thus: All Priests were to be of the
Tribe of Levi. But the Scribes and Pharisees were not of the Tribe of Levi:
Ergo, they were not Priests, and so by consequence not men in Office.

A. We desired you to prove your minor, viz. That the Scribes and Pharisees
were not of the Tribe of Levi; which you did, thus:

Paul was a Pharisee, but not of the Tribe of Levi: Ergo no Pharisees were of
the Tribe of Levi.

A. We replied, that this was but one particular instance, and so could not
make a rule, no more then one Swallow can make a Spring: besides you were told,
A particulari ad universale non valet consequentia; because one man is blind,
ergo all men are blind; because one Lay-Preacher is a Caviller, ergo all are
Cavillers; because one nayling Preacher is ignorant, ergo all are ignorant,
etc. This was your Bakers Logic, and it savours of the Peel.

But to clear this doubt, Multi ex Scribis and Pharisaeis erant Sacerdotes vel
Levitae. A Lap.
I shall give you one place that plainly proves the Pharisees to be Priests and
Levites, Ioh. 2. 19. compared with v. 24. The Jews sent Priests and Levites
from Jerusalem: and who were they? v. 24. They that were sent, were of the
Pharisees* So then you see they were Pharisees, Per cathedram Meton. intelligi^
honorem, gradum, dignitatem, auctoritatem docendi and jubendi, quam apud
Judaeos habuit Moses, quam Scribae Mosen acceperint.
yet of the Tribe of Levi.

2. Giving* though not granting, that they were not of the Tribe of Levi, yet
that they were not bare gifted men, but Preachers in Office, is clear, Mat. 23.

Secondly, They sit in Moses Chayr, (i. e.) had the ordinary Office of Teaching
the people committed to them: they were Doctors of the Law; and Christ bids the
people, Hear them.

3. The Priests were to be of the Tribe of Levi, but the Scribes and Pharisees
were Prophets; and these might be of any Tribe, as Ieremah was, and other
extraordinary Prophets. A Lap.


The fourth Allegation.
Acts 7. Stephen being a Deacon, and no Pastor in Office, yet Preached, Ergo,
un-officed men may preach.

Answ. We must distinguish of Deacons: 1. Some were called extraordinarily, as
Philip, Acts 8. who was an Evangelist, Acts 21. 8. he was not self-called, but
by a special Commission from the Spirit he goes from Jerusalem to Samaria* and
thence called by an Angel to instruct and baptize the Eunuch. An Angel calls
Philip, but these men want men and Angels to bring them in.

2. Others were called Ordinarily, Diaconi been fungentes Officio acquirunt
libertatem and auct^ritatem, ut bomines etiam potentes non curent: sed libere
^a quae fides Christi exigit, profit. antur, doceant, arguant and proficiant.
A Lap.
when by improving their talent, the Church had experience of their industry,
ability, and piety, they were promoted to be Pastors, 1 Timothy 3. 13. They that
have used the Office of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good degree;
that is, they make themselves fit and worthy to be promoted to higher degrees
in the Churches service.

3. Stephen's was no Sermon; but being accused of blasphemy, he makes an
Apologetical Oration for himself, and a Confession of the Faith before his
persecutors: and if this be Preaching* then those women-Martyrs in Queen Mary's
time that did confess and profess the Truth before their adversaries were
Preachers.

The fifth Allegation.
Act. 8. 4. They that were scater'd abroad went everywhere Preaching the Word.
Robinson, p. 46, etc.
Hence they gather that all that can may Preach.

These were not the Apostles (say they:) for ver. 1. They stayed at Jerusalem,
Ergo, They were private Christians that did Preach. Hence the Socinians gather
that Vocation and Ordination are needless; because they do not read that these
were sent or ordained.

This is that (...), their Argumentum decumanum, nodus decumanus, their
Achilles invincibilis, See more fully on ^^is, T. Workman against Lay-preach.
p. 9, 10. ^ Antidote, p. 38, etc.
their strong hold; which being pulled down they are left naked.

A. This is a non sequitur: Because they that were dispersed preached, Ergo,
All that can may Preach.

For, 1. It cannot be proved that all these dispersed were private m^n out of
Office: Seaman Diatrib. Preface. Argumentum ab authoritate negante, sed non ab
authoritate negativa, valet in Theologicis. Ut, non meminit hujus rei
Scriptura, ergo non est admittenda. Pride.
Philip was one of these scattered and dispersed ones, who was an Evangelist,
v. 5. etc. therefore they were not all private men: there were besides the
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and the seventy Disciples; they might be some
of these, and not private professors.

2. The Apostles might give them a Commission to Preach when they went thence,
Act. 15. 22, 23.

Obj. The Text does not say so.

A. Ab authoritate negative, nihil concluditur. Arguments drawn from silent
authority, conclude nothing. We do not read of Adams Faith or Repentance; it
does not therefore follow that he had no Faith and Repentance. We do not read
of his Sacrificing, observing the Sabbath, or performing any pious exercise;
yet we cannot in the judgment of Charity conclude that he omitted these
things. We read of no Parents that Melchizedek had; it does not therefore
follow he had none, etc.

3. Did not the Lord give them Commission by immediate revelation, giving them
the spirit of Prophecy, and so calling them extraordinarily (as he did many in
those Primitive times?) This I think I can prove from the Text: and if so, you
are gone: for extraordinary examples make no ordinary Rules. Though God permit
the Israelites to rob the Egyptians, yet I may not steal.

1. I prove their extraordinary Call, Ex^raordinar^am vocationem non temere
damnant Apostoli, sed ex effectis judicant. Beza Piscat.
by the extraordinary Effects of their Preaching, Acts 11. 21. And the Hand of
the Lord was with them* and a great number believed and turned to the Lord. 1.
The Hand of the Lord was with them, as it was wont to be with extraordinary
gifted Prophets. Thus the Scripture usually speaks of the Prophets. 2 King. 3.
15, Thus, the hand of the Lord came upon Elisha; i. e. the Spirit of Prophecy.
So Ezekiel. 3. 14. The hand of the Lord was strong with me. Rutherf. Due Right, p.
293, etc.
Luke 1. 66. and 5. 17, by the hand of the Lord is meant the mighty power and
assistance of God in miracles, and inward working in the hearers accompanying
their Ministry. Manus est Symbolum energiae, index rei, and instrumentum
operationis. Vide Greenhil in loc.
So Deod. large Annot. Chrysostom. Oecum. and a Lap. Deus sua potenti manu aderat
eis ad faciendum miracula in confirmationem fidei, ad praedicandum tant a
sapientia and efficacia, ut multos Gentiles converterent ad Christum.

2. The extraordinary number of converts, Perk. 1 Vol. p. 761.
their great and quick harvest, shows more then ordinary assistance. To this
assents Reverend Perkins. Some (says he) the Lord calls by special instinct*
and extraordinary Singulari Dei impulsa hoc factum. Call.
inspiration of the Spirit. The dispersed preached without any outward Call, no
doubt by the instinct of the holy Ghost as appears, in that the Hand of God was
with them. And whereas false Prophets often plead an extraordinary Call, he sets
down marks, by which we may discern their Illusions from Gods Call. I.
Extraordinary Calling never takes place, but when Ordinary calling fails; and
that is at two times especially: 1. In the founding and planting of a Church.
So Apostles and Evangelists were called extraordinarily. 2. In times of
universal Apostacy, when the Church is ruined and defaced. II. You may know
them by their Doctrine. Bucan. loci, p* 540, etc.
III. By their lives. IV. By their Gifts: whom God calls extraordinarily, he
endows with extraordinary knowledge, courage, etc.

Lastly, Privilegium non tollit legem.
I answer by way of Concession, giving, though not granting your desires. Say
these were private Christians, yet I shall clear all by asking you two
questions.

1. Q When did these dispersed Disciples of the Apostles, though not Apostles,
Preach?

A. Not in times of Peace and settlement, but in times of sore pesecution* when
Steven was stoned, and the Church was scattered about, and forced to flee up
and down, Act. 8. 1, 2, 3. 4. Very Emphatical is the word Therefore, ver. 4.
Speaking before of the persecution of the Church, and of the stoning of Steven,
the Holy Ghost infers, Therefore those that were scattered, Preached; implying,
that had not that persecution been, and the Apostles constrained to abide at
Jerusalem, with their converts, those men might not have done what they did.
Are our times such? are our Stevens stoned, our flocks scattered and dispersed
our Ministers all banished and gone? etc. If so* then you that have gifts may
supply their room, P^tet hoscum ^yprios Evangelist ^ Evangeli, Zas^e
Gent^libus. A Lap. Quum Antiochena Eccl^sia per Ministr^s extraordinem vocatos
plantata sit; non est in quod in plantandis Ecclesii, semper ordinariam
vocationem requiramus.
etc.

2. Q. Where did they Preach?

A. Not at Jerusalem, a planted, settled, constitured Church, v. 1. but at
Phenice, Cyprus, Antioch, etc. amongst heathens, infidels and Idolators, where
no Church was planted, as appears, Act. 11. 19, 20. they Preach at Antioch to
the Grecians, who were Gentiles and Heathens without Christ, and without God in
the world, as appears Romans 1.

That may be lawful in Ecclesia constituenda in an unplanted Church, in the
beginning of a Reformation, when no rule is set, no Ministers, no Magistrates,
no Teaching, no knowledge, no Ordination can be had, none to ordain etc. which
is utterly unlawful in Ecclesia constituta, in a planted, constituted Church,
where there is a settled Ministry, settled Ordinances settled Worship, according
to the Rule, etc. Here must be Election, Probation Ordination. Full to this
purpose is that quotation of that ingenuous and studious Gentleman: Piscat. in
Act. 11. 20.
Laymen may Preach upon occasion to Churches disordered, and to persons not
yet gathered to any Church. Leigh Com. on N. Test.
Those which were dispersed upon the pesecution of Steven, did publish the
Gospel where there was no Church. Acts 11. 20.
But how eminent soever men's abilities are, The (...) and thing in question is
not whether a gifted man may preach in an untlanted, but in a planted Church.
how well soever known to themselves or the world, to undertake the instruction
of the people without public Order, in public Assemblies, is a thing that no
Scripture, no time, no custom of the Primitive Church will allow. Thornedike
Service of God at Relig. Assemb. cap. 11.

Now let us gather up all, and put it into a Parallel, that our gifted brethren
may the better see how near they come to their pattern. The Parallel.
1. Those dispersed had extraordinary gifts. But our gifted Brethren have not
ordinary. 2. These had an immediate Call. But ours have not a mediate. 3. Those
Converted many souls. These Pervert many. 4. The Hand of the Lord was with
those. The Hand of the Lord is against these. 5. Those preached the Word if
God, Act. 11. 19, 20. These deny the Law, and preach New-lights. 6. Those
preached in times of Persecution. These in times of Peace. 7. Those preached in
unplanted Churches, amongst Heathens. These in planted Churches amongst
Christians.

By this time I hope I have levelled your strong Hold, and laid him in the
dust. I now march on to the rest.

The sixth, a Fort.
Acts 13. 14 15. Paul and Barnabas coming into the Synagogue, the Rulers sent
to them (not as Apostles, which they acknowledged not, but only as men having
gifts) that if they had any word of exhortation, they should say on.

A. Paul and Barnabas were men in Office true and faithful Prophets and
Apostles, and so had Commission to teach the Nations wheresoever they went.
It Is a non-sequitur, Because men in Office were desired by the Rulers to
exhort, Ergo, Men out of Office may do so.

2. They were known to be Teachers in Office, and (in all probability) were so
reputed by the Rulers of the Synagogue: having heard the fame of their
Preaching and Miracles, which might easily come from Cyprus to Antioch, they
desire a word of exhortation from them, v. 14. Act. 14. 1. They were known
Prophets.

3. This was practiced in corrupt times, and times of great confusion. So the
learned Apollonious acknowledges, that in corrupt times especially it was
permitted to some out of Order, to teach and exhort; but they were always such
as had testimony of their gifts, and of whom there was a general opinion of
their mission, extraordinary or ordinary, by reason of the Doctrine they
preached, and the works they did. Thus at Nazareth Christ was permitted in the
Synagogue to read and explain the writings of the Prophets, Luke 4. 16. as one
who by reason of his Majesty and miracles did everywhere obtain audience, as
reverend Beza here notes; by which right he taught both in the Temple, and
everywhere; wherefore also the ordinary Doctors demanded of him by what
Authority he did is, Mat. 21. 23. So we find that Paul and Barnabas were
allowed, ( Act. 13. 15.) publicly to speak and exhort in the Synagogue at
Antioch, as being such whose fame was already known to those of Antioch; for
they had before this time for a whole year preached the Word of God to many
there, and brought many to the Faith of Christ, etc.

But observe his conclusion: But in the practice of the New Testament, none but
Prophets by Gifts and Office, either ordinary or extraordinary, were permitted
publicly in the Assembly of Believers to preach the Word of God in Christ's
Name, etc. Thus he.

What have we to do with Jewish corrupt Customs? We are to wal^ by Rule, and
not by such new Lights. The liberty given in their Synagogues, can be no
president to us, no more then the custom of persecuting the godly, and casting
them out of their Synagogues.

Let Us sum up all. 1. Because Paul and Barnabas, who were men in Office,
preached; Ergo, such as are not in Office, may preach. 2. Because such as were
known to be Teachers, and were famous, preached; Ergo, such as are unknown
Teachers, and infamous, may preach. 3. Because the Jews had a custom, in
corrupt times to call forth gifted men to speak in their Synagogues; Ergo, we
must leave the Word, and follow their superstitious customs. This is sure some
Shooe-makers Logic: it is set upon the Last, and stretches well.

The seventh, a Tower.
The example of Apollos, Act. 18. 24 25, etc. An eloquent man, and mighty in
the Scriptures, instructed in the way of the Lord, taught diligently, etc.
Because he preached without a Call, Ergo, Gifted Brethren may preach without a
Call.

This is a Tower, Hic dignus vindice nodus.
a strong Tower* in our Brothers conceits; here they triumph (though it be
before the Victory:) Apollos, Apollos preached without a Call, etc. But let us
approach near it, and we shall discern this Tower to be a Tower of Babel. too
weak and sandy a foundation for their high and haughty building: Like the
Apples of Sodom, glorious to the eye; but touch them, and they fall to dust and
ashes.

And therefore I answer, Ubi similes causae and circumstantiae, ibi locum habet
exemplum. Weems Jewish Synag. 1 part. p. 265, etc.
1. This is an Example, but no Precept: examples may not be followed, without
observation of the like causes, and like conditions. Now I doubt not but I shall
prove your case and Apollos's to be different; and then this instance will do
you no good. In following examples, (says a very learned man) we must mark
four things: 1. How they did it. 2. When they did it. 3. Where they did it. 4.
Why they did it. These will give some light in this business.

1. We will inquire who it was that Preached? By Grace. This may have a
relation to Apollos, who by his authentical Ministry called Grace, Romans 1. 5.
and 15. 15.
Apollos. What was he? A Minister. How is that proved? 1 Cor. 3. 5. Who is
Paul? and who Apollo? But Ministers, etc. He is in terminis, expressly called a
Minister.

Obj. He was ordained afterward.

A. You may do well to prove that. Affirmanti incumbit probatio: Qu^d enim non
lego, nec credo. Where the Scripture has not a Tongue to speak, 1 Cor. 3. 10.
Deodat.
we must have no ears to hear.

2. He was a coadjutor to Paul, Zanchy in Ephesians. 4. 11.
and therefore often joined with him, 1 Cor 3. 6, 22. and 1. 1. 12. and 4. 6. and
16. 12. Paul may plant, Apollo water; Bucan. loci, p. 525.
q. d. I Paul first planted and preached the Word, Apollos came after me, and
by his Ministry expounded the same Doctrine of Christ to you, Formatus ^uit a
natura, informatus cura, confirmatus praxi, in iis quae sunt Domini. Pride.
and so watered what I had taught. Hence the learned Zanchy ranks him with
Evangelists; Timothy, Titus, Silvanus, Apollos: these were not tied to any one
place, but were assistants to the Apostles, to water what they had planted.

3. What were the gifts and endowments of the Minister? Surely* more then
ordinary; few in all the Scripture so highly commended for endowments and
abilities, as he. Such as God calls extraordinarily, he gifts extraordinarily.

The Text tells us he was an eloquent man; he was both prudent and eloquent, he
had skill in the words, and could expound well; he had good elocution to
express (...) Exposition. Matter well habited, is more acceptable.

Mighty in the Scriptures (i. e.) well instructed and grounded in them, and
endowed with a singular grace of Gods Spirit, to propound, expound, and
persuade them to men.

Instructed in the way of the Lord; He had learned the coming of Christ into
the world, and his Doctrine, when John the Baptist had taught obscurely and
imperfectly of it; but had not participated of the clear and large Declaration
which Christ and his Apostles had made of it.

4. Fervent in spirit. He was no cold, dead Teacher; but he taught powerfully,
livelily, experimentally.

5. He taught diligently: he was no idle, Strawberry-Preacher.

6. He does not preach his own fancies, but the things of the Lord, viz. the
Baptism of John, (i. e.) the Doctrine which John the Baptist had delivered
concerning Christ, and had sealed to his Disciples by Baptism.

7. He teaches boldly in the Synagogues, not fearing the face of man.

8. Observe his rare Humility: he does not disdain (though he were a man of
singular abilities) to be taught what he knew not of mean persons; an humble
man can learn of the meanest; a little child shall lead him, Isa. 11. 6. to see
a Master in Israel sit by an Aquila, a Tentmaker, and a Priscilla his wife, and
to be instructed by them, to learn of his Auditors, was no less an act of
meekness then of wonder; but a wise man looks more at the Counsel then the
Counselor; he regards not so much who, as what the instruction is; an Abraham
can hearken to the Counsel of Sarah, and Job of his servants.

9. He has the approbation of the Church of God for his abilities, ver. 27.
The Brethren of the Church of Ephesus write Letters commendatories in his
behalf to the Disciples at Corinth to receive him.

10. His Teaching was operative and fruitful; he did not labor in vain: For,
1. he furthered the faith of Believers and helped them much. 2. He was able to
convince gainsayers, verse. 28. he convinced, he mightily convinced the Jews,
and that not privately, for fear of opposition but he undertakes them
publicly; and this he does not by weak humane inventions, but by the
Scriptures, (out of Isaiah, Daniel, the Psalms, Moses and the Prophets) he does
Theologically demonstrate, and infallibly conclude, that this Jesus the Son of
Mary was the true Messiah promised to the Fathers, etc.

Thus you have seen this good man in his colors; how like our gifted Brethren
are to him, we shall see in the Parallel.

The second Quaere will be* When he preached?

A. 'Twas in a time when Churches were planting, in the Primitive times, when
God gave extraordinary gifts, and poured out the Spirit of Prophecy in
abundance, for the gathering and perfecting of his Church, etc.

2. 'Twas in a time when that corrupt custom was in practice among the Jews, of
giving liberty to some (though not in Office) to preach.

3. I answer by way of concession: Should we grant that Apollos was not a man
in Office, yet 'twill not help you: for this is but an instance (as a judicious
Divine well observes) of the liberty given by the Jews, or taken, when as yet
there was no Church in being. Take in all the commendations of the man, and, in
a like juncture of time, others of like abilities may do the like.

I come now to the Parallel, that our Brethren may see how like, or rather how
unlike they are to their Pattern, and, as they conceive, their Patron. 1.
Apollos was a man of extraordinary abilities. These (most of them) have not
ordinary. 2. He is called a Minister, and was a Preacher. These are
Diminishers, and Praters. 3. He was an Helper to the Apostles. These are
Hinderers to their Successors. 4. He was Eloquent. These are Loquent. 5. He was
mighty in the Scriptures. These in Raptures. 6. He taught the things of God.
These their own Fanries. 7. He taught frequently. These firily. 8. He taught
boldly and openly in the Synagogues. These clancularly creep into houses and
corners. 9. He was very humble and lowly. These very proud and self-conceited.
10. He had the approbation of the Church of God. These preach without it. 11.
He convinced and converted many. These will not be convinced in themselves, nor
do they convert any; yea, they pervert many.

Deliberandum est de remedio praesertim cum non Cynthius, sed Apollos aurem
vellat.

The eighth is a Bulwark.
1 Cor. 14. 1, 31. where the Apostle exhorts them to desire spiritual gifts*
but rather that they might prophecy; and tells them, verse. 31. they may all
Prophecy, etc. Hence our Brethren conclude, that all that have Gifts may
Prophecy in public.

Our gifted Brethren build very much upon this Text; and being pursued, they
run hither for shelter; but in vain, being merely deluded with the word All, as
if the Apostle had commanded all the Godly promiscuously to preach, when he
speaks only to Prophets, as the context clearly shows.

The Question then will be, who are meant by this word, All v. 31. Ye may all
Prophecy.

A. 1. I answer Negatively, It cannot be meant of all the Saints collectively;
for then women, who have gifts, should preach, who yet are forbidden. Secondly,
private Professors are nowhere commanded to leave their Callings, and go study
Arts and Sciences, that so they may be Preachers; but are commanded to abide in
their Callings 1 Cor. 7. 20. Thirdly, then all should Baptize; (for Christ has
joined Preaching and Baptizing) and then what need Christ give Pastors and
Teachers? Are all Prophets? 1 Cor. 12. 29.

2. I answer positively, By all is meant, all such as are Prophets: the Text is
clear, v. 29. Let the Prophets speak two or three, etc. v. 30. If any thing be
revealed, etc. They were extraordinary Prophets, and spoke by immediate
revelation, without study: then follows, v. 31. For ye may all Prophecy, i. e.
all you that are gifted and called to be Prophets; for so it follows, v. 32.
The spirits of the Prophets, i. e. the Doctrine of every Prophet, must be
subject to the examination adn censure of the other Prophets; and therefore
(says the Apostle) every Prophet may speak in public, to the end that he may
be discerned and approved by the rest. General words must be confined to the
particular Argument of the speech: So that the word all must be confined to the
Prophets; Prophets* Prophets, all ye that are Prophets may preach, but these
were Prophets by Gift and Office; therefore they might and did preach publicly
in Christ's Name in the Assembly: So that the Apostle speaks not of all
Believers in common, nor of any in the Congregation promiscuously but of the
Prophets lawfully called to instruct the church of God. And it is worth
observing* that the word Prophet is never given to any in the Old Testament, or
the New, but only to Ministers and men in Office; and therefore our Savior
expressly distinguishes a Prophet from a righteous man, Mat. 10. 41.

q. d. All you that are Prophets, and have the gift of Prophecy, and
extraordinary revelations, so that you can dexterously open hard Prophecies ex
tempore, without any study, and interpret Prophetic Scripture to edification,
etc. whilst these miraculous and extraotdinary Gifts endure* ye may, all that
have them use them.

2. It appears they were Prophets, because the duties of Prophets are ascribed
to them, v. 3* 4, 5, 12, 24, 25. they must interpret, convince, confute edify*
etc. all which are the duties of a Prophet.

Thus its clear, that the^e were Prophets; and if so* this place cannot help
our Brethren; for thus they must argue hence: Because Prophets who were men in
Office, yea, extraordinary Prophets, did preach: Therefore, we gifted Brethren,
who are no Prophets, nor men in Office, may preach. Hoc est dialectica
Independentica.

Obj. T. P. Objected, that these were ordinary, not extraordinary Prophets.

A. Habemus confitentem reum; you have betrayed your cause: for if these were
Prophets, as you confess they were, and I have proved from the Text; then
unless you can prove your selves to be Prophets, and men in Office, this place
will no whit avail you.

But secondly, I shall easily prove them to be extraordinary Prophets from the
Text, v. 30. If any thing be revealed* etc. They preached ^xtemporary
Revelations; they were able by the singular revelation of the Spirit to give
the sense of Prophetic Scripture, without study or pains Gal. 1. 12. and
sometimes they would foretell things to come, as Agabus, Act. 11. 27. and the
four daughters of Philip. In the beginning of the Gospel and first planting of
it, the Lord was pleased to confirm it by extraordinary gifts of miracles,
Healing, Tongues, Interpretation, Prophesying, and foretelling things to come.
These were temporary, and to endure only in those primitive times; they are
now ceased; so that he is a miracle that should desire now such miracles. Fully
to this purpose is that of a learned man: The grace of Prophesying under the
New Testament was of immediate revelation and inspiration of the Holy Ghost to
all purposes, as under the Old. V. 30, If revelation be made to another that
^i^teth by, let the first hold his peace to show us that some were in^pired
upon the very point of time with the truth of matters in debate at their
Assemblies, as 2 Chronicles. 20. 14. Act. 13. 2. Thus he.

These Prophets are set amongst extraordinary Offic^rs, Ephesians. 4. 11.

Three things T. P. objected against this Answer.
1. That these could not be Extraordinary Prophets, because (v. 29.) their
Doctrine was to be tried.

Answ. Vide Ruther^. Pl^^ for Pres^. p. 250, etc.
This trying and judging did not consi^t in calling them to account, as for the
truth of that which the holy Ghost inditeth; but to consist in the judging the
meaning and consequence of things inspired, which even the persons from whom
they came though not ignorant thorowout, yet were not able of themselves to
sound to the bottom.

2. An Extraordinary Prophet (though in penning Scripture infallible, yet) in
other points might err. Aaron erred, Exodus 32. 4. Peter erred about the
calling of the Gentiles, Acts 10. 15. and Gal. 2. 14, The Apostles were
ignorant of Christ's Resurrection, and his Sufferings* etc. and therefore they
were commanded to try the spirits; and Luke commends the Bereans for trying the
doctrine of a Paul and Silas* Acts 17. 11. for although these Prophecies were
infused by the holy Ghost that cannot err, yet all things are not revealed to
one; and that which is not revealed to one, is oftentimes revealed to more, and
sometimes in a clearer manner. There might be also something mingled with that
which the Prophets received: and it might so fall out, that that which they
added of their own, by way of confirmation, illustration, or application, might
be justly* subject to censure: withal, it must be tried and judged by others,
whether the Prophecies proceed from the inspiration of the holy Spirit, Vide
Large Annot.
and according to the Rule of Faith, Isa. 8. 20.

2. 'Twas objected, that these could not be Extraordinary Prophets, because (
v. 3.) they spoke to edification, exhortation, and comfort, as Ordinary
Prophets did.

A. The Answer is easy: The Extraordinary Prophets, as Amos, Isaiah, Ezekiel,
etc. did preach to edification, exhortation, and comfort* as well as the
Ordinary.

3. 'Twas objected, Hoc aliquid nihil est nuci cass^^ simillimum, quod si
cultro veritatis ape^iat^r, nihil intus inveni^tur nis^ vani^as and inanitas.
that the Apostle forbidding women, did give liberty to men to preach.

A. I see you will play at low game before you will ^it out. I answer
therefore by way of concession, and grant that the Apostle forbids women and
enjoins men to preach: but what men? Not all gifted men in general, but all men
gifted, and called to be Prophets, as I have clearly proved* p. 57.

2. If you will argue fitly from this place* it must be thus: The Apostle
forbids all women* gifted or ungifted, to preach; There fore all men, gifted or
ungifted, Hoc (...).
are allowed by the Apostle to preach. No doubt but then we should have good
Preaching!

3. No woman may administer the Sacrament; He that desires fuller satisfaction
on this Text' let him peruse reverend M. Rutherf. Due Right of Presb. p. 297
and Workman ag. Lay-preach. p. 14, etc.
therefore, any man may.

I shall conclude this Point in the words of a Reverend Divine. It Is granted
(says he) that all Orders Officers, or Members of the Church above Ministers,
may preach as well as they, whether ordained, or uno^dained; as Apostles*
Evangelist* and Prophets. For Prophets* such as are under the New Testament,
they are always placed next unto the Apostles and before Pastors and Teachers 1
Cor. 12. 28, 29. Ephesians. 4. 11. In the Primitive times there were many such;
Thorndike on Rel. Assem. c. 5.
yea* many in one Church, as at Antioch and Corinth: whether these were
ordinary or extraordinary, it is easy to judge, by the continuance or
discontinuance of them in the Church in after-ages* an at present. If there be
any so gifted by the holy Ghost, above ordained persons, that they are worthy
to take place of them, and of Evangelists; let them by all means have the
liberty of their Gifts, and their proper denomination: I think ordinary
Ministers should give them the right hand of fellowship, and place. As for any
kind of Prophets or Prophesying in the public Congregation below Ministers
and their Ministry, there is none to be found in any enumeration of Scripture,
either in Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. or Ephesians. 4. where we were most like to find it:
and therefore it is still with me resolved, that the Prophets and Prophesying
which we read of, 1 Cor. 14. was extraordinary. He that believes three kinds
of Prophets under the new Testament let him distinguish them. Thus he.

I shall gather up all into a Parallel* because Logic does not please you.
Contraria juxta se ^osi^a magis elucescunt.
1. T^ose were Prophets. But our gifted brethren are no Prophets. 2. T^ose were
Extraordinary Prophets. These no^ Ord^nary. 3. T^ose had a spirit of
Revelation. Th^se of D^lusion. 4. Those could dext^rously expound Prophetic
Scripture. Th^s^ are dextrous in dark^^^ng t^em, and some in d^ny^ng them.

The ninth Objection.
Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. Having the^ gifts differing according to the grace that is
given to us, whether Prophecy, let us prophecy, etc. Hence they gather, that
all that have the gifts of Prophecy, may pr^phe^ie, etc.

A. It Is granted, that they who have the gift of Prophecy may prophe^ie; and
they that have the gift of Ministry (or Deaconship) must do the duty of a
Deacon. But who are they that have this gift? They that are Prophets by Office,
and not those that have abilities only, as one very well observes; M. Wo^km^n
ag. Lay preach p. 2, 3, etc.
and this will appear more fully by the context and scope of the chapter.
Having exhorted to duties of piety in general v 1* 2. he comes, v. 3 to 9. to
particular duties of Ecclesiastical persons and Officers viz. That they should
not be proud of their spi^itual gifts (which in those days abounded) but to
think soberly and self-denyingly of themselves.

2. He sets down a disti^ct and perfect enumeration of all the standing
Off^cers in the Church, and exhorts them to discharge the duties of their
sev^ral Functions, v. 6, 7, 8. These Off^ces are reduced to two general heads:
1. Prophecy; (not the extraordinary gift of foretelling future things,
P^opheti^m non vid^^u^ in^elligere facu^^^tem d^vinandi even^us fu^uros qua e^
accepe^^a^tvet^res Prophet^ and q^id^m n^vi post Christum, ut Agab s, and ^.
etc. but the ordinary, in the right understanding and interpreting of
Scripture.) Under this are contained, first, he that Teaches i.^. the Doctor
or Teacher; Secondly, he that exhorts, i. e. the Pastor. Under Ministry are
comprised, 1. He that gives* i. e. the Deacon; 2. He that rules, i. e. the
ruling Elder. So then, by Prophecy, here, is not meant the extraordinary gift
of interpreting Scripture by Revelation without study, (which were it so yet
could it not help you) but the ordinary gif^ of Preaching and expounding
Scripture by an ordinary Minister and set Church-O^ficer, of which the Apostle
is here speaking, who must give himself to exhortation and teaching: and this
is that Prophesying which we are comm^nded to prize, qu^ p^ae i^it de
ordinariis and p^rp^^u^s h^ud dubio ch^rismatis: sed r^ctam S^ripturarum
Pro^^etica rum i^telligentiam and ^^plicandi fac^tatem, etc.
1 These. 5. 20. Despise not Prophesying, i. e. Preaching by men in Office, by
sent Prophets.

Now let us see what they can gather hence. Because Pastors and Teache^s, who
were Prophets and men in O^fice are commanded to Prophe^ie and expound the
word, etc. Therefore private gifted persons, who are not men in O^fice may
Prophecy and expound the Word. This is Kneading-trough-L^gick.

The tenth Objection.
1* Cor. 11. 5. Every woman that prays or prophesies wi^h her head covered
etc. Here (say they) were women that did Prophecy. Parandus. Vide Leigh
Comment. loc.
Now if gifted women did Prophecy, then much more may gifted men. ^hus Mi^^am,
Anna and H^lda Prophecy, 2 King. 22. 14. and Deborah. Judge. 4. 4. and Philips
four daughters. So Romans 16. 1, 3* 7. Ph^be a servant of the Church Aquila and
Priscilla my helpers, Egoloq^or de a^^i^, hi dis^ep^^nt de cepis
. Andr^n cus and Junia of note among the Apostles etc.

A. Here Is Chalk for Cheese. We speak of ordinary gifted men in Office,
Ex^^a^rdin^^y (...) cannot m^k^ an ord^^ary Rule
. and they flee to women that were called extraordinarily, as Miri^m, Hulda etc.

As for Ph^be, she was a Diaconess to minister to the ^^ck, and not a
Pra^dicantess to preach, or have Peter's keys jingling at her girdle.

Aquila and Priscilla* by their private instruction and admonition, were (...),
adjutores mei* my helpers. And so not only men* but women should teach their
children, servants and neighbors the way of the Lord, Pro. 1. 8. and 6 20. and
31 1, 26. Act. 18. 26. T it. 2. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 5. Yea, a woman in her husbands
absence (and presence too, if he be not able) may teach her children, pray with
the family etc.

As for that place, Being in the Church whilst the act of Preaching is
performed Deod.
1 Cor. 11. 5. the words are not be taken actively for women's preaching* but
passively for their attending on praying and prophesying with reverence, and
joining with such as pray or prophecy* and going along with them in their
heart.

2. We must distinguish of Prophesying. So Pisca^or in locum.
1. There is Prophesying which is Preaching and Expounding Scripture; Vide
Leigh's Comment in locum. And the large Annotat. Engl.
and thus (say some) these women did not Prophecy. 2. Prophesying is taken for
any publishing and Singing the praises of the Lord in Psalms and Hymns. So
Psalm. 68. 11 The Lord gave the Word, great was the company Annunciatricum, of
She-Preachers and publishers of Gods praise: V^ Ainsworth, in Psalm. 68. 11. Sic
A Lap. in loc.
In those days* after the obtaining of some great Victory* the women were wont
to sing Songs unto God; as Miriam. Deborah, etc. and so the word Prophecy is
often used in Scripture, Numb. 11. 1 Samuel 10. 5. 2 Chronicles. 25. 1, 2, 3.

3. Suppose I should grant (as many judicious Divines do and I conceive it to
be the most natural and genuine sense) that women in those Primitive times were
inspired with an extraordinary spirit of Prayer and Prophecy; according to
that promise, Apostolis loquitur de mulier^bus spi^i^u precum and Prophetiae
(...), etc Par^^^ in l^c.
Joel 2. 28. I will pour my Spirit in those days on my handmaids, V. (...) in
locum.
and they shall Prophe. This was their practice; Duplicivitio l^bor bin^: 1
Quod ape^to^cap^e incede^e^t. 2. Q^od (...) loquerentur. Pet.
but they failing in the manner, and abu^ing their liberty, the Apostle enjoins
them silence in public for ever, 1 Cor. 14. 34 35. Let Your women keep ^ilence
in the Churches; for it is not permitted for them to speak: and tells them it is a
shame, because not only against a positive Law, but against the Order of
Nature. In 1 Timothy 2. II, 12. he prohibits their public teaching, and that for
two reasons: I. In respect of man's precedence in his Creation, ver. 13. For
Adam was first formed and then Eve; M^tryr* in l^^*
the woman was made after the man, and for the man; and therefore for her to
take upon her the Office of Teaching, or to usurp Authority over the man; what
were it but to invert the court and order of Nature? 2. From the woman's
priority in her de^ection: Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived
was in the transgression. Adam was not deceived, viz. not p^imarily; he was not
first deceived, but the woman, etc. 2. Not immediately by the Serpent as the
woman was* but by the means of the woman's solicitations and intici^g* to whom
he yielded ex amicabile quadam benevolentia; out of a loving and indulgent
affection toward her* etc. B^in^l. Looking^gl^ss* p. 2, 3.
as a very reverend Divine has well observed. Taking upon her to be a Teacher
at first she became a Seducer and undid all her posterity: hence she is
suspended from Public teaching for ever.

The eleventh Objection.
1. Cor. 16. 15 16. The house of Stephanas addicted themselves to the Ministry
of the Saints etc. Hence the Anabaptists ignorantly gather, that a man may call
himself to Preaching, and needs no ordinary Call to the Ministry.

A. 1 It does not appear that the house of (...) were Ministers and Preachers,
(...) signif. servato gradu and statione in qua quis ^ollocatus ^uerit, ^e^e
opibus cum ^fficio conjun^ctis addicare, q. d. eos sesequidem totos ultro
^anctorum ministerio devorisse, legitime tamen vocatos, etc.
but rather Deacons and Church Officers who did serve and administer to the
necessities of the Saints, in collecting and distributing alms for their
support; and to this end they freely gave up themselves (as being lawfully
called to that ministry and service) (...), to the service of the Saints: they
were not compelled or hired to it, but (which was their glory) they cheerfully
and spontaneously gave themselves to the the service of the Saints, to succor
the poor, to harbor strangers and exiles, to attend the sick and languishing
Saints, etc.

2. Take it which way yo please either for the service of the Ministry, or of
the Presbytery, or Deaconship, still this is the sun that they being lawfully
called did freely give up themselves to the service. Those Anabaptists (the
firebrarnds of Societies, Leigh Critic.
as one rightly styles them, that make these Saints to call themselves do make
the Scripture to contradict it self: Tumofficium docendi tum quamvis Functionem
Ecclesiasticam denotar. Leigh. Quodvis fignificat Ministerium. Aurenius
Problem. p. 25. Anabaptist^ omnis ordinis tubatores.
for it tells us, No man may take this honor to himself without a Call. Ephesians 4.
II. Christ gave some Pastors, etc. they did not un of themselves, etc.

Obj. The Apostle (v. 16.) commands them to submit themselves to such: Ergo,
they were Gifted Preachers.

A Had you concluded, Par. Si Scripture per Scripturas explicamus, nibiltic,
pro Anabaptistarum (...) inveniemus.
herefore sure they were Gifted Officers, you had hit the Nail on the head. Had
they been usurpers, the Apostle would never have enjoined subjection, i. e.
reverence and honor suitable to their Offices and submission to their pious
admonitions and godly exhortations q. d they have spent themselves to further
you and submitted themselves to the meanest for your good; therefore, do you
spend your selves for them, and submit your selves to all acts of love and
kindnels for their good. This submission must be mutual, Ephesians. 5. 21

The twelfth Objection.
Heb. 5. 11, 12. When for the time ye ought to have been Teachers, etc. Here (
say they) the Apostle blames them because they were not all Teachers.

A. The fallacy lies in the word Teachers; there are two sorts of Teachers. 1.
Some are public Teachers, who teach as Officers, authoritatively by virtue of
a call. Rom 12. 7. these Teachers must attend on Teaching. Now the Apostle does
not blame them because they were not such Teachers: for he blames women and
children, as well as men, for being dull of hearing, etc.

2. Others are private persons, who must teach in a private way; and these the
Apostle blames, Oportebar vos post tam longa^ institutionem esse doctores; at
in primis pietatis elementis quasi alphabeta^ii iyrones ab^duc haeretis: imo
quasi infan^ei estis, quibus ^ac in^^illari, non solidum cibum ingeri, nec^^^^
e^^. Par. in loc.
that when for the time they might have been to full of knowledge* that they
might have been Teachers of others in a private way, by exhortation,
admonition, counsel, and reproof, etc. yet they had need of milk, and to be
taught their Catechism, when considering the great means of knowledge, which
they had long enjoyed, they might have been fit for stronger meat.

The thirteenth Objection.
1 Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a Royal Priesthood. Rev. 3. 1 0. and 1. 6. And have made
us unto our God Kings and Priests and we shall reign on earth. Exodus 19. 6. All
Priests must teach; but all Believers are Priests; Ergo, all Believers may
teach.

Answ. The fallacy lies in the word Priest. We read in Scripture of two ^orts
of Priests. 1. Some were Priests by Office, Est fallacia Aequivocationis, seu
Homonymiae, insunt 4 termini.
and these were to offer Sacrifice, and teach the people, etc. these are called
a ^ituall Priesthood: this is swallowed up by the Priesthood of Christ.

2. There is a Royal Priesthood proper to all Believers, who are called Priests
comparatively. 1. The Priests, the sons of Levi, are said to come near to God,
Deuteronomy. 21. 5. So Believers by says have boldness and access of God, and draw
nigh to him. 2. In respect of the Sacrifices they offer, viz. Prayer and
praise, Psalm. 116. 17. 2. Good works, V. Owen Du^y of past. and peop. p. 19,
20, etc.
Heb. 13. 15. 16.

3. Themselves, they must slaughter their sins, and mortify the old man, and
offer up their souls and bodies in sacrifice to God; and so they are Kings
spiritually, because they reign over ^in and Satan.

4. In respect of the common anointing. Priests were anointed; Nos omnes and
reges and ^^cerdotes spiritualiter. P. Matt.
so all believers have an unction, even the Spirit of God, which shall lead
them into all truth, 1 Ioh. 2. 20. and being thus taught, they may, and must
teach others privately according to their places and stations, the way of the
Lord; but not publicly; for then the whole body should be eye, etc.

2. A. I shall show the weakness of this Argument per iaem, thus: The Office of
a King is to Rule: but every believer is a King; Ergo.

(...) ^o ye not get into the Throne, put on your Kingly Robes, (...) p. 8.
take state upon you, ride on with King John a Leyden the Tailor, who had
fifteen wives, and at last came to hanging? etc.

The fourteenth Objection.
1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. As every man has received the (...) even so minister the
same one to another. etc. Robi s^against Yates 49. 50, etc.
Every (...) the Talent which God has given him. Mat. 25. else G^^ will take
it from him and curse him. Thus they argue:

All that have gifts must use them. But many private men have gifts; Ergo, they
must use them.

Answ. Antidote, p. 31, 32, etc. V. p. 2. Rutherf. Due Right, p. 294.
All that have gifts must use them, true; but where? not ministerially and
publicly, for then many women who have excellent Gifts should be Preachers;
but privately, in that sphere and place where God has set him; public persons
must use their Talent publicly, and private persons by private instruction,
admonition, and in their Families.

This place only enjoins every man to be helpful in his place according to the
Gifts which God has given him; but are no command for Laymen to turn
Preachers: Having spoken of the use of Gifts in general, v. 11. he descends to
two particulars, v. 12. First* to the gift of Prophecy: Secondly, the
ministering according to our abilities.

The fifteenth Objection.
Revel. 11. 3. the two witnesses Prophecy; not only the Clergy, but all the
faithful.

Answ. 1. Theologia symbolica non e^t Argumentativa.
Borrowed speeches make no grounded Arguments.

2. These witnesses consisted both of Pastors and people; the Pastors witnessed
by public preaching against Antichrist, and private persons by making an open
confession and profession of the truth against him; V. Rutherf. Due Right, p.
295.
and so many women were Martyrs, yet no Preachers; and this is that Peter
commands, 1 Pet. 3. 15. to be ready to make confession of the truth, not preach.

The last Objection is a Skeleton.
A penniworth of their small reasons, Hac reci^asse est re^u^asse. ^ Pet. 3.
15. Jam. 5. 19, 20.
a parcel of bare bones, the very naming them is confutation sufficient; as 1
Cor. 1. 27, 29. God has chosen the foolish things etc. Ergo, Laymen may
preach.

1 Cor. 7. 16. What know thou O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband?
and 1 Cor. 12. 11. and 1 These. 5. 11. command private instruction; and Phil. 2.
15* 16.

Luke 8. 39. Christ having delivered the man possessed, bids him go, and show
how great things God has done for him; and he went and preached; Robins.
against Yates, p. 42, etc.
published it, says our Translation.

A. 1. He had Christ's command to do so.

2. He only tells (...) Christ had done for him, V. Rutherf. Due Right, p. 291.
which in a large sense may be called Preaching: yet it is one thing to publish
a mi^acle, and another thing to be a (...).

Obj. Robinson obje^^s, the word is commonly used for preaching which Luke
(...) sets down.

A. (...), propr^e^, alta v^ce (...) m^re c^amare, etc. Leigh (...).
The word in the Original signifies also to publish (^s our Translation has
it) and as an Her^lsd to deliver a m^tter in open (...) in the hearing of a
multitude that many may take ^^tice of it; as that Noble Critic who has do^e
^orthily in Ephra^a* and therefore is deservedly famous in our Bethlem* has
well ob^e^ved; and in his Comment on this place; Christ comm^nds him to report
it as the work of God, etc.

Lastly, they (...) the ex^mple of the ^om^n of S^maria, Robins. Plea, p* 44,
etc.
Ioh. 4. 28* 29 etc. She preached Christ to her Neighbors; Ergo, they may do so
too.

A* Now they have no help from men* they flee to women* but in vain: for this
woman did not take upon her to teach them, or convert them her self; but
seeks only to bring them to Christ by whom she was converted. It Is one thing
to preach* and another thing to bring tidings of a Savior, as this woman and
the Shephe^ds did.

2. Admit she had preached, yet where was it? in Samaria, amongst Heathenish
Neighbors, where no (...) was yet planted: And here we grant that in such
(...) a woman may occasionally declare the Gospel in ^ no (...).

Now because a woman may publish Christ in an unplanted Church, Ergo* Gifted
men may preach in a ^l^nt^d, is such Logic, as none but such Gifted men as you
are, will u^e.

I should now conc^ude; (...)
but th^^^ was one thing more ^bjected viz. That our Min^stery was
Antichrist^^n: of which o^e (...) then I have done.

Object. Your Ministry is A^^ichristi^n; you are (...) Divines, Egyptian
Enchanters, ^ug^^rs limbs of the D^vil (...) covetous lordly sed^tious (...)
the troubl^^^ (...) ^ riest ringleaders to Babylonish confusion, trained up in
(...) Hea^h^ ism* vain Philosophy, ung^dly Ar^s; Legal (...) Lions persecutors
of the Saints; your maintenance antichri^^ian lik^ Simon the Sorcerer; Priestly
S^rib^s and Pharisees, Hypocrites* etc A whole load of such ignominious titles
you may find in a little Pamphlet of one * Collyer, Carbone notandus.
a very dangerous Sectary.

Answ. Lo this is the Livery we must look for from the ungrateful world ^ It Is
no new thing: Mat. 5. 11, 12. Thus did they persecute and revile the Prophets
which were before us: let us not fret, but rejoice, Gratias ago Deomco, quod
d^gnus sim q^^^m mundus o^erit. Hier. Z^ch. 13* 6.
and with those Apostles, esteem it our honor to be dishonored for Christ.
Had they been enemies, we could the better have born it; but these are the
wounds with which we are wounded in the house of our friends; those that not
many years ago were ready to pull out their own eyes for our good, now forsake
us, and are ready to pull out ours.

God is beholding to us for the kindness which we show to his Ambassadors. To
be derided by Egyptians, is t^^eatned as a misery, H^s. 7. ult. but to be
reproached by Professors, is very g^i^^ous.
If David were so displeased with Hanun, for abusing his servants, 2 Samuel 10.
45. surely then the Righteous Lord will not always ^ndure the indignities
which are done to himself; for he that despises you, despises me. But he will
arise, and smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them
that hate his Ambassadors, that they rise not up again. Though Moses bear the
reviling of Miriam, yet the Lord will not; D^ut. 33. 11.
while he is dumb, God speaks; while he is deaf, God hears and stirs. The more
silent the patient is, the more shrill will the wrong be.

And whereas they say our Ministry is Antichristian, because we were ordained
by Antichristian Bishops: We answer; This is easily said, but not so easily
proved; for, 1. we have our Ordination from Christ by Bishops and Presbyters;
we receive it not so much from them* as from Christ our Lord and theirs. His
sevants we are, and in his Name do we execute our Ministerial Functions, and
not in the Bishops. The Authority of the Presbytery is only Ministerial
service* whereby it restifies, declares, and approves of those whom God
approves and calls.

2. Neither were the Bishops which ordained us, Antichristian; which I prove
thus: Those who by their life and doctrine have witnessed against Antichrist,
could not be Antichristian. But our Bishops (since the Reformation) have
witnessed against Antichrist: Ergo. Witness our Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper
Latimer, Farrar, Jewel* Pilkington, Sands, Babington, A^bot, Davenant, Hall,
Morton Usher etc.

3. Consider they were Ministers, and did ordain us not qua Lord Bishops* but
quda Presbyters, and had other Presbyters to join with them; so that our
Ordination from them is valid, and may in no wise be disclaimed. 4. Many of
them were able Ministers, and painful Preachers; no man can truly a^firm, that
all our Bishops were wicked and Antichristian, many of them were men fearing
God.

5. Admit some of them have been Popish and wicked yet we must not condemn all
the Apostles for one Judas; A particulari ad universale, ab ^ypothesi ad
thesin, non v^let consequentia. Duci vul^* non cogi vult^ Vide Append. ad Ius
divinum, p. 265, etc.
there have always been de facto, some evil Officers and Ministers in the
Church. Hophni and Phine as, Scribes and Pharisees, some envious and perverse
Teachers, Acts 20. 29, 30. Phil. 1. 15. yet the wickedness of such Ministers
did not null their acts, Mat. 23. 23. their Ordination, as well as their
Teaching, was valid, notwithstanding their personal wickedness; the Leprosy in
the hand does not hinder the growing of the corn: Elijah may not refuse his
bread, Rutherf, Due Right, p* 205. 206, etc.
because brought by a Raven. Suppose they be wicked, Antichristian, Heretical,
etc. that ordain, yet our Ministry is firm.

Now since man is a rational creature, Sadeel Op^ra, p. 541, etc.
and is easier led then forced, I shall briefly use some Arguments to convince
the judgment, Hom* disp. p. 115 Zanc. in quar^. praecept. p. 703, 704, etc.
and refer you to larger Treatises for fuller satisfaction.

1. Arg. Those whose Ordination was right for substance, (though it fail in
some circumstance, yet) is valid: But our Ordination was right for substance;
Bern. against Sep. p. 129. Pride. fascic. p. 245, etc.
we had the inward Call, and the outward; we were examined for our life and
Learning, and approved of; we had imposition of hands by Elders, with Prayer
and Exhortation to diligence in our places; Perk. 1 Vol. p. 760, 761, etc.
the Bible is given to us with a command and Authority to preach the Word, and
dispense the Sacraments. We having these substantials, the failing in some
circumstantials cannot invalidate the action. Mornay on the Church, chap. 11.
p. 365.
A man that has a mole on his face, yet is a man still, etc.

2. Arg. If the Baptism of Ministers in times of darkest Popery was true
Baptism (because right for substance, R^thb. ag. Sep. p. 39. Shall Ordinat. be
thought more necessary to the being of a Minister, then Baptis^ is to the being
of a ^h^istian? etc. we distinguish between a defective Ministry and a falls
Ministry, as we do betw^en a man that is lame or blind, and a man that is but
the picture of a man, etc.
though corrupted with many superstitious Ceremonies) then the Ministers also
were true Ministers, (for substance, though some corruptions were mixed with
it) else their Baptizing had been invalid, and no better then a Midwives
Baptizing. But it is acknowledged that their Baptism was effectual: Therefore
their Ordination was effectual. If no Reformed Church did ever re-Baptize such
as were Baptized by them, why should Ministers be re-ordained, more then
Rebaptized?

3. Arg. If the Papists disclaim us, as having no Call from them, the our
Calling cannot be Antichristian: but they disclaim us from having any Call from
them. So that one of you two must needs err: The Papist says, we are no
Ministers, because not called by the Pope: The Separatists say we are no
Ministers, because we have our Call from the Pope. As Paul set the Pharisees
and Sadduces at variance to help himself, B^ll ag. Can, p. 4, 5, 24, 29, 35,
41, 72, 102,
Act. 23. 6, 7. so I shall leave the Papist and the Separatist to reason this
case, whilst I step forth to the fourth Argument.

4. Arg. If your Ordination be Antichristian, Quis tul^rit Gracchos* Bernard
against Sep. p. 144, etc.
then cannot you (with modesty) ^ccuse us. But your Ordination is
Antichristian: Ergo.

The Minor I prove. That Ordination which is contrary to the Rules of Christ is
Antichristian. Vide Rutherf. Plea, p 78, 79. and 124, 125, etc.
But your Ordination is contrary to the Rule of Christ: Ergo. The Minor I
prove. You allow the people to ordain Ministers, and private persons to ordain
Pastors: but Christ commands Pastors to Ordain Pastors. As the Priests were
Ordained by Priests* Ezra 6. so the Apostles by Christ, Ioh. 20. 21. Bishops
and Elders by Apostles Act. 14. 23. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Tit. 1. 9. Show one precept
or president if you can, that ever private persons did Ordain a Pasto^.

2. If your Ordination by Plebeian Artificers be valid, then ( a fortior^) our
Ordination by Learned, Orthodox godly. Divines, will be valid.

5. Arg. Those Ministers which are elected, proved, ordained by the Presbytery,
according to the mind of Christ, cannot be Antichristian. But our Ministers Now
are elected, proved, ordained by the P^esbytery, according to the mind of
Christ: Ergo.

6* Arg. Those Ministers which are diametrically opposite to the Priests and
Shavelins of Antichrist, cannot be Antichristian. But our Ministers are so:
E^go.

This will appear by the ensuing Parallel. 1 Popish Priests are ordained to
Sacrifice. But our Ministers are sent to Preach and Pray. 2. They teach the
Traditions of men. But ours teach the perfect Word of God. 3. They mix the
Sacraments, and alter both their Number and their Nature. But ours preser^e
them in their purity both ^or Number and Nature. 4. They a^e for Mass. But ours
abhor it as a filthy Idol. 5. They are the Popes sworn Vassals. B^^ ours have
witnessed with their blood against him and his. 6. These pervert Souls, and
draw them from Christ. Ours C^nvert Souls, and bring them to Christ, as your
selves can witness: for, consider whether you did not receive the work of
conversion from sin unto God, which you presume to be wrought in you first of
all* in these public Assemblies from which you now separate. And if once you
found Christ walking amongst us, how is it that yo do now leave us? Are we
less, and not rather more reformed then we were? If the presence of Christ,
both of his power and grace be with us, why will you deny us your presence? Are
ye holier and wiser then Christ? Is not this an evident token that we are true
Churches, and have a true Ministry, because we have the Seal of our Ministry,
even the conversion of many sons and daughters unto God? Does not the Apostle
from this very ground, argue the truth of his Apostleship? 1 Cor. 9. 2. Is it
not apparent that our Ministers are sent by God* because their Embassage is
made successful by God for the good of Souls? Did you ever read of true
conversion ordinarily in a false Church? Will the Lord concur with those
Ministers whom he sends not? Does not the Prophet seem to say the quite
contrary? Vid. That excellent satisfactory Vindication of the Presbyterial
Governm. by the Synod of London, Nov. 2. 1650. p. 141, etc.
Ier. 23. 21, 22. And therefore either renounce your conversion, or be
converted from that great sin of seperating from us; for it is a greaat
aggravation of your sin, that you separate from us in a time of Reformation:
whilst public Authority has been at work to find out Gods way, private
persons have taken their advantage to set up their own. Whilst the one has
been reforming, the other* instead of joining with them to strengthen their
hands, have been withdrawing and separating themselves and others from them.
And what, Separate from a Reforming Church! A Church that professes so much
willingness and readiness to be conformed to the Rule of the Word! Brethren,
let me tell you, There is more in this circumstance, then happily some have been
or are aware of. When God is coming toward a Church, then to run from it! When
God is turning his face toward it, then to turn our backs upon it! When God is
building it up, then to be active in pulling it down! This is a sad thing; and
surely if rightly apprehended, must sit sadly upon the spirits of some.

Had it been some years since, when God seemed to have been about to depart
from us, when Innovations and Corruptions were breaking in upon us, then to
withdraw, then to forsake the Church, (however I dare not avouch it for a work
so transcendently meritorious as some conceive of it, yet) I grant it
tolerable. But now to do it, now that (as them^selves conceive of it) the
Church is coming up out of the wilderness now that she begins to boil out her
scum, now that she begins to be more refined and reformed; now to forsake her,
truly this is no small aggravation to this desertion.

For Mariners at Sea to forsake their ship when she is ready to sink, (though
possibly it may be an error and oversight in them so to do, yet) it is
pardonable. But if the ship shall begin to rise and float again, so as they see
apparent hopes that with a little pumping and baling she may be saved, now to
leave her, (much more to cut holes in her sides) their owners will give them
little thanks for it. Some years since, the Church of God amongst us seemed to
be in a sinking condition; then to leave her* might be pardonable. But now, now
that through the merli of God she begins to be somewhat floatsome and boyant,
so as aycttle industry and pains in the pumping and purging, may free her and
save her, shall we now de^ert her? (that I do not say cut holes in her sides.)
Surely, surely, Land. Vind. of Pre^^. p. 140.
never was Separation from this Church ^o unwarrantable as it is at this day:
warrantable it never was since she was a true Church. In the last Age an error
it was, Ame^us unitat^m, ^imea^mus separatione^^. Aug.
a S^hism; and that not only Mr. Ainsworths more rigid, but Mr. Robinsons more
moderate Separation, so accounted and censured at all hands; Surely then at
this day it cannot be warrantable. Make the fairest of it, an unadvised
Separation it is: As a judicious and pious Divine (in that satisfactory and
elabora^e Tract against this sin) has fully proved; M. Brinsly Ar^raign. of
Sep. p. 31, 32.
whose words being so suitable and seasonable to this purpose, I could not but
for thy good transcribe. and with them so fully and clearly expressing my
mind, I shall conclude.

I have now finished my work, and well-nigh my time together. It was far from
my thoughts (the Lord he knows) ever to have published a Tract of this nature;
but being openly challenged to make it good, I fell to study the point; and
upon perusal of Authors, I found that some had done excellently in answering
Objections, but omitted Arguments which confirm the Thesis: Others had some
Arguments, but omitted the answering of Objections; some answer to some
Objections* others to other some; but here thou have seventeen Arguments to
convince the judgment; an Answer to above thirty Objections, even all that
eve^ my little reading could attain, with References to larger Tracts, which
handle any point more fully. Cover all the Solaecisms, Barbarisms, and
imperfections, with the mantle of love; consider 'twas the work of successive
hours, redeemed from rest and recreations, framed in the midst of double
employment* besides personal Trials, etc.

If thou reap any benefit, give God the glory, who has brought this light out
of darkness, and the good out of the oppositions of our Brethren: If thou see
any imperfections, defects, weaknesses, etc. as I am conscious to my self of
many) yet let not, O let not the Truth of God suffer through my weakness and
failings, Me me adsum qui ^eci, in me convertite ferrum.
but ascribe them to me, even to me, to whom of due they belong: I am very well
content to decrease, so his glory may increase; let my name perish, so his may
flourish; let me dye, so my Gods honor may live, I have enough.

Now to the only wise God, Domine Deus, quaecunque dixi de tuo, agnoscant and
tui; si qua de meo, and tu ignosce and tui. Aug.
who has given both heart and hand, will and deed, the way and the work, be
given all praise and glory from Angels, men, and every creature, from
henceforth and for ever. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

