THE Daily Practice OF DEVOTION: OR, The Hours of Prayer FITTED To the main
Uses of a CHRISTIAN LIFE.

Also Lamentations and Prayers for the Peaceful re-settlement of this Church
and State.

By the late Pious and Reverend H. H. D. D.

Cum clamore valido and lachrymis preces offerens exauditus est pro sua
reverentia.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty,
MDCLXXXIV.

The Introduction.
ALL things tend naturally toward some certain End, and desire some Good, the
attainment of which is the Perfection of their Nature, and the enjoyment of it
their Supreme Happiness.

The highest Perfection and Happiness of Mankind consists in their nearest
approach unto God the supreme End and only Good.

The only means of thus approaching and applying our selves to God is, a
sincere Love of him; the Natural effect and expression of which is, our keeping
his Commandments, 1 John 3. 5.

Now the whole Service of God, which is that we call Religion, being in the
Holy Scriptures largely and plainly declared to the meanest understandings, may
seem to be all comprehended under these three Heads: Faith, Works and Prayer.

I. By Faith we nnderstand the hearty Belief of whatsoever is revealed by God.

II. By Works, the diligent Observing of whatsoever is commanded by God.

III. By Prayer, the humble Petitioning for all requisites to that end.

Of the First we have a short Summary in the Apostles Creed.

Of the Second, in the Two Tables of the Law.

Of the Third we have an excellent Pattern in the Lords Prayer.

Of which, though the last be the only Subject of our present Discourse, yet
the First and the Second were to be mentioned, being the natural Introductions
to it.

The Apostles Creed.
I Believe in God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.

And in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord, which was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead and buried; he descended into Hell; the third day he rose again from the
dead, he ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty; From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints, the Forgiveness of Sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life
everlasting. Amen.

The two Tables of the Law.
I. THou shall have none other Gods but Me.

II. Thou shall not Worship any kind of Image.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of God in vain.

IV. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother.

VI. Thou shall do no Murder.

VII. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not Steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear False Witness.

X. Thou shall not Covet any thing that is thy neighbors.

The Lords Prayer.
OUR Father, which art in Heaven,

Hallowed be thy Name:

Thy Kingdom come:

Thy Will be done, in Earth as it is in Heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread;

And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

And lead us not into Temptation; But deliver us from evil,

For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Contents.
OF the daily practice of Devotion. Page 1 Of set Forms of Prayer. 2 Of the
Lords Prayer. 3 The Lords Prayer. 4 The Paraphrase. 5 Of the parts of Prayer. 7
Of the Difficulty of Prayer. 9 Preparatives to Prayer. 10 Preparatory Prayers.
14 A General Form of Prayer. 15 The Seven Hours of Prayer for every day. 31 The
First Hour. 35 The Second Hour. 43 Of Public Prayer the third hour. 59 The
Third Hour. 63 The Fourth Hour. 69 The Fifth Hour. 79 The Sixth Hour. 85 The
Seventh Hour. 93 Of Solemn Repentance. 109 A General form of Confession. 115 Of
the Lords Supper. 129 Of Frequent Receiving. 133 Of Preparation. 137 Prayers
before the Sacrament. 141 Before the Bread. 146 After the Bread. 147 Before the
Cup. 148 After the Cup. ibid. An Hymn. 149 After the Sacrament. 151 An
Admonition after Receiving. 153 Of Death. 157 A Prayer Preparatory to Death.
160 Lamentations and Devotions for Times of Captivity. 163 Psalms. 172 Prayers.
183 A Prayer for the Church. 190 A Prayer for the King and State. 195 A Prayer
for all Christian Princes and the Ecclesiastical State. 202
(...) Clem. Alexander. Stromat. lib. 7. p. 728.

OF THE DAILY PRACTICE OF DEVOTION.
Micah 6. 8. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk Humbly with
thy God?
Of Prayer.
AS Religion is the Life of the Soul, so Prayer is the Soul of Religion, and
the Breath by which it lives and moves, without which it is stifled up and dies.

It is a piece of Service, as most acceptable to God, so most useful to us: for
as in it we make our daily acknowledgment, and do homage as it were to the
Great King, so in it we have continual access into his high Court, to offer up
our Petitions to Him, to make known our Wants, and implore his gracious Relief.

Of set Forms of Prayer.
AND although the perpetual changeableness of all things in this transitory
Life do every day alter our occasions, and create to us new necessities; yet
our great and common wants and interests remaining still the same, in all
reason we may still use the same words to express them to God.

Our extraordinary Necessities may be added and inserted in their proper places
in our ordinary Prayers, as our daily occasions shall require.

Otherwise, being comprehended under the general heads expressed in our usual
Form, it will not always be necessary to mention them particularly to Him that
knows what things we have need of before we ask, Mat. 6. 7, 8.
and neither hears us the sooner, nor understands us the better for our many
words.

Of the Lords Prayer.
AND indeed any sober Christian may abundantly satisfy himself both of the
Lawfulness of Set Forms, and the Usefulness of Short ones, from the Direction
and Example of our Lord, who Himself prescribed to His Disciples a Brief Form
of Prayer, still remaining upon record in the Holy History, and daily used in
the Catholic Church.

Which excellent Pattern, Mat. 6. 9.
doubtless, Luke 11. 2.
we may do well to imitate in our Devotions, as that which in a fit method and
few words comprehends and sums up all necessaries; as may appear by this Short
Paraphrase.

The LORD's PRAYER.
OUR Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy Kingdom come: Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.

Give us this day our daily Bread;

And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

And lead us not into Temptation; but deliver us from Evil.

For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Paraphrase.
O Mercifnl Lord God, who have vouchsafed to adopt and receive us Thy unworthy
Creatures into the number of Thy Children, and Heirs of thy Kingdom, we beseech
Thee grant us the assistance of Thy Grace, that we may reverently worship Thee,
diligently serve Thee, and readily and cheerfully obey Thy holy Will here on
Earth, even as those Blessed Spirits do in Heaven.

And whereas by reason of our many weaknesses and Frailties we are often
hindered, and always negligent in the performance of these Duties, We beseech
Thee continually to relieve and supply us with all Spiritual and Temporal
necessaries, for our help and furtherance in thy Service.

And in whatsoever we have hih^erto been wanting, or have otherwise
transgressed Thy Holy Will, We beseech Thee mercifully pass by and pardon it,
even as we our selves do heartily and sincerely forgive all those who have
wronged or offended us.

And that we may not for the future fall again into the like sins, We beseech
Thee graciously to assist and preserve us in all Temptations, and powerfully
defend and deliver us from all the assaults of our daily Enemies, the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil.

For Thou, O Lord, art the Supreme King; Thou art able to do All things, and to
Thee is due the Honor and Glory of All, both in this world, and that which is
to come. Amen.

And thus the very excellency of the Prayer it self, both for the Matter and
Method, beside the dignity and veneration of the Author, may sufficiently
commend it to our use: it serving so properly either for a Beginning, or a
Conclusion to our other Devotions.

Of the Parts of Prayer.
THE several sorts or parts of Prayer are by the Apostle reduced to these four
Heads, 1 Timothy 2. 1.

SUPPLICATION. PRAYER. INTERCESSION. THANKSGIVING.
I. Supplication is the Confessing of Sins, and imploring Pardon and
Reconciliation with God. II. Prayer is the petitioning for supply of all good
things, Spiritual and Temporal, which we have need or use of, for our Souls or
Bodies. III. Intercession is the praying for others, as well as our selves,
extending to all sorts and states of men in the world. IV. Thanksgiving is the
returning of Praise to God for all his Mercies and Blessings bestowed on us.
And this last is the most pleasant and delightful part of all the worship of
God, according to that saying of the Prophet David, It is a good thing to sing
Praises unto our God, yea a joyful and pleasant thing it is to be thankful,
Psalm. 14. 7. 1.

Of the Difficulty of Prayer.
FOR otherwise Prayer, in respect of the other parts, (though as it is
ordinarily used or abused, it be taken for an ordinary matter, yet indeed) to
perform it rightly and duly, is the highest and hardest piece of all the
service of God.

For (beside the qualifications required to fit us for the preformance of it)
Prayer being in it self a Duty wholly Spiritual, and requiring a Spiritual
intention of the Soul to God, it will be found a very difficult and rare thing
for us, who are continually clogged and incumbered with Flesh and blood, so to
abstract our thoughts from all bodily and worldly things, as to place them
freely and purely upon an invisible Object.

And to this occasion the craft of our old Enemy is no way wanting, who as he
is always impertinently interposing in every good action, so is he never more
importunate and impudent than when we are busy at our Devotions.

Preparatives to Prayer.
I. THerefore in this, as in all other things, before you begin sit down and
consider with your self what you are about to do. II. Resolve, that to make any
Address to God, without a Resolution at least to set your self heartily and
wholly to his Service, is not only fruitless, but hurtful, and that which will
turn your very Prayer into sin.

For to hope for any favor at his hands, and yet continue in your sinful
course, is to make him such an one as your self.

III. Remember your own meanness, and the Majesty of Him to whom you speak;
that he is the Great King sitting in Heaven, and you a poor worm creeping on
the Earth. IV. Consider how unworthy you are to receive the least favor from
him, whom you have so often and so highly provoked in despite of his continual
mercies to you. V. Consider how great a favor and benefit you enjoy in this
liberty of approaching and speaking to God. VI. Be sober and moderate in your
Petitions regulating and submitting your desires, both for the Matter, and
Manner, and Measure, and Season, to his Wisdom and Will. VII. Remember that he
is a Spirit, and sees into the heart, and therefore not only your words and
behavior, but also your thoughts and imaginations must be such as may not
offend his pure eyes. VIII. Let your Praying be rather frequent than long, that
the tediousness of many words may not weary and dull the Devotion of your Mind.
IX. Recollect and take up your thoughts from the world and worldly things, that
they may be wholly intent upon the business you are about.

And this you may do by a short Meditation, or preparatory Prayer, or reading
somewhat in the Scripture, or some other pious Book.

X. Now when you have thus brought your gift to the Altar, Mat. 5. 23.
remember the advice of your Savior; first put away all malice and hatred out
of your heart, and forgive all others before you presume to ask pardon for your
self.

And know that this is a qualification so necessary, so essential to the due
performance of any Devotions, that our Savior in that very short Prayer of his
own thought it worth the mentioning, and that as a kind of Condition, Mat. 6.
12, 14, 15.
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.


Preparatory Prayers.
GIve ear to my words, O Lord, consider my meditation.

Hearken to the voice of my cry, my King and my God, for unto Thee will I Pray,
Psalm. 5. 1, 2.

Thou that hear the prayer, unto Thee shall all flesh come.

Let not my Lord be angry if I, who am but dust and ashes, presume to approach
and speak unto Thee: O Thou that art easy to be entreated, and rejoycest in
doing good, bow down thy gentle ear, and hear me, and have mercy upon me.

Raise up my soul, and sanctify my heart and lips, that I may ask those things
which are most agreeable to thy holy Will.

Let the words of my mouth, Psalm. 19. 14.
and the meditations of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my Strength
and my Redeemer.

A General Form of Prayer.
HEar my Prayer, O Lord, Psalm. 27. 8.
and hearken to the voice of my supplication, when I cry unto Thee, 28. 2.
when I lift up my hands toward the Mercy-seat of thy holy Temple.

O Holy Lord God, whose pure eyes will not behold iniquity, I the vilest of all
thy Creation, and most sinful among all the sons of men, do yet presume to cast
my self down before the footstool of thy Throne of Grace, Esth. 5. 2.
humbly beseeching Thee to stretch forth Thy Golden Scepter of Peace, that I
may touch it, and not die, but live to praise thy mercy.

I confess, Psalm. 51. 5.
O Lord, that I was even conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity; and
though thou had washed me from that Original Pollution of Nature in the holy
Fountain of Baptism, yet have I since again defiled my self with all manner of
actual Abominations.

O my God, Ezr. 9. 6, 7.
I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face unto thee, for mine iniquities are
increased over mine head, and my trespasses are waxed great unto the Heavens.
Since the days of my youth I am in a great trespass, and my whole life is
nothing else but a continued transgression of thy Law, and provocation of thy
wrath.

I have but slightly performed, or neglected, and wholly omitted, and even
contemned those Duties and Services which thou requirest of me: but have
greedily committed, and carelessly, and even presumptuously continued in those
sins which thou have strictly forbidden, and severely threatened.

So that if thou should enter into judgment with thy Servant, I could expect
nothing but to receive my portion with hypocrites and unbelievers, and to be
cast out into utter darkness, in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone
for evermore.

But thou, O Lord, which desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that he
should turn from his wickedness and live; turn thou me, O good God, turn me
from all my transgressions, and let not iniquity be my ruin.

Open thou mine eyes, and awaken my dull and stony heart, that I may see and
understand the vileness and misery of my sinful state; that I may hate, and
abhor, and forsake all my evil ways, and turn to thee with all my heart and
with all my strength.

Give me that Godly sorrow which works true repentance; 2 Cor. 7. 10.
forgive and put away all my sins and offenses, nail them to the Cross of Jesus
Christ, and bury them in his Grave, that they may never rise up in judgment
against me.

Receive me, O my Father, and be reconciled unto me in the mercies and merits
of thy dear Son: for his sake restore me again to thy grace and favor, and the
light of thy countenance, and establish me with thy free Spirit, Psalm. 51. 12.

Send down the dew of thy heavenly grace, the light of thy Holy Spirit into my
heart, to lead me in thy way, and enable me to walk in it.

Give me strength to resist all temptations, and to stand against all assaults
of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; that no Allurement may draw, no Terror
may drive me from the straight path of thy Service, but that I may persevere in
it to the end of my days; that having lived in thy fear, I may die in thy
favor, rest in thy peace, rise in thy power, and reign with thee for ever in
thy Glory.

And thou, Mat. 6. 33.
O Lord, which have promised to add all other necessaries to them which seek
first thy Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, remember me also with thy
temporal blessings, as shall seem best unto thee, and may be most for the
advancement of mine Eternal Interest.

Give me health of Body, soundness of Mind, competence of means, comfort of
Friends, peace in this world, and contentment of mind what state soever thou
shall please to call me to.

Give me grace to set my heart not on things below, but on things above; that I
may cheerfully expect when it shall please thee to translate me from thy
blessings in this world to the joys of thy Eternal Kingdom.

And thou, O Lord, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
which have commanded us to make prayers and supplications for all others as
well as our selves, we beseech thee to extend thy mercy and goodness to all
mankind in all the corners of the Earth.

Open and enlighten the eyes of them that sit in darkness and the shadow of
death, Luke 1. 79.
and guide their feet into the way of peace: that thy way may be known upon
earth, and thy saving health among all nations, Psalm. 67. 2.

Enlarge the bounds of thy Catholic Church: Unite and sanctify all that are
already received into her bosom, and restore her to her ancient purity and
prosperity.

Send such Priests whose lips may preserve knowledge, and make the People
diligent to seek thy Law at their mouth; and so direct and rule both Priests
and People, that by their holy conversation they may shine as Lights in the
midst of a crooked and perverse generation.

And thou who have promised to make Kings and Queens the Nursing Fathers and
Nursing Mothers of thy Church, Isai.
protect all the Governments of the world, especially Christian Kings and
Princes, and more particularly Him whom thy particular Providence has placed
over us.

Preserve and prosper him in all his ways; give him success in all his
undertakings and actions, that having lived and ruled here in justice, piety,
prosperity, peace, and happiness, he may quietly pass from this earthly and
transitory to a heavenly and eternal Crown.

Bless his Illustrious Family, and the whole State under him. Distribute thy
blessings to every one as thou shall judge most meet, and as may best fit, and
enable, and encourage them in their several Places and Callings, in the
performance of their duties of Worship and Obedience to thee, and of justice,
and Honesty, and Charity to their Brethren,

Bless all those to whom I am bound by any special Relation.

Parents, Friends, Kindred, Benefactors, Family.
Thou, O Lord, know the Name and place of every one, Thou know our
several desires and wants: We beseech Thee to proportion thy reliefs and
blessings to every one, that we may be mutual helps and comforts to each other
in our passage through this vale of misery and tears.

Have mercy and compassion upon all that are under any calamity in body, or
mind, or outward condition, especially those that suffer for righteousness
sake: Give them Patience to bear, and Prudence to make a right use of all their
Afflictions; and in thine own good time relieve and restore them here, or take
them away from these temporal miseries to thine eternal rest in Heaven.

And let not my Lord be angry, Gen 18. 32.
and I will speak but this once, and that in obedience to thy command, Mat. 5.
44.
for our Enemies, Slanderers, and Oppressors, especially those that have caused
or increased the public Distractions: Lord, restrain their malice, and open
their Eyes and Hearts, that they may see the crookedness of their own ways, and
return into the straight path of meekness and Charity; that we may live
together in Peace here, and reign together in thy Glory hereafter.

And that our Ingratitude for Thy former Blessings may not make us more
unworthy and incapable of the future, we humbly desire to offer up our
sacrifice of Praise and Thansgiving for all thy goodness and loving kindness
multiplied and continued upon us.

That Thou have been pleased to create us men after thine own Image, the most
excellent of all the works of thy hands.

And when by our own sin and fall we had made our selves worse than the vilest
of all thy Creation, Thou were yet pleased to find out a means of Redemption
and Reconciliation, by the death and satisfaction of thine own only Son.

And have farther vouchsafed in some measure to shed abroad in our hearts the
good gifts and graces of thy holy Spirit, to excite, enable, and encourage us
in the performance of thy Service here, and to seal to us the good hope of
eternal happiness with Thee hereafter.

That Thou have vouchsafed me to be born of Christian Parents, and brought up
in the bosom of thy Church, and nourished with the sincere milk of thy word,
and to live under the glorious Sunshine of thy Gospel:

That Thou have bestowed on me sufficient endowments and abilities of Nature,
as soundness of mind, and health of body; and withal a competence of means,
comfort of friends, and other conveniences and contentments of life:

That Thou have preserved me from my Childhood until now from all mischiefs and
dangers, and have not cut me off in the midst of my sins, but allowed me space
of Repentance, and brought me safe thus far of my life to this present day.

These and all other thine innumerable and inestimable mercies, O Lord, as we
had nothing in us to deserve them, so have we nothing to return for them, but
an acknowledgment of our extreme unworthiness of any the least of them.

We therefore offer up our selves unto Thee, beseeching thee graciously to
receive us, and sanctify thy mercies to us, and us to thy service; that we may
make use of them to the honor and glory of thy Name, and the eternal good of
our own Souls.

O Holy Lord God, that know our necessities before we ask, and our ignorance
in asking, have mercy upon our infirmities, pass by and pardon the
imperfections of our Prayers; bow down thy gentle ear, and hear, and grant
these our requests as shall seem good to Thee.

And whatsoever else thou know more useful or expedient for me or any of thy
servants:

Thou that know to give good gifts, we beseech Thee choose for us, and give
us those things:

And all for His sake who has given us confidence to come unto Thee, and ask
in His name, and has taught us to sum up all our Prayers in his own words,
saying,

OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread, and
forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead
us not into temptation, but diliver us from Evil. For Thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Numb. 6. 24. The Lord bless us, and keep us;

The Lord make his face to shine upon us, and be gracious unto us.

The Lord lift up his countenance upon us, and give us Peace.

2 Cor. 13. 14. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and
the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with us all. Amen.

THE SEVEN HOURS OF PRAYER FOR EVERY DAY.
Psalm. 119. 164. Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous
judgments. Psalm. 119. 62. At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto thee.
NOW for the Times of Prayer, our Saviors Counsel is, Luke 18. 1.
that men ought always to pray, and not to faint; adding a Parable to show us
the virtue of Importunity. Ephesians. 6. 18.
S. Paul's is agreeable, 1 These. 5. 17.
Praying always, and without ceasing, that is, frequently and constantly.

Among the Ancients it was no less than seven times a day: (Nay David and S.
Paul add the eighth, Psalm. 119. 62.
at Midnight; Acts 16. 25.
so that every third hour of the Night, as well as of the Day, was begun with
the solemnity of Prayer.)

And this Pattern I have thought worthy to be commended to the practice of all
pious Christians: For the having so often recourse to Heaven, must need make us
more careful of our conversation on Earth.

Yet this without any design of laying a burden upon those, whose Occasions or
Devotion will not so often serve them: only wishing, that they who cannot
afford so many, though so small portions of the day, to their Maker, would yet
join with David and Daniel, at least three times a day; or at the least of
leasts, twice; that the outgoings of the Morning and Evening may praise him.

The rest may be supplied by lifting up the eyes of their Souls to Heaven with
some short and hearty Ejaculation, though in midst of any Employment, of any
Company.

THE FIRST HOUR OF PRAYER, AT THE Morning Watch or Cock-Crowing; About III. in
the Morning.
Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light. Romans 13. 12. The night is far spent, the day is at hand;
let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor
of light. Ephesians. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness.
O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee, Psalm. 63. 1.

My soul flies unto the Lord before the Morning Watch, I say, before the
Morning Watch, Psalm. 130. 6.

Have I not remembered thee in my bed, and thought upon thee when I was waking?
Psalm. 63. 7.

Mine eyes prevent the Night Watches, that I might meditate in thy word, Psalm.
119. 148.

OUR Father, which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name; thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread; and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil.

For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, open thou my lips,

And my mouth shall show forth thy praise, Psalm. 51. 15.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Psalm. 139. O Lord, thou have searched me out, and known me; thou know my
down-sitting and mine up-rising; thou understandest my thoughts long before.

Thou art about my path and about my bed, and spiest out all my ways.

For lo there is not a word in my tongue, but thou, O Lord, know it
altogether.

Thou have fashioned me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me.

Such knowledge is too wonderful and excellent for me, I cannot attain unto it.

Whither shall I go then from thy Spirit? or whither shall I go then from thy
Presence?

If I climb up into Heaven, thou art there; if I go down to Hell, thou art
there also.

If I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of the
Sea;

Even there also shall thy Hand lead me, and thy Right Hand shall hold me.

If I say, peradventure the darkness shall cover me, then shall my night be
turned to day.

Yea, the darkness is no darkness with thee, but the night is as clear as the
day: the darkness and light to thee are both alike.

For my reins are thine, thou have covered me in my mothers womb.

I will give thanks unto thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made;
mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

My bones are not hid from thee, though I be made secretly, and fashioned
beneath in the Earth.

Thine eye did see my substance yet being unperfect, and in thy Book were all
my members written,

Which day by day were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.

How dear are thy counsels unto me, O God! O how great is the sum of them!

If I tell them, they are more in number than the sand. When I wake up, I am
present with thee.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

O Lord God, who by the power of thy Word did produce a glorious Light out of
Darkness, Mal. 4. 2.
Let thy Sun of Righteousness with healing in his wings arise upon us, and
enlighten the darkness of our hearts, and rescue us from the shadow of death;
that we may walk in the light of thy Grace here, and rejoice in the light of
thy Glory in thy Heavenly Kingdom hereafter, through the same Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

And the very God of Peace sanctify us wholly, 1 These. 5. 23.
that our whole Spirit, and Soul, and body, may be preseved blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE SECOND HOUR OF PRAYER, AT THE Sunrising, or First Hour of the day. About
VI. in the Morning.
Eccles 11. 9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight
of thine Eyes:

But know thou that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment.

Chap. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure
in them.
MORNING.
I Laid me down and slept, and rose up again, and the Lord sustained me, Psalm.
3. 5.

I. As soon as you open your eyes, Psalm. 121. 1.
lift them up unto the Hills from whence comes your help, and begin the work
of the day with thanksgiving to God, who has delivered you from the dangers of
the forepassed night, refreshed your weary body with quiet sleep, and brought
you safely to the beginning of another day.

II. Consider, That perhaps many others, no worse than you, have this night
been hurried from their beds to the bar of Judgment, and there received a sad
sentence of eternal woe; yet God of his infinite and undeserved goodness has
spared you until now, to repent and prepare your accounts.

III. Return him all possible thanks and praise for this inestimable mercy: and
commend your self to his Grace and protection for the following day, and the
rest of your life; humbly beseeching him to continue his mercy and goodness to
you, in preserving you from all evils, and supplying you with all neccssaries
spiritual and temporal; and implore his Grace to guide and direct you in all
your undertakings and actions, as may most conduce to the glory of his great
Name, and the good of your own soul.

IV. Consider what sin or sins you have more especially been guilty of
yesterday, or since the last time of your solemn repentance; and resolve by the
grace of God assisting you, to avoid those sins, and all occasions of them.

V. Consider what you have to do this day: Resolve, not to spend it in idleness
or evil employments; and be careful to undertake nothing, in which you cannot
with confidence and a good conscience desire the gracious assistance of God,
without which all endeavor and industry, all toil and travel is vain and
fruitless.

Whatsoever thou take in hand, remember the end, and thou shall never do
amiss, Ecclus. 7. 36.

VI. Keep diligent watch over your self in all your ways: and where you find
you have gone awry, delay not to return presently: for the longer you go
forward, the farther you have back again, and the less time left for that and
the rest of your Journey.

VII. Be careful of your precious Time, that you do not lose it in doing
nothing, or cast it away on that which is worse: for you know not how soon you
may be called to account for every idle and ill-spent minute.

Resolve to spend this day as that which, for ought you know, may be your last:
and remember, that as the Night, so Death draws on every hour, and may perhaps
overtake you before Midday.

Morning Prayer.

O Let me hear thy Loving kindness betimes in the morning, for in thee is my
trust. Show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my Soul unto
thee, Psalm. 143. 8.

O hearken unto the voice of my calling, my King and my God; for utto the will
I make my Prayer.

My voice shall thou hear betimes, O Lord: early in the morning will I direct
my Prayer unto thee, and will look up.

But make me to remember that thou art God, and have no pleasure in wickedness,
neither shall any evil dwell with thee, Psalm. 5. 2, 3, 4.

OUR Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name; thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread; and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, open thou my lips.

And my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Psalm. 19. THE Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handy work.

One day tells another, and one night certifieth another.

There is neither speech nor language, but their voices are heard among them.

Their sound is gone out into all Lands, and their words into the ends of the
world.

In them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which comes forth as a
Bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a Giant to run his course.

It goes forth from the uttermost part of the Heaven, and runs about unto
the end of it again; and there is nothing hid from the Heat thereof.

The Law of the Lord is an undefiled Law, converting the Soul: the Testimony of
the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple.

The Statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the Heart; the Commandment of
the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes.

The Fear of the Lord is clean, and indureth for ever: the judgments of the
Lord are true and righteous altogether.

More to be desired are they than Gold, yea than much fine Gold: sweeter also
than Honey and the Honeycomb.

Moreover, by them is thy servant taught: and in keeping of them there is great
reward.

Who can tell how often he offends! O cleanse thou me from my secret faults.

Keep thy servant also from presumtuous sins, left they get the dominion over
me: so shall I be undefiled and innocent from the great offense.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be always
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

The Song of Zachary.

BLessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people: Luke 1. 68.

And has raised up a mighty Salvation for us in the House of his Servant David.

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the world
began.

That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate
us.

To perform the mercy promised to our Forefathers, and to remember his holy
Covenant.

To perform the Oath which he swear to our Forefather Abraham, that he would
give us.

That we, being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him
without fear;

In holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.

And thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest, for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways,

To give knowledge of Salvation to his people for the remission of their sins,

Through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the dayspring from on high has
visited us,

To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to
guide our feet into the way of peace.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

BLessed be thy holy Name, O Lord, who have showed me the light of thy
countenance, and have delivered me from the darkness and dangers of this night,
and refreshed me with quiet sleep; and raised me up again as it were from the
grave, and restored me to life, and the joyful light of another day.

Give me grace to make it a resurrection to newness of life also, that I may
spend this day, and all that thou shall yet be pleased to add to it, in thy
Service, to the Glory of thy Name, and the Good of my own Soul.

O Lord, blot out as a nightmist mine iniquities, and scatter my sins as a
morning cloud, Isai. 44. 22.

Grant that I may become a Child of the Light and of the Day; 1 These. 5. 5. 8.
that I may walk soberly, Romans 13. 13.
chastely, and honestly as in the day.

Open thou mine eyes that I may see, Psalm. 119. 18, 36, 133.
incline my heart that I may affect, and order my steps that I may walk and run
in the way of thy Commandments.

Hold me fast, and keep me close by thee. Guide me with thy Hand. Uphold me
when I am falling: lift me up when I am down. Reduce me when I go astray, and
hedge in my way, that I find not the path to follow after vanity.

Keep me in all my ways, Psalm. 91. 2.
and defend me from all the dangers and evils of this day, Psalm. 121. 8.
O Lord, preserve my going out and coming in, from this time for evermore.

And now, O Lord, I offer up my self a living Sacrifice unto thee, beseeching
thee mercifully and graciously to receive me. Cleanse me from all my
Pollutions; heal all my infirmities, and sanctify all the Powers and Faculties
of my Soul and Body to thy service this day; that in all my thoughts, words,
and works, I may always have an eye to that Supreme end of my Creation; and so
order the whole course of my life, that I may be always ready and prepared for
death, and that severe account which I must one day make unto thee, that so I
may do it with joy and not with sorrow, and receive that Crown which thou have
promised to them that persevere unto the end, Heb. 13. 17.

And with my self I commend unto thee all whom any bond of Nature, or
Freindship, or Religion, commands me to pray for; especially --

-- and all that have at any time done good to me, thou, O Lord, do good to
them, and reward them sevenfold into their bosom.

Preserve us, O Lord, Psalm. 121. 7.
from all evil: O Lord I beseech thee, Jude 24.
keep our Souls; keep us from falling, and present us faultless before the
presence of thy Glory at that day.

And the Peace of God, Phil. 4. 7.
which passes all understanding, Com. Pr.
keep our hearts and minds in the Knowledge and Love of God, and of his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord.

And the Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be
with us this day, the rest of our lives, and for evermore. Amen.

OF PUBLIC PRAYER AT THE THIRD HOVR.
Psalm. 119. 9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way?

Even by ruling himself after thy Word.

Psalm. 111. 10. The Fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. A good
understanding have all they that do thereafter. The praise of it endures for
ever.
NOW as Private Prayer has this Promise of our Savior, that being performed
in the Closet secretly, Mat. 6. 6.
it shall yet be rewarded openly: Mat. 18. 20.
so, much more when two or three are gathered together in his Name, has he
promised to be in the midst of them, and hear their requests.

This therefore being the usual Hour wherein the Public Service of the Church
is every day to be celebrated, this Private Form is far from any purpose to
supplant the use, or pretense to supply the want of that.

Which though it be now by the Children of this generation shamefully east out
of the House of God, yet certainly all true Children of the Church will receive
it into their own Houses, and make their Family their Congregation.

But they that want even this Convenience also, may yet at least perform their
part of the Public Duty in the Privacy of their Closet, and comfort themselves
with this Consideration, that the Prayers which are sent up from never so
diverse and distant places on Earth, yet all meet together in the High Court of
Heaven.

The following Form therefore is intended for no more than a Preparation to the
Public. And so likewise at the Fifth Hour, whereon the Evening Service of the
Church is to be celebrated.

THE THIRD HOUR OF PRAYER, AT THE Third Hour of the Day, About IX. in the
Morning.
HEar my Prayer, O God, and hide not thy self from my Petition.

OUR Father, which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name; thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread; and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from all evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, open thou my lips,

And my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Psalm. 25. UNto thee, O Lord, will I lift up my Soul. My God I have put my
trust in thee; O let me not be confounded, neither let mine enemies triumph
over me.

For all they that hope in thee shall not be ashamed; but such as trangress
without a cause shall be put to confusion.

Show me thy ways, O Lord, and teach me thy paths.

Lead me forth in thy Truth, and learn me; for thou art the God of my
Salvation. In thee has been my hope all the day long.

Call to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindness,
which has been ever of old.

O remember not the sins and offenses of my Youth: but according to thy mercy
think thou upon me, O Lord, for thy goodness.

Gracious and righteous is the Lord, therefore will we teach sinners in the way.

Them that be meek shall he guide in judgment: and such as be gentle, them
shall he learn his way.

All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his Covenant
and his Testimonies.

For thy Names sake, O Lord be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

What man is he that fears the Lord? Him shall he teach in the way that he
shall choose.

His Soul shall dwell at ease, and his Seed shall inherit the Land.

The Secret of the Lord is among them that fear him, and he will show them his
Covenant.

Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of
the Net.

Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in misery.

The sorrows of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my troubles.

Look upon my adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sin.

Consider mine Enemies how many they are, and they bear a tyrannous hate
against me.

O keep my Soul and deliver me: let me not be confounded, for I have put my
trust in thee.

Let perfectness and righteous dealing wait upon me, for my hope has been in
thee.

Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

ALmighty Lord God, who have created all things for thine own Glory and
Service, give us grace to direct all our thoughts, words, and works to that one
end, that so having served thee faithfully here, we may glorify thee eternally
in thy Kingdom hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

NOW unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, Ephesians. 3. 20.
according to the Power that works in us; unto him be Glory in the Church by
Christ Jesus, throughout all ages world without end. Amen.

THE FOURTH HOUR OF PRAYER, AT THE Sixth Hour, or Midday, About XII. at Noon.
Psalm. 34. 12. What man is he that lusts to live, and would fain see good
days?

Keep thy Tongue from Evil, and thy Lips that they speak no Guile:

Eschew Evil, and do Good:

Seek Peace, and ensue it.

Psalm. 102. 24. O my God, take me not away in the midst of m^e Age. As for thy
years they endure throughout all Generations.
HEar me when I call, O God of my righteousness; have mercy upon me, and
hearken unto my Prayer, Psalm. 4. 1.

OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread, and
forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead
us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil. For Thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, open thou my lips:

And my mouth shall show forth thy Praise.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

Psalm. 27. THE Lord is my light and my salvation, of whom then shall I fear?
The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid?

When the wicked (even mine enemies and my foes) came upon me to eat my flesh,
they stumbled and fell.

Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid:
and though there rose up war against me, yet will I put my trust in him.

One thing I have desired of the Lord, which I will require, even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.

For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his Tabernable, yea in the
secret place of his dwelling shall he hide me, and set me up upon a rock of
stone.

And now shall he lift up mine head above mine enemies round about me.

Therefore will I offer in his dwelling an oblation with great gladness, I will
sing and speak praises unto the Lord.

Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry unto Thee; have mercy upon me, and
hear me.

My heart has talked of thee, Seek ye my face; thy face, Lord, will I seek.

O hide not Thou thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure.

Thou have been my succor: leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
salvation.

When my father and mother forsake me, the Lord takes me up.

Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in the right way, because of mine
enemies.

Deliver me not over into the will of mine adversaries; for there are false
witnesses risen up against me, and such as speak wrong.

I should utterly have fainted, but that I believe verily to see the goodness
of the Lord in the land of the living.

O tarry thou the Lords leisure: be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart,
and put thou thy trust in the Lord.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

The Song of SS. Ambrose and Augustine.

WE praise Thee, O Lord, we acknowledge Thee to be the Lord.

All the Earth does worship Thee the Father everlasting.

To thee all Angels cry aloud, the Heavens, and all the Powers therein;

To Thee Cherubim and Seraphim continually do cry,

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath.

Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory.

The glorious company of the Apostles praise Thee.

The goodly fellowship of the Prophets praise Thee;

The noble Army of Martyrs praise Thee;

The Holy Church throughout all the world does acknowledge Thee,

The Father of an infinite Majesty,

Thine honorable, true, and only Son,

Also the Holy Ghost, the Comforter.

Thou art the King of Glory, O Christ,

Thou art the Everlasting Son of the Father.

When thou tookest upon Thee to deliver man, Thou did not abhor the Virgins
womb.

When Thou had overcome the sharpness of Death, Thou did open the kingdom
of heaven to all believers.

Thou sit at the right hand of God in the Glory of the Father.

We believe that thou shall come to be our Judge.

We therefore pray Thee help thy servants whom Thou have redeemed deemed with
thy precious blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints in Glory everlasting.

O Lord save thy people, and bless thine heritage:

Govern them and lift them up for ever.

Day by day we magnify Thee,

And worship thy Name ever world without end.

Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord, have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us.

O Lord let thy mercy lighten upon us, as our Trust is in thee.

O Lord in the have I trusted; let me never be confounded.

WE humbly beseech Thee, Com. Pr.
O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and for the glory of thy
Names sake turn from us all those evils that we most justly have deserved: and
grant that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust and confidence in thy
mercy, and evermore serve Thee in holiness and pureness of living, to thy
Honor and Glory, through our only Mediator and advocate, Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

NOW the God of peace, Heb. 13. 20.
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the
Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make us perfect in every
good work to do his will, working in us that which is well-pleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

THE FIFTH HOUR OF PRAYER, AT THE Ninth Hour of the Day, About III. Afternoon.
Preparative to the Public.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 2, 3. 4. The day of the Lord so comes as a Thief in the night:

For when they shall say, Peace and Safety, then sudden destruction comes upon
them as Travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape.

But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a
thief.


ENter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy fight shall no
man living be justified, Psalm. 143. 2.

OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread, and
forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from Evil. For Thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, open thou my lips,

And my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Psalm. 39. I Said I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not in my tongue.

I will keep my mouth as it were with a bridle, while the ungodly is in my
sight.

I held my tongue and spoke nothing. I kept silence yea even from good words;
but it was pain and grief to me.

My heart was hot within me, and while I was thus musing, the fire kindled, and
at last I spoke with my tougue.

Lord, let me know mine end, and the number of my days, that I may be certified
how long I have to live.

Behold, Thou have made my days as it were a span long, and mine age is even as
nothing in respect of Thee; and verily every man living is altogether vanity.

For man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain; he heapeth
up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.

And now, Lord, what is my hope? truly my hope is even in Thee.

Deliver me from all mine offenses, and make me not a rebuke unto the foolish.

I became dumb, and opened not my mouth, for it was thy doing.

Take thy plague away from me; I am even consumed by the means of thy heavy
hand,

When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, Thou make his beauty to
consume away, like as it were a Moth fretting a garment: every man therefore is
but vanity.

Hear my prayer, O God, and with thine ears consider my calling: hold not thy
peace at my tears.

For I am a stranger with Thee and a sojourner, as all my fathers were.

O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength before I go hence, and be
no more seen.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the begininng, is now, and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

O God from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do
proceed, work in us thy unprofitable servants both to will and to do, Phil. 2.
13.
that the Glory of both may return to Thee the giver of every good and perfect
gift, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

NOW unto Him that is able to keep us from falling, Jude 24.
and to present us faultless before the presence of his Glory with exceeding
joy; to the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and
Power, now and for ever. Amen.

THE SIXTH HOUR OF PRAYER, AT THE Twelfth or Last Hour of the Day, About VI. in
the Evening.
Deuteronomy. 32. 29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end. Job 14. 1, 2. Man that is born of a woman is
of few days, and full of trouble: he comes forth like a flower, and is cut
down; he flees also as a shadow, and continues not.
PRaise the Lord, Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3, 4.
O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits,

Which forgiveth all thy sin, and heals all thy infirmities;

Which saves thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and
loving kindness.

OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread, and
forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from Evil. For Thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, open thou my lips.

And my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Psalm. 90. LOrd Thou have been our refuge from one generation to another.

Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were
made, Thou art God from everlasting, and world without end.

Thou turnest man to destruction: again thou say, come again ye children of
men.

For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, seeing that is past as
a watch in the night.

As soon as thou scatterest them they are even as a sleep, and fade away
suddenly like the grass:

In the morning it is green, and grows up; but in the evening it is cut down,
dried up and withered.

For we consume away in thy displeasure, and are afraid at thy wrathful
indignation.

Thou have set our misdeeds before thee, and our secret sins in the sight of
thy countenance.

For when Thou art angry, all our days are gone; we bring our years to an end,
as it were a tale that is told.

The days of our age are threescore years and ten; and though men be so strong
that they come to fourscore years, yet is their strength then but labor and
sorrow; so soon passes it away, and we are gone.

But who regards the power of thy wrath? for even thereafter as a man
fears, so is thy displeasure.

O teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

Turn Thee again, O Lord, at the last, and be gracious unto thy servants.

O satisfy us with thy mercy and that soon; so shall we rejoice and be glad
all the days of our life.

Comfort us again now after the time that thou have plagued us, and for the
years wherein we have suffered adversity.

Show thy servants thy work, and their children thy glory.

And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon us. Prosper Thou the work
of our hands upon us, O prosper Thou our handiwork.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

The Song of S. Mary.

MY soul does magnify the Lord, Luke 1. 46.
and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

For he has regarded the lowliness of his hand-maiden.

For behold from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed:

For he that is Mighty has magnified me, and Holy is his name.

And his mercy is on them that fear him throughout all generations.

He has showed strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts;

He has put down the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble and
meek.

He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty
away.

He remembering his mercy has helped his servant Israel, as he promised to our
forefathers Abraham and his seed for ever.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it wrs in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

O Lord God, who have created the light and darkness, and by the continual
interchanges of day and night put us in mind of our transitory condition,
and the shortness of our abode here, Give us grace to set our selves about the
work of salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2.
while the day of salvation lasts; that when the night of death comes, and
our Lord shall call us to account, we may receive the reward of good and
faithful servants, Mat. 5. 21.
and enter into the joy of our Master Jesus Christ. Amen.

NOW our Lord Jesus Christ himself, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16.
and God even our Father, which has loved us, and has given us everlasting
consolation, and good hope through grace, comfort our hearts, and stablish us
in every good word and work.

To Him be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

THE SEVENTH HOUR OF PRAYER, AT Bedtime, About IX. at Night.
Mark 13. 33. Take ye heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is.
Mat. 26. 41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. Job 1. 21.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither. Chap.
14. 12. Man lies down, and rises not; till the heavens be no more they shall
not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep.
EVENING.
I. AS you began, so end, the day with God, in thanks and praise, that he has
graciously preserved you hitherto; and in prayer to him, that he will vouchsafe
still to continue his mercy and protection to you.

II. Remember that your days are but a span long, that in the midst of life you
are in death, and every day brings you nearer to that long night.

III. Consider, that perhaps many others, no worse than you, have this day been
cut off in the midst of their days and sins, and cast into the place of
darkness; yet the long-suffering of God has spared you until now, to make up
your accounts.

IV. Show your self truly thankful for this inestimable favor, by making right
use of it, spending the time which is given you in doing some good, in working
while it is called to day, before the night comes, wherein no man can work.

V. The Evening of the day is now come upon you, and for ought you know the end
of your life may be as nigh at hand, when you shall be called to account how
you have spent your time here.

VI. Begin therefore with your self beforehand.

When you have done with the world, and all business and company, and are
retired to your privacy and quiet, sit down and call your self to a strict
account how you have spent this day; what you have done, what you have left
undone; what good you have neglected, what evil you have committed.

Where you perceive you have done well, give thanks to God, and ascribe it and
all the Honor of it to him alone, who has enabled you to perform it, working
in you both to will and to do.

Where you have omitted your duty, or otherwise done ill, confess and humble
your self before him, and earnestly desire pardon and reconciliation.

If you have wronged or offended any one this day, desire God to forgive you,
and resolve to make satisfaction. If any one have wronged or offended you,
freely forgive them, and desire God to confirm your pardon by adding his.

How can he sleep at quiet that is not at peace with God, and in charity with
the World?

And consider that if this be done constantly and sincerely every night,
whenever it shall please God to call you to judgment, you will have but one
day to answer for.

VII. The Son of Man comes as a thief in the night, Mat. 24. 44.
at an hour when you are not aware: be careful that he may find you watching,
and employed about his Service.

Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing,
Mat. 24. 46.

Evening Prayer.

IN the night I lift up my hands toward thy Sanctuary, and bless thy Name,
Psalm. 134. 2, 3.

The Lord has granted his loving kindness in the daytime, and in the
night-season also will I sing of him, and make my prayer unto the God of my
life, Psalm. 42. 10.

As long as I live will I magnify thee in this manner, and lift up my hands in
thy Name.

Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the Incense, and let the lifting up
of my hands be an Evening Sacrifice, Psalm. 14. 1, 2.

OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread, and
forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead
us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil. For Thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, open thou my lips,

And my mouth shall show forth thy Praise.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

Psalm. 91. Whosoever dwells under the defense of the most High, shall abide under
the shadow of the Almighty.

I will say unto the Lord, Thou art my hope, and my strong hold; my God, in him
will I trust.

For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome
pestilence.

He shall defend thee under his wings, and thou shall be safe under his
feathers. His Faithfulness and Truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

Thou shall not be afraid for any terror by night, nor for the arrow that
flies by day:

For the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the sickness that
destroys in the noonday.

A thousand shall fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it
shall not come nigh thee.

Yea with thine eyes shall thou behold, and see the reward of the ungodly.

For thou Lord, art my hope: thou have set thine house of defense very high.

There shall no evil happen unto thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling.

For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.

They shall hear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone.

Thou shall go upon the Lion and Adder; the young Lion and the Dragon shall
thou tread under thy feet.

Because he has set his love upon me, therefore shall I deliver him; I shall
set him up, because he has known my Name.

He shall call upon me, and I will hear him: yea I am with him in trouble, I
will deliver him, and bring him to Honor.

With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my Salvation.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Psalm. 121. I Will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence comes my help.

My help comes from the Lord, which has made Heaven and Earth.

He will not suffer thy foot to be moved, and he that keeps thee will not
sleep.

Behold, he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.

The Lord himself is thy Keeper: the Lord is thy defense upon the right hand;

So that the Sun shall not burn thee by day, neither the Moon by night.

The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil, yea it is even he that shall keep
thy Soul.

The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in, from this time forth
for evermore.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

The Song of Simeon.

LOrd, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy Word,
Luke 2. 29.

For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all people,

To be a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the Glory of thy people
Israel.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

BLessed be thy holy Name, O Lord my God, who have showed me the light of thy
countenance, Psalm. 27. 23
and caused me to see thy goodness in the land of the living: who have
preserved me in all my ways, and delivered me from all the dangers and evils of
this day, and brought me safe thus far of my life to the beginning of this
night.

O Lord, I beseech thee forsake me not in the vanishing of my days, but still
contiuue the protection of thy gracious hand upon me: Psalm. 84. 28.
be thou my light and defense, my guide and guard, through the valley of misery
and tears, and the shadow of death, to that Holy Hill, where thine Honor and
our Rest dwells.

Give me grace to remember the many days of darkness, Eccl. 11. 8.
and prevent the long night of Death by a timely preparation for it; that being
always ready and provided, whenever thou shall call me to judgment, I may
give an acceptable account how I have spent my time here.

Lord, as we add days to our days, so we add sins to our sins.

Father, I have sinned against Heaven and against thee, and am no more worthy
to be called thy Son, Luke 15. 21.

But I will confess my wickedness, and be sorry for my sins, Psalm. 30. 18.

Here make a particular Confession of the sins you have committed this day, or
since your last solemn account.
THus have I wandered from the right way of thy Commandments, walking after the
foolish Imaginations of mine own corrupt heart, and wearying my self in the
by-ways of vanity and wickedness all the day long.

But now, O Lord, I desire to turn from my evil ways; and evening after evening
I return to thee with all my heart, Psalm. 27. 9, 10.
and seek thy face: O hide not thou thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away
in displeasure.

Out of the deep my soul cries unto thee; Psalm. 130. 1.
O hear my voice, Psalm. 51. 1, 2.
and have mercy upon me. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, after thy great goodness;
according to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses. Wash me
thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

Forgive and put away all mine offenses and abominations, for the merits and
satisfaction of thy dear Son: in him be reconciled unto me, and restore me
again to thy grace and favor, to the peace and comfort and communion of thy
holy Spirit, that mine eyes may see thy Salvation, and thy Servant may depart
in peace, Luke 2. 29, 30.

And now, O Lord, I go to my bed as to my grave, and know not but that I may
awake in another world: Live or die I commend my self to thy mercy and
goodness, beseeching thee to receive me under the wings of thy protection,
where I may rest safe and secure from all evils.

And with my self I commend unto thee all whom any relation or occasion has
made near or dear unto me --

Thou Keeper of Israei, who do neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 121. 4.
receive us all into thy keeping, and preserve our Souls in perpetual peace and
safety.

And the peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep our hearts and
minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord:

And the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be
with us this night, the rest of our lives, and for evermore. Amen.

OF SOLEMN REPENTANCE.
NOW beside this daily and ordinary Confession and Repentacne, it were good to
set apart some particular times, once a week (on Fridays) or at least once a
month, for a more solemn Humiliation.

In which you may proceed by these several steps.

I. Take an exect survey of the state of your Soul: Examine your self strictly,
and search into every corner of your heart.

Recollect and reckon up particularly, as far as you can remember, all the
several sins and abominations of your past life, especially since your last
solemn Account.

Represent every one in his own colors, with all the several circumstances of
aggravation and odiousness you can call to mind.

II. Labor to get a true and through sight and sense of the vileness and
misery of your condition.

Consider in what a dangerous and deplorable state you had been, if God, should
have taken you away in this course without Repentance.

And hereupon you cannot but acknowledge and magnify his mercy and
long-suffering; that notwithstanding all these provocations he has yet forborne
you thus long, and now by his goodness leads you to Repentance, Romans 2. 4.

III. Strive to be seriously affected with a true and hearty sorrow for having
so hainously offended so good and gracious a God.

Steadfastly resolve to forsake all these abominations, wherewith you have thus
grieved his holy Spirit.

But be sure this be done sincerely, withou reserving to your self any other
darling sin.

Though it seem never so small, though it be never so dear to you, yet spare it
not for any respect.

Though it be to you as your right hand, or your right eye, yet pluck it out,
or cut it o^^, and cast it from you, Mat. 5. 29, 30.

It is better for you to enter into life halt or maimed, than to be cast whole
into everlasting fire, Mat. 18. 8. Mat. 9. 43. 45. 47.

God will have all or none; he will not be content with a part, though never so
great a part.

IV. Apply your self to God by a lively faith in his promises, of mercy and
pardon in the blood of Jesus Christ.

Pour out your soul before him in an humble Confession of all your sins and
abominations.

Beseech and importune him for the grace of godly sorrow, which may work in you
true Repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 10.

Implore his mercy and pardon in the merits and satisfaction of his dear Son
Jesus Christ.

V. Offer up your self wholly into his hands with a promise and vow of new
life, and more diligent performance of your duty.

And desire the gracious in fluence of his Holy Spirit, as well for a seal of
your Pardon, as to excite, and assist, and enable you to perform his will for
the future.

VI. And though it be impossible for you to make restitution or satisfaction to
God for the wrongs and affronts which in every single sin you have offered to
his Glory; yet to show the sincerity and readiness of your will according to
your Power, set your self with most diligence to the performance of those
Duties wherein you have been most defective.

And act a kind of holy revenge upon those sins of which you have been most
gulity, by setting your self most zealously to the practice of the contrary
virtues.

VII. And this your reconciliation to God it will be fit (I may say necessary)
to make your peace with the world:

By making restitution and satisfaction to all that you have wronged; by
desiring pardon of those you have offended; and likewise by freely Pardoning
all that have offended or injured you.

And if all this be done sincerely and uprightly, as is required, on your part,
doubtless, Cor. 10. 13.
God is faithful that has promised, Heb. 20. 23.
and will not fail in the performance of his part.

A GENERAL FORM OF CONFESSION.
O Lord, the Great and Dreadful God, Dan. 9. 4, 5.
keeping the Covenant, and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep
his Commandments; we have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly, and have rebelled: even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy
judgments.

By our impious and godless thoughts of Thee; Pri. Form of Prep.
our confidence in the arm of flesh; by placing our affections on earthly
things, and neglecting to love and delight in Thee; by presuming of thy
mercies, and yet continuing in our sins,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day, Dan. 9. 7.

By our want of reverence to thy Service, not considering the awfulness of thy
Presence, and that honor due to Thee in thy House; by our formal and
hypocritical worship; by open profanation and sacrilege; by shows and
Pretenses of piety to cover our worldly and wicked designs,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By our vain and rash oaths, blasphemies and perjuries; by our execrations on
our selves, our brethren, and our enemies,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By undervaluing thy public Service, and neglecting to bear a part in it; by
mispending that time either there or elsewhere in wanton or worldly thoughts or
employments; by not keeping the Spiritual Sabbath unto Thee, in serving Thee
truly all the days of our lives; by not duly observing the times of Festivity
or Fasting appointed by just Authority,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By not duly acknowledging thine ordinance and authority in the persons of our
Superiors; by speaking evil of dignities, and reviling the Rulers of thy
people; by groundless jealousies and suspicions, mis-judging and censuring
their actions; by being as a people that strive with their Priests, and not
submitting our selves to those who by thy appointment watch over our souls; by
neglecting those committed to our charge, not correcting those sins which have
cried loud for examplary punishment,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By rash anger, malice, hatred, revenge, and the bloody effects thereof; by
uncharitable contentions and divisions, factions and animosities; by cruelty
and unmercifulness, and communicating in the sins of blood,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By the manifold sins of uncleanness, by seeking or not avoiding the occasions
thereof; by idleness, intemperance and drunkenness, by immodest words and
gestures, by shameless boasting or not blushing at those sins,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By thefts, rapines, and oppressions; by vexatious suits practiced and
countenanced; by exactions, and unjust gains in bargaining; by defrauding the
labourer of his hire, by want of due care in expending what we have, and a good
conscience in acquiring more,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By lying, detraction, and contumely; by censuring and rash judgment; by false
witness, and perverting the course of justice,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee,

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By uncontentedness and desiring change in our estates; by giving our selves
over to lustful, covetous, and inordinate affections; by neglecting acts of
Charity, and doing as we would be done to, and not doing our duty in that state
of life unto which it has pleased Thee to call us,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By fretting our selves because of the ungodly, and being envious against the
evil-doer; by not loving our enemies, not blessing them that curse us, not
doing good to them that hate us, nor praying for those that despightfully use
us, and persecute us,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By presuming to do evil that good may come thereof; by placing piety in
opinions; by straining at Gnats, and swallowing of Camels, scrupling at things
indifferent, and making no conscience of known sins,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By running into open profaneness, under color of avoiding Superstition; by
guiding our conscience by humors and phansies, and not by the certain rules of
thy Law; by having itching ears, and heaping to our selves Teachers, and by
having men's persons in admiration because of advantage,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face as at
this day.

By impatience under thy correcting hand, not endeavoring our amendment by it,
and reflecting on our own sins as the causes of it; by despising thy
chastisements, and not rejoicing in tribulations, nor glorifying Thee that have
counted us worthy to suffer for righteousness sake,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By our want and neglect of those necessary Christian duties of Humiliation and
godly sorrow for sin, of indignation and revenge upon our selves for it, of
confessing and forsaking, of restitution and satisfaction to others; and not by
bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance,

We have provoked and rebelled against Thee.

O Lord, righteousnnss belongs unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

WHO can tell how often he offends? O cleanse Thou us from these, and from our
secret sins, Psalm. 19. 22.

Try us, O good God, and search the ground of our hearts; prove us and examine
our thoughts.

Look well if there be any other way of wickedness in us; and lead us in the
way everlasting, Psalm. 139. 23, 24.

Behold, O Lord, we are here before Thee in our sins; we stand guilty of these
and many more, not only of all sorts, but of all degrees also; and we know and
confess, that the least of these deserves no less than the wages of eternal
death.

But if Thou, Psalm. 130. 3.
Lord, should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide
it? If Thou should thus severely proceed in judgment against us, Isai.
our spirits should fail before Thee, and those souls which Thou have made.

Deal thou with us therefore, Psalm. 103. 10.
O Lord, not after the multitude of our sins, but according to the multitude of
thy mercies. Turn away thy face from our sins, and behold that Son of thy Love
in thine own bosom, that does not only intercede, but has satisfied; not only
request and entreat, but even require and challenge Thee to have mercy upon us.

For his sake therefore, we beseech Thee, have this mercy upon us, to make us
capable of thy mercies. Send down the dew of thy Heavenly grace, that may melt
and mollify our frozen and stony hearts, that we may see and confess, and
hate, and forsake, and sincerely repent us of all our past sins and
abominations, and turn from the evil of our former ways, to Thee that art the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, John 14. 6.

And then, O Lord, do Thou return to us also; forgive the Debt which has been
discharged by the precious blood of thy dear Son, and seal to us our pardon by
the gift of thy holy Spirit, which for the time to come may prevent, excite,
and enable us to walk before Thee in holiness and rigtheousness all our days:
that having cast off the works of darkness, Romans 13. 12.
and put on the armor of light, we may like valiant Soldiers fight that good
fight against all temptations of the world, 1 Timothy 6. 12.
the flesh, and the Devil; that having finished our course, we may receive of
Thee that crown of life which Thou have promised to them that continue faithful
unto death, Rev. 2. 10.

And all for his sake, who by his death has overcome death, and opened unto us
the gate of everlasting life. To him, with Thee, and the Holy Spirit, be all
Honor and Glory, world without end, Amen.

OF THE HOLY SACRAMENT OF THE Lords Supper, AND THE PREPARATION Before it.
Psalm. 116. 12, 13. What reward shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me?

I will take the cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

Psalm. 26. 6. I will wash my bands in innocence: so will I compass thine Altar,
O Lord.
THere yet remains one principal piece of Devotion, and that without which
there is indeed no Devotion; it being the Sacrifice, in the Smoke of which our
prayers must ascend up before him that sits on the Throne.

Now although God being himself a Spirit, desires also to be worshipped in
Spirit; Joh. 4. 24.
and in his own respect cares not for these outward and sensible performances;
yet because the minds of men, being as it were shut up in this prison of the
Body, can receive little information or affection but what is conveyed to them
by the Sense, it has pleased him to accommodate himself to our imperfection
and infirmity, and appoint certain Ceremonies or outward actions which working
immediately upon the Senses, are by them conveyed in unto the Soul, and make on
it a more powerful impression of that which is signified by those sensible
actions.

Such are Looking up toward Heaven when we speak to God, Kneeling when we pray
to him, Standing up when we praise him, and Bowing at the mention of his Sacred
Name; such is the dipping in water, and signing with the Cross in the Sacrament
of Baptism: and such is the receiving of Bread and Wine in this other, of which
we speak.

For though the eating of Bread and drinking of Wine are in themselves actions
so very ordinary, that they are also very inconsiderable; yet in this they are
made use of to signify to us the most extraordinary and excellent mercy that
ever the Great King of Heaven bestowed upon his poor Subjects and Servants here
on earth. For,

I. It is the Commemoration of the death of his own only Son for the redemption
of lost Mankind; the wounding of his body signified by the breaking of Bread,
and the shedding of his Blood by the pouring out of Wine.

II. Besides this, it is also an Evidence of Gods reconciliation and favor to
us, and demonstration that we are in League and Amity with him, in that we are
admitted to his own Table, to eat of his Bread, and drink of his Cup.

III. It is a means and instrument of conveying grace and strength to the Souls
of Worthy Receivers.

IV. It is our Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for all his mercies and
blessings; particularly temporal, the good things of this World, the fruits of
the Earth, which we here offer unto him under these two Principal of Bread and
Wine.

Of Frequent Receiving.
THis then being a Service so acceptable to God and so beneficial, so necessary
for men, it were but reason to expect that all good Christians would show
themselves ready and forward to the performance of it.

And accordingly in the first Age of the Church, when Religion and Zeal were in
their youth and vigor, it was the good custom to celebrate this Sacrament (if
not every day as it is thought, yet at least) every Lords day.

But afterward as Piety began to grow more dull, and Love more cold, it was by
little and little brought down to once a Month.

And this Order still remains in the Church of God, (though now somewhat
disturbed by prevailing Sectaries among us.) And at those times the Supper is
appointed to be made ready, and the Table furnished for all such as can think
fit to spare so much time from their worldly business, to come to the
Marriage Feast of the great King of Heaven. For herein they are yet left to
more liberty, and not necessarily required to come oftener than thrice a year.

And truly such is the negligence of many (who yet would be accounted
Christians) that they are not ashamed to stretch this libetty to the utmost.
Yea, and it were well if even then they would come meetly provided, and had not
more respect to the Shame of the World, than to the Honor of God, or their own
Good.

Certainly any sober Christian cannot consider without shame and indignation
how much Mankind are fallen from their first love.

But that which is ordinarily brought for an excuse, is in it self so unworthy
and unreasonable, that it makes this Neglect yet more abominable and
intolerable.

And indeed it is somewhat worse than that for which those invited in the
Gospel received a severe Censure. Mat. 22.
There it was, Luke 14. 18, 19, 20.
they were taken up with their several Affairs, one had bought a farm, or a
Yoke of oxen; another had married a wife; and therefore they could not come.
But here one is engaged in such a sin, which he has no mind to leave yet;
another is not in charity; and in general they are not prepared, and therefore
they cannot, that is, they will not come.

Such is the ridiculous madness of men in this barbarous and brutish Age, that
they can think fit to excuse and justify one fault by pretending more and
greater.

But if you are not prepared to meet your Savior at his Table, to celebrate
the memorial of his Mercy how would you appear before him at his Seat of
Judgment, to which yet you know not but you may be sooner called?

If therefore you could wish to be always provided for Death, which often comes
suddenly, always uncertainly, think not much to bestow a little time in
preparing your self for this Sacrament, as often as you may have an opportunity
of receiving it.

And those which in these days of Captivity have not that convenience of
receiving from the hands of them who have authority to give it, may yet do well
not to omit the Duty of Preparation. Let them do that which they can, and for
that which they cannot God will accept the will for the deed.

Of Preparation.
THE best Preparation to this holy Duty is a continued habit of holy living,
and frequent meditation upon Heaven and Heavenly things; particularly the great
mercies of God in the Blood of Jesus Christ.

But because the minds of men cannot be always so intent and circumspect, but
that they need some more solemn Excitations and Exercises, it will be requisite
to set apart some few days before to be employed more particularly in this
business.

I. Therefore Examine your self, and inquire strictly into the state of your
Soul, and take a view of your whole Life, especially since the time of your
last Recieving.

Observe and consider how you have performed this duty formerly, whether
worthily or unworthily, and what good or ill effect it has wrought in you;
what progress you have made in Grace and Goodness, or whether you grow worse
and worse in sin; and what are the Causes and Occasions of either.

II. Confess and humble your self before God, and earnestly entreat and contend
for his mercy, and pardon, and reconciliation, and grace and favor in the
Merits of Jesus Christ; that he will wash you from all your Pollutions in his
Blood, and cloth you in the White robe of his Righteousness, that so having on
a Wedding garment, Mat. 22. 12.
you may be a welcome Guest to his Table.

And here solemnly renew that Promise and vow which you formerly made in that
other Sacrament of Baptism, and repeated since every time you have received
this. That you will forsake Sin and Satan, and cleave to the Lord your God with
all your heart, and by the assistance of his gracious Spirit walk before him
uprightly, and serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of your
Life.

III. Consider, that you are now to communicate not only with God, but also
with the congregation of your fellow Christians; and that the Rule and
Essential Character, by which you are to know and declare that you love God is,
that you love your brother also, I John 4. 21.

Therefore take care to reconcile your self with the World; by freely forgiving
and meekly desiring forgiveness, and endeavoring to restore and establish
peace and charity, and brotherly kindness, and right understanding between your
self and all with whom you have had any kind of difference.

IV. Recollect and raise up your thoughts from the earth and worldly things,
and devoutly meditate on heavenly and spiritual matters; such as,

1. The Creation and Fall of Mankind, and the great Miseries which we were
thereby engaged in.

2. The inestimable Mercy and Goodness of God in bestowing his own only Son for
our redemption, and restoring us again to a capacity and hope of his heavenly
good things.

3. The incomparable love of Christ, in that he vouchsafed to be born meanly,
to live in poverty and contempt, to die in shame and torment, and endure those
pains which were due to us for our sins, that he might redeem and rescue us
from both.

These and such like are to be remembered, and considered with joy, and thanks,
and praise.

Prayers before the Sacrament.
NOW for particular Forms of Prayers, Meditations, and other Exercises of
Devotion, before, and at, and after the holy Sacrament, the many books designed
peculiarly to that purpose will abundantly furnish you with such, and these
short ones following will not hinder the use of them.

Before the Sacrament.
DEpart from me, for I am a sinful Man, O Lord, Luke 5. 8.

I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof.

For the House of my Soul, which thou had made a fit Temple for thy Holy
Spirit to inhabit in, I have defaced and defiled with all manner of pollutions
and abominations. It is become a den of ravenous beasts, and a cage of unclean
Birds, and every corner so crowded with filthiness, that Thou will not find
where to lay thy head, Luke 9. 58.

But Thou, O Lord, which despisest not a penitent Sinner, but have promised to
dwell with the humble and contrite spirit, I beseech Thee cast me not away from
thy presence, but cast out all profaneness and uncleanness out of my heart, and
remove every thing that may offend the pure eyes of thy Glory, and the holiness
of thy Presence: and then, O Lord, vouchsafe to come and enter in, and dwell
there, and abide with me for ever.

Behold, O Lord, I am before Thee in my sins, clothed with filthy garments, and
Satan standing at my right hand, Zach. 3. 1.
accusing me, and bringing my transgressions into remembrance before Thee, with
loud clamours for justice against me.

O Lord I acknowledge and confess my self guilty, and that I have deserved the
utmost of thy wrath and indignation.

But, O Lord, I appeal from thy seat of Judgment to thy Throne of Grace and
Mercy, humbly beseeching Thee to rebuke and repel the malicious Accuser of thy
servants, and hearken to the intercession of our Advocate in thine own bosom;
For his sake have mercy upon me, and pardon my offenses, and blot out the
Handwriting that is against me, and put away all mine iniquities, and drown
them in the depth of the Sea.

Wash me thoroughly from all my pollutions in that fountain which Thou have
opened for Judah and Jerusalem to purify in; Zach. 13. 1.
and then cloth me in that white robe of thy Sons righteousness, the
Wedding Garment requisite at this Feast, and admit me to thy Table which Thou
have prepared for thy children.

And grant, O Lord, that when I have tasted of these thy Heavenly dainties, I
may no more return like the Dog to his vomit, 2 Pet. 2. 22.
nor as the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire; but I may keep my
self unspotted from the world, and walk before Thee in all purity and holiness.

And now, O Lord, Thou invitest and exhortest me to come to thy holy Table.

O my God, I know mine own unworthiness: yet in the multitude of thy mercies I
will humbly approach to thine Alter, Psalm. 5. 7.
beseeching Thee to behold me not with a severe, but a gracious eye.

Thou know the earnest desire of my Soul: be thou pleased to pass by the
weakness of the flesh, Mat. 26. 41.
and accept the willingness of the spirit; and grant that I may now receive
this holy Sacrament to the Honor and Glory of thy Name, and the Good and
comfort and Salvation of my own Soul.

The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, 2 Chronicles.
30. 18, 19.
the Lord God of his Fathers, though he be not according to the Purification of
the Sanctuary.

Before the Bread.
O Blessed Lord God, who have given us thine only Son to lay down his life for
our Sins, and his flesh for the food and nourishment of our Souls; purge and
purify my vile and sinful Soul, that it may be a fit habitation for his pure,
unspotted, and precious Body, and that no unclean thing may presume to enter
where his holy feet have trod, from henceforth for ever.

After the Bread.
BLessed be thy holy Name, O Lord my God, who have vouchsafed to feed me with
that Bread from Heaven, the Flesh of thy dear Son; grant that in the strength
of this food I may walk before thee in holiness and righteousness all the days
of my life, 1 Kings 19. 8.
till I come to the Mount of God, the holy Hill, where thine Honor and our
Rest dwells.

Before the Cup.
O Blessed Lord God, who have given the Blood of thine only Son to be shed for
our sins, and to refresh and restore our weary gasping Souls; cleanse and
sanctify me, O Lord, that I may receive this cup with a pure heart, and not
with polluted lips, to the eternal comfort and refreshment of my Soul.

After the Cup.
BLessed be thy holy Name, O Lord my God, who have vouchsafed me to drink of
this Fountain of Living Water, the precious blood of thy dear Son; grant that
this holy Cup may be an Antidote and Preservative against all sin and evil, and
may keep my Soul in health and strength to the end of my days.

An Hymn.
O Lord, B. Andrews Man. p. 290.
who did not despise nor forsake Man transgressing thy commandment and
falling:

But as a tender-bowell'd Father did visit him sundry ways;

Giving him that great and precious Promise concerning the Blessed quickening
Seed.

Opening unto him a door of Faith and Repentance unto life:

And in the fullness of time sending the same Christ to take the Seed of Abraham:

And by the oblation of his life to fulfill the obedience of the Law,

And by the sacrifice of his Death to take away the curse thereof,

By his death to redeem the World,

And by his Resurrection to quicken the same.

Who did all things to this end, to bring back Mankind to thee, that he might
be partaker of the Divine Nature, and Eternal Glory.

Who did attest the Truth of thy Gospel,

By many and manifold Miracles,

By the ever-memorable Conversation of thy Saints,

By their supernatural patience under torments,

By the most wonderful Conversion of the whole World unto the Obedience of
Faith, without Strength, Rhetoric or Force.

Blessed, praised, and hallowed be thy Name, the Mention and Memory, and all
the Monuments thereof, both now and for ever. Amen.

After the Sacrament.
LOrd, what is Man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of man that thou
visitest him? Psalm. 144. 3.

What is thy Servant, that thou should look upon such a dead dog as I? 2 Samuel 9. 8.

The Dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from their Masters Table; Mat. 15. 27.
but thou have fed me with the Bread of thy Children, and given me to drink of
thine own Cup.

Thou have fed me in a green pasture, and leadest me forth beside the waters of
comfort, Psalm. 23. 2.

O taste and see how gracious the Lord is: Blessed is the man that trusts in
him. Psalm. 34. 8.

What reward shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me; Psalm.
116. 12.

Lord, I offer up unto thee my self, my Soul and Body, and all that I am and
have, beseeching thee graciously to receive me for thy servant, to dwell in thy
House, and praise thy Name for evermore, Psalm. 84. 4.

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath,

THou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power; For thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created, Rev.
4. 11.

Thou art worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof for thou have
slain, and have redeemed us to our God, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and
people, and Nation; and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, Revel. ^.
9.

Salvation to our God, which sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb. Amen.

Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and
Might, be unto God for ever and ever. Amen. Rev. 7. 10, 12.

An Admonition after Receiving.
AND now you have thus solemnly devoted and consecrated your self to God and
his service, beware that you do not fall back, and return to your former course
of sin, 2 Pet. 2. 22.
like the dog to his own vomit; or as the Serpent, which casts up his Poison
when he goes to drink, and when he has quenched his thirst, returns and sucks
it up again.

And thus some are content to leave their sins at the Church-door, but with an
intent to take them up again when they come out.

But God will not be so mocked.

And know this, That if you have well and worthily performed this Duty to day,
yet if you do not persevere in Piety, as you have promised and begun, not only
your former sins, but even the piety of this day shall one day rise up in
judgment against you.

But a diligent Watching and wariness over your ways after this, will be the
best preparation against the next time.

OF DEATH.
AND now I cannot think any Conclusion more fit and proper for this daily
course of Devout Life, than a short meditation on that which shall be the
Conclusion of Life it self.

I. First therefore, consider the shortness and miseries of this Life, That our
days consume in vanity, and our years Psalm. in trouble; That our whole Life is
but as a Dream, and when Death awakes us, we find our hands empty of all that
which has cost us so much labor, and travel, and sorrow, and sin.

II. Remember the swiftness and suddenness of Death; Psalm.
That our days are but a span-long, Psalm. 103. 15.
and our flourishing but as a flower of the field, which though it be not
plucked up, yet soon withers of it self, and falls away.

The Young may dye soon, but the Old cannot live long.

III. Remember that in this short life, we are yet to provide for an Eternity
either of weal or woe; and therefore cannot be too careful how we spend every
minute of that upon which depends a matter of so great, so lasting importance.

IV. There is but one way of Birth, but many ways and means of Death: and our
Life hangs by so small a thread, that every little Chance is ready to break it
off.

V. After Death we are immediately called to Judgment before the high Court of
Heaven, to give a severe account how we have performed that duty to which we
were created; and accordingly to receive an irrevocable sentence of eternal
happiness or misery.

VI. The Judge, before whom we shall stand, is infinite both in Knowledge and
Power; so that it is impossible either to hide any thing from his all-seeing
eye, or to escape out of the reach of his Almighty hand.

VII. The Lord comes in a day when we look not for him, Luke. 12. 46.
and in an hour when we are not aware: Let us therefore watch, and wait for his
coming, that when he knocks, we may open unto him immediately, Verse. 36.

How dangerous and deplorable a condition would it be, to be found and taken
away in the midst of any Sin, or in a continued course of sinful Life?

On the contrary: How happy, and blessed, and joyful a thing would it be, to be
found practicing and persevering in that which is good?

Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing,
Luke 12. 43.

A Prayer preparatory to Death.
O Eternal Lord God, who have created the World and all Time, who have made my
days as it were a span long, and mine Age even as nothing in respect of thee:
Psalm. 90. 12.
Teach me so to number my days, that I may apply my heart to thy Heavenly
Wisdom, and so carefully employ this short time which thou have appointed me to
spend here, so make up thy reckonings before that great day come, that
whenever thou shall call me hence, I may give such an account of the Talent
wherewith thou have entrusted me, that I may receive that joyful Sentence,

Well done, good and faithful Servant, Mat. 25. 21.

Grant that I may be always provided with Oil in my Lamp, Mat. 25. 1, 10.
and ready to enter in with the Wise Virgins whenever the Bridegroom shall
come, and receive a blessing among those which watch and wait for thy coming.

So come, Lord Jesu, come quickly. Amen. Rev. 22. 20.

LAMENTATIONS AND DEVOTIONS FOR THE TIMES OF CAPTIVITY.
Eccles. 12. 13, 14. Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole matter:

Fear God, and keep his Commandments; for this is the whole duty of Man.

For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether
is be good, or whether it be evil.


I. IS it nothing to you, Lam. c. 1. v. 12. 14, 15, 6, 17, 5.
all ye that pass by? Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day
of his fierce anger.

The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand; they are wreathed and come
up upon my neck. He has made my Srength to fail; the Lord has delivered me
into their hands, from whom I am not able to rise up. The Lord has trodden
under foot all my mighty men in the midst of me; he has called an assembly
against me to crush my young men. The Lord has trodden the Virgin the Daughter
of Judah as in a Wine Press, and all her beauty is departed from her. Zion
stretches forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her.

Her adversaries are the chief, her Enemies prosper; for the Lord has
afflicted her. For the multitude of her transgressions her children are gone
into captivity before the Enemy.

For these things I weep: Verse. 16.
mine eye, mine eye runs down with water; because the Comforter that should
relieve my Soul is far from me. My Children are desolate because the Enemy
prevailed.

The Lord is righteous; Ver. 18, 20, 21.
for I have rebelled against his Commandment.

Behold, O Lord, for I am in distress. My bowels are troubled, my heart is
turned within me; for I have grievously rebelled. Abroad the Sword bereaveth,
at home there is as death.

They have heard that I sigh; there is none to comfort me. All mine Enemies
have heard of my trouble; they are glad that thou have done it.

II. How has the Lord covered the Daughter of Zion with a Cloud in his anger,
C. 2. v. 1, 3, 2, 9.
and cast down from Heaven unto the Earth the Beauty of Israel, and remembered
not his footstool in the day of his anger!

He has cut off in his fierce anger all the Srength of Israel. He has
polluted the Kingdom and the Princes thereof. Her King and her Princes are
among the Gentiles: they are become like Hearts that find no Pasture, and they
are gone without strength before the Pursuer, Chap. 1. 6.

The Law is no more; C. 2. v. 9, 7, 6.
her Prophets also find no Vision from the Lord. The Lord has cast off his
Alter, he has abhorred his Sanctuary, and violently taken away his Tabernacle,
and destroyed his places of the Assembly. The Lord has caused the Solemn
Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion; and has despised in the
indignation of his anger the King and the Priest.

All that pass by clap their hands at thee; Verse. 15.
they hiss and wag their head at the Daughter of Jerusalem. Is this the City
that men call the perfection of Beauty, the Joy of the whole Earth?

Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom thou have done this, Verse. 20.

III. Remember mine affliction and my misery, C, 3. v. 19, 20, 21.
and the wormwood and the gall.

My Soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me.

This I recall to mind, therefore have I hope.

It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, Ver. 22, 23, 31, 32, 33.
because his Compassions fail not:

They are new every morning. Great is thy faithfulness.

For the Lord will not cast off for ever: but though he cause grief, yet will
he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies: for he does not
afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of men.

Wherefore does a living man complain, Ver. 39, 40.
a man for the punishment of his sins?

Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.

IV. The Lord has accomplished his fury, Chap. 4. ver. 11, 12.
he has poured out his fierce anger, and has kindled a fire in Zion, and it
has devoured the foundations thereof.

The Kings of the Earth, and all the Inhabitants of the World, would not have
believed that the Adversary and the Enemy should have entered into the Gates of
Jerusalem.

The anger of the Lord has divided them, Ver. 16, 17, 18, 19.
he will no more regard them. They respected not the persons of the Priests,
they favored not the Elders.

As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help; in our watching we have
watched for a Nation that could not save us.

They hunt our steps that we cannot go into the streets. Our Persecutors are
swifter than the Eagles of the Heavens; they pursued us upon the Mountains,
they laid wait for us in the wilderness.

The Breath of our nostrils the Anointed of the Lord, Verse. 20.
was taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among
the Heathen.

V. Remember, O Lord what is come upon us: Chap. 5. ver. 2, 3.
consider and behold our reproach.

Our Inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to aliens.

We are Orphans and Fatherless; our Mothers are as Widows.

Servants have ruled over us; Verse. 8, 12, 15, 16.
there is none that does deliver us out of their hand.

Princes are hanged up by their hand. The Faces of the Elders were not honored.

The Joy of our Heart is ceased: our Dance is turned into Mourning.

The Crown is fallen from our head: Woe unto us that we have sinned.

For this our Heart is faint; Verse. 17.
for these things our eyes are dim.

Thou, O Lord, remainest for ever, Verse. 19, 20, 21.
thy Throne from generation to generation.

Wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time?

Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned: renew our days as of
old.

PSALMS.
I. O God, Psalm. 74. 1, 2.
wherefore art thou absent from us so long? Why is thy Wrath so hot against the
Sheep of thy pasture?

Remember the congregation which thou have purchased of old; the lot of thine
Inheritance, and this Mount Sion wherein thou have dwelt.

O God, the Heathen are come into thine Inheritance: 79. Ver. 1.
thy holy Temple have they defiled, and laid Jerusalem on heaps.

They have cast fire into thy Sanctuary, 74. ver. 7.
they have defiled the dwelling place of thy Name unto the ground.

We are become a reproach to our Neighbors, 79 ver. 4, 5, 8, 9, 10.
a scorn and derision to them that are round about us.

Lord, how long will thou be angry? shall thy jealousy burn like fire for ever?

O remember not our old sins: let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for
we are brought very low.

Help us, O God of our Salvation, for the glory of thy Name; deliver us, and
purge away our sins for thy Names sake.

Wherefore should the Heathen say, whereis their God?

Remember this, O Lord, ^4. ver. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
that the Enemy has reproached, and the Foolish people have blasphemed, thy
Name.

O deliver not the Soul of thy Turtle Dove unto the multitude of the wicked:
forget not the Congregation of thy poor for ever.

Have respect unto the Covenant: for the dark places of the Earth are full of
the habitations of Cruelty.

O let not the Oppressed return ashamed: let the poor and needy praise thy Name.

Arise, O God, plead thine own cause: remember how the foolish man reproacheth
thee daily.

Forget not the voice of thine Enemies: the noise of those that rise up against
thee increases continually.

II. HEar, Psalm. 80. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7.
O thou Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock: thou that
dwell between the Cherubims show thy self.

O Lord God of Hosts, how long will thou be angry against the Prayer of thy
people?

Thou feedest them with the bread of weeping, and give them plenty of tears
to drink.

Thou make us a strife unto our Neighbors, and our Enemies laugh among
themselves.

Turn us again, O God of Hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved.

Thou have brought a Vine out of Egypt; V. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
thou have cast out the Heathen and planted it.

Thou preparedst the Soil before it, and did cause it to take root and it
filled the Land.

The Hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the goodly Cedars with the
branches thereof.

She sent out her Boughs into the Sea, and her Branches upon the River.

Why have thou then broken down her Hedges, so that all they that pass by the
way do spoil her?

The Boar out of the Wood does waste it, and the Wild Beast of the Field does
devour it.

Return, we beseech thee, O Lord of Hosts; look down from Heaven, behold and
visit this Vine;

And the Root which thy Right Hand has planted, and the Branch which thou
made strong for thy self.

Let thy Hand be upon the Man of thy Right Hand, Ver. 17, 18, 19.
upon the Son of Man whom thou made strong for thy self.

So will not we go back from thee. Quicken us, and we will call upon thy Name.

Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be
whole.

III. O God, thou have cast us off, Psalm. 60. 1, 2, 3.
thou have scattered us; thou have also been displeased; O turn thee unto us
again.

Thou have made the Land to tremble; thou have broken it: Heal the Breaches
thereof, for it shakes.

Thou have showed thy people heavy things; thou have made us to drink the Wine
of Astonishment.

For thou have forsaken and abhorred thine Anointed, 89. ver. 38, 39, 40, 41,
42, 43, 44, 45, 46.
and have been displeased at him.

Thou have broken the Covenant of thy Servant, and have profaned his Crown to
the ground.

Thou have broken down all his Hedges, and made his Strong Holds a Ruin.

All that pass by spoil him: he is become a reproach to his Neighbors.

Thou have set up the Right hand of his Adversaries; thou have made all his
Enemies to rejoice.

Thou have also turned the edge of his Sword, and give him not victory in the
Battle.

Thou have made his glory to cease, and have cast his Throne down to the ground.

The days of his Youth have thou shortened, and covered him with dishonor.

How long, Lord, will thou hide thy self for ever? Shall thy wrath burn like
fire.

Behold, O God, our Defender, 84. ver. 9.
and look upon the face of thine Anointed.

Comfort us again now after the days wherein thou have afflicted us and the
years wherein we have seen adversity. 90. ver. 15, 16, 17.


Show thy Servants thy Work, and their Children thy glory. And the Glorious
Majesty of the Lord our God be upon us.

IV. TRuly God is good to Israel, Psalm. 73. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12.
even to such as are of a clean heart.

But as for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped:

For I was zealous at the foolish, when I saw the Prosperity of the wicked:

For they are in no peril of Death, but their strength is firm.

They are not in trouble with the weak, neither are they scourged like other
men.

Therefore Pride compasses them as a Chain, Violence covers them as a
Garment.

Their eyes swell with fatness, they have surpassed the imaginations of their
heart.

They deride and speak maliciously, from on high they speak Oppression.

They set their Mouth against the Heavens, and their Tongue walked through the
Earth.

And they say, How does God know? Is there Knowledge in the most High?

Behold, these are the Ungodly, these prosper in the world, they increase in
riches.

Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, Ver. 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
and washed my hands in innocence.

If I say, I will speak thus, I should offend against the generation of thy
Children.

And I thought to know this which was grievous in my eyes.

And I went into the Sanctuary, then understood I the end of these men.

Surely thou set them in slippery places, thou castest them down into
destruction.

How are they brought into desolation; As in a moment they are utterly consumed
with terrors.

As a Dream when one awaketh, so (Lord) when they awake thou shall destroy
their shadow.

Fret not thy self because of the evil doers; 37 ver. 1, 2, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.
neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity.

For they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green Herb.

I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green Tree:

And he passed away, and lo he was not; yea I sought him, but he could not be
found.

Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.

But the Transgressors shall be destroyed together, and the end of the wicked
shall be cut off.

For the Salvation of the righteous of the Lord: he is their strength in time
of trouble.

And the Lord shall help them and deliver them: he shall deliver them from the
wicked, and save them because they trust in him.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost:

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

PRAYERS.
I. O My God, Ezra 9. 6, 7, 15.
I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God: for our iniquities
are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto the Heavens.
Since the days of our Fathers have we been in a great trespass unto this day;
and for our iniquities have we, our Kings and our Priests, been delivered into
the hand of the Enemy, to the sword, to Captivity, and to a Spoil, and to
confusion of face, as it is this day.

O Lord God of Israel, thou art righteous: Behold, we are before thee in our
trespasses, for we cannot stand before thee because of this.

Nevertheless, Neh. 9. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
for thy great mercies sake consume us not utterly, nor forsake us; for thou
art a gracious and merciful God.

Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God, who
keep covenant and mercy, let not all the trouble seem little before thee
that has come upon us, on our Kings, on our Princes, and on our Priests, and
on our Prophets, and on our Fathers, and on all thy People.

Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou have done
right, but we have done wickedly. Neither have our Kings, our Princes, our
Priests, nor our Fathers, kept thy Law, nor hearkened unto thy Commandments,
and thy Testimonies wherewith thou did testify against them: for they have
not served thee in their Kingdom, and in thy great goodness that thou gave
them, and in the large and fat Land which thou gave before them; neither
turned they from their wicked works.

Behold, we are servants this day; and for the Land that thou gave unto our
Fathers, to eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof, behold, we are servants
in it.

II. O Lord the great and dreadful God, Dan 9. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
keeping the Covenant and Mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep
his Commandments, we have sinned and have committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts and from thy
judgments.

Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy
Name to our Kings, our Princes, and our Fathers, and to all the people of the
Land.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face as at
this day. O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face, to our Kings, to our
Princes, and to our Fathers, because we have sinned against thee.

To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him.

Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his Laws
which he has set before us by his servants the Prophets: therefore the Curse
is poured upon us, and he has confirmed his words which he spoke against us,
and against our Judges that Judged us, by bringing upon us a great evil; for
under the whole Heaven has not been done as has been done upon Jerusalem.

O Lord, Ver. 16, 17, 18, 19.
according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee let thine anger and thy
fury be turned away from thy holy mountain; because for our sins, and for the
iniquities of our Fathers, thy people are become a reproach to all that are
about us.

Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his
supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary that is desolate,
for the Lords sake.

O my God, incline thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and behold our
desolations, and the People which is called by thy Name; for we do not present
our supplications before thee for our righteousness, but for thy great mercies.

O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do: defer not for thine own
sake, O my God; for thy people are called by thy Name.

III O Lord God, Deuteronomy. 9. 26, 27, 28, 29.
destroy not thy People and thine Inheritance, which thou have redeemed through
thy Greatness which thou have brought forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand.

Look not unto the Stubbornness of this People, nor to their Wickedness, nor to
their Sin; lest the Land whence thou broughtest us out to say, Because the Lord
was not able to bring them into the Land which he promised them, and because he
hated them, he has brought them out to flay them in the Wilderness.

Yet they are thy People and thine Inheritance, which thou broughtest out by
thy mighty Power, and by thy stretched-out Arm.

O my Father, Mat. 26. 39.
if it be possible let this Cup pass from us: nevertheless not as I will, but
as thou will.

Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee; Mar. 14. 36.
take away this Cup from us: nevertheless not ours, but thy will be done. Amen

TWO PRAYERS For the Peaceful re-settlement of this Church and State.
IV. A Prayer for the Church.
O Blessed Lord, who in thine infinite mercy did vouchsafe to plant a
glorious Church among us, and now in thy just judgment have permitted our sins
and follies to root it up; be pleased at last to resume thoughts of Peace
toward us, that we may do the like to one another. Lord, look down from
Heaven, the Habitation of thy Holiness, and behold the ruins of a desolate
Church, and compassionate to see her in the dust. Behold her, O Lord, not only
broken, but crumbled; divided into so many Sects and Factions, that she no
longer represents the Ark of the God of Israel, where the Covenant and the
Manna were conserved, but the Ark of Noah, filled withal various sorts of
unclean Beasts: and, to complete our misery and guilt, the spirit of division
has insinuated it self as well into our affections as our judgments; that
badge of Discipleship which thou recommendest to us, is cast off, and all the
contrary wrath and bitterness, anger and clamor called in to maintain and
widen our breaches. O Lord, how long shall we thus violate and defame that
Gospel of Peace that we profess? how long shall we thus madly defeat our
selves, lose that Christianity which we pretend to strive for; O thou which
make men to be of one mind in an house, be pleased so to unite us, that we
may be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.
And now that in Civil affairs there seems some aptness to a Composure, O let
not our Spiritual differences be more unreconcileable. Lord, let not the
ronghest winds blow out of the Sanctuary; let not those which should be thy
Ambassadors for Peace, still sound a Trumpet for War: but do thou reveal thy
self to all our Eliah's in that still small voice, which may teach them to Echo
thee in the like meek treating with others. Lord, let no unseasonable stiffness
of those that are in the right, no perverse obstinacy of those that are in the
wrong, hinder the closing of our wounds; but let the one instruct in meekness,
and thou be pleased to give the other repentance to the acknowledgment of the
Truth. To this end do thou, O Lord, mollify all exasperated minds, take off
all animosities and pre udices, contempt and heart-burnings and by uniting
their hearts prepare for the reconciling their opinions: and that nothing may
intercept the clear sight of thy truth, Lord, let all private and secular
designs be totally deposited, that gain may no longer be the measure of our
Godliness, but that the one great and common concernment of truth and peace may
be unanimously and vigorously pursued. Lord, the hearts of all men are in thy
hands, O be thou pleased to let thy Spirit of peace over-shadow the minds of
all contending parties; and if it be thy will, restore this Church to her
pristine state, renew her days as of old; let her escape out of Egypt be so
entire, that not an hoof may be left behind: But if thy Wisdom see it not yet a
season for so full a deliverance, Lord, defer not, we beseech thee, such a
degree of it, as may at least secure her a being; if she cannot recover her
beauty, yet, O Lord, grant her health, such a soundness of constitution as may
preserve her from dissolution. Let thy providence find out some good Samaritans
to cure her present wounds: and to whomsoever thou shall commit that important
work, Lord, give them skilful hands and compassionate hearts; direct them to
such applications as may most speedily, and yet most soundly, heal the hurt of
the daughter of Sion; and make them so advert to the interests both of truth
and peace, that no lawful condescension may be omitted, nor any unlawful made.
And do thou, who art both the wonderful Counselor and Prince of peace, so
guide and prosper all pacifick endeavors, that all our distractions may be
composed, and our Jerusalem may again become a City at unity in it self; that
those happy primitive days may at length revert, wherein Vice was the only
Heresy; that all our intestine contentions may be converted into a vigorous
opposition of our common enemy, our unbrotherly feuds into a Christian Zeal
against all that exalts it self against the obedience of Christ. Lord, hear us,
and ordain peace for us, even for his sake whom thou have ordained our
peacemaker, Jesus Christ our Lord.

V. A Prayer for the King and State.
O Most gracious Lord, who do not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children
of men, who smitest not till the importunity of our sins enforce thee, and then
correctest in measure, we thy unworthy creatures humbly acknowledge that we
have abundantly tasted of this patience and lenity of thine. To what an
enormous height were our sins arrived ere thou beganst to visit them! and when
thou could no longer forbear, yet mastering thy power, thou have not
proportioned thy vengeance to our crimes, but to thy own gracious design of
reducing, and reclaiming us. Lord, had the first stroke of thy hand been
exterminating, our guilts had justified the method; but thou have proceeded by
such easy and gentle degrees, as witness how much thou desiredst to be
interrupted, and show us, that all that sad weight we have long groaned under,
has been accumulated only by our own incorrigibleness. It Is now, O Lord, these
many years that this Nation has been in the Furnace, and yet our dross wastes
not, but increases; and it is owing only to thy unspeakable mercy, that we, who
would not be purified, are not consumed; that we remain a Nation, who cease not
to be most sinful, and provoking Nation. O Lord, let not this long-suffering of
thine serve only to upbraid our obstinacy, and inhanse our guilt; but let it at
last have the proper effect on us, melt our hearts, and lead us to repentance.
And Oh, that this may be the day for us thus to discern the things that belong
to our peace! that all who are (yea, and all who are not) cast down this day in
an external humiliation, may by the operation of thy mighty Spirit have their
Souls laid prostrate before thee in a sincere contrition! O thou who can out
of the very Stones raise up children unto Abraham, work our stony flinty hearts
into such a temper as may be malleable into the impressions of thy grace, that
all the sinners of Sion may tremble; that we may not by a persevering obstinacy
seal to our selves both temporal and eternal ruin; but in stead of our
mutinous complaining at the punishments of our sins, search and try our ways,
and turn again to the Lord. O be thou pleased to grant us this one grand
fundamental mercy, that we who so impatiently thirst after a change without us,
may render that possible and safe by this better and more necessary change
within us; that our sins may not, as they have so often done, interpose and
eclipse that light which now begins to break out upon us. Lord, thy Dove seems
to approach us with an olive branch in her mouth, oh let not our filth and
noisomness chase her away; but grant us that true repentance which may atone
thee, and that Christian charity which may reconcile us with one another. Lord,
let not our breach either with thee or among our selves be incurable, but by
making up the first prepare us for the healing of the latter. And because, O
Lord, the way to make us one fold is to have one Shepherd, be pleased to put us
all under the conduct of him to whom that charge belongs; bow the hearts of
this people as of one man, that the only contention may be who shall most
forward in bringing back our David. O let none reflect on their past guilts as
an argument to persevere, but repent, and to make their return so sincere as
may qualify them not only for his but thy Mercy. And, Lord, be pleased so to
guide the hearts of all who shall be entrusted with that great concernment of
settling this Nation, that they may weigh all their deliberations in the balance
of the Sanctuary, that conscience, not interest, may be the ruling principle,
and that they may render to Caesar the things that are Cesars, and to God the
things that are Gods; that they may become healers of our breaches and happy
repairers of the sad ruins both in Church and State; and grant, O Lord, that
as those sins which made them are become National, so the repentance may be
National also, and that evidenced by the proper fruits of it, by zeal of
restoring of the rights both of thee and thine Anointed. And do thou, O Lord,
so dispose all hearts, and remove all obstacles, that none may have the will,
much less the power, to hinder his peaceable restitution. And, Lord, let him
bring with him an heart so entirely devoted to thee, that he may wish his own
honor only as a means to advance thine. O let the precepts and example of his
Blessed Father never depart from his mind; and as thou were pleased to perfect
the one by suffering, so perfect the other by acting thy will; that He may be a
blessed instrument of replanting the power instead of the form of Godliness
among us, of restoring Christian virtue in a profane and almost barbarous
Nation. And if any wish him for any distant ends, if any desire his shadow as a
shelter for their riots and licentiousness, O let him come a great but happy
defeat to all such, not bring fuel, but cure, to their inordinate appetites;
and by his example as a Christian, and his Authority as a King, so invite to
good, and restrain from evil, that he may not only release our temporal, but
our spiritual bondage, suppress those foul and scandalous vices which have so
long captivated us, and by securing our inward, provide for the perpetuating
our outward peace, Lord, establish thou his throne in righteousness, make him a
signal instrument of thy glory and our happiness, and let him reap the fruits
of it in comfort here, and in bliss hereafter; that so his earthly Crown may
serve to enhanse and enrich his heavenly. Grant this O King of Kings, for thy
sake and intercession of our Blessed Mediator, Jesus Christ.

A Prayer for all Christian Princes and the Ecclesiastical State.
ALmighty God who rulest in the Kingdoms of men, and in all events of the
world, defend those with thy mercy whom thou have adorned with thy power, lift
up the horn advance the just interests of all Christian Kings, Princes, and
States by the power of thy venerable and life-giving passion.

Give unto all them who serve thee in the ministeries of religion, wisdom and
holiness, the blessings of peace, and great abilities to minister prosperously
to the good of souls by the power and aids of thy holy Spirit of wisdom.

Pardon all our sins; take away our iniquities from us all, and preserve us
from all danger and trouble, from need and persecution, from the temptations of
the Devil, from the violence* and fraud of all our enemies. Keep us O God from
sinning against thee, and from suffering thy wrath, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Postscript.
THE desolation of Sion being that which every good Christian ought to remember
in his Daily. Addresses to Heaven, I should wrong, not only your Charity, but
even your good Nature, to think you forgetful or careless of our Common Mother,
the Church of England, thus despightfully used by those ungrateful and
unnatural Children, who having formerly sucked her Breasts, yet are not ashamed
to trample upon her in the day of her Calamity. I have therefore thought it not
improper to add these foregoing Lamentations and Devotions in her behalf;
hoping they will not be unacceptable or unuseful to you, and such others as
shall find it worth their while to have proceeded thus far. To the blessing of
God I commend them and you.

Farewell.
THE END.

