A DISCREET AND LEARNED SPEECH: Spoken in the PARLIAMENT, on Wednesday, the 4.
of January, 1641. BY Mr. HAMPDEN, Burgess for Buckingham. Concerning the
Accusation of High Treason, preferred by His Majesty, against himself the Lord
Kimbolton, Sr. Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Pym, Mr. Strowd, Mr. Hollis, worthy Members
of the House of COMMONS. Therein worthily declaring the difference betwixt a
good subject and a bad, and referring his own Trial to the Judgment of that
Honorable Assembly.

depiction of cockfight

London Printed for F. Coules, and T. B. 1641.

Mr. HAMPDEN His Speech in PARLIAMENT on Wednesday, the 4. of January 1641,
Concerning the accusation of high treason preferred by his Majesty, against
himself, the Lord Kimbolton, Sr. Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Pym, Mr. Strowd, and Mr.
Hollis, Worthy members of the Lower House* of PARLIAMENT.
Mr. Speaker,
IT is a true saying of the Wise man, that all things happen alike to all men,
as well to the good man as to the bad, there is no state or condition
whatsoever, either of prosperity or adversity, but all sorts of men are sharers
in the same, no man can be discerned truly by the outward appearance, whether
he be a good subject, either to his God, his Prince, or his Country, until
he be tried by the touchstone of loyalty: give me leave I beseech you, to
parallel the lives of either sort, that we may in some measure discern truth
from falsehood, and in speaking I shall similize their lives.

First, in Religion toward God. Secondly, in loyalty and due subjection to
their Sovereign, in their affection toward the safety of their Country.

First, concerning Religion, the best means to discern between the true and
false Religion is, by searching the sacred Writings of the old and new
Testament, which is of it self pure, and indicted by the Spirit of God, and
written by holy men, unspotted in their lives and conversation, and by this
sacred Word may we prove whether our Religion be of God or no, and by looking
in this glass we may discern whether we are in the right way or no.

And looking into the same, find that by this truth of God, that there is but
one God, one Christ, one Faith, one Religion, which is the Gospel of Christ,
and the doctrine of the Prophets, and Apostles.

In these two Testaments is contained all things necessary to salvation, if
that our Religion does hang upon this Doctrine, and no other secondary means,
than is true to which comes nearest the Protestant Religion, which we
profess, as I really and verily believe, and consequently that Religion, which
joyneth with this Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, the traditions and
inventions of men, Prayers to the Virgin Mary, Angels, Saints; that uses in
the exercise of their Religion, strange and superstitious worshipping,
cringing, bowing, creeping to the Altar, using Pictures, Dirges, and such like,
cannot be true, but erroneous, nay divelish, and all this is used and
maintained in the Church of Rome, as necessary as the Scripture to Salvation.
Therefore it a false and Erroneous Church, both in Doctrine and discipline, and
all other Sects and Shismes, that learnes not only on the Scripture, though
never so contrary to the Church of Rome, is a false worshipping of God, and not
the true Religion. And thus much concerning the Religion, to discern the truth
and falsehood thereof.

2. I come now M. Speaker to the 2d. thing intimated unto you; which was how to
discern in a State between good Subjects and bad, by their loyalty and due
subjection to their lawful Sovereign; in which I shall under favor observe
two things.

1. Lawful subjection to a King in his own Person, and the Commands, Edicts,
and Proclamations, of the Prince and his Privy Council.

Lawful obedience to the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, made, enacted by the
King and the Lords, with the free consent of his great Council of State
assembled in Parliament.

1. For, the first to deny a willing and dutiful obedience to a lawful
Sovereign and his Privy Council; for as Camden truly says, the commands of
the Lords Privy Councillors, and the Edicts of the Prince is all one, for
they are inseparable, the one never without the other, either to defend His
Royal Person, and Kingdoms and against the Enemies of the same, either
public or private. Or to defend the ancient privileges and Prerogatives of
the King, pertinent and belonging of right to his Royal Crown and the
maintenance of his Honor and Dignity. Or to defend and maintain true Religion
established in the Land, according to the truth of God, is one sign of an evil
and bad subject.

2 Secondly, to yield obedience to the commands of a King, if against the true
Religion, against the Ancient and fundamental Laws of the Land, is another
sign of an ill Subject.

3 Thirdly, to resist the lawful power of the King, to raise insurrection
against the King, admit him averse in His Religion, to conspire against His
Sacred Person, or any ways to rebel, though commanding things against our
Consciences in exercising Religion, or against the Rights, and Privileges of
the Subject, is an absolute sign of a disaffected and traitorous subject. And
now having given the signs of discerning evil and disloyal Subjects, I shall
only give you in a word or two, the signs of discerning which are loyal and
good Subjects, only by turning these three signs already showed on the
contrary side.

1 He that willingly and cheerfully endeavors himself to obey his
Sovereigns commands for the defense of his own person and Kingdoms, for the
defense of true Religion, for the defense of the Laws of his Country, is a
loyal and good Subject.

2. To deny obedience to a King, commanding any thing against Gods true Worship
and Religion, against the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of the Land, in
endeavoring to perform the same, is a good Subject.

Not to resist the lawful and Royal power of the King to raise sedition or
Insurrection against his Person, or to set division between the King and his
good Subjects by rebellion. Although commanding things against conscience, in
the exercise of Religion, or against the rights and privileges of the Subject,
but patiently for the same to undergo his Princes displeasure, whether it be to
his imprisonment, confiscation of goods, banishment, or any other punnishment
whatsoever, without murmuring, grudging, or reviling against his Sovereign or
his proceedings, but submitting willingly, and cheerfully himself and his
cause to Almighty God, is the only sign of an obedient and Loyal Subject.

I come now to the second means to know the difference between a good Subject
and a bad, by their obedience to the Laws, Statutes and ordinances made by the
King, with the whole consent of his Parliament. And in this I observe a twofold
subjection: In the particular members thereof, dissenting from the general
Votes of the whole Parliament. And secondly, the whole State of the Kingdom to
a full Parliament.

1. First I conceive, if any particular member of a Parliament, although his
judgment and Vote be contrary, do not willingly submit to the rest, is an
ill Subject to the King and Country.

And secondly, to resist the Ordinance of the whole State of the Kingdom,
either by the stirring up a dislike in the hearts of his Majesty's Subjects* of
the proceedings of the Parliament. To endeavor by leavying of Arms to compel
the King and Parliament to make such laws as seem best to them, to deny the
power, Authority, and privileges of Parliament, to cast aspersions upon the
same and proceedings; thereby inducing the King to think ill of the same, and
to be incensed against the same, to procure the untimely dissolution and
breaking off of a Parliament, before all things be settled by the same, for the
safety and tranquillity both of King and State, is an apparent sign of a
treacherous and disloyal Subject against his King and Country. And th^s having
troubled your patience, in showing the difference between true Protestants,
and false loyal Subjects and Traitors, in a State or Kingdom; and the means
how to discern them. I humbly desire my Actions may be compared with either,
both as I am a Subject, a Protestant, and a native in this Country; and as I am
a member of this present and happy Parliament, and as I shall be found guilty
upon these articles exhibited against my self, and the other Gentlemen, either
a bad or a good Subject to my gracious Sovereign and Native Country. To
receive such sentence upon the same, as this Honorable House shall be
conceived, to agree with Law and Justice.

FINIS.

