A PRACTICAL CATECHISM.

Theologia est Scientia affectiva, non speculativa.

Gerson. (...).

Clemens. in Poedagog. OXFORD, Printed in the year M. DC. XLV.

The Table.
OF Divinity. p. 1. Of Practical points. p. 2. Of the First Covenant. p. 3. Of
the Second Covenant. p. 6. Of the names of Christ. p. 15. 1. Of Jesus. p. 16.
Of the name Christ, and his three offices. p. 21. Of Christ's Kingly office. p.
22. Of Christ's Preistly office. p. 27. Of Christ's Propheticke office. p. 38.
Of Faith. p. 40. Of Hope. p. 61. Of Charity. p. 74. Of Repentance. p. 84. Of
Self-denial. p. 104. Of taking up the Cross. p. 109. Of Justification. p.
112. Of Sanctification. p. 113. Gods method in saving a sinner. p. 119. Of
Christ's Sermon in the Mount. p. 120. Of the Beatitudes. p. 122. Of Poverty of
Spirit. p. 122. Of Mourning. p. 124. Of Meekness. p. 126. Of Hungring and
thirsting after righteousness. 135. Of Mercifulness. p. 138. Of Purity of
heart. p. 140. Of Peacemaking. p. 144. Of Persecution for righteousness sake.
p. 148. Of the order of the Beatitudes. p. 152. Of the exemplary lives of
Christians. p. 154. Christianity is not destructive of the laws to which
mankind had been formerly obliged. p. 156. Christ perfected the law. p. 157.
Of Killing. p. 164. Of the power of the sword. p. 165. Of Selfe-murther. p.
166. Of Duells. p. 168. Of War. p. 172. Of Anger causeless or immoderate in
the breast. p. 173. in the tongue. p. 177.
Of contumelious speaking. p. 180. Of Reconciliation. p. 183. Of the time of
calling our selves to account for trespasses. p. 184. Of Adultery. p. 186. Of
looking on a woman to lust. p. 188. Of the eye and hand offending. p. 191. Of
Divorce. p. 192. Of Swearing. p. 203. Of Revenge or retaliating evil. p. 208.
Of Wars. p. 213. Of loving enemies. p. 225. Of Almes-giving. p. 236. Of
Vainglory. p. 252. Of Prayer. p. 259. Of Vain repetitions. p. 271. Of the
Lords Prayer. p. 273. Of Fasting. p. 288. and 296. Of Sobriety. p. 290. Of
Feasting. p. 295. Of the desire and love of wealth. p. 306. Of Worldly Care. p.
315. Of judging others. p. 338. Of the power of Prayer. p. 346. Of doing as we
would be done to. p. 346. Of Wariness and prudence. p. 348. Marks of
False-teachers. p. 349. Of Profession of Christianity without action. p. 352.
ERRATA.
Page 4. lin. 8. After Covenant add a Comma. p. 14. lin. 13. after Covenant,
add, in the notion wherein now we take it. l. 16. after Covenant, add, and
that especially, and therefore is so called, Heb. 8. p. 15 l. 3. for falsible
r. feasible. p. 16. l. 19. for words, word. l. 20. for things thing. p. 32. l.
16 for follow. Wherein, r. follow, wherein. p. 36. l. 23. dele it clear. l. 24
after person add, so as he shall be thought perfectly to have obeyed, l. 25.
after were add thus. p. 40. l. 12. r. proposed. p. 54. l. 17. r: particular
is. p. 77. l. 24. t. that is in. p. 107. l. 5. r. those must be equally
renounced. p. 121. l. 9. for lights r. hights. p. 133. l. 14. for foolish
Jewish. p. 137. l. 3. for your r. that. p. 151, l. 15. r. when it is (...). p.
163. l. 14. r. first he reh^ p. 169. l. 11. for this r. these. p. 183. l. 18.
r. unretracted. p. 189. l. 23. r. creature. p. 198. l. 22. r. that this is. l.
23. r. adultery] you. p. 199. in marg: r. (...). p. 205. l. 18. r. those. p.
206. l. 8. r. on the. l. 23. r. may. p. 233. l. ult. for with r. which is. p.
255. l. 9. after or, add at least as from. p. 256. l. 1. for come to. r.
cannot. p. 257. l. 20 r. blowing. p. 266. l. 22. for non, r. no. p. 271. l. ^.
after duty, add and. p. 280 in marg: r. (...). p. 284. l. 13. r. is it. p.
307. l. 25. r. bent on. p. 341. l. 28. for theirs, r. yours.

A PRACTICAL CATECHISM.
Scholar. I Have by the grace of God, and your help and care, attained in some
measure to the understanding of the principles of Religion, proposed to those
of my age by our Church-Catechisme; and should in modesty content my self with
those rudiments, but that I find my self, as a Christian, not only invited,
but obliged to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Shall I therefore beseech you to continue my guide, and to direct
me, first, what kind of questions it will be most useful for me to ask, and
you to instruct me in, that I may not please my self, or trouble you with
less profitable speculations?


Catechist. I will most readily serve you in this demand, and make no scruple
to tell you that that kind of knowledge is most useful, and proper to be
superadded to your former grounds, which tends most immediately to the
directing of your practice, for you will easily remember, that it was the form
of the young man's question, Mark. 10. 17. Good Master, what shall I do, that I
may inherit eternal life? and our books tell us, that the oracle (that is the
Devil himself) was informed to proclaim Socrates to be the wisest man in the
world, because he applied his studies, and knowledge to the moral part, the
squaring and ordering of men's lives; and Gerson a very learned and pious man,
has defined Divinity of all others, to be an affective, not only speculative
knowledge, which you will best understand Theologia est scientia affectiva, non
speculativa. (...), Glem. Al. in pedag.
the meaning of, by a very ancient writers words, which are in English these,
that the end of Christian philosophy is to make men better, not more learned;
to edify, not to instruct.


S. I shall most willingly entrust my self to your directions, and though the
vanity of my heart, and the unrulinesse of my youthful affections may perhaps
make me an improper auditour of such doctrines, yet I hope the doctrines
themselves and the assistance of Gods grace, obtaineable by our prayers, may be
a means to fit me to receive profit by them. I beseech you therefore to tell
me your opinion, what kind of doctrines, and what parts of Scripture will be
likely to have the most present influence on my heart, or contribute most to a
Christian practice.


C. I conceive especially these five, first, the Doctrine of the first and
second Covenant, together with the difference of them: secondly, the Names, and
(in one of them intimated) the Offices of Christ: thirdly, the Nature of the
Three Theological Graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity, together with Self
denial, and Repentance, or Regeneration: fourthly, the Difference and
dependence betwixt Justification and Sanctification: and lastly, the through
understanding of our Saviors Sermon on the Mount, set down in the fifth,
sixth, and seventh Chapters of Saint Matthews Gospel. But you will be
frighted with the length of this task, and discouraged from setting out on so
tedious a journey.


S. I shall think it unreasonable for me, to be tired with receiving the
largest favors, that you have the patience, and the charity to bestow upon me,
and to show you that I have an appetite to the journey, I shall not give you
the least excuse of delay, but put you in mind where it was that you promised
to set out, or begin your first stage, and beseech you to god before me, my
guide and instructor, first in the doctrine of the two Covenants; to which
purpose my ignorance makes it necessary for me to request your first help, to
tell me what a Covenant is.


C. Covenant is a mutual compact (as Of the first Covenant.
we now consider it) betwixt God and man, consisting of mercies on Gods part
made over to man, and of conditions on man's part required by God.


S. It will then be necessary for me to demand first what you mean by the
First Covenant.


C. I mean that which is supposed to be made with Adam, as soon as he was
created, before his first sin, and with all mankind in him.


S. What then was the mercy an Gods part made over to him in that Covenant?


C. It consisted of two parts, one sort of things supposed before the Covenant
absolutely given to him by God in his creation: another promised and not given,
but upon condition.


S. What is that which was absolutely given?


C. 1. A law written in his heart teaching him the whole duty of man, 2. A
positive law, of not eating the fruit of one tree in the garden, all others
but that one being freely allowed him by God. 3. A perfect strength and ability
bestowed on him to perform all that was required of him, and by that a
possibility to have lived for ever without ever sinning.


S. What is that which was promised on condition?


C. 1. Continuance of that light, and that strength, the one to direct, the
other to assist him in a persevering performance of that perfect obedience. 2.
A crown of such performance, assumption to eternal felicity.


S. What was the condition upon which the former of these was promised?


C. Walking in that light, making use of that strength, (and therefore upon
defailance in those two, upon the first sin, that light was dimmed, and that
strength, (like Sampsons when his locks were lost,) extremely weakened)


S. What was the condition, upon which the Eternal felicity was promised?


C, Exact, unsinning, perfect obedience, proportioned to the measure of that
strength; and consequently upon the commission of the first sin, this crown
was forfeited, Adam cast out of Paradise, and condemned to death, and so
deprived both of eternity and felicity, and from that hour to this, there has
been no man living (Christ only excepted who was God as well as man)
justifiable by that first covenant, all having sinned, and so coming short of
the Glory of God promised in that covenant.


S. You have now given me a view of the first covenant, and I shall not give my
curiosity leave to importune you with more questions about it. Only if you
please, tell me, what condition Adam and consequently mankind were concluded
under, upon the defailance, or breach of the condition required in that first
covenant, for I perceive Adam sinned, and so brake that condition.


C. I have intimated that to you already, and yet shall farther enlarge on it.
Upon the fall of Adam, he and all mankind forfeited that perfect light and
perfect strength, and became very defective and weak both in knowledge and
ability of performing their duty to their Creator, and consequently were made
utterly incapable of ever receiving benefit by that first covenant. It being
just with God to withdraw that high degree of strength and grace when he saw so
ill use made of it.


S. But why should God inflict that punishment upon all mankind, for (or upon
occasion of) the sin of that one man? though he used his talent so very ill,
others of his posterity might have used it better, and why should they all be
so prejudged, upon one man's miscarriage?


C. Many reasons may be rendered for this act of Gods, and if they could not,
yet ought not his wisdom to be arraigned at our tribunal, or judged by us.
Now this is an act of his wisdom, more then of distributive justice, it being
free for him to do what he will with his own, and such is his Grace and his
Crown. But the most full satisfactory reason may be this, because God
intending to take the forfeiture of that first Covenant, intended withal to
make a second Covenant, which should tend as much or more to the maine end, the
eternal felicity of mankind, as, or then the first could have done. And that
you will acknowledge, when you hear what this second covenant is.


S. I beseech you then what is the second Covenant: and first with whom was it
made?


C. It Of the second Covenan:
was made with the same Adam now after his fall, in these words, The seed of
the woman shall break the Serpents head. Genesis 3. 15. and afterward repeated
more plainly to Abraham. Genesis 22. 17. 18.


S. But who is that Seed of the Woman?


C. The same that in the words spoken to Abraham is meant by Thy seed, which
the Apostle (Gal. 3. 16.) tells us is Christ.


S. What then is the first thing promised in that second Covenant?


C. The giving of Christ, to take our nature upon him, and so to become a kind
of second Adam, in that nature of ours to perform perfect unsinning obedience,
and so to be just, according to the condition of the first Covenant, and yet
being faultlesse, to undergo a shameful death voluntarily upon the Cross, to
satisfy for the sin of Adam, and for all the sins of all mankind, to taste
death for every man. Heb. 2. 9. and this being the first thing, all other parts
of this Covenant are consequent and dependent on this, and so this second
Covenant was made in Christ, sealed in his blood (as it was the custom of the
Eastern Nations to seal all Covenants with blood) and so confirmed by him,
which is the meaning of those words 2 Cor. 1. 20. All the promises of God in
him are yea, and in him amen, that is are verified (which is the importance of
Yea) and confirmed (which is meant by Amen) into an immutability, in or by
Christ.


S. Well then. What are the promises or mercies made over unto us in Christ by
this second Covenant?


C. First a revelation of his will, called the law of faith, according to which
we Christians ought to live, and this is set down as a part of that Covenant.
Heb. 8. 10, 11. Secondly a promise of pardon or mercy to our unrighteousness,
and our sins and our iniquities, v. 12. Thirdly the giving of grace or
strength, although not perfect, or such as may enable us to live without ever
sinning, yet such as is sufficient to perform what is necessary now under this
second Covenant, in which respect it is said by S. Paul. Rom 10. 8. that the
word, (that is, the condition of the second Covenant,) is nigh thee, the
meaning of which will not be understood, but by comparing it with the place,
from whence it is cited, Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 14. The commandment which I command
thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, (the Hebrew word there is by the
Greek translators best expressed, it is not (...).
too heavy for thee, and in other places, it is not impossible for thee,) but
v. 14. it is very nigh unto thee in thy mouth and in thy heart (the Greek add,
and in thy hand) that thou may do it, and therefore Saint John says, His
commandments are not grievous, the word signifies heavy and unsupportable, and
Christ himself, that His yoke is easy and his burden light, and Saint Paul
again that He can do all things through Christ that strengthens him, able to
do nothing of himself, in order to the attaining of bliss, (we are not
sufficient of our selves, says he in another place, to do any thing) but yet
through Christ that strengthens me I can do all things that are now required
of me, (our sufficiency is of God.)


S. I beseech you where is this part of the promises of the second Covenant set
down in Scripture?


C. It Is intimated in these and many other places, but is distinctly set down
in the song of Zachary, Luke 1. 74. he there speaks of the oath which God
swear to our father Abraham, v. 72. which he styles Gods holy Covenant, v. 71.
and he specifies two parts of it. 1 Deliverance or safety from the power of our
enemies, Sin and Satan, in the words That we being delivered without fear or
danger (for so the pointing of the Greek words in the most ancient copies
teach us to (...).
read) that is, safe and secure, out of the hand of our enemies. 2 Giving of
power or strength to us, to enable us to serve him, so as he will accept of,
and to persevere in that service, in the rest of the words [that he would grant
unto us (or as the word is rendered Rev. 11. 3. give power) (...).
that we might serve him (or to serve him) in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life,]


S. This place is, I acknowledge, a clear one to the purpose, and I have
nothing to object against it; only pardon my curiosity if having been told by
you that this second Covenant was repeated to Abraham Genesis 22. 16. and finding
it here called the oath sworn to Abraham, and yet by reading of that oath in
Genesis not finding any such form of words there expressed, I beseech you to
satisfy this scruple of mine, and reconcile those two places which both you and
the margents of our Bibles acknowledge to be parallel the one to the other,
but the sound of the words does not so readily consent to. The granting me this
favor may, I hope, make the whole matter more perspicuous.


C. I am of your opinion and therefore shall readily do it, and it will cost me
no more pains then this, 1. to tell you that there is one part of the oath
mentioned in Genesis which belonged peculiarly to the temporal prosperity of the
people of the Jews, which were to spring from that Abraham, [I will multiply
thy seed etc:] and indeed that whole verse 17. may literally and primarily be
referred to that; but then besides that, (which Zachary respects not) there
are three things more promised, spiritual blessing, spiritual victory, and
the incarnation of Christ, the last of these Zachary mentions not in the words
of the oath, because it is supposed in his whole song occasioned only by it,
and uttered on purpose to celebrate the incarnation of Christ, but the other
two parts are specified and interpreted by him; the victory over (or possessing
the gates of) the enemies there, is here called deliverance without fear from
the hands of our enemies; and the blessing there, is explained here to be
giving us power to serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all our
days, the grace of God for the amending of our lives; according to that of the
Apostle, Gal. 3. 14. where the receiving the promise of the spirit is called
the blessing of Abraham, the power of Christ assisting and enabling us to
persevere, being really the most inestimable blessing that this life is capable
of, to which purpose Saint Peter Act. 3. 26. speaking of Christ sent by God to
bless us, expresses the thing, wherein that blessing consists, to wit in
turning away every one from his iniquities.


S. I have troubled you too far by this extravagance, I shall make no delay
to recall my self into the rode again, and having been taught by you these
several particulars of Gods promise in the second Covenant, I shall desire you
to proceed to tell me what is the condition required of us in this Covenant,
unless perhaps there be some farther particulars promised on Gods part, which
you have not yet mentioned.


C. The truth is, there be two more promises of God, the first, of giving more
grace, the second, of crowning with glory; but both those conditional
promises: the first, upon condition that we make use of those former talents,
those weaker degrees of grace given us, which is the intimation of the parable
of the noble man Luke 19. 13. the sum of which is, that unto every one that
has (that is, has made good use of the talent of grace entrusted to him) as
Heb. 12. 28. to have grace signifies to make use of it to the end to which it
is designed,) shall be given; and from him that has not (made that use he
ought) even that he has shall be taken from him. The second upon condition
that he be at the day of death or judgment, such a man as Christ now under
this second Covenant requires him to be.


S. What then is the condition of this second Covenant, without which there is
yet no salvation to be had?


C. I shall answer you first negatively, then positively. negatively, it is not
1. perfect, exact, unsinning obedience, never to offend at all in any kind of
sin, (this is the condition of the first Covenant) nor 2 is it never to have
committed any deliberate sin in the former life, nor 3 never to have gone on
or continued in any habitual or customary sin for the time past, but it is
positively the new creature, or renewed sincere honest faithful obedience to
the whole Gospel, giving up the whole heart unto Christ, the performing of
that which God enables us to perform, and bewailing our infirmities, and
frailties, and sins, both of the past and present life, and beseeching Gods
pardon in Christ for all such; and sincerely laboring to mortify every sin,
and perform uniforme obedience to God, and from every fall rising again by
repentance and reformation. In a word, the condition required of us, is a
constellation or conjuncture of all those Gospell-graces, faith hope, charity,
self-denial, repentance, and the rest, every one of them truly and sincerely
rooted in the Christian heart, though mixed with much weakness and
imperfection, and perhaps with many sins, so they be not wilfully and
impenitently lived and died in, for in that case nothing but perdition is to be
expected.


S. What part of the promises is this condition required to make us capable of?


C. Of pardon of sins, and salvation: by which you see that no man shall be
pardoned or saved, but he that observes this condition.


S. What condition is then required to make capable of that other part of the
conditional promise, to wit, of more grace, or continuance of that we have
already?


C. A careful industrious husbanding of it, and daily prayer for daily
increase, and attending diligently to the means of grace.


S. Meethinkes I now understand somewhat of the nature and difference of these
two Covenants, and shall not need to ask you which of them it is that we
Christians are now concerned in, for I take it for granted, that it is the
second. Only be pleased to tell me which of these two it was by which the
Jews were to expect salvation?


C. Both Jew and Gentile, that is, every man that ever was, or shall be saved
from the beginning of the world, was, and is, and shall be saved by this second
Covenant.


S. How then were the Jews obliged to the observation of the law? is not the
law the first Covenant.


C. The Judaicall law was not the first Covenant, but the law of unsinning
perfect obedience made with Adam in innocence. The truth is, the Judaicall law
did represent unto us the first Covenant, but so it did the second also: the
first by requiring perfect obedience, and pronouncing a curse on him that
continued not in all those many burdensome ordinances, which the law gave no
power to any to perform. The second in the sacrifices, and many other rites,
which served as emblems to show us Christ, and in him the second Covenant.


S. I shall not interpose any more difficulties, which my ignorance might
suggest, but only put you in mind, that you told me that this doctrine had a
most present influence on our lives, be pleased to show me how.


C. It has so, many ways. I will mention a few. First, By prescribing the
condition, it sets us a work to the performance of it, and that is living
well. Secondly, By showing us how possible or falsible that condition is by the
Grace and help of Christ, it first obliges us to a deligent performance of
that duty of prayer for that Grace, and then stirs us up to endeavor and
industry in doing what we are enabled to do, that we receive not the grace of
God in vain. Thirdly, By showing us the necessity, indispensible necessity of
sincere obedience, it shuts the door against all temptations to carnal
security, sloth, presumption, hypocrisy, partial obedience, or habitual going
on in sin. And Fourthly, By showing the true grounds of hope, fortifies us
against desperation. And Lastly, if we need any encouragements in our Christian
walk, his promise to enable first, and then to accept, will most abundantly
contribute to that purpose.


S. I acknowledge the usefulness of your directions, and I beseech God to
assist me in bringing forth the fruit which it is just for you to expect. and
for God to require from them; and I promise you by his help to he mindful of
your admonitions.

I shall desire you to proceed to the second kind of doctrine, which at first
you mentioned, the names and in one of them the offices of Christ. I beseech
you what names do you mean?


C. Those two most eminent and vulgarly known, so often repeated, but so
little weighed, Jesus and Christ.


S. I pray you what is the importance of Of the name JESUS.
the word Jesus?


C. It is an Hebrew word which signifies Savior or salvation. I shall not need
to prove it when an Angel has asserted it, Mat. 1. 21. Thou shall call his
name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins.


S. The place you cite I have considered, and find a very puzling difficulty
in it, by giving my self liberty to read on, to the two next verses, the words
of which are these: All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the Prophet, saying, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a
Son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel. How could his name be called
Jesus and Emmanuel too? or how could the calling his name Jesus, be the
fulfilling of that prophecy that foretold that they should call his name
Emmanuel?


C. You are to know that in the Hebrew tongue, words and things, and so also
calling and being, name and person are all one; No word shall be impossible
with God, is, nothing shall be impossible: and my house shall be called the
house of prayer, is, my house shall be the house of prayer to all people, that
is, to the Gentiles as well as Jews; and so many names, that is, so many men:
and according to that idiom. (retained both in the Prophets of the Old, and
Evangelists of the New Testament) this phrase [they shall call his name
Emmanuel] is in signification no more then this, He shall be, God with us, or
God incarnate in our flesh; which incarnation of his, being on purpose to save
his people from their sins, that prophecy which foretold it, was perfectly
fulfilled in his birth and circumcision, at which time he was called Jesus.
Which name was but a signification of his design in his coming into the world,
according to another place; This day there is borne in the City of David a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord.


S. By the answering of my impertinent scruple I have gained thus much, that
the whole end of Christ's birth, of all he did and suffered for us, was that he
might save us. I pray you then what is meant by saving.


C. To save is to redeem from sin, as you will acknowledge, if you observe
but these two plain places; first, that which even now I cited. Mat. 1. 21.
[he shall save his people from their sins,] (which is the only reason there
rendered why he is called a Savior) then Tit. 2. 14. Christ gave himself to be
crucified for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity.]


S. Wherein does this saving or redeeming from sin consist?


C. In 3 things, first, In obtaining pardon for sin or reconciling us to God;
and consequently to that, in delivering us from the eternal torments which
from God as judge, and from Satan as accuser first, and then as executioner,
are in strict justice, or by the first Covenant due to sin. Secondly, In a
calling to repentance, by weakening the reigning power of sin, and the
tempting power of Satan, by mortifying the old man, (that is, the sinful
desires of the natural, and sinful habits of the carnal man,) by implanting
a new principle of holiness in the heart. And thirdly, In perfecting and
accomplishing all these so happy beginnings, at the end of this life in heaven.


S. How can it be said that Christ came thus to save, to do all this, when so
many, so long after his coming, are so far from being thus saved in all or
any of the three senses?


C. That he came to save is certainly true, whatsoever objections you can have
against it: and that by saving these 3 things are meant, if you please I shall
manifest from other Scriptures. The first sense is contained in the word, (as
it is used,) Luke 1. 71. salvation, or (...).
that we should be saved from our enemies, which must needs be our spiritual
enemies, sin and Satan* and if you doubt whether sin be there meant, or the
pardon of sin, by that saving, the next verse will clear the difficulty,
where it follows, to perform the mercy, or mercifully to (...), etc. (...).
deal with our fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant, of which Covenant
you know this is one special part, Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful to their
sins, (which explaines the merciful dealing there) and their iniquities will
I remember no more. And then for the second sense, that saving signifies
calling to repentance, may appear not only by comparing those two places, [I
came to call sinners to repentance,] and [Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners,] out also by a notable place, Act. 2. very useful for the
explaining of that word. v. 38. it is reported that Saint Peter said unto them,
repent, etc. and v. (...).
40. in more other words he testified unto them, or preached unto them, saying,
be ye saved, or escape ye from this perverse generation: (...).
whence it is clear, that being saved, etc. is but more other words to signify
repentance, and therefore surely that word, v. 47. which we render such as
should be saved, but is (...).
literally [the saved] signifies peculiarly those who received that
exhortation, v. 41. that is, those that repented of their sins. but this by
the way. As for the last acception of the phrase, it is so ordinary for
salvation, to signify the holy pure life in heaven, that I shall not need give
you any proof of it. Having therefore cleared the truth, this were sufficient,
although I wanted skill to answer your objection, but yet that may easily be
done too, by saying that Christ has really performed his part toward every one
of these, and that whosoever has not the effect, and fruit of it, it is
through his own wilful neglect, and even despising of so great salvation.
Light came into the world, and men loved darkness more then light, and having
made a Covenant with death and damnation, are most worthy to have their
portions therein.


S. What then is the short or sum of Christ's being Jesus?


C. It Is this, that he came into the world to fetch back sinners to heaven,
that whosoever of mankind shall truly repent and fly to him, shall through him
obtain pardon of sin, and salvation, a mercy vouchsafed to men, but denied
to Angels, who being once fallen are left in that wretched estate, and no
course taken, and consequently no possibility left for their recovery: which
most comfortable truth is clearly set down by the Apostle, Heb: 2. 15. though
in our English reading of it, it be somewhat obscured; The words rightly
rendered run thus, He does not (...).
take hold of Angels, but the seed of Abraham he takes hold of. Where the
word which I render taking hold of, signifies to catch any one who is either
running away, or falling on the ground or into a pit, to fetch back or recover
again. This Christ did for men by being borne, and suffering in our flesh, but
for Angels he did it not.


S. What special influence will this whole doctrine have upon our lives?


C. I will show you, 1. It is proper to stir up our most affectionate love
and gratitude to this Savior, who has descended so low even to the death of
the cross to satisfy for our sins, to obtain pardon for us. this love of
Christ constreineth us, says the Apostle. 2. It Is proper to beget in us a just
hatred of sin which brought God out of heaven to make expiation for it. 3. It
is a most proper enforcement of repentance and amendment of life, to remember,
1. That without that we are likely to be little benefited by this Savior,
except we repent salvation it self shall not keep us from perishing. 2. That
that was an end of Christ's death to redeem us from all iniquity and purify to
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, as well as to satisfy for us.
4. It is proper to teach us fear of offending, and keep us from security,
when 1, we find what an exemplary punishment God saw fit, if not necessary, to
inflict on sin in the person of his son, and 2, remember how much more
guilty we now shall prove, if we will still damn our selves in despite of all
these means of saving us. Of the name CHRIST and his three Offices.



S. I beseech God to open my heart to those considerations, and then I shall
farther importune you to proceed and tell me the signification of the word
Christ, wherein you told me the Offices of Christ were intimated. but I beseech
you first what do you mean by Offices?


C. I mean by that word, places of charge and dignity, to which God thought
fit to design Christ, that he might the better accomplish the end for which he
sent him; the trust or charge supposing somewhat to be done by him, and the
dignity implying somewhat to be returned by us; as you will see in the
particulars.


S. What then is meant by the word Christ?


C. Anointed, and that intimates the three Offices to which men were wont to
be inaugurated by the ceremony of anointing.


S. What are those three Offices?


C. Of King, and of Priest, and of Prophet.


S What belonged Of Christ's Kingly office.
to Christ to do as King?


C. To set up his throne in our hearts, or to reign in the souls of men, and
to give evidence of his power through the whole world.


S. What was required of him to that purpose?


C. 1. To weaken and shorten the power of Satan, which Christ really did at his
suffering, Heb. 2. 14. by death destroying the Devil, and again I saw Lucifer
fallen down from heaven, that is from the more unlimited power which he had
before: and 2 to give strength and grace to overcome all rebellious lusts, and
habits of sin, to bring them down in obedience to his Kingdom, and this he
has done also by sending his spirit; (in reference to which are those words
cited out of the Psalmist, he has led captivity captive, and given gifts unto
men,) and in a word to reign till he had brought all his enemies under his
feet, Homer calls the Eagle. (...) Homero. Tullio aetas, trigenta annoru^
s^a^ium vid. Rhodig: l. 19. c. 22. and Homer of Nest. (...). and Herodot. l. 2.
p. 144. (...). and Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. p. 335. (...).
1 Cor: 15. 25.


S. What, and how many be those enemies?


C. He has many enemies, some temporal, but most spiritual.


S. What mean you by his temporal enemies?


C. I mean the Jewish nation, that rejected and crucified him, which, within
the compass of one generation were, according to his prediction destroyed by
the Romans, and preyed upon by those Eagles Mat. 24. 28. by which are noted the
Roman Armies (whose ensign was the Eagle) which found them out (as such
vulturs do the carcass Job. 39. 30.) wheresoever they dispersed themselves.
For that that prophecy of Christ's, Mat. 24. belongs to this matter, the
destruction of those present crucifiers, and the Jewish state, and not to the
destruction of all enemies at his great appearing yet to come, is apparent by
the 34 verse. This generation shall not pass till all these things be
fulfilled. Where the word generation signifies such a space that they that were
then alive, might and should live to see it, in that sense, as the word is
used, Mat. 1. Where the time or space of 14 men's lives in a line succeeding one
another, is called 14 generations, not that generation signifies the whole
space of a man's life (for that is often 60, 80, or an 100 years) but rather the
3 part of that; for of any man's age, part he lives in his fathers life time,
and part after his sons birth, and thereupon it is wont to be said, that three
generations make one saecle or hundred years, as you shall find ordinarily it
does. So that the plain meaning of that speech of Christ's [this generation
shall not pass, etc] is this, that all this should come to pass in their age,
or within the life of some that were then men, as Mat. 16. 28. There be some
standing here which shall not taste of death till they see the son of man
coming in his Kingdom. Which, though some by the next Chapter following, are
persuaded to interpret of the transfiguration, (as if that were Christ's coming
in his Kingdom) may yet more properly be interpreted of this matter, so
immediately consequent to his being killed by the Jews, and rising again, v.
21. which was the ground of this speech of his) Christ's illustrious coming to
destroy those Jews; to which also that other place belongs, (which will clear
both these) Jo. 21, 22. If I will that John tarry till I come, what is that to
thee? which, says Saint John, was not to be interpreted that he should never
dye, v. 23. but only that he should tarry till this coming of Christ: which,
of all the Disciples, peculiarly (and I think only) John lived to see, and
after that wrote his Revelation in the 14th year of Domitian, about the 65t of
Christ: This destroying or subduing his enemies and crucifiers (being so
terrible, that when it is foretold, Mat. 24. it is generally mistaken for the
day of final judgment) is many times in the New Testament, styled the
Kingdom of God, and the coming of Christ, the end of all things, and the end
of the world, because Christ's powerful presence was so very discernible in
destroying of that nation, and that effect of his Kingdom, in bringing his
enemies under his feet.


S. What other enemies did you mean?


C. First, Sin, the great enemy of souls, which he labors to destroy in
this life by the power of his grace, and will totally destroy at the day of
judgment. Secondly, Satan, which I told you of, who therefore, when Christ
comes to dispossess him of his hold in the poor man, demands, Art thou come
to destroy us? Mark. 1. 24. and at another time, Art thou come to torment us
before our time? acknowledging that Christ was to destroy them, (they
understood so much in the sacred predictions) but withal hoping it was not yet
the time for that execution, and in the mean while counted it a kind of
destruction and torment to them to be cast out or retrenched of any of their
power which they had over the bodies or souls of men.


S. Are there no other enemies that this King must destroy?


C. Yes, two more; First, All wicked and ungodly men, that after all his
methods of recalling them to amendment, do still persevere in impenitent
rebellions, to whom eternal perdition belongs by the sentence of this King.
Those that will not let him reign over them must be brought forth and slain
before their King. Secondly, Death it self, according to that of the Apostle,
1 Cor. 15. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death: he shall despoile
the grave, and make it restore all its captives, and then death shall be no
more, shall be swallowed up in victory.


S. What is required of us in answer and return to this Office of his?


C. Principally and by indispensible necessity that we render our selves
obedient, faithful, constant Subjects to this King, hold not out any disloyal
fort, any rebel lust or sin against him, but as to a King, vow and perform
entire allegiance unto him. But then consequently that we entrust him with our
protection, address all our petitions to him, have no war or peace but with
those who are his and our common enemies or friends, fight his battles
against sin and Satan, pay him our tribute of honor, reverence, obedience,
yea and of our goods also, when they may be useful to any poor member of his.


S. I shall detain you no longer with less necessary Quaeries about this
Office of his, as, When Christ was inaugurated to it? because I have had the
chance to observe by comparingtwo known places ofScripture together (Psalm.
110. 1. and 1 Cor. 15. 25.) that [Christs reigning] and [his sitting at Gods
Right hand] are all one, from whence I collect that the time of his solemn
inauguration to his Regal Office, was at his Ascension.


C. You have guessed aright, and therefore I shall not farther explain that
unto you, nor put you in mind of any other niceties, but instead of such,
rather remember you of the practical conclusion, that this Office of Christ's
may suggest unto you, that you are no farther a Christian, then you are an
obedient subject of Christ's, that his Gospel consists of commands as well as
promises, the one the object of the Christian faith, as well as the other.


S. O Lord increase this faith in me.

Please you now to proceed to the second Office of Christ's that of his
Preisthood.


C. I shall, and Of Christ's Preistly office.
first tell you, that the nature of this Office of Christ is a little obscure,
and therefore I shall tell you nothing of it, but what the Scripture gives me
clear ground to assert.


S. What does the Scripture tell us of Preisthood?


C. It mentions two orders of Preisthood, one after the order of Aaron, the
other after the order of Melchizedek.


S. What was the office of the Aaronicall Priest?


C. To offer sacrifice, and to bless the people, but especially to sacrifice.


S. What of the Melchizedekian Priest?


C. It is not improbable that Melchizedek offered sacrifice also, but because
the sacred story mentions nothing of him, as belonging to his Preisthood, but
only his blessing of Abraham, therefore it is resolved that the Melchizedekian
Preisthood consisted only in blessing. This you will best discern by looking
into the story of Melchizedek meeting Abraham, Genesis 14. 18, 19.


S. What is there said of him?


C. It is said that Melchizedek King of Salem brought forth bread and wine, i.
e. treated and entertained Abraham as a King, and he was the Priest of the most
high God, and he blessed him and said, Blessed be Abraham of the most high God
which has delivered thine enemies into thine hand.


S. Which of these kind of Priests was Christ to be?


C. Christ being considered in the whole purpose of God concerning him, was to
undertake both these offices of Preisthood, to be an Aaronicall Priest first,
and then for ever after a Melchizedekian Priest, he was appointed first to
offer up sacrifice for the sins of the world, which he performed once for all
upon the cross, and therein exercised the office of an Aaronicall Priest, and
withal completed and perfected that whole work of satisfaction for sin, to
which all the old legal sacrifices referred; and that being done, he was to
enter upon his other office of Melchizedekian Preisthood, and exercise that
continually from that time to the end of the world, and is therefore called a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. And this second kind of
Preist-hood is that which the Scripture of the New Testament, especially the
Epistle to the Hebrews, does mainly refer to, when it speaks of Christ, and
is to be conceived to speak of that, whenever it indefinitely mentions
Christ's Preist-hood.


S. But what then? is not Christ a Priest ofter the order of Aaron?


C. I told you that he was, but now I tell you, that he is not: he was once, in
his death, but never was to repeat any act of that afterward, and so now all
the Preist-hood that belongs to him is the Melchizedekian. I will set this
down more plainly. It is most truly said and resolved, that Christ's death was
a voluntary offering and sacrifice of himself once for us, and that will serve
to denominate him an Aaronicall Priest in his death, or rather to conclude that
his death was the completion of all the rites and ceremonies (such as the
sacrifices) of the Aaronicall Preisthood. But this being but one act never to
be repeated again, is not the thing that Christ's eternal Preisthood (denoted
especially by his unction or Chrisme) referres (...)
to; but that other Melchizedek-Preisthood that he was to exercise for ever.
Besides it may be said that this sacrifice at his death, may, under that notion
of an Aaronicall sacrifice, pass for the rite and ceremony before his
consecration, or at the consecrating him to be our eternal high priest. For
such sacrifices we find mentioned Lev. 8. 22. the ram, the ram of consecration;
and of this nature I conceive the death of Christ to be a previous or
preparatory rite to Christ's consecration to his great eternal preist-hood
after the order of Melchizedek, whereupon it is said that it became God to
consecrate (...)
the Captain of our salvation by sufferings. Heb. 2. 10. for so the word
signifies, which we render to make perfect. To which purpose you may observe
two things 1 that Christ's preist-hood (...).
is said to be an eternal preisthood [thou art a priest for ever] and a
preisthood not transitive, but for ever fastened in the person of (...).
Christ, Heb. 7. 24. after the power of an indissoluble life., v. 16. which
cannot appertain to that one single finite unrepeated sacrifice of himself
upon the Cross. 2, that Christ was not inaugurated to this his preisthood till
after his Resurrection, as may appear by Heb. 5. 5. Christ glorified not
himself to be made an high priest, but he that said unto him, thou art my
son this day have I begotten thee. Which words denoting the time of Gods
inaugurating him to his preisthood may by the sound seem to belong to his
birth, but being compared with Act. 13. 33. and Ps. 110. 14. it plainly
appears that they belong to the resurrection of Christ. and Act. 3. 26. it is
clearly said, God having raised up his son Jesus sent him to bless you;
which is a denotation of this preisthood, as I told you; and anon, if you
remember me, I will more largely show you.


S. Will not this derogate something from the suffering of Christ, or
satisfaction wrought by it?


C. No nothing at all, but rather demonstrate that this death of his was
necessary in a double respect, 1, as an act of an Aaronicall Priest, and a
completion of all those legal rites, which vanished at the presence of this
great sacrifice. 2, that in respect of the satisfaction wrought by it, it was
necessary to make him our eternal Priest, or to make us capable of the
benefits of that Preist-hood of his.


S. Well then, I shall acknowledge those plain words of Scripture, that Christ
is now to us and ever shall be a priest of Melchizedeks Order, and not strive
to fancy him still an Aaronicall priest (that sacrifice being offered up once
for all) because I have no ground now for such fancy. But then I beseech you
wherein lies the parallel betwixt Melchizedecks preist-hood, and Christ's? Is it
in offering of bread and wine which we read of Melchizedeck, or in any thing
answerable to that?


C. No, that is the Papists phansy caused by a great mistake of theirs, they
conceive that Melchizedek offered up Bread and Wine to God: and that in that
respect he is called a Priest, or that he was sacrificing, or did sacrifice;
but in this there are two mistakes, for first, Melchizedek brought forth this
bread and Wine, and presented it to Abraham, did not offer it to God; and
therefore Philo a Jew, well seen in that story, sets it as an act of
hospitality in Melchizedek, contrary to the crabbed niggardliness of Amelek,
he would not allow water, but Melchizedek brought forth bread and wine.
Secondly, this he did as a King, and so Christ as a King may perhaps be said to
entertain and feed us in the Sacrament with bread and wine, and the spiritu,
all food annexed to, or represented by it, the giving of grace and pardon being
a donative of his Kingly Office: but the Preistly acts of Melchizedek are those
that follow. Wherein only Christ's Eternal or Melchizedek. Preisthood consists.


S. What are they?


C. 1. Blessing us. 2. Blessing God for us.


S. What is the meaning of Christ's blessing us?


C. You will see that by reviewing the place even now cited, Act. 3. 26. God
having raised up his son Jesus sent him to bless us: which now you perceive
is a denotation of his Preistly office, the Melchizedek-Preisthood being to
bless.


S. I do so, but how does that show me what that blessing is?


C. Yes, there are words that immediately follow which clearly describe
wherein this blessing consists, in turning away every one of you from his
iniquities.


S. Be pleased then to make use of that key for me, and show me clearly
wherein that part of Christ's Preisthood, his blessing of us consists?


C. In using all powerful means to convert or turn i e. to bring all mankind
to repentance.


S. What be those means?


C. First, the communicating that spirit to us whereby he raised up Jesus from
the dead, Romans 8. 11. Secondly, sending the Holy Ghost, (to convince the world
of sin, and righteousness, and of judgment,) that is, appointing a
succession of Ministers to the end of the world, to work in men's hearts a
cordial subjection to that doctrine which at Christ's preaching on earth was
not believed. Thirdly, the giving of grace, inspiring of that strength into all
humble Christian hearts that may enable them to get victory over sin.
Fourthly, his interceding with God for us, (which you know is the peculiar
office of the Priest) as he promised he would for Saint Peter, that his faith
fail not, that is, that God will give us the grace of perseverance, (which
intercession of his being now with power and authority, (all power is given to
me says Christ) is all one in effect with the actual donation of that grace)
and as a crown of this follows another kind of blessing, actual bestowing of
heaven upon such blessed persevering children of his Father.


S. What is required of us in answer to this part of his Office?


C. First, to seek and pray for grace to descend toward us through this
conduit of conveyance. Secondly, to receive it when it thus flows with humble
grateful hearts. Thirdly, to count grace the greatest blessing in the world.
Fourthly, to make use of it to the end designed by Christ: not to pride or
wantonness, or contempt of our meaner brethren, but to the converting and
reforming of our lives. And fifthly, to look for no final benefit, pardon of
sins, or eternal salvation from that Priest either as suffering or
satisfying for us, but upon the good use of his grace, which will engage us to
walk painfully here, and to approach humbly to receive our reward, the crown
not of our works, but Gods graces hereafter.


S. What is the second part of Christ's Melchizedek-Preisthood?


C. Blessing or praising God for ever in heaven for his goodness, his mercy,
his grace toward us poor sinful enemies of his, in giving us the victory
over our so bitter adversaries, sin and Satan, and death and hell, by the blood
of the Lamb, and the power of his Grace.


S. What is our part in this business?


C. To follow this precentor of ours in blessing and magnifying that God of all
grace, and never yiedling to those enemies which he has died to purchase, and
given us power to resist and overcome.


S. I do already discern the influence of this Office, thus explained, upon
our lives, yet if you please* give me your direction, and opinion what is the
maine practical doctrine emergent from this Office of Christ, especially as it
consists in blessing.


C. This is it, that from hence we learn, how far forth we may expect
justification and salvation from the sufferings of Christ, no farther it
appears, than we are wrought on by his renewing and sanctifying and assisting
grace, this being the very end of his giving himself for us, not that
absolutely or presently we might be acquitted and saved, but that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, from the reigning power, as well as guilt, and
that impartially, of all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. without which acquisition of purity, and
zeal of good works in us as in a peculiar people, Christ fails of his aim
and design in dying for us, he is deprived of that reward of his sufferings,
which is mentioned, Is. 53. 10. The seeing of his seed, the having the pleasure
of the Lord, (which is said to be our sanctification, 1 These. 4. 3.) prosper in
his hand, the seeing of the travail of his soul, v. 1. dividing his portion
with the great, and the spoil with the strong, v. 12. that is, rescuing men
out of the power of sin to amendment of life, and to holiness, which is the
crown and reward of his pouring out his soul to death, and making
intercession for the transgressors. And if he fail of his hope, much more
shall we of ours, after all that Christ has done and suffered, the impenitent
unreformed fiduciary shall perish. And what can you imagine more obligatory to
good life, then this?


S. I acknowledge the truth of what you say to be very convincing, and shall
think my self bound in charity to my poor tottering soul no longer to
flatter and fool my self with such vain hope, that Christ's active and
passive obedience shall be imputed to me, unless I am by his blessing thus
qualified to receive this benefit from his death. Yet now I think of it, if
Christ's active obedience may be imputed to me, then what need have I of obeying
my self? If the righteousness that was in him by never sinning, be reckoned
to me, what need I any other initiall imperfect inherent righteousness or
holiness of my own? this is to me a scruple yet not answered by you.


C I confess it is, for I have had no occasion to mention that active
obedience of Christ, it being no part of his Preistly Office. And now if you
will have my opinion of it, I conceive it clear that Christ's active obedience
is not imputed unto any other person. For first, if his active righteousness
were imputed to me, then by that I should be reckoned of and accepted by God,
as if I had fulfilled the whole law, and never sinned, and then I should have
no need that Christ should suffer for my sins, and so this would exclude all
possibility of having Christ's passive obedience imputed to me. For what
imaginable reason could be given, why I should suffer for sin, or any other
surety for me, if by some former act I am accounted to have performed perfect
unsinning obedience, at least have the benefit of that obedience performed by
that surety of mine, and accepted for me? Secondly, the truth is clear that
Christ's active obedience was required in his person, as a necessary
qualification to make it possible for him to suffer or satisfy for us, for had
he not performed active obedience, that is, had any guile been found in his
mouth, or heart, had he ever sinned, he must have suffered for himself, and
could no more have made satisfaction for us, then one of us sinners can now do
for another. From both which reason it is clear that Christ's active obedience
will not supply the place of ours, or make ours less necessary, and
consequently that our renewed obedience and sanctification is still most
indispensably required (though mixed with much of weakness, ignorance,
frailties, recidivations,) to make us capable of pardon of sin or salvation,
which sure is the intimation of those places which impute our Justification
rather to the Resurrection of Christ (and the consequents of that, the
subsequent acts of his Preisthood heretofore mentioned,) then to his death.
Such are Romans 8. 34. It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? it
is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes intercession for us? which last words refer
peculiarly to that act of this his Preist-hood in blessing or interceding for
us. and Romans 4. 25. who was delivered (to death) for our offenses, and was
raised again for our justification. The Death of Christ not justifying any who
has not his part in his Resurrection.


S. I perceive this theme of Christ's Priesthood to be a rich mine of Christian
knowledge, every scruple of mine opening so large a field of matter before you,
I shall satisfy my self with this competency which you have afforded me; I
beseech God I may be able to digest it into kindly juice, that I may grow
thereby.

Please you now to proceed to the third and last Office of Christ, that of a
Prophet.


C. I shall, and Of the Prophericke office of Christ.
promise you not to exercise your patience so largely in that, as in the former.


S. Wherein does his Propheticke Office consist? In foretelling what things
should happen to his Church?


C. No, that is not the notion we have now of a Prophet (although that he has
also done in some measure, as far as is useful for us.)


S. What other notion have you of a Prophet?


C. The same that the Apostle has of prophesying, 1 Cor. 11. 4. and 14. 6.


S. What is that?


C. Interpreting or making known the will of God to us.


S. Wherein did Christ do that?


C. In his Sermons, but especially that on the Mount, telling us on what terms
blessedness is now to be had under the Gospel, and revealing some commands of
God which before were (either not at all, or) so obscurely revealed in the Old
Testament, that men thought not themselves obliged to such obedience. Besides
this, the Propheticke Office was exercised in ordeining ceremonies and
discipline for his Church, the use of the Sacraments, and the power of the
keys, that is, the Censures of the Church.


S. What else belongs to his Propheticke Office?


C. Whatsoever else he revealed concerning the Essence and Attributes of God,
concerning the mystery of the calling of the Gentiles, and whatsoever other
divine truth he revealed to his auditors, either in parables, or plain
enuntiations.


S. What are we to return to this Office of his?


C. Our willing full assent, never doubting of the truth of any affirmation of
his; a ready obedience to his institutions, and commands, neither despising nor
neglecting the use of what he has thought fit to prescribe us, and subduing
carnal proud reason to the obedience of faith.


S. You have gone before me through the names and offices of Christ severally;
Is there any influence on practice that all of them jointly may be thought to
have, over and above what from the severals you have showed me?


C. I shall commend only one consideration to you for this purpose, that
Christ being an union of these three Offices, is a Jesus or Savior finally to
none but those who receive him under all his three Offices, uniformly into
their hearts.


S. (...).
I may do so, that I may be not a little way, or a partial, unsincere, but a
true Christian.

What hinders but that you now proceed, according to your method prpoosed, to
the particulars of the third rank, the Theological graces and Christian
virtues?


C. I shall, if your patience and appetite continue to you.


S. To begin then with the first, what is Faith?


C. There is not any one Of Faith.
word in nature which has more significations then this has in the Word of
God, especially in the New Testament. It sometimes signifies the acknowledgment
of the true God, in opposition to Heathenisme, sometimes the Christian
Religion, in opposition to Indaisme; sometimes the believing the power of
Christ to heal diseases; sometimes the believing that he is the promised
Messiah; sometimes fidelity or faithfulness; sometimes a resolution of
conscience concerning the lawfulness of any thing; sometimes a reliance,
affiance, or dependence on Christ, either for temporal or spiritual matters;
sometimes believing the truth of all divine revelations; sometimes obedience to
Gods commands, in the Evangelicall not legal sense; sometime the doctrine of
the Gospel, in opposition to the law of Moses; sometimes it is an aggregate of
all other graces; sometimes the condition of the second Covenant in opposition
to the first; and other senses of it also there are, distinguishable by the
contexture, and the matter treated of where the word is used.


S. I shall not be so importunate, as to expect you should travail with me
through every of these severals, but shall confine your trouble to that which
seems most necessary for me to know more particularly. As first, which of all
these is the notion of that Faith, which is the Theological Grace, distinct
from Hope and Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 13?


C. It is there the assenting to, or believing the whole word of God,
particularly the Gospel, and in that the commands and threats, and promises
of that word: especially the promises. This you will acknowledge if you look
on v. 12. of that Chapter, and there observe and consider, that Vision in the
next life is the perfecting of that Faith in this life, or that Faith here is
turned into Vision there, (as hope into enjoying) for this argues Faith here to
be this assent to those things which here come to us by hearing, and are so
believed by adherence, or dark enigmaticall knowledge, but hereafter are seen
or known demonstratively, or face to face. Hence is it that Faith is defined by
the Apostle, Heb. 11. 1. the ground or foundation of things (...)
hoped for, the conviction (or being convinced, or assured) of things which we
do not see. The foundation on which all hope is built, (for I must first
believe the promise before I can hope the performance of it on right grounds)
and the being convinced of the truth of those things for which there is no
other demonstration, but only the word and promise of God, and yet upon that
an inclination to believe them as assuredly, as if I had the greatest evidence
in the world.


S. I cannot but desire one trouble more from you in this matter, what kind of
Faith was the Faith of Abraham, which is so much spoken of in the New
Testament, To. 4. Gal. 3. Heb. 11. Ja. 2. and seems to be meant as the
pattern by which our Faith should be cut out, and upon which both he was, and
we may expect to be justified?


C. I cannot but commend the seasonablenesse of the question before I answer
it, for certainly you have pitched upon that which is the only sure foundation
and groundwork of all true knowledge and resolution in this matter, Abraham
being the Father of the Faithful, in whom that grace was most eminent, very
highly commended and rewarded in the Scripture, and like whom we must be, if
ever we expect to approve our selves to, (or to be justified by) God.


S. But what then was the Faith of Abraham?


C. Many acts of Abraham's Faith there are mentioned in the New Testament, which
were several exercises of that grace in him, but especially two there are, by
which in two trials of his Faith he approved himself to God, so far as that
God imputed them to him for righteousness, i. e. accepted of those acts of his
as graciously, as if he had performed perfect unsinning obedience, had lived
exactly without any slip or fall, all his life, yea and gave him the honor of
being called the friend of God.


S. What was the first of those acts?


C. That which Saint Paul referres to Romans 4. and Gal. 3. his believing the
promise of God made unto him, Genesis 15.


S. What was that promise?


C. It consisted of two parts. First, that God would shield and defend, or take
him into his protection, and withal reward him abundantly for all the service
that he should ever perform unto him. This promise is set down, v. 1. in these
words, fear not Abraham, I am thy shield and exceeding great reward. The sum
of which is, that God will protect all those that depend and trust on him, and
reward all his faithful servants in a manner and measure inexpressibly
abundant, and particularly that he would then deal so with Abraham, a true
faithful servant of his, and consequently that he should not fear. This
promise it is not said in the text expressly that Abraham believed; but yet it
is so far implied that there is no doubt of it, for Abraham's question, v. 2.
[What will thou give me, seeing I go childlesse?] is in effect a bowing and
yiedling consent to the truth of this promise, and firmly depending upon it:
and thereupon proceeding to a special particular, wherein he desired that
favor of God to be made good to him, the giving him a child for his reward,
whereas otherwise (having none, and so his servant being his only heir
apparent) all the wealth in the world would not be valuable to him, and
thereupon as a reward of that his former faith, on the former promise God
proceeds to make him that second more particular promise, which I called the
second part of it.


S. What was that?


C. The promise that he should have an heir of his own body, from whom should
come a posterity as numerous, or rather innumerable, as the stars of heaven,
(and among them at length the Messiah in whom all the people of the world
should be blessed) for that is the meaning of [so shall thy seed be, v. 5. and
of the same words delivered by way of Ellipsis, Romans 4. 18. Who believed that
he should be the father of many nations, accordingly as had been said to him
by God.] So (i. e. as the stars of heaven) shall thy seed be. This second
part of the promise being a particular contained before under the general of
rewarding him exceedingly, but not till now explicitly revealed to Abraham,
that God would then reward him by giving him a son, and a numerous posterity,
and the Messiah to come from him, was a particular trial whether his former
belief were sincere, i. e. whether he would trust and depend on God or no,
there being little reason for him to expect a child then, having remained so
long without one, and so some difficulty in so believing; and then it follows
that in this trial he was found faithful, he believed, v. 6. (or as Saint
Paul heightens it, beside or beyond hope he believed, Romans 4. 18.) and God
counted it to him for righteousness, i. e. took this for such an expression
of his faithfulness and sincerity and true piety that he accepted him as a
righteous person, upon this performance, though no doubt he had many
infirmities and sins which he was or had been guilty of in his life,
unreconcileable with perfect righteousness.


S. What was the second of those acts of Abraham's faith?


C. That which Saint James mentions c. 2. 21. and Saint Paul, Heb. 11. 17.
offering up his son Isaak upon the Altar. For God having made trial before
of his faith, in one particular, that of believing his promise; makes now a new
trial of it in another, that of obedience to his commands: for when God gives
commands as well as promises, the one is as perfect a season and means of
trial of faith as the other; and to say I have faith, and not thus to evidence
it, not to bring forth that fruit of it, when God by expecting it and requiring
it puts me to the trial, is either to manifest that I have no faith at all,
or else not a through faith, but only for cheaper easier services, not able to
hold out to all trials. Or else that this is but a dull livelesse habit of
faith, without any vital acts flowing from it: which yet are the things that
God commands, and without yiedling of which in time of trial (or when
occasion is offered) the habit will not be accepted.

And this I conceive the clearest way of reconciling Saint James and Saint
Paul, Abraham was justified by faith, says Saint Paul, Rom, 4. and not by
works, i. e. by believing and depending on God for the performance of his
promise, and resigning himself up wholly to him to obey his precepts; or more
clearly by that Faith which howsoever it was tried, whether by promises of
strange incredible things, or commands of very hard duties, (killing his only
son) did constantly approve it self to be a true says, and so was accepted
by God, without performance of absolute unsinning obedience, much more without
performance of the Mosaicall law, (Abraham then being uncircumcised) which two
things, one or both, are generally by Saint Paul meant by works. But then
says Saint James, Abraham was justified by works, i. e. his Faith did approve
its self by faithful actions, particularly by offering up his son, an act
of the greatest fidelity, and sincerity, and obedience in the world, and if in
time of trial he had not done so, he had never passed for the faithful
Abraham, had never been justified, i. e. approved or accepted by God, which is
in effect all one with that which Saint Paul had said; neither one nor the
other excluding or seperating faithful actions or acts of Faith, from Faith,
or the condition of justification, but absolutely requiring them as the only
things by which the man is justified, only Saint Paul mentions the works of
the law, and excludes them from having any thing to do toward justification,
leaving the whole work to Faith; and Saint James, dealing not with the Jews,
but with another kind of adversaries, has no occasion to add that exclusive
part, but rather to prevent or cure another disease which he saw the minds of
men through mistake and abuse of Saint Paul's doctrine possess't with, or
subject to (thinking that a dead habit of Faith would serve the turn, and
mistaking every slight motion or formal profession (such as bidding the poor
go, and be rich, and giving them nothing, v. 16.) for that habit of faith) and
in opposition to that, resolving that the Faith which in time of trial, when
occasion is offered, does not bring forth acts, is such a dead carcass of
faith that God will never be content with, to the justifying or accepting of
any, or counting any man (as Abraham) his friend; for such are none, says
Christ, but those which do whatsoever he commands them.


S. I thank you for this very plain delineation of Abraham's Faith: be only
now pleased, to prevent any mistake of mine, to change the scene, and bring
home the whole matter to mine own heart, and tell me what is that Faith which
is required of me, and which alone will suffice to denominate me a child of
Faithful Abraham, and which will be sure to be accounted to me for
righteousness by God; and this you may please to do only with reflection,
and in proportion to what you have already told me of Abraham.


C. I will obey you. The faith which is now required of you, and which God will
thus accept to your justification, is a cordial sincere giving up your self
unto God, particularly to Christ, firmly to rely on all his promises, and
faithfully to obey all his commands delivered in the Gospel: which will never
be accounted that sincere cordial faith, unless you do (whenever any
trial is made of you) act and perform accordingly, believe what Christ has
promised in the Gospel, against all spiritual or worldly temptations to the
contrary, and practice what Christ commands against all the invitations of
pleasure or profit, or vain glory to the contrary; to which purpose it is,
that Christ says, that they cannot believe, which receive the praise of men:
by that one carnal motive, as an example or instance of the rest, illustrating
this truth, that he that the World, or Flesh, or Devil, can carry away from
the profession of, and obedience to Christ, is no son of the faithful
Abraham, no beleiving Disciple of his. For if it be said that Abraham was
faithful before these acts of his Faith, at least before that second of them,
that of obedience, being justified upon the believing the promise before, Genesis
15. and so that you may have true faith, before you produce those effects of
it, at least by believing the promises of Christ you are so justified, without
respect unto (or abstracted from) this obedience to his commands, I shall soon
satisfy that scruple, by confessing the truth of it as far as concerned
Abraham, on this ground, because Abraham was by God (who saw his heart)
discerned to be faithful before any of these trials, nay had formerly given
evidence of it by going out of his country at Gods command* which was an act of
great obedience (...)
Genesis 12. 1. and Heb. 11. 8. And after, being tried at that time only with a
promise, he gave full credit to that, and still gave evidence of his fidelity,
as fast as occasions were offered, which God, that saw no maime in him, did
accept of even before he had made those other trials. And proportionably it
will still hold true of you, that if your heart be sincerely given up to
Christ, if there be in you a resolution of uniforme obedience unto Christ,
which the searcher of hearts sees to be sincere, and such as would hold out in
time of temptation, this will be certainly accepted by God to thy
justification; nay if God try thee only with the promise, as (be it but this)
that Christ will give rest to all that being weary come to him, or for
temporal things, that he will never fail thee, nor forsake thee, if thou do
confidently depend on the truth of this without any doubting or staggering,
this will be accepted by God to thy justification, without any farther acts of
faith or obedience to his commands, in case, or supposing, there were no such
command as yet given to thee, or no occasion of obeying it; But now thy case
being in one respect distinguished from that of Abraham's, the whole Gospel
being already revealed and proposed to thee as a summary of what thou art bound
to believe and what to do (and no need of any such particular revelations of
Gods will, either by way of promise or particular precept, as was to Abraham)
the object of thy faith is already set thee, all the Affirmations, all the
promises, and all the Commands, yea and Threats of the Gospel; and all these
are to be received uniformly with a cordial faith proportioned to each of
them, assent to all his affirmations, dependence on all his promises,
resolution of obedience to all his commands, (even those hardest sayings of
his, most unacceptable to flesh and blood) and fear and awe of his Threats,
without any flattering fallacious hope of possibility to escape them. Thy
Faith, if it be true, must be made up of all these parts and not of some one or
more of them; and then whenever any trial shall be particularly made of
thee, in which kind soever it happens to be first, thou must express and
evidence thy fidelity, or else this faith will not be accepted by God to thy
justification, i. e. will not be approved by him, or accounted for thy
righteousness; and the same must be resolved, when and how often soever
occasions shall offer themselves either of assenting or adhering, or obeying or
fearing God, (i. e. whenever any difficulty or other temptation interposes in
any one of these) for then it is with thee as it was with Abraham when God
tempted him, and there is no justification to be had, but upon passing
faithfully (I say not, without all sin, all blemish, all imperfection, but
without all falsenesse, faithlessenesse, hypocrisy) honestly, sincerely through
such trials. For though God may approve and justify thy faith and thee, before
or without any trial, any performance, (beholding all in the heart which men
do in the actions) yet when those trials are made, and the performance not met
with, it is then apparent even to men and thy own soul, that thy resolutions
were not before sincere, (i. e. thy faith true) and consequently God that saw
that before those trials, cannot be thought to have justified that unsincere
resolver, that dead heartlesse livelesse Faith. But when upon such trials God
meets with his desired expected returns, he then justifies the fidelity or
Faith of that man, and consequently that man himself, who has showed himself
so faithful; and so (by the purport of the New Covenant, through the
sufferings and satisfaction of Christ) he imputes not to that man the sins of
his former, nor frailties and infirmities of his present life.


S. You have given me a large account of my demand, and I can find nothing
wanting to my present satisfaction but the more distinct descending to the
several parts, and branches of faith, that I may more nearely look into the
severals of my duty in this matter, wherein I am so mightily concerned.


C. I shall give you that without detaining you long, or adding much to what
has been already said, only by giving you the object of true faith, which is
of two sorts, Either God himself, Or the Word of God; God who is believed in,
and the Word of God as the rule of that Faith, or matter to be believed, and
that Word entirely considered, signifying whatsoever I am (or may ever be)
convinced to come from him, and in it (as it is now shut up, and comprised in
the Books of Canonical Scripture) these special parts which do divide the
whole Scripture between them. 1. The Affirmations of Scripture, whether by way
of Historical Narration, or by way of Doctrine. 2. The Promises of God, both
in the Old and New Testament, but especially the promises of the Gospel, both
such as belong to this life, and specially those that belong to another. 3. The
Commands of God, whether the Natural Law of all mankind written in our hearts
by the finger of God, made up in the frame of the humane soul, and more
clearly revealed both in the Decalogue and other parts of sacred writ; or
whether the Commands of Christ, raising nature to a higher pitch in the Sermon
on the Mount, and superadding some positive institutions, as those of the
Sacraments and Censures of the Church, in other parts of the New Testament. 4.
The Threats of the Gospel, those terrors of the Lord, set on purpose to drive
and hazen us to amendment of our sinful lives. All these put together, are the
adequate object of our Faith, which is then cordial and such as God will
accept of, when it affords to every one of these that reception which is
apportioned to it, assent to the truth of the Affirmations, fiduciall reliance
on the promises, obedientiall submission to the Commands, and humble fear and
aw to the Threats.


S. I have heard much of a General, and a Particular Faith, and that the
General is little worth without the Particular. Tell me whether that be
appliable to the Faith you now speak of?


C. Being rightly understood it is.


S. What then is the General and Particular Faith as it referres to the
Affirmations of Scripture?


C. The General, is a belief of Gods veracity, that whatsoever is affirmed by
him is infallibly true; the Particularis, the full giving up my assent to every
particular which I am convinced to be affirmed by God, as soon as ever I am so
convinced, or have means sufficient offered me so to convince me, and yet more
particularly the acknowledging of those truths which have special marks set
upon them in Scripture to signify them to be of more weight then others, as
that God is, Heb. 11. 6. That Christ is the Messiah of the world, the
acknowledging of which is said to be life eternal, Jo. 17. 3. The Doctrine of
the Trinity, into which all are commanded to be baptized, and those other
fundamentals of faith which all men were instructed in anciently before they
were Vid: Cyrilli H^^ros: catech.
permitted to be baptized, contrived briefly into the compasle of the Apostles
Creed, a summary of Christian faith or doctrine necessary to be believed.


S. What is the General and Particular Faith, as it referres to the Commands
of the Gospel?


C. The General is an assent to the truth and goodness of those Commands in
general, as they concern all men, that is, beleiving that Christ has given
such a law to all his Disciples, to all Christians, and that that law is most
fit to be given by him. The Particular is the applying these Commands to my
self, as the necessary and proper rule of my life, the resolving faithful
obedience to them.


S. What is it as it reforres to the Threats?


C. The General is to believe that those Threats will be (and that it is most
just they should be) executed upon all against whom they are denounced: The
Threats under oath absolutely, non-admission into Gods rest to all disobedient
provokers, Heb. 3. 11. the conditional Threats conditionally, i. e. unless
we repent, and use the means to avert them. The Particular is to resolve, that
except I get out of that number, I shall certainly find my part in them.


S. What, as it referres to the Promises?


C. The General is the believing the truth, infallible truth of the Promises,
which Promises (the object of that Faith) being generally conditional, not
absolute Promises, great care must be taken that the Faith be proportioned to
the nature of the Promises; As when the Promise of rest is made peculiarly to
the weary and heavy laden thus coming to Christ, the General faith is to
believe undoubtedly, that this rest shall be given to all that perform this
condition, to all humble faithful penitentiaries; and to believe that it
belongs either absolutely to all, or to any but those who are so qualified, is
to believe a lie; No piece of Faith, but phansy or vain conceit, which sure
will never advantage, but betray any that depends upon it.


S. What then is the Particular Faith terminated in this conditional Promise?


C. Not the beleiving that the Promise belongs absolutely to me, (for it does
not, any longer then I am so qualified) nor the believing that I am so
qualified (for 1. perhaps I am not: and 2. that is no object of faith, no part
of the promise, or of any other piece of Gods word) but it is made up of these
three things, 1. the confident persuasion that if I fail not in my part,
Christ will never fail in his; if I do repent, no power of heaven, or earth,
or hell, no malice of Satan, no secret unrevealed decree shall ever be able to
deprive me of my part in the promise. 2. A setting my self to perform the
condition on which the promise is made; as when rest being promised upon
condition of coming, I come upon that invitation, then this coming of mine may
be called particular application; as when a picture is so designed and set, as
to look on every one that comes in at the door, and on none else, the way to
be particularly looked on, i. e. to apply the eye of the picture particularly to
me, is to come in at that door. And 3. the comparing the conditional Promise
to my particular present estate by way of selfe-examination, and thence
concluding upon sight of the condition in my self, that I am such a one to
whom the Promise belongs, and shall have my part in it, if I continue and
persevere. The second of these, if it be real and sincere, gives me a
certainty of the object, seals the Promise to me in heaven, which will remain
firm, though Certitudinem obiecti.
I never know of it. The third, if it be on right judgment of my self, may
give me the other certainty, i. e. ascertaine me that I am in the number of
Gods children; but there being so Certitudinem subiecti.
much uncertainty whether I judge aright of my self or no, and there being no
particular affirmation in Gods word concerning the sincerity of my present, or
perseverance of my future condition, that assurance reflexive, of which this is
one ingredient, cannot be a divine Faith, but at the most an humane, yet such
as perhaps I may have no doubting mixed with, nor reason that I should so
doubt. For at the conclusion of life, having finished his course and;
persevered, Saint Paul could say without doubting, henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness. Which if another man be not able to say with
that assurance, 'twill not presently be want of Faith in him, as long as this
want of assurance proceeds not from any distrust of the truth of Gods promises,
but only from an humble conceit of his own repentance, that it is not such as
God requires of him. And if that place, 2 Cor. 13. 5. [Know ye not that Christ
Jesus is in you, except you be reprobates?] be objected, to prove that all are
Reprobates that know not that Christ is in them; the answer will be
satisfactory, that the words rendered [in you] (...).
signify very frequently in the Scripture, and peculiarly in a place parallel
to this, Exodus 17. 7. among you, or in your congregation. And so the sense will
be best dissolved into a question and answer, know you not (by the miracles and
preaching, the demonstration of the spirit and of power) that Christ Jesus is
among you? (by way of interrogation, for so it is in the Greek, and the meaning
appears by the context to be) Know ye not, discern you not, your selves, that
the power of the Gospel is come among you, by my Apostleship? and then by way
of answer [Except you be reprobates] you are obdurate insensate creatures
undoubtedly unless you do.


S. You have showed me the difference betwixt General and Particular Faith,
and I shall not follow that matter any farther, but I pray help me in one
difficulty. We are said in Scripture to be justified by faith, and we hear
much talk of a justifying faith; I pray, tell me what Faith this is, to which
Justification is attributed?


C. First let me tell you that Faith, in whatever acception, is no proper
efficient cause of justification, for such is only God through the
satisfaction of Christ, accepting our persons and our weak performances, and
not imputing our sins: in which act nothing in us can possibly have any, so
much as inferior isntrumental, efficiency; the most that can be said is, that
it is a condition without which God, that justifies the penitent beleiver, will
never justify the impenitent infidel, and therefore it is observable that it is
no where said in Scripture, that Faith justifies, but that we are justified by
Faith, which particle [by] is a peculiar note of a condition, not a (...) cum
genitivo.
cause.


S. But then what Faith is this which is the condition of our justification?


C. That Faith which we showed you was Abraham's Faith: or infewer words, the
receiving the whole Christ in all his offices; as my King, my Priest, my
Prophet, whereby I believe the Commands as well as the Promises of the Gospel;
or take the Promises as they are, i. e. as conditional Promises. And this a
cordial practical belief, a firm resolution of uniforme obedience and
Discipleship, faith made perfect by works, Ja. 2. 22. Intimating, that without
the addition of such works, such obedience Evangelicall, it would be
imperfect, unsufficient to this end, that is, to our Justification. The same is
called in a parallel phrase, faith consummate by love, Gal. 5. 6. (which
indeed we render working by love, but the Greek and Syriack signifies
consummate (...).
by love) that is, by acts of Christian Charity, and therefore in two parallel
places is thus varied, in one we read instead of it the new Creature, Gal. 6.
15. in another, the keeping the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19.


S. But how then is it so often said that we are not justified by works, Gal.
1. 16. and Romans 3. 28. that we are justified by faith without the deeds of the
law?


C. I have in effect already told you, and shall in a word again tell you. The
word workes] and deeds of the law, in those places signifies perfect legal
obedience, or circumcision, and the like Judaicall out-dated Ceremonies; and
Faith] the Evangelicall Grace of giving up the whole heart to Christ, without
any such perfect obedience, or Judaicall observances; and so it is truly said,
we are justified by Faith without them: i. e. without such works, such perfect
obedience; yet not excluding, but including that Evangelicall obedience, for
without that Faith is dead, says Saint James, 2. 17. and then sure not able to
justify any. And therefore you may observe in that Apostles discourse, Ja. 2.
he affirms that Abraham was justified by works, v. 21. and makes that a
parallel phrase to that of the Old Testament Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness, v. 23. where, as [justification] and
[imputed to him for righteousnesse] are phrases of the same importance, so are
[workes] and [beleiving] also.


S. The reason of it, I conceive, is because Faith always brings forth good
works, or if it do not, it is no true Faith.


C. I am not altogether of your opinion, for I conceive it very possible for me
to believe, and yet not to live accordingly. The truth is, that is not a
justifying Faith, or such as even now I defined, and so no truefaith in that
sense, but yet it may be a true Faith, for so much as it is; I may truly,
without all doubting, believe the promise of mercy and salvation to the true
penitent, and none else, which belief is very fit and proper to set me a
reforming and amending, and yet it is possible for temptations of carnal
objects to persuade me to defer this duty, nay never to think fit to set my
self to the performance of it, the present pleasures of sin may outweigh in
my debauched choice those future. spiritual joys; nay I may see and like
them, and yet for the present embrace the contrary, the will of man being a
middle free faculty, not absolutely obliged to do or choose what the
understanding judges most honest, i. e. what Reason and Faith, and the Spirit
of God commands to be done. The truth is, if this faith get once to be
radicated in the heart, to rule and reign there, if the will chooses what
Faith recommendeth, then it brings forth all manner of good works; and so
then it is the consummation of Faith by Charity and Good works that God
accepts in Christ to justification, and not the bare aptness of faith to
bring forth works, if those works by the fault of a rebellious infidel will
be not brought forth.


S. But is there no one peculiar act of Faith to which justification is
particularly imputable?


C. That to which justification is promised, is certainly the giving up of the
whole soul entirely unto Christ, accepting his promises on his conditions,
undertaking Discipleship upon Christ's terms; But yet it is possible that some
one act of faith may be more excellent and acceptable in the sight of God then
others; as that humble act of the faithful servant, that when he has done
all, acknowledges himself unprofitable, and so excludes all glorying, (which
the Apostle makes very necessary to justification, Romans 4.) expects all good
from Gods free mercy in Christ, withwithout any reflection on any of his own
performances; or again that of full trust, affiance, reliance, rolling ones
self on God, depending on his all sufficiency in the midst of all
difficulties, on the fidelity of him that has promised, when all worldly
probabilities are to the contrary; but then this must be accompanied with other
acts of faith, when occasion is offered for them, and with use of the means
prescribed by Christ, or else reliance may prove presumption after all. And
however it is, we must add to our faith, virtue, etc. or else our faith may
still be dead, livelesse, being alone, that is, unable to stand us in any stead
to the desired end.


S. I could hear you and propose scruples to you for ever on this argument,
but I desire to carry away only so much of this subject of faith as may tend
to the increase of all virtue in me, and I am sensible how long I have detained
you on this theme, and therefore I shall importune you no farther about it; but
yet only vary, not end your trouble, and advance to the next Theological
Grace, that of Hope, and desire your directions in that particular.


C. This Grace is subject to Of Hope.
some mistaking, and therefore I shall desire you to mark carefully what I
conceive of it.


S. What is Hope?


C. It is a patient comfortable expectation of the performance of Gods
promises, belonging to this life, or a better.


S. What is the ground of Hope?


C. Some sure word of promise assented unto by faith.


S. What is the object of Hope?


C. It is made up of two things, 1. The thing promised, 2. The Cause or Author
of it. 1. The thing promised, or the performance of that promise. Such is the
Resurrection of the dead, which nature cannot help us to see any thing into,
but being believed by faith, becomes the object of Hope. And it is observable,
that seven times in the Acts of the Apostles, the word Hope referres to this
one object, the Resurrection or future state or life in another world, which
indeed is the supreme object of the Christians Hope, and all other things but
in an inferior degree, and as they refer to that, and in order to that great
treasure of our rejoicing. Though the truth is, as there be promises of this
life, as well as of another, (as that God will give us all things necessary for
us, and the like) So is there a Secular Hope, or an Hope of this life, and an
object of that Hope.


S. What is that Secular Hope


C. A reliance on God that he will send me whatsoever is good for me.


S. What is the object of that Hope?


C. Good successes, good things.


S. Am I bound to hope that all things that are good for me shall befall me?


C. I must answer you with some caution: First, Those promises are
conditional, All things shall tend to good to them that love God. If we be
lovers of God, then that promise belongs to us, not else. And consequently then
we are to hope it, not else; Ye that fear the Lord, hope in the Lord, says
the Psalmist.


S. But is every true servant of God bound to hope, that God will give him all
secular good things, as wealth, peace, honor, and the like?


C. There is another condition required in him first before that promise
belongs to him, and consequently before he is bound to that hope.


S. What is that?


C. To pray for them, for the having and finding, is promised to none but to
them which ask and seek; yea and to use the means ordinary and lawful,
which are in order to that end, as labor, and the like. (among which
mercifulness and liberality is one, to which the promise of secular wealth is
most frequently made, and the contrary threatened with want.)


S. Well then, must the servant of God having prayed, and used those means,
hope and be assured that that which he thus prays for, shall be granted him?


C. Yes: either formally, or by way of aequivalence; either that, or something
that is better; or again either now or when God fees fitter for him: for this
must be allowed God to be able to choose for us better then we can for our
selves, both for the thing it self, and the time of conferring it. For many
times, that which we ask, would, if it should be granted, be worst for us, and
perhaps tend to our destruction; and then God by denying the particular matter
of our prayers, does grant the general matter of them, which always is that
which is best for us. Sometimes again he deferres to grant, that we may
reinforce our impression, pray more ardently, and for us to be so exercised in
prayer and hope, is best for us also.


S. Are we bound then thus to expect and hope, in every thing that we pray for?


C. Yes, we are, and the want of that is the sin of wavering or doubting,
noted by Christ and his Apostles.


S. Well, but you toldme there was another part of the object of Hope, besides
the thing promised, which you called the cause or author of it. What is that?


C. The person that is to make good this promise to me, which is God himself.
And therefore we are so often exhorted to hope in the Lord, etc. For as in the
other affections, we are not only angry at the injury, or the provoking thing
done to us, but at him that did it, and we do not only fear pain and
punishment, but him also that can inflict it on us; so we do not only hope
for Heaven, or for any other good thing, but for God as the fountain of our
bliss, and through whose mercy it is, that it befalls us. This is called hope
in him, or (as it should rather be rendered) Hope on him, 1 John 3. 3. And this
is a special act of Christian hope, to be thus unbottom'd of our selves, and
fastened upon God with a full relyance, and trust, and dependence on his mercy.


S. I thank you for this direction. Give me leave to proceed. What be the
seasons and opportanities of this Hope?


C. 1. Time of tribulation, Romans 5. 4. Tribulation works patience, and
patience experience, and experience Hope, and Hope makes not ashamed. Where
the word, (...)
which we render experience, signifies being approved upon a trial, and the
sense runs thus. Tribulation is a season and a means to work patience, and
that patience to produce approbation, as of one that is tried in the fire, and
has past the test. And this a means to work an Hope or expectation of
reward, and that Hope will keep from being ashamed of those sufferings, and
make us rather rejoice in them, as in benign auspicious signs that in another
world there is a reward for the righteous, because in this life the contrary
rather. So Romans 12. 12. Rejoicing in Hope, and patient in tribulation, are
joined together. 2. Time of temptation, when some present delight is ready to
invite to sin, or present bitterness to deter from the ways of God, then
the Hope of future joies to be exchanged for that bitterness, and to outvy and
preponderate that pleasure, comes in seasonably. 3. The Time of mourning for
the dead, which the assured Hope of a Resurrection will moderate and alleviate.


S. You told me the ground of Christian Hope was the promises. I pray, is a man
to hope for nothing but that for which he has some promise in Scripture?


C. He may perhaps lawfully hope for some things for which there is no promise,
so there be nothing to the contrary; but then this is not the grace of Hope,
but a good natural assurance or confidence, which Aristotle observes young men
to be full of, and old men not so inclined to. But if it be for any spiritual
matter, (...).
it is, if it be not grounded on some promise, but presumption.


S. There is no promise in Scripture for every particular man's eternal
salvation, yet sure every man is bound to hope he shall be saved.


C. This is the misprision I desired to anticipate and forestall in you, and
now I must be feign to cure, seeing I could not prevent it. To which purpose
you must again remember, that Gods promises being the grounds of Hope, and
those promises being but seldom absolute, most what conditionate, the Hope,
(if it be the Christian Grace of Hope,) must be proportioned and attemperate to
the promise; and if it exceed that temper and proportion, it becomes a tumor
and tympany of Hope. For example, that there shall be another state or life
after the end of this, both for just and unjust, there is an absolute promise,
and therefore every man may justly hope for that, though to the ungodly it be
matter rather of fear, then Hope; but for a happy or joyful Resurrection to
life, a blessed future state there is no absolute unlimited, but conditional
limited promise, to the true penitent believer, and none else; for to all
others God has sworn, they shall not enter into his rest. And then he that is
such, may no more hope for his part in the Resurrection of the just, then for
the most impossible thing: or if he do hope, that Hope will stand him in no
steed, will never make that true by hoping it, which was otherwise false; The
Hope of the Hypocrite shall perish, says Job, and so the carnal impenitent,
his Hope shall perish also; sure never be able to keep him from perishing.


S. What then is the Christian Hope in this particular?


C. It is an assurance, 1. That though my sins be never so great, they may be
pardoned me, if the condition to obtain that pardon be not neglected. 2. To
hope chearefully and confidently upon the observation of those means. 3.
(which is the prime act and evidence of the Christian Hope) to set
industriously and piously to the performance of that condition on which the
promise is made: as Saint John says, Every man that has this hope purifies,
And 4. upon view of the sincerity of that performance of mine, to hope
comfortably and chearefully for Gods performance. In breife, the Hypocrite or
unreformed sinner may have some room for Hope suppositively if he do change
and repent, the honest penitent may hope positively. The former may hope as for
a future possibility, the latter at the present as for a certainty. But the
latter of these, is the only Christian Hope. For by this you shall know a
Christian Hope from all other, that he that has it purifies himself. The
Hypocrite or carnal man hopes, and is the wickeder for hoping, he fears
nothing, and so discernes not the necessity of mending; The best way to reform
such a man, is, to rob him of his Hope, to bring him to a sense of his
danger, that he may get out of it, to conduct him by the gates of Hell, to a
possibility of Heaven. But the Scripture. Hope, the [this Hope,] as Saint John
calls it, i. e. the Hope of seeing God, 1 John 3. 2. being grounded on
conditional promises, (and that condition being purity, holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord) sets presently to performing that condition,
that is, to purifying, according as you shall see the practice of it in Saint
Paul, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises, (what promises?
conditional promises, c. 6. 17.) let us purify our selves, etc.


S. But is not Despair a sin? and does not that consist in not hoping for
Heaven?


C. The want of the Christian Hope is a sinful despair, but not the want of
all kind of Hope, the thinking it impossible his sins should be forgiven
though he should be never so truly penitent, is a sin, but that rather of
infidelity, then despair, it being the dis-beleeving an eternal truth of
Gods. A consequent of this indeed may be desperation, (as on the contrary, Hope
is a consequent superstructed on faith) to wit, when he that believes himself
incapable of Pardon, goes on without any care or thought of reforming, such an
one we vulgarly call a desperate person, and that sure is a most damning sin;
but for him that lives an impenitent sinner, not to hope for mercy as long as
he does so, is sure no sin superadded to his impenitence; his impenitence is
a sin, but that being supposed, his not hoping is but duty and justice; the
contrary would be a greater sin and a more desperate sign. So that not every
not hoping for Heaven is the sin of Despair, but rather the peremptory
contempt of the condition, which is the ground of Hope. The going on (not only
in terrors and amazement of conscience, but also) boldly, hopingly,
confidently, in wilful habits of sin, which therefore is called
desperateness also, and the more bold thus, the more desperate.


S. But what if a godly penitent man should either doubt of his salvation, or
not at all hope for it?


C. If that doubting or not hoping be only grounded in a false judgment of his
own repentance and sincerity, in conceiting too meanly of himself, in
thinking himself no true penitent, when he is; this will not be the sin of
Despair; no nor infidelity neither: because if he could believe his penitence
sincere, (the want of which belief is not the dis-beleeving of any part of
Gods word, because that says nothing of him particularly) he would assuredly
hope; and now that only his humility makes him so comfortless, there is
certainly no sin in that.


S. But what if a sinner be so overwhelmed with sorrow, as not to lay hold on
the promises at all, is not this the sin of Despair?


C. The trial of him will be by examining whether he purify or no, that is,
whether his sorrow bring forth fruits of amendment; if so, this is not the
sin of Desperation yet, he has the Grace of Hope, which brings forth fruits
of Hope, though it be so clouded over with a melancholy vapor, that it be not
discernible even to himself. But if this trouble of mind set him a sinning
farther, like Judas, who had sorrow but then hanged himself, this is Despair
indeed.


S. I shall solicit you no farther in this point, but for your prayers that
God will keep me from all premature persuasion of my being in Christ, that he
will give me that Hope that may set me a purifying, and not suffer me to go on
presumptuously or desperately in any course. Only upon occasion of this Grace
of Hope, give me leave to ask you whether he that now lives in sin, and
hopes he shall one day repent, and go to Heaven, (this Repentance, and that
Heaven, being a future good, and so the object of Hope) may be said to have the
Grace of Hope, in any kind.


C. By no means. Because God has made no such promise that he shall repent,
nor without Repentance, that any man shall have Heaven. This is a groundwork
of carnal security, and no degree of the Grace of Hope.


S. Once more: may he that has gone on in a continued course of sin, and at
last is overtaken with Gods judgments, (and seeing Hell gates open upon him,
does greive for his former wicked life, and upon that hopes for mercy,) be
conceived to be saved by that Hope?


C. I list not to pass sentence on any particular, because I cannot thoroughly
discern his state; only I can say in general, I know no promise of pardon in
Scripture, to a bare deathbed sorrow, because indeed none to any sorrow at any
time, but that which is (...), Godly sorrow, which works Repentance; which
Repentance, as it is available if true, though never so late, so is seldom
true, when it is late, nor can well be known to be true, but by persevering
fruits which require time. And though a serious purpose of amendment and true
acts of Contrition, before or without the habit, may be accepted by God to my
salvation, yet in this case there is no sure judgment, whether this purpose be
serious, or these acts true acts of Contrition. And so in this case, there is
no foundation for his Hope: and then a groundless Hope, or a bare Hope without
the other conditions, to which the promises belong, will never be able to save
any.


S. Shall we now proceed to the third Grace, that of Love or Charity?


C. Most willingly: it is a precious Grace, and that which Saint Paul preferres
before Hope and Faith.


S. But is any Grace to be preferred before that of Faith? (I thought that had
been the most necessary Gospellgrace.)


C. It is most certain there is (Faith being taken in that notion, which I
told you, belongs to that place) because Saint Paul has affirmed it, that
Charity is the greatest of the three, 1 Cor. 13. 13. And it is as sure, that no
other Scripture has contradicted this; and although very great things are said
of Faith, as of the only condition of Justification and Salvation, yet. 1.
This is when it is in conjunction with Charity, Faith consummate by love. And
2. It Is observable, that the most imperfect things are always the most
necessary, and consequently the great necessity of Faith is no argument of it is
dignity in comparison of this other Grace. For indeed Faith is necessary so, as
without which Charity cannot be had, but then this alone is unsufficient to
save any, if Charity be not added to it. Faith is the foundation, which though
it be the most necessary part of the building, yet is it the lowest and most
imperfect: Charity the superstruction which is never firmly built but when
grounded in Faith, and when it is so, it is far more excellent then it is
foundation. Besides, Charity is a Grace not out-dated in Heaven, as Faith and
Hope are.


S. But what is Charity?


C. The sincere love of God, and of our neighbor for his sake.


S. Wherein does the love of God consist?


C. As love in its latitude is of two sorts, of Freindship, and of Desire; the
first betwixt friends; the second, betwixt lovers, the first a rational, the
second a sensitive love; so our love of God consists of two parts. 1.
Esteeming, prizing, valuing of God. 2. Desiring of him.


S. How shall I know whether I do Esteem God as I ought to do?


C. If you would be content to do any thing or suffer any thing, rather then
loose his favor, rather then displease him. If you love me, (says he) keep
my Commandments. And therefore loving him and obeying him, love and works,
(to wit, Evangelicall works) are taken for the same thing in Scripture.


S. How must this love be qualified?


C. The special qualification, or rather indeed essential property of
Charity, is the sincerity of it, as that is opposite to hypocrisy or a double
heart, or divided love, or joining any rival or competitor in our hearts with
him. The loving God above all, and all other for his sake, this is set down
both by Moses and Christ in these words; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength. The Heart, as I conceive, signifying the Affections; The Soul the
Will, or elective faculty; The Mind the Understanding or rational faculty;
And the Strength the powers of the body for action; and all four together,
making up the whole man, and the word All, affixt to each, not to exclude all
other things from any inferior part in my love, but only from an equal or
superior, to exclude a partial or a half love.


S. What are the motives that may stir up this love in my heart?


C. 1. The consideration of Gods infinite essence. And 2. Of his most glorious
Attributes. And 3. Of his bounteous actions toward us in creating, redeeming,
preserving and providing such rewards for those that love him.


S. What is that other part of love which you call the Desiring of him?


C. The actual appetition or fastening our affections on him, desiring to
enjoy him. 1. His Grace, or sanctifying Spirit here. And 2. The perpetual
vision of him hereafter. The former part of this is called, hungering and
thirsting after righteousness. A hatred and impatience of sin, a desiring to
be out of that polluted condition, and to be made like unto God in holiness
and purity, (and you may know the sincerity of that, 1. By assiduity and
frequency and fervency in prayer, that way of conversing and communing with
God, a most infallible concomitant of this kind of love. 2. By loving and
seeking the means, 1. of resisting sin, and 2. of receiving, and 3. of
improving of Grace; that one principal desire of David's, That he might dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of his life, t^ behold the fair beauty
of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.) The latter part of this is called by the
same David, the longing of the soul after God; by Saint Paul, desiring to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ.


S. What are the motives to this kind of love?


C. 1. Gods loving us first, and dying for us, an expression of that love able
to constreine and extort a reciprocation or return of love. 2. The true
superlative delight even to flesh and blood, that is, in sanctity, and the
practice of Christian virtues beyond all that any sensual pleasure affords, so
great that when they are expressed by the Apostle in these words, [Neither eye
has seen, nor care heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man
toconceive what things God has prepared for them that love him.] They are
ordinarily mistaken for the description of Heaven. 3. Those joies in the vision
of God in another life, thus described by the Psalmist, In thy presence are
fullness of joies, and at thy right hand pleasures for evermore.


S. Well, you have gone through the two parts of the love of God; And told me
that the sincerity required in it, requires me to love God with all my heart.
May not I then love any thing else but God?


C. You may, but with these conditions, 1. that it be not some prohibited
object, as the world and the things of the world, for if any man love the
world, the love of the father is not in him. 1 John 2. 15. 2. That it be in a
degree inferior to the love of God, thus God being loved above all, other
things may lawfully in a lower degree be loved also. 3. That those other things
be loved for Gods sake, and in that order that he prescribes them.


S. But may not the outward expressions of love in many good Christians be
greater to some other object, then to God? or is this incompatible with the
sincerity of the love of God?


C. Our love of God may be sincere, though it be accompanied with some
frailties; now the sensitive faculty may have a sensitive love of some
sensitive objects; which though it be moderated so, as not to fall into sin
either in respect of the object, or the excess, yet through the nature of man's
sense may express it is self more sensitively toward that inferior object,
then toward God himself; and this is a piece of humane frailty, not to
bewholly put off in this life. And yet for all this, the love of God may be
more deeply radicated in that soul; and that will be tried by this, that if
one were to be parted with, I would part with any thing, rather then God. But
that not to be judged, by what I could answer, if I were asked the question;
nay nor what I would resolve at a distance, but in time of temptation and
actual competition betwixt God and that any thing else that could not be held
without sinning against God, what then I would really do. This may best be
understood by that other passion of sorrow. I may weep more for the loss of a
friend, then for my sins, yet my sorrow for sin may be the deeper and more
durable sorrow, though it be not so profuse of these sensitive expressions. So
may, and must our love of God be most firmly rooted, though not so
passionately expressed, as through the infirmity of our flesh, and neerenesse of
other objects to it, our love to them is wont to be.


S. Shall we proceed to the other branch of Charity, that of our Neighbor, and
first, what do you mean by the word Neighbor?


C. Every man in the world, for so Christ has extended the word, Luke 10. 36,
37. Not only to signify the Jew in relation to the fellow Jew, who was the
Old Testament-Neighbour, but to the Samaritan, in relation to the Jew, i. e. to
him that was most hated by him, as appears by the parable in that place.


S. What is the love of my Neighbor?


C. 1. The valuing him as the Image of God, one for whom Christ died, and one
whom God has made the proxey of his love, to receive those effects of it from
us, which we cannot so well bestow on God. 2. The desiring, And 3. The
endeavoring his good of all kinds.


S. In what degree must this be done?


C. As I desire it should be done to my self.


S. How is that?


C. Why, in all things to deal with other men as (if I might be my own
chooser,) I would wish that other men, nay God himself, should do to me. This
will certainly retain me within the strictest bounds of justice to all men I
have to deal with, (because it is natural to desire that all men should deal
justly with me) and teach me all mercy to others both in giving, and forgiving,
and blessing them, because I cannot but desire that God should be thus
merciful to me.


S. But will not my love of God be sufficient (without this other love of my
neighbor) to denominate me Charitable?


C. It will not. 1. Because this loving my neighbor is one, nay many of the
Commandments which he that loves God must keep, 1 John 3. 23. 2. Because God
has pleased to appoint that, as the test of the sincerity of the love of God,
in judging of which we might otherwise deceive our selves, and prove liars, had
we not this evidence to testify the truth of our love, according to that of
Saint John, 1 Ep. 4. 10. For he that loves not his brother whom he has seen,
how can he love God whom he has not seen? Which place argues that all the
arguments or motives which we have to love God, we have to love our brother
also, God having devolved all his right to our love, upon our brethren here,
(and therefore interpreting whatsoever is done to them as done to himself) not
so as to divest himself of it, but to accumulate it on this image here below,
communicating all his claims to it, to which claims of God, our relation to
our brethren superadding one more, that of acquaintance, and affinity of our
humane nature, expressed by those words, [his brother whom he has seene] it
follows in all necessity, that he that loves not his brother, that behaves not
himself to all men, superiors, equals, inferiors, strangers, friends,
enemies, Turks, Jews, Heathens, Heretics, sinners, according as the rules
of Christian charity, of justice and mercy oblige him, is not a lover of God.


S. Is there any more that I need know concerning this grace?


C. No more at this time? The particulars farther considerable will come in out
rode hereafter.


S. Your proposed method than leads me to Repentance Of Repentance
next; what is Repentance?


C. A change of mind, or a conversion from sin to God. Not some one act of
change, but a lasting durable state of new life, which I told you was called
also Regeneration.


S. But is not Regeneration an Act of new birth?


C. No, it is the state of new life, (called the New Creature) living a godly
life, or like sons or children of God, for the Scripture phrase, to be
regenerate or borne again or from above, is all one with being a child of God,
that is, one who, as he has (...)*
his seed of new life from the Spirit of God, so returns him the obedience of
a sonne-like gracious heart, lives like a son in his family, and never goes
from him with the prodigal into the far Country.


S. Of what parts does Repentance consist?


C. Not properly of any, it being nothing else but a change of mind or new
life; yet there are many preparatives in the passage to this state, every of
which does also in some measure accompany it where ever it is.


S. What are those preparatives then?


C. 1. Sense of sin. 2. Sorrow or contrition for sin. 3. Confession of
sin. 4. Disclaiming, forsaking, resolving against sin.


S. Wherein does the Sense of sin consist?


C. In discerning, 1. The Odiousness. 2. The Danger of it.


S. What Odiousness?


C. 1. How it displeases God, and makes us odious in his sight. 2. How it
defiles and defames us, turns the members of Christ to be members of an
harlot. 3. Makes us odious to all good men. 4. Makes us incapable of heaven,
wherein nothing shall enter that defiles, Rev. 21. 27.


S. Wherein does the Danger consist?


C. In bringing 1. the curses of this life upon us. 2. temporal death. 3.
eternal plagues and torments in another world.


S. What then is a Sense of these?


C. 1. A conviction of the truth of these. 2. A serious consideration and
pondering of this important truth as it concerns our endless weal and woe.
3. A being affected with it, so as to humble our souls in that sense, which
leads to sorrow and contrition.


S. What is sorrow and contrition for sin?


C. A being greived with the conscience of sin, not only that we have thereby
incurred such danger, but also that we have so unkindly greived and provoked so
good a God, so compassionate a father, so gracious a redeemer, so blessed a
sanctifier.


S. Is it not sufficient to greive in respect of the danger and damnation which
sin betrays me to, and is not such grief contrition?


C. No, it is but attrition, which any man living would have, when he saw such
danger near; he would be pricked at heart, and be ill pleased to see hell
gaping upon him: and you may observe that where such present danger is the only
cause of sorrow, when that danger is over, there seldom or never follows
reformation. And therefore that opinion and doctrine of the Papists, who teach
that this attrition, (or sorrow, that we shall be punished) without producing
amendment of life in the sinner, yet by the power of the keys, i. e. by the
absolution of the Priest, is turned into contrition, is a most ridiculous
deceit of souls; for there being no promise of Scripture that such attrition
alone, or flying from the wrath to come, Mat. 4. shall be sufficient to obtain
pardon without bringing forth fruit worthy of repentance; the Priest that
absolves any on no better grounds then those, goes beyond his commission, and
by telling a lie, can never make that lie become truth, by absolving an
uncontrite sinner, cannot sure make him contrite, either in reality or in Gods
acceptance of him; because he has not promised to accept any, but the broken
and contrite; and therefore not any thing else in stead of contrition.


S. What think you then of that sorrow and compunction, that the approach of
death and terrors of the Gospel bring men to?


C. If it be a bare sorrow and compunction, only respecting those present
terrors, and advancing no higher, then certainly it has no promise of mercy
belonging to it. But if that which begins thus, by Gods mercy allowing of time,
and by his Grace using these terrors for the softening of the heart, improve
farther into sorrow for displeasing of God, and from thence into a real
sincere resolution to amend and forsake sin, then these superstructions have
a promise of mercy belonging to them, though that foundation had not. The only
thing then in this matter to be considered, is, whether it be thus improved or
no: and that no man can certainly judge of, neither Confessor nor patient
himself, but by the fruits of it, after wards in time of temptation. For 1.
the man himself may through self-love take that for Godly sorrow and
resolution of amendment, which is only sorrow for his own danger, and
willingness to avoid that, and again, when foreign temptations are out of
the way, and by disease, etc. inner flames quenched in him, he may resolve
against those sins which before he had lived in; or, by way of natural
revenge, he may vow never to return to those sins which he has had such
experience of, for the emptiness and damningnesse of them, and so think
himself a complete penitent. And 2. the sensitive expressions being often as
great for the one as the other, nay greater for danger then for sin, and from
weakness of body, then change of mind, the confesfor may easily mistake
likewise; but when God pleases to restore health and strength, when those
present apprehensions are over, and temptations of the world and flesh return
again, and perhaps some new that were not before in his rode, then if the
sorrow continue as great, and the resolution as earnest, and persevere to hold
out in despite of temptations to the contrary, and take not up any new sins
in exchange for the old, this is a comfortable evidence, that that sorrow was
Contrition, and that resolution a sincere resolution. But if, this time and
means of trial being allowed, the matter prove otherwise, if the penitent
return to his former jollity, and luxury, or instead of those nauseated sins,
make some other choice of a new path to hell, entertain covetousness instead
of prodigality, spiritual pride instead of carnal security, envy, malice,
sedition, faction, in commutation for lust, and the like; This is a
demonstration that that sorrow was not Contrition, that resolution no sincere
resolution, and consequently that if that man had then died, there would not
have been found any thing in him which God has promised to accept of. But if
the case be set in a third or middle way, that the patient dye before any such
trial has been made, either to evidence the sincerity or unsincerity, then
that which remains for us is, not to judge, but to leave him to Gods
inspection, who can see without those ways of trial, and discern what it was
in it is self, attrition or contrition, sincere or not sincere, whether it
would have continued (or no,) a through change of mind; and consequently will
accept the will for the deed, if it be a firm and ratified will, and not
else. And so in breife, God may have mercy on him whose repentance began never
so late, if he see it was sincere repentance. But in this case there is small
matter of comfort to us, because there is no such way of assurance that we are
ordinarily capable of, nor reason to hope that God will afford us any
extraordinary; and for any man to put off his present repentance, on
contemplation of a possibility that his latter repentance may serve the turn,
is the most wretchlesse presumption in the world; and that which I am sure has
no promise of mercy annexed to it.


S. I shall satisfy my self with these grounds of resolution for this matter
and conceive that any more particular difficulty will be salved by the
application of these grounds to it, and so not object what was obvious to have
done, the example of the theife on the cross which is so common ground of
security, and presumption to carnal livers; because I already discern reason
to think his state the state of true contrition and conversion, and not only
of attrition, because in those minutes he lived on the cross, he gave such
evidence of this in confessing and praying to Christ, when his own Disciples
had forsaken him: and beside, Christ who know his sincerity and will not accept
the unsincere, revealed to him his acceptance of him. I shall therefore detain
you no longer with questions of this nature, but proceed to inquire more
particularly of Contrition.

What sins must be taken in by it, or for what must this Godly sorrow be
conceived?


C. For all kinds and sorts of sin. 1. For the weaknesses, frailties, and
pollutions of our nature, our pronenesse and inclinations to sin; for though
these being unconsented to, are no actual sins, yet are they matters of true
sorrow, and grief, and humiliation to a true Christian, as infelicities, if
not as sins; that he is such a polluted uncle^^^ creature, and so apt to fall
into all sin, if he be not restrained and prevented by Gods Grace. 2. For the
sinful acts and habits of our unregenerate life, with all the aggravations
belonging to them. 3. The slips and relapses of our most regenerate life, and
the infinite frailties and infirmities that still adhere to it.


S. How can Contrition, which you called a preparative to repentance, and so to
regeneration, include sorrow for the sins of the regenerate life?


C. I told you these preparatives to repentance do also accompany it
wheresoever it is; and in that respect it will be clear, that Contrition is
not one initiall act of sorrow for sin past, but also a current permanent
state of sorrow and humiliation for sin present, and through the whole life
never outdated.


S. What now is Confession of sin?


C. It is of a sorts. 1 to God, 2 to men, especially the Presbyters.


S. What is Confession to God?


C. An humble, sorrowful, acknowledgement of sin in prayer to God. 1. By
confessing that I am a sinner, who have worthily deserved his wrath. 2. By
enumeration of the particular sorts of sin, of which I know my self guilty.
3 By aggravating these sins upon my self, by the circumstances and
heightning accidents of them. 4. By comprizing all my unknown unconfest sins
under some such penitentiary form, as that of David's, who can tell how often he
offends, cleanse thou me from my secret faults.


S. How does the necessity of this appear?


C. Beside the practice of David and other holy men in scripture, by these
express texts: If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins; and he that confesses and forsakes shall have mercy.


S. But why then should we confess to men, and particularly to Presbyters?


C. 1. Because we are commanded by Saint James, 5. 16. to confess our faults
one to another, that we may be capable of one another prayers. 2. Because the
context there seems very probably to mean the Presbyters when he says [one
to another] for speaking of the sick man, he bidds him call the Presbyters v:
14. and there is no intimation of any other company with him, or consequently
of any other there present, that he can confess to, but to them. 3. Because
there being 2 parts in sin, the guilt and the corruption, the one to be
pardoned, the other cured; the first being confessed to God, to obtain his
pardon ought also, if it have been offensive and scandalous to the
congregation, to be acknowledged to them, that that expression of repentance
may make satisfaction to them for the ill example, and avert and deter from
sin, whom it had invited to it: And for the cure, it will sure be very
profitable to advise with others, especially the Physicians of the soul, how
and by what means this cure may be wrought, how a raging sin may be subdued,
occasions to it avoided, to which end alone the disclosing of the particular
state is more then profitable; and this being supposed, it will be acknowledged
necessary for a Christian not to despise such proper useful means to a
necessary end, unless without that help he can direct himself, which
ignorant men and habituate sinners in any kind will hardly be able to do. 4ly,
Because this may much tend to my comfort, when another upon a strict survey and
shrift of my former life, and present testification of my repentance, may upon
good grounds give me absolution, and pass judgment on me, better then I can
do on my self.


S. What is the fourth preparative to repentance?


C. A firm resolution, and vow of new life. 1. An abjuring of all my former
evil ways, i. e. both of the sins themselves, and the occasions which were
wont to bring me to those sins; secondly a resigning my self up to do the
will of Christ; thirdly the pitching on some particular duties of piety and
charity, which were most criminously omitted before, and are most agreeable to
my calling to perform.


S. What now is the penitent state?


C. The actual continued performance of these resolutions, both when occasions
are offered, and when temptations to the contrary.


S. But what if those resolutions be not then performed?


C. Then is not that to be accounted a penitent or regenerate man.


S. But what? are no sins compatible with a regenerate estate?


C. Yes. 1. Sins of infirmity, secondly of ignorance; and (under that head of
infirmity) thirdly sins of sudden surreption; and fourthly such as by daily
incursion of temptations, though constantly resisted, yet through the length of
the work, and our frailty, and Satan's vigilance sometimes are gained from us,
all these (together with those, Fifthly, which through levity of the matter
insensibly steal from us) are by general repentance i. e. humbling ourselves
before God for them, begging Gods pardon in Christ, and laboring against them
more diligently for the future, reconcilable with a regenerate estate; are
spots, but those spots of sonns, though they be never totally overcome in this
life: sixthly some one wilful act of deliberate sin, which we might have
resisted, if it be presently retracted with Contrition and Confession, and
reinforcing of our resolution and vigilance against it, and so not favored or
indulged unto, may be also reconcilable with a regenerate state so far, as
not wholly to quench the spirit of God, to cause spiritual desertion, though it
do greive that spirit, wast the conscience, wound the soul, and provoke Gods
displeasure, (from which nothing but hearty repentance, can deliver us) and
commonly bring some temporal judgment upon us.


S. What then are unreconcileable with a regenerate state?


C. Whatsoever are not compatible with an honest heart, a sincere endeavor:
(...), Non operatur peccatum.
particularly these two Hypocrisy and Custom of any sin. Whosoever is borne
of God does not commit sin 1 Jo. 3. 9. (i. e. does not live in sin as in a
trade or course) for his seed remains in him, (there is in the regenerate a
new principle or seed of life, a principle of cognation with God, which whilst
it continues in him, is still a hazening him out of sin,) and he cannot sin
in such manner, because he is borne of God; or if he do, he is no longer a
child of Gods, or regenerate person, or as Gal. 5. 16. walk in the spirit and
you shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, i. e. these two are
unreconcileable: when we say an honest man cannot do this, our meaning is not
to affirm any natural impossibility, that he is not able, but that he cannot
think fit to do it; the principles of honesty within him, as here the seed of
God or new principles in him, will resist it; or if he do it, he is no longer
to be accounted an honest man.


S. This place in Saint John's Epistle has sure great difficulty, I beseech you
make it as intelligible to me, as you may.


C. I shall do it, and that most clearly by bringing down the sense of the
whole chapter from the beginning to this place in this breife paraphrase; do you
look upon the words in your Bible, whilst I do it. v. 1. Gods love to us is
very great in that he has accepted us Christians to be his Children, (which by
the way is the reason that the world which rejected Christ, rejects us also.)
(v. 2.) and being children, though we know not exactly the future benefit which
shall accrue to us by this means, yet this we know, that when this shall be
revealed to us, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, and that
vision will assimilate us to him, (v. 3.) and the very hope of it now has the
same power of making us pure, as he is pure. (for 1, Hope includes desire and
love of the thing hoped for, which being Heaven, a place of purity, the hope of
Heaven must include a desire of purity, and therefore the Heaven that the
sensual man desires, if he desire it for the present, is a mockeheaven; and if
it be the true Heaven the state of purity, then he desires it not for the
present, but hereafter when sensual pleasures have forsaken him. And 2 the
condition of Gods promises being our purification or sanctification, and the
particular condition of this seeing God, being Holiness, it is madness for us
to hope any thing but upon those grounds, and therefore he that has this hope
of seeing him or being like him hereafter, labors to become like him now, in
purity, (a special imitable quality of his) And (v. 4.) he that wants it, (i.
e. every one that commits sin) is guilty of the breach of the law, of this
Evangelicall law of his; and that sin it self is that breach, upon which
consequently follows the forfeiture of those promises contained in it, (v. 5.)
and to that end, that we, for whom he dyed, should not thus sin, it was
without doubt that he came amongst us, and sin or any such impenitent
committer of sin, is not in him, (v. 6.) For every one that remains in him,
as a member of his sins not wilful deliberate sins; if any man do so,
pretend or profess, be what he will, he has neither seen nor known Christ
(v. 7.) I pray suffer not your selves to be deceived, Christ you know is
righteous, and the way to be like him is to be righteous also, and that cannot
be but by doing righteousness, living a constant Christian life, (v. 8.) He
that does dot so, but goes on in a course of sin, is of the Devil, and by his
actions expresses the stock he comes of. For it is the Devil that began his
age with sin, and so continued it, and so sin is his trade, his work, and
this was a special part of the end of Christ's coming, to destroy his trade,
to dissolve that fabric he had wrought, i. e. to turn sin out of the
world, (v. 9.) and therefore sure no child of God's, none of that superior
stock will go on in that accursed trade, because he has God's seed in him,
that original of cognation between God and him, Gods grace, that principle of
his new birth, which gives him continual dislikes to sin, such as (though they
do not force or constreine him not to yield to Satan's temptations, yet) are
sufficient to enable him to get out of those snares; and if he be a Child of
God, of Christ's making, like him that begat him in purity, etc. he cannot, he
will not thus go on in sin, (v. 10). So that hereby you may clearly
distinguish a child of God, from a Child of the Devil, he that does not live a
righteous and charitable life, (to do justice, and to love mercy, as Micah
says) is no child of Gods, has no relation of consanguinity to him. I shall
need proceed no farther, by this you will understand the sense of the verse to
be this, and no more. Those that are like Christ, and so God's children, it is
supposed that they have such a seed or principle of Grace in them, that
inclines them to dislike, and enables them to resist all deliberate sins; and
if they do not make that use of that grace, sure they are not like Christ,
none of his fellow-Sonnes of God: a regenerate man remaining such, will not,
nay morally cannot do so; so doing is contrary to a regenerate state.


S. I heartily thank you for this trouble. I shall divert you by another
scruple, which is this. Will not I pray you, the flesh, as long as we continue
in these houses of clay, be we never so regenerate; lust against the spirit,
the members war against the mind, and so keep us from doing the thing that
we would, yea and captive us to the law of sin; and so will not this captivity,
and thraldom to sin, so it be joined with a contrary striving and dislike,
be reconcilable with a regenerate estate?


C. Your question cannot be answered with a single Yea, or Nay, because there
be several parts in it, some to be affirmed, others to be denied; and
therefore to satisfy you, I shall answer by degrees, 1. That there is a double
strife in a man, the one called a war betwixt the law in the members and the
law in the mind, the other the lusting betwixt the spirit and the flesh. The
former betwixt the law in the members, and in the mind, is the persuasions of
sin or carnal objects on one side, and the law of God, inviting us on the
other side, commanding us the contrary; and in this case, the law, as the
Apostle says, being weak, and not able of it self to help any man to do
what it commands him, it must needs follow, that they that have no other
strength, but the bare light of the law in the mind, no grace of Christ to
sustain them in their combats, will by their carnal appetite be led to do
those things, which the law tells them they should not; which if they do and
continue in them, this condition you will have no color of reason to mistake
for a regenerate state, 1. Because it is the state of him only that knows the
law (which is not able to quicken or renew) considered without the grace of
Christ, which is necessary to a regenerate man, 2. Because this law in the
mind, when it is not obeyed, but despised, does serve only to testify against
us, that we knew our Masters will, and did it not, i. e. that what we did, was
against thedictates of our own conscience, which sure will never help to
excuse a sin (but tather to aggravate it) or consequently to make that act
reconcilable with a regenerate estate, which otherwise would not be so; and
therefore 2. Of this kind of composition of a man, when his mind or upper
soul being instructed in its duty dislikes the sins he commits, and yet he
continues to commit them, you may resolve, that this striving or this dislike
of his mind is no excuse or Apology for his sin, much less any argument of
his regeneracy or good estate; but on the other side his serving of, or
captivity to the law of sin in his members, is all one with the reigning of
sin in his body to fulfill the lusts thereof, and that a sure token of an
unregenerate: for of every regenerate it is said 1 John 5. 4. that he
overcommeth the world, which is quite contrary to being sold under sin (a
phrase referring to the Romans custom of selling of slaves under a spear) or
to that which is said of Ahab. 1 King. 21. 25. that he was sold (the Greek
reading) to do evil, being a slave of sin, or serving with the flesh the law
of sin, and therefore you may conclude, that he, whosoever it is, that with the
mind serves the law of God. i. e. approves of Gods command, or consents to it,
that it is good, and yet with the flesh, the members, serves the law of sin,
not only commits some act of sin, but lives indulgently in it, and is thereby
enslaved to it, is never to be counted of as a regenerate man, but only as one
that by the law is taught the knowledge of his duty, but by that bare knowledge
is not enabled to perform it.


S. But what then is the other thing you told me of the lusting of the spirit
and flesh one against the other?


C. Those words you will find Gal. 5. where by the spirit is meant the seed of
grace planted in my heart by God, as a principle of new life, or the mind and
upper soul elevated yet higher (above the condition it is in by nature, or by
the bare light of the law) by that supernatural principle; and by the flesh is
meant again the carnal appetite still remaining in the most regenerate in
this life: and the lusting of one of these against the other, is the absolute
conttariety that is betwixt these two, that whatsoever one likes, the other
dislikes, whatsoever one commends to the will, the other quarrelleth at.


S. What then is the meaning of that which follows this contrariety, Gal. 5.
17. in these words [so that you cannot do the things that ye would?]


C. The words in Greek are not [that you cannot do] but [that you do not] (...)
and the sense is, either 1. That this contrariety always interposes some
objections to hinder or trash you from doing the things that you would, i. e.
sometimes the spirit trashes you from doing the thing that your flesh would
have done, sometimes the flesh trashes you from doing the thing that the spirit
would have done. And 2ly. whatsoever you do, you do First against one velleity
or other, And secondly with some mixture of the contrary: Or else that this
contrariety gives you trouble, that whatsoever you do on either side, you do it
not quietly, stilly, but with a great deal of resistance and opposition of the
contrary faculty.


S. Well then, may this lucta, this resistance, be in a regenerate man?


C. Undoubtedly it may, and in some degrees will be, as long as we carry flesh
about us, for the flesh will always dislike what the spirit likes; but then,
we must be sure that the flesh do not carry it against the spirit. i. e. do not
get the consent of the will to it, for if it do, lust conceives and brings
forth sin, even those works of the flesh mentioned v, 19. for though this
lucta be reconcilable with a regenerate state, i e. that a man may be
regenerate for all this, yet it is not an argument of a regenerate estate, so
that every one that has it, shall by that be concluded regenerate; for if the
flesh carry it from the spirit, to fulfill the lusts thereof, it seems that
man walks not in the spirit. v. 16. and consequently is not in a regenerate
state.


S. But is every man unregenerate that does any thing that the flesh would have?


C. I told you, frailties and imperfections, and also sins of sudden
surreption, and those that by daily incursion, continual importunity, at some
time or other gained in upon us, (so they were as suddenly taken and repented
of) were reconcilable with a regenerate estate; and therefore if it proceed no
farther, it is only mixture of the flesh in our best actions, or else slips
and trips, or falls suddenly recovered again; but not carnality, or walking
after the flesh. And for these you know the remedy I prescribed you, daily
prayer for pardon for daily slips, and daily caution and care and endeavor to
prevent them. But as for indulgence in, or habits of carnality, it is not the
lusting of the spirit against the flesh that will excuse them from being works
of the flesh, or him that is guilty of them from being carnal. For it being
too too possible and ordinary for the lustings of the spirit, i. e. spiritual
motions to be resisted, it will be little advantage to any to have had these
motions, unless he have obeyed them, i. e. unless he walk in the spirit, and
be led by it: for to such only it is that there is no condemnation, To. 8. 1.


S. I shall not detain you but with one scruple Votum poenitentiae.
more, and that is, whether a vow or a wish that I were penitent, will not be
accepted by God for repentance?


C. If you take that vow and that wish to be all one, you are mistaken; a wish
is a far lower degree then a vow; and therefore I must dissolve your demand
into two parts; and to the first answer, that the vow or resolution to amend,
if it be sincere, and such as is apt to bring forth fruits, is sure to be
accepted by God; and that it is not sincere we shall not be able to discern,
but by seeing it prove otherwise in time of temptation: only God that sees the
heart, can judge of it before such trial, and if he find it sincere, he will
accept of it. But for the wish that I were penitent, there is no promise in
holy writ that that shall be accepted, nor appearance of reason, why he, that
wishes he were penitent, but is not, should be accounted the better for that
wish; 1. Because when the reward of penitents, and punishment of impenitents is
once assented to as true, it is impossible but the mind of man should wish for
the one, and have dislikes to the other, and so no virtue in that necessity. 2.
Because that wishing is only a bare, aerie, speculative act of the mind, and
not a practical of the will, which alone is punishable or rewardable. 3.
Because the actions being contrary to such wishings are more accusable of
deliberate sin, and sin against conscience; then if those motives which
produced those wishes, had never been represented to the faculty.


S. But are not prayers for the grace of repentance, (which are but a kind of
articulate wishes, put in form of the court, and addressed to God) accepted by
God?


C. Not so far as to save them that go no farther. Accepted they shall be
(if rightly qualified with humility, and ardency, and perseverance, or not
fainting) so far as concerns the end immediate to them, i. e. God has
promised to hear them, in granting the grace prayed for, strength to convert
from sin to God, (which is the clear Gospell-promise, How much more shall your
Heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them that ask?) and then when this
grace, or strength given, is thus made use of to actual reformation, then the
promise of that other acceptance belongs to him also; and so prayer is a good
means, and wishing a good thing too, as previous or preparative to that; and
both without doubt proceeding from the good spirit of God. But yet if the whole
work be no more but this, if he be advanced no farther toward repentance, but
only to wish, and to pray that he were penitent, this person remains still
impenitent, and so long the impenitents portion belongs to him, and none other;
for still he that is borne of God overcomes the world: and he that is advanced
no farther toward a victory, then to wish or pray for it, is for that present
far enough from a conqueror; and if for the future he add not the sincerity
of endeavor to the importunity of prayer, the Joshua's hand's held up to
fight, as well as the Moseses to pray; the sword of Gideon as the sword of the
Lord, little hope that such victories will be atcheived.


S. God grant me this grace, and an heart to make use of it. But we have skipt
over one particular forementioned, The grace of self-denial. And I do not
remember that you mentioned taking up of the Cross, which in Christ's
prescriptions, is wont to be annexed to it. Give me leave to recall them to
your memory. And first, what is meant by Self-denial?


C. The abnegarion or renouncing of all his own holds and interests and trusts
of all that man is most apt to depend upon, that he may the more expeditely
follow Christ.


S. What are these severalls that we are thus to renounce?


C. In general, whatsoever comes at any time in competition with Christ. In
particular, the particulars whereof every man is made up, his soul, his body,
his estate, his good name.


S. What under the first head, that of his Soul?


C. 1. His reason, when the word of Christ is contradicted, or checked by it,
as in the business of the resurrection, and the like. I must deny my reason,
and believe Christ, bow down the head and worship, captivate my understanding
to the obedience of faith.


S. But I have heard that God cannot do contradictions, or make two
contradictions true at once, and in one respect. How then can I be bound to
believe God, when that which he says contradicts reason?


C. I am not glad that you have met with that subtlety, yet seeing it is proper
to the particular we are upon, and that a branch of a practical point, I will
endeavor to satisfy you in it. 1. By granting the truth of your rule, that to
make both parts of a contradiction true, is absolutely impossible, a thing
which Gods infinite power and veracity makes as unfit for God to be able to
do, as to lie, or sin; because it were not an excess, but defect of power,
to be able to do these. But then, secondly you must know what is meant by
contradictions, nothing but affirmation, and negation of the same thing in all
the same respects; as to be and not to be; to be a man, and not a man; to be
two yards long, and not two yards long; which therefore are thus absolutely
impossible to be done, even by divine power. But then thirdly, That which you
called reason's contradicting of Christ, is a very distant thing from this. For
when reason says one thing, and Christ the contradictory to that, reason does
not oblige me to believe reason; or if it does, it bids me disbeleive Christ,
and so still I believe not contradictories, which soever of the contradictories
I believe; all that reason has to do in this case, is to judge which is
likeliest to judge of, or affirm the truth; it is self, or God; wherein if it
judge of it is own side against God, it is very partial and very Atheistical:
it being very reasonable, that God which cannot lie, should be believed, rather
then my own reason, which is often deceived in judging of natural things,
it is only proper object; but is quite blind in supernatural, till God be
pleased to reveal those unto it. The short is, reason tells me, and in that it
is impossible it should err, especially God having revealed nothing to the
contrary, it is doubtless that it does not err) that these two propositions
cannot be both true, there is another life, and there is not another life; and
therefore I am not bound by Christ to believe both; but it does not tell me,
that to affirm another life implies a contradiction, but only that it is
above reason to discern how there can be a return from a total privation to
a habit again, and some other things supposed in the Resurrection, which
though nature cannot do, and consequently natural reason cannot tell how they
are done, yet reason may acknowledge the God of nature can do, and will do,
if he says he will; and illuminated reason having revelation of this will of
God's, must and does believe they shall be done, or else makes God a liar.


S. What then is it to deny my reason?


C. Whenever my reason objects any thing to what God affirms, to resolve
that God shall be true in despite of all my apparances and objections to the
contrary.


S. Is there any thing then else in the soul which I am to deny?


C. Something there is which men are apt to overvalue, and something there is
thought to be, which is not, and both those equally renounce.


S. What do you mean by that something which is over-valued?


C. Natural strength, which is now so weakened, that it is not at all able to
bring us to our journies end, without some addition of special grace of God,
to prevent and assist in that work; and therefore all strength in my self, i.
e. all sufficiency in my self, as of my self, I must renounce, and apply my
self humbly in prayer for, and trust, and dependence on that special grace of
Christ, to help me both to will and do whatsoever is good; and that is, to
deny my self, that is, all opinion of my own abilities toward the attaining
any supernatural end.


S. What is that other sort of things which you say is thought to be, but is
not?


C. Any righteousness of my own, for as for perfect unsinning righteousness,
he that should pretend to that, deceives himself, and the truth is not in him,
says the Apostle; and for imperfect righteousness, such as by the help of
grace this life is capable of, though that be a condition without which no man
shall see God; (be either justified, or saved,) yet must not that be depended
on, as the cause of either, but only the free mercy of God in Christ, not
imputing of sin; and so I am to deny my own righteousness, renounce all
trust in that for salvation.


S. What now does self-denial, as it referres to the body, signify?


C. It signifies renouncing of all the unlawful, sinful desires of the flesh,
and even lawful liberty, and life it self, when they come in competition with
Christ, so that either Christ must be parted with, or these. And the same is to
be conceived both of estate, and good name; he that hates not house and land,
that is, contemnes them not in respect of Christ, will not part with any
worldly hope or possession, rather then do any thing contrary to Christ's
command, is not worthy of me, says Christ; and, If you receive the praise of
men, how can you believe? he that is not resolved to part with reputation, and
honor, when it comes in competition with Christ, can never go for a good
Christian; and not only thus, when these things come in competition with
Christ's service, but even absolutely taken, some kind of self-denial is
required of us by Christ, of which the particulars are not specified by him,
but referred to our voluntary performing them. We must not allwaies do what is
lawful to do, but weane our selves from, and deny our selves the enjoying of
many lawful pleasures of the world, that we may have the better command over
our selves, and that we may be the more vacant for Gods service, thus fasting,
etc. become our duty, yea and revenge, or contrary abstinence in case of former
excess.


S. This grace, by the hints you have afforded me, I discern to be a most
eminent Christian virtue, the God of heaven plant it in my heart. But what do
you think needful to add to this; about taking up the cross?


C. That it is a precept peculiar to the Gospel, that nothing but Christianity
could make fit to be commanded us.


S. What do you mean by the cross, and by taking it up?


C. By the cross I mean any affliction that God in his providence sees fit to
lay upon us, or to lay in our way toward piety. Any punishment which befalls us
either for righteousness sake, or not for unrighteousness.


S. What mean you by taking it up?


C. 1. Not receding from any Christian performance upon sight of that in the
way, which in the parable of the sower is, not being offended; or scandalized,
or discouraged, or falling away in time of tribulation. 2. Bearing of it
patiently, cheerfully, and comfortably. 3. Giving God thanks for it.


S. Is a man bound to be glad that he is afflicted?


C. He is. 1. Because he sees it is God's will, when it is actually upon him;
and then he ought to be willing, and joyful, that God's will is done. 2.
Because Christ commands him to rejoice, and be exceeding glad, Mat. 5. 12.
Rejoice and leap for joy, Luke 6. 23. To think it all joy. Ja. 1. 2. 3.
Because it is a conforming us to the Image of the crucified Christ, to which
every beloved of God's is predestinate. Romans 8. 29. 4. Because it is such a
sign of God's love, that every one that is not chastened, is by that character
marked out for a bastard, and no son. Heb. 12. 8. Which though it be not set
down, as a duty of ours, for which we are to account; or again as a mark by
which men are given to discern, whether they are children of God, or no; yet
is it as an aphorism of observation for Gods ordinary acts of providence now
under the Gospel, that he is wont to chastise those here, whom he best loves,
which is sufficient motive of joy to him, who finds himself in that good
number.


S. But is a man bound to give thanks for Afflictions?


C. Yes, he is, 1. Because that is the only spiritual Christian way of
expressing to God his rejoyceing. 2. Because it comes from God, and is meant by
him for our good, a gift, or donative of heaven; To you it is given. Phil. 1.
29. it is granted as a grace and vouchsafement of Gods special favor to
suffer for Christ: and that grace designed. 1. To reform what is amiss, 2. To
punish here, that there may be nothing of evil left for another world, 3.
Because we are so commanded to glorify God in this behalf. 1 Pet. 4. 16. and
in this respect to sanctify the Lord God in our hearts. 1. Pet. 3. 15. i. e.
to hallow, or praise him for it.


S. This is easily assented to, if it fall upon me for righteousness sake, as
the Apostles went out of the Temple rejoyceing, that they were thought worthy
to suffer shame for Christ's name: but what if it be not so, but only that
afflictions fall on me, I know not how?


C. They are then not only patiently and thankfully to be received, but to be
rejoiced in also. 1. Because of all kind of chastening the Apostle pronounces,
that, though for the present it seems not joyous, but grevious; yet afterward
it yeildeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them which be exercised
thereby. Heb. 12. 11. 2. Because there is somewhat behind of the suffering of
Christ, to be filled up in our flesh. Col. 1. 24. i. e. some relics of that
bitter passion-cup of his for us to drink. 3. Because it is such an expression
of a curse to have our reward, and with Dives, all our good things in this
life, and that an ominous sign that there is nothing left to be rewarded in
another life.


S. What then is to be thought of them, who to get the cross off from their
own shoulders, and to put it on other men's, will venture on things most
contrary to peace, and shake the quiet, perhaps the foundations of a Kingdom?


C. I will say no more, (and I can scarcely say worse) then that they are
enemies to the cross of Christ, a very ill and sad spectacle among Christians;
and that there is nothing more unreasonable then to pretend Christianity for
the doing this, which is so perfectly contrary to it.


S. You have now past through all Christian graces at the first designed for
consideration. I shall put you in mind of the next thing whereof you have made
your self my debtor, the difference of, and dependence between Justification
and Sanctification, wherein first you will please to give me the notion of the
single terms, And, 1. what is Justification.


C. Of Justification.
It is Gods accepting our persons, and not imputing our sins, his covering, or
pardoning our iniquities, his being so reconciled unto us sinners, that he
determins not to punish us eternally.


S What is the cause of that?


C. God's free mercy unto us in Christ, revealed in the new Covenant.


S. What in us is the Isntrumental cause of it?


C. As an Instrument is logically and properly taken, and signifies an
inferior, less principal, efficient cause, so nothing in us can have any
thing to do (i. e. any kind of physical efficiency) in this work; neither is
it imaginable it should, it being a work of God's upon us, without us,
concerning us, but not within us at all. And, if you mark, Justification being
in plain terms but the accepting our persons and pardoning of sins, it
would be very improper and harsh to affirm, that our works, our any thing,
even our Faith it self should accept our persons, or pardon our sins, though
in never so inferior a notion; which yet they must, if they were isntrumental
in our Justification. it is true indeed, those necessary qualifications, which
the Gospel requires in us, are conditions or moral instruments, without which
we shall not be justified; but those are not properly called instruments or
causes.


S. What are those qualifications?


C. Faith, repentance, firm purpose of a new life, and the rest of those
graces, upon which in the Gospel pardon is promised the Christian; all
comprizable in the new creature, conversion, regeneration. etc.


S. Are these required in us, so as without them, we cannot be justified? How
then are we justified, by the free grace of God?


C. Yes, these two are very reconcilable, for there is no merit in our Faith
or Repentance, or any poor weak grace of ours to deserve Gods favor to our
persons or pardon of what sins are past, or acceptance of our imperfect
obedience for the future; it is his free grace to pardon and accept us on such
poor conditions as these, and this free grace purchased, and sealed to us by
the death of Christ.


S. What now is Sanctification?


C. The Of Sanctification.
word may note either a gift of God's, his giving of grace to prevent, and
sanctify us; or a duty of ours, our having i. e. making use of that grace; and
both these considered together, either as an Act, or as a State.


S. What is it as it signifies an Act?


C. The infusion of holiness in our hearts, or of some degrees of holiness,
and parallel to that, the receiving and obeying the good motions of God's
sanctifying spirit, and laying them up to fructify in an honest heart; the
turning of a soul to God, or the first beginning of new life.


S. What is it as it signifies a State?


C. The living a new, a holy, a gracious life, in obedience to the good grace
of God and daily improving and growing, and at last persevering and dying in it.


S. What now is the dependence between Justification and Sanctification?


C. This, that the first part of Sanctification, the beginning of new life,
must be first had before God pardons or justifies any, then when God is thus
reconciled to the new convert upon his vow of new life, he gives him more
grace, enables and assists him for that state of Sanctification, wherein if he
makes good use of that grace, he then continues to enjoy this favor and
Justification; but if he perform not his vow, proceed not in Christian holy
life, but relapse into wasting acts or habits of sin, then God charge
again all his former sins upon him, and those present iniquities of his, and
in them, if he return not again, he shall die, as appears by Ez. 18. 24. If
the righteous (i. e. the sanctified and justified person) depart from his
righteousness, and commits iniquity; in his sin, that he has sinned, he
shall dye: and by the parable of the King, Matt. 18. where he that had the debt
pardoned him freely by his Lord, yet, for exacting over severely from his
fellow servant, is again unpardoned and cast into prison, delivered to the
tormentors till he should pay all that was due unto him. v. 34. which parable
Christ applies to our present business. v. 35. So likewise shall my heavenly
father do also unto you.


S. But is not a man Justified before he is Sanctified; and if he be, how then
can his Justification depend on his Sanctification?


C. If he were justified before he were sanctified in any kind, then would your
reasoning hold, for sure by the same reason that justification might be begun
before repentance or resolution of new life, or conversion to God; it might
also be continued to him that repented not, or that returned to his evil way;
and therefore, without all doubt this kind of Sanctification is precedent in
order of nature to justification. i. e. I must first believe, repent, and
return, (all which together is that faith which is required as the condition
of our being justified, a receiving of the whole Christ, a cordial assent to
his commands, as well as promises, a giving up the heart to him, a resolution
of obedience, a pronenesse or readiness to obey him, the thing without (...)
Jobius ap: Phot: bibl:
which (says an ancient writer) Christ can do none of his miracles upon our
souls, any more then he could his mighty works among his unbeleiving
countrymen) before God will pardon: (though indeed in respect of time there is
no sensible priority, but God's pardon and our change go together, at what
time soever we repent, or convert sincerely, God will have mercy. i. e.
justify.) A further proof of this, if it be needful, you may take from the
author to the Hebrews. c. 10. where having said v. 14. that Christ by his own
suffering perfected for ever them that are sanctified, intimating that they
must be sanctified before he perfect them, he adds a proof by which these
two things are cleared, First, that to perfect there, signifies to forgive
sins or to justify. Secondly that this doctrine of the priority of
sanctification is agreeable to the description of the second covenant, Jer. 31.
33. That by perfecting he means justifying or pardoning of sins, it is
apparent by v. 17. their sins and iniquities will I remember no more; which
must needs be acknowledged to be that part of the testimony that belongs to
that part of the proposition to be proved by it [(...), he has perfected for
ever] (the former part of the testimony belongs to the latter part of the
proposition, as being an expression of sanctification) which may farther thus
appear; to perfect, in this Author, signifies to consecrate to preisthood (c.
2. 10. 5. 9. and 7. 28.) that, being applied to us, is a phrase to note boldness
or liberty to enter into the Holies v. 19. that again to pray confidently to
God, which v. 18. is set to denote pardon of sin, and washing our hearts from
an evil conscience, i. e. from guilt of sin v. 22. Which being premised, the
second thing most necessaryly follows, that in Jeremy 31. 33. the tenure of
the covenant sets Sanctification before Justification; for, says the Apostle,
(...), he first said, I will put my law into their hearts, and put or write
them in their thoughts, or minds, and then (...), after the saying of that,
(...), Also I will no more remember their sins, nor their offenses. Many
other Scripture-evidences might be added to this matter, if it were needful.
As for those that make Justification to be before Sanctification, I hope and
conceive they mean by sanctification that sanctified state, the actual
performance and practice of our vows of new life and our growth in grace, and
by our Justification that first act of pardon; and then they say true; but if
they mean, that our sins are pardoned before we convert to God and resolve
new life, and that the first grace enabling to do these, is a consequent of
God's having pardoned our sins, this is a mistake which in effect excludes
justification by faith, which is that first Grace of receiving of Christ and
resigning our hearts up to him, and must be in order of nature precedent to our
Justification, or else can neither be condition, nor instrument of it and
besides, this is apt to have an ill influence on practice, and therefore I
thought fit to prevent it. The issue of all is, that God will not pardon till
we in heart reform and amend, he that forsakes, i. e. in hearty sincere
resolution abandons the sins of the old man, shall have mercy, and none but
he. And then, God will not continue this gracious favor of his, but to those,
who make use of his assisting grace to persevere in these resolutions of
forsaking; so that the justification is still commensurate to the
sanctification, an act of justification upon an act of sanctification; or a
resolution of new life, and a continuance of justification, upon continuance of
the sanctified estate.


S. But is not God first reconciled unto us, before he gives us any grace to
sanctify us?


C. So far reconciled he is, as to give us grace, and so far as to make
conditional promises of salvation, but not so as to give pardon or justify
actually; for you know, whom God justifies those he glorifies, i. e. if they
pass out of this life in a justified estate they are certainly glorified; but
you cannot imagine, that God will glorify any who is not yet sanctified; for
without holiness no man shall see the Lord. And therefore you will easily
conclude, that God justifies none, who are unsanctified; for if he did, then
supposing the person to dye in that instant, it must follow, either that the
unsanctified man is glorified, or the justified man not glorified. Any thing
else God may do to the unsanctified man, but either save him, or do somewhat
on which saving infallibly follows; and therefore give him Grace he may, but
till that Grace be received and treasured up in an honest heart, he will never
be thoroughly reconciled to him, i. e. justify or save.


S. I pray then from these premises set me down the order or method used by
God in the saving of a sinner.


C. I will. It is this. 1. God gives his son to dye for him, and satisfy for
his sins; so that, though he be a sinner, yet on condition of a new life he
may be saved. Then 2. In that death of Christ, he strikes with him a New
Covenant, a Covenant of mercy and grace. Then 3. According to that Covenant he
sends his spirit, and by the word and that annexed to it he calls the sinner
powerfully to repentance; If he answer to that call, and awake, and arise, make
his sincere faithful resolutions of new life; God then 4. Justifies, accepts
his person, and pardon's his sins past: Then 5. gives him more grace, assists
him to do, (as before he enabled to will,) to perform his good resolutions.
Then 6. upon continuance in that state, in those performances till the hour of
death, he gives to him as to a faithful servant, a crown of life.


S. The Good Lord he thus merciful to me a sinner. I bless God, and give you
many thanks for these directions, and shall be well pleased to continue you my
debtor for the other particular you promised me, till some farther time of
leisure, and so intermit your trouble a while.


LIB. II.
S. THe benefit I reaped by your last discourse, Of Christ's Sermon in the Mount.
has not satisfied, but raised my appetite to the more earnest importunate
desire of what is yet behind, the consideration of Christ's Sermon in the
Mount. Which I have heard commended for an abstract of Christian Philosophy, an
elevating of his Disciples beyond all other men in the world for the practice
of virtue; But I pray, why did Christ when he preached it, leave the multitude
below, and go up to a Mount, accompanied with none but Disciples?


C. That he went up to the Mount, was to intimate the matter of this Sermon to
be the Christian law, as you know the Jewish law was delivered in a Mount, that
of Sinai. And that he would have no auditors, but Disciples, It was, 1.
Because the multitude followed him not for doctrines, but for cures; c. 4. 24,
25. And therefore were not fit auditors of precepts. 2. Because these precepts
were of an elevated nature, above all that ever any Lawgiver gave before; and
therefore were to be dispensed only to choice auditors. 3. Because the lights
and mysteries of Christianity are not wont to be abruptly dispensed, but by
degrees, to them that have formerly made some progress, (at least have
delivered themselves up to Christ's Lectures, entered into his School) i. e. to
his Disciples.


S. What then? are none but Disciples the men to whom this Sermon belongs? and
if so, will it not thence follow that the commands contained in it, shall
oblige only the successors of those Disciples, the Ministers of the Gospel,
and so all others be freed from that severity?


C. That it was given only to Disciples then, it may be acknowledged; but that
will be of latitude enough to contain all Christians; for to be a Disciple of
Christ, is no more then so; for you know Christ first called Disciples, and
they followed him some time, before he sent them out, or gave them commission
to preach, etc. i. e. before he gave them the dignity of Apostles, of which as
only the Ministers of the Gospel are their successors, so in Discipleship
all Christian professors. And therefore you must resolve now once for all,
that what is in this Sermon said to Disciples, all Christians are concerned in
indifferently; it is command and obligatory to all that follow him.


S. You have engaged me then to think my self concerned so nearely in it, as
not to have patience to be longer ignorant of this my duty.

Will you please then to enter upon the substance of the Sermon, wherein I can
direct my self so Of the Beatitudes.
far, as to discern the 8 Beatitudes to be the first part. I pray how far
am I concerned in them?


C. So far as that you may resolve your self obliged to the belief. 1. That
you are no farther a Christian, then you have in you every one of those graces,
to which the blessedness is there affixed. 2. That every one of those graces
has matter of present blessedness in it: the word blessed in the front
denoting a present condition, abstracted from that which afterward expects
them. 3. That there is assurance of future blessedness to all those that have
attained to those several graces.


S. I shall remember these three directions, and call upon you to exemplify
them in the particulars as they come to our hands: and therefore first I pray
give me the first of these graces, what it is?


C. Poverty of spirit.


S. What is meant by that?


C. It may possibly signify a preparation of mind or spirit to part with all
worldly wealth, a contentedness to live poor and bare in this world; but I
rather conceive it signifies A lowly opinion of ones self, a thinking my self
the meanest vilest creature, least of Saints, and greatest of sinners, contrary
to that spiritual pride of the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3. 17. which said she
was rich, and increased with goods, and had need of nothing; not knowing that
she was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. This is that
insant child-temper that Christ prescribes, so absolutely necessary to a
Christian, Mat. 18. 4. and c. 19. 14. and that in respect of the humility of
such, c. 18. 4. and the littleness, Luke 9. 48. i. e. being in our own
conceit, (which I conceive is meant there, by the phrase [in spirit]) the
least, and lowest, and meanest, and (as children,) most impotent unsufficient
of all creatures.


S. What now is the present blessedness of such?


C. It consists in this. 1. That this is an amiable and lovely quality, a
charm of love amongst men, where ever it is met with; whereas on the other
side, pride goes hated, and cursed, and abomined by all; drives away servants,
friends, and all but flatterers. 2. In that this is a seed-plat of all virtue,
especially Christian, which thrives best, when it is rooted deep, i. e. in the
humble lowly heart. 3. Because it has the promise of grace, [God gives grace
to the humble,] but on the contrary, resists the proud.


S. What assurance of future blessedness is there to those that have this
grace?


C. It is expressed in these words, [for theirs, or of them is the Kingdom of
Heaven] which, I conceive, (...).
signifies primarily, that Christ's Kingdom of grace, the true Christian
Church, is made up peculiarly of such, as in the answer of Christ to John, Mat.
11. 5. a way of assuring him that he (...)
was the Christ; it is in the close, the poor are Evangelized, or wrought on by
the preaching of the Gospel; and as Mat. 18. 4. He that shall humble himself
as the child, the same shall be greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. a
prime Christian or Disciple of Christ; and c. 19. 14. for of such (which is a
like phrase parallel to [of them] here) is the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. the
(...).
Church, into which he therefore commands them to be permitted to enter by
baptism, and chides his Disciples for forbidding them. Thus is the Kingdom of
Heaven, to be interpreted in Scripture in diverse places of the New Testament,
which you will be able to observe when you read with care.


S. But how does this belong to future blessedness?


C. Thus, that this Kingdom of Grace here, is but an inchoation of that of
Glory hereafter; and he that lives here the life of an humble Christian, shall
there be sure to reign the life of a victorious Saint.


S. What is Mourning?


C. Contrition, or godly sorrow conceived upon the sense of our wants and
sins.


S. What wants do you mean?


C. Spiritual wants, 1. Of original immaculate righteousness, and holiness,
and purity. 2. Of strength and sufficiency to do the duty which we ought to
God our Creator, Christour Redeemer, and the Spirit our Sanctifier.


S. What sins do you mean?


C. 1. Our original depravednesse, and pronenesse of our carnal part to all
evil. 2. The actual and habitual sins of our unregenerate, And 3. the many
slips and falls of our most regenerate life.


S. What is the present felicity of these mourners?


C. That which results from the sense of this blessed temper, there being no
condition of soul more wretched, then that of the senseless obdurate sinner,
that being a kind of numnesse, and lethargy, and death of soul; and
contrariwise, this feeling, and sensiblenesse, and sorrow for sin, the most
vital quality, (as it is said of feeling, that it is the sense of life;) an
argument that we have some life in us, and so true matter of joy to all that
find it in themselves. And therefore it was very well said of a father. Let a
Christian man greive, and then rejoice that he does so. Besides, Deleat homo
Christianus, et de dolor gaudeat.
the mourning soul is like the watered earth, like to prove the more fruitful
by that means.


S. What is the assurance of future felicity that belongs to this mourner?


C. It Is set down in these words, [for they shall be comforted] Christ who
hereafter gives, now makes promise of comfort to such, the reaping in joy
belongs peculiarly to them that sow in tears, and godly sorrow works
repentance to salvation, when all other works death: And besides, this
assurance arises from the very nature of comfort and refreshment (by whichthe
joys of heaven are expressed) of which none are capable but the sad disconsolate
mourners: nor indeed is heaven, the vision of God, and revelation of his
favor, matter of so much bliss, as when it comes to those that wanted
comfort, and when it wipes away all tears from their eyes, who went mourning
(all the day) all their life long.


S. What is meekness?


C. A softness, and mildness, and quietness of spirit, expressing it self
in many passages of our life. 1. In relation to God, and then it is a ready
willing submission to his will, whether to believe what he affirms, be it
never so much above my reason, (the captivation of the understanding to the
obedience of faith) Or to do what he commands, and then it is obedience; or to
endure what he sees fit to lay upon us, and then it is patience; cheerfulness
in affliction, contentedness with ou^ lot whatsoever it is, (contrary to all
murmuring and repining, and enmity to the cross, and all restless
unsatisfiednesse) the being dumb or silent to the Lord. Psalm. 37. 7. and
resolving with old Eli, it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. All
which, faith, obedience, patience, though they be virtues of themselves
distinct from meekness, strictly taken, may yet be very sitly reduced to that
head, in as much as meekness moderates that wrath, which would by consequence
destroy them. 2ly. In relation to men, whether Superiors, Equals, or
Inferiors. If they be our Superiors, then it is modesty, and humility, and
reverence to all such in general (at least reductively, meekness being an
adjunct and help to those virtues, removing that which would hinder them;) but
if withal they be our lawful Magistrates, then our meekness consists in
obedience, active or passive, acting all their legal commands, and submitting
(so far at least, as not to make violent resistance) to the punishments which
they shall inflict upon us, when we disobey their illegal, in quietness of
spirit, and not being given to changes; the direct contrary to all speaking
evil of dignities, but especially to sedition and taking up of Arms against
them; which of what sort soever it be, though we may flatter our selves that we
are only on the defensive part, will bring upon us condemnation. Romans 13, 2.
For although it be naturally lawful to defend my life from him that would
unjustly take it away from me, yet if it be the lawful supreme Magistrate that
attempts it, I must not defend my self by assaulting of him, for that is not
to defend only, but to offend, and God forbid that although it were to save my
own life, I should lift up my hand against the Lords anointed. It is true,
defensive wars may be possibly lawful at some time, when offensive are not;
but of Subjects against their Sovereign neither can, because if it be war it
will come under the phrase resisting the power, Romans 13. and so be damnable,
and quite contrary to the meekness here, and farther to all such oaths,
which in every Kingdom are taken by the Subjects to the supreme power, of
allegiance etc.


S. Wherein does meekness toward our Equals consist?


C. Those may be our friends, or our enemies, or of a middle nature. If they be
our friends, then meekness consists, 1. In the not provoking them, for the
wrath of man works not the will of God. Ia. 1. 2. Bearing with their
infirmities. 3. In kind, mild, discreet reproof of them; and 4. In patience
and thankfulness for the like from them again, 5. In submitting one to
another in love, every one thinking another better then himself.


S. But what if they be our Enemies?


C. Then it is the meek man's part to love, to do good, and bless, and pray
for them, in no wise to recompense evil with evil, injury with injury,
contumely with contumely, in no wise to avenge our selves, but to overcome
evil with good.


S. What if they be neither our friends, nor foes?


C. Then meekness consists in humble, civil, modest behavior toward them,
neither striving and contending for trifles, or trespasses, or contumelies, nor
molesting with vexatious suites, nor breaking out into causeless anger, proud
wrath, as Solomon calls it, rage or fury, nor doing ought that may provoke them
to the like.


S. But there is yet another notion of my Equals considerable, those to whom I
have done injury, what is meekness toward them?


C. It consists in acknowledging the fault, and readiness to make
satisfaction, in going and desiring to be reconciled to such a brother, and
willing submitting to all honest means tending to that end.


S. What is the duty of meekness toward Inferiors?


C. Condescending, kindness, lovingnesse, neither oppressing nor tyrannizing,
nor using imperiousness, nor taking the rod when it may be spared, nor
provoking to wrath, Servants Subjects, or Children.


S. Is there any other branch of meekness, which my questions have not put
you in mind of, to communicate to me?


C. There is one branch of it scarce touched yet, the meekness of our
understandings in submitting our opinions to those that are placed over us by
God; which though it be instrict speaking, the virtue of humility and
obedience, and not the formal elicite act of meekness; yet meekness being
ordinarily, and sometimes necessarily annexed to these acts of those virtues, I
shall place them reductively under meekness.


S. What must this meekness of our understandings be?


C. The proper'st rules for the defining it, will be these. 1. That where, in
any matter of doctrine, the plain word of God interposes it self, there we
must most readily yield, without demurs, or resistance. But, 2. If it be matter
neither defined, nor pretended to be defined in Scripture, then with each
particular man among us, the definitions of the Church wherein we live, must
carry it, so far as to require our yiedling and submission; and with that
Church which is to define it (if it come in lawful assembly to be debated) the
tradition of the Universal, or opinion of the primitive Church, is to
prevail, at least to be hearkened to with great reverence in that debate; and
that which the greater part of such a lawful assembly shall judge to be most
agreeable to such rule, or (in case there is no light to be fetched from
thence, then) that which they shall of themselves according to the wisdom
given them by God, agree upon to be most convenient, shall be of force to
oblige all inferiors. 1. Not to express dissent. 2. To obedience. But 3. If
Scripture be pretended for one party in the debate, and the question be
concerning the interpretation of that Scripture, and no light from the
Scripture it self, either by surveying the context, or comparing of other
places, be to be had for the clearing it, then again the judgment of the
universal or my particular Church, is to be of great weight with me; so far,
as if it command, to inhibit my venting my own opinion either publicly, or
privately, with design to gain proselytes; or if all liberty be absolutely
left to all in that particular, then meekness requires me to enjoy my
opinion, so as that I judge not any other contrary-minded.


S. But what if there be on both sides great probabilities, but no
demonstration from Christian principles, or interposing of the Church, which
way will my meekness then direct me to propend?


C. That which must then direct me is my own conscience, to take to that which
seems to me most probable, and in that my meekness has nothing to do, nor
can it oblige me to believe that which I am convinced is not true, nor to
disbeleive that which I am convinced is true: but yet before I am thus
convinced, my meekness will give me it is directions not to rely too
overweeningly on my own judgment, but to compare my self with other men, my
equals, but especially my superiors, and to have great jealousies of any my
own singular opinions, which being represented to others as judicious as my
self, together with the reasons that have persuaded me to them, do not to
them prove persuasive; nay after I am convinced, my meekness may again move
me to hearken to other reasons, that other men judge more prevailing, and if
occasion be, to reverse my former judgment thus past upon that matter; It being
very reasonable for me (though not to believe what I am not convinced of, yet)
to conceive it possible for me not to see those grounds of conviction which
another sees, and so to be really mistaken, though I think I am not; and then
what is thus reasonable to be concluded possible, my meekness will bid me
conclude possible, and having done that, advise me to choose the safer part,
and resolve rather to offend and err by too much flexibility, then too much
perverseness; by meekness, then by self-love.


S. What is the present felicity of the meek man?


C. 1. The very possession of that Grace being of all others most delightful
and comfortable, both as that that adornes us and sets us out beautiful and
lovely in the eyes of others, (and is therefore called the Ornament of a meek
and quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 4.) and as that that affords us most matter of
inward comfort; as for example, that part of meekness which is opposed to
revenge, and consists in bearing, and not retributing of injuries, this to a
spirituall-minded man is matter of infinite delight. 1. In conquering that mad,
wild, devilish passion of revenge; getting victory over one's self, which is
the greatest act of valor, the thought of which is consequently most
delightful. 2. In conquering the enemy, of which there is no such way, as the
soft answer, which, says the wise man, turns away wrath; and feeding the
hungry enemy, which, says Saint Paul, is the heaping live coals upon his
head; and that the way that Metallists use to melt those things, that will not
be wrought on by putting of fire under them, which he expresses by overcoming
evil with good. 3. In conquering or out-stripping all the foolish and heathen
world, which had never attained to this skill of loving of enemies, which is
only taught Christians by Christ. The honor of this must needs be a most
pleasant thing. 2. It is matter of present felicity to us, in respect of the
tranquillity and quiet it gains us here, within our own breasts, a calm from
those storms that pride, and anger, and revenge, are wont to raise in us. And
3. In respect of the quiet, peaceable living with others, without strife, and
debate, without punishments, and executions, that are the portion of the
seditious turbulent disobedient spirits. Which is the meaning undoubtedly of
the promise in the Psalmist, the meek shall inherit the earth, i. e. shall
generally have the richest portion of the good things of this life; from whence
this place in the Gospel being taken, though it may be accommodated to a
spiritual sense, by interpreting the earth for the land of the living, yet
undoubtedly it literally notes the land of Canaan, or Judea, which (...).
is often in the Old and New Testament called the earth; and so then the promise
of inheriting the earth, will be all one with that annexed to the fifth
commandment, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God
gives thee, i. e. a prosperous long life here is ordinarily the meek man's
portion, which he, that shall compare and observe the ordinary dispensations of
God's providence, shall find to be most remarkeably true, especially if
compared with the contrary fate of turbulent seditious persons.


S. But if this reward belong to the meek in this life, what assurance of
future felicity can he have, there being no other promise to him here, but that
he shall inherit the earth?


C. The temporal reward can no ways deprive him of the eternal; but as the
temporal Canaan was to the Jew, a type, and to them that obeyed, a pledge of
the eternal, so the earth here a real inheritance below, and a pawn of
another above; and this is the meek man's advantage above many other duties, a
double Canaan is thought little enough for him; the same felicity in a manner
attending him, which we believe of Adam, if he had not fallen, a life in
paradise, and from thence a transplantation to heaven. The like we read of them
that part with any thing dear to them for Christ's sake, or in obedience to
Christ's command (which I conceive belongs especially to the liberal minded
man) he shall have a hundred fold more in this life, and in the world to come,
everlasting life, and unless it be here to the meek (or to godliness in
general, 1 Timothy 4. 8.) we meet not with any other temporal promise in the new
Testament: which may therefore be resolved very well to be parrallel to that
other, not only in the hundred fold, or inheritance in this life, but in that
other also of another life. Besides, other places of Scripture there are that
intimate the future reward of the meek, as where it is said to be in the sight
of God of great price; and that if we learn of Christ to be meek, we shall
find rest to our souls; and even here the blessedness in the front, noting
present blessedness, cannot rightly do so, if there were no future reward also
belonging to it, it being a curse, no blessing, to have our good things with
Dives, or with the Hypocrite our reward in this life, and none to expect
hehinde in another.


S. What then is the fourth grace?


C. Hungring and thirsting after righteousness.


S. What is that? And 1. what is meant by righteousness?


C. It is of two sorts. 1. Inherent, and then Imputed; the inherent, imperfect,
proportioned to our state, consisting in the mortifying of sins and lusts,
and some degrees of holy new life; the Imputed, is Christ's righteousness
accepted as ours, which is in plain words, the pardon of our sins, and
acceptance of our persons in Christ.


S. What is Hungring and Thirsting?


C. You may join them both together, and make them one common appetite of both
those kinds of righteousness. Or if you please, you may more distinctly set
them thus, that hungring is an earnest appetite or desire of food, and here in
a spiritual sense is apportioned to the first kind of righteousness, that of
God's sanctifying grace, which is as it were bread or food to the soul to
sustain it from perishing eternally; and so Hungring after righteousness, is
an eaget, impatient, unsatisfyable desire of grace, of sanctity to the soul,
and that attended with prayer and importunity to God for the obtaining of it.


S. What is Thirsting after righteousness?


C. Thirsting is a desire of some moisture to refresh, and is here apportioned
to that second kind of righteousness consisting in pardon of sin, which is
the refreshing of the panting soul mortally wounded, and so like the heart in
the Psalmist longing after the water brooks, to allay the fever consequent to
that wound, to quench the flame of a scorching conscience; and so Thirsting
after righteousness, is a most earnest desire of pardon, and petitioning of it
from God in Christ, and never giving over your importunity, until he be
inclined to have mercy.


S. What present felicity can there be in this Hunger and Thirst?


C. As appetite or stomach to meat is a sign of health in the body, so is
this hunger in the soul, a vital quality, evidence of some life of grace in
the heart, and in that respect matter of present felicity; whereas on the other
side, the decay of appetite, the no manner of stomach, is a pitteous
consumption-signe, and most desperate prognostic; and not caring for grace or
pardon, for sanctification or justification, the most mortal desperate
condition in the world.


S. What assurance of future happiness attends this Hungring?


C. As much as God's promise of filling can afford. Nay proportionably to the
two parts of the appetite, the state of glory is full matter of satisfaction to
each; there is there perfect holiness without mixture of infirmity or
carnality, answerable to the hungring after inherent righteousness; and there
is there perfect final pardon and acquittance from all the guilt and debt of
sin, and so the Thirst of imputed righteousness is satisfied also. So that
he that has no other hunger or thirst but these, shall be sure to find
satisfaction, which they that set their hearts upon carnal worldly objects,
hungring after wealth and secular greatness, lusts, etc. shall never be able
to arrive to, either here or hereafter; such acquisitions being here, if
attained to, very unsatisfying, the more we have of them, the more we desire to
have, and in another world no expectation of ought that shall be agreeable to
such desires.


S. What is mercifullnesse?


C. Abundance of charity, or goodness, or benignity; there being in the
Scripture-stile two words near kin to (...) and (...), and (...),
one another, justice and mercifullnesse, ordinarily going together; but the
latter a much higher degree then the former; the first signifying that legal
charity that both the law of nature and Moses require to be performed to our
brethren, but the second an abundance or supereminent degree of it; expressions
of both which we have Romans 5. 7. under the titles of the righteous man, and the
good man.


S. Wherein does this mercifullnesse express it self?


C. In two sorts of things, especially, 1. Giving, 2. Forgiving.


S. In giving of what?


C. Of all sort of things that our abilities and others wants may propose to
us: such are, releife to those that are in distress, ease to those in pain,
alms to poor housekeepers, vindication of honest men's reputation when they
are slandered, but above all to men's souls, good counsel, seasonable
reproves, encouragement in performing of duty when they are tempted to the
contrary, comfort in time of worldly afflictions, but especially of temptation;
strengthening in the ways of God, and whatsoever may tend to the good of any
man.


S. What mean you by Forgiving?


C. The not avenging of injuries or contumelies, not suffering their trespasses
against men, nay nor sins against God to cool or lessen my charity and mercy
to them, but loving and compassionating, and showing all effects of true
Christian mercy (such especially as may do them most good) as well to enemies
and sinners as friends.


S. What is the present felicity that attends this grace?


C. 1. The present delight of having made another man happy, of rescuing a
poor soul wrestling with want etc. from that pressure, to reprive him that
was as it were appointed to dye, certainly the most ingenuous pleasure in the
world. Secondly the gloriousness (...). Pyth.
of so doing; a kind of God-like act; one of the two things which a heathen
could say was common to us with God, especially if it be an act of Ghostly
mercy, an alms, a dole, a charity to the soul; to rescue a poor sinner
dropping into the pit, reeling into hell, by conference, advice, examples of
heavenly life, not only to save my self, but others also; this is in a manner
to partake of that incommunicable title of Christ, that of Savior; such a
thing to which (says Aristotle) as to an heroicke quality belongs not praise,
but pronouncing blessed; according (...).
to that of Saint Paul from our Savior, it is more blessed to give, then to
receive: a blessed thing to give.


S. What assurance is there of future blessedness to such?


C. The greatest in the world, from this promise annexed, [they shall obtain
mercy] Gods punishments are mostly answerable to our sins, he thinks good to
give us a sight of our transgression by the manner of his inflictions, and so
he is also pleased to apportion his rewards to our graces; mercies to the
merciful most peculiarly; by mercy meaning, 1. Acts of bounty, liberality,
temporal abundance, the portion of the almes-giver, and spiritual abundance
of grace, of strength in time of temptation. 2. Mercy in forgiving, pardoning,
not imputing our sins. Upon which ground it is, that in the form of prayer
which he has himself prescribed us, he annexeth the forgiving of all
trespassers against us, to our prayer for forgiveness to our selves, as the
condition without which we may not hope for such forgiveness.


S. What is purity in heart?


C. The Heart signifies the inner man, and especially the practical part, or
principle of action. And the purity of that is of two sorts; the first, that
which is contrary to pollution; the second, that which is contrary to mixture;
as you know water is said to be pure, when it is clean, and not mudded and
defiled; and wine is said to be pure, when it is not mixed. In the first respect
it excludes carnality, (...).
in the second, hypocrisy.


S. When may a man be said to be pure in heart, in the first sense?


C. When not only in the members, or instruments of action, but even in the
heart, all parts of carnality, or worldliness are mortified. As when we
neither are guilty of acts of uncleanenesse, nor consent to unclean desires;
nay feed not so much as the eye with unlawful objects, or the heart with
filthy thoughts; and because there be other pieces of carnality besides, as
strife, faction, sedition, etc. yea and pride, and the consequents of that; all
these must be wrought out of the heart, or else we have not attained to this
purity; but are in the Apostles phrase, 1 Cor. 3. 3. still carnal. And so for
worldliness (for earth you know will pollute also) when I not only keep my
self from acts of injustice and violence, but from designs of oppression, nay
from coveting that which is another; and so likewise for Satanicall
injections, when I give them no manner of entertainment, but reject them,
suffer them not to stay upon the soul, and so defile it.


S. When may I be said pure in heart, in the second sense?


C. When I attain to sincerity; when I favor not my self in any known
sin; double not with God; divide not between him and my own lust, own
ends, own interests; between God and Mammon, God and the praise of men, etc.
For this is sure a maine part of the damning sin of hypocrisy, against which
there are so many woes denounced, (not the appearing to others less sinful
then we are, for that is not more unpardonable, but less damning then open,
professed, avowed, scandalous sinning; but) the halting between God and Baall,
the not loving and serving God with all our heart; the admitting other rivals
with him into our hearts.


S. But is no man to be thought a good Christian, that has either carnality,
or hypocrisy in him?


C. None that is either carnal, or hypocrite. But the truth is, as long as we
live here, and carry this flesh about us, somewhat of carnality there will
remain to be daily purged out; and so also some doublings, some relickes of
hypocrisy; somewhat of my self, my own credit, my own interests still
secretly interposing in my godliest actions; But these (so they be not suffered
to reign, to be the chief masters in me, to carry the maine of my actions
after them,) may be reconcilable with a good estate; as humane frailties, not
wasting sins.


S. What is the present felicity that belongs to such?


C. To the first sort of purity belongs, 1. That contentment that results from
having overcome and kept under that unruly beast, the carnal part, and brought
it into some terms of obedience to the spirit. 2. The quiet and rest that
proceeds from purity of heart, contrary to the disquiets and burnings that
arise from unmastered lusts. 3. The ease of not serving and tending the flesh,
to obey it in the lusts thereof. 4. The quiet of conscience, absence from those
pangs and gripings, that constantly attend the commission of carnal sins.
The same may in some measure be affirmed of all the other branches of the first
kind of purity. And for the second, as it is opposite to mixture, or hypocrisy;
the conscience of that is matter of great serenity of mind, of Christian
confidence and boldness toward God and man; when I have no intricacies,
Maeanders, windings and doublings within me; need not disguises or artifices of
deceit; but can venture my self naked and bare to Gods eye; with a, Prove me,
O Lord, and try me, search my reins and my heart. And so to men; fear not the
most censorious strict survey, have a treasure of confidence, that I dread not
the face of any man; have no pains, no agonies for fear of being deprehended,
which the hypocrite is still subject unto.


S. What is the reward apportioned to purity hereafter?


C. The Vision of God, which, 1. Only the pure are capable of. And 2. which
has no matter of felicity in it, but to such.


S. Why are only the pure capable of the sight of God?


C. Because God is a Spirit, and cannot be seen by carnal eyes, till they be
cleansed and purged, and in a manner spiritualized; which though it be not done
thoroughly till another life, yet purity here, such as this life is capable of,
is a most proper preparative to it; and therefore is said to be that, without
which no man shall see the Lord; which you know is affirmed of holiness, Heb.
12. 14. which word in that place signifies the very purity here spoken of.


S. Why has the Vision of God no felicity in it, but to the pure?


C. Because a carnal faculty is not pleased with a spiritual object; there
must be some agreeableness before pleasure is to be had, and that pleasure
necessary to felicity.


S. What is meant by Peacemaking?


C. The word Peacemakers signifies no more then peaceable minded men. The
notion of making, in Scripture Phrase, belonging to the bent of the soul; as
to make alye, is to be given to lying, to practice that sin, to be set upon
it. So, to do, (which is in Greek, to make) righteousness and sin, 1 Job.
2. 29. and 3. 4. notes the full bent and inclination of the soul to either of
them. So to make peace both here, and Ia. 3. 18. is to have strong hearty
affections to peace.


S. Wherein does this peaceable affection express it self?


C. In many degrees; some in order to private, some to public peace; some to
preserve it where it is; some to reduce it, where it is lost.


S. What degrees of it in order to private peace?


C. 1. A command and victory over ones passions, especially anger and
covetousness; the former being most apt to disquiet families, the latter
neighbourhoods. The angry man will have no peace with his servants, children,
nay wife, and parents, any that are within the reach of his ordinary
conversation: and the covetons man will contend with any near him, that have
any thing that he covets. 2. Charitable or favorable opinion of all men, and
actions, that are capable of candid interpretations. Jealousies in the least
societies being the most fatal enemies to peace, and fomentors of the least
discontents into the mortallest feuds and hatreds. 3. An apertnesse and
clearenesse of mind, in a friendly debate, with friends or neighbors, of any
actions which have past, subject to misconstruction, without all concealing of
grounds of quarrel, not suffering them to broyle within, but discreetly
requiring an account of all such dubious accidents of those who are concerned
in them. 4. The resolving against contentions, and litigations in law as much
as is possible, being rather content to suffer any ordinary loss, then to be
engaged in it; and in greater matters referring it to arbitrament of honest
neighbors, then to bring it to suit. 5. Expressing a dislike to flatterers,
whisperers, and backbiters, and never suffering our affections to be altered by
any such. By these you will guess of other degrees also.


S. What in order to public peace?


C. 1. Contentment in our present station, and never fastening our ambition and
covetise on any thing which will not easily be attained without some public
change or innovation. 2. Willing obedience to the present government of Church
and State. 3. Patience of the cross, or preparation for that patience, and
resolving never to move a State, to get my self from under any pressure. 4.
Resolving on the truth of that sacred dictate, that the faults and infirmities
of Governors are by God permitted for the punishment of the people; and that
consequently they are to be looked on not in a direct line only or chiefly,
to censure them; but in order to reflection on our selves, to observe what in
our selves has so provoked God to punish us. 5. The not thinking our own
opinions in religion (such as are not of faith) of such importance, as either
to deny salvation, or communion to any that differ from us. 6. Modesty and
calmness in disputing. 7. Not affixing holiness to opinions, or thinking
them the best men that are most of our persuasions. 8. The not defining too
many things in religion. And many others you will judge of by these.


S. What to preserve it where it is?


C. 1. Valuing of it according to it is true estimation, as that which is in the
eyes of men very amiable, and in the sight of God of great price. 2.
Considering how insensibly it may be lost, and with how great difficulty
recovered again, and how near a hell this life is without it. 3. Prudent
watching over it, and over those that are enemies to peace. 4. Not being easily
provoked, but overcoming strife with mildness, or kindness, the soft answer,
etc. and overcoming evil with good. 5. Praying constantly to God the Author of
peace for the continuance of this beloved creature of his among us.


S. What to recover it when it is lost?


C. 1. Humbling our souls, amending our lives, searching out these peculiar
reigning sins that have made this blessing too good for us to enjoy. Making
our peace with God first. 2. Examining what I have contributed toward the
removing of it, whom I have slaundered, etc. and repairing what I have thus
done by confession and satisfaction 3, By incessant prayer to God fetching it
back again.


S. What is the present felicity that belongs to such?


C. 1. The present rest and peace, the greatest of all worldly pleasures, and
which is, as health in the body, the foundation of all other superstructions of
temporal joy. 2. The conscience of the charitable offices done to all others
by this means. 3. The honor of being like God in it, who is the God of Peace,
and like Christ who came on this errant to this earth of ours, to make peace
between the greatest enemies, his father and the poor sinner-soule.


S. What is the reward apportioned to peaceablenesse hereafter?


C. 1. God's acknowledgment of us, as of those that are like him. 2. Pardon of
sins, and eternal rest, and peace hereafter.


S. To whom does the last Beatitude belong?


C. To those, 1. That are persecuted for righteousness sake. 2. That are
reviled falsely for Christ's sake.


S. How do these differ one from the other?


C. Only as a more general word, and a more special. Persecution signifies
(...).
properly and strictly, being pursued, and driven, and hunted, as noxious
beasts are wont, but in common use notes what ever calamity or affliction the
malice or tyranny of others can lay on us; and Revileing is one special kind
of it, which is most frequently the true Christian's lot. Because 1. Those that
have no strength or power to inflict other injuries, have yet these weapons of
their malice always in readiness. 2. Because they who are not good Christians
themselves, do in their own defense think themselves obliged to defame those
that are; their good actions being, when they are silent, so reproachful to
them, made to reprove their thoughts, Wised. 2. 14. And so they by their
tongues to revenge themselves upon them; to redeem their reputation by that
means.


S. But what is meant by the phrases. [for righteousness sake] and [falsely
for my sake?]


C. Those words contain a restraint or limitation of the subject, to this
purpose; that the Beatitude belongs not to those indefinitely that are
persecuted and reviled; for many may thus justly suffer, as thieves, as
murderers, evill-doers, busy-bodies, 1 Pet. 4. 15. And little joy or
blessedness in that; but to those peculiarly that are true Christians; Either
1. For some good action wherein their Christianity and the testimony of a good
conscience is concerned; as when men are reviled or persecuted, because they
will not either totally forsake, and apostatize from Christ, or in any
particular occurrent offend against him: Or when some such Christian
performance brings this consequent persecution, or reproach upon them. Or 2.
For some indifferent sinlesse action; which though it be not done in necessary
obedience to Christ, yet bringing unjust persecution or reviling falsely upon
them may (though in an inferior degree,) belong to this matter. And in that
case be thought to be permitted by our wise and good God, etc. disposed or
ordered by him for our Beatitude, i. e. for the benefit of us as Christians;
either as a chastisement of our other sins, that we may not be condemned with
the world; or as a means of trial whether we will bear it patiently and
Christianly.


S. Wherein does the present felicity of those consist?


C. 1. In having our evil things in this life, that so all our good things,
our reward, may remain on arreare, unpaid till another life. 2. In the honor
and dignity of suffering for Christ's sake. 3. In conformity with the ancient
Prophets and Champions of God in all ages. 4. In the comfort that proceeds from
this evidence and demonstration of our being true Christians, for that is the
meaning of [yours is the Kingdom of Heaven.] i. e. the state of Christians, or
the true Christian state. It being a Christian aphorism, that God chastens
every Son. Heb. 12. 7. and that the good things, that are made good to
Christians here, shall be with persecutions, Mar. 10. 30. 5. In this pledge of
Gods favor to us, in that we are thought worthy to suffer shame for his name.
6. In the assurance of a greater reward hereafter, proportioned to our
sufferings here.


S. What is the reward hereafter apportioned to this?


C. A greater degree of glory in heaven.


S. You told me, at your entering on the Beatitudes, that I was no farther to
believe my self a Christian, then I should find all and every of these graces
in me to which these beatitudes are prefixed; that I can without difficulty
acknowledge for all the former, and resolve I am no farther a Christian, then I
am poor in spirit, mourning, meek, hungring and thirsting after
righteousness, merciful, pure in heart, and peaceable; but the last sticks
with me, and I cannot so easily assent to that, that I cannot be a Christian
unless I be persecuted and reviled. I pray clear that difficulty to me?


C. I shall, by saying these four things to you. 1. That though to be
persecuted is no duty of ours, yet. 1. To bear it patiently, and 2. Rejoice in
it when it befalls us, and 3. That it be for righteousness sake, when it is
our duty required of all Christians. 2. The very being persecuted, though it be
not a duty again, is yet a mark and character of a Christian; and the
Scripture does seem to affirm, that no good Christian shall ever be without
his part in it. Heb. 12. 6. etc. And it will be hard for any to find out one
holy man that has passed through his whole life without this portion. 3. If it
shall not be so general a rule as to be capable of no exception, but some good
Christians be found, which are not persecuted, yet still the preparation of
mind for this indurance, is necessary to every Christian. 4. The being
persecuted shall contribute much to the increase of our glory, and so may still
be said necessary respectively (though it should not be affirmed absolutely) to
the attaining of that degree of glory: and therefore this is placed after all
the rest, as a means of perfecting and consummating the Christian, that as the
former seven are necessary to the attaining a crown at all, so this to the
having so rich a crown, or so many gemms in it.


S. Is there any thing now which from the Order of these Beatitudes you would
think fit to teach me?


C. Yes, especially two things. 1. That the grace first named is a general
principal grace, which is the foundation of all the rest. Where that is once
seated and planted, all the rest will more easily and more happily follow.
Humility is the seed-plat of all, and from thence it is most proper to proceed,
1. To mourning or sorrow for sin; the humble heart is a melting heart. 2. To
meekness and quietness of spirit; the humble heart is the next degree to
that already. 3. To hungring and thirsting after righteousness; the humble
heart will most impatiently desire both pardon of sin (that first kind of
righteousness) and grace, to sanctify, (that second kind of righteousness.)
4. To mercifullnesse; the humble heart will be most ready to give and forgive,
5. To purity of heart; the humble heart is most unreconcileable with all
filthiness both of the flesh and spirit: but especially the latter, of which
pride, a chief particular, is the direct contrary to humility. 6. To
peaceablenesse, contention being generally the effect of pride. 7. To
persecution and revileing; humility 1. being apt to tempt the proud worldlings
to revile and persecute. 2. being sure to work patience of them in the
Christian.


S. What is the second thing that from the Order you observe.


C. The interchangeable mixture of these graces; one toward God, and another
toward man: thus interweaved, that the first respects God, the next man; the
next God again, and so forward till it comes to the last, which respects God
again. For having told you, that the first is a general fundamental grace,
as the head to all the rest, it follows that the second, that of mourning,
must be the first particular, which being fastened particularly on sin,
respects God, against whom we have sinned: then next to that, meekness
respects our neighbor especially; and 3. hungring and thirsting after
righteousness, (which is all to be had from God) respects God.
Mercifullnesse again respects man. Purity in heart, God; Peaceablenesse,
man; and lastly persecution for righteousness sake, and patience of it, as
coming from a consideration and belief of Gods provident disposal of all
things, respects God again. So that you see the first and the last
respects our duty toward God, who is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last;
and those between, divided between our neighbor and God. That so we may
resolve, that to God belongs the chief, and first, and last of our love and
obedience, yet so as not to exclude but require also in its subordination our
care of duty and love toward man also; one intermixing lovingly and freindly
with the other, and neither performed, as it ought, if the other be neglected.


S. Christians must be exemplary.
I conceive you have now concluded the explication of the first part of this
Sermon. God give me grace to lay all the severalls to heart.

What is the sum of the second branch or Section in it?


C. It consists of the four next verses. to wit v. 13. 14. 15. 16. and the
sum of them is, the necessity that the graces and virtues of Disciples, or
Christians, should be evident and exemplary to others also, i. e. to all
heathens and sinners, and all indefinitely which may be attracted by such
example. This is enforced by four resemblances. 1. Of salt, which as long as
it is salt, has a quality of seasoning of other things, to which it is
applied. 2. Of the Sun, that is apt to illuminate the dark world. 3. Of a City
on a hill, which is conspicuous. 4. Of a candle set in a candlestick, which
gives light to all that are in the house. By all which he expresses, that
those graces are not to be accounted Christian, which either 1. do not bring
forth fruits, and so remain but dull habits, useless possessions; Or, 2. that
are not made exemplary to others.


S. But sure all this belongs to Ministers and men in eminent place only; they
are the salt of the earth and light of the world, not every private Christian?


C. Yes, every private Christistian for such are the Disciples to which Christ
here speaks, the same auditors to every part of of the Sermon, and so the duty
of exemplary lives in some measure required of every of them, who before were
bound to be meek or peaceable etc. i. e, (as it is apparent v. 1.) all those
that are entered into the School of Christ: not only Apostles (whose successors
Ministers are) for as yet there were none such, the (Apostleship and sending
abroad to preach with a commission to that purpose, beginning together, both
after this. c. 10. 1.) but, I say, all Disciples, that is, all Christians, that
undertake to follow Christ, and expect any good by him.


S. What then is the meaning of this necessity that the Christians graces must
be evident and exemplary?


C. It Is this. 1. That a Christian must not content himself in doing what
Christ commands, but must also dispose his actions so as may most tend to Gods
honor, which consists in bringing in many disciples unto him, and which ought
to be as precious to a Christian as the salvation of his soul. 2. That he
ought to labor the conversion of others (in charity to them) the extending not
enclosing of God's Kingdom.


S. This doctrine is clear, and therefore I will detain you no longer on this
section.

What is the sum of the next Section which consists of four verses more. 17.
18. 19. 20?


C. Christ did not abolish
It is in breife the attestation of two great Christian truths.


S. What is the first of them?


C. That Christianity is not contrary to the laws by which mankind had
formerly been obliged, is not destructive of them; Christ now commands nothing
that the natural or moral law had forbidden, or forbids nothing that that had
commanded: this is affirmed in three forms in this section. First, v. 17. he
came not to destroy the law and the Prophets, i. e. the doctrine designed and
taught by them; and it would be a very dangerous error, very noxious to
practice, to think he did, think not etc. Secondly, v, 18. He affirms with
an asseveration, that the least letter or title of the law, shall not be
destroyed, i. (...).
e. loose its obligingness, (till all be fulfilled, we read, it is) till all
things be done, i. e. till the world be at an end, or (which is the same at the
beginning of the verse, though in other words) till heaven and earth, i. e.
this present world, pass away, or is dissolved. 3ly. v. 19. He pronounces
clearly, that he that affirms any the least commandment of the law to be now
out-dated, that not only breaks them himself, but teaches others that they
are not obliged to keep them, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, i. e. shall not be accounted a Christian; for so the Kingdom of heaven
frequently signifies in the Scripture.


S. What is the second thing?


C. That Christ has perfected the law, and set it higher, then any the most
studied Doctor did think himself But perfect the Law. (...).
obliged by it formerly. And this is affirmed here also by two phrases; First,
v. 17. I came not to destroy the law, but to perfect it. The Greek word which
we render [perfect] is answerable to an Hebrew, which signifies not only to
perform, but to perfect; to fill up, as well as to fulfill; and so is rendered
sometimes by one, and sometimes by the other. And the Greek it self is so used
in like manner, When it referres to a word or a prophecy, then it is to
perform, to fulfill. 2 Chronicles. 36. 22. 1 Mac. 2. 55. In other cases it is to
fill up, to complete, to perfect, Eccl. 33. 16. and 39. 12. and 2 Chronicles. 24.
10. And that it is so in this place, may appear by the ancient Greek fathers,
which express it by two similitudes. 1. Of a vessel that had some water in it
before, but now is filled up to the brim. 2. Of a picture that is first drawn
rudely, the limbs only, and lineaments, with a cole, or the like. But (...).
when the hand of the Painter comes to draw it in colors to the life; then
it is said to be filled up. 2. That except your righteousness, i. e. Christian
actions and performances, exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, i. e. go higher, then that strictest sect of the Jews, the Doctors
among them, thought themselves obliged to, or taught others that they were,
they shall not pass for Christians here, or prove Saints hereafter. In which
words sure he does not pitch on the name of Scribes and Pharisees peculiarly,
as those that were the greatest evacuators of the law by their own
hypocritical practices or false glosses in some particulars; but the Pharisees
as the most exact sectamong the Jews, Act. 26. 5. and the Scribes, as the
Doctors of the law, and those that knew better what belonged to it then other
men; and both together those that sat in Moses chair, and taught there truly*
though they practiced not, [they say, but do not]) the doctrine of the
Mosaicall law in that manner, as others were obliged to perform it, Mat. 23.
2. This same truth is also farther proved in the remainder of this Chapter, by
induction of several particulars of the law, first barely set down by Christ,
and then with Christ's improvement added to them, in this form of Speech, but
I say unto you. And though this be no new doctrine, but affirmed distinctly by
most of the ancient, especially the Greek writers, before Saint Austines time;
and thus far acknowledged by all parts, that Christ required more of his
Disciples, i. e. of Christians now, then the Jews by any clear revelation had
been convinced to be necessary before, (which is in effect as much as I shall
desire to have granted) Yet I have thought good to confirm it yet farther to
you, (because it is the foundation of a great weighty superstructure) by two
things. 1. By one other remarkable place of Scripture. 2. By some reasons
which the Fathers have given for the doing of it.


S. What is that remarkable place of Scripture?


C. In the first Epistle of Saint John, c. 1. prefaced and brought in with more
magnificent ceremony, then any one passage of Scripture. That which was in the
beginning, etc. v. 1. That which we have seen and heard, etc. v. 3. and These
things write we, v. 4. This then is the message, etc. v. 5. all which are
remarkable characters set upon that which follows, showing it to be the sum
of the whole Gospel, or doctrine of Christ; and it is this, [That God is light,
and in him is no darkness at all,] v. 5. Which words so ushered in, you will
easily believe have somewhat more in them, then at the first sound, taken alone
they would seem to have, and this sure it is; that now under the Gospel,
Christ this light appears without any mixture of darkness. Light is the
state and doctrine of Christianity; darkness, of sin, and imperfection, and
such as was before among Jews and Heathens, (which is referred to by the
phrase, If we walk in darkness, v. 6. i. e. live like Jews or Heathens) and
therefore to be light, without all mixture of darkness, is to be perfect
without all mixture of imperfection; which you will not think fit to affirm
of God, (or Christ under the Gospel) in respect to himself (for that were to
conceive, that he had not been so before) but in respect of his Law and
Commandments; that they had before some mixture of imperfection, but now have
none; had before some vacuities in them, which now are filled up by Christ.


S. What reasons do the fathers give for this?


C. These especially; Because 1. Christ under the Gospel gives either higher
or plainer promises, then he did before; the promises of eternal life are now
as clear, as those of a temporal Canaan had been before to the Jews. 2.
Because he gives more grace now to perform them, then before he had done. The
law given by Moses was a carnal law, i. e. weak, unnaccompanied with strength
to perform what it requires; but the Gospel of Christ is the administration
of the spirit, i. e. A means to administer the spirit to our hearts, to enable
to do what he commands to do; and then (as the Father said) Lord give me
strength to do what thou command, and command what thou listest.


S. If this be true that Christ now requires more then under nature or Moses
had been formerly required, at least fully revealed to be required, How then
is our Christian burden lighter, then the Jewish formerly was? In these things
it is heavier rather?


C. It is made lighter by Christ in taking o^^ that unprofitable burden of
ceremonies, that had nothing good in them, and yet were formerly laid on the
Jews: lighter again in respect of the damning power of every least sin or
breach under the first Covenant, which to the penitent beleiver is taken away
in the second. Which two things being supposed, the adding of these perfections
to the law, (which are all of things gainefull and profitable, and before (even
by those that were not, or thought themselves not obliged by them) acknowledged
to be more excellent, and more honorable then the other) will not in any
reason be counted the increase of a burden, (for no man will be thought
oppressed by that he gains by) but the gainefull yoke will be a light one,
though it be a yoke, Matthew. 11. 30. And 2. 28 long as he gives strength, his
Commandments, what ever they are, cannot be grievous.


S. But sure it were not difficult to find in the old Testament, the same or
equivalent commands to every of those that follow here, how then can Christ be
said to have improved them?


C. Some glimmerings perhaps of this light there were before, as Gospel under
the Law: But these either, 1. not universally commanded to all under threat of
eternal punishment, but only recommended to them that will do that which is
best, and so see good days, etc. Or 2. not so expressly revealed to them, so
that they might know themselves thus obliged. And yet if any will contend and
show as universal plain obligeing precepts there as here, I shall be glad to
see them, and not contend with him: So he will bring the Jews up to us, and
not us down to the Jews, the only danger, which I have all this while used
all this diligence to prevent.


S. One question more I shall trouble you with in this matter, whether these
superadditions of Christ in the rest of the chapter, may not be resolved to be
only Counsels of perfection, which to do, is to do better; and not Commands,
which not do to is asin?


C. The following superadditions are all commands, and not counsels only;
Christ saying this now in the same manner, as Moses did that other before;
Christ in a mount, as he in a mount; his saying [I say unto you] a form of
command, as that phrase [God spoke these words and said] a form of it, Ex. 20.
and the breach of these new sayings threatened with judgment, and hell fire,
and imprisonment irreversible, and casting into hell etc. in the ensuing words.
All which signify them sins, which must be accounted for sadly by a
Christian, and not only faylings of perfection.


S. How many sorts of these new commandments are there in this ensuing chapter?


C. Six, 1. Concerning Killing, 2. Adultery, 3. Divorce, 4. Perjury, 5.
Retaliation, 6. Loving of Neighbors. In each of which Christ, to show that he
came not to destroy, but to fill up or perfect the law, first rehearses the old
law and thereby confirms it, and then annexeth his new law to it.


S. That we may proceed to this matter, I must [Ye have heard that it was said
by them of old time?]


C. [Ye have heard] signifies you have been taught, and that out of the word
of God, or books of Moses; [sayd by them of old time] seems to be ill
translated, and therefore is mended in the margents of our Bibles [To them] i.
e. to the Jews your ancestors: And that this is a denotation of the law of the
Decalogue, given to them Exodus 20. you will have little reason to doubt, if you
observe that the three severalls to which these words are prefixed, (being
omitted in the rest, in some part) are three distinct commandments of the
Decalogue, thou shall not kill, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not
forswear thy self, or take God's name in vain, (as anon you shall see.) As
for the other three of divorce, of retaliation, of loving neighbors and hating
enemies, which have not that entire form or phrase prefixed, but some other
different from it, they are not commands of the law, but permissions, or
indulgences allowed the Jews, but now retrencht, and denied Christians.


S. Of killing.
The first of these being the sixth of the law, I must first desire you to
explain unto me, and tell me what was forbidden by it under the law.


C. The first and principal thing is the shedding of man's blood, by way of
killing; taking away his life, God only, who gave us life, having power to take
it away again.


S. What then is the Magistrate's taking away the life of a capital offender?
Is not that forbidden by that law?


C. God having sole power over the life of man, may without doubt take it away
by what way he pleases, either immediately by himself, or by any man, whom he
appoints to execute his will: Thus you know might Abraham kill his son when
God bid him; because though Abraham had not power over his son's life, yet God
had; and his bidding Abraham kill him, is not any thing contrary to this law,
which only forbids man to do it, but does not forbid God. In the like manner,
God having Genesis 9. 6. commanded the murderers blood to be shed by man, and
thereby enstated the power of the sword on the Supreme Magistrate, (who, by
whomsoever he is chosen to be Magistrate, by God, or the people, has that
power of the sword given him immediately from God, the people having not singly
this power over their own lives, and therefore not able to give it any other)
not only permits him and makes it lawful for him thus to punish malefactors,
but commands and requires him so to do, as his minister to execute wrath. Romans
13. and so the word [Thou] in the Commandment is the man of himself, without
power or commission from God. Which yet he that has it must exercise justly,
according to the laws of God and man, or else he breaks the commandment
also; this commission being not given to him absolutely and arbitrarily to use
as he list: but according to defined rules in the Scripture [he that sheddes
man's blood, etc.] (which was given not to the Jews, but to all the sons of
Noah) and according to the laws of every nation, which being made by the whole
body of the nation, or all the States in it jointly, are referred to some
supreme power, either one, or more, to execute; who consequently is invested
from heaven with authority to do it.


S. May not a man in any case kill himself?


C. He may not; having no more power over his own life, then any other man's;
and how gainful soever death may seem to any, yet is he to submit to Gods
providence, and to wait, though it be in the most miserable, painful,
wearisome life, till God please to give him manumission.


S. What is to be said of Sampson, who killed so many by pulling away the
pillars, and involved himself in the same destruction?


C. He was a Judge in Israel; and such in those days, (and particularly him)
did God ordinarily move by his spirit to do some extraordinary things; and it
is to be imagined, that God incited him to do this; or if he did not, he were
not not be excused in it.


S. What is to be said of those that rather then they would offer to Idols in
the Primitive Church, did kill themselves, and remain still upon record for
Martyrs?


C. If the same could be affirmed of them which was of Sampson, that God
incited them to do this, they should by this be justified also; but having
under the Gospel no authority to justify such pretense of divine incltation,
it will be safest to affirm, that this was a fault in them, which their love
of God and fear that they should be polluted by Idols was the cause of; and
so, though it might as a frailty be pardoned by God's mercy in Christ; yet sure
this killing themselves was not it that made them Martyrs, but that great love
of God, and resolving against idolatrous worship; which testified it self in
that killing themselves for that cause; This it was that made them pass for
Martyrs, and that other incident fault of theirs, was not in that case thought
so great, as to divest or rob them of that honor.


S. What is meant by that which follows the mention of the Old Commandment in
this place? [Whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of judgment.]


C. The word rendered [the judgment] signifies a Court of Judicature, or Assizes
of Judges, who sat in the gates of every City, and had cognizance of all
greater causes, and particularly of that of Homicides, Deuteronomy. 16. 18. The number
of these Judges was ordinarily twenty three. And so though it be not annexed,
Exodus 20. to that Commandment, yet from the body of the Mosaicke Law, Christ
concludes, that against killing the sentence of death by the sword (for that
was the punishment pecular to that Court) was to be expected.


S. But was nothing else forbidden in the law by that Commandment, but killing?


C. That was the prime especial matter of it, but by way of reduction other
things which are preparatory to this, or offenses of this nature, but of a
lower degree. As 1. Mutilating or maiming any man's body. 2. Wounding him, which
may possibly endanger his life. 3. Entering into, or accepting, or offering of
Duells, wherein I may kill or be killed, in which case, which soever it prove,
I am guilty of murder. Nay if by the equality of fortune both come safely off,
yet the voluntary putting my self on that hazard, is guilt enough for a whole
ages repentance, and humiliation; to consider what had become of me, if without
repentance, I had thus fallen a murderer of my self and my fellow Christian
also.


S. May no injury or affront be accounted sufficient to provoke me to offer, or
challenge to a Duel?


C. None imaginable; for that injury, what ever it is, if it be a real one, of
a considerable nature, will be capable of legal satisfaction; and that must
content me; private revenge being wholly prohibited by Christ. Or if it be
such, that the law allows no satisfaction for, that is an argument that it is
light and unconsiderable; and then sure the life of another man, and the danger
of my own will be an unproportionable satisfaction for it.


S. Well, but if another send me a Challenge, may not I accept of it?
especially when I shall be defamed for a Coward if I do not?


C. Certainly I may not; the law of killing restraines me. And for that excuse
of Honor, it is First, most unreasonable that the obedience to Gods commands
should be an infamous thing. And then 2. If so impious a custom has
prevailed, I must yet resolve to part with reputation, or any thing, rather
then with my obedience to God. Nay 3. You may observe, that there are two sorts
of cowardice, much differing the one from another; the one proceeding from
fear of being beaten, or killed; the second from fear of hurting or killing
another. The most valiant despiser of dangers may be allowed to have a great
deal of the second of this, and will certainly have as much of it, as he has
either of good nature, or religion; and that will restrain Duells as much as
the other. And might this but pass, as sure it deserves, for a creditable
thing, the fear of the other kind of discredit would work little upon us. For
the world is now generally grown so wise, that a man may, without any
dishonor, fear being killed or hurt; and even to run away from such dangers,
being very imminent, is creditable enough. The unluckinesse of it is, that the
other honest kind of fear, that of hurting or killing another, is become the
only infamous thing, the only cowardice that is counted of. For the removing
of which, you may observe, 4. That in a reasonable estimation of things, he
that for the preserving of his reputation shall venture to disobey God, is sure
the greatest coward in the World; he is more fearful of disgrace and ignominy
in the world, then any pious man is of violating the laws of natural reason,
of offending God, or of incurring the flames of eternal Hell.


S. But what am I to do in case of Challenge offered to me?


C. 1. In conscience toward God, to deny it, what ever the consequents may be.
2. To offer a full satisfaction for any, either real or supposed injury done
by me, which has first provoked the challenger. 3. As prudently as I can to
signify (and by my actions testify the truth of that) that it is not the fear
of dying, but of killing, not cowwardize, but duty, which restraines me from
this forbidden way of satisfying his desire.


S. But what if all this will not satisfy him, but he will still thirst my
blood, and accept of no other allay, but assault me, and force me either to
deliver up my own life, or try the uncertainty of a Duel?


C. The utmost that in this extreme case can be lawful, I shall define to you,
by this example which I have met with. Two persons of quality meeting in a
public place, the one passed an affront upon the other; the other bare it
patiently in that presence, but after sent him a challenge; he sent him a
return of acknowledgment of his fault, and readiness to give him any
satisfaction that should else be thought onto wipe off the injury; the other
will not accept any other; he keeps his chamber, and for a long time uses all
care not to meet him in any place which would be seasonable for fighting, and
still offers tender of satisfaction. At length it falls out they meet in a
place where this could not be avoided. The challenger sets upon him, he draws
in his own defense, wound's him lightly, having done so, desires again that
this may end the quarrel, or offers any other satisfaction; the challenger
will not consent, assaults again, is killed; and so the Tragedy concluded with
the chief Actors life. That the surviver did any thing unlawful in all this,
all circumstances considered, I cannot affirm; no man being bound to spare
that other man's life, which he cannot spare without parting with his own. I
conceive this may satisfy the utmost of your scruples in this matter, if I
tell you, that this case taken with all the circumstances, is the only one I
can give you wherein one of the two Duellers may be innocent. And you will be
apt to deceive your self, if you seek to find out other cases, and think to
justify them by this.


S. But is there nothing else reducible to the prohibition of murder?


C. Yes, 4. Oppression of the poor, and not giving those that are in extreme
distress, according to that of the son of Sirach; The poor man's bread
(either that which he has, or that which in extreme want he craves of thee) is
his life, and he that deprives him of it is a murderer. 5. The beginnings of
this sin in the heart, not yet breaking forth into action, as malice, hatred,
meditating of revenge, wishing mischeife, cursing, etc. All these are reducible
to this Commandment, as it was given in the law.


S. Is there yet any thing else thus reducible?


C. One thing more there is, and that is, War, the consideration of which is
full of great difficulties. For though all unjust war be simply forbidden
under this sixth command of the law, and it be evident enough, that some wars
are unjust, as that of Subjects against the supreme power or Magistrate in any
state, that of one Prince or nation invading another for the enlarging of their
dominion or territories, etc. And though indeed there be but few wars but
sin against this Commandment, and in those few that do not, yet there be
many actors in them, auxiliaries, stipendiaries, etc. which have no lawful
calling to take part in that trade of killing men, (for so only have they that
do it in obedience to their lawful Magistrate) yet still it is apparent, that
some war is lawful; as that which has had Gods express command; and that
which is for the repressing of seditions and rebellions; and betwixt nation and
nation, for the just defense of themselves, and the repelling of violence. But
this last head of wars being that wherein the greatest difficulties lie, will
not be so proper for this place, as for another which we shall meet with, that
of not resisting of evil, v. 39. And therefore to that place we shall refer
it; as also that of private war in case of assault.


S. I shall then count of that debt, and not require payment till that time
comes: but proceed to demand.

What Christ has added to this letter of the Mosaicke law thus explained?


C. It is clearly answered in these words, [But I say unto you, that whosoever
is angry with his brother without a cause] etc. to the end of that verse.
Wherein there be three things forbidden by Christ. 1. Causeless or immoderate
anger, going no farther then the breast. 2. The breaking out of this anger into
the tongue, but some what moderately: [Whosoever shall say Racha. 3. A more
violent railing, or assaulting him with that sword of the tongue that anger
has unsheathed. [Whosoever shall say thou fool.]


S. What do you mean by the first of these?


C. That anger which is either without any, or upon light cause; or, being upon
any the justest and weightiest cause, exceeds the degree and proportion due to
it; and this again in either kind aggravated by the duration and continuance
of it. And the Greek word here used is a denotation of every of these.


S. For the understanding of this, I desire first to know whether any anger be
just or no, in respect of the cause? and if so, what?


C. Saint Paul's advice of being angry and not sinning, though it refer there
peculiarly to the not continuing or enduring of wrath, [Let not the Sun go
down in thy wrath] does yet imply, that some wrath may be lawful in respect
of the cause; for otherwise the non-continuance of it would not justify it from
sin. The most justifiable causes of anger are, 1. When it proceeds from
sorrow that God is provoked; anger conceived for Gods sake, Mark. 3. 5. without
reflection on our selves. 2. When for virtues sake; to see that neglected,
despised, and the rules of it violated. 3. When for other men's sake; still
without reflection on our selves or any interest of ours. And each of these not
in light trivial matters neither, but in matters of weight; and so the
causeless anger is that which rises upon slight or no causes, or those wherein
our own interests are concerned; Which though they may be causes, are not
justifiable causes of anger in us.


S. Having this direction from you to understand causeless anger, I shall
easily answer my self for the other two circumstances which make it fit for
Christ to prohibit it. As 1. When it is immoderate and exceeds the degree and
proportion due to it, which I confess may be done even when the cause is just.
And 2. When it continues beyond the length of a transient passion; when, as the
Apostle says, the Sun is permitted to go down upon our wrath. But I pray
what is meant by that phrase which is by Christ here repeated, and again
applied to this causeless anger, as before to killing, [shall be in danger of
the judgment] sure it is not that he thinks it fit, that every Christian that
thus offends should be put to death, as even now you interpreted those words?


C. The meaning is, that the wrathful man in another world shall be subject to
punishment as the homicide here, i. e. that wrathfullnesse being so contrary to
that meekness, patience, humility required now by Christ, and being, as
Solomon intimates, an effect of pride and haughtiness, is to be counted of as an
Un-Christian sin; which unless it be mortified Prove. 21. 24.
here by the grace of Christ, will cost us dear in another world; though not
so dear as the second and third mentioned in this verse. The punishment in
that court of judicature being the sword, or beheading; which, though it be
heavy enough, is not yet so great as the two other which are after named.


S. This of causeless anger being thus clearly forbidden by Christ, and yet
that that even good Christians are so subject to fall into; what means will
you direct me to, to mortify or subdue it?


C. 1. A conviction of the danger and sin of it; not flattering our selves
that either it is no sin, or such as with our ordinary, frailties shall have
it is pardon of course. But 1. Such as is here under a heavy penalty
particularly denounced against by Christ. And 2. is so opposite to those graces
of humility, meekness, patience, peaceablenesse, bearing with one another,
and forgiving one another, etc. and required so strictly by Christ of his
Disciples, i. e. all Christians followers of him. 3. A consideration of the
unreasonablenesse of that sin, which is, 1. Unjust, being causeless, or
immoderate. 2. So much against what I would have done to me either by my
brother, (it being a very painful uneasy thing to be under another wrath,
especially when ill words or blows are joined with it; and that that no body
would be under, if he could help) or by God himself (whom I so often displease,
and would be so sorry if he should be wrath with me, even when justly he might.
3. The laboring against that bitter root of pride in my heart, of which this
is so necessary infallible an attendant. 4. The reflection upon my self, if
it were possible, in time of that passion, or else immediately after, when I
come to my self again out of that drunkenness of soul, and considering how
ill-favored a hateful thing it is; how like a tiger, a bear, or any the
furiousest beast rather then a man, it makes me; what a deforming us, putting
us out of all that posture of civility, that in our sobriety we choose to
appear in. Yea and what a painful agony it was when I was under it, 5. To
consider how at such time we are out of our own power, apt to fall into those
oaths, acts of furies, indiscretions, revealing of secrets, disadvantageous
expressions, etc. in a few such minutes, which a whole age of repentance will
not repair again. 6. A sober vow or resolution never to permit my self to
fall into so inconvenient and dangerous a sin; that when I find it a coming
upon me, I may restrain it by remembering, this was it that I thought fit to
vow against. 7. A watching over my self continually, that I be not taken
unawares. 8. Absteining carefully from the least indulgence to any beginnings
of it; it being easier to keep from any first degree of it, then yiedling to
that, to restrain the farther degrees. 9. Avoiding temptations and
provocations as much as I can; and so the company of those who are subject to
that sin. 10. Laboring with God in prayer for grace to mortify this in me.
11. Diverting in time of temptation, with some particular repeated ejaculations
to God to suppress at that time any such exorbitant affection in me. Many
other conducible means you will be able to suggest to your self.


S. What is the second thing here forbidden?


C. Saying to his brother, Racha,] i. e. When anger breaks out into
contumelious speeches; such are the calling him empty, despicable, witless
fellow; for the word Racha, is an Hebrew word, and signifies vain or empty.
This, though not the highest kind of contumely, is yet greater then the
former, and therefore is here expressed by the punishment apportioned to it,
greater then the former; as much as stoning is a sorer death then beheading;
for that is the meaning of [he shall be in danger of the Council,] the
Council signifying the Sanhedrin, or the Supreme and great Senate where the
ordinary punishment was stoning. And so the meaning is, this is a greater
sin, and so to expect a greater punishment then the former.


S. What is the third thing forbidden here?


C. Saying thou foole] i. e. when wrath breaks out into more virulent
railings, all sorts of which are here intimated by this one word; and this
being a greater sin or aggravation of causeless anger then the former, is
here described by the third kind of punishment: which, though it were not in
any legal Court of judicature, was yet well enough known among the Jews; not
under the name of hell fire, (as we render it by a mistake, because (...)
those torments in hell are in other places described by these,) but of the
valley of Hinnom. The meaning of which is this. Without the City of Jerusalem,
in the valley of Hinnom, there was a place where the Jews sometime, in
imitation of the Phaenicians, used a most cruel, barbarous, kind of rites,
burnt children alive, putting them in hollow brazen vessels, and so by little
and little scalding them to death; where, because the children could not choose
but howl hideously, they had Timbrells perpetually sounding to drown that
cry, and therefore it was called Tophet, (from a word signifying a Timbrell)
and is described by the Prophets of the Old Testament. This punishment taking
denomination from the Is. 30. 33.
place, that valley of Hinnom, is called here in Greek by a word little
differing in sound from (...)*
the Hebrew, and that word in the New Testament, and ordinarily in sacred
Writers Greek and Latin, set to signify hell fire: because this was the best
image or expression of those torments conceived there, that their knowledge or
experience could represent to them. And so is here fitly made use of to
express the greatest sin in this kind, by the greatest punishment that they
could understand. For indeed above the sword and stoning, there was no
punishment in use in the Jewish Courts of judicature, (the burning among them
being not this of burning alive, but the thrusting of an iron red hot into
their bowels, which made a quick dispatch of them) and therefore to ascend to
the description of a third superlative degree of sin our Savior thinks fit
to use that mention of the punishments in the valley of Hinnom.


S. You have by this plenteous discourse on this word, prevented my doubt,
which would have been, whether the last only of these sins, and not the two
former, make a Christian liable to hell fire; for now I perceive the meaning of
it is that torture in the valley of Hinnom. And that to express a third
greater degree of punishment in another world answerable to that third degree
of sin; and that nothing else is to be collected from it.

I shall only trouble you with one scruple in this matter, and that is,
whether all kind of calling Racha or fool, i. e. all contumelious speaking of
a greater or less degree, be such a sin punishable in a Christian in another
world?


C. I shall answer you* 1. By interposing one caution observable in these
words; It is not all using of those words, but that which is the effect and
improvement of causeless immoderate anger; for you see they are here set as
higher degrees of that. And therefore, 2. Those speeches that proceed from any
thing else, particularly when they are spoken by those to whom the office and
duty of chastiseing others belongs, as Masters, Teachers, Superiors in any
kind, (nay perhaps equals too, who in charity are obliged to reprove the
neighbor, and not suffer sin on him) And by them, 1. Done to that purpose
that they may by these goads wake them out of a lethargy of sin; And again, 2.
Done seasonably, so as they be in prudence most likely to work good effect.
And 3. Upon great and weighty causes; And 4. without seeking any thing to
themselves, either the venting of inordinate passion; or the ambition and
vanity of seeming severer then others, or so much better then those whom they
thus reproach; these all this while are not subject to this censure or danger.
And of this nature you may see in the New Testament these severalls, Ia. 2. 20.
O vain man, i. e. literally, Racha. Mat. 23. 17. The fools and the blind,
spoken by Christ. And again, v. 19. and Luke 24. 25. Ye fools, etc. and Gal.
3. 15. O foolish Galatians, and v. 3. are ye so foolish? Which is directly the
other expression [thou foole] which now you will see and discern easily (if
you consider the affection of the Speakers,) to be out of love, not causeless
inordinate passion, and so not liable to the censure in this text. But then 3.
There is little doubt but that all detraction, censoriousnesse, back biting,
whispering, that so ordinary entertainment of the world to busy our selves when
we meet together in speaking all the evil we know, or perhaps know not, of
other men, is a very great sin here condemned by our Savior, and upon his
advertisement timely to be turned out of our communication; as being most
constantly against the rule of doing as I would be done to; no man living being
pleased to be so used by others, as the detractor uses others.


S. I beseech God to lay this to my heart, that by his assistance I may be
enabled to suppress and mortify this inordinate passion, that my nature has
such inclinations unto; to that end, to plant that meekness, and patience,
and humility, and charity in my heart that may turn out this unruly creature;
to arm me with that continual vigilance over my self that it may not steal
upon me unawares; but especially to give me that power over my tongue, that I
may not fall into that greater condemnation.

But I see you have not yet done with this theme; for before our Savior
proceeds to any other commandment, I perceive he builds somewhat else on
this foundation in the four next verses. [Therefore if thou bring thy gift to
the Altar, etc.] Be pleased then to tell me, 1. How that belongs to this
matter? And 2. what is the duty there prescribed?


C. For the dependence of that on the former, or how it belongs to it, you will
easily discern, if you remember that old saying, That repentance is the planke
to rescue him that is cast away in the Ship-wracke. Our Savior had mentioned
the danger of rash anger and contumelies, etc. And because through humane
infirmity he supposes it possible that Disciples or Christians may thus
miscarry, he therefore adds the necessity of present repentance and
satisfaction after it.


S. What is the duty there prescribed?


C. It is this. 1. Being reconciled with the brother. v. 14. and agreeing with
the adversary, v. 25. i. e. using all means to make my peace with him whom I
have thus injured. For the word [be reconciled] signifies not (...).
here to be pacified toward him, for he is not here supposed to have injured
thee, for if he had, the anger would not be causeless, but to pacify him to
regaine his favor, (and thus the word is used in the Scripture dialect in
other places) confessing my rash anger and intemperate language, and offering
any way of satisfaction that he may forgive me, and be reconciled to me; which
till he do, I am his debtor, in his danger to attache me, as it were to bring
me before the Judge, and he to deliver me to the Baily or Sergeant, and he to
cast me into prison, etc. i. e. This sin of mine unretrived by repentance,
will lie very heavy upon my score; and without satisfaction to the injured
person, will not be capable of mercy or pardon from Christ: which danger is set
to enforce the duty. The second part of the duty is, that the making this our
peace is to be preferred before many other things, which pass for more
specious works among us; as particularly before voluntary oblations, which are
here meant by the gift brought to the Altar, such as those of which the Law is
given; Lev. 1. 2. Not that the performance of this duty is to be preferred
(being a duty to my neighbor) before piety, or the duties of true Religion
toward God; but before the observation of outward rites, sacrifices, Oblations,
etc. Mercy before sacrifice, Mat. 9. 13. and 12. 7. And that those offerings
that are brought to God with a heart full of wrath and hatred, will never be
acceptable to him. Our prayer expressed, 1 Timothy 2. 8. by [lifting up of holy and
clean hands] must be without wrath; or else like the Fast, Isa. 58. 4. [Ye
fast for strife and for debate] and the long prayers, Isa. 1. When the hands
were full of blood.] It Will be but a vain oblation in Gods account, like Cains
when he resolved to kill his brother.


S. Is there any thing else you will commend to me out of these words before we
part with them?


C. Yes, 1. That the time immediate before the performing of any holy duty, of
prayer, of oblation, of fasting, of receiving the Sacrament, etc. is the
fittest and properst time to call our selves to account for all the trespasses
and injuries we are guilty of toward God and men. [If thou bring thy gift, and
there remembrest, v. 23.] That it seems a season of remembering. 2. That though
the not having made my peace with those whom I have offended, make me unfit for
any such Christian performance, and so require me to defer that till this be
done; yet can it not give me any excuse to leave that Christian performance
undone, but rather hasten my performance of the other, that I may perform this
also. He that is not yet reconciled must not carry away his gift, but leave it
at the Altar, v. 24. And go and be reconciled, and then come back and offer
his gift. He that is not in charity or the like, and so unfit to receive the
Sacrament, must not think it fit or lawful for him to omit or neglect that
receiving, on that pretense, (or if he do, it will be a double guilt) but must
hasten to recover himself to such a capacity that he may with clean hands and
heart, thus come to Gods table whenever he is thus called to it. 3. That a
penitent reconciled sinner may have as good confidence in his approaches to God
as any, [Then come, etc. v. 24.] 4. That the putting off or deferring of such
businesses as these of reconciliation, satisfaction, etc. 1. Is very dangerous.
And 2. The danger of them past reversing, when it comes upon us. 5. That there
is no way to prevent this, but in time of life and health, quickly, instantly
to do it, the next hour may possibly be too late. Agree quickly whilst thou
art in the way, v. 25. 6. That the punishment that expects such sinners is
endless, indeterminable, the till thou have paid, v. 26. is not a limitation
of time, after which thou shall come out, (any more then [she had no children
till she died] is a mark or intimation of her having children after death) but
a proposal of a sad payment which would never be done, the paying of it would
be a doing for ever.


S. I thank you for these supernumerary meditations, I hope they shall not be
cast away upon me.

I shall detain you no longer here, but call upon you to proceed to the next
period, which I see to begin in like manner with a commandment of the old law,
Thou shall not commit adultery; and the same introduction to it which was to
the former, [Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time] which, by what
I before learned of you, I conclude should be, [to them of old time] or to the
ancient Jews, Exodus 20. 14. I shall propose (...) more scruples in this
matter, but only crave your directions for the maine, what you conceive
forbidden here in that old Commandment.


C. As in the former God by Moses restrained all the accursed (...).
issues of one kind of sensuality; so in this place of the other, this of
lust. And naming the chief kind of breach, that of Adultery, i. e. lying
carnally with a married woman, he forbids also all other acts of uncleanenesse
which are not conjugall. Thus have some of the Jews themselves interpreted the
word; and so in the Scripture (...)
and good Authors, in common use, adultery and fornication are taken
promiscuously to signify all manner of uncleanenesse. Of which, though some
kinds seem to have been permitted the Jews, yet this permission is not to be
conceived to extend any farther then the benefit of legal impunity, (not that
they were lawful or without turpitude.) Yea and that some kinds of them were
by their law severely punished, you shall see, Deuteronomy. 22. But more severely by
God himself, as Numb. 25. So that under the letter of that old Commandment
are contained not only the known sins of adultery and fornication, but all
other kind of filthiness mentioned Romans 1. 24, 26, 27. and v. 29. Where there
are four words which seem to contain all sorts of it under them: (...)
Fornication, (...)
Villainy, (...)
Immoderate desire, (...)*
Naughtiness: And so again, 2 Cor. 12. 21. Uncleanness. fornication,
lasciviousness, and Gal. 5. 19. Adultery, fornication, uncleanenesse,
lasciviousness, and idolatry. Which last word in that and other places, seems
a word meant to contain all such kind of sins under it, because they were
so ordinary in the Idolatrous mysteries of the Heathens; most of their rites
and secrets of their religion, being the practice of these filthy sins. So
Ephesians. 4. 19. and 5. 3. in both which places, as also before, Romans 1. 29. and
Col. 3. 5. The word there rendered Covetousness in the three latter and
greediness in the first, (...)
signifies that irregular desire; and so those Heathenish sins which here also,
Col. 3. 5. are called Idolatry, I would not give you any more particular
account of these sins, but desire God to fortify you with all care and
vigilance against them, grounded in a sense of hatred and detestation of them,
as of the greatest reproach to your nature, greivance to the Spirit of God,
defamation of Christianity where ever they are to be found, and the sins of
such a nature, that when they are once in any kind indulged to, they are apt
to break out into all the baseness and vileness in the world; and that in
breife, are called by Saint Peter, abominable idolatry, 1 Pet. 4. 3.


S. The Good Lord of all purity by the power of his sanctifying grace proserve
me from all such taints, to be a Temple for the Holy Ghost. But what else is
reducible to this Commandment of the law?


C. 1. All desires of these sins consented to, although they break not out into
act. 2. All morose thoughts i. e. dwelling or insisting on that image, or
phansying of such unclean matter with delectation. 3. The feeding my lust with
luxurious diet, inflaming wines, etc. or other such fuel and accentives of
it, etc.


S. What now has Christ added to this old prohibition?


C. You have it in these words, That whosoever looks after a woman to lust
after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart.


S. What is the meaning of that?


C. That he that so looks, etc. 1. Signifies his heart to be adulterous,
though himself be not, either through want of opportunity, etc. 2. That he
shall by Christ be censurable as the adulterer under the law.


S. But what is the full importance of looking on a woman to lust?


C. It is not to look to that end that I may lust, (as some are willing to
interpret here; by this means making the looking sinful only in order to
that end, that lusting; without designing of which they conceive the looking it
self will be no fault) but either to look so long till I lust, or else to
satisfy my lust (though not with the yiedling to the corporal pollution, yet)
so far as to feed my (...) or as Chrysostom reads it, (...).
eye, to gaze, to dwell on the beauty of other women. I shall give it you in
the language of the Fathers who have thus interpreted it. He that stands and
looks earnestly, Theoph. He that makes it abusinesse to look earnestly upon
gallant bodies and beautiful faces, that hunts after them, and feeds his mind
with the spectacle, that nails his eyes to handsome faces. Chrysostom. And again,
Not he that desires that he may commit folly, but looks that he may desire.
And again, God has given thee eyes that seeing the creator thou may
glorify him and admire him. As therefore there was (...).
an immoderation and fault in anger, so in looking. If (says he) thou will
look and be delighted look upon thine own wife, and love her continually;
but if thou look after other beauties, thou do both wrong her, letting thy
eyes rove otherwhere; and thou wrongest her whom thou look on, meddling with
her illegally: For though thou touchest her not with thy hand, yet with thy
eyes thou do. To this Saint Peter referres, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Eyes full of
adultery; there being an adulterous look as well as an adulterous embrace; the
former forbidden by Christ, as well as the latter by Moses.


S. I had not thought this prohibition of Christ's had been so severe, but
seeing it is the opinion of the ancient Fathers, that the words are thus to be
interpreted, and that the feeding of the eye, yiedling to satisfy that with
unlawful objects, the beauty of any but our own wives, and the stirring up of
fire within, which is apt to be kindled by that means, is here forbidden, I
shall no longer doubt of it, but resolve, and with Job make a Covenant with my
eyes that I will not behold a maid, i. e. please my self with the
contemplation of her beauty; and the Lord give me grace to make good this
resolution. But then if it be a fault thus to behold, will it not be so also in
the woman that is thus beheld, (as the patient in adultery sins as well as
the agent) especially if she take as great pleasure in that, and deck and set
her self out to that end that she may be thus looked on?


C. Saint Chrysostom answers that question also, that it is a great fault, and
a kind of Adultery in that woman, that thus not only exposes and prostitutes
her self to the eyes of men, but so dresses and sets her self out, and calls
to her the eyes of all men; if she strike not, wound not others, she shall yet
be punished, for she has mixed the potion, prepared the poison, though she has
not given the cup to drink; yes, and has done that too, though none be found
that will drink of it. It seems a piece of Christian chastity there is
required of women in this kind, that is not generally thought of.


S. I shall trouble you no longer with this matter, only I desire to know,
what the two other verses in this period, of the eye and hand offending thee,
have to do in this matter?


C. They are the preventing of an objection, after this manner, upon the giving
of that severe prohibition, men will be apt to object. O but it is hard not to
love that which is beautiful, and not to behold what is loved. To this
foreseen objection he answers before hand; It Is hard and unpleasant indeed,
but more unpleasant sure to be a frying in hell. It Were better to put the very
eye out of the head, to cut off the hand, even that which were most useful and
honorable, then to be cast into hell. Much more when that is not required to
cut off, or pull out those members, but only to turn away the eye from the
alluring object, to keep the hand from immodest touches, nay, (says
Chrysostom) This is a most mild and soft precept; it would have been much
more hard, if he had given command to converse with and look curiously on
women, and then to abstain from them.


S. But what has the hand to do with that business of looking?


C. The mention of it is by way of analogy or reduction to that former precept,
and does imply that that former prohibition of looking is to be extended to all
other things of the like nature; all libidinous touches, etc. and whosoever
absteines from the grosser act, and yet indulgeth himself such pleasures as
these with any but his own wife, sins also against this law of Christ.


S. Divorce. What was the state of this business under the law?


C. The ten Commandments mention nothing of it, and therefore you see the
proemiall form is changed; not as before [Ye have heard that it has been
said to them of old] (the character of the Commandments) but only, [It has
been said] which notes that there is somewhat in Moses his writings about it,
though not in the Ten Commandments. And what that is, you will see, Deuteronomy.
24. 1. to the fifth, to this purpose, That he that has married a wife and
likes her not for some uncleanenesse which he has found in her, he is
permitted to give her a bill of divorcement, and send her out of his house: and
in that case she may marry again; and though her second husband do so too, or
dye, yet the former husband not permitted to take her again for his wife. Now
that which was there said, is no justification of that giving a bill of
Divorcement upon any occasion, save only that of fornication, (as appears by
Christ's testimony, Mat. 19. 3. to the 10th.) But an indulgence of legal
impunity granted to the Jews, Because of the hardness of their hearts, i. e.
Because they were such an unruly stubborn people that if they should have
incurred punishment from the Magistrate by putting away a wife which they liked
not, they would have been likely to have killed those hated wives, that so
they might freely have married again. So again, Mark. 10. 4, 5. Where though
it be called a precept, v. 5. yet but a sufferance, v. 4. i. e. a precept of
permission, or a law that this shall be tolerated without incurring of legal
punishment. Or if he, contrary to law and justice, do put her away, then the
precept is, that he give her a Bill of Divorcement in her hand. Nothing in the
whole action, precept, but that it was thus in the Old Testament; (only a
permission or not punishing of such divorces) may appear by Mal. 2. 16. The
Lord says, That [he hates putting away] speaking, as the context shows, not
of every kind of Divorce, but particularly of the putting away a wife for
barrenness, without other default; of which the Prophet brings in the women
complaining, and to show the unjustice of it, seuseth the example of Abraham,
under the title of (...): one, v. 10. who desiring issue and having none, would
not yet put away his wife.


S. What does Christ now in his new Law, in this matter?


C. He recalls that old indulgence or permission; for coming now to give more
grace then the law brought with it to the Jews, he thinks not fit to yield so
much to the hardness of men's hearts, as to remit them from legal punishments
here, if they shall use that liberty so contrary to the vow of wedlock; and
therefore in Christian Commonwealths leaves the punishing of such offenders as
free as it had been among the Jews, had it not been for that sufferance. As
for the sin and consequent punishment of it in another world, though he need
not ampliate that, (there having not been any such privilege of immunity
before to the Jews, only such punishments, according to the nature of the Old
Testament, not so explicitly spoken of) yet he seems to intimate it in
saying, [He causes her to commit adultery, and him that marries her] which
sure is punishable in another world by that punishment which awaits adulterers
themselves; and if after such divorcement he himself marry again, he
commits adultery, and is in that name liable, Matthew. 19. 3.


S. But what, is no kind of Divorce lawful now under Christ?


C. Yes, clearly, that which is here named in case of fornication i. e. If the
wife prove false to the husbands bed, and take in any other man, it will then be
lawful by Christ's law for the husband to give her a Bill of Divorce, i e.
legally to sue it out, and so put her away. The reason being because of the
great inconveniences and mischeifes that such falsenesse brings into the
family; children of another body to inherit with (or perhaps before) his own,
etc. which sort of reasons it is that this matter of Divorce now under Christ,
is cheifely built on, (and not, as might be imagined, that of the conjugall
contract, for that being mutual, would as well make it lawful for the wife to
put away the husband, which is no where permitted in the Old or New Testament)
this liberty being peculiar to the husband against the wife, and not common to
the wife against her husband, because I say those family inconveniences do not
follow the falsenesse of the husband, as they do that of the wife; to which
may be also added one other, because the wife has by promise of obedience made
her self a kind of subject, and owned him a Lord, and so has none of that
authority over him (an act of which, putting away seems to be) which he by
being Lord has over her.


S. Is there no other cause of Divorce now legal among Christians, but that in
case of fornication?


C. I cannot define any because Christ has named no other.


S. But me thinks there is a place in Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 12. from whence I
might conclude that Christ has named some other. For when Saint Paul says
that the brother, i. e. believer, having an unbeleiving wife, if she be willing
to live with him, he must not put her away, he prefaceth it in this manner: To
the rest speak I, not the Lord. Whence I infer, that in Saint Paul' s
opinion Christ had not then said that unbeleife was not a lawful cause of
Divorce; and consequently I conclude that Christ had left place for some other
cause beside fornication, and therefore I should guess that the naming of
fornication here was not exclusive to all other causes, but only to those that
were inferior to it, (and that would make it contrary enough to what was by
Moses permitted, to wit, [for every cause] Mat. 19. 13.) and that if there
should be found any other cause as great as that, it might be conceived
comprehended under that example named of fornication; and then I shall be bold
to interpose my opinion, that sure if the wife should attempt to poison, or
otherwise to take away the life of the husband, this would be as unsupportable
an injury as adultery, and so as fit a cause of a Divorce, as that.


C. You have proposed an objection of some difficulty. I must apply answer to
it by dividing it into parts, and making my returns severally. 1. That in that
place, 1 Cor. 7. if the words [speake I, not the Lord] did belong to the words
immediately following, to wit, those which you name, your collection from
thence would be reasonable. But I conceive they belong rather to the 15 verse
precisely, That in case the unbeleiver will not live with the beleiver, then
upon her or his departure, the beleiver, man or woman, shall not be in bondage,
(i. e. constreined to live unmarried,) but may freely marry in this case: and
of this it may truly be said, That Christ had said nothing; and so, This speak
I, not the Lord. Now that this stands so far from that preface, falls out,
because when the Apostle had resolved to say this, that he might say it
seasonably, it was necessary for him to premise those other cases, v. 12, 13.
and give a reason for them, v. 14. and then this, v. 15. would come in
intelligibly. If this interpretation be acknowledged, then the ground of the
whole objection is taken away. And if it be objected again, that by that
liberty of Saint Paul's, the woman beleiver being put away by the infidel
husband, is permitted to marry again, which seems contrary to Christ's saying,
That he that puts her away except in case of fornication, causes her to
commit adultery, and whosoever shall marry her commits adultery. For if in
any case but fornication she be caused to commit adultery, and he that marries
her commit adultery, how in this other case of unbeleife is she free to marry?
To this I answer also. 1. That if all this be granted, 'twill yet be nothing to
the present purpose; for it concludes only against Saint Paul's judgment; that
he did contrary to Christ's in giving this liberty, not that Christ had said
this, which Saint Paul says, he had not said, which is the only thing that
this objection is built on. But then, 2. Though that which Saint Paul here
says, be somewhat which Christ has not said before, and so an example of [I,
not the Lord] yet it is not opposite or contrary to what Christ had said; for
though Christ say, that he that divorces (not for fornication) causes his wife
to commit adultery; yet sure his meaning is only that as much as in him lies,
he causes her, by putting her to some ill exigents, which may perhaps tempt
her to harlotry; but not that he forces her to this, infallibly or
irresistibly; for sure it is possible one who is so divorced, may live chaste;
yea and though she have leave to marry, live single ever after. And that is the
meaning of that phrase, [causeth her to commit adultery.] You may be assured by
this, that Christ mentions it only as an aggravation of the man's fault, who by
this puts her on that hazard, of which he is no whit less guilty, though she
resist that temptation, and escape that danger. And for that part of our
Saviors speech, [he that marries her that is divorced, commits adultery] it
belongs not to the matter, for that [her] there, is not [her] that is divorced
for some other cause; for she having merited nothing, no reason that she should
be punished by that bondage; or consequently that he that marries her, being
now free, should be thought to offend; but the [her] is she that is divorc't
for fornication, and of such an one it is very reasonable on both sides, though
the truth is, Christ had affirmed nothing of it. Thus you see the place to the
Corinthians cleared. I shall only, (by the way,) add, that v. 12. those words
[to the rest] seeming to be opposed to the [the married] v. 10. as though he
spoke now to the rest, i. e. those that are unmarried, is a mistake caused by
the English Translation, for those that v. 12. he speaks to, are married also.
The word (...)
would better be rendered, for the rest, or [to the rest] referring not to
persons, but things, [concerning the rest.]

Having answered now your first part of the objection, I proceed to the second,
and answer, that there were again some reason in the inference, if first,
Saint Paul had thus affirmed, (which we have showed he did not.) And 2. There
could be produced any cause so justifiable for Divorce, as Adultery is. But of
this I am persuaded that there can nonebe produced because in all
considerations none is so great and so irreparable an injury, as this; none
that repentance can so little set right again, the possibility of which is one
great reason why other injuries are not thought fit by Christ to be matter of
Divorce. For though it be possible some other sins may be as great or greater
then adultery, (as idolatry, heathenisme, for example) yet because this is not
so contrary to, and destructive of the conjugall state, therefore it is not
thought fit to cause Divorce, by Saint Paul, (nor as appears, by Christ
neither) though to cause damnation, (which is far greater punishment then
Divorce) it be abundantly sufficient. As for the having attempted the life of
the husband, (which leads me to answer the last part of the objection) I shall
make no doubt to say this is not equal to the having committed adultery. For
first, It appears that though it was attemped, yet it was not acted, (fot if
it had, that would have made a real divorce indeed) and the attempt, 1. Is not
so punishable, as the act; And 2. It may by repentance be repaired again, and
the rest of the life be the more happy and comfortable with such a penitent
wise; and this very possibility is considerable: and that that was the reason
why the beleiving husband is advised not to put away the unbeleeving wife, [for
he knows not whether he may not convert and save the heathen wife by living
with her] has place here also. To this purpose I will tell you a story, of a
Master and Servant, which you may accommodate to an husband and wife. Les
Digueirs, after Constable Videl in the life of Les Digue^rs.
of France, had learned that his man that served him in his chamber, was
corrupted to kill him: being in his chamber with him, and none else, he gives
him a sword and dagger in his hand, and takes another himself; then speaks
thus to him, You have been my servant long, and a gallant fellow, why would
you be so base as to undertake to kill me cowardly? here be weapons, let it be
done like a man: and so offered to fight with him; The servant fell at his
feet, confessed his vile intention, begged pardon, promised unfeined
reformation. His Master pardons him, continues him in place of daily trust in
his chamber, he never has treacherous thought against him after. So you see
this crime may be repaired again, and no danger in not divorcing. But then 2.
If there were danger of being killed still, yet may the inconvenience of living
with one who has been false to the bed, be beyond that. Love is strong as
death, jealousy cruel as the grave; the coals thereof are coals of fire, which
has a most vehement flame, says Solomon. And if that be thus caused, what a
hell is that man's life? and that is far worse then death, especially then the
mere danger of it; and beside, if she also have repented of her fornication,
and the husband be satisfied that she has so; yet the disgrace of having been
so used, and perhaps the continual presence of a base brat in the family will
be yet more unsupportable then that possible danger of loosing a life. For you
see how ordinary it is for men to contemn their lives, to endanger, nay often
actually to loose them rather then part with reputation or any such trifling
comfort of life; on this maxim of the natural man's, that it is better to dye
then live miserably or infamously. And though Christianity curb that gallantry
of the world, yet still it commands us to contemn life when it comes in
competition with obedience to him; which here it does, or may do, if Christ
command (as his words affirm he does) this not-divorcing for any kind of
cause, but fornication. The same might be said in diverse other things where we
are apt to interpose the excuse of extreme necessity (i. e. danger of loosing
our lives) when we are not inclined to do what God bids us do. Where 1. If we
did thus dye, it were martyrdom, and that the greatest preferment of a
Christian. 2. Seeing it is but danger, and not certain death, we may well
entrust our lives in Gods hands by doing what he bids us; and think our lives
safest when so ventured. And so I have satisfied your scruples.


S. Other scruples in this matter of divorce I think I could make to you; but
I hope neither you nor I by the blessing of God shall ever have occasion to
make use of the knowledge of such niceties.

Of Swearing.
I shall hasten you to that next period which conteines a prohibition so
necessary to be instilled into young men, least the sin get in fashion, and
that root so deep in them that 'twill not suddenly be weeded out, and that is
of Swearing. Be pleased therefore after Christ's method in delivering, and yours
formerly in expounding, to tell me the meaning of the old Commandment which by
the style of the preface, [Ye have heard that it has been said to them of old
time] I collect to be the third of the ten Commandments?


C. The first part of it, [Thou shall not forswear thy selfe] is clearly the
third Commandment; but the latter part [But shall perform to the Lord thine
oathes] is taken out of other places of the law, to explain the meaning of the
former, and to express it to be, as literally it sounds, against perjury, or
nonperformance of promissiory oaths;


S. But the third Commandment is in Exodus, [Thou shall not take the name of
the Lord thy God in vaine] is that no more, then [Thou shall not forswear thy
self?]


C. No more undoubtedly, if either Christ may judge, who here says so; or the
importance of the words in the original be observed. For to take or lift up
the name of God, is an Hebrew style, to swear; and the word [vaine] and
[false] is all one, as 1 the Hebrew writers (...)
generally acknowledge, 2. that of idle word enforces, Matt. 12. 36. being
there applied to that not only vain but false speech v. 24. [He casts out
Devils by the Prince of Divels] 3. Because the very word that Exodus 20. 7. is
(...)
rendered vain in the third commandment, is used Deuteronomy. 5. 18. in the ninth
commandment for (and is so rendered by us) false witness. and so Ps. 24. 4.
lifting up the soul unto vanity (that phrase of lifting up the soul,
referring to that form of swearing by the life) is expressed in the next words,
sworn deceitfully. By all which it is clear, that to take Gods name in vain
is to forswear ones self.


S. But is nothing else reducible to this old Commandment?


C. Swearing simply taken, is not reducible, for besides that Oecumemus
the express words of Moses plainly permit it, thou shall swear by his name
Deuteronomy. 6. 13. 10. 20. The fathers say plainly, that to swear under Moses was
lawful. Yet perhaps foolish, wanton, (sure profane blasphemous) using of
God's name may be resolved to be there forbidden by reduction.


S. What then has Christ superadded to the old Commandment?


C. A total universal prohibition of swearing itself, making that as
unlawful now, as perjury was before.


S. Are no kind of oaths lawful now to a Christian?


C. That you may discern this matter clearly and distinctly, you must mark
two circumstances in our Savior's Speech, 1. That phrase v. 37. but but let
your communication, etc.] from whence one universal rule you may take, that to
swear in ordinary communication, or discourse, or conversation, is utterly
unlawful. 2. You may apply our Savior's prohibition to the particular matter
of Moses his law forementioned, and that was of promissory (not assertory)
oaths; and then adding to that the importance of the word [sweare] as it
differs from adjuration, or being sworn, taking an oath administered by those
who are in authority, you have then a second rule, That all voluntary, but
especially promissary oaths, are utterly unlawful now for a Christian.


S. What do you mean by voluntary oaths?


C. This, that no other impellent but my self, or my own worldly gain or
interest extort from me: for of these you must resolve, that if my oath be not
either for the glory of God, (as Saint Paul's oath Romans 1. 9. Gal. 1. 28. etc.
which were to stand upon record to posterity and to confirm the truth of God,
being in his Epistles, whereas in all the story of his conversation in the Acts
we never find that he did swear,) Or for the good of my Neighbor, (wherein
generally I as a private man am not to be judge, but to submit to the judgment
of the Magistrate legally calling me to testify my conscience, or to enter into
some oath for the good and peace of the public) or some such public
consideration, but only for my own interest etc. it is utterly unlawful.


S. Why did you add, but especially promissory oaths?


C. Because those are most clearly hear forbidden both by the aspect these
words have in the precedent, thou shall perform thy oaths, and by the precept
of Saint James in that matter. c. 5. 12. Let your yea, be yea; and your nay,
nay; i. e. let your promises and performances be all one, (the first yea
referring to the promise, the second to performance) which he there mentions as
a means to make all promissory oaths unnecessary; for he that is so just in
performing his word, there will be no need of his oath, and he that does use
oaths in that matter may be in danger to fall into lying or false speaking,
which is the meaning of those words (...) i. e. (...).
which we there render lest you fall into condemnation.


S. What is the meaning of those severalls that follow, Neither by heaven. etc?
Nay it not be, that I must not swear by them, but only by God? Or not swear
falsely, so much as by them?


C. No, but clearly this, that those lesser oaths taken in by some in civility
to God, whom they would not invoke in small matters, but yet would use this
liberty of swearing by other inferior things, are now utterly unlawful; a
Christian must not use any of those. Because every of these are creatures of
God (whose whole being consists in reference to him) and not to be subjected to
their lust to be tossed and defamed by their unnecessary oaths.


S. What is meant by the positive precept in the close, [but let your
communication be yea yea, nay nay.] Is it, as you expounded Saint James [Let
your yea be yea, etc.] i. e. let your promises and performances be answerable
to one another?


C. No, there is difference betwixt the phrases, Let your yea be yea signifies
that, (as on on the other side, yea and nay, signifies lovity, 2 Cor. 1. 19.)
But let your communication be yea yea, is this, in ordinary discourse you may
use an affirmation (that is one yea) and if occasion require an asseveration
(that is another yea,) and so again a negation and a phrase of some vehemence
(as a redoubling) to confirm it (that is nay nay:) and this will serve as a
good useful means to prevent the use of swearing, by assigning to that
purpose, some such asseveration which will serve as well, and therefore Christ
does not only forbid any more then this, but in a manner direct to the use of
this, as that which will help us to perform his precept.


S. There is yet one thing behind, the reason that this is backed with, for
whatsoever is more then this, comes of evill] what is meant by that?


C. Either that it comes from the evil one, Satan, who makes men unapt to
believe without oaths, that so he may make the free use of them the more
necessary: or from evil, i. e. that great kind of evil amongmen, the breaking
of promises, from whence this custom of adding oaths proceeds. By which is
also intimated, that oaths are here by Christ forbidden, not as things in
themselves evil, but as things which are not to be used but in affairs of
special moment, a reverence being due to them, which are therefore not to be
made too cheap.


S. Of revenge, or retaliating evil.
Be pleased then to advance to the next period, and the foundation of that laid
as formerly in the words of the law, [An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth,] which I see again by the variation of the preface from that which was
prefixed to the commands of the decalogue, not to be of that number, and yet is
the phrase also varied from that which was prefixed to that of divorce: There
only [it has been said] but here [ye have heard that it has been said.]
What is the reason of that?


C. It signifies that as it is less then a commandment of the law (i. e. is
no precept that every one should thus require an eye of him who had put out
his) so it is more then a bare immunity from earthly punishment to him that
should so require; (which I told you was all that was allowed in that of
divorce,) the truth is, this was by the law of nature, and Moses freely
permitted (and no sin then chargeable on him that did so) that he that had
lost any member of his body might, by way of revenge or retaliation, legally or
judicially require the like member of his, who had thus injured him, to be
taken from him. Deuteronomy. 19. 21. though among the Jews, this private men were not
to do on their own heads, but might by legal process, go to the Judges and
require this due from them.


S. What has Christ appointed in this matter?


C. It Is set down in these words, [But I say unto you that you resist not
evil.] Where the word which (...)
we render [evill] signifies not a thing but a person, the injurious man, or he
that has done the injury; and the word rendered [resist] notes not that that
our English commonly signifies; but peculiarly (...), ut praepositio (...) non
oppositionem sed retributionem not at utin voce (...) and (...) and (...)*
to retaliate, to return evil for evil; by which interpretation it is
directly answerable to what went before [eye for eye,] etc. and so is a denying
to Christians that liberty that before was allowed the Jews; that of revenge,
retaliation, returning those mischeifes to others, which we have received from
them.


S. What plain places of Scripture be there which prohibit this, so that I may
be induced, by the analogy of them, to believe this forbidden here?


C. One plain place there is, which seems to me to be a direct interpretation
of this, Romans 12. 17. Rendering to no man evil for evill] so again, v. 19.
Avenging not your selves] i. e. thus rendering evil to evil:] which is farther
explained by the following words, [but give place unto wrath] i. e. to Gods
revenge, as it follows [vengeance is mine, I will repay it, says the Lord.]


S. But how far does this precept of not revenging extend? To public
Magistrates, or only to private persons one toward another?


C. To this I shall answer by these several degrees. 1. That it does not
interpose in the Magistrates office, so as to forbid him to punish by way of
retaliation, if the laws of the land so direct him for his office being to
preserve the Kingdom in peace, Christ forbids not the use of any lawful
means to that end, but rather by the Apostle confirms it in his hand, by
saying, [he bears not the sword in vaine] and adding [he is Gods Minister, an
avenger for wrath to him that does ill.] By which is intimated that that sword
for vengeance, or punishment of offenders, which naturally belongs to God
only, is as far as respects this life, put into the hands of the lawful
Magistrate, with commission to use it, as the constitution of the Kingdom
shall best direct, either by way of retaliation, or otherwise; and what is done
thus by him, is to be counted Gods vengeance executed by him; and so no more
contrary to the prohibition of private revenge, then Gods own retributions
would be; which yet are mentioned by the Apostle as an argument to prove the
unlawfulness of ours, Romans 12. 19. Avenge not your selves, but rather give
place to wrath; leave all punishment to God, For it is written, vengeance is
mine: By which connection you may note by the way, that the motive why we should
not avenge our selves is (not that which some revengefull minds would be best
pleased with, because by our patience our enemies shall be damned the deeper,
as some would collect from Romans 12. 20. but) because the privilege of
punishing offenders, i. e. of vengeance, belongs peculiarly to God, and to none
but those to whom for things of this life he is pleased to communicate it.
Which I conceive to be the reason why upon this ground of vengeance belonging
to God only, set down in the end of Romans 12; The thirteenth to the Romans
begins with obedience to the higher powers, and their being ordained by God,
etc. This being thus set, it will follow 2ly. That Christ's prohibition belongs
only to those who have received the injuries, considered (whatsoever they are)
as private sufferers; and those are forbid two things; 1. Taking into their
own hands the avenging of themselves. 2. (and which is the special thing in
this place, the former being not by the law permitted to the Jews themselves,
though among the Heathen it was generally thought lawful to hurt them who had
injured us) desiring and thirsting, seeking and requiring even that revenge
which the law of man affords, with this reflection on himself, for the
satisfying his revengefull humor. This might Christ very reasonably prohibit,
it being before not commanded, but only permitted by Moses law; though forbid
the Magistrate thus to punish offenders he could not, without destroying that
law, which indeed to have done would not be thought reasonable for Christ, the
greatest part of the world being so far from Christians even now in times of
Christianity. Not that it is made utterly unlawful by Christ to prosecute any
who has wronged me; and bring him to legal punishment; for that the law of
man authorized and not contradicted by Christ, may and often does require of me;
and there is great difference between revenge and punishment: Nor that it is
unlawful to require reparations for an injury done me when the matter is
capable of it; nor to do the same for the good that may accrue to my brethren
by the inflicting such exemplary punishment on offenders; but that to require
this for the satisfying of my own revengefull humor besides or without the
reparation of the damage received by me, (as generally it is when I require an
eye for an eye; for in that case the pulling out of his eye will contribute
nothing toward the helping me to mine again) or again to require it in
contemplation of the farther inconvenience that may possibly befall me another
time if this pass unpunished, is thought fit by Christ to be interdicted us
Christians; who are bound, 1. By gratitude for what Christ has done to us in
pardoning of injuries, to go and do likewise, i. e. to pardon and not revenge
injuries. 2. By the law of faith to vanquish such fears, and depend on Gods
providence to defend us for the future, and not to be so hasty and follicitous
in using all possible means, however unlawful, for the future securing of our
selves. And all this seems to be the literal importance of that phrase, Romans
12. 19. [Not avenging our selves,] Whatever avenging is lawful, that is not
which reflecteth upon our selves, and our own immoderate passions; whether
that of anger, or that other of desire, a branch of which is this wordly
carking.

From these two thus set it will appear thirdly, what is to be said of wars
between one Kingdom and another, which are of a middle nature between the
revenge of the Magistrate upon the offender within his jurisdiction, and the
revenge of one private man upon another; this being between equals, and so
not of the first kind; and yet between public persons or bodies, and so not
of the second, which consequently will be only so far lawful, as it agrees
with the first; and unlawful as with the second.


S. In what respect may war be lawful? Or is it at all so?


C. That it is not absolutely unlawful, appears 1. By the Baptists answer to
the soldiers when they came to his Baptism, Luke 3. 14. where he forbids them
not that calling as unlawful. 2. By Christ's commending the Centurions faith
who was then a Soldier. 3. By Paul's using a band of soldiers against the
Treachery of the Jews. 4. By Saint Peter's baptizing of Cornelius without his
giving over the military employment. Now in what respect war may be lawful,
will appear, if we observe the causes of it. 1. If it be for the suppressing
of a sedition or rebellion at home, it is clearly lawful for the lawful
Magistrate, as having the power of the sword, 1. To preserve the peace of the
land. And 2. To punish and suppress the disturbers of it. In which case it is
impossible any war should be lawful on both sides; there being but one
supreme power in any Kingdom, (whether that consist of one, or of more
persons) and to that belonging the power of the sword, which whoever else
takes into his hand in any case usurpeth it, and therefore ought to perish by
the sword. 2. If betwixt one Kingdom and another, then the war may be
lawful again, in case one Kingdom does attempt the doing any eminent injury
to another, which by a war may possibly be averted from those whom the
Magistrates office binds him to protect. An eminent injury I say, and that
which is more hurtful then war, or taking up of arms, and that again, when
there is no arbitration, or other means of debating such controversies, or
averting such injuries to be had. And with these cautions, To hurt no peaceable
man, as near as may be; To shed as little blood as is possible; Not to
protract it out of desire of revenge, or gain; Not to use cruelty on captives,
on those that yield themselves, that desire quarter, on women, children,
husbandmen, etc. To give over war when any reasonable terms of peace may be
had; To take away nothing from the conquered, but the power of hurting. In
these cases and with these cautions as it is lawful to the Supreme Power to
use arms, so is it also to others his Subjects that have commission from him,
if they be satisfied of the justice of the cause; it being not imaginable that
any. Magistrate should by his own personal strength protect his Subjects
without the assistance of others with him.


S. But is it lawful for a private man for the repelling of any the greatest
injury from himself to kill another? Or if it be not, how can this war
against those who are not our Subjects and Rebels, but those who are out of our
power, and over whom we have no jurisdiction, and so we are but private men in
respect of them) be accounted lawful, seeing it is sure more sinful to kill
many then one?


C. To the first part of your question I answer, that a private man may not, by
the law of Christ, take away another life, for the saving his own goods, or
the repelling any such kind of injury from himself, because life is more then
goods: but if his life be attempted also, and no probable means to save it but
by taking away the others life, it may then be lawful to take away his life;
Christ having interposed nothing to the contrary, (where yet he that to save
another life, or rather then take it away, should venture and lose his own,
may be thought to do better and more honorably, in imitating Christ who laid
down his life for his enemies.) This then being granted, I say yet to the
second part of your question, that the same rule cannot be extended to the
making of war unlawful. 1. Because the Supreme Power who is supposed to
manage the war, has the sword put into his hand by God, (which the private
man had not;) and that not only to punish Subjects, but also to protect them:
2. Because it is his duty so to do, which he may not, (without sin against
them, and failing in discharge of trust) neglect; whereas the private man
having power of his own goods, may recede from that natural right of his;
deny himself, to follow Christ; and for his life it self may better thus part
with it, by leaving it to Gods tuition, then the Magistrate can another man's,
being entrusted by God to defend it, and by oath bound to perform that part of
his duty. And for the number of those whom a war endangers to kill, that will
be countervailed with the number of those whom it is intended to preserve,
whose peace and quiet living, if it may be gotten, is more valuable to them
then life it self deprived of that.


S. Well then, supposing war to be lawful, and these two kinds of wars to
be such, What other kind of lawful wars are there? Or be there any more?


C. It will be hard to name any other; and yet I shall not peremptorily say
there is no other, because some other perhaps may be found which will bear
proportion to one of these.

It will be easier to inform you in this matter by telling you what be the
special sorts of wars that are unlawful.


S. What be they?


C. 1. When one Nation fights with another for no other reason but because
that other is not of the true Religion; this is certainly unlawful. For 1. God
has not given any nation this jurisdiction over another. And 2. It Is against
the nature of Religion to be planted by violence or consequently by the sword;
and therefore much more is this unlawful for Subjects to do, against the
laws and governors under which they are placed.


S. But is not Religion the most precious thing of all? What then may we fight
for, if not for that?


C. It is the most precious thing indeed, and that to be preserved by all
lawful, proper, proportionable means; but then war or unlawful resistance
being of all things most improper to defend, or secure, or plant this; and it
being acknowledged unlawful for Peter to use the sword for the defense of
Christ himself, to do it merely for Religion, must needs be very unlawful.
Religion has still been spread and propagated by suffering, and not by
resisting: and indeed it being not in the power of force to constreine my
soul, or change my Religion, or keep me from the profession of it, arms or
resistance must needs be very improper for that purpose.


S. What other war is unlawful?


C. All manner of invasive war for the enlarging of our territories; for the
revenging of an affront; for the weakening of those that we see prosperous, and
consequently suspect it possible for them to invade us for the future; or in
any case, unless perhaps to get some reparation for some eminent injury done
to our nation which the nation cannot reasonably bear, nor yet hope for any
other way of reparation.


S. What is required to make it lawful for any private man to take arms?


C. Commission from the Supreme Powers under which he lives, and to whom he is
a Subject, and who have the power of the sword in their hand; and therefore as
in obedience to them, it is possible for a private man lawfully to take arms,
even when the Governors do it unlawfully, supposing that he think the cause
good upon the Supreme Powers undertaking it; so he that takes up arms only for
hire, or hope of honor etc. under one who is not his Magistrate, may, though
the cause be just for which the General fights, commit sin in fighting under
him.


S. What is there more that you think fit to teach me from this precept of not
retaliating, or not av enging the injurious?


C. It will be best given you by proceeding, and observing what Christ adds on
the back of this prohibition. But whosoever shall smite thee on thy right
check, turn to him the other also etc.


S. What is generally observable from those additions?


C. 1. The occasion of them, 2. The general nature of them wherein they all
agree and accord.


S. What is the occasion of them?


C. Christ's foresight of an objection, which upon occasion of the prohibition
precedent, men would be apt to make, thus: If when one does me an injury I may
not revenge it on him my self, or require a legal revenge upon him, then by
this easiness he will be taught to multiply those injuries; to smite me on the
other cheek, when he sees me take that so patiently; to take away my cloak
also, if I am so tame as to let him carry away my coat without any payment; to
make me go a stage of two miles with him next time, if I take the first
oppression so patiently. To this foreseen objection, our Savior answers by
commanding us to perform the former duty, and put this feared hazard to the
venture, intimating that this is not sure to be the reward and consequent of
such patience. But yet if it should be certainly so, yet we Christians must
rather submit to this also, then give the raines to our revenge on that
consideration; we must venture that consequent with Christ who has commanded
us this patience, and be armed for the worst that can befall us in his service.
From whence you see what obligation it is, that lies upon us toward those acts
which are accounted so ridiculous among men. Not that we are presently to turn
the left cheek to him that strikes us on the right, to give the cloak to him
that takes the coat, etc. but to perform the precept of non-revenge, and not
to be tempted from it by any foreseen inconvenience: Yea and really to make
that adventure, if I cannot perform that obedience without it, rather let him
take the cloak also, then seek ways of revenge for such former trespasses.
Which will be nothing unreasonable, if we consider, 1. That Christ can preserve
us from farther injuries if he think good, as well without as with our
assistance; and indeed that patience is often blessed by him to be a more
prosperous means of this, then self revenge would be; it being Christ's tried
rule to overcome evil with good, 2. That if we should chance to suffer any
thing by obeying him, he will be able to repair us in another world.


S. What now is the general nature of these appendant precepts, wherein they
all agree and accord?


C. That they are all tolerable and supportable injuries both in respect of
what is done already, and what may be consequent to our bearing them. For thus
the loss of the coat, or cloak also is a moderate injury; the smiting on the
cheek or cheeks a very unconsiderable pain; and only valued for the
contumely annexed to it, which yet Christians had been before, v. 11. (and
should after by the sufferings of Christ be) taught to support cheerfully; and
the going a mile or two a very tolerable invasion on their liberty, and a very
easy post, being compared with the ordinary stages, and from thence 1. The
reasonableness and agreeableness of Christ's commands to our strength
appears; that he provides us such easy yoakes and light burdens. even when
we think he uses us most hardly, 2. The indulgence which he allows us in
matters of greater concernment; where the damage or trespass is not so
supportable, he there intimates a liberty to use some means to save or repair
our selves, (which may be extremely useful if not necessary to our temporal
Subsistence) though not to work revenge on the enemy for what is past, by
exacting any punishment on his person, by endeavoring to trouble him, who has
troubled us, (which cannot bring in any profit to us.)


S. What now is particularly observable from each of these, and 1. from the
first?


C. That for light injuries done to our bodies which leave no wound behind
them, nor are the disabling or weakening of our bodies, nor bring any
considerable pain with them, we are not to seek any way of private, no nor so
much as of legal revenge, no not though the injury were a contumely also, and
the putting it up, a reproach in the account of the world, and withal a
possible nay probable means to bring more upon me of the same making, this
thus set, is my Christian duty, which I cannot omit without sin; and which
for us to perform or Christ to command is so far from unreasonable, that the
contrary if we observe the experience of it, is much more unreasonable, and the
seeking revenge ordinarily subjects us to greater inconveniences, to more and
more dangerous blows, many times, if we become our own champions, and avenge
our selves; and to more considerable trouble and charge, if we seek it from
the Court of Judicature.


S. What do you in particular observe from the second?


C. 1 The word rendered [sue at (...)
law] may also signify to strive, or contend with thee any other way, and so
take away thy coat from thee, (and in this case rather loose that and more,
then either hurt or malign him) and it is not improbable that it may so
signify here, because Saint Luke reads [him that takes away thy coat,
forbid not. etc.] i. e, do not by contrary (...)
violence or hurting of him thus repel him. If it refer to the former, then
we learn that suing at the law, though it be meant as a remedy for trespasses,
is often used as an instrument to do them. 2. That another having wronged me by a
suit, and gotten an unjust verdict against me does not make it Christian for me
to attempt the like on him. 3. That I must not stand so punctually on my right
of dominion or propriety in my goods, as to design revenge on every one
whosoever shall in the least matter entrench on it, which, beside that Christ's
prohibition makes sin in a Christian, the very delays, and expencefullnesse
of Courts makes unreasonable and absurd for any man to do. Many losses are more
supportable. then such a costly means of repairing them: Yet this not so far
to be extended, but that he that 1. By no arbitration can get his own. Or 2.
that desires only to obtain decision of any controversy, Or 3. he that by
this means may defend a widow or orphane, Or 4. provide for his own family.
Or 5. enable himself to relieve the poor, may lawfully in a matter of great
moment enter a suit at law.


S. What from the third?


C. That the same rule holds for my liberty, that did for my body and estate,
that every diminution of it must not enrage me either to a private or legal
revenge on the invader: the sum of all is, that small supportable injuries of
any kind we Christians must bear without hurting again, or so much as
prosecuting or impleading the injurious. In weightier and more considerable
matters, though we may use means. 1. To defend our selves. 2. To get legal
reparations for our losses, yet even in those the giving any way to revengefull
desires, or desireing to give him any smart, or pain that brings no real
gain, or ease, or advantage to us, save only the satisfying our revengefull
humor, is still utterly unlawful.


S. But what is that, that follows in the close of this period, v. v. 42, Give
to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou
away?] And how comes it in this place?


C. The substance of it is a command of universal, unlimited liberality
according to our power to all that are in need, and a direction to one special
kind of works of mercy, the lending (without all exaction of use for the
loan) to those, that are in present want, and may by such present supplies for
present exigence, be taught a way of thriving in the world, and getting out
from those difficulties of fortune. In which case the lending for a time, and
after that time the requiring mine own again, may do some men as much,
perhaps more good, by obligeing them to industry, and providence, and fidelity,
then giving to some others might have done.


S. What connection is there betwixt this precept of liberality, and the
non-revenge immediately preceding.


C. It Is this, 1. That forgiving, and giving, the two special works of our
charity toward men, should always go together; one never does so well, as when
the other is joined with it. Revenge will blast our liberality; and the coveteous
illiberall heart will defame the most perfect patience. 2. That the practice of
liberality will help us to think it reasonable not to meditate Revenge, and
withal demonstrate our patience of injuries etc. to be no pusillanimous
cowardly act, because I dare not resist him, but only an act of obedience unto
Christ, in doing as he has done, both for patience and liberality, my
Christian charity obligeing me to one as well as the other.


S. Of loving enemies
What now is the groundwork of the next period?


C. The repetition of the old law of loving neighbors and hating enemies.


S. Is there any such thing in the law of Moses, or Nature, that we should hate
our enemies, and love none butneighbours?


C. I shall tell you as clearly as I can what both those laws have done, in
this matter.


S. What has the law of Moses done?


C. For the loving of the Neighbor, i. e. the fellow Jew, it has commanded to
love him as thy self, Lev. 19. 18. and not to avenge nor bear any grudge
against him; from which, though it were no exclusion of the like to other
countrymen, yet it is very true that the Jews took occasion of advantage to
deny all kindness and exercise of offices of common humanity to all others
unless they became Proselytes to them, Now this they did without any authority
of their law, which therefore Christ by the parable of the good Samaritan,
shows to belong to the loving of (and showing mercy to) others beside their
own country men, and extending the meaning of the word [neighbour] to all
those who are of the same common stock with us, and are men as well as our
selves: though the truth is, God by prescribing the Jews peculiar meats, and
forbiding others that were familiarly used by the Nations, did consequently
interdict them any special familiarity of converse with the Nations; by way of
caution, lest they should be corrupted by them who were at that time so
extremely Idolatrous; which rule consequently was to be accounted temporary,
and to last no longer then the reason of it. But then, for the hating of
enemies, it is not to be thought that there was any such precept given to them,
of hating, either all but their own country men, or even all their very
enemies. Thus much only toward it we find in the law, that though the Jews
were commanded to do courtesies to their enemies of their own country, to
rescue the enemies Ox out of the ditch, etc. yet they are forbid to enter any
friendship, affinity, league with the seven nations, Hittites, Amorites, etc.
or to show any mercy to them; which yet must not be extended to the commanding
all manner of mortal hatred against them, but this within certain limits;
they were to offer them conditions of Peace, and to permit them to redeem
their lives, if they desired it, by servitude, Deuteronomy. 20. 10, 11. and though
upon not accepting of conditions of peace, they were to have no pity on them,
but to destroy them utterly, yet this belonged only to those of that age;
Solomon does not so, but only levies a tribute of bond-service upon them 1
King. 9. 20, 21. After the same manner were they to deal with the Amalekites,
to have war with them for ever. Ex. 17. 16. Deuteronomy. 25. 19. and with some
difference, with the Moabites, and Ammonites. In all which nothing can be
observed contrary to the law of nature, or humanity; for the same power that
the Magistrates on earth have over malefactors, the same sure must be yielded
God over Nations and Governors of them, to put them to death by what means he
please. This execution he was pleased to commit to the people of the Jews,
after a long time of patience, when those natione had filled up the measure of
their rebellion, Lev. 18. 14. So that this of hating enemies] cannot be
accounted of as any common general command, for it held not generally against
any but these forenamed nations; but as a special, particular sentence of
Gods, to be at that time executed on them. And although, the truth is, the
Jews did generally resolve it lawful to kill or spoil any that were
strangers from the religion of the true God; yet by the limiting of Gods
command for such execution to these forenamed, and that with this reason,
because they had filled up the measure of their iniquities (which when it is,
none but God can judge of) it is evident that this was an error in the Jews,
and that the rather because at this time when Christ spoke, they were subject
to the Romans, and had no power of the sword in their hands; in which case
those former commands of war with Ameleck, (much more with other idolatrous
Nations, against whom it was not appointed) became utterly out-dated, and the
law of nature was to prevail; which commends love and charity to all men.


S. You promised also to show me what the law of Nature had done in this
matter. I pray what is it?


C. We have no better way now to judge of that then by the writings and sayings
of the wisest natural men; the sum of which is this; That all men are to be
loved and obliged by us; No man to be hurt or disobliged but he who has first
injured me; in which case the great Philosopher thinks it a reproveable thing
to love an enemy, Arist: Top.
(as to hate a friend) but withal, the moderatest, and wisest, and most
elevated minds, though they would not command or oblige all men to love
enemies, do yet commend it as most honorable so to do, and give many
excellent reasons for it; and conclude, that the wise and good man has no
enemy. So that from all this the short is, that the Jews taking some advantage
from those forementioned commands of Moses, and mistaking them, did think it
lawful to hate others of different Religions, i. e. all other Nations, (and
the same may be observed of the Grecians toward the rest of the world under the
title of Barbarians) but in this did they both against the law of Moses, as
has been showed, and against the law of Nature; by which, hating or hurting
is avowed only in case of injuries done, and even then also the contrary
commended; and so that which Christ has here to do, is partly to recall and
reform the Jews to the law of nature, and to command that which that
commended, partly to advance and set it higher then the law of the Jews had
required of them before.


S. What then is now the law of Christ in this matter?


C. It is set down, v. 44. But I say unto you, love your enemies, etc. to the
end of this Chapter. The sum of which is, that other men's faults or sins
against us (nay against God himself, for the Jews enemies, the people of the
seven Nations, Amorites, etc. being most detestable sinners before God, are
here referred to in this word, Enemies) give not us any dispensation for the
non-payment of that great debt of our nature, love to all our kind. It Is true
indeed the passions and affections that our nature is subject to, do incline
us to revenge against our enemies; or if we can conquer that, yet we cannot
choose but make a distinction between friends and foes, and at least have a
great coldness and indifference to those who have deserved so ill at our
hands. But Christ is come to mortify those affections of rage and revenge; and
to lead us higher then nature would bring us; to affections, and words, and
actions of kindness, and benignity to those that have expressed the contrary of
every of these toward us.


S. But is it not abundantly sufficient, if my affections and behavior toward
mine enemy, be not like his to me, unkind, retaliating of injuries, etc? Is
there any more required of me?


C. Yes undoubtedly, of a Christian; who is to transcribe that copy, that
Christ's own dealing with us when we were enemies, did set us. I must not only
negatively not hate, or curse, or pursue with injuries; but love, and bless,
and do good, and pray for my greatest enemy.


S. What is meant by Loving him?


C. That denotes the affection of charity, and kindness, and benignity toward
him: 1. Wishing him all the good in the world, but that especially which he
most wants, the good of his soul, conviction of sin, reformation, etc. 2.
Pitying and compassionating him, and that the more for being mine enemy,
because that implies a sin in him, which is of all things the most proper
matter of compassion. 3. Being cordially affected toward him.


S. What is meant by Blessing him?


C. The word in Greek, and the opposition to cursing, (i. e. evil or bitter
speaking) notes kindness and (...).
freindlinesse of language; giving them all freindly and courteous words, who
have nothing but railing and evil speaking for us; commending in them whatever
is capable of it, though they do nothing but defame and backbite us.


S. What is meant by Doing good to them?


C. All outward real effects and actions of charity. Such are alms if they be
in want; feeding, giving to drink, clothing them, when they are hungry,
thirsty, naked; comfort if in any distresses; Counsel if in any difficulty;
rescuing their goods, etc. if we see them in danger; admonishing them in a
freindly manner, and such as may be most likely to prevail with them when we
see them falling into any sin, reproving and correcting fatherly, when we see
them fallen: In a word, contributing our utmost to the good of their bodies,
estates, families, reputations, but especially their souls; and all this
without any tincture of our revenge, or rage mixing with it.


S. What is meant by Praying for them?


C. Desiring of God for them whatsoever they want. 1. Pardon of sin with an
expression of my free pardoning them. 2. Grace for amendment of life. 3. All
other blessings temporal and spiritual which they stand in need of.


S. This is a duty of some difficulty, what help can you direct me to, to
facilitate the performance of it?


C. Many considerations there are which will tend to that end. Three there are
here named.


S. What be they?


C. The first is the example of God, who shows mercy to sinners, who are his
enemies; and in the outward disspensation of temporal blessings, gives as
liberal a portion many times to the wicked, unthankful provokers, as to his
good servants; and for the common advantages of life, Sun and Rain,
dispenses them generally in an equality to all. And then for us to do the
like, is a God-like thing; the greatest dignity that our nature is capable of.


S. What is the second help?


C. The consideration of the reward which God has decreed for such who do
this, and that proportioned to their actions; retribution of good to evil, of
mercy and happiness, though we are sinners and enemies. Whosoever does but
think of that, how much the joies of Heaven for eternity are beyond the
pleasure of a little revenge for the present, will never think fit to make
such an unequal exchange, to lose so rich a reward for so poor a pleasure.


S. What is the third help?


C. The consideration of what is done by all others the vilest and wickedest
men in the world. For such were the Publicanes accounted, and yet they could
think themselves obliged to love their friends, and satisfy that obligation;
they could use civilities, and courteous compellations and salutations to their
neighbors, etc. And if we who are bound to exceed the Scribes and Pharisees,
the strictest sect among the Jews, shall be but in the same rank with
Publicanes, (who are otherwhere put with heathens, and harlots, and sinners)
the vilest and most abominable of all men; this will sure be a great reproach
to us Christians.


S. What other motives can you add in this matter, why I should love my
enemies?


C. 1. That by this means I shall conquer my self, my unruly passions, with a
most glorious heroical piece of victory. 2. That by this I shall preserve my
self in a great calmness and quiet of mind; which thoughts of revenge
wholly deprive me of. 3. That this is of all others the most probable way of
overcoming my enemies; Revenge being a means of exasperating and enflaming
him, charity of melting him. Which if I do, I first get a friend for an enemy,
and secondly, have the honor and claim to the reward due to them, that
convert sinners from the error of their ways. 4. That this is a way of
excelling all other men in the world; none but Christians thinking themselves
obliged to do this. 5. That this is the special way of Christian perfection,
and is so called in the close of this Chapter, Be ye perfect, as your Father
which is in Heaven is perfect. In stead of which, Saint Luke reads, 6. 36. Be
ye merciful, etc. nothing this mercy, or alms, or benignity to enemies to be
the highest degree of Christian perfection.


S. I beseech God by his renewing quickening spirit to mortify the contrary
sin, and work this truly Christian grace in my heart. You have past through
the fifth Chapter, and so Christ's Reformations of, and Additions to the Old
Commandment. I will not question why Christ reformed or improved no more of
them, it is sufficient to me that he has not; which being an act of his
wisdom, it is not forman to question, but acquiesce in.


C. You judge aright, yet do I conceive that two other Commandments of the
second Table Christ has improved in this Sermon. The ninth there of not
bearing false witness, he has improved into not judging, c. 7. 1. the last of
not coveting, into taking no thought, c. 6. 25. etc. And as for the fifth
(which is the only one of the second Table now left out, there may be
particular reason for it, because that honor of father and mother, obedience
to superiors, Magistrates; etc. was by the Jewish law advanced so high, even
to prohibiting of thoughts of evil against such (which say the jews, is the
only case wherein thoughts are prohibited) that there was no need or almost
possibility of setting it higher. Let us now proceed to the next, the sixth
Chapter, and consider what first we shall fall upon.


LIB. III.
S. WHat is the first general aim or design of this next part of the Sermon
beginning, c. 6?


C. The regulating of three great Christian duties, Almes-giving, Prayer, and
Fasting. Three so necessary considerable offices of a Aquinas 2. 2. qu. 85.
art. 3. ad 2.
Christian, that learned Divines have resolved them to be the three special
Christian sacrifices, or acts of divine worship; the first out of our estates;
the second of our souls; the third from our bodies; which are the three
principal parts of a man, every one therefore obliged to pay its tribute of
acknowledgment to the Creator.


S. I shall then presume them worthy of our distinct survey, and to that
purpose pitch upon that first, which I see first placed that of Alms giving,
and expect what method you will propose to me as most proper to give me a
clear sight of what Christ has thought fit to represent to me concerning it?


C. I shall reduce it summarily to these two heads, 1. A duty supposed, 2. A
caution interposed for the regulation of this duty.


S. What mean you by the duty spposed?


C. I mean this, that the duty of almes-giving here mentioned, is not so much
here commanded by Christ, as presumed and supposed, as a duty that both the law
of Nature, and of Moses, required of all men, Heathens and Jews before, and
therefore needed not to be commanded by Christ, but only to be thus honorably
mentioned by him as a duty that he meant not to evacuate, but confirm; so
far that he that would not observe it should be unworthy the title of a
Christian, nay of a Jew or Heathen man; all laws so strictly exacting it of
him.


S. The duty being so necessary, and yet only touch^ on or named here, you may
please a little to explain to me.


C. I will, by telling you, 1. That it is the same duty, (expressed by the same
word) that mercifullnesse is in the fifth Beatitude; but then 2. That it seems
here to be restreined to that one kind of mercifullnesse which consists in
giving; and that peculiarly of releife corporal to them that want it, and
therefore it will not be pertinent in this place to speak to you of any branch
of mercifullnesse, but of that which we ordinarily call Giving of alms.


S. What do you think fit to tell me of that?


C. Only these two things, as most proper for your direction in this duty, the
first for the substance of the duty, the second for the most convenient manner
of performing it.


S. What for the substance of the duty?


C. That I am bound by all laws of Nature, of Moses, of Christ, as God has
enabled me, to relieve those that are in want, the hungry, the naked, the
fatherless, and widow. etc. destitute of worldly succor, the doing of which
is called pure religion or worship, (...).
by Saint James, c. 1. 27.


S. What directions have you for the most convenient manner of performing it?


C. This one especially (which St Paul. 1 Cor. 16. 2. has given me occasion to
think on) that every rich man or thriving man, every one that either has
constant revenue, or profitable trade, should lay by him in store, as God has
prospered him, for the use of the poor; dedicating yearly, or monthly, or
weekly, such or such a proportion for this purpose, and seperating it from the
rest of the heap, that it may be ready for such uses, as the providence of God
shall offer to us.


S. How will this be best done?


C. By a yearly valuation of my income, whether of rents, or gains by
trading, and setting a part a reasonable proportion of that, and then dividing
that gross proportion into as many parts, as there be weeks in the year; and
then every Lords day (according to the Apostles direction) or otherwise
weekly, to put into the poor man's bag, or box, or pocket, such a just
propottion, which from that time I am to account of as none of mine, but the
poores propriety; which I cannot take from them again but by stealth, that I
say not sacrilege. This way of setting a part before hand will be very useful
both for the resisting of coveteous thoughts, which will be apt still to
intercurre, when objects of charity offer themselves; and also for the having
provision ready at hand, to give when we would be willing to give, which
otherwise perhaps would sometimes be wanting; and the doing this thus weekly,
will make the sum thus parted with so insensible, that we shall not miss out
of our estates, what is thus consecrated.


S. But I pray what proportion yearly should I thus design.


C. The exact ptoportion or quotum, I cannot prescribe you, the Scripture
having defined nothing in it; but by commending liberality, and voluntary and
cheerful giving, rather intimating that there is no set proportion to be
defined, but to be left to every man's own breast, how to proportion his free
will offering: For although one place there be that seems to require all to be
set apart for this purpose that comes in by way of gain from Gods prospering
hand, to wit that just now mentioned, 1 Cor. 16. 2. where he appoints that
every one set apart (...), treasuring up whatsoever he has gained, or thrived,
or been prospered, (not as we render it as God has prospered him, for it is
not [(...) as] but [(...) whatsoever] yet it appears that that was in a
peculiar case at that time, for the releiving the poor Christians at
Jerusalem, who were so many, and so few to relieve them then, that all that
could be spared was little enough for the turn; and therefore that can no more
make a rule for the present times, then the having all common then, and
bringing all to the Apostle's feet, will be exemplary to us. I shall only for
your better direction give you the best light I can, which will be by these
gradations. 1. That the Jews, the People of God were bound by law to set apart
a tenth of all their increase every third year for the use of the poor; Every
year you know the tith was paid to the Priest, but that being done, every
third year they were to tith again, for the poor; which was in effect a
thirtieth part yearly of their increase; for that (you know) a tenth part
every third year, being distributed into three parts, and each of those three
assigned to each year, will amount to. But then 2. other commands there were
given to those Jews, concerning the poor, as of permitting them to lease in
the field, lending them without use, restoring the pledge before night, and
other the like, and all this a Jew was bound to; he sinned against the law, if
he did it not. This was his Righteousness, (...)
Deuteronomy 24. 13. i. e. that degree of mercy which the law required of him, instead
of which the Greek translatours use a word signifying Alms or Pity, the same
which is in this place (...)
of Christ's Sermon, (and it is farther observable, that in this place some
very ancient Copies instead of this word which signifies Alms, have another
word signifying Righteousness) all which signifies some degrees of
almes-giving to be required (...)
by the law, without performance of which a Jew cannot be accounted righteous:
and such were those three years tithings, and the rest forementioned. But then
thirdly, beside this Righteousness of the Jew, or that proportion required to
his being arighteous Jew, there was another (...)
higher degree among them, called Mercy, or goodness, or bounty, or charity,
which, say (...)
their Interpreters, is more then righteousness, excess or abundance of
righteousness. Thus shall (...)
you see those two words many times put together, not as equivalent, but one a
higher degree then the other. Dan. 4. 27. Break off thy sins (...)
by Righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing Mercy to the poor; the
mercy set last, as being highest. so Mic. 6. 8. What does the Lord require of
thee, but to do Justice and love Mercy? (...).
So when the comparison is made by the Apostle between a Righteous man and a
Good man, Romans 5. 7. the Good man, is this merciful minded man, which far
exceeds the other. By which you see that he that will be a Good, a pious, a
merciful Jew, he must exceed those terms, which by the law, the lew was bound
to, i. e. must allow to pious uses much more then the thirtieth part of his
increase every year; and this law, and direction being by God himself given
to his own people the Jews, may deserve so far to be considered by us, as
it is an evidence of Gods judgment then to that people. But then 4thly though
this be not a law now binding us, as not given to us, yet being a law of
charity and mercy to my poor neighbor, which for the substance of it, is an
eternal law of Nature, there will be small reason for a Christian to think
himself disengaged from that quotum or proportion, which even the Jews, who
were considered as in a state of imperfection, were obliged to; save only that
this is now left to their own freedom which was before commanded; and 'twere
shame that a Christian thus left to his own freedom should come short of what
a Jew was brought to by constraint. But 5ly. on the contrary side, the more
perfect law of Christ, and the more grace, and the more light brought into the
world by him, requiring higher perfection now, then before by law was required,
(so that except our righteousness exceed theirs, we shall not enter the
Kingdom of Heaven) may very justly be deemed to require a greater proportion
of us now in works of mercy, then of them was then expected. From whence it
will be consequent, 6ly. That as our Righteousness must exceed their
righteousness, (...)
so our Mercy their mercy: i. e. that to be a righteous Christian, (i. e. such
an one, as performs what the law of Christ requires of him for almes-giving)
it is necessary to set a part much more then a yearly thirtieth of his revenue,
or increase; and to be a merciful or benign or pious Christian, much more
again then that, is necessary. But then seventhly, the Christian (as also the
Jewish) law in this matter, does not so consist in an indivisible point, as
that any set proportion can be defined, lower then which would be the sin of
parsimony, and higher then which the sin of prodigality; but is allowed its
latitude, within which it may move higher or lower without sin; yet so that
it may on one side be so low, that it will be unchristian love of money; and on
the otherside so high (if it be to the neglecting, and exposing his own
children, and family) that it may be wretchlesse prodigality: which two
extremes being by the help of the former directions avoided the rule will be,
That the more liberal we are to them that want, or the more liberal in
setting a part for them to provide them a plentiful patrimony, the more
acceptable it will be in the sight of God; and the more liberally rewarded:
according to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sows bountifully,
shall reap bountifully, by which I conceive is meant not only Gods abundant
retributions of Glory in another world, but even his payments of temporal
plenty here, to those who have been willing to make that Christian use of that
earthly talent committed to their Stewarding.


S. Do you believe, that liberality to the poor is likely to receive any such
reward in this life? The reason of my question is, because if there were any
ground for the affirmative, I should conceive it a most convincing motive to
all, even the worldlyminded men, to cast their bread thus upon the waters; if
it should return to them again in this life with increase. Liberality being a
thing pleasant and delightful even to flesh and blood, to the most covetous
minded man; and nothing imaginable to deter any from the practice of so
lovely a duty, were it not the fear of diminishing our store or bringing our
selves to want by that means. I shall therefore in great earnest desire to
hear your opinion in that point?


C. I make no doubt of this truth, that mercifulness and Christian liberality
is the surest way to plenty and contentment in this life; so far from ever
being a means of impoverishing any, that it is most constantly (when exercised
as it ought) a means of enriching. And that you may not think this a phansy
or speculation, or groundless confidence in me, I shall tell you that I
conceive there is not any one thing (temporal) for which there are so many
clear evident promises in the Scripture as this. For the giving you ground of
faith in this, I will name you some. And a foundation I shall lay, Deuteronomy. 26.
11. where there is by God prescribed a form of prayer to be used by him that
has made an end of tithing all the tith of his increase the third year, i. e.
that has paid the poor their patrimony, (as appears by the rest of the
verse, and which till it be done, the third years tithing is not made an end
of.) And the form prescribed gives the man that has so done liberty and
privilege of claim and challenge to all kind of earthly blessings. v. 13.
Then thou shall say before the Lord thy God I have given to the stranger, to
the fatherless, etc. And thereupon, v. 15. Look down from heaven and bless
thy people Israel, and the land which thou have given us, a land flowing with
milk and honey. The mention of the milk and honey, and affluence, is an
interpretation what that blessing is which is there prayed for so confidently;
to wit, temporal plenty here; and Gods prescribing this form of prayer is
argument enough that God will grant it to him, that having performed this
condition, does humbly in prayer require the performance of such promise. Only
by the way, these two things must go together inseparably, performance of the
condition, and then prayer to God. According to that of the blind man in the
Gospel, that he that is a worshipper of God and does his will, him he hears.
Other places fit to be superstructed on this you have in the Psalms of David,
Psalm. 41. 1. Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy. And what kind
of blessing this is, appears by the context, The Lord will deliver him,
preserve him, keep him alive, bless him on the earth, etc. And besides others
one remarkable place that book affords, Psalm. 37. 25. I have been young, and
now am old, yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.
What is meant by the righteous there, will be evident, if you advise with v.
21. The Righteous shows mercy and gives. and v. 26. The righteous is ever
(or all the day) merciful and lends. His liberality such and so continual
(all the day merciful) that one would think it able to exhaust his patrimony;
to bring him, at least his posterity, to want and beggary; and yet in all
David's observation, he had found (so far as to make an Aphorism of it) that
none were ever brought to want by that means; but, as it follows for
confirmation of this truth, v. 26. His seed is blessed; his posterity as
prosperous as if their father had dug through the mine into hell (where the
Poets thought riches dwelt) to fetch (...). Pluto.
out treasure for them. Where although the rule do not necessarily hold so
far, that no other means can make a merciful man poor, (for perhaps
negligence, suretyship, some other sin lived in and bringing a curse upon
him, may; and mercifulness not prove antidote sufficient to secure him against
all other poison.) Yet thus far it does in David's observation hold, 1. That
it never brings any man to want; whatever else may, that will not; 2. That it
is an ordinary means to help to more wealth; to enrich the posterity; to
bestow temporal blessings on them; a benign favorable influence this has
upon all that belongs to him. And this which David mentions as an Aphorism of
his own observation, I believe I might extend to all times, and challenge any
Historian of past, or observator of present times, to give one instance out of
his knowledge to the contrary; of any Christian Almes-giver that brought
himself or his posterity to want (nay that did not thrive and prosper the
better) by that means. Some notable examples I have known in my time for the
confirming what I now say, but could never yet hear of any to the contrary. To
these I shall add a few places of testimony also out of the Proverbs of
Solomon, 11. 24. There is that scatters and yet increases, i. e. One sort of
scatterers there is that increases by scattering; and no cause of doubt but
that the merciful is this kind of scatterer; which farther appears by the
opposition in the rest of the verse, There is that with holds more then is
meet, and it tends to poverty. Astrange thing that scattering should be a
means of increasing; giving, of having; and withholding, of poverty; keeping,
of not having; but when it is considered how all temporal plenty is of Gods
disposing, how by his blessing and opening his hand, all things are filled with
plenteousnesse; and by his withdrawing his auspicious influence, all things are
improsperous, moulter and crumble into nothing, there will be small difficulty
in beleiving Gods promise for such kind of difficulties, as these. Besides, the
following verses make it clear, that it belongs to this matter, v. 25. The
liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall be watered also
himself. And selling of corn being an act of liberality, v. 26. in opposition
to him that withholdeth it, it follows, Blessing shall be upon his head. and
v. 28. The Righteous, i. e. the liberal again, (as opposite to him that
trusts in riches) shall flourish as a branch. i. e. be very prosperous. And
though it follow in the last verse, that the righteous shall be recompensed on
the earth; i. e. meet with afflictions and punishments here; set is that
common state of good men reconcilable with temporal blessings here, as may
appear, Mark. 10. 30. So again, Prove. 13. 22. A good man leaves his
inheritance to his childrens children. Where if the good man be the same that
is meant by that phrase, Romans 5. 7. it will be distinctly pertinent to this
matter, (and so the context would enforce, and the wealth of the sinner is laid
up for the just.) But if it be a more general word, yet then also this of the
merciful will be contained under it. So again, Prove. 14. 21. He that has
mercy on the poor happy is he. So 19. 17. He that has pity on the poor
lends unto the Lord: the Vulgar read it [lendeth unto the Lord upon use] and
that which he has given will he pay him again, and (it being lent upon use,)
pay him with use, and interest also. On occasion of which place I remember an
ancient story in Cedrenus (how true I know not) of a Jew, as ancient, says he,
as King Hezechiahs time, that having read this place and weighed it, resolved
to try whether God would be as good as his word. Gave all that he had but two
pieces of silver, to the poor, and then waited and expected to see it come
again; but being not presently answered in that expectation, grew angry, and
went up to Jerusalem to expostulate with God for cheating him by this
unperformed promise. The story goes on, that he being on his way, found two men
a striving, engaged in an unreconcileable quarrel; about a stone, that both,
walking together, had found in the way, and so had both equal right to it; but
being but one and undividible, could not both enjoy; and therefore to make them
friends, he having two pieces of silver, does upon contract divide them betwixt
the pretenders, and has the stone in exchange from them; having it, he goes on
his journey, and coming to Jerusalem shows it the Goldsmith, who tells him
that it was a jewel of great value, being a stone fallen and lost out of the
high Priests Ephod, to whom if he carried it he should certainly receive a
great reward; he did so, and accordingly it proved; the high Priest took it of
him, gave him a great reward, but withal a box on the ear, bidding him trust
God the next time. The story if true, is an instance of the matter in hand; if
not, yet an emblem or picture of it. So again, Prove. 22. 9. He that has a
bountiful eye shall be blessed, for he gives of his bread to the poor. Where
the affirmative promise is most punctual, and the reason to confirm it most
remarkable, being but the repetition of the thing it self, (as principles are
feign to be proved by themselves) the bountiful minded man shall be blessed,
why? because he is bountiful, i. e. no other argument needful to prove it but
this; the promise, infallible promise belonging peculiarly to such. And Prove.
28. 27. He that gives to the poor shall not lack. A most definitive large
rule, from whence no exception is imaginable, if we had but faith to depend
upon it. And lest you should think that this referred only to the state of
the Jews under the Old Testament, and belonged not at all to us Christians,
you may first observe, that these Proverbs of Solomon are not truths peculiar
to that state, but extensive even to us Christians; and more purely so, then to
them, many of them. 2. That in the Gospel one place there is that repeates in
sense one part of these places, that of 19. 17. [He that gives to the poor
lends to the Lord.] to wit, Mat. 25. 43. [In as much as ye did it to one of
these, you did it unto me.] And then why may not the latter part belong to us
also? 3. One plain promise of temporal things there is in the Gospel also to
those that part with any of their goods for Christ's sake, (and such sure are
the Christian Almes-givers that do it in obedience to Christ's law, and charity
to fellow Christians,) Mat. 19. 29. and that in a general unlimited style,
excluding all exception, Mark. 10. 30. There is no man that has left house, or
brethren, etc. and lands, i. e. worldly goods, but he shall receive an hundred
sold now (...)
in this time: (this first lower harvest, this season of retributions) houses,
etc. i. e. temporal blessings here; and then over and above in another world,
everlasting life. Only with a mixture of persecutions, as Saint Mark (or
Saint Peter who had asked the question which occasioned this speech of Christ's,
and whose Amanuensis Saint Mark was) has it, as before I told you. Prove. 11.
31. after all those temporal promises to the Almes-giver, it is added, He
shall be recompensed, or receive his portion of afflictions in the earth. By
all these testimonies from the word of God, both in New and Old Testament, I
conceive this doctrine as clear as any in the Scripture. That the promise of
temporal plenty to the liberal is so distinct and infallible, that it can be
no less then gross ignorance of plain Scripture not to observe it; and
arrant infidelity not to believe it; and strange Unchristian sin not to
practice that so amiable a duty; that to him that beleives this, there is not
the least temptation imaginable against it, even the covetous man himself
being allowed to be the objector.


S. I cannot but acknowledge the truth of your premises, and reasonableness of
the conclusion from them, and only mervaile what artifice the Devil has
gotten to ensnare men by, and keep them from doing that which is so agreeable
to their humors and dispositions, even as they are partakers of but ingenuous
nature. God melt the heart and open the hand of the obdurate world, and teach
us the due practice of it.

I shall presume you have no more necessary to be added to the explication of
the duty here supposed [and thou when thou do almes] I shall call you from
thence to the second particular mentioned, The Caution interposed, and desire
to know what that it?


C. The Caution is, that we do not our alms to be seen of men; or use any
means in the doing of them, to have glory of men; to be praised or commended
by them. For this is an infirmity very ordinarily insinnuating it self in our
best actions, to blast and defame them in the eyes of God; every man being apt
to desire to be better thought of by man for the performance of this duty;
especially if he be an exceeder in it.


S. But were we not commanded before, that our light should shine before men?
What is that but to do our good works so, that men might see them?


C. To this I shall answer 1. By telling you that the performance of duties to
God may be either public or private; the one in the congregation, the other
in the closet; the former ought to be as public as it may, that so they may
be more exemplary, and tend more to the glorifying of God; and to that the
shineing of our light belongs: the second, as private as it may, to approve our
selves the more to God, and to that this caution here pertaines. And though
this be more illustriously observable in the two following duties of prayer and
fasting, yet will it hold in some measure in this also; the Church being
designed for giving also, and every Christian anciently wont to bring some what
to the Corban every time he came to Church, a remainder of which custom we
have still in the offertory, 2. That there is great difference betwixt doing
our good works so, that men may see them, and doing them to be seen of men;
and again, between doing them so before men, that they may see, and glorify
our father in heaven, and that we may have glory of men. The former, if it have
not the latter to blast it (and if it be truly so, it excludes the latter) is
only a Christian charitable care, that my good actions may be exemplary to
others; the second that they may be matter of reputation to my self: The
former respects only God's glory, and not mine own; the second mine own vain
aerie credit here, and not (or more then) God's. The first a most divine
Christian act, expression of great love of God, and desire to propagate his
Kingdom; of great love of my brother, and desire to make all others as good as
my self, by setting them such copies on purpose to transcribe; the second is
an evidence of great passion, and self-love, and impatience of having our
reward put off to so long a date, as the reversion in another world; and
consequently these two are most diversely rewarded; the first with a great
degree of glory, for the glory we have brought to God's name; the second so
odious in the sight of God, that even our alms giving, or best actions, are
eaten through and smitten as the gourd with the worm, and come to nothing, find
no reward in another world; the little reputation gotten here and affected by
us, must serve our turns, the only reward we are to hope for; which shows the
unhappynesse and folly of this sin of vainglory, it robbes us of all the
reward that our most esteemeable, acceptable, free-will-offerings, our works
of mercy, can hope for from God.


S. Is this desire to be seen, and have glory of men a sin, or no?


C. A sin surely it is, as a deflexion to the creature; and if it be the
principal motive of our actions, then a wasting sin; unreconcileable with
charity, or the favor of God, (for it seems the praise of men rules in us,
and not the love of God, and then how can you believe? Jo. 5. 44.) but if the
love of God be the principle or prime mover of our actions, and this other of
the desire to be seen of men, do only steal in, as a secondary carnal
interest of our own; then, though it be a sin still, and such an one, as
will deprive us of all future reward of that good work, to which it is
adherent, yet through God's mercy in Christ and his equitable interpretation of
our infirmities, it will not prevail so far as to separate between God and
us eternally, or to cast us out of his favor; this I conceive may be concluded
by analogy from that hard place of Saint Paul 1 Cor. 3. 12. or an example
whereby that (being of a larger extent, and belonging first to matters of
doctrine, then to many other things) may be illustrated. The foundation being
once laid, i e. Jesus Christ, (he being set the principle of all our actions,
the faith in, and love of him being depeest grounded in our hearts)
superstructures on this, are either of pure substantial metal, which will
bear the test, or trial, or judgment of God (for that is meant by [the day]
which word in all languages almost signifyes judgment) when done without this
mixture of dross or hypocrisy; or else of a baser allay which will not hold
out the trial, but will perish in the fire, when they are brought to it for
trial, such are these almes-givings, etc: of ours, which have this desire of
vainglory mixed with them. The former of these works, as gold, etc. not
consumable by the fire, abide the trial, and are rewarded, v. 14. the latter
like wood, etc. combustible matter, perish in the fire, or trial, are burnt v.
15. come to be acounted to him for reward; and so all those good deeds of his
are lost; come to nothing (eaten through with that cankar of vainglory) this
mulct or punishment lies upon him for this fault, but yet the foundation
remaining still firm, the faith and love of God in (...).
his heart, he himself shall be saved, or escape; shall not himself be burnt,
though his works are; yet so, as by fire, or through, or out of fire. As (...).
one that being in the midst of a fire, has his very clothes burnt from his
back, and scapes only with his life; these tainted works of his are lost,
but himself escapes, naked and bare, to be one of the Nethinim, as it were, or
doore-keepers in the Kingdom of God; mean while this favor which he finds,
that is thus guilty of this blasting sin, will give him but little
encouragement, or comfort to indulge to it, when he knows, that when it is
chief in his heart, the principle of his actions, or superior to the love of
God in him, it is then an act of arrant infidelity, and little mercy to be
expected then; and even when it comes in, but as a secondary, appendant to his
good deeds, it is yet then a means to deprive him of all the reward or benefit
of his best actions, his Almes-giving, prayer, and fasting; and brings him low,
to a very sad estate here, and comparatively mean one hereafter; all which he
that will adventure for a little paultry praise, that mere blast and wind, and
breath of sinful men, is sure very ill advised.


S. This being so unhappy a sin, and yet so hardly gotten out of us, what
means can you direct me to, to prevent it?


C. 1. A consideration of the price it costs us [Ye have no reward of your
Father which is in Heaven] or [they have their reward] here, and so none behind
in another world. 2. A resolution before hand never to make my good deed more
public then the circumstances necessarily attending the present occasion,
extort from me. If I do every good deed in the season and place that God
represents the object to me, let him alone to provide for his own glory, that
is, to rise from it; and therefore I shall not need in that respect to use any
artifice to publish it, under pretense of making my light shine before men.
Therefore I say the second means will be a resolution not to make my good
action more public then it needs, as by browing a trumpet, or using any
means proportionable to that, though in a lower degree, to call men's eyes
toward me; or to do what I do (on purpose and by choice) in the market place
or street, or places of public meeting and concourse. (for so (...).
the word rendered Synagogues, signifies) But 3, rather on the other side, if I
find that humor of vanity getting in upon me, to labor for the greatest
secrecy imaginable, (for that is meant by that impossible phrase of [not
letting the left hand know what the right hand doth]) which by the way gives
also a very useful advertisement for our direction in our dispensing of alms.
Not to do them so much to the beggar in the street, (who 1. Is here, by
accident, literally forbidden, v. 2. [not in the streetes] And 2. For the most
part is a disorderly walker, and not the fittest object of such charity
(releife of his wants without his labor being the nourishing his idleness)
And withal 3. Is the most proper food for our vain glory) as to the poor
labourer in secret, the housekeeper that comes not abroad, and yet needs aid
and releife more truly, to support the burden of a numerous hungry family, and
withal cannot be any temptation to our vaineglorious humor; at least so
probably is not, as the other. 4. The contemplation of the reward that attends
my contempt of the praise of men, a thousand times more, even in kind, then
that which the vain man attaines to; to wit, being praised of God openly
before Men and Angels (whereas a few spectators of sinful men is all that can
here be compassed) in a full quire, all looking upon us; not only to be
praised but rewarded also.


S. I conceive you have now gone through the first of the three things, and
fully satisfied all my scruples, God grant my obedience and practice, and
observation of your directions may be as perfectly complete and universal. I
shall call upon you now to the second, beginning at the fifth, and extended to
the 16th verse. In all which I expect what you will observe unto me.


C. Of Prayer.
The same general parts that before. A Duty supposed, and a double Caution
interposed. The Duty supposed is prayer; that great prime branch of the worship
of God, required of all that acknowledge God to be God, and most reasonable for
all that acknowledge, 1. The world to be ruled by his providence. 2. Themselves
to have any need of his grace or pardon. Or 3. That hope for any reward from
him in another world.


S. I shall desire your direction in diverse particulars concerning this duty.
And 1. How many sorts of prayer are there?


C. 1. Prayer of the heart, when the soul sighs out it is desires unto God; and
of the tongue added to that, which is then vocal prayer. 2. Either public or
private: Public of two sorts, 1. In the Church, or meeting together of all
that will join with us, called together by tolling of a bell, etc. which is
very useful and necessary, 1. For the public testimony of our piety. 2. For
the stirring up and enflaming of others. 3. For the making of those common
public requests, wherein all that meet are concerned; as for all men, the
whole Church, the Rulers and Magistrates of that Community wherein we live, for
pardon of sins, gift of grace, preservation from danger, and all other things
that as Fellow Members of a Church or State, we may stand in need of. 4. For
the prevailing with God, (the union of so many hearta being most likely to
prevail, and the presence of some godly, to bring down mercies on those
others, whose prayers have no promise to be heard; especially if performed by a
consecrated person, whose office it is to draw nigh unto God, i. e. to offer up
prayers, etc. to him, and to be the Ambassador and Messenger between God and
Man; Gods Ambassador to the people, in Gods stead beseeching them to be
reconciled; and the peoples Ambassador to God to offer up our requests for
grace, pardon, mercies, to him. 2. In the family, which is a lesser
Congregation, the Master or Father of which is to supply the place of the
Priest, (and to provide this spiritual food for all that are under his power
and charge, as well as their corporal food) and ask those things which in
that relation of members of the same family are most acknowledged to be
needful for all there present. And then private prayer of two sorts again,
either of husband and wife together, (who are as it were one flesh, and have
many relations comnon to one another, and yet distinct and peculiar from all
others.) Or of eveey man or woman, single and private from all others, in the
closet, or retiredness.


S. Having mentioned the sorts, you will please also to mention the parts of
prayer?


C. Those are set down by Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 1. Supplications, prayers,
intercessions, giving of thanks. The first seems to refer to Confession
and acknowledgement (...).
of, and beseeching pardon for sin. A necessary daily duty both in public
and private, for our selves and others; only in private fit to be more distinct
and particular, by way of enumeration of the kinds, and acts, and aggravating
circumstances of sin. The second is the petitioning or requesting of all
things necessary (...).
for our bodies or souls, in all our capacities either as single, or double
persons; as members of families, of Kingdoms, of Christendom, of mankind it
self. The third is the interceding or (...)
mediating for others, offering up prayers for friends, for enemies, for all
men, especially for our lawful Governors, Kings, and all that be in authority
spiritual or civil. The fourth is the returning our acknowledgements to God
for all (...)
benefits received by us, or others; being bound by the rule of gratitude to be
mindful of what we have received; of piety, to acknowledge God's hand in
bestowing them; of charity, to be sensible of what ever good, any part of
mankind has been partaker of, from that great spring of goodness, as well as
our selves; and by all these, to express all in our prayers and addresses to
heaven.


S. My next inquiry must be, how often this duty must be performed?


C. This great duty consisting of these so many parts, must be performed
frequently by all and every Christian, without any slacking or intermitting of
it; but how frequently there is no precept in this place or any other of
scripture; which argues that though the substance of the duty be under
particular precept, yet the frequency is left (after the manner of other
free-will-offerings) to every man's own conscience, and prudence, as occasions
and circumstances shall direct. Yet from the commands and examples of
Scripture, some special directions, we may take with us. As 1. that one day in
seven is to be set apart for this purpose, (though not to be all spent in the
performance of this one duty, yet) for this duty to be carefully performed both
in the Church, the family, and in private; and that with more solemnity then
ordinary. 2. That other times taken notice of by the Church, either by way of
commemoration of partticular passages in the story of Christ, of his Saints,
etc. or by way of commemoration of some notable benefits received; or on
occasion of particular urgencies, etc. be by us solemnly observed also,
according to the rule of the Church wherein we live; in like manner as the
Jews observed their days appointed them by law. 3. that no man omit to
perform this duty at least morning and evening, every day; this being
solemnly required of the people of God, directed by the law of piety to begin
and close all with prayer, which the very heathens could judge necessary, and
being the least, that can be meant by that precept of the Apostle of praying
without ceasing, or continually: which is thought by many to extend no farther
then in proportion to the daily sacrifices among the Jews, which were
constantly every morning and evening; but by none interpreted, or conceived
interpretable to any lower proportion. But then 4. the examples of holy men in
scripture do add unto this number, some more, some less: David in one place
specifies the addition of a third, at morning, and at evening, and at noone day
will I pray, and that instantly, i. e. in a set, solemn, intense, earnest
address, Ps. 55. 17. (and so Daniel, c. 6. 10.) and this of noonday is the
same with the sixth hour, which is a time of prayer, Act. 10. 9. used by Saint
Peter. Others again observed the ninth hour, i. e. about three of the clock
in the afternoon, as Peter and John Act. 3. 1. which is there called an hour
of prayer, it seems commonly observed; and by going up to the Temple it is
likely that public prayers were used at that time, and this superadded to the
former is a fourth time. And there is little doubt, but that the third hour,
i. e. nine in the morning, was an hour of prayer also, though there falls not
out to be any mention of it in the new Testament, and then that is a fifth
time: And the evening prayer being answerable to the morning, and so used at
six in the evening, as the other at six in the morning, the custom of Godly
men has been to shut up the evening with a Compline or prayer at nine of the
Night, and so that is a sixth time. To which David seems to add a seventh:
Psalm. 119. 164. seven times a day do I praise thee; where praising being the
fourth part of prayer, may be a denotation of the whole duty, although the
truth is, the phrase seven times may possibly be taken not strictly to signify
that number, but as a phrase or form of speech to denote frequency. These
directions put together, and pondered and compared with the leisure that every
man has from the duties of his calling, and with the great unvaluable benefits
of prayer, and with the power of importunity i. e. frequent coming to God in
prayer, acknowledged by Christ, and with the con^^rnance of those things which
we may ask and obtain by prayer, above most other things which we spend great
part of our time on, and with the reasonableness of giving God a liberal
portion out of our time as well as our estates, who has allowed us so much
besides to our own uses, will be very helpful to you that you may judge
discreetly what is to be done in this business, and then still resolving that
what is well done and well weighed for circumstances, being for the substance a
duty commanded, the more of it is performed, it will be the more acceptable to
God.


S. From these Scruples satisfied give me leave to proceed to another what kind
of forms my prayers may, or must be presented in?


C. In this there are two questions couch ed; 1. whether any set form of
prayer be lawful to be used? 2. If it be, whether any other may be used? And
then what directins may be had for that? To the first I answer positively, that
set forms of prayer are lawful, both as the word [set] signifies premeditate
limited forms as opposed to extemporary, and as it signifies prescribed, and
for some occasions and uses commanded. That it is lawful to use a set
determinate form of words either written or fastened in our memory, is
apparent both by the example of Christ, (who in Saint Luke bids us when we
pray, say, Our Father, etc: not only pray after this pattern (as the words in
Saint Matthew may be interpreted) but use these very words, When you pray say,
Our Father, etc. Luke 11. 2.) and of John Baptist who taught his Disoiples to
pray in some form, though we know not what it is, Luke 11. 1. As also of the
Priests that used set forms of blessing the people, Numb. 6. 24. and of our
Savior himself, who used a part (if not the whole) of the 22 Psalm upon the
cross; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? etc. And of the Church of
the Jews, and Christian Churches through all times, who have had their
Liturgies as ways and forms of serving of God publickely, and as means to
preserve the true Religion from all corruptions in doctrine. And to these
arguments may be added one more of common observation even when the Minister
(or who ever is the mouth of the rest) prays, though in a form of his own
present extemporary effusion, yet at that time all others present are limited
to his conceptions, and pray in as stinted a form, as if what the Minister
prays were read out of a book, or dictated by his memory. That it is also
lawful to use a set (as that signifies a prescribed) form of prayer is
apparent also, 1. By Christ's prescribing; which he would not sure have done if
it had not been lawful to have used it being prescribed. And so also, 2. By
the other examples mentioned, which are most of them prescriptions. 3. By the
non-objection against the use of them; for sure if it be lawful to use them
it is lawful to prescribe them at some time, and for some uses, (for that a
thing in it self acknowledged and proved to be lawful, should by being
commanded by lawful authority become unlawful, is very unreasonable, unless
lawful Magistrates be the only unlawful things,) and at other times to use
other liberty is not forbidden, and so no tyranny used upon our Christian
liberty. 4. By the great benefit that accrues to the Congregation in having
discreet well-formed prayers, and so not subject to the temerity and
impertinences of the sudden effusions; and the same still in constant use,
and so not strange or new to them, but such as they may with understanding go
along with the Minister, and by the help of their memory the most ignorant may
carry them away for his private use; and generally those that want such helps
are by this means afforded them. And lastly, that by means of prescribed
Liturgies the unity of faith and charity is much preserved.


S. Well then, supposing these set-formes to be lawful in themselves, and
lawful to be prescribed, another question you taught me, whether any other may
be used but such?


C. Yes doubtless, For the Church being obeyed in the observance of the
prescribed Liturgy in public, gives liberty for other; sometimes in the
public Congregation, so it be done prudently and piously, and reverently, and
to edification; and so also in the family, or in visitation of the sick, if
the particular condition of one or other do require it. And in private in the
closet, it is not supposed by our Church but that every one may ask his own
wants in what form of words he shall think fit; which that he may do fitly
and reverently, 'twill not be amiss for him to acquaint himself with the
several sorts of addresses to God, that the Book of Psalms, and other parts
of Holy Writ, and all other helps of devotion will afford him, either to use
as he finds them fit for the present purpose, or by those patterns to direct
and prepare himself to do the like.


S. What qualifications be required in our prayers to make them acceptable to
God, or prevalent with him?


C. Three sorts of qualifications: One in the person that prays; and that is,
that he lift up clean hands without wrath or doubting, 1. That he be purified
from all wilful sin, bring not any unmortified wickedness with him for God
to patronize. 2. That he have charity to his brethren, and humility; the two
contraries to wrath. 3. That he come with confidence to Gods Throne, assuredly
beleiving that if he ask what he ought, and what God has not decreed against,
God will grant it him either in kind, or by giving him that which is better
for him. For this a Christian is bound to believe, that God is the hearer of
prayers; that they which ask shall have; only this with these limitations,
unless God by his all-seeing eye judge somewhat else better for us; or by some
particular decree has determined the contrary; as when the destruction of a
nation is determined, then though Noah, Daniel, and Job intercede for it, they
shall only save themselves, but not the nation.


S. What other sort of qualifications is there?


C. In the prayer it self. As 1. That the matter of it be justifiable; such
things as God has promised to give his Children; Or when that is doubtful
whether it be such or no, then with submission to his wisdom, as well as his
will; if he sees it best for us, and not otherwise. 2. That the things that
belong to our souls, and wherein God may most be honored, and our neighbor
benefited, be most and primarily desired. 3. Zeal or fervencie. 4. Attention,
as it is contrary to wandering idle thoughts; which (though they are very apt
still to interpose, and no hope ever to be wholly without them) yet must be
labored against, and by the use of all means probable repelled, and pardon
for them asked solemnly of God. 5. Constancy, and perseverance in asking,
commended to us by the parable of the importunate widow. 6. The use of such
bodily reverence, such gestures and postures as may both help to inflame our
zeal, and be a fit companion of our spiritual worship. And 7. sometimes
adding to Genesis 28. 20.
our prayers vows of voluntary oblations, after the example of Jacob If God.
etc.


S. What is the third sort of qualifications?


C. Those that are to follow our prayers. 1. Observation of Gods returns to
our prayers; and in that of God's gracious providence in denying what would
have been less fit, and granting that that is more; 2. Returning him the
thanks and the glory of all his grants, and denialls. 3. Considering and
setting a value on this great unparalleled dignity and prerogative of a
Christian, in talking, and conversing, and prevailing with God; no difficulty
of access, no doubt of acceptance. 4. Raising from his mercies a stock and
treasure of confidence for the future, together with a love of him; and by his
denyalls learning to make fitter addresses the next time. 5. Expressing our
gratitude for his mercies by our acts of charity and bounty to our brethren
that ask of us, or need our aid, and in case of precedent vow, paying that
which we have vowed.


S. If there be nothing else, which you will add concerning the duty supposed,
be pleased to proceed to the Cautions interposed in it?


C, The first of them is common with that in the matter of almes-giving, that
the desire to be seen, or praised of men for our piety, do not interpose in
our devotions; to that purpose, that it be not done in (...)
common assemblies (meaning thereby not the Church, or public assemblings to
that purpose in the house of God, as the word Synagogues might seem to import,
but any place of public view where men use to be spectatours) nor in the
corners of streets i. e. places chosen on purpose as most conspicuous (for he
that is in the corner of streets is seen by all in either street) but that our
private prayers (which peculiarly are here spoken of) be as private as may be;
in the closet, and the door shut: as near as we can, no eye, but that of
heaven, admitted to behold us. For if, in a duty, wherein God is so nearely
concerned by way of honor, and our selves both in duty, for the obtaining our
needs, we can take in so poor an accession, as the consideration and desire
of the praise of men, it is most just that that should be our reward, and no
other expected from God for us.


S. But what is the second Caution?


C. That we use not vain repetitions.


S. What is meant by that phrase?


C. The word in Greek is a proverbiall word, (...).
referring to a person whose name was Battus, and a fault that he was observed
to be guilty of; which, seeing it is now uncertain what it was, we shall best
guess of, by the context here, particularly by the reasons that are here
annexed to the cautions. 1. Because by this we shall be like the heathens, who
think to be heard by their much speaking; 2. Because we shall be like them in
thinking that our many words help God to understand our meaning, which he
knows before we begin to pray. By which it is, 1. plain, that all repetition
in prayer is not forbidden, because all such is not against either of those
reasons; and withal, because both David in his Psalms (particularly Psalm.
136.) and Christ in his agony used the same words in prayer many times.
Secondly that the thing here forbidden is somewhat that the heathens were
guilty of; as before the Hypocrites of the vaineglory. 3. That the thing most
probably to be fixed on, is this, the Tumbling out of a many unsignificant
words, as the heathen Tragedies express their manner, or the same words over
and over again, not out of fervency of mind, but to lengthen out the prayer
as long as they can, counting this length of words a good quality, or that that
makes it either more powerful or more acceptable with God, which indeed was
the peculiar fault of the Gentiles, the Jews rather using concisenesse and
brevity in their prayers. From all which it follows, that the bare length of
prayers, any farther then either the necessity of our several wants, or the
fervency of our Zeal requires, or may tend to the inflameing of our Zeal, is
not acceptable to God or like to prevail with him; but rather to do the
contrary, if it be affected by us, which is farther evidenced by the manner of
that prayer which is here by Christ commended to us, as a pattern and form of
ours to be ruled and directed by. Our Father etc. a very concise and short
prayer. Of the Lords Prayer.



S. Being by our Saviors Speech and our progress in attendance thereon fallen
upon the Lords prayer, though I have formerly in the explication of our
Church-Catechisme learnt somewhat of the understanding of it, yet it being a
prayer of such special weight and difficulty, I shall again desire your
particular directions for the understanding of every part and branch of it
distinctly. And 1. Is there anything that from the general fabric of the
words you would observe to me?


C. Yes, this one thing, that our first and chief care ought to be the glory
of God, advancement of his kingdom, and obedience to his will; i. e. the
setting up God in that excellence that belongs to him; which is the sum of
the three first petitions: And then after that, the care of our selves and
those things wherein we are most concerned; the sum of the three latter. To
which if we annex the Doxology [for thine is the Kingdom etc.] which is the
reflecting on God's gloryagain the observation will be enlarged, that the glory
of God etc: ought to be our first and last care; and all that is good to our
selves taken in only as it may best consist with that, on each side limited
with it; Just as we read of the Liturgy used by the Jews, that of the eighteen
prayers used in it, the three first and three last concerned God; and the rest,
between themselves and their own wants. But the truth is, the ancientest
Greek copies have not those words of Doxology, and there is reason to think
that they came in out of the Liturgies of the Greek Church; where (as now in
many places) the custom was, when the Lords prayer had been recited by the
Presbyter, for the people to answer by way of Doxology (as after the reading of
every Psalm a Glory be to the Father, etc.) For thine is the Kingdom, the
power, and the glory, for ever and ever Amen.


S. Please you then to enter on the particular survey of this prayer? Where
first occurres the title which we bestow on God in it, which I already conceive
as a means to raise up our hearts to him, and a ground of confidence that he
can and will hear our prayers. But what is the particular importance of it?


C. 1. That we look on God as children on a father, with all reverence, and
love, and gratitude; as on him who is 1. Our creator and father of our being.
2. More peculiarly set out to us in that relation, then to any other sort of
creatures; as Plato said, God was a (...).
maker of other things, but a (...).
father of men. 3. That all the acts of a father on earth are by him performed
to us, but in a far higher and more excellent degree; as far as heaven is
above earth. Such are, 1. His begetting us a new to a lively hope; i. e. his
giving us his spirit, the principle of spiritual and celestial life: 2. His
continuance of assisting grace to preserve what he has begotten: 3dly. His 1
preventing 2 exciting and 3 illuminating grace, as a kind of education to our
suoles: fourthly, His providing an inheritance for us in another world, not by
the death of the father, but by the purchase of the son, to be enstated on
us, at our death; which is the coming out of our nonage, as it were, And
besides all this, wherein he is a Father to our souls and spirits, many, nay
all kind of paternall acts to our very bodies, which we owe more to him, then
to our earthly parents who begat them; as also the feeding, preserving,
maintaining, adorning, and at last crowning of them. 2. By this title, and in
it that particle [Our] we 1. signify our belief of Gods free bounty, and
fatherly respect to all our kind, and labor not to ingrosse, or enclose it to
our selves. 2. We extend our prayers to them, as well as to our selves. 3. We
express our faith, and relyance, and total plenary dependence on him, as
Ours, and without whom we can hope nothing. 3. By the adjunct of this title
[which art in heaven] we celebrate his infinity, immensity, all sufficiency,
and all the rest of his attributes, whereby he differs from our fathers on
earth, i. e. from men, and the honourablest of creatures.


S. From the title you may please to descend to the petitions; and first to
those which concern God; of which all together, if you would teach me any
thing, I shall be ready to receive it.


C. I shall only trouble you with this from thence; That the form of wish
rather then prayer, retained in all those three, different from the style of
the three latter, does contain under it a silent prayer to God, to take the
means or way of performing this into his own hands; and by his grace or
providence, or however he shall see fit, to take care that by us and all
mankind, His name may be hallowed, His Kingdom may come, His will be done, etc.


S. What is meant by the first petition, [hallowed be thy name?] And 1. what by
Gods name?


C. By his name is meant himself; God in his essence, and attributes, and all
things that have peculiar relation to him: It being an ordinary Hebraisme that
thing and word, doing and (...) and (...) and (...)
speaking, being called and being, name and essence, (as his name shall be
called Wonderful, i. e. he shall be a wonderful one) should be taken
promiscuously, the one for the other.


S. What is meant by hallowing?


C. The Hebrew word, or Syriacke dialect in which Christ delivered it,
signifies to separate from vulgar common use, to use in a separate manner, with
that reverence and respect that is not allowed to any thing else; in that
notion that holy is opposed to common or profane. Thus is God hallowed, when he
is used with a reverence peculiar to him above all other things; when such
power, majesty, dominion, goodness, etc. are attributed to him, that are
compatible to nothing else. Thus is his Name hallowed, when it is reverently
handled; His word or Scripture, when weighed with humility, received with
faith, as the infallible fountain of all saving truth applied to our souls,
and the souls of our hearers, as the instrument designed to our endless good,
the power of God unto salvation. Thus is his House consecrated to his service;
his Priests designed to wait on him and officiate; the Revenues of the Church
instated on God for the maintenance of his lot or Clergy; the first day of the
week among us (as among the Jews, the last) set a part for the worshipping of
God publickely and solemnly. And every of these is hallowed when it is thus
according to the design, used separately; when none of these mounds to fence
each, are broken down, but all preserved from the inrode of sacrilegious
profaners.


S. Having explained the single terms, what is now the meaning of the complex,
or petition?


C. I pray to God that he will be pleased, by his grace, poured into my heart
and the hearts of all men, and by the dispensation of his gracious providence
to work in all our hearts such a reverence, and aw, and separate respect unto
him, his Majesty, his attributes, his works of grace, his name, his word, his
day, his Ministers, his consecrated gifts the patrimony of the Church, divolved
from him upon them, that the sins of sacrilege and profaneness, and
idolatry, and irreverence, and in devotion, etc. may be turned out of the
world; and the contrary virtues of Christian piety set up and flourish among us.


S. O blessed Father, Thus be thy name hallowed by me and all mankind.

Please you now to proceed to the second. [Thy Kingdom come] And 1. What is
meant by Gods Kingdom?


C. The exercise of Christ's spiritual Regal power in the hearts of all his
servants, and Subjects, or Disciples, that give up their names unto him, 1.
Here in this imperfect Kingdom of grace, where the mortifying of every unruly
affection is erecting of a Throne for Christ; 2. At the famous much expected
calling of the Jews, (those greatest enemies of Christ) so often prophesied
of, when Christ's Kingdom in the hearts of men shall be much more illustrious
then now it is; more holiness, more obedience, more sincere perfect
subjection, and less resistance of enemies, whether Satan, or wicked men, in
what manner we do not yet know; 3. In the great final doom of all enemies,
and crownning of all Saints, which shall be attended with a Kingdom which
shall have none end, Christ giving up the Kingdom to his Father, and all his
Saints taken in to reign with him for ever.


S. What do you mean by praying that this Kingdom of God may come?


C. I pray that God by his grace inspired into my heart, and the hearts of all
men, and by his other blessed disposal of all things below, will so begin to
set up his Kingdom in our hearts immediately, so weaken the power of the
adversary, and the malice of opposers, that it may by degrees of flourishing
daily increase; his ancient people the Jews be effectually called; and all
other things which are in his purpose, orderly completed; till at last this
mortal compounded Kingdom, which has so much mixture of infirmity, and sin
and rebellion in it, be turned into a Kingdom of perfect holiness, and
immortality.


S. O come Lord Jesus quickly into thy Kingdom of Grace here for the
illuminating and preventing, for the purging and cleansing, for the
regenerating and sanctifying of our souls! for the bestowing on us that
precious blessed grace of perseverance; and in the Kingdom of thy glory for the
perfecting and accomplishing of us hereafter!

Proceed we to the third petition. [Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven] What is meant by Gods will?


C. His commands whatsoever they are, but especially those which are delivered
to us in the Gospel by Christ.


S. How is his will done in Heaven?


C. It is performed by the Angels who are his Ministering spirits, doing those
things in the governing of the world below, and of every of us, which he
appoints them to do. And this which they are thus appointed, they do
willingly, chearefully, speedily, and without neglecting any part of it.


S. What do you mean by the doing it on earth?


C. The obedience of all men here below.


S. What then is the full importance of the whole petition?


C. We pray to God, that he will so inspire his grace into all our hearts, and
so direct by his providence, and assist to performance, that we may obey him in
all his commands here on earth, willingly, readily, cheerfully, speedily,
impartially, or (sincerely, without indulgeing our selves to any kind of sin
in the omission of any part of our duty to him) as his Angels daily obey his
commands in Heaven.


S. Blessed Lord, give us this grace to will, and assist us to perform!

From the petitions that respect God, we may non proceed to those that respect
our selves more particularly; though by your explication I perceive that in
those which respect God, wear nearly concerned also.


C. It is true in some kind, but not immediately and particularly, as in the
latter three; of which one thing you may observe in general, which yet I
cannot conveniently declare to you till I have explained to you the particulars.


S. Be pleased then to do that. and first in the former of then [Give us this
day our daily bread] to tell me what is meant by Daily Bread?


C. By bread, is (...).
meant all the necessaries of life. By daily, somewhat which the word in
English does not distinctly signify, yet well enough expresses the sense of.
For thus it is. The word in Greek comes from a word which signifies the day
approaching, or the morrow, or (in the scripture (...)
sense of the Hebrew answerable to it) the remainder of our lives how long or
short soever it (...)
is; which because it is uncertain, men ordinarily make this an excuse for
their covetousness that they may lay up for their age, and so the older they
are, grow the more covet ous. From hence the word rendered [dayly] denotes so
much as shall be sufficient or proportionable for the remainder of our lives;
which in our prayers we beseech God to take into his care, and to distribute
unto us this day, i. e. (as Saint Luke interprets it) or daily day by day. So
that the prime importance (...).
of this petition is, Lord give us day by day that which shall be sufficient
for the remainder of our lives.


S. You said this was the prime importance of it, which seemed to imply that
there was another; What is that?


C. The most obvious sense I call the prime sense, because the words do first
yield it; that is (as I told you) to the bodily necessaries of this life, food
and raiment; but a secondary sense there is, which though the word yield but in
the second place, yet is a more weighty considerable sense; to wit, as bread
imports in a spiritual acception the food of the soul; the grace of God;
without which that can as little sustain it self as the body without food,
and then the daily bread is that measure of continual grace which will suffice
for the remainder of our warfare here; which we beseech God day by day to
bestow upon us, to assist and uphold us in all our wants, and refer the care
thereof unto God, who, we are confident, cares for us.


S. I beseech God thus to care for us all, and give us day by day for the
remainder of our lives, all things necessary for our souls and bodies!

You may now please to proceed to the next, i. e. the fifth petition. Forgive
us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.]


C. There will be little difficulty found in that; to forgive, is to absolve,
pardon, free from punishment; and the word, trespasses, signifies all manner of
offenses against God, the word in Greek is debts; (...).
which is a Syriack expression to signify sins: Thus occasioned, every man
is bound to perfect, exact, obedience to God by the condition of the first
covenant, and that under an heavy penalty, if he fail, he then which has so
failed is thus God's debtor to punishment; which if it be not forgiven him,
will fetch out a writ against him, cast him into prison, and there leave him
(till he has paid the utter most. i. e. eternally.) We therefore pray to God
to remit these debts of ours, the payment of which would go so deep with us,
and whereas we add [as we forgive them etc:] that is only a mention of a
qualification in us, made necessary by Christ, to make us capable of that
remission of God's; and as an argument to enforce that grant, by professing our
selves freely to pardon all those, that by any injuries done to us are become
our debtors, i. e. might justly in strict law be by us prosecuted to punishment.


S. Lord, grant us all this free pardon through the satisfaction of Jesus
Christ, for all our sins, and give us grace thus to forgive all others, that
have injured us, as freely as we hope for pardon from our good God!

I shall lead you to the last petition, which seems to be made up of two
members. Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. What is meant
by temptation first? then by Gods leading into it?


C. By temptation is meant any allurement of pleasure or profit; or deterrement
of danger or evil, which may bring me to fall into any sin. To enter into
such temptation] (as Mat. 26. 41. the phrase is used) signifies so to be
involved with either of these, that I cannot get out. To make to enter, or to
bring or lead into it, (...).
(which are all one) is to occasion our thus entering or being involved. Which
God may do by leaving us, or by withdrawing his grace. So that the meaning of
this petition is not, that God would not permit us to be tempted, (which is the
lot of all, especially the most Godly men, Ja. 1. 2, 3.) but that he will not
so forsake, or leave us to our selves, so destitute, and withdraw his grace, so
deliver us up (in time of temptation, either through prosperity or adversity,
or Satan's assault) that we be not able to extricate our selves; that he will
not leave us to be overcome by temptation. For so [to be tempted,] Gal. 6. 1.
signifies, being of a reall-passive signification, (of which nature there be
many in the New Testament) and noting the being overtaken also, ensnared to
sin, wrought on by temptation, for the possibility of that only is it; the
consideration of which will move us to restore such, as be already overtaken,
which is the subject of that verse.


S. Lord do not thou thus leave or forsake us in time of temptation so far
as that we be overcome by it! But what is the importance of the other member of
the petition?


C. The former was only negative, for not bringing us to this great hazard by
forsaking or destituting us; the latter is positive for deliverance from
temptation, not again from falling into it, but from being overcome by it;
which God may do by either of these ways. 1. By giving us a proportionate
measure of strength, or grace to bear it, and move under it, how heavy soever
the pressure be. Or 2. By tempering the temptation to our strength, and not
permitting the assault to be over heavy; and so, that God will do this by
which of these means he pleases, and deliver as from the power or hurt of
temptation, (which then only becomes evil when we are overcome by it) is the
sum of that second part of the last petition, Deliver us from evil, or out
of evil; whether by that, meaning the evil one, Satan, the artificer, and
designer, and improver of temptation; Or the temptation it self of our own
lust; or the world and enemies of piety.


S. Lord, be thou thus seasonably pleased to rescue and deliver us, when we
should otherwise surely be overcome, by the power and assistance of thy mighty
grace!

I now remember you told me one thing would be observeable from the
generallveiw of these threepetitions, which having now explained them, it will
be seasonable to afford me.


C. It is this, The order wherein God is wont to dispense his spiritual gifts
unto us, by the order wherein Christ directs us to petition them. Thus, God
first gives grace to sanctify; that manna from heaven, that bread of life,
without which we are not able to live to God. 2. He pardons sins to them that
are thus fitly qualified to receive his pardon. 3. He assisteth and upholds
from falling into sin, i. e. he 1. Sanctifies, 2. Justifies, 3. Gives grace
to persevere, and in this order we must desire and pray for these several
degrees of grace.


S. What now have you to add concerning the Doxology added to these petitions?


C. This, that whether it were delivered by Christ, or annexed out of the
Liturgies of the ancient Greek Church, it is a very fit form of
acknowledgement to God to enforce the granting of the petitions; especially
those three which respect God; thus, [Thy kingdom come] for [thine is the
Kingdom.] [Thy will be done] for [thine is the power.] [Hallowed be thy name]
for [thine is the glory] for ever and ever. The first of these is the
acknowledgement of God's dominion due to him over the world; and is not (nor
can be) said in earnest by any, but those that freely resign up their souls
for him alone to reign in, The sole Prince and Monarch of their souls: He
that retains one rebel lust out of his obedience, does mock him when he
repeates those words. The second is the acknowledgement of Gods omnipotence,
and all sufficiency, the fountain of all that grace and strength we beg for;
and he that cannot rely on him for all that is necessary for this life and
another, does reproach him when he faith Thine is the power. The third
acknowledges the thanks, the honor, the glory, of all we are, or have, to be
due to him from whom all is received, and he that can impute any thing to
himself, as his own acquisition, can never be thought in carnest when he
faith [Thine is the glory.] The Amen that concludes, is but a solemn style of
the Jewish first, and then Christian Church. Either noting the faith of him
that prays, and consides that what he here prays for shall be granted; or
only a recollection of all that is before prayed for, by the speaker; by which
all that are present, use to make themselves partakers of the severalls, and to
express their joining in each with him. [So be it.] Answerable to what is at
length in our Letany [We beseech the to hear us good Lord.]


S. I perceive after the recitation of this prayer, one appendage there is
which comes in as it were in a parenthesis, before our Savior proceeds to
the next matter [For if ye forgive men their trespasses etc. v. 14. 15. what is
the meaning of that?


C. It is a returning by way of reveiw, or giving a reason of one passage in
the former prayer (and but one, as if that were the most hugely important of
any) to wit why those words [as we forgive them that trespass against us] were
interposed. Namely because in God's forgiving of us, he has a peculiar respect
to our free pardon and forgiving of other men; as appears by the parable. Mat.
18. 35. where he that had his debt forgiven him by the King, yet going out and
challenging his fellow servant and exacting payment from him, has the former
forgiven debt most sadly brought upon him again and this applied there v. 35.
particularly by Christ, to every of us who from our hearts forgive not our
brothren their trespasses. And therefore whosoever prays for forgivenes,se in
this prayer, does not only oblige himself to forgive all others, but even
curse and bring down imprecations upon himself, and desire God in effect
never to pardon him, if he be not thus qualified by pardoning of others. 'Twill
therefore be most absolutely necessary for every man, that takes this prayer
into his mouth, first to put all malice, desire of revenge or grudge out of his
heart; or else his prayer shall be truned into a curse to him.


S. Of Fasting.
You have past through the second period of this chapter, the weighty duty of
prayer, together with the cautions and directions belonging to it. Let us now
by your leave advance to the third, reaching through the next three verses. 16,
17, 18. Moreover when thou fastest etc. where first, I pray what is the
importance of the phrase [Moreover] because that was not formerly used in the
second of the three?


C. It notes 1 this duty to be not so ordinarily and frequently taken notice
of as the former, and therefore a note of remarke is prefixed to it. 2. that
this is also a duty necessary to be superaeded to the practice of the other two
if we will be Disciples of his; it being a part of the worship of God also,
when it comes in conjunction with them.


S. Well then I shall presume you will continue the same method of handling
this, which in the former two, you have observed; by taking notice of, 1. a
duty supposed, 2. a caution interposed. I shall desire to receive first what
you will recommend unto me for the Duty which is here supposed, [thou when thou
fastest.] What kind of fasting is here spoken of?


C. Not the solemn prescribed fasts of the Jews (for those were not to be
concealed or dissembled) such as the great day of expiation, called the Sabbath
which God had chosen (described Is. 58. in those expressions which are
ordinarily thought to belong to the weekly Sabbath day:) Nor those other three
added to that under the time of the second Temple. But days of private fasting
that every one prescribed themselves, as a free will offering; some once, some
twice, some oftener every week, denying themselves their lawful ordinary
food, commonly not eating till the going down of the sun, and then very
moderately also. Which exercise as Christ disliketh not, but rather approves
it by his mention here, so he desires to free and rescue it from the
vaineglorious design of Pharisaicall hypocrites in the using of it. But before
you will be well capable of hearing, and assenting to your duty in this of
fasting or denying your self your lawful food, it will be necessary by way of
preparative, for you to know your duty in respect of sobriety; or what eating
or drinking (abstracted from the superaddition of this duty offasting) is
lawful for Christians. For as he which is not advanced so far in the school
of nature as to observe rules of justice, will scarce be a fit auditour of the
doctrine of almes-giving premised; So certainly he that has not submitted
himself to the rule of sobriety will be hardly brought to hear of fasting;
and besides, the truth is that the unjust man's alms will avail him little,
and as little the drunkards or gluttons fasts. And therefore it will not be
amiss a while, before we proceed, to take in the consideration of this duty of
sobriety.


S. I acknowledge the reasonableness of the proposal. Of Sobriety.
What then do you mean by Sobriety?


C. Temperance in eating and drinking, which (whatsoever may be said of it
under the Old Testament among the Jews, who being allured to the service of
God, especially with the representation of temporal promises of plenty, etc.
could not so fitly be interdicted the liberal use of meats, and drinks, but
might be allowed somewhat in that matter which is not allowable to Christians;
at least might be so far permitted the exceeding of those strict terms of
sobriety, without danger of punishment) is now strictly commanded Christians in
the New Testament; and that under threat of damnation to him, that frequently
of willingly, and indulgently offends herein. Thus 1 Cor. 6. 10. it is said of
drunkards, that they shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: where the word is
not to be restrained to those who drink to bestiality, (...) from (...),
strong or sweet wine: all one with Vinosi or Vinolenti.
to the depriving themselves of the use of their reason, that drink drunk as
we say; but belongs to all that drink wine or strong drink intemperately,
though through their strenght of brain they be not at present distempered by
it. So Gal. 5. 21. among the works of the flesh, which they that do shall not
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, there is mention of Revellings or comessations,
(...).
or excess in eating. So Romans 13. 13. both together forbidden: surfeiting, or
excess in eating; (...) and (...).
and drunkennesses or excess in drinking. And so, 1 Pet. 4. 3. Excess of
wine, revellings and drinkings. And on the other side is sobriety commanded, 1
These. 5. 6. 8. And Tit. 2. it is mentioned as a special design and end of the
appearing of Christ, that we should be instructed to walk justly, and piously,
and soberly in this present world. The first of those three referring to our
duty to our neighbor; the second to our duty toward God, and that of sobriety
to our duty toward our selves; (nothing tending more to the preservation of our
selves then that; and nothing more hurtful and unagreeable with that charity
which we owe to our selves then intemperance) and so in those three the whole
duty of man comprised.


S. How many sorts of excess in eating and drinking be there to which sobriety
is opposed?


C. The excess is of two sorts; one in the quantity, when we eat or drink to
the overcharging of the body; and the sobriety contrary to that is, when we
eat and drink no more then agrees with the health and good temper of it,
though we do allow our selves the pleasures and delights in choice of meats,
etc: Another excess there is in the quality or delicacy of meats or drinks,
and a studied care and pursuit of such as are thus most delightful. And the
sobriety contrary to this, is when we content our selves with that meat and
drink which is necessary or useful to the health and strength of our bodies,
and neglect or despise all other delicacies.


S. Are both these kinds of excess condemned, and sobrieties commanded us
Christians?


C. Some difference there is in this matter. The former of those excesses is so
forbidden, that he that uses it is excluded from the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
6. 10. Gal. 5. 21. And consequently the contrary sobriety strictly commanded
under that heavy penalty. But the second kind of excess is not so forbidden,
or the contrary sobriety so commanded under penalty of exclusion from the
Kingdom of Heaven to him that uses that excess, only in the choice of
meats that are most delicious. Yet because two considerations there are which
make this excess in the quality or delicacy to be unagreeable to the
composition of the Gospell-rule of life, I cannot but say that this kind of
sobriety is commanded also, and the contrary habit to it a finne.


S. What be those two considerations?


C. 1. The hope of eternal life, and endless spiritual joies that are
proposed to us in the New Testament; which if they be ever suffered to enter
into, and fill our hearts, will produce a dis-esteeme and mean opinion, and in
time a contempt and scorn of all carnal delights and pleasures; an using (the
pleasant part, as well as the profitable of) the world, as if we used it not;
and, so we may have food convenient for us, a notcaring for any choice or
superfluity; an absteining purposely from all supervacaneous pleasure. The
second consideration is the duty of charity and liberality to our poor
brethren required of us, and so recommended to us in the Gospel: in which he
that fares deliciously, and takes care not only for the preserving of the
health and strength, but also for the pleasing and entertaining of his palate,
will be less able to discharge his duty; that supervacaneous pleasure bringing
a superfluous expense and charge along with it. These two considerations make
it very hardly seperable from sin, for any man to allow himself this 2d kind
of excess; though I shall not pronounce damnation on him that is guilty of it;
1. Because I do not find in the New Testament any particular direct immediate
command against it; 2. Because the virtue of sobriety, especially in this 2d
sort consists not in any one point indivisible, so that he that eats this
kind of meat sins not, and he that eats any more delicious does sin. 3.
Because there is no rule by which to define delicious meats; that being most
delicious to one, which is less to another. 4. Because indeed to a temperate
healthy man the plainest and ordinariest meats are most delightful and
pleasing also. On which and the like reasons I shall not condemn or terrify
any man in this matter, nor tell him the absteining from delicacies is by any
precept required of him. But only mention to him these seven things. 1. That
it is a vile and Unchristian thing to set the heart upon such mean carnal
delights. 2. That what I can conveniently spare from my self, I should reserve
for those that do, or may want it. 3. That there is excess in the quality as
well as quantity of meats and drinks. 4. That a Christian may do better to
deny himself lawful pleasures, then do all that is not unlawful. 5. That
the end of eating and drinking is the preservation of health and strength; and
not the delighting the palate. 6. That though a well-tempered healthy man's
appetite ordinarily demands those things that are fittest for him; and
consequently in that case the satisfying the appetite may not be amiss; Yet 1.
The appetite is often intemperate in it is demands; often demands this or that
which by some custom it has been used to; and then that custom being
equivalent to a disease sometimes, sometimes the author of some real disease,
that disease should be cured, and that appetite mean time not obeyed; 2. The
appetite is tempted many times by the object, either really present, being set
before us; or imaginarily, being represented by the phansy, and then the motion
of the appetite is no argument of the meetenesse of satisfying it. 7. That
fasting, or abstinence wholly, is also a Christian duty to be used sometimes;
and by these rules I shall leave any prudent and sincere Christian to direct
himself in this matter, and desire him in the fear of God to be careful that
he offend not against that Christian necessary duty of sobriety in any kind.


S. But may not feasting be lawful now among Of Feasting.
us Christians, and so delicious fare?


C. Feasting, as it is an expression of thanksgiving to God, and celebration of
some act of his mercy, as it is an act of hospitality for the receiving and
treating of others, as well as our own family; as it is a means of preserving
and increasing mutual love and charity among men, is certainly now lawful,
and commendable; But all these ends and uses may be provided for, without
luxury and delicacy (only variety perhaps will be useful in sundry respects)
and again without any man's overcharging himself, and therefore will never be
an excuse, or apology for either. And as for honest mirth and cherfulness,
it will not at all be provided for by immoderate or delicious eating or
drinking, but rather hindered by it; raised tumultuously perhaps by that means
for the present, but then apt to degenerate into scurrilitie etc. and withal
attended with bitterness in the stomach, with satiety, and drowzinesse, which
is most contrary to it. In breife the true Christian feasting is when the poor
and rich meet at the same common entertainment, and they that want partake of
others plenty in the same common meal, contrary to the [Every man his own
supper.] Where for one to be drunken, i. e. to eat or drink excessively,
(...).
is as great a soloecisme, as for another to go away hungry.


S. I shall hope to lay that doctrine of sobriety to heart, and so to be in
some measure qualified for that superstruction and superaddition of fasting
which occasioned this discourse. Which because you resolved to be a duty
supposed in a Christian and acceptable to God under the Gospel I must first
desire the ground of that affirmation.


C. 1. Because it is here in the same manner joined with the two former,
almesgiving and prayer, which are unquestionably such duties. 2. Because it is
here promised a reward by Christ, if it be not blasted by vaineglory. 3.
Because it is foreseen by Christ to be that, that men are apt to expect praise
for among men. 4. Because Christ in other places approves, if not commands the
use of it; only affirms the reason for his Disciples to fast, to be not then
so agreeable, because the bridegroom was with them, Matt. 9. 15. but when the
bridegroom should be taken away i. e. after the death and departure of Christ,
then shall they fast in those days. 5. Because Christ brings in the Pharisee
boasting, that he fasts twice in the week, and lays no manner of censure on
him for so fasting, but only for the pride in boasting of it, and (I remember)
it is Saint Chrysostomes direction, that we should only avoid the Pharisees
pride, but not neglect his performances; as on the other side, forsake the
Publicans sins, and retain his humility. 6. Because it was prevalent with
God being joined with prayer to the working of miracles. Matt. 17. 21. and so
again for the obtaining the presence of the holy Ghost in a special manner,
Act. 2. and used by the Apostles before the Ordination of ministers, 8. 3. and
Act. 14. 33. 7. Because the performance of this is thought by Saint Paul a
sufficient occasion for a temporary parting of man and wife, 2 Cor. 7. 5. which
otherwise he would not advise; which signifies this to be an employment of
weight among Christians, 8. Because it is mentioned by Saint Luke as a part of
the worship of God, joined with prayer, in Anna. Luke 2. 37. of whom it is said,
that she departed not from the Temple serving, or worshipping God in prayers and
fastings, night and day; of (...).
which I conceive this is the importance; That she constantly frequented the
Temple at the hours of prayer, (not that she dwelt or continued all ways
there; for v. 38. there is mention of her coming thither) and used constant
observations of fasting; and in so doing, worshipped God. 9. Because Cornelius
his vision, which brought him to Christianity, is mentioned to have been at a
time of his fasting and praying. 10. Because of the many good ends and uses, to
which fasting is proper; and in respect of which, it looks more like a
Christian virtue, then, considered as a bare abstinence from a meal, it does.


S. What be those ends or uses?


C. 1. As an act of self denial, which it is, when otherwise I would eat,
but choose rather to abstain to perform this act of that, which in general
Christ requires of his Disciples. 2. As an act of revenge; which (...).
you find among the effects of Godly sorrow, and parts of repentance. 2 Cor.
7. 11. and such may fasting be, if on consideration of, and by way of
punishment on my former plenitude and luxury I now think fit thus to punish my
self. 3. As a means of expressing my humiliation for sin, in time of Gods
wrath lying upon a nation or any particular person, and for the averting of
God's wrath: To which fasting has been always counted very agreeable, and
found to be very successful, both in the old Testament, and in all stories of
the Church. 4. As a means to fit any man the better for the performing the
duty of prayer as it ought. To which purpose he that does not acknowledge its
propriety of usefullnesse, is certainly a man of a strange making; much
distant from the best sort of Christians, whose experience will sure commend it
to him. 5. As a means to enable to the performing of works of mercy, by
giving that to the poor, which is spared from my self, which therefore should
be always observed in either public or private fasts which we keep
religiously, that we may never be the richer for what is thus spared, lest we
seem (or be tempted) to fast for coveteousnesse, as others do for strife. Is.
58. to which purpose it is that you see here alms, and prayer, and fasting,
joined together by Christ, not to be divided by us. If the meal we fast from
bring any thing to our purses, it will not be accepted. For Is. 58. the fast
which God has chosen, or that which is aceptable to him, is said to be that,
when we break the bread to the hungry etc. 6. As a means to abate the desires
and luxuriances of the flesh, and make the body more tractable, and tame, and
patient of receiving the dictates of reason; and to subdue in it inclinations
toward uncleanenesse, when those are likely to prove too strong for us. To
which purpose that fasting should be useful, 'twill not be hard for any man to
guess, that considers the cause of carnal desires in the body, and that old
saying, that without Ceres and Bacchus, the belly-deities, Venus, or
incontinent desires grow cold.


S. Is all kind of fasting then acceptable to God?


C. No certainly, To fast out of sorrow or mourning for the death of a friend,
is not so, (though not sinful neither.) To fast to save the charges of eating;
to be the better able, or more at leisure to transact business of the world,
is not so, (though again not sinful) and by these you will guess of some
other kinds also. Yet you may mark still, that one thing there is in all
fasting, to wit self denial, which though it is not by every one that fasteth
proposed as an end, yet if it be so proposed, by so doing that fast shall be
acceptable to God.


S. I have yet one objection against all which you have said in this matter,
and it is this, that all this while you have not mentioned any command or
precept of fasting in the new Testament, and therefore do I not believe there
is any such; and for the old Testament, though there be a command for the
observation of the great day of expiation every year, yet 1. That was only
obligatory to the Jews. 2. It was a public fast, and not pertinent to this
place, which speaks of private fasts, 3. If it should be thought to concern
us, yet being but once in the year, it would not be considerable; from all
which it being supposed that there is no precept now particularly obligeing us
Christian's to fast, it may seem to follow, that fasting is not now acceptable
to God.


C. To your whole objection I answer, 1. That there is no necessity of a
precept of fasting, to assure us that it will be acceptable to God; there was
no precept for voluntary oblations under the law (save only a direction when
they were offered, that they should not be offered maimed etc. as here there
is, that we should not blemish our fasting with desire of praise of men,) and
yet they were accepted; and many other evidences have been produced to prove
the use of fasting to be acceptable to God, though not commanded. 2. Though
there be no explicit command of fasting in the new Testament, yet from the
nature and constitution of the Gospel, it may be collected, that there are in
some cases some tacit commands of it. As when all degrees of uncleanness, all
satisfying the desires of the flesh, are forbidden, save only in lawful
matrimony, and no allowance of polygamy or concubines, to him that finds
himself unable thus to live in conjugall chastity, the using of means, which
may help to it, are tacitly commanded by God; and consequently fasting, if
that be the only means left him; and then, as to the Disciples, that could
not cast out that Devil, which would not go out but by prayer and fasting, it
is accounted infidelity by Christ, not to use that means, Mar. 9. 19. So will
it be the like unchristian sin in him, that uses not this means so necessary
to so necessary an end. The same may be said, in case the Magistrate under whom
we live prescribes the observation of it, or when ever any man sees it
necessary, or very probable, that he shall be hindered from the performing of
some duty (which he owes to the glory of God or edification of his brethren)
unless he fast that day. Lastly, the case may be so set, that a man may
discern himself able, without any detriment to his health, or danger of
shortning his life, etc. to use frequent fasting, and withal by that means
much advance his spiritual ends, have greater vacancy for holy employments,
greater store for works of mercy, etc. and then sure in this case the commands
of praying, and mercifullnesse, will be also tacit commands of fasting. So
that though there be not any particular explicit precept, obligeing every man
whatsoever, under pain of sin to fast simply, thus, or thus often; yet
tacit commands there may be to them that are by any of these circumstances
fitted for it; and even to those that for the present are not, it will yet be
fit to be considered and counted of, as a duty that they may be concerned in;
and that, if in no other respect, yet in this, that they are Christians who
aspire to an angelical life, and invisible joys, and should therefore deny,
and by that weane themselves of those sensual corporeal pleasures of eating,
or drinking, so far as to preservation of life and health, and to their duty
to themselves may be agreeable.


S. How often then should a Christian fast?


C. By what has been said, you will guess it unlikely, that I should
undertake to prescribe set rules for this, the duty I shall leave to you as a
voluntary oblation for you to offer as frequently as prudence joined with due
care of your health, and as piety, and the spirit of God shall prompt you; and
only tell you these three things, 1. That the Pharisee fasted twice every
week, and that never censured in him as a piece of Pharisaisme, or hypocrisy,
or fault of any kind; but as commendable, if he had not boasted of it. 2. That
every Christian ought to have his solemn set days for the performing that
great and weighty duty of humiliation, in calling himself to account for all
his ways, and confessing his sins to God more particularly; and those days
should not be too slow in their returns, lest his soul be too deep in
arreares, and so unwilling to come to accounts at all. It Is very reasonable for
every man or woman of leisure to set apart one day in the week for this turn;
and if the whole day or any other part of it may not thus be spared from the
business of his calling, yet the dinner time that day may be borrowed from
eating, and thus more usefully employed, without any disturbance to his other
affairs. And he that uses not some such constant course (which yet on
special occasions may be altered) will be in great danger to be found, and
censured a neglecter of the duties of a Disciple of Christ. 3. That over and
above this common duty of all men, some other wants there are or may be in this
or that man, to the repairing of which fasting may be very isntrumental, as
has been showed; and so proportionably is to be more frequently used by them
who have this need of it Of which their own conscience in the fear of God is
left the judge. All this has been said of private fasting, because that is
peculiar to this place. For public fasting the direction must be had from the
laws where we live; which so far at least oblige every one that he offend
not against them, either contemptuously, or with scandal.


S. I shall now desire Gods direction and grace to incline me to the
performance of this my duty, so as may be acceptable to him, and to pardon me
for my former omissions of it, which truly have hitherto been very great.

You may please now to proceed to the caution interposed, wherein I shall
presume it superfluous for you to say much, having twice already insisted on
it, in order to prayer and almes-giving?


C. The caution is it self in plain intelligible words, [When you fast be not
as the Hypocrites, of a sad countenance, for they disfigure (or discolor)
their faces that they may appear to men to fast] but (rather then so) do thou
when thou fastest anoint thy head, and wash thy face, (for thy outward guise
appear in thy ordinary countenance and habit; for the Jews were wont to
anoint themselves daily, unless in time of mourning) that thou appear not to
men to men to fast, (that no man out of thy family be witness of thy private
fasts) but to thy father which is in secret; that thou may appear desirous
to approve thy self to him only, who only is able to reward thee.


S. You have now past through those three great Christian duties which by their
so near confederacy here, and by what you have said of them, I find so linked
together, that it is very reasonable we should set apart some time for the
joint practice of them altogether; for though it may be fit to give alms when
I pray not, nor fast not; and to pray when I neither give alms, nor fast; yet
sure my fasts wherein the expense of a dinner is saved, should be joined then,
with almes-giving, to wit, giving to the poor that which is thus spared, and
always with prayer, God give me a heart thus to practice it!

Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, etc.] And so on in one
continued thread to the end of the Chapter. Of all which what is the chief
summary importance you may breifely tell me.


C. There are two things to which all the ensuing sixteen verses belong, and
the second of them Of the desire and love of wealth.
appendant to the former, unto which the discourse insensibly glides. The
former is for the mortifying of all desire and love of wealth; the latter for
the moderating our worldly care or secular providence. The former in the six
ensuing verses, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.


S. Why do you refer these words, Lay not up, etc. to the mortifying of
desire and love of wealth?


C. Because a treasure is a metaphorical word, to signify that which men
desire and love most importunately, and set their heart upon; and so the
prohibition of laying up our treasure on earth, is in effect the forbidding to
love, or desire, or set the neart upon any earthly riches as a possession; but
only to use them so as may most improve our future account, i. e. by liberal
dispensing of them to raise a bank, which may enrich us for ever in another
world. For the enforcing of which prohibition and exhortation, he mentions, 1.
The vanity and uncertainty of worldly riches; which evidences how unfit they
are for our hearts to be set upon. One kind of them, that which consists in
costly vestments, the moth, a poor despiseable creature, can and does destroy
and make useless; another kind, our corn, and other the like fruits of the
earth, (which the fool so applauded himself that he had store of for many
years) earing, (for so the word rendered rust, does (...).
signify) whether of men, or (the ordinary attendants of granaries) vermin,
brings to naught, (or if you will retain the word in our translation, [rust]
it will then refer to our money, and all other goods of that nature which are
eaten with rust) and our any other kind of treasure, never so closely and
safely locktup, thieves can, and ordinarily do break through and steal from
us. And 2. The infatuating power of riches, when we come once to love them, to
resolve to have them, (which Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 8. calls they that will be
rich) and to that purpose to serve or wait upon (...).
them, which way soever they lead us; Our hearts are then so wholly set upon
them that we cannot serve God, or endeavor to approve our selves to him. This
our Savior proves by contrariety of the commands of these two Masters, God and
Mammon; for if their commands might be subordinate one to the other, they might
both have their answerable obedience: God in the first place, and Mammon, or
wordly wealth, in the subordination. But Gods commands being contrary to
Mammons, i e. to those courses which are necessary to the getting of riches, he
that will grow rich, that is bent in that design, must give over all hope of
being, or passing for, Gods servant.


S. What be the commands of God that are so unreconcileable with the service of
Mammon, or vehement desire of wealth?


C. 1. His command of doing justice, exact justice; as that excludes all
violence, fraud, oppression, etc. 2. That command of justice of the tongue in
performing of promises, though to the greatest hinderance and damage; in not
slaundering any for the wealth of the whole world. 3. His command of absolute
contentment in what state soever I am set by him. 4. That command of selling
and giving to the poor, i. e. if otherwise thou can not relieve thy indigent
brother in distress, but by selling somewhat of thy own; then to do that,
though it be most unlike prospering, or thriving in the world. 5. That command
of freedom and ingenuity of spirit; unconcernednesse in these worldly,
inferior, transitory things; selfe-resignation; dependence on Gods providence
for our daily bread; instead of all carking infidelity of the worldling. And 6.
That of earnest desire and contending for peace. 7. That of meekness,
patience, praying for enemies.


S. How are all those so unreconcileable with Mammons commands?


C. You will discern it in the particulars. 1. Mammon prescribes violence to
every man, oppressing the poor righteous man, any that stands in our way to
our espoused gain. 2. Mammon commands false accusing, blasting, defaming of
any which are likely to keep or get any preferment or possession that we have
a mind to; as in the example of Jezabell toward Naboth it appears, when her
husband had a longing after his vineyard; 3. Mammon commands a perpetual
unsatisfiednesse, a kind of dropsie-thirst, infused still at the bestowing of
our plenty; Mammon will not be thy friend, but on condition thou shall be more
importunate in getting wealth, more passionate in making court to Mammon after
this then thou were before; and so generally you may observe it, the more
possessions, still the more covetise. 4. Mammon commands tenacity, a most
strict keeping of our own; nay a perpetual desire of being a purchasing, of
making some new bargains, enlarging the walk; and if Christ require to sell
and give, you see the rich man, Mammons servant, presently leaves him, he goes
away very sad, because he was very rich. 5. Mammon has all manner of slavish
tremblings; cowardly, uningenuous fears for his Subjects task, (quite
contrary to selfe-resignation) a dismal thoughtfullnesse at every apprehension
of danger; a perpetual carking and hovering over his wealth, and a venturing
on any the most unlawful [In-Christian practice, when ever that great law of
selfe-preservation, (as Mammon tells him) i. e. the law of Mammon, but of no
other lawgive, (I am sure not of Christ) suggests it to him. 6. Mammon commands
war (for enlarging of dominion, of possessions) that more glorious name of
pyracy, which Saint James seems to have considered, when he says, wars come
from our pleasures, Ja. 4. 1. which (...).
are surely those pleasures consequent to the delight or lust of the eye;
desiring to have, v. 2. It being most clear that coveteousnesse puts upon all
the most furious wars, and contentions, and quarrels in the world. 7. Mammon
sets men upon the most malicious acts of revenge of any thing; the covetous man
has still so many enemies in his black book, so many quarrels to answer,
injuries to repay, trespasses to revenge, that his whole life is a kind of hell
to him; not knowing how to be quit with every of them, he is feign to treasure
up quarrels many years together, and study nothing but the payment of such
debts. Other contrarieties might be mentioned between the commands of God and
Mammon; God commands to keep the heart, Mammon the wealth, with all diligence,
or above all keeping; God commands sorrow for sin, Mammon sorrow for losses;
God commands confession of Christ and all Christian truth, and never more then
when it is most opposed, when like to bring most danger to the Confessor; Mammon
commands prudence, wariness, time-serving, never hazarding any thing for
truths sake; the righteous is bold as a Lion, when the Mammonist with his
wealth, and heaps before him, dares not quatch without a license from Mammon;
an assurance that it shall cost him nothing. These and an hundred more
contrarieties evidence the truth of our Saviors general speech, that [no man
can serve two Masters] brought home to this conclusion, you cannot serve God
and Mammon; and from thence enforce the prohibition of not laying up our
treasures on earth, or setting our heart on worldly riches; which is the maine
importance of those six verses. But beside this there is a positive exhortation
in these verses to charity, and liberality, which is meant by laying up our
treasure in Heaven, i. e. so laying out our wealth, as that it may bring us in
those everlasting returns, as Christ explaines the phrase by the like in
another place; give to the poor and thou shall have treasure in Heaven, and
Make you friends of the unrighteous, or transitory, or unstable, Mammon,
(contrary to the true durable riches) that when you fail they may receive you,
i. e. (by an Hebraisme) you may be received (as this night they shall require
thy soul, is all one with, thy soul shall be required) into everlasting
habitations. And besides other benefits of your liberality, this will be one,
that when you thus lay up your wealth by giving it to God, and his poor
children, your heart which duly follows that treasure, will have no
temptation to fasten on the earth, but on heaven, where our treasure dwells,
our hopes are laid up, our joy is to be expected.


S. I shall not trouble you longer with this matter, it being so obvious and
plain, only methinks two verses there are in the midst of these which sound
not to this matter and are somewhat obscure; I beseech your help to direct me
to the meaning of them, they are v. 22. and 23.] The light of the body is the
eye; if therefore the eye be single the whole body shall be full of light, But
if thy eye be evil, the whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore
the light that is in thee bedarkenesse, how great is that darkness.]


C. These words, as they are mostly interpreted concerning the goodness or
illness of iutentions, are not indeed very pertinent to the business in hand
of liberality and of love of money, you may therefore give me your patience
while I give you the natural genuine interpretation of them, and then you will
discern how pertinent they are to the present (...).
matter. To which purpose, I shall first tell you what is meant by a single,
and an evil eye, 2. By light and darkness. 3. By the similitude here used.
And then 4. how all belongs to the point in hand.


S. What is meant by the single, and evil eye?


C. The word single signifies in the New Testament Liberal; the single eye,
liberality, bounty, distribution of our wealth to the poor. So Romans 12. 8. He
that gives in singleness, or, as our margent reads, liberally. 2 Cor. 8. 2.
the riches of your singleness, we read, liberality. c. 9. 11. To all
singleness, we read to all bountifullnesse, and v. 13. Singleness of
distribution, we read liberality of distribution, or liberal distribution. Ja:
1. 5. that gives to all men singly, (...).
we read liberally. Contrary to this the evil eye signifies envy,
covetousness, unsatisfiednesse, niggardliness, and all the contraries of
liberality. So Mat. 20. 15. is thy eye evil because (...).
I am good? i. e. Art thou unsatisfied therefore, because I have been more
liberal to another? thou have thy due, why art thou discontent, or
unsatisfied? So Mat. 7. 22. Out of the heart comes the evil eye, i. e. envy,
covetousness, unsatisfiednesse. (For this is observable that envy is generally
set as the opposite to all liberality, and God by the fathers called without
envy, meaning most liberal and bountiful.) The word which (...) Da^s (...)
Artstoph. (...)
is here rendered evil being aequivalent to an Hebrew word which signifies the
greatest degree of illiberality or uncharitableness; and the word eye being
added proverbially, perhaps because that part has most to do in covetousness,
which is called the lust of the eye, 1 Ja. 2. 16.


S. What is meant by light and darkness?


C. By light, Christianity, or the state of the Gospel. We are of the light,
and walk like children of light; and darkness, contrary to that, unchristian
heat henish affections or actions.


S. What is meant by the similitude here used?


C. That as in the body of a man the eye is the directer, shows it what it
should do, and if it be as it ought, directs it the right way, but if not,
leads into most dangerous errors; so in the body the heart (mentioned
immediately before) if it be liberally affected, having laid up its treasure in
heaven, and fastened it self on it, it will direct the man to all manner of
good Christian actions; but if it be covetous, unsatisfied, worldly, hard, it
brings forth all manner of unchristian, heathenish actions. And then if the
light that be in thee be darkness, if the heart in thee be unchristian,
heathenish, how great is that darkness? what an unchristian condition is this?


S. I shall not now asks you how all this belongs to the point in hand.


C. It is indeed plain enough already, that it belongs perfectly to the
business. And this is the sum of all 1. That liberality and charity in the
heart is a special part of Christianity; has a notable influence toward the
production of all Christian virtues, and a main argument and evidence it is of
a Christian to have this grace in him. 2. That uncharitableness,
worldly-mindednesse, unsatisfiednesse, uncontentednesse, envy, covetousness,
is a sin of a very evil effect, and consequence; betrays a man to all most
unchristian sins; fills him full of iniquity, (according to that of Saint
Paul. 1 Timothy 6. 10. for the love of money is the root of all evil. etc.) and a
sad symptom wherever we find it of a great deal of ill besides. All which
comes in very pertinently on occasion of those words, where the treasure is,
there will the heart be also, and are a foundation for that appendant
affirmation [You cannot serve God and Mammon.]


S. You have fully cleared this difficulty, and past through the first of the
two things contained in the remainder of this chapter, that which pertaines to
the mortifying all desire and love of wealth, God make it successful in my
heart, to work all covetous warthy affections out of it, and plant all
contrary graces of liberality, and mercifullnesse in their steed!

Of worldly care.
You will please now to proceed to the other thing, the moderating of our
worldly care, and providence, in the following words. Take no thought for your
life, etc. and that taking its rise from the former[ therefore, say unto you
take no thought etc.].


C. I shall now proceed to this point. which takes up all the verses to the end
of this chapter, and in it only detain you with two things, 1. The precept,
or doctrine of worldly thoughtlessenesse, 2. The enforcements of it, showing
how reasonable it is to be observed, though it seem a strange doctrine.


S. To begin with the first, what care and solicitude is it, that is here
forbidden?


C. It is set down in these three several phrases, 1. Take no thought for
your life, what you shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body,
what you shall put on. v. 25. 2. Take no (...)*
thought, saying what shall we eat etc. v. 31. and 3. Take no thought for the
morrow. v. 34. From all which it appears, that the thing here forbidden is
that, whatever it is, which is the full importance of the Greek word rendered
[taking thought] which being derived by Grammarians (...).
from a phrase which signifies in English to divide the mind) does then
signify a dabiousnesse of mind, or anxiety; and that, a want or littleness,
a defect of faith, v. 30. a not believing, as we ought, that God that gives us
life and bodies, will allow us means to sustain one, and array to there Saint
Luke calls it by a word which we render (...).
doubtful mind, or careful suspense, but signifies hanging betwixt two; a
not knowing how to resolve whether God will do this for us, or no. Now that I
may give you the clear evidence of the Christian doctrine in this matter. I
will deliver it distinctly in these few propositions. 1. That this is a truth,
(infallible truth) of Gods, that God will for the future provide for every
servant of his, food and raiment, a competence of the necessaries of life; this
truth may appear by the promises to this purpose in the scripture; two there
are of this nature, that the margents of our Bibles in this place refer to.
Psalm: 55. 22. Cast thy burden on the Lord, and he shall sustain thee. 1 Pet.
5. 7. Casting all care on the Lord, for he cares for you. To which you may
add Christ promise, that if we ask we shall have, if we asks not amiss,
says Saint James; which sure we do not, if we ask but what he taught us to
ask; this day our daily bread, i. e. (as in the explication of the Lords
prayer was showed) day by day those things that are necessary for the remainder
of our life. Many other promises you will observe to the same purpose, and
particularly this in the place by way of expostulation. v. 30. shall he not
much more cloth you, O ye of little faith? intimating strongly a promise that
he shall, and requiring faith or belief of this promise at our hands.
Secondly, That want of faith or trust in this promise, not believing this
truth, is a piece of the damning sin of infidelity, so charged here upon them
that believe it not, v. 30. Thirdly that any carking solicitude for the
future, is an argument of this distrust, this not daring to rely on God's
providence, and God's promise; and so an unchristian sin.


S. But is not every man commanded by the Apostle. 1 Timothy 5. 8. to provide for
his own, especially those of his own house or kindred? and if he does not,
defined to have denied the faith, and to be worse then an infidel? Sure then
this want of thoughtfullnesse and secular providence will rather be infidelity.


C. To reconcile this prohibition of Christ's with this precept of Saint Paul's.
It will be necessary to add a 4th proposition, That for present supplies, a
Christian not only may, but must use those lawful and proper means that are
ordinarily in his power to use to the attaining that end; and this is so far
from distrusting of God, or not depending and beleiving on him, that it is
indeed a special act of this faith; the doing of what he requires us to do,
and without our doing of which he has not promised to supply us. His promises
which are the object of our faith, are not absolute, but conditional promises;
require and suppose a condition to be performed on our part, and then give us a
right to the thing promised, not before. Every man therefore must do somewhat
himself to provide for his own (and not to do so is infidelity in Saint
Paul's style; just as the Disciples are called faithless for not casting out of
the Devil, that would not be cast out but by prayer and fasting. i. e. For not
using that means to cast him out, Mark. 9. 19.) to be isntrumental to Gods
providence; not to fly to his extraordinary protection, when his ordinary is
afforded us. God does not use to multiply miracles unprofitably, nor at all but
for the begetting or confirming of our Faith; which can, not be the case when
we neglect those means of making good Gods truths, which are already by him
afforded us; but only when all lawful means have been tried improsperously,
then 'twill be Gods season to show forth his extraordinary power. In the mean
time it is sufficient that he offer us means to bring us to that end which he
promises; and if we neglect those means, and so fail in the condition
required of us, we thereby discharge him of all obligation to make good the
promise to us; which was not absolute for him to do without us, but
conditional for him to do if we failed not in our parts.


S. But what are those means required on our parts, as subservient to Gods
providence in feeding and clothing us?


C. I shall first name you some that are such means, and then others that are
mistaken for such, and are not. The true means you may know in general by
this mark, that all means perfectly lawful, (i. e. all things that are
proper to that end, and are no way prohibited by God) are such, and all
unlawful are not. But then particularly, 1. Labor and diligence in ones
caling (...).
is such a lawful means. As in spiritual so in temporal things if we
labor, or work, God will cooperate. As in the war with Amelek, when Israel
fights, God will fight with them. Poverty is the Amelek, our honest labor
fighting against it, (and therefore the idle person is called 2 These. 3. 6, 7,
11. a disorderly walker. The word being military, (...).
signifying one out of his rank, one that is not in file to fight against this
enemy) and when we are thus employed, God our Captain has sworn that he will
have war, will fight against that enemy with us for ever; and that as the 72
read in that place, with a secret hand, assisting him that is thus busied;
prospering him insensibly that is thus employed; A sure blessing on the
laborious, Prove. 10. 4. The hand of the diligent makes rich. And on the other
side, he that will not labor, says the Apostle, let him not eat; which is
there a piece of Apostolical discipline to beseige idleness, and starve it
up. And that an image on earth of what is done in Heaven, (as in the other
censures of the Church) it being the rule of Gods ordinary providence, that
they that neglect the means shall not obtain the end. This promise being
conditional as all others, not to the idle profane jiduciary, but to the
faithful labourer; The absolute Stoicall depender on fate, may starve for want
of industry, dye for want of physic, and be damned for want of repentance;
and all this not through too much, but too little Faith; the not taking the
means along with him which were predestined by God to bring him to a better
end.


S. What other means is there required of us by God to this end?


C. Prayer to him for our daily bread; the condition without which there is no
one thing which we have promise to receive from him. Ask and ye shall have,
etc. but not otherwise. So elsewhere the worshipping of God is joined with the
doing of his will, to make us capable of Gods hearing.


S. What other means?


C. Honest thrift; the not spending upon our lusts, our vanities, those good
things of this world, that our labor and prayers have by Gods blessing brought
in to us. For the prodigal may starve as well as the sluggard; he that drinks
out his bread, as he that does not earne it. God has not undertaken for any
sin that it shall not ruin us. His protection is like that of the law, for
them only that travail in the day, and in the rode; not for the disorderly
walkers in any kind, that have any bypath or night-worke to exhaust that
treasure, that his providence has or is ready to bestow. And the same that I
say of luxury, may be said also of other harpies and vultures, that leave men
often times as bare as the highway robbers; that sly sin of close adultery,
that eats out so many estates. Yea and that other of strife and contention;
that pestilence as it were that walks in darkness, and devoures the wealth
as well as the soul, and no reparations to be expected from God for such
losses. One means more there is to which Gods promise of temporal plenty
being annexed we may well add it to the former. Exercise of justice and mercy.
Bring you all the tithes, says God by Malachy, into my storehouse, Mal. 3. 10.
i. e. both the Priests and the poor man's tith, and prove me now herewith if I
will not open the windows of Heaven, and power you out a blessing, etc. To
which purpose the Jews had a proverbiall Da Decimas in hoc utditescas.
speech. Pay tithes on purpose that thou may be rich. And many places of
Scripture to the same purpose, which before mentioned; and threatenings on the
contrary, that they that withhold more then is meet, it shall tend to want. To
these may perhaps be added another means, having also the promises of long and
prosperous life annexed to it, that of meekness and obedience; of which,
says the law, their days shall be long in the land flowing with milk and
honey; and the Gospel, that they shall possess the earth. As also it is
affirmed of Godliness in general, that it has the promises of this life, i.
e. of so much of the prosperity of this world as shall be matter of contentment
to them. Now these being by God designed as fit and proper means to the
qualifying us for the performance of his promise of secular sufficient wealth
to us, and the condition required on our parts; 'twill be but the beleiving of
a lie for any man to neglect these several means on his part, and yet to
claim or challenge the end on Gods part: In the same manner and degree as it
is for the impenitent sinner to believe and challenge the pardon of his sins
and salvation.


S. I cannot but consent to this truth, and acknowledge the fitness of the
means which you have mentioned as truly subservient to that end.

But you told me there were also some that were mistaken for such means, but
are not. What are those?


C. 1. Secular wisdom, policy, contrivance, (for though this seem sometimes
to obtain that end, Yet 1. There is no promise made to it. 2. It many times
fails of the design. Nay 3. It has often times a most remarkable curse upon
it) 2. Hoarding up all that comes; pinching the back and belly to fill the
bag. 3. Going to law and contentiousnesse. 4. Tenacity; not giving or lending
to those that truly want; the griping illiberall hand. Give and it shall be
given unto you, not else. 5. Immoderate care and solicitude; loving and
courting of the world. 6. Deceit and injustice; and especially Sacrilege and
perjury. Each of these in the esteem of the world, the fairest way to wealth,
yet in the event prove the straight rode to curse and poverty, (it is a snare
to devour that that is holy, says Solomon, and after vows to make enquiry,
and that snare to the wealth, as well as the soul. See the flying roll, Zach.
5. 2. and the curse that it brought with it, v. 3. and that entering into the
house of the theife and of him that swears falsely. v. 4. i. e. on his family
also, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and never leave haunting
it till it consume it with the timber and stones; that that a man thinks would
be best able to endure, the firmest part of an estate moulters and crumbles
away between the fingers of the perjured person; noting this to be a consuming
sin, (and a consumption an hereditary disease) an emblem of which is to be
seen, Numb. 5. in the perjured woman, v. 27. The water that causes the curse
shall enter into her, and become bitter, and her belly shall swell, and her
thigh rot, those two parts of the body that have relation to the posterity.) 7.
Distrust of Gods promise; for sure never any man got any thing of God by not
trusting him; He that will not take his word must find out some other
play master. 8. Oppression, violence, spoiling of others, (though that seem a
sure present course to bring in wealth) for the threate of the Prophet, Isa.
33. 1. belongs to such. Woe unto thee that spoilest; when thou ceasest to
spoil thou shall be spoiled. Men are seldom suffered to taste any of the
fruit of those sins, least they or others should fall in love with them.


S. You have now abundantly discharged your promise in setting down the true
and the pretending means.

Have you any more propositions now to add to the four already mentioned in
this business?


C. Only these two. 5ly. that he that uses these true means appointed by
God, and discardes the false ones suggested by the world, by Satan, or by his
own ravening stomach, is more sure of not wanting for the future, is better
provided for a comfortable old age, and a thriving prosperous posterity, then
all the worldlings arts can possibly provide him. He that gives over all
anxious thought for himself, enters into Gods tuition, and then shall surely
be never the poorer for not caring. 6. That the using of unlawful (though
never so specious or seemingly necessary) means to the getting or preserving
of worldly wealth, or the necessities of life, is the most direct piece of
infidelity, most clearly forbidden in the phrase of taking (...).
thought; this being the distrusting of God and his authorized means, and
flying to the witch with Saul, or rather the Devil to help us to it; the
dividing our minds, or hanging betwixt two; or rather indeed forsaking of one,
and sleaving to the other; disclaiming God and his providence, and trusting to
our selves and our own artifices; The greatest anxiety of mind imaginable;
which thus drives us out of our reason, our Christianity, to those courses
which are most contrary to both.


S. I conceive the sum of your whole discourse on this matter is this, that
for the good things of the world God having made promise to give them to his
servants, and his promise being conditional, requiring at our hands the use of
means to obtains the thing promised, our duty is to use those means labor
and prayer, etc. and then so fully to trust God for the performing his promise,
as never to have anxious or dubious thought about it; never to fly to any
unlawful means, to provide for our selves. And by this way of stating, I
acknowledge our Saviors speech here fully reconciled with Saint Paul's command
of providence, with Christ's praying for temporal blessings, etc.

I have only one scruple wherein I shall desire your satisfaction, whether God
does not sometimes leave men destitute of food and raiment, and how then it can
be infidelity to be anxious in that point? Or how can Gods promise of caring
for us be said to be performed?


C. I answer, 1. That it is not ordinary for men to be left destitute of food
and raiment; and though sometime it cannot be had but by begging of it, yet God
having in his providence designed the rich man to be his steward, the wealthy
man's barn to be the poor man's storehouse; no man is left destitute that is
afforded this means. 2. There being so many other means forenamed, required
of us, to be isntrumental to Gods providence, it will hardly be found that any
man is left thus destitute, who has not first been wanting to himself; and
so the whole matter imputable to his default, and not to Gods. 3. That if the
utmost be supposed which is imaginable, that some one be left so far
destitute as to come to starve, yet may the promise of God remain true and
firm; for that promise obliges him not to eternize the life of any, which
being supposed, that he should dye by famine, is as reasonable and
reconcilable with this promise, (which can extend no farther then that he will
sustain us, as long as he sees it fit for us to live, but no longer) as that
he should dye by sword, or pestilence; and that death as supportable as many
other diseases and deaths, of the stone, strangury, dysentery, etc. 4. That
suppose God do thus destitute us, yet our anxiety, or solicitude, our using
of unlawful means, can never be able to relieve or secure us; whatsoever we
can in this case call to our releife, God can curse and blast also, and make it
as unable to help us, as the reed of Egypt; and though sometimes God permits
unlawful means to offer us help, when lawful fail us, to make trial of us
whether we will use them, and distrust God or no, (who ought to be trusted and
relied on, though he kill us) yet is it far more ordinary for those who have
fled to all manner of dishonest means of increasing wealth, to come to
absolute beggary and distress, and contumelious ends; then in any man's
observation it will be found for the trusters in God to do. 5. Why may it not
be thought and found true upon every man's selfe-examination, that such
destitution, when ever it befalls a child of Gods, is a punishment of some
sin which God in mercy sees fit to punish here, and not in another world. As
particularly that of littleness of Faith in this matter, (as Peter's sinking,
Mat. 14. 30. was a punishment of his fear, and doubting, and little Faith;
which some good men (...).
are so subject to, and wheresoever it is found may expect to be punished,
being it self a sin, and containing in it so many other sins; 1. The sin
of disobedience to Christ's command here, in his [take no thought] or [you shall
not take thought] ver. 31. Secondly, the sin of infidelity, not trusting, and
so denying (in actions at least) Gods veracity; the attribute wherein he
chiefly glories; giving him the lie as it were, an affront and contumely to the
almighty. Thirdly, the sin of worldly-mindednesse, placing our care and
affection on such base inferior objects; incurvation of the immortal soul to
a thing so much below it; and robbing God of his due, that peculiar creature of
his, the heart, so naturally his, and moreover so importunately begged for by
him. Not to mention many other sins which constantly follow this solicitude,
(where it is once entertained, not as a transient passion, but a Chronicall
disease) though not constantly the same, as indevotion, impatience,
unmercifullnesse, cowardice, worldly sorrow, maligning of others, etc.


S. Having thus largely explained the prohibition, you may please to add in
one word what is the countrary Christian duty, that is here commanded by Christ?


C. Praising God for our present wealth, and trusting him for the future.


S. What do you mean by the former?


C. Praising him four ways. 1. By acknowledging the receipt. 2. Using it, and
rejoicing in it. 3. Ministering, communicating to them that have not. and 4. If
any thing still remain, keeping it as isntrumental to Gods providence for the
future, laying up what God gives us to lay up.


S. What do you mean by the latter?


C. 1. Believing his promise, 2. Obeying his directions in the use of his
authorized means, and none else. And 3 referring the success cheerfully to
him, and praying to him for it without doubting.


S. I conceive you have now done with the precept or doctrine, which now I see
how fitly it is annexed to the former matter of not serving of Mammon. 1. As an
answer to the Mammonists reason of serving Mammon, that he may not be destitute
the morrow, 2. As an improvement of that exhortation to which it may be
seasonably superadded, but would never have entered or have been admitted
without that harbenger. I beseech God to sink it now unto my heart! To which
end I presume you will give me your assistance by proceeding to the second
thing proposed from our saviors words here, the Inforcements of it, showing
how reasonable it is to be a observed by a Christian?


C. I shall proceed to that, and give you the inforcements as they lie. A first
inforcement is the consideration of what God has done to us already. 1. He
has given us life it self, which is much more, and a far greater act of
power and mercy then to give food for the continuing of that life. 2. Given us
the very body we take such care of, and that much more again then the raiment
that must cloth it, and those he has given without any aid of ours, without
our use of direct or indirect means, and therefore no doubt can provide
sufficiently for the susteining of both, and for his willingness to do it, if
we trust and rely on him, those very former mercies of his are pawnes and
pledges of it. God (says a father) Deus donando debet Cypr.
by giving becomes our debtor. Every mercyfrom so good a father, comes forth
twins; a gift; and a bond together; a present payment, and a future pawn; a
sum paid down, and an annuity made over, the having bestowed favors, the
greatest obligations to continue them, when we can begin with the Psalmist Ps.
100. It is he that made us, then we may as confidently go on, we are his people
and sheep. etc. and then, O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, not
only for past mercies but confidence of future also, his mercy is everlasting,
etc. A second inforcement is taken from the example of God's providence toward
other creatures 1. For food, from the fowls of the air, 2. For raiment from
the lillies of the field. For food, that those birds without any trade of
husbandry, of sowing or reaping, etc. are by the providence of God sufficiently
sustained. (Nay of many birds it is observed they are fattest still in coldest
and sharpest weather.) Nay that sort of birds, that Saint Luke mentions. Luke
12. 24. the ravens are a creature that if Job or the Psalmist may be believed
Job 38. 41. Ps. 147. 9. has more of the providence of God illustrious in it
then any other. Naturalists have observed of that creature, that it exposes
the young ones (...)
as soon as they are hatched, leaves them meatelesse and featherlesse to
struggle with hunger, as soon as they are gotten into the world, and whether
by dew from heaven, a kind of manna rained into their mouths when they gape,
and as the Psalmist says call upon God, or whether by flies flying into their
mouths, or whether by worms bred in their nests, as some think, or by what
other means, God knows, God feeds them. Vallesius.
And therefore perhaps it was, that that creature to make its return of
gratitude to God, flies presently on its errand to feed the prophet elias in
the wilderness; in which this was surely very observable, that that creature
which is so unnatural as not to feed its own young ones, did yet at God's
command feed the prophet. As sometimes those baggs of the miser are opened
liberally to Gods children, (at their death in building hospitalls etc.) which
had been shut to their own all their life. This example our Savior shuts up
with an expostulation, [are not you much better then they?] Man a much more
considerable creature then those birds, man the Monarch of all them, and the
life of my Lord the King worth ten thousand of theirs, and therefore surely a
far greater part of God's providence, then they, though no thoughtfulness of
his contribute to it. But then this must be taken with some caution along with
it; not that we should neither sow, nor reap, because the fowls do neither;
but that we should take no anxious thought, as (...).
they neither sow nor reap; that it is as unreasonable for a Christian to
distrust Gods providence, to bury his soul in an anxious care for earthly
things, though the very necessaries of life, as for the raven to be set to
husbandry. Had men acquired but as much religion, dependence, trust, reliance
on God by all the preaching of the Gospel, by all the cultivation of so many
hundred years, as nature teaches the young ravens, as soon as they are
hatched, to gape toward heaven, and so in a plain, downeright, natural,
inarticulate way, to call on God, the Mammonists idol would soon be driven
out of the world; and instead of it, a cheerful comfortable dependence on
heaven (in despite of all our jealous traitorous fears, that worldly hearts
betray us to) an obedient submission to Gods direction in using those means
that he directs us; and then resigning all up into his hands to dispose of,
with an [If I perish I perish] and [I will wait upon the Lord which hides his
face, and I will look for him] and [though he kill me yet will I trust in
him.] The other example concerning raiment from the lillies of the field lies
thus. God in his forming of the world has bestowed a strange proportion of
natural be auty and ornament upon the lillies that grow in every field or
garden, though those are of a very short duration, and being inanimate do
contribute nothing to their own beauty, but most evidently the whole work
wrought by God only, and all the care and solicitude and temporal advantages
of gold and the like artificial bravery cannot equal or compare with that
natural beauty which God has endued them with. Which consideration as it may
well lessen our desire of the gallantry of clothes, and mortify our pride
which they feed in us (the utmost that we can attain to in this kind being
not comparable with that, which is in the meanest creatures) so may it give us
a fiduciall relyance on God for all things of this nature; who sure can cloth
us; as well as those, and will certainly provide for us such raiment, as is
convenient for us, by our use of ordinary means, without our anxious care and
solicitude for the future.


S. What is the next inforcement of this duty?


C. An argument taken from our own experience in things of some what a like
nature v. 27. For the stature of ones body, or the age of ones life, (for the
same word signifies both, but seems in this place rather to denote the former
only) every of us know (...)*
and confess, that our care and solicitude can do nothing to make any
considerable addition to it. Now certainly the lengthening of the life for a
few days or hours, is not so great a matter as life it self; nor the
tallnesse or stature of the body, as the body it self (for what matters it how
tall a man is) and therefore it being so confestly the work of God only to
dispose of these less things, our stature etc. how much more reasonable is it
to believe that the same God, without any anxious solicitude of ours, can and
will conserve our life and body, by giving us those things, which are necessary
to their conservation?


S. What is the next inforcement?


C. The contrary practice of the Gentiles, v. 32. The heathen indeed, who
either acknowledge no God at all, or deny his providence over particular
things, do use this kind of solicitude, seeking vehemently and importunately,
for all these things, i. e. for (...).
food, and drink, and clothing for the remainder of their lives, or for such
a proportion of wealth as will be able thus to furnish them for their lives
end, and this may be allowed or pardoned them, that have no better principles
to build on; but would be a shame for Christians to have gotten no higher, by
the acknowledgement of the true God, and his particular providence, and care
over all creatures, but especially over us men, for whose use all other
creatures were created; and by the doctrine of Christianity, which teaches us
faith or dependence on Christ for all, and desires to mortify all love of the
gains and pleasures of this world in us, (by promising us a richer inheritance
then this earthy Canaan) and to work in us an indifference and untroublednesse
of mind for all outward things, and many other graces in order to this, which
no heathen could ever arrive to.


S What is that fifth inforcement?


C. It is set down in these words v. 32. [For your heavenly father knows
that you have need of all these things] i. e. these things that are necessary
for you (and others you need not seek after) God knows you have need of as
well as you, and that God is your father, and cannot be so unkind to you as
not to be willing to bestow them on you; and that father an heavenly father,
and consequently is perfectly able to bestow them.


S. What is the sixth inforcement?


C. This, that there is a far more easy, Christian, and compendious way to
all these necessaries of life, then your solicitude or anxious care: To wit
the setting our minds upon our higher interests, minding and intending of those
joys in another life, and that way of Christian obedience which will lead us
to them; which if we do thus intend God has promised to give us these
necessaries of life, as an appendage or addition over and above; Piety having
the promise of this life as well as of another.


S. What is the seventh inforcement?


C. Because the time to come, for which we desire to lay in before hand (and by
that means lay a double burden on that part of our life, which is present, to
provide for it self, and that other also) will when it comes, be able to take
care and make provision for it self. The Manna, that came down from heaven to
the Israelites, fell every day, and therefore there was no need of laying up in
store (and if it were done, it putrified) of reserving any part of the present
portion; for, for the time to come they were sure to be as plentifully
provided, as for the present they were; and so the providence of God that has
brought us in a present store, will be able and ready to do the like for the
remainder of our lives, when it comes; and therefore all that we shall acquire
by this solicitude before hand, is only to accumulate trouble, and disquiet
upon our selves; besides that due labor, and industry, which we owe to God, as
subservient to his providence, and to our selves for our present subsistence,
so much more as will secure us for the future also; which, what is it but to
multiply toil upon our selves, above the proportion that God has designed to
us? Whereas the trouble that belongs to every day for the maintaining of it
self (i. e. the labor and sweat that we eat our bread in) is sufficient for
that day, without our artifices to increase it, and requires too much (rather
then takes up too little) time of divertisement from the duties of piety to
these so vile inferior offices. The duty being thus largely enforced, and our
hearts by so many engines and pullies raised from this earth of ours, to that
principal care of Celestial joies, it may now be thought reasonable to
hearken to Christ in a prohibition which was never given to men before, and so
this hard saying be softened, this circumcision of the heart, amputation of all
those superfluous burdensome cares of the worldling or Mammonist, be found
supportable to the Christian. I shall need add nothing to so plentiful a
discourse of this subject, but my prayers, That we all be in this, the true
Disciples of Christ, Scholars and practicers of this heavenly lesson!


LIB. IV.
S. I See there is yet, after all the trouble, that your charity to me has
cost you, another occasion and opportunity still behind, ready to tempt you
farther to continue your favor to me, in leading me through the 7th Chapter,
wherein this Sermon on the Mount, is concluded. You may please therefore to
enter upon that. And tell me what you find especially considerable in it.


C. One strict particular Christian precept I find in that Chapter which,
before I told you, will do well to be added to those many that the former
Chapters have afforded; and then four general ones; and then a conclusion of
the whole Sermon.


S. What is the particular precept you speak of?


C. It is set down positively in the five first verses; and then a limitation,
or explication, or caution added to it, v. 6. The precept is Negative, not to
judge other men, v. 1.


S. What is meant by Judging?


C. 1. All rash and temerarious. 2. All severe, unmercifull censures of other
men.


S. What mean you by Rash censures?


C. Such as are not grounded in any manifest clear evidence of the fact, but
proceed from my jealous and censorious humor; being still forward to conclude
and collect more evil of other men then does appear to me. As 1. When by some
indifferent actions done by my fellow Christian, and appearing to me; I surmise
some other evil thing not far distant from that, and which may possibly be
signified by it, but is not so necessarily. Or 2. When an action of another is
capable of two interpretations, the one fastening evil upon it, the other not;
I take it on the evil side, and censure him for that action for which, perhaps
God, the searcher of hearts, will never judge him; or in case God sees it to
beevill, but I do not, then however thus to judge, is in me temerarious
judgment. Or 3. When any other man has done any thing apparently evil, yet
from thence to infer a greater guilt in him then to that action necessarily
belongs, as the action being perhaps capable of extenuation by circumstances,
for me to deprive it of those extenuations, and pass the judgment, which
would belong to it absolutely considered. Or 4. Upon the commission of one or
more single actions, not sufficient to build up an habit, or argue a malignity
in the agent, to censure him as guilty of that habit or that malignity, this is
still temerarious judgment; which commonly proceeds, wheresoever it is, from
pride, ambition, vainglory, or from envy, malice, uncharitableness, and
self love; from one or more of these; and falls under the judgment due to the
suspicious, contumelious, whisperer, busy-body. Quite contrary to that charity
that hops all things, beleiveth all things, thinks none evil; to that
humility that thinks better of others then our selves; that peaceablenesse
which Christ commends to us; that kindness and pittifulnesse in bearing one
another burdens; and so lessening them, and not making them heavier by our
censures.


S. What mean you by unmercifull censures?


C. Those which have no mixture of mercy in them, Ja. 2. 13. The precept of
forgiving those who have wronged me, is by Christ improved in some kind even to
those offenses which are done against God, so far as that I be obliged by it
to look upon them in others in the most favorable manner, (as on the other
side I should be most severe in the examining and judging my self) and always
remit of that rigor and severity which the matter is capable of, as knowing
that my own best actions must be looked on favorably by God, and not strictly
weighed by him, or otherwise they will never be accepted by him.


S. To what purpose is all that which in this matter is added to this
prohibition in the rest of this period?


C. It Is first, A deterrement from this sin. 2. A direction how to avoid it.
The deterrement this; to consider how fearful a thing it were, if God should
judge us without mercy; and how reasonable, that he should so do, if we be so
unmercifull to other men. The direction, to reflect our eyes and censures,
every man upon his own sins, and there to busy them in aggravating every
matter into the size that justly belongs to it; by this means to pull down my
own plumes, to abate my proud censorious humors, and then those will appear
but motes in another man, which now do pass for beams with me. He that is
truly humbled with a sense of his own sins, will be willing to wink at
faults in another; at least not to improve and enlarge them; not to censure and
triumph over them.


S. What is the limitation, or caution, or explication of this precept added in
the sixth verse?


C. The sum of it is this, that this precept of not judging, is not so
unlimited that it should be unlawful for me to censure or think evil of any
man; as in case he be an open profane person, expressed by a dog or swine, the
one a creature so accursed, that the price of him was not to be consecrated;
the other so unclean that, 'twas forbidden to be eaten by the Jewish law, and
both of them emblems of an habitual impenitent sinner, 2 Pet. 2. 21. The
first, again, intimating such as bark and rave at all good exhortations;
contradicting and blaspheming, Act. 13. 46. The second those, that though they
blaspheme not, yet by the impurity of their lives show the secret content of
their heart. This sacred exhortation of not judging, or censuring such as they
are not to expect any benefit from; this act of Christian charity is too holy,
and sacred a thing to be cast away on such swine and dogs, who are first
incapable of it, then will make such ill use of it; and if in stead of judging
the offender, you go about to exhort with never so much mildness, (which is
the wisest and most charitable Christian way in this matter) they will contemn
your exhortations, and repay them with contumelies in stead of thanks.


S. But what, may I never pass judgment on another man unless it be such a
notorious offender?


C. Yes! If that which you judge in him be (though neither habitual, nor
incorrigible) yet notorious, and evidence of fact make it subject to no mistake
of theirs. 2. If you extend that censure no farther, then that fact; or no
farther then what may from that fact be necessarily inferred; 3. If you
express your judgment or censure in words, no farther then may agree with
rules of charity; As 1. Charity to him either in telling it him your self, and
seasonably reproving him, or telling it some body else, to that end that he may
reprove him. Or 2. Charity to others, that they may be warned and armed, not to
be deceived and ensnared by him; Or 3. Charity to the community, that he may
not by concealment of some great faults get into such place of judicature etc.
where that ravenous humor of his, entering in a disguise of sheeps clothing,
may be armed with power to do more mischief. In all which I must be very
wary, that under this cloak of charity I do not carry along a malicious, or
proud, or wanton, petulant humor of my own; or even an habit of defaming; and
flatter my self that charity is the only mover in me all this while.


S. But can my judgment be forced? My assent or belief follows, and is
proportioned to the motives that induce it; As knowledge cannot choose but
follow demonstrative premises, so belief cannot choose but follow those that
appear most probable; and if I see that by a man by which my discourse leads
me to conclude him drunk, etc. can I offend in judging him?


C. If my conclusion be rightly inferred by due premises, and offend not
against rules of discourse, I do not offend in so concluding, or in so
judging, so that I keep it within my own breast, and do mix mercy with
judgment, i. e. take the more favorable part in judging; for no man is bound
not to know what he sees, or not to believe what seems to him (judging in
simplicity) strongly probable. Nay 2. If he express his judgment to him whom
he thus judges, on purpose to be satisfied of the truth of his judgment; or,
in case it prove true, to admonish; it is still not only lawful but
commendable. Nay to tell it another to either of these purposes, it will be so
also.


S. But what if I tell it another, not on either of these purposes, and yet not
on any defamatory malicious design neither?


C. Though it be not out of any malicious design, or flowing from any stitch
or grudge which I have to that man, yet it may be a defamatory design; for I
may have that general habitual humor of pride or vainglory, that for the
illustrating and setting out my self in more grandeur I may think fit to
blast and defame every man I meet with; and then that will be sin enough,
though I have no particular malice to that person. But if it be not from any
such design neither, yet some of this may mingle with it in the action; Or if
neither, then still some other evil may; as that of whispering, curiosity,
meddling with other men's matters, wantonness, vain desire of (...).
tatling, telling news, etc. and if any of these be it, then will it be so
far sinful as the motive or cause of it is.


S. But if still it be separated from all such sinful motive, or adherent, and
be only produced by somewhat neither good, nor evil, (as I conceive it
possible that many words of my mouth, as well as thoughts of my heart, and
motions of my body, may be neither morally, nor Christianly good, nor evil;
and that it is not necessary for them to be designed to any particular
Christian end, if only this general care be had that they be not against
charity or edification.) What is to be said of such Judging?


C. Though some other words may perhaps be of this nature, as indifferent as
motions, or turns, or gestures of the body, (and therefore it is not without
(...)
reason thought, that by every idle word, Mat. 12. 36. Is meant only every
false word as has been said) yet perhaps this of judging another will not be
of that nature; being subject to more defaults and taints, then most other
things; and that which is here indefinitely forbidden; and if it break forth
into words it is yet more subject to evil. But if still it be mentioned only
as a relation entire and simple, of what I saw, and leave the conclusion to
others judgments, and not interpose mine, or only so far interpose mine, as
to relate truly what conclusion I did then make of it, and what moved me to
that conclusion, absteining still most strictly from adding or concealing
ought, or doing or saying any thing, that has any tincture from my own pride,
censoriousnesse, etc. it may still be as harmless and blameless in me, as
writing of the honestest history. But because this is the most that can be
lawful, and still is no more then lawful, (or not sinful) not arrived to any
degree of moral goodness, and because it is very apt to fall into evil, and
however, because of the scandal that others may take, who by seeing a godly
man take this liberty, may mistake it, and go farther and fall into sin,
'twill therefore concern him to use this sparingly, and deny himself that
lawful liberty, if it be but by way of revenge for the unlawful, which he
has so often taken; and though this he should not be foward to judge a sin
in others, (lest he thus fall into the fools snare, censure others of
censoriousnesse,) yet ought he in this matter to be very watchful over
himself, that he offend not with his tongue.


S. This precept of not judging I cannot without tears and hearty confession
of mine own great guilt in this kind, tear home with me; and I fear there
are few in this last, and most uncharitable age of ours, who have not had their
part in it. I beseech God to reform it in all our hearts, and join this last
act of prudence, which this sixth verse has mentioned, with that simplicity
which in the former five was required of us!

You told me that after one particular precept, which you have now explained,
there followed some General precepts. What is the subject of the first of them?


C. It is concerning that great business of prayer, in the five next verses 7.
8. 9. 10. 11. considered now, not as a duty of ours toward God, or an act of
worship, (as it was considered. c. 6.) but as an engine or artifice, to fetch
downefrom heaven the greatest treasures that are there, even that of grace it
self, or the holy spirit, as appears by the comparing this place with Luke
11. 13. and the sum of it is this, that prayer is the key of entrance into
the fathers house; that no man shall ever fail of finding and receiving good
things, particularly Grace, the greatest good, that asks and seeks and
knockes, i. e. uses importunity in prayer, as a child to a father, depending
wholly on him; and if he be once, or twice repelled, returning unto him with
humility, and submission, and dependence, and confidence again, and never
giving over petitioning, till he obtaines.


S. What is the next general Precept?


C. It is that famous one, that the heathen Emperor is Severus
said to have reverenc't Christ and Christianity for, and that all the wisest
men of the Nations have admired for the best and highest rule of charity to our
neighbors, in these words v. 12. [All things whatsoever you would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them.] Which (says he) is the law and the
prophets, i. e. on which all the duty of charity depends, or wherein the whole
law concerning that, is fullfilled.


S. What is the meaning of this Precept?


C. To love my neighbor as my self; or not to suffer my self-love to
interpose, or make me partial in judging of my duty to others; but thus to
cast, whenever I do any thing to my brother, would I be well pleased to be so
dealt with by any other? Or, if I might have mine own choice, would not I
desire to be other wise used by other men? Or yet farther, that whatsoever
usage I desire to meet with, at Gods hands, (which is certainly undeserved
mercy, pardon of trespasses, and doing good to enemies or trespassers) the same
I must perform to others, for so this phrase [whatsoever you would that men
should do to you] does by quod. hi fieri vis etc.
an Hebraisme import, [whatsoever you would have done unto you] which is the
style that this precept is ordinarily read in, and then extends to whatever I
desire that God or Christ Jesus should do to me, i. e. not only all the
Justice, but all the mercy, and goodness, and bounty in the world. In which
sense it will best agree with the precept of liberality to enemies (with which
it is joined Luke 6. 31.) and the promise of God here to give to every asker,
(of which bounty of God's we that are partakers, ought to do the like for our
brethren) and be a fit introduction to the exhortation that follows of
Christian strictness, which seems to be built on this, and to be but a branch
of this great precept; and not a several from it.


S. What is that Exhortation you mean?


C. That of a great superlative strictness in the ways of godliness; not
being content to walk in the broad rode that Jews and heathens have contented
them selves with (not willing to undertake any thing of difficulty for Christ's
sake, and so by that means falling into destruction, but) entering in at the
strict gate, and narrow way that leads unto life; that way which these
elevated precepts have chalk't out to us; and which here it seems, are not
proposed as counsels of perfection, but as commands of duty, without which
there is no entering into life, no avoiding destruction.


S. What now is the third General Precept?


C. It is a precept of wariness and prudence, to beware of errors, and those
whose trade it is to seduce us to them, and this in the six next verses, 15.
16. 17. 18. 19. 20. and it belongs not to all deceivers of any kind, but
particularly to such as profess to follow Christ, and yet teach false and
damnable doctrine; which, that they may put off to these auditors the better,
they pretend a great deal of holiness in some other particulars. And the
sum of that which he here says to this purpose, may be reduced to this,
Whenever any false Teacher comes to disseminate his doctrine, the surest way
to discern him will be, to observe the effects and actions discernible in him
or which are the fruits of his doctrine. If all his Actions, and all the
designs and consequents of his Doctrine, be the advanceing of piety, and
charity of all kinds, then you may resolve, that he is no such (false, at least
dangerous) false Teacher, For 1. the Devil will never assist him or put him
upon false Doctrines to such an end, to bring more holiness, and Christian
practice into the world. 2. Such holy Ch^^stian practice is not easily built
upon any false ^octrine, 3. If the Doctrine should chance to be false that
brings forth such wholesome effects, then to him that receives it for those
effects sake, and otherwise discerns not the Doctrine to be false, it may be
hoped, (through God's mercy in Christ to our infirmities) it shall not prove
dangerous or destructive. But if the consequents or effects that flow naturally
from the Doctrines which he brings, be either against rules of piety, or
Christian virtue; As 1. If they tend to the lessening of our love of God; to
the aliening our hearts from him, by giving us mean, or unworthy notions of
him, contrary to those Attributes of infinite Power, Justice and Goodness
which we ought to believe of him; If they tend to the begetting of presumption
and security in our hearts, by giving us any ground of hope without purifying,
and amending our wicked lives; by leaving no place for fear, whatsoever we do,
by making us conceit highly of our selves, rely, and trust on, and boast of our
own merits, If they lead us to Idolatry, to the worship of some what else
beside the only true God, or to a bare formal outside worship of him. If they
open the door to false or needless swearing, or to profaneness, and neglect
of God's service. Or 2. If they tend to disobedience, sedition, rebellion,
faction, speaking evil of digni^ies, acts of Jewish Zelots, etc. to the
favoring or authorizing of any kind of lust, of divorces forbidden by Christ,
etc. to the nourishing of rash anger, uncharitable (either timerarious or
unmercifull) censuring, envy, emulation, variance, strife, malice, revenge,
contumelious speaking, whispering, backbiteing, etc. to the excusing or
justifying of piracy, rapine, oppression, fraud, violence, any kind of
injustice etc. to the spreading of lies, slanders, defamations, etc. to
covetousness, unsatisfiednesse, uncontentednesse in our present condition,
desire of change, casting the cross on other men's shoulders, that we may free
our own from it; to dealing with others, as we would not be well pleased to be
dealt with our selves; or, in a word, if they tend to the discouragingor
discountenancing any Christian virtue set down in this or any other sermon of
Christ, or by his Apostles, or to the granting any dispensation, or liberty
from that Christian strictness in these duties, or in those other of
repentance, selfe-denyall, meekness, mercifullnesse, peaceablenesse, etc. by
these marks, and characters, you may know this to be a False Teacher. Yet not
so far this, as that whosoever is guilty himself of any of these sins, shall
be (if he be a Teacher) a false one; for it is possible his Doctrine, and
Actions may be contrary; but that, if these be the fruits, and natural effects
of his Doctrine, then shall his Doctrine be thus condemned; otherwise an ill
man he may be, and yeta teacher of truth; a wicked, but not a false Prophet.


S. But is it not said of these False Prophets that they come in sheep
clothing, which sure signifies their outward actions to be innocent? How then
can they be discerned by their fruits?


C. I answer first, that the fruits of their Doctrine may be discerned, though
their own evil Actions be disguised, and varnished over. 2. That though their
Actions most conspicuous and apparent be good, yet their closer Actions (which
may also be discerned by a strict observer) are of the making of the wolf,
ravenous and evil. 3. That though they begin with some good shows to get
authority, though they enter as sheep, do some specious acts of piety at
first; yet they continue not constant in so doing, within a while put off the
disguise, and are discernible.


S. What now is the fourth or last general Precept?


C. The sum of it is, that it is not the outer profession of Christianity or
Discipleship, (though that set off by prophesying, doing miracles, etc. in
Christ's name, i. e. professing whatsoever they do to be done by Christ's power)
which will avail any man toward his account at that great day, without the
real, faithful, sincere, universal, impartial, performing of obedience to
the laws of Christ.


S. But can, or does God permit any wicked man to do such miracles, etc?


C. Yes, he may, for the end of miracles, and preaching, etc. being to convince
men of the truth of the Doctrine of Christ, that may well enough be done by
those that acknowledge that truth, though they live not accordingly; the
miracles done by them being not designed by God to the commendation of the
instruments, but to the persuading of the spectators


S.


C. It is this, (occasioned by the last precept of doing, as well as professing
Gods will) that the profession of Christianity lending a patient ear to those
doctrines, will, (if it be, (as often as it is) trusted to and depended on, to
render us acceptable to Christ) prove a very fallacious, and deceitful hope.
Whenever any storm comes, any shaking disease or affliction, which gives us
occasion to awake thoroughly, and examine our selves to the bottom, we are not
then able to retain any hope or comfortable opinion of our selves, although in
time of quiet and tranquillity, before we were thus shaken, we could entertain
our selves with such flattering glozes. Hearing of Sermons, and professing of
love to, and zeal for Christ, may pass for piety a while, but in the end it
will not be so. It Is true Christian practice, that will hold out in time of
trial; and that hope of ours which is thus grounded, will stand firm and
stable in time of affliction, and temptation, at the hour of death, and the
day of judgment. This doctrine of Christian duty and obedience is such that
can never deceive any man that is content to build upon it. Nor infirmity, nor
sin, (committed, but repented of, and forsaken) nor Devil, shall ever shake
any man's hold that is thus built; endanger any man's salvation, that lives
according to the rule of this Sermon; nor shall all the flattering deceitful
comforters of the world, bring in any true gain to any other.

And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were
astonished at his doctrine. For he taught them as one having authority, and not
as the Scribes.

OHoly Jesu, that came down from heaven, and were pleased to pay that dear
ransom on the Cross for us, on purpose that thou might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto thy self a peculiar people, zealous of good works,
we beseech thee to write thy law in our hearts; that most excellent divine law
of thine, that we may see it and do it, that we may know thee and the power of
thy resurrection; and express it in turning every one of us from his
iniquities. That we no longer flatter our selves with a formal external
serving of thee, with being hearers of thy word, partakers of thy Sacraments,
professors of thy truth, knowers or teachers of thy will, but that we labor
to join to these an uniforme, faithful obedience to thy whole Gospel, a
ready cheerful subjection to thy Kingdom, that thou may rule and reign in
our hearts by Faith; and that we being dead unto sin and living unto
righteousness, may have our fruit unto holiness, may grow in Grace, and in
the practical knowledge of thee Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and at last
persevering unto the last, attain to that endless glorious end, the reward of
our Faith, the fruit of our labors, the perfection of our Charity, and the
crown of our Hope, an everlasting blessed life of love, and holiness with
thee, O Father of mercies, O God of all consolations, O holy and sanctifying
spirit, O blessed Trinity coeternall, To which one Infinite Majesty, We most
humbly ascribe the honor, glory, power, praise, might, majesty, and dominion,
which through all ages of the world have been given to him which sits on
the Throne to the Holy Spirit, and to the Lamb for evermore. Amen.


FINIS.

