OF IDOLATRY.

(...)



OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL, Printer to the Universitie. 1646.

OF IDOLATRY.
origination first, and then Critical peculiar importance of it among ancient
writers, those especially of the Scripture.

Idol, of which it is compounded, must first be viewed. And of that there is no
question, but that in the literal notation of it, it signifies an Image or
representation of any kind, and accordingly in the Old Testament is set to
express both (...) an image, or similitude, any kind of figure in general;
and (...) a carved or graven image in specie, a statue of wood or stone, any
kind of Sculpture; Though the truth is, (...) is not the most ordinary rendering
of either of these, but (...) imago of the former, and (...) but twice, and
(...) sculptile of the latter, and (...) but thrice.

nothing that has no being, (to which Saint Paul referres when he says an
Idol is nothing) or if you please a no God, (...) that has no Divinity, 1 Cor.
8. 4. 1 Cor. 10. 19.
no power to help the Client or Worshiper; parallel to that passage, Deuteronomy. 32.
they have provoked me (...) with that which is no God.

Gods, the many false Gods of the heathens, by the Greek seven times rendered
(...) Idols, unless perhaps it may be conjectured, that they which so rendered
it in those places, mistook, or misread (...) Gods (which in other places they
constantly render (...), at least two hundred times) for (...) nothings,
vanities, which is very near in writing and sound unto it, and such mistakes
are no great news in those translatours.

Pollution, filth by which any man is contaminated; This is rendered sometimes
(...) abomination, but more frequently (...) (Idol) then any thing else, which
certainly referres not only to the pollution of the Soul by the commission of
that sin (for by every other sin some such pollution is contracted) nor
only to that other notion of spiritual fornication, but principally to the
abominable sins of uncleanness, and filthiness, which those Idol worships
were ordinarily guilty of, and from thence received a great aggravation and
heightning of their guilt, and punishment. And to the same purpose the word
(...) abomination, or filthiness, (and so most commonly rendered (...), and
(...)) is sometimes (...) Idol also.

high places, the Altars or Temples of their false Gods peculiarly, (as may
appear 1 Macc. 1. 62. where (...) the Heathen Altar was by Antiochus set upon
the (...) or Altar of the Jews) and these would be more properly rendered (...),
Idol Temples, or altars, then (...) Idols, and therefore perhaps in that one
place Ezekiel. 16. 16. where it is rendered (...), it may be a false print, for
(...), I am sure our English most properly renders it high places, and those
are called (...) not only by the author of that book 1 Macc. 1. 50. but by
Saint Paul himself, 1 Cor. 8. 1. speaking of him that eats (...) in a Temple
or other place where those false Deities were worshipped.

vanity, from whence it is that the Gentile-Idol worshipers under the title of
[(...)] all men, the generality of mankind (or all the world but the Jews) are
said to be (...), Wisd. 13. 1. vain or Idolatrous by Nature, that is, either by
birth born in that Idolatrous age among those Heathens; or else by long,
popular, national, oecumenicall custom, which is, says Galen, (...) an
acquired nature; Thus has Suidas interpreted the word (...) nature, that it is
sometimes (...) a chronicall evil custom, and instances in that place where
Saint Paul tells the Ephesians chap. 2. 3. that they had been by nature the
children of wrath, (as (...) children of wrath, signifies peculiarly Gentiles,
so) the prime if not only intent of that adjunct (...) is (as many
circumstances in the context will convince) that they were such Idolatrous
Gentiles, either (...) by birth, (born such Gentile worshipers, (...) as the
rest also of the Heathen world was) or else (...), by custom, by long popular
habit of education, or (which will unite both those senses, and more fully
express the word (...) from (...)) by a long habit deduced from their very
first being or birth, and so continuing till the time of their conversion;
customary Idolaters, walking (...), according to the age or vicious custom of
the Heathen World, verse. 2. and the practices of the (...), infidels or
unbelievers. And so will the word be best rendered, when the same Apostle
expostulates with the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11. and demands whether (...) (we
render nature) did not tell them, that it was a shame for a man (...), which we
render to wear long hair, but I conceive, would more properly (according to the
use of the word in the Greek authors) be translated to let the hair grow at
length. If either of the Interpretations be accepted, then sure (...) must
only signify the custom and fashion of the place, or of the generality of
men, or else birth, as that contains in it the distinction of sexes, or in
the mixed sense, an universal continued custom from their birth till then; and
not nature in the ordinary acception, or as it signifies the law of nature
written in our hearts. For then not only Absaloms hair must be against nature,
(which yet the Scripture charges not with that crime) but even the vow and
practice of Samson and the Nazarites, had been an unnatural sin. A later
Critic would have (...) be taken for braiding of hair, or making a dressing of
it (which I confess the Apostles argument in that place, and the mention of
(...), a covering, would persuade) but then still (...) must signify (though
not only a local, yet) an universal custom, such as has designed and
fitted distinction of attires to distinction of sexes, which it would be hard
to impute to the dictate of nature in every man's heart, so that that should be
thought to define what attire is natural to a man, what to a woman, but is an
act either of local custom, (...), (which in this matter the Apostle appeals
to, verse. 16. against all disputers) or else of universal custom of all
nations, which he seems to plead in this place. But I conceive it without
example in Authors sacred, or heathen, that (...) should signify a dressing,
(whatsoever (...) and other words of some affinity may be thought to do.) The
notion which at first I gave you will satisfy all pretensions both of the
Grammarian and the Textuary, that it signify to let the hair grow at length
without cutting or poling it, that will satisfy the Critic, for that is (...)
comam promittere, and to do so, there can be little reason assigned, unless it
be in order to braiding it, or making a covering of it, on occasion of which it
is that the Apostle here says, that it is an honorable or decent thing for a
woman to do so, verse. 15. (and the contrary for a man) and not to do so is all
one for her, as to be shorn or shaven, verse 5. and 6. and so that satisfies
the Textuary also.

But this by the way, from this acception of the word (...) vanity, for idols,
it is that Romans 1. 21. Saint Paul says of the heathen, that (...) they became
vain, that is, fell to those impious idol-worships.

Lords or husbands (or as we retain the Hebrew word in English, Baalim) 2 Chronicles. 17. 3. Jer. 9. 15. is rendered in the Greek again (...), idols, and so
clearly signifies those other heathen deities taken into a rivalry with the God
of heaven.

Sun-images in the margin, Es. 17. 8. but whosoever considers the place, and
Ezekiel. 6. 4. will acknowledge that it signifies (not the images, but) the places
of worship of (...) that is, the Sun, called by the Greeks (...) and (...), the
places where the sacred fires were made in honor to the Sun, and the word is
therefore by the Targum rendered, Isai. 17. 8. (...) delubra, temples, (a
description of which is given us by Benjamin in his Itinerary, and by some of
the Rabbis, affirmed to have been first of a religious institution to God in
thanksgiving for that glorious creature) these I say are once rendered (...),
idols, Isai. 27. 9. but in other places (...), temples, etc.

Ezekiel. 36. 18. (...), idols, and our English from thence have continued that
rendering [our idols] where yet I conceive the Hebrew should be translated
[their actions or inventions] (the word properly denoting any good or evil work
or enterprise) and the Greek rendering may possibly have been a mistake of the
Hebrew (...) for (...) (from which before we had (...) for idols) and then it
will be the same in our English also.

cause of grief, of toil, of frightfull passion, is often rendered (...), noting
again their heathen Gods, which used their clients exceeding ill, the (...),
demons, the fear and dread of whom produced the Greek word which we render
Superstition, And near of kin unto that, is a seventh (...) which once is
rendered (...) also, and from the origination of the word is justly rendered
[horrours] in our Margin, 2 Chronicles. 15, 16.

Teraphim, those which Rachel stole from Laban, are rendered (...), idols, also,
and seem to have been some images ((...), says Josephus, images of his Gods)
but as others guess, images set to a certain position of the Stars, with the
figures of the planets upon them according to the custom of the Syrians then,
by which they were wont to divine; not any thing like the Cup, whereby say the
Egyptians of Joseph, he divineth, for that I conceive was but a drinking cup,
wherein he used to drink in those sacrifices by which he prepared to receive
presages from God, (and therefore I should render those words Genesis 44. 5. [with
which he receives presages] but Astrologicall instruments, with pictures of
Stars upon them, which some conceive to have been so made, that they were
able to speak sometimes, and then they will differ but little from the
Sun-idols even now mentioned, for those they say, by the operation of the fire,
became vocal.

image, or sculpture, or representation sometimes, yet it signifies somewhat
else besides that, particularly these two things, 1. the Heathen Gods under the
notion of false (together with the Temples wherein they were worshipped) 2. The
same again, and their worships under the notions of filthy, unclean, and
abominable. Which two notions of the word (that we may proceed a step further)
we shall now look on, as they were in order to worship, and that will open to
us some entrance to a view of idolatry, or the worship of idols what it is.

worshipping of false Gods, and images, I shall give you a brief narration of it
out of the soberest of the Jewish writers, Maimonides l. 1. de Idololatria.

The first rise of Idolatry is, says he, to be referred to the days of Enosh,
when men (taking notice how God had created the Stars and Spears for the
government of the world, and by placing them in so eminent a state seemed to
make them partakers of his honor, and used them as his Ministers and Officers)
resolved it their duty to laud, and extol, and honor them, and taught others
that this was the will of God, that we should magnify and worship those whom
he had preferred and dignified (as a King would have his Ministers honored)
and that that is the honoring of God. Upon this foundation says he, they
began to build Temples to the Stars, to sacrifice to them, bow themselves
before them, that by so doing they might obtain Gods favor, and this was the
ground of Idolatry, not that they thought there was no God but the Stars, but
that they thought this worship performed to them to be the will of God. In
process of time false Prophets arose, pretending messages from God, and
directions for the worshipping of such or such a Star, nay for the sacrificing
to all the host of them, building them Temples, making pictures of them that
might be adored by women, children, and all others; and to that purpose they
invented certain figures, affirming them to be revealed to them by prophecy,
to be the images of such Stars. Thereupon men began to make images in
Temples, under trees, on the top of hills, and all men to meet and worship
them, resolving and proclaiming that from those images all good and evil did
proceed, and therefore in all reason they were to be feared and worshipped; the
Priests promising all increase and prosperity as the reward of this worship,
and prescribing of rules for the performance of it. After these, other
impostours rose, that affirmed such a Star, or Sphere, or Angel, to have
spoken to them, and prescribed their way and manner of worship; in sum, it
was generally spread over the world, that images were to be worshipped, each by
a peculiar manner of sacrifice, and adoration, and the name of God was quite
lost out of the mouth and minds of all men; so far as not to be acknowledged
by them, but all sorts of people worshipped nothing but images of wood and
stone, built temples on purpose for them, adored and swear by their name, and
even the Priests and wise men among them thought that there was no other God
but those stars, etc. for whose sakes these images were made. As for the
great God of this world no mortal knew him, save only Henoch, Methusalah,
Noah, Sem and Heber, and so it continued till Abraham was born, the pillar of
the world. Thus much Maimon. and much more by way of story and observation. And
what is thus by him observed of the heathens, is by others deduced as clearly
for the idolizing of Kings and great persons, (...), men admired by their
flatterers says Chrysostom: which besides the testimony of Wisd. 14. 17. and
Aristotle Met. 1. (where he shows how admiration of great men and benefactours
has been the great principle of idolatry or men-worship) is every where
observable in the story of the Roman Cesars, no man dying without an (...), or
being made a God; and then constantly the setting up of their statues in their
Temples, following as an attendant of it.

idol-worship, before they came to images, and that last so prodigious a pitch,
such a dishonouring of the deity, that the Psalmist could not say any thing
more reproachful of the makers of them, and trusters in them, then that they
were (...), like or equal to their Gods.

Isai. 44. 13. to the twentieth verse; and the other, Wisd. 13. 11. and so to
the end of that Chapter; the third, in the Epistle of Jeremy, showing the
ridiculous progress of a knotty piece of wood into a solemn deity, and the
irrational senselessenesse of that worship, even in the judgment of Heathens
themselves, witness Heraclitus, (...), praying to inanimate things is like
talking to houses; And yet this madness the constant disease of those that had
set up any other deity but that of the only true God of heaven, that ever
adored any creature, (...) Romans 1. (not only more, as we render it, but)
besides or except the Creator; There being no stay for those (that became thus
vain to worship any thing but God) no stop in their tumbling (as Maimon.
phrases it) to that deep gulf of impiety, the worship of the most inanimate
mean creatures in the world.

Maximus Tyrius gives a more favorable ingenious account of this matter,
(...). That as letters were invented for the expressing of words, (that so by
the help of writing, the weakness of men's memories might be repaired) so the
images of the Gods were provided to help the infirmities of men, in which they
may lay up the names of their Gods, (...), and the famous things that are worth
remembering of them, and in brief to help them to celebrate their Gods as they
ought, as so many (...), help and manuductions for remembrance, and (...),
signs and tokens of their honoring them, Trophies as it were of their Noble
acts to perpetuate the memory of them. So that although, as he acknowledges,
God be invisible to eyes, yet in respect of our infirmity, and again of the
nature of Lovers to love, to behold their pictures whom they love, it will not
be amiss to use any thing that may thus bring us in mind of God, and all this
with a caution, that nothing be terminated in the picture, but the love, and
remembrance, and everything bestowed upon God only. This is a piece of Heathen
divinity very handsomely managed, being indeed no pretense of plea for the
worshipping of Images, but only the using them as helps to perform our duty to
God; But it is no news to see the actions of the many, and the writings of the
few very unlike one the other. (it being very easy to write virtuously, and
hard to live so.) And certainly the Heathen practice was quite another thing
then this Platonic speculation; and so much of the first and second notion of
an Idol.

Idol, as it signifies filthy or abominable, it will be worth observing, what
the Author of the book of Wisdom says of it in universum, Wisd. 14. where
after an enumeration of many other wickednesses in their (...), verse. 23. in
their inhumane sacrifices and mysteries, he concludes with (...) pollution,
inversion of nature, disorder of marriage, adultery, and shameless
uncleanness, verse. 26. and at length concludes that the worship of the
namelesse Idols, or those not to be named, is the beginning, and cause, and end
of evil; all the villainies in the world the design and special parts of those
worships.

Orig. con. Cells. Just. Mar. Apol. Clem. Al. (...). Athenagoras. Theop. ad
Autol. Tatianus. Theod. (...). Euseh. Praep. Eu. Cyril. Alexan. cont. Julian.
Tertul. A. pol. Minut. Felix. Arnobius. Lactantius. Aug. de Civit. Dei.
Firmicus.
set of books, which may serve any student for the Isthmus, or (...), or
passage between the study of humane and divine learning) I shall only point to
some passages in the sacred writ that look this way. 1. Kings 14. 24. after the
mention of the Idols and groves follows that there were Sodomites in the Land,
doing according to the abominations of the Heathen, which the Lord had cast out
before the children of Israel, which gives you moreover a view of the
particularity of the sin of the Amorites and other Nations, which provoked
God to that fatal slaughter, and eradication of them, which is more fully set
down, Levit. 18. 24, 25, 27, 28. and an express threat added from Heaven,
verse. 29. that whosoever shall commit any of these abominations shall be cut
off from among their people.

digression here to mark, that at the routing out of those Nations, and the
planting in of the Jews in their stead, by way of Covenant, the condition of
that Covenant being that they should fear the Lord, and not walk in the ways
of those Nations) the sign or seal of that Covenant was designed to be such as
had a particular reference to these sins of the flesh, and denoted the
amputation of the (...) superfluity of naughtiness, which had been practiced
among those Gentiles, and which would infallibly bring as certain excision upon
them, (if they reformed it not) as was threatened by God to every male Israelite
that should continue uncircumcised. To the same purpose were all those laws and
writes concerning legal pollutions, to bring them to the greatest alienation
of mind, and detestation of this piece of Heathenisme; Yea and one main part of
the promise of God upon their obedience, viz. the multiplying of their seed
(which was so remarkable in that Nation, that Josephus mentions (...), as the
craft as it were, and special peculiar excellency of that people) was a most
natural proper effect of the abstaining from those sins, and it is as clear
that in our Christian Sacrament of Initiation, the (...), the washing away the
sordes of the flesh, had a propriety also to that, (which is accordingly
mentioned in the vow of baptism, the forsaking of all the sinful lusts
thereof.) but this by the way.

Idols and the Sodomites are mentioned together, and 2. Kings 23. 7. the houses
of the Sodomites are cast down; where there is also mention of the groves for
those dark purposes, by which under that name of (...) Astarta seems to be
designed. So when the Babylonians made Succoth Benoth, what is meant thereby
but the Tents of Venus, in which all the Virgins were solemnly prostituted to
the honor of that false deity Venus, under the title of Mylitta? and so the
prostitution of their daughters for the honor of their gods, which is
mentioned not only by Herod. l. 1. and Strabo l. 16, but in the Epistle of
Jeremy verse. 43. where the cords mentioned are undoubtedly the signs of their
vows (and obligation from thence) to pay that sacrifice before they went. So
Isa. 57. 5. Inflaming, or you that inflame your selves with Idols under every
green tree, noting that prostitution of men and women in the Groves about their
Idol-temples, in honor of their false gods. And to instance in no more, it
seems not improbable upon these grounds that the frequent expressions of the
Idolatrous practices of the Jews by fornication, whoring, and the like, may be
somewhat more then a trope or figure of Rhetoric, having thus much of Reality
in it also: It being clear that this falling off to the Heathen Idols brought
them often to these Heathen sins also; as in the matter of Baal-Peor it is most
evident. So Romans 1. 26. it is affirmed of the Gentiles that as a punishment of
those Idol-heathen-worships God gave them up (...), to dishonorable infamous
affections, and a particular account of them is set down, verse. 26. women
changing the natural use, etc. and likewise men also (...) verse. 27. and (...)
verse. 28. guilty of those most reproachful shames, and contumelies of nature.
Of which there was abundant store in the Eleusinia sacra, Cybeles mysteries,
Venus, and Flora's feasts, from which it will not be tolerable to repeat them.

New Testament, and particularly of the notion of Idolatry there, (for which
advantage it is that this discourse has thus enlarged it self.) As first, Ephesians.
4. 29. where speaking of the Gentiles, he says (...) (that is, in Hesychius's
Glossary) who (...).
giving over all labor, (as idleness is the mother-sinne of the Sodomites)
gave themselves up to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness (...), we
render it, [with greedinesse] the word is interpreted Covetousness in other
places, but signifies not only that, but all immoderate, and peculiarly
inordinate unnatural desire, not only coveting of wealth, I say, but in
Aristotle any thing that is opposed (...) to equality, when any man will have
((...)) above his portion. So in Hesychius (...), to denote the [more then is
due or ought to be] whatsoever the subject matter be. So in Lucian de calumn:
page 844. the Calumniator is described to be one that will have all his
auditors to himself, will let no man else be heard, and for this he calls him
(...), and so Democrates in his (...). defines (...) to be a speaking all, and
not endureing to hear any body else: And the notion that I now speak of,
applied to inordinate lust, though it differ in the object, is the same in
effect with this, a desiring and usurping, that which is not agreeable to his
condition, sex, nature, etc. and of that we have a grammatical ground in the
Hebrew word (...) which signifies covetousness and lust, and being often rendered
(...) is once rendered (...) pollution, Ezekiel 33. 31. where though our English
read covetousness, yet the sense directs otherwise, even to that which verse.
29. is expressed by abominations. Of this I should not thus define, were not many
places of the New Testament eminently applyable to this sense, nor thus far
extravagate on this word, did it not much tend to the explaining and asserting
the New Testament notion of Idolatry* that now we are upon.

Romans 1. 29. you have together in this matter (...), fornication, villainy, (not
covetousness again, but) inordinate desire and naughtiness, and yet more
evidently, Coloss. 3. 5. where speaking of the Gentile unbelievers, among their
deeds that a Christian is so carefully to avoid, the Apostle mentions
fornication, uncleanness, (...) (I conceive, in Salvians phrase) passivity,
evil concupiscence and (...), sure inordinate desire again which is Idolatry
(and this seems to me to have been acknowledged by Saint Cyprian, who Ep. 52.
will have [(...), which] refer to each of those foregoing names) the
interpretation of that heathen worship of theirs, for which the wrath of God
comes on the children of disobedience (it seems again this was the sin that
brought that fatal destruction upon them) (...), in which sins the
Colossians had sometimes walked when they lived (...), among the Gentiles. So
Ephesians. 5. 3. let neither fornication, nor uncleanness, or (...), inordinate
desire be named among you, (those nefanda, sins not to be named) as becomes
Saints, as they are opposed to Gentiles again. And so verse 5. Every
fornicatour, and unclean person, and (...), (not covetous, but inordinate
luster) who is an Idolatour.

Idolaters also, when the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. 6. Be not ye Idolaters, as
were some of them, as it is written, they sat down to eat and drink and rose
up to play. For the Greek (...), which we render to play, may possibly refer
in that place to those sins of uncleanness. It is clear that (...) does Genesis
39. 14, and 17. which we there render [mock] and though (...) be not the word
there used, yet the Hebrew (...) signifies both, and is the word used both in
that place of Genesis, and Exodus 32. 6. from whence our Apostle cites it; and
if comparing the story Acts 7. 41. (where it is said in this matter, (...),
they rejoiced in the works of their hands) be apt to persuade any, that (...)
to play, is all one with (...) to rejoice, and so that both denote their
dancing before their Idol, it will be as obvious to reply that (...) there
used, signifies most properly the rejoicing at a feast Luke 12. 19. and 15. 23.
24. 29. 32. and 16. 19. and so following, the offering of sacrifice to their
idol, shall denote a sacrificall feast, and be all one with the eating and
drinking here, but not with the playing that attends it: and so still the (...)
may probably be thus interpreted; especially when in this place it follows
immediately after (...) lusters after evil things, and is attended with (...),
neither let us commit fornication. etc. and from thence perhaps it is that
verse 14. to his exhortation of flying from Idolatry, he subjoyns verse 15. I
speak to wise men, judge what I say; not willing to add more words on that
subject. This is but a conjecture of which I am not confident. But no question,
this is the meaning of (...), the abominable nefarious Idolatries, 1 Pet. 4. 3.
of the fruitless works of darkness, whereof Christianity made them ashamed
of the (...), those things that were done in secret, and (...), which it was a
shame to name or speak out; (all one perhaps with the (...), the hidden
idolatry in the Council of Laodicea) to which you may add, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. this
is the will of God, (...), your purification, consisting as it follows in
abstaining from fornication, etc. and after (...), in purification and honor
(as that is opposed to (...), dishonourablenesse, vileness, Romans 1. 26.) not
in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles etc. To which purpose it is the
conceit of some learned men, that that which follows must be applied (...),
verse 6. (though our English reading look quite another way) for so the context
will enforce, verse 7. for God has not called us, (...), for uncleanness, but
(...), to or in purification. And so every of those words will bear, if it were
now seasonable to insist upon it. And it is observable that Isai. 57. 8. where
the Prophet speaks to the That that whole verse belongs to that matter will
appear, if you view it in the Original. Thus. (...) thou have been dissolute
(laxata (...) dilatata) (...) by thy lying with them (so it is rendered Number. 31.
17.) Thou have cut them or made them Eunuchs for thy self (so (...) which
perhaps we mistake for (...) Covenant, does signify, and so the Targum renders
it (...) succidisti, detruneasti) thou lovedst to lie with them, etc.
adulterous Apostate Israel [Thou have discovered thy self to others beside me,
and art gone up, etc.] the Greek Translatours have used these words, (...),
etc. by (...), [departing from me] expressing [the discovering her self to
others beside me] and by (...) [desiring more] rendering [the going up] which
may therefore seem to be set in that place (according to the Hebrew (...)
conscendit, ascendit, transcendit) for [(...)] in the notion that we now speak
of; and then you see the sympathy betwixt (...) and (...), according to the
dialect and idiom of those writers.

So 1 Cor. 5. 11. (...), either fornicatour, or inordinate luster, or idolater.
Which cannot be applied to the worship of images, because he there speaks of
Christians in the profession at least, who sure did not then worship images,
but might be guilty more probably of those carnal heathen uncleanness, those
impurities so solemnly used in the idol-worships. In which place, and the
precedent verse under the general word (...), fornicatours, are specified
(...), the fornicatours of this world, that is, the Gentiles, (...); The
inordinate lusters and idolaters again belong to that matter; and so it is more
then possible may the (...) too, which we render extortioners, but may rather
seem to signify the (...), or (...), the rape or stealing of women or virgins,
the (...), 2 Pet. 2. 12. preying on them (the literal notation of the word
from (...), rapio, by which as by (...), the Hebrew (...) is rendered) and so I
have observed the word to be used in Constant. (...) Raptoris bona publicanda,
etc.
Harmenopulus, and may perhaps also in Saint Matthew. chap. 23. 25. where (...)
is joined with (...), incontinence, and opposed to (...) and (...), cleansing
and clean, verse 26.

Idolaters, 1 Cor. 6. 9. being so joined on both sides with fornicatours,
adulterers, soft or effeminate defilers of themselves with mankind. And what if
the phrase (...), Romans 2. 22. do so also, [thou that abhorrest Idols] The word
(...) seems to refer to those (so frequently called) (...), abominations;
whether (those of the Sydonians, and the like, that is, whether) abominable
sacrifies, killing, and offering their sons and daughters unto devils, or
abominable sorceries, Deuteronomy. 18. or abominable senseless stupidity, in
worshipping inanimate creatures, or abominable lusts in their idol-feasts, I
shall not now define, but only observe, that if we should apply it peculiarly
to the last of these (yet not excluding the rest) the rational importance of
the place will bear it very well. Thou that do so detest and abominate those
heathen villainies in their idol-worships, if upon that ground of zeal thou
rob and rifle their Temples, wilt never be able to clear thy self.

[Idolater or Idolatry] in the New Testament, I shall briefly give you a view
of them, Gal. 5. 20. Where of the works of the flesh, carnal sins there are
in the Front, Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, (...) (that (...), Hesych.
foul sin, which our Translation renders here lasciviousness, but elsewhere
shameless uncleanness, Wisd. 14. 26. Idolatry, etc. all clearly of a making,
if this notion of Idolatry be accepted. So Apoc. 21. 8. where among the eight
severalls, to which the fire and brimstone old Sodoms lot, is apportioned, you
will find these five unbelievers (a general word for Gentiles) (...) (we
render it abominable, it is most probably in that place, and in that
conjunction those that have been guilty of those (...), abominations, or
bestiall sins, as Apoc. 17. 4. you have (...), the abomination and
uncleanness of her fornication, and so verse 7. fornicatours, and idolaters,
and all liars, (that is, I conceive all that are guilty of those false
idolatrous worships) and so again, chap. 22. 15. Fornicatours, Idolaters, and
every one that loves and works a lie, (all those that delight in, and
practice those false worships, which are called a lie, Romans 1. 25.) and (...)
sorcerers in the front, either because that sin was so ordinarily joined to
those other heathen impieties, (as may appear by one eminent place, Deuteronomy. 18.
from the ninth to the thirteenth verse) or upon a ground, which I shall have
occasion to mention anon, of conjuring their Gods by magical ceremonies,
((...) and (...)) to adjoyn themselves to the consecrated images. And all this
under the title of the dogs that are without, that is, the Gentile world of
Idolatours.

fragments of Polycarpus's Epistle speaking of Valens a Presbyter of Philippi,
and his having committed somewhat utterly unworthy of that calling (which is
not there named, and perhaps by that may be rather guessed at what it was) by
his example he admonishes others to abstain [ab avaritia] (that sure was in
Greek, (...)) from inordinate desires, [and sint casti] and be chaste. Adding,
that whosoever did not thus abstain [(...)] ab idololatria coinquinabitur, and
tanquam inter Gentes judicabitur, will be contaminated by Idolatry, and shall
be judged as among the Gentiles.

[Idol] in the Old Testament; and more then so, to the explication of the word
Idolatry (and by the way, of many difficult passages) in the New, so as to
signify those Heathen basenesses, that Christians were too apt to learn from
the Gentiles, when their Image Worship was less tempting to them, and may
therefore possibly be the vice, from which the Apostle so dehorts his little
children, that is, his new born babes in Christ or Gentile converts, that they
abstain or keep themselves from Idols, 1 John 5. 21. for there was (as far as
we read in Scripture) little of any other kind of Idolatry in fashion among
Christians at that time (unless perhaps the eating the (...) may come under
that title which yet Saint Paul prohibits only in order to Scandal.) and that
this was, not only slyly and secretly (but even avowedly and profestly) you
may see 2 Pet. 2. which Chapter being read and weighed in the Original, will
appear to be almost wholly spent on this matter. I will give the Reader a
little light to it.

sect of false teachers ready to creep in among those Christians, verse 1.
bringing in (...) doctrines of destruction; you will guess what that means, if
you mark what some ancient * Codex antiq. in Coll. Magd. Ox.
copies set in stead of that word which we render [destruction,] when it
returns again verse. 2. for there the old manuscripts have (...) want onnesses,
in stead of (...) destructions. Our English reads damnable heresies in the
first place, and pernicious ways in the second, but those are only generally
paraphrases which come not home particularly to the notation of the word, and
therefore the margin of our books confessing that other reading, renders it
verse 2. lascivious ways, in the sense that now we contend for. This is
further explained (which convinces the discourse to belong to this matter) by
the sins of the old world, verse 5. and of Sodom peculiarly, verse 6. by the
(...). verse 7. the conversation of those that observed no laws in their
lasciviousness, such as did so grieve righteous Lot in Sodom, by (...) lust of
pollution or abominable desire, verse 10. by (...). verse 12. we render it
[born to be taken and destroyed] but it signifies rather in the active sense,
that are made ad praedandum to prey, (or catch and tear, so Job 24. 5. (...) by
the Greek rendered (...) to catch, is in the Chaldee paraphrase rising up early
to their prey) and to corrupt, that is, good for nothing but to assault and
debauch (as ravenous beasts do use to prey upon) all they meet with
promiscuously; and it is observable that the word (...) which properly
signifies those things which are taken and torn with wild beasts, (because such
were not to be eaten Vid. excerpta Gemarae tr. Sanhedr. c. 1.. 7.
Lev. 17. 15.) is by use enlarged to all forbidden meats among the Robbins (if
the lungs of any thing have a hole in them, they call it (...) etc. says In
Thisbi. p. 139.
Elias Levita) and so by analogy is here made use of to denote those unclean
prohibited acts, which are so to be accounted of among Christians, as the cibus
vetitus among the Jews, and therefore it follows, that those that take pleasure
in that (...), such riotous actions as these verse 13. are called (...) and
(...) from the Hebrew (...) macula, spots and blemishes, (such as among the
Jews made the sacrifice unclean) defilers and polluters of those, with whom
they do (...) feast or revell, in the end of that verse. So it is again
expressed verse 14. by having eyes full of the adulteress, and that cease not
from sin, intangling, unstable or unconfirmed Souls, that is, new converted
Christians, having a heart (...) (in the sense which before we gave of the
word, and which belongs to it also verse 3.) exercised with those inordinate
lusts, that is, wholly employed on them; which denominates them (...) children
of a curse, that is, worthy to have a curse fall on them (as the Son of
perdition worthy to be destroyed) And ver. 15. by the way of Balaam (who we
know brought the Israelites to that sin of uncleanness with the Moabitish
women, and to the curse by that means) by (...) verse 18. that high pitch of
vanity, or false Idolatrous worship, as a snare to bring men to the (...) etc.
lusts of the flesh, lasciviousness, etc. (with reference to the vicious
Heathen (...).
conversation) by a villainous licentiousness, verse 19. (stolen in under
pretense of Christian liberty, but being indeed the basest Vide Romans 6. 10.
submission) and by (...), the pollutions of the Heathen world, that is, of the
Nations, or Gentiles, verse 20. (which the knowledge of Christ was designed to
turn out, but complying and mixing with it, was the vilest and most damning
condition that could befall any, verse. 21, 22.) and at last by a (...) the most
swinish wallowing in the mire of all uncleanness. And if you would know who
these unclean heretics were, (which Christianized all the villainies of the old
Idol-worships) referred to in this and other places of the Epistles, I shall
not positively define, but leave it indifferently between the Gnostics and the
Nicolaitans, the Gnostics covertly (...).
named 1. Tim. 6. 20. (it seems they were then a creeping in at Ephesus) and
profestly declaimed at Tit. 1. under the title of the Cretian evil beasts, and
slow bellies, verse. 12. and (...), polluted persons, verse. 15. and (...)
abominable, and such as by their works deny the faith, verse. 16.

purification, and not to uncleanness, that is, being by their conversion to
Christianity obliged to forsake those carnal lusts) did abuse the Grace of God
(that is, the light and mercies of the Gospel) to wantonness, (...). Jude
verse. 4. (which that it belongs to this matter in hand will appear by the
parallel assigned them, verse. 7.) that is, used it as an occasion to commit, or
protection to continue in such sins, that they were guilty of strange
prodigies of filthiness, and retained in their Sacraments some Symbola of
them, I had rather should be learnt from Epiphanius, then from this paper. Of
them this is sufficiently known, that persuading themselves, that they were the
Children of God, they thought they might wallow in all filthiness, and be no
more polluted by Irenaeus.
it then the Sun beams by the dunghill on which they fall; And against that
doctrine of theirs it is that some interpret that of Saint John [that he which
is born of God cannot sin, because he is born of God] that is, cannot sin
upon that head or score, to signify that their being born of God can be no
patent or security for their sinning.

Nicolaitans which had their names from Nicholas the Deacon in the Acts, and
their sensual practices from his example (as might appear by the vile passages
that Saint Jerome and others relate of him) I shall not need to say more then
what we find mentioned of them, Apoc. 2. as first, that their works were odious
to God, verse. 6. then secondly, that it was a sect of doctrine among Christians
(as odious as it was) verse. 15. and it will not be unseasonable to pray, that
God will keep all Sectaries from the like. Thirdly, that it was the same
doctrine that Balaam taught Balaac to bring the Israelites to a curse, when
nothing else could do it. verse. 14. and that fourthly, not only specified in
the story to be whoredom with the daughters of Moab, Numb. 25. but in this
place particularly mentioned (...), eating things offered to Idols, and
fornication; it seems the former of those, the Idol-feasts, was wont to be
previous and preparatory to the latter, (and Saint Hieromes relation of
Nicholas witnesses the truth of the parallel) and therefore of the seven
precepts of the Sons of Noah, mentioned in the Apostles Council in the Acts
(required of all proselytes that came in to Judaisme, and so by way of
compliance at that time, prescribed to all the Gentiles that became Christians)
the two first were those of abstinence from meats offered to Idols, and from
fornication, Acts 15. 29. and the former of them, verse. 20. called (...), the
pollutions or abominable villainies in those Idol-worships, as in Hesychius
(...) is expressed by (...), participation of their abominable (or as he renders
(...)) unclean sacrifices, and the second (...) fornication, being all one with
the (...) de retectione nuditatum, all uncleanness in general contains
adultery, incest, and all unlawful lusts. And that will give an account why
those (...) should be so forbidden in the Acts (it seems for that danger of
unclean sins so commonly annexed to the Idol. feasts, as will appear, Psalm.
106. 28. and Numb. 25. 1. 3.) and yet be counted of as perfectly indifferent
things by Saint Paul 1, Cor. 8. viz. being separated from all danger of that
unclean appendage. Fifthly, of these Nicolaitans works it is there added, that
unless they be straight reformed, God will come quickly upon that Church of
Pergamus, verse. 16. and that coming signifies a fatal blow, which was not
only observable to have fallen upon the seven Nations, on Sodom, ou most of
the great Monarchies of the world, for the revenge of this provoking sin,
(Idolatry thus heightened with this addition of villainy) but even more then one
of those seven Christian Churches may be thought to have been involved in that
guilt, and ruin; even this of Pergamus, and the next of Thyatira, verse. 20.
which sin being described by Jezabel making her self a Prophetess, and
teaching and seducing Christians, (...), to commit uncleanness, and to eat
things offered to Idols, (in the sense before mentioned) and by (...) depths of
Satan, verse. 24. she is said to have time given her for the reformation of this
villainy, verse. 21. and not making use of it, to have been delivered up to
destruction, verse. 22.

Idols for new converts to take heed of, in those days, such carnal
Gospellers, that retained that part of the Heathen Idolatries, which flesh and
blood was most apt to be taken with, when the worshipping of Images was cast
out. And if that villainous piece of Heathenisme which (by Gods desertion, and
that thick long darkness, (wherein they lived) lay before the coming of
Christ, as an hideous sin at once and judgment on those barbarous times,
cannot yet (by sixteen hundred years of full light, and by all Christ's precepts
for all kind of purity of the very heart) be exorcized, or mortified amongst
us, and if still our ears are open to every sect of hypoctiticall professors,
though never so wild and ignorant, that brings any liberty, or proffer of
carnality along with it, then sure is the title of Christian but ill bestowed
on us, we are still the grossest Idolatours in the world; and so are in all
reason to expect the most exemplary punishments, which fell on them, be it the
portion of Sodom, a judgment rained down immediately, a kind of fire and
brimstone from heaven, (such are our strange, groundless, irrational
destructions wrought upon one another at this time, which no man living can
tell from whence they came; which is a sure argument that there is somewhat of
the (...) in it, either as that signifies the divine hand of God, visible in
the judgment, or as (...) signifies also that (...). Hesyc.
brimstony fire that comes with thunder) or be it the judgment that fell upon
the Nations for those villainies, a (...), or final destruction of a profane
polluted people.

origination and use of the word Idolatry, especially in the old and new
Testament, and found somewhat meant by it in the New, which is not so vulgarly
taken notice of, I shall desire to prevent a mistake, and do therefore profess
not to have designed these observations to that end, that the sin of Idolatry
so declaimed at in the Scripture, should be thought to signify nothing else,
but those acts of villainy in the Heathen mysteries; or because the worshipping
of images is not so frequently spoken of in the New Testament, that therefore
it should be no sin now under the Gospel. That it is a gross and provoking
sin in them that are guilty of it, there is no question, and the affirmation
of Text is clear, that there is no communication or reconcileablenesse betwixt
the Temple of God and Idols, 2. Corinthians. 6. 16. and that the guilt of that
sin among the Nations worshipping those senseless Deities, was so great, that
it provoked God by way of just punishment to deliver them up to those infamous
vile affections. Romans 1.

critical to the real material part of the discourse, and inquire into the
nature of that sin, merely as it is a worship of Idols, or images. In which
matter you may first observe some considerable difference between the two sorts
of resemblances, which have been usual among men. Some extantes, corporeal
figures standing out, (...), statues, graven images; others only
representations, or pictures, painted on windows, tables, chalices, etc. The
former of these were most used by (because fittest for the turns of) the
Heathens, being by them (through the commodiousnesse and advantage of their
bodily shapes) conceived to be more capable of animation by those gods of which
they were the resemblances. Thus is it the known divinity of Aug. de civ. dei.
l. 8. c, 23.
Trismegistus (or some body in his disguise) that Statues or Simulachra were
the bodies of their gods, who by some magical ceremonies of consecration
(whence it seems to be that, Galath. 5. Apoc, 1. 22. (...) sorceries, are
joined with idolatries) were forced to Neque era neque auri argentique materia
quibus signa conhe^^nt, esse Deos decernimus, sed eos ipsos in his colimus,
quos dedicatio infert sacra, and fabrilibus efficit inhabitare simulach. is.
A^nol. cont. Genti. l. 6.
join themselves to them, to animate them, to assume, and inhabit those earthen
bodies as it were. To which fancy perhaps the Apostle may relate, when he tells
the Christians that their bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, that God is
powerfully in them, though not in those dumb images. And Desacrif. and Mag.
Proclus relates it as their opinion generally, that the gods were by their
favor and help present in their images, and thereon is grounded the old
relation of the Tyrians, who on a fear that Apollo would forsake them, bound
his image fast with golden Chains, and that other of the Athenians who clipped
the wings of the image of victory, that she might not fly away from them. And
so the Sicilians in Divin^^. in Q. Cacil.
Cicero complaining that they had no gods in their Isle, give this reason for
it, that Verres had taken away all their Statues. And so the Idol thus raised
above its natural pitch by bringing down some aethereall spirit into it, (viz.
the god whose image it was) became a god in their opinion, and was thought able
to hear, see, speak, help, do any thing that belonged to a Deity. Thus does
Nero in Suetonius pretend to know things to come by the instruction of such an
icuncula or little image. So Trismegistus tells us of speaking Images, and
Historians the like of Memnons Statues, and so Labans Teraphim, being supposed
to have had a spirit included in them, went for Labans gods. And it is not
improbable by the Text that the Israelites Calf was by them thus counted of, as
an image which upon Aarons consecration was thus animated by God, and so fit to
go before them, to be their conductour in Moses absence, whom they knew to be
moved and directed by God.

Calf, these gods as they call them, were by them desired to supply Moses
place, and though the conjecture be not improbable, that the figure of it was
the same with the figure of a Cherub (which God after appointed to be in the
Tabernacle, Exodus 25. 18. and of which it is possible Aaron might then have
some intimation) as may appear by comparing Ezekiel, 1. 10. with chap. 10. 14.
where that which is the face of an Ox, or Calf in one place, is the face of a
Cherub in the other, and the ground of this resemblance in reference to Joseph's
providing for the Egyptians, and also for his father and brethren in the famine
(whereupon his scutchion is said to be an Ox, agreeable to that prophecy of
him, Deuteronomy. 33. 7. his glory is like the firstling of a bullock, as Minutius for
his care of feeding the soldiers in a dearth was honored by the Romans with
a golden Ox, Live. l. 4. and as Suidas relates of King Apis that he fed the
Alexandrians in a famine, and therefore was honored after death with a Temple
and an Ox in it) yet was this image worshipped by them (as appears by their
sacrificall feast and celebration) and so used just as the Egyptian Idols,
which were accounted as so many gods. And therefore the question which is
ordinarily made, [whether the Israelites worship this Calf, or only God in
this Calf] may well enough be superseded, and the resolution be sufficiently
clear, that they worship not God only, but the idol-calf also, (and so I am
sure their successors have conceived, which talk so much of a grain of the Calf
in every judgment they have suffered ever since) and so doted upon the
specious Idol. and were transported with their sensual way of worshipping it,
that God was quickly almost lost, and forgotten amongst them, their heart going
back into Egypt, where such like images had been in fashion and were wont to be
worshipped.

Jeroboams Calves; of which though it may not be improbable, that they also
were the imitation of the images of the Cherubim in the Temple, and so the same
of setting them up in Dan and Bethel an act of Schism, designed on purpose by
Jeroboam to keep open the great division in the State, 1. Kings 12. 26. yet was
it not the guilt of Schism alone, to which it was liable, (as Aaron Purgatus.
Moncaeus has labored to persuade) but having an addition of sacrificing to
those Calves also, verse. 32. and the proclamation of [Behold thy gods, O
Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt] verse. 28. (which intimates
them to be set out by him to the people for so many animated inspirited images)
no question but the guilt of Idolatry belonged to it, and that the divine
censure and character of Jeroboams sin (that stuck so close to his posterity)
imports also.

pictures which are called dimissae, depressae, a plain painting on a table,
etc. without any protuberancy, or bunching, were not by the Gentiles thought so
capable of receiving that animation. The distinction is Maimons; the first he
calls (...) the protuberant image, the other (...) the depresse, either drawn
on a table in colors, says he, or weaved in hangings. The former of these and
not the latter, was it which was so strictly forbidden the Jews (and accounted
as a (...) of polytheisme, a token of the worshipping of many gods, (a
discriminative note between the worshipers of the one true, and the many false
Deities) because of that Heathen opinion, that such statues, or protuberant
pictures were by magic made capable of these ethereall spirits; an abuse, of
which the depresse pictures were not so capable. And hence it is (not without
reason) that learned men that conceive the second commandment to prohibit none
but the former (peculiarly the graven image) and to that purpose read that
which follows, by way of explication, not of disjunction, [graven image, the
likenesse] etc. (as it is Deuteronomy. 5. 8. in the Hebrew, not, [or the likenesse] do
extend it even to the making, or having any such, and not only to the
worshipping of them.

c. 3. 12.
Maimon. it is forbidden to make images though it be only (...) for ornament;
but then that, says he, is to be understood of the images, that bunch out, or
are embossed; but for the painted or woven (...) they are not unlawful: and he
specifics very nicely that a ring that has for a seal the figure of a Man, if
it be gibbous, or swelling out, is not it self lawful to be worn, but yet it
is lawful to seal with it, because the impression, in that case, is hollow,
not swelling out, and on the otherside if the seal be depresse, or hollow, it
is lawful to wear, but not to seal with it. chap. 3.. 13. It is true this he
restrains again, that none (in this matter only for ornament) is forbidden,
but the figure of a man; but others in obedience to the words of the second
command, extend it to the prohibition of all living creatures also, (only the
inanimate, such was the Golden Vine in the Temple, were excepted,) And truly it
seems very probable, that to the Jews it was (whether by the force of the
second commandment, or by some precept elsewhere, or by the Tradition of the
Elders, I say not) conceived utterly unlawful to have any such images,
especially in their Temples or places of worship (unless in case of Gods
particular command, as the Cherubim, and the brazen Serpent) yea and to bow in
their presence in any place; for this will Maimons stating the several cases
convince to have been his opinion, and, as he conceived, the constant doctrine
of the Jews. I am sure they are appointed to be broken down, Exodus 34. 13: and
examples there are of the peoples practice that way, both in the story of
Herod's Trophies, and the Eagle set up by him over the gate of the Temple, and
in many other particulars; And the Greek Church at this day, though it has
pictures good store, yet I think it has none of these embossed Statues allowed
in it (which yet the Lutherans use promiscuously, yea and clothe and adorn them
too, and conceive not themselves to sin against any commandment of the law,
because they do not worship them.)

reason of this prohibition to the Jews, is by Maimonides again cleared to be,
not for any natural primitive sinfulness in an image of a man etc. but only
for caution, (and therefore within the vail whither the eyes of the people were
not permitted to enter, God himself appoints the Cherubims to be set up, and
Solomon graved Cherubims upon the walls of the greater house, 2. Chron. 3. 7.
that is, in the body of the Temple I conceive, because none but the Priests did
come in thither, Luke 1. 8, 9.) to hedge and keep them from all danger of
falling into the Heathen worships, and upon the obligation of the words of that
Text, Exodus 34. 12. beware etc. lest it be a snare unto thee.

Idolatours used in their worship; and so the specifying of the three sorts in
the Commandment may argue, [the things in heaven, in earth, in the waters],
from each of which the several follies of men had fetched their Deities. To
instance only in the last and lowest of them, that the Crocodiles in the river
were so accounted of among the Egyptians is clear (among many other) by one
notable relation in Max. Tyr. (...). There was a woman, says he, in Egypt that
nursed up a young Crocodile, and was counted a mighty happy person (...), as
one that had brought her God to hand, and kept it tame by her; this woman,
says he, had a son (...), of the age of the God, and when they grew up to
some bigness, the Crocodile killed and devoured the child, (...), she in her
mourning for her son pronounced him blessed in this death, that he was thus
offered up a present to her domestic God. And they which could worship such
wild vulture Gods, could not much be blamed, if they deified every onion in the
garden, much more every star in the sky, which sure deserved their
acknowledgement much better then the vulture of the sea the Crocodile, had done.

Caution among the Jews (extended only to those images which were so abused by
the Heathens) is the design of those Homilies in our book, concerning the
peril of Idolatry, which though they acknowledge that * images be of themselves
things indifferent, and that * men are not so ready to worship a picture on a
wall, or in a window, as an embossed and gilt image set with pearl and stone,
and profess (in the P. 20. lin. 1. P. 27. near the end.
beginning of the third part of the Homily) that all which is said, is thus
meant, [in that we be stirred and provoked by images to worship them, and not
as though they were simply forbidden by the new Testament, without such
occasion and danger] and count it a piece of Superstition, and scrupulosity to
abhor all pictures, as images of princes, etc. which, says that Homily,
Christ saw on the Roman coyns and reprehended them not, nor condemned the art
of painting and image-making as wicked of themselves, p. 44. yet, in respect of
the frequency of that sin in those times of the so eminent danger that images
in Churches would be worshipped, and all possible means would not be probable to
secure the use of them against that danger, they do with great earnestness
exhort the not setting them up, especially in country Churches, where the
number of the ignorant may much enhaunce that danger; and it may be observed
that in the Articles of our Church we make acknowledgement of that whole book
of Homilies, that they were useful and profitable for those times, wherein
(being so lately gotten out of Popery where image worship was so ordinary) the
danger was so great of falling back, upon every temptation, to that sin. And
though the Homilies be wary and careful to prevent another contrary danger,
lest any private persons under color of destroying images should make any
stir or disturbance in the commonwealth, and therefore adds P. 18. l. 2.
that it must always be remembered that the redress of such public enormities
pertains to the Magistrate, and such as be in authority only, and not to
private persons, yet to those whose duty it is to take care for the people that
they be godly as well as quietly governed, the exhortation is very instantly
pressed, that (after the pattern of Hezekiah, etc.) they perform this part of
their duty, viz. that as Hezekiah did in the case of the brazen Serpent, so the
Magistrate whenever he sees images to be abused, or the people apt to worship
them, think himself obliged in conscience to appoint them to be removed in care
of the honor of God, and the peoples good. And this is certainly very good and
wholesome doctrine, and nothing more reasonable, then that he which is
defendour of the Faith, should take care to defend the impotent seducible
weakling (I mean not the railer at images, who sure is of all others the safest
from that danger of worshipping them, and consequently disclaims any want of
that fatherly caution,) from such imminent peril (when any such there is) of
this image worship. And that this is the Supreme Magistrates charge, and
belongs not to any inferior, further then to execuse what he commands, might
be evidenced from the doctrine and censures of the Church, in the case of the
iconoclastae, if it were now pertinent. To this I shall only add (that which
I conceive other men's experience of themselves will incline them to believe)
that the worship of images or any thing but God, is not a thing to which
English Protestants for these late years (especially the Catechized and
knowing) have generally had any strong temptations, at least not such in any
comparison, as immediately after the reformation, the minds of men (before used
to such ignorant vanities) were subject to. And I doubt not but many men that
have frequented Churches, and places where pictures have been, can sincerely
upon examination of their memories, say with me, that they are not conscious to
themselves, that they ever found themselves under any inclination or danger of
falling into any act of image worship. Which consideration, if it be true, (as
I cannot but persuade my self it is) will take off much from the necessity of
continuing those strict cautions (of not permitting any kind of image in any
Church, and the like) which some other times or inclinations of men might make
more necessary, and consequently take off much from the odium which the way of
adorning some Churches with imagery has lately lain under.

images among the Jews may be enlarged also to bodily gestures, whether
religious to God, or civil to our superiors, in any place where images are;
for both these seem to have been interdicted the Jews, at least by them to have
been accounted unlawful (as will at large appear by Maimonides in the book
forecited) though the heart were never so far from worshipping the images. But
then though the Jews were under that strict restraint, yet aliens, proselytes,
of other nations, were not bound to that strictness; but Naaman is permitted
by the prophet to go with his Heathen Master into the house of Rimmon, and
(when the Master worships there, and leans upon his hand) to now himself in the
house of Rimmon, 2 Kings 5. 18. upon this ground, first, that he never went
into the Idol-temple, but to wait upon his Master in the office which he had.
Secondly, that he professed himself to all, (even to that heathen Master, and
those that were in his Court) to be a worshiper of none but of the true God,
and to that end carried two mule-loads of earth out of Palestine with him, v.
17. in honor of him whose name was great there, and to build an Altar,
according to the prescript, Exodus 20. 24. by which it was sufficiently clear to
the beholders, (as by an interpretative protestation) that, when his Master
worshipped, he only bowed, and then his bowing was only civil to his Master
the King, not religious to Rimmon or Saturn, or his image there; And therefore
to his question whether God will be offended with him in that matter, the
Prophet answers him with a [go in peace.] I cannot think so irreverently of the
Prophet, as that he should make that answer ironically to his new convert (any
more then I can believe Naamans scruple belonged only to the former part of
his life (reading it in the praeter sense) for sure that had been guilty of the
worshipping the Idol, and not only bowing in the house of Rimmon) but that he
meant in earnest, what alone the words import, that in thus doing, and no more,
he need not fear that he should be a breaker of that Law, which in this
particular was not given to him, or any but those of that Nation, or people of
the Jews; For it is an ordinary observation, that Gentiles or aliens were
received in among the Jews under a double capacity, either as Proselytes of
Justices, to submit to the whole Judaicall law, to every rite and positive
precept of it; or else only as Proselytes of the Gates (and such was Naaman)
to submit to the seven precepts of the Sons of Adam and Noah (and no more)
among which the (...) of the strange worship, or Idolatry was one, and so a
necessity imposed on them of casting off the Idol. worship, but not of not
bowing to the King in the presence of an Idol, unless the case were of such a
gesture that in that nation were performed to none but the deity in worship
(the reason that the Grecians refused once to bow to the Persian King, because
that reverence was there performed to none but God) which was not the manner
then in Syria, but veneration and even prostration paid to the King as well as
to God. Thus much I have said on occasion of the first sort of Images, the
embossed and protuberant among the Jews; and shall not need to descend to a
more particular survey of the second sort, it being already manifest that the
reason that prevailed to prohibit the very having the former among the Jews,
did not even in their opinion extend unto the latter. And for worshipping,
though the latter were not among them so likely to occasion that sin, yet if
any Jew should have been so mad to worship any such image, the sin it is
acknowledged, would have been as great, as that which was committed with the
grosser corporeous object, and so will it hold infallibly among all others.

Idol, and the Idolatry forbidden there. It may now be fit to proceed one step
further, and to enquire whether there may not possibly be in the Christian
Church, such a sin as Idolatry, that is, whether he that acknowledges the
Christians God, and worships no heathen Deity, much less image of such, may
not yet possibly fall into that sin of Idolatry, as that signifies worshipping
somewhat else beside the invisible God, be it an image of God, or else a Saint,
or Angel, or somewhat else clothed in some respect or relation to God.

books especially) which (or whether any whole) Church or sort of Christians at
this day) are guilty of this sin, because it is to be expected that the
writings of prudent men will be so cautious, as not to accuse themselves in
this matter; as even now I gave you an example from Maximus Tyrius a Platonic
heathen in the description of it among the Gentiles. Yet because Divos,
divasque non aliter venerantur quam Deum ipsum, etc. Lud. in Aug. de civ l. 8.
c. ult. vid. Cassand. consult. de imag. Polyd. Virg. de rerum invent. l. 6. c.
13. 45.
some number of sober men which have lived in the Roman Communion has given
me occasion, I shall interpose my wish, that the care which by their writers is
taken for excuse of the doctrine of the learned, were used for the directing
and examining of the practices of the ignorant also.

I shall therefore set down in thesi what may, according to the grounds laid in
the former part of this discourse, conclude a Christian guilty of Idolatry, and
leave every man's own conscience (and among all others the Romanists) to
examine, and as occasion shall be, to accuse himself, and every Christian to
advise and exhort (but withal to abstain as much as is possible from judging)
other men.

any creature, particularly to an Angel, those things which belong peculiarly
to God, though he acknowledge the true God, is yet guilty of that sin, as
truly as those Heathens that worshipped the creature (...) beside the Creator,
Romans 1. that is, worshipped God, but not God only. (Thus the Arrians were
condemned of idolatry, that affirming Christ to to be a creature and not God
incarnate, they did yet bestow divine honor * Athanas cont. A^^. or^^.
on him, and so Nestorius in like manner, and his followers styled (...)
man-worshipers, and both these sentences confirmed by the second * Ephesians. Council.
cap. 67.
Council of Nice, which is thought so favorable to images.) As for example.

Angels omniscience, omnipotence, etc. that is, that the Angels can freely
understand all men's prayers, and as freely grant them their wants, is, I
conceive, a piece of Idolatry, [Freely] I say, and I mean by the word [freely]
their doing it by their own original power, and not only by Gods revealing
the one to them, or by giving them power to do the other. As for him, that
supposes the Angels to know all things which God pleases to reveal to them, by
looking upon God as on a voluntary glass (as Biel sets it) and withal
believes, that God reveals all things to them so, and that thereupon they know
by that means whatsoever any man says to them at any distance; Or again, for
him that conceives them to see all things in the world by seeing Gods face, and
looking on it as in a natural glass, that reveals all that God knows without
any choice, or act of his will (as some others set it), these may be very
erroneous, yea and (if they teach them for doctrines) be guilty of sin, in
that (but speculative) mistaking, namely the sin of dogmatizing, of affirming
for matter of Faith that for which they have no ground of Scripture or evidence
(which I conceive to be the fault charged on such, Col. 2. in the phrase (...),
undertaking to penetrate, or know what men know nothing of, (...), vainly
puffed up with the thoughts of their own flesh, their own reason, or fancy,
fictions of men, (Gnostics, etc.) without any revelation from God) Yet can I
not say, that these are Idolatours by so conceiving, or thinking, or affirming,
by imagining these vain or false things, if they go no further: (as they that
came into the (...), into the presence of Images, but worshipped them not.) But
then if they add practice to conceit, worshipping those whom they have elevated
to that pitch; build Altars, make offices, pray to them, especially in the
house (or in the time of the service) of God, they do by this action, add a
greater aggravation to the speculative sin, and for ought I know, fall into a
kind of idol-worship, fancying Angels to be what they are not, and then paying
them that adoration which is due only to God, at least they fall inro a
prohibited act, by neglecting the only Christian course of making our
addresses only by Christ to God, which I conceive is the meaning of (...),
Col. 2. 18. Let no man deprive you of that Christian bravium or prize,] the
peculiarity of privilege of coming unto God by Christ only. The same will be
said of offering sacrifice, incense, or the like unto them (acts of worship and
so peculiar to God (making vows or swearing by them, asking grace, pardon of
sins, or salvation of them.

Via Con. cil. Laod. can. 35. p. 352. and Zo. nar. in can. ^tum, and Judill in
Cod eccl. univers. p. 262. 49.
Angelici in the primitive Church, who conceived that nothing was to be asked
of God but what was by the petitioner committed first to one Angel, then from
him to another, and so by those many degrees brought to God, this may be
thought a first rise of the sin of Angel-worship, somewhat parallel to that,
which we gave you from Maimonides of the Heathen Idolatry.

What has now been said, must be taken with some caution, and it is this, that
to bow to an Angel appearing to any man, (which civility we pay to any
superior) would not come under this censure. A consideration which has made
some wise men think that the Angels refusing of worship at Saint John's hands in
the Revelation, chap. 19. 10. was not the rejecting it as an act of Idolatry
(or any kind of sin if it had been accepted) but as an evidence of the Angels
acknowledging himself John's Fellow servant (the reason which is there rendered
in the Text) and so not superior to him in that office. But to this it may be
said, that the Angels admonition [worship God] that follows, may possibly argue
that John took the Angel for God appearing* and accordingly worshipped him, and
therefore I shall not define. But then still for any other reverence or bowing,
but that of divine adoration, there is no question but it may be performed to a
man, when we meet him, and then much more unto an Angel; And that any gesture
of reverence shall pass for divine adoration, will, I conceive, be only in
the power of God, and each man's own soul to define, the same outward act being
(without any danger) performable both to Man and God, and nothing but the
intention of the person making the difference. Much less will the worshipping
of God, when an Angel appears to us, (as supposing God to be peculiarly present
where those his Satellites or Courtiers appear) come under that charge, nor
consequently doing it in the Church (peculiarly at the first Vid. view of the
New Directory, p. 21. and p. 82.
entrance into that holy place) where the Angels are supposed to be present
(the Angels singing with us, says Chrysostom, and Angelus Orationis, says
Tertullian, and the presence of whom in the Church is used by Saint Paul, as an
argument for the decent behavior of women in that place) as Jacob at the
appearing of the Angels both put off his Shoes from his feet, and resolved that
God was in that place, and that it was no other but the house of God, or gate
of Heaven.

fellow-Christian upon earth. The Idolatry is either in the heart, the giving
him a free unlimited power, or in the actions praying to him, as supposing he
had such power, and not the bare observing, (and reverencing accordingly) his
created power or dignity, held from God by way of dignation, or desiring him,
(when he comes within my reach) to discharge any office of charity to me.

Saints in heaven, that the beseeching them to bestow mercies upon me, the
putting up those petitions to the blessed Virgin, etc. which are terminated in
her self (as many Forms, if not her whole Office may appear to be) are, over
and above the error of thinking her able to relieve them, acts parrallel to
that old Idolatry also; And the thinking them to come to the knowledge of our
prayers in speculo again, is a presumption in a matter of which Scripture has
told us nothing, and so may fall under the forementioned accusation.

Yet so again, that if it were sure to any, chat any Saint does hear his
demands, it were certainly no fault to beg that favor of him, which were in
his free power to bestow, and which we ordinarily demand of one another, that
is, the joining with, or for us, assisting and reinforcing our prayers to God.
And supposing that they do not hear or understand what he says, yet what guilt
shall lie on him that thinks they do, and speaks accordingly to them, I omit
now to define, because it is not to my present purpose, which was only to
enquire what is Idolatry, not Folly, what Worshipping or praying for help, to
that which is not God, not speaking to them to pray for us which cannot hear.

images either of God, Christ, or Angels, or Saints, many particulars may be
resolved and avowed from the principles of discourse already laid, 1. That to
conceive them able to hear and help by virtue of him, whose image they are, is
a spice of that heathen doctrine of [Images being the bodies of the gods] (of
their being animated by those whose images they were) which had among them its
foundation in sorcery, and then was the ground of Idol-worship; and it were
happy if some Non video in multis quod discrimen sit inter ecrum opinionem de
sanctis and id quod Gentiles putabant de d^^s suis. Lud Vives ^n Aug. de civ.
l. 8. c. ult.
Ignorant Christians in some places, were not either willingly betrayed to, or
uncharitably kept in this barbarous rudeness. So again will it be, 2. to pray
to, or to bestow any act of divine worship on any such Image in any respect;
For that supposes, and is built on the former conceit, and so a worshipping of
that which is not God; and what is that but Idolatry? I say, in any respect,
and I mean with any distinction of mediante imagine, or relative, etc. For
first it is an unreasonable thing for them, to whom the law is given, to make a
distinction by which it may in some sense be lawful not to keep it, such
distinctions must be made by the lawgiver, or else they are not safe. 2.
Although it be to God also, mediante imagine, that is, first fastening my act of
worship upon the Image, as the next or immediate object, and then mediately on
God, this is clearly to worship the Image, though not the Image alone, and that
must be Image Worship, or 2. though it be only relative to the Image in
relation to God, whose Image it is, this is again worshipping that Image, though
not that Image only, and that will not rescue the worshipping of an Image from
the censure of Image Worship, any more then the affirming Faith to justify
instrumentaliter relative, is not the affirming it to justify.

image worship and idolatry, or idol-worship, if any such be pretended from the
difference between image and idolum, it will not be worth our pains to examine
it, because the worshipping of any thing which is not God, be it image or idol,
Christian or heathen similitude, or any thing else, will fall under the guilt
which now we speak of.

worship God (and none but God) in a Church where images are (without so much
as fixing the eye on them in the act of adoration) to use an image only for
ornament (in a kingdom were Image-work, hangings, and pictures, do pass for
the noblest way of adorning those places which we most prize) to pray or to bow
down to God (and to him only) in a Church where such representations are set
up (for beauty, or as an indifferent thing) without any the most inferior
degree of worship to them, (nay with a protestation of renouncing and detesting
it) cannot be affirmed Idolatry, without either affirming God to be an Idol, or
else [not worshiping] to be [worshiping] nor indeed be liable to any guilt
unless it be in order to scandal, which how far it is to prevail, as we
have already given an intimation, so the grounds of defining have sufficiently
Of Scandal.
been laid down in another discourse.

reverent usage of an Image, if it signify no more then the using it civily
for his sake, or in remembrance of him whose superscription it bears,
especially if that be but a privative reverence, (a not using it vilely and
contumeliously) or whatever may not come under the style of a positive act of
adoration, this is no part of religious worship, any more then the laying of a
Bible on the Table, and not on the ground, etc. But if it be the actual
bestowing of worship on that inanimate thing, as on the next (though not last)
object, I mean bestowing that adoration on the Image (though in a lower degree)
in one act, which in another is given to God, worshipping the Image for Gods
sake (the relative worship) or God mediante imagine, so that the Image be
either the object, or part of the object of any one act of worship, it will
fall under the censure of Image Worship.

Capitular of Charles the Great charge it on the Bishop of Cyprus in the second
Council of Nice, that he allows the image the same worship which belongs unto
the Trinity; (and some learned Papists, Aquinas, Bellarmine, etc, have done
little less) But he that will survey the Greek acts of that Council, will
find the Capitular mistaken. For when the Greek reads, (...), I perform that
adoration of worship to none but the Trinity, (and faith of the images, only
(...), etc. I receive and embrace them reverently) the Capitular reads it in a
quite contrary sense, for having said, Servitium adorationis quod Trinitati
debetur, ei se redditurum garrierit (which though it has no great hurt in it,
because the word [Ei] that follows, may apply it to Trinitati, and cannot
refer to imagines, yet by [gorrierit] it apears the Capitular did not take it
so) it is added, Servitium soli debitum Creatori, exhibere se fatetur
Creaturis, etc. Which is a plain calumny to that Bishop, and even contrary to
the former part of the relation, (the Latin words cited from the Council) if
the [Ei] be taken notice of.

Image of God the Father. who never was clothed in flesh, or visible form. if
it be on design so to represent him, or if (being made) it be received as a
resemblance, or. Image of him, this is a most irrational folly or mistake, for
which there is no excuse; and though it be not idolatry, unless being thus
made it be worshipped also, yet is it a direct contradiction to one great end of
Gods prohibiting Images, viz. that all men be admonished that he is invisible;
and it is worth observing, that the ancienter of the Heathens themselves have
resolved God to be so far from any visible shape, that they would not allow
the making any image or picture of him. Thus Empedocles, (...), etc. No man's
head, or feet, or knees, or other limbs to be conceived in God. (...), etc.
but a sacred in-effable mind; so says Plutarch in Numa; that Pythagoras (...),
conceived God (under the title of the first*) to be invisible, etc. and that on
those grounds Numa forbad the Romans, (...), to conceive God to have the shape
of any creature, or to have (...), any formed image of God. Which says he,
continued for one hundred and seventy years after the building of Rome, no
(...), image of any form to be seen in their Temples. So faith Gerson, I
remember, of the Temple of Peace in Rome, which it seems was of that first
erection, sine simulachro, sine imaginibus, it had no resemblance or image in
it. So Antiphanes of God; that he is not known by an image, nor likened to any
thing, (...), and therefore no man can learn him by the help of an image. And
Philoponus in his Preface to Aristotle de Anima, conceives it very necessary to
a pious man that would conceive, or pray to God as he ought, to study the
Mathematics, by the help of which he may be able to abstract and separate
(...), from matter, and so have a right notion of the deity. So agreeable to
the general notion of wise Heathens (till a custom of sin had besotted them)
was that of God himself to Moses, Thou have not seen any similitude at any
time, Deuteronomy. 4. 8. On which the making any image of him is prohibited. All which
notwithstanding, if in the representation of a sacred story, there be set down
any form, particularly an eye, a ray, a glory etc. not to express the person
of God the Father, but to stand for him, not to signify any supposed likeness
of him (which is impossible) but only to present him to the mind of the
beholder, a doing some action of his (which is in effect to do the very same
thing in a Table, which the word Jehovah or God would do in a Book) I conceive
not what charge could be laid on it, at least what degree or spice of Idolatry,
unless I must be thought to worship the name of God, because I write or read
it.

resemblance of the man Christ Jesus, the bare expressing and not worshipping
that form, that was so long visible on this earth, as this pretends no more to
the painting of divinity, then the lines of a body can be thought to undertake
to express the soul, (and so cannot be accused of that imposture) so will it
not be liable to any other charge with any that has not resolved all pictures
even of his own parents unlawful. (unless it be perhaps in order to the
danger of being worshipped by others, which consequently ought very prudently to
be weighed and considered, before any such be set up in any place, as before
was touched.)

pictures of holy men, the discourse wholly abstracting from worship, or
design, or thought of worship, as here it does in our present consideration;
To which purpose it is observable, that Calvin himself is by Doctor Reinolds
produced, and avouched (against Bellarmines contrary slander) to affirm the
Images of Christ and the Saints, non esse prohibitas simpliciter not to be
simply prohibited; and so in like manner, Luther, the Zuinglians, Melancthon,
and the Madgeburgians, all detesting the worship of Images, but not the Images
themselves. And so Illyricus and Peter Martyr also, who thinks the worship of
images to be a prime part of Popish Antichristianisme, does yet resolve,
Christi and Sanctorum imagines haberi recte posse, modo ne colantur atque
adorentur, that the images of Christ and the Saints may lawfully be had, so
they be not worshipped.

worship the bread in the Sacrament, must (wheresoever it is to be met with)
certainly be Idolatry too, in the literal notation of the word, that is, the
worshipping that which is not God. And for those that do this on any the
subtlest ground, that by any error or mistake (be it never so piously taken
up) do actually worship this bread, that first conceive it to be turned into
the very body of Christ, and the elements after consecration to be no longer
bread and wine, but very Christ incarnate, and thereupon do worship it. These I
say, in case they be mistaken, and those elements be not so turned and
transubstantiated into Christ, though they are not guilty of the sin of
Idolatry in all the aggravations that belonged to it among the heathen; being
not guilty of their (...), the acknowledgement of the many gods, of which their
image worship was an appendage, yet can I not free them from the charge of
worshipping an idol, that is, somewhat which is not God, viz. a piece of
consecrated bread, etc.

censure, may know that the Papist-Doctours are very ready to make confession
of it themselves. If the elements be not so changed, says Costerus of
Transubstantiation, we Papists are the meanest vilest kind of Idolaters in the
world, worse (as I remember he adds) then the Laplanders that worshipped a red
Cloth, And there is no denying it upon that supposition, because it is part of
the supposition, that what is so worshipped for God, is not God, and that is
(...) an Idol in the Scripture-sense, which is all that I have now said.

worship nothing but what they conceive to be Christ, and consequently that the
Ignorance and contrary persuasions which may be pretended for such acts in some
men, particularly the Romanists, may plead much for them in Gods Court, (as we
read that the times of Ignorance God winked at in some Heathens, though that
was an idolatrous ignorance, so far at least as not to deprive them and their
posterity of all means of recalling them) I shall then answer, that so I shall
hope (and pray) that it may do in this matter also, move Gods mercy so far at
least, as (if not to pardon the sins without repentance, yet) to give grace
to work a sight and a change in such seduced ignorants.

bread in the Eucharist be not transubstantiate (as, according to some other
principles of the Papists, I conceive it near demonstrable that it is not, that
I mention not the direct contradictions which are affirmed or employed in that
doctrine) and yet Costerus and his friends think it is, supposing them to come
honestly and blamelessely to these errors, If, I say, It be demanded, whether
in this case [that their ignorance or error be grounded on misunderstanding of
Scripture] This so simple and not gross ignorance may serve for a sufficient
antidote to allay the poison of such a sin (of material though perhaps in
them not formal Idolatry, because if they were not verily persuaded, that it
were God they profess, they would never think of worshipping it) I shall then
answer, that of this matter I had only temptation to make, and set the
question (as before I had of prayer to Saints, supposing the petitioner to
believe that they could hear him) but have now no necessity to define and
satisfy it, being only to consider what idolatry is, not how excusable
ignorance or mistake can make it. Yet something it will not be amiss to add
to direct our Charity.

ignorance, or false opinion will not make the worshipping of bread (remaining
bread) to be the worshipping of none but God, I conceive it is plain, Or if it
would, it would make the Heathens worshipping of an image, to be the worshipping
of none but that God whose image it was, for they sure believed as much that
that image was by consecration become the body of God, and animated by it, as
any Papist believes transubstantiation. But whether this their error was as
capable of Apology or pardon, being infused into them by their false teachers
(which yet they thought to be true ones,) and pretended to Revelation for it
(says Maimonides) as this which is taken up upon the words of Scripture,
(though in a mistaken and (as I conceive) impossible because contradictory,
sense) I shall now define no further, then by saying these two things.

Heathen idolatry was the worshipping of the many false Gods first, and then of
the images of them, (the former of which these men are not said, or thought to
be guilty of) secondly, that the more the conscience believes this error to be
a truth of Gods, and the more innocently it comes to that belief, the easier
in all probability will the sentence be another day; That ignorance or mistake
which sincerely and honestly (without mixture of carnal principle, or design,
prejudice, or passion, etc.) founds it self in the word of God mistaken, (and
would be laid aside, if sufficient instruction were offered) being very justly
the object of our pity and our prayers, and neither of our censure, nor scorn;
And if it were merely a speculative error, and had not the happiness of some
impious practice attending it, I should make the less doubt of its obtaining
pardon at Gods hands; And howsoever I will hope, it may still (at that gracious
tribunal) be far from being irremissible to him, who has reformed his other
known sins, and for all known and unknown is truly humbled.

reform their error, if it be possible, or if prepossession have made it
otherwise to them, yet in all justice not to expect of us, (who profess to
believe that the elements are not transubstantiate, and that the humane nature
of Christ is received and contained in, and confined to Heaven, till the day of
restitution of all things; and this withal upon the same grounds, (I mean of
literal affirmation of Scripture) on which they profess to believe that this
is Christ's body, and this neither contradicted by any other Scripture, nor
implying any thing like a contradiction in reason, nor a savagenesse or a
sin, as Saint Augustine says eating of Christ's flesh does, and that
therefore it must not be literally interpreted) to worship that which we think
a creature, or somewhat which is not God, or anathematize us and separate from
our communion for not doing so.

Church, which only adores Christ in the Sacrament (as that signifies the
Action, in which certainly Christ is) and not the Elements themselves, nor
Christ's body locally present under the shape of those Elements, (as certainly
it cannot be, without either being no longer in Heaven or being in more places
then one at once) which has set the doctrine of that Sacrament in a most
exquisite temper to satisfy all rational Christian pretenders, in that most
excellent Catechism in the Liturgy, and in her practice allows the Elements,
no more then a reverent usage proportionable to such instruments of Gods
worship, (which is both justified by Case of Consc. c. 31.
Amesius, who assigns them a singular reverence in time of the use of them,
and a privative kind of reverence after it) there can be no show of charge
against it for so doing, nor consequently for kneeling at the time of receiving
the Sacrament which is only a kneeling to God in prayer (which might be now
further enlarged on, but that it has had its place in another View of the New
Direct. p. 27.
discourse) unless it be a fault to worship Christ, or to choose that time or
place to do it in the lowlyest manner, when, and where he is eminently
represented by the Priest, and offered by God to us.

East, or altar, or syllables of the name of Jesus, he that must think them
worshipped, by those who profess and protest to worship God, and none but God,
(that way or on that occasion) must either be of a very short discourse, (like
them in Athenaeus, that hearing men cry (...) God help, when the neighbor
sneezed, thought the very thing which we call sneezing, or else the brain from
which it came, to be a God so worshipped by men) or else of a very pettish
spleen, that can condemn the most blameless authorized practices, not only
of this present particular, but of the ancient universal Church (for the
worshipping God toward the East was most eminently such) upon any the most
irrational jealousy, or dislike.

sign of the Cross, used by our Church in baptism, which has been by some
cried down under the title of Idolatry, two things it will not be amiss
briefly to have observed, 1. That the same ground of zeal or passion that has
incited some men lately to charge it of a breach of the second Commandment,
has long since moved Parker on the Cross.
one of the same spirit to accuse it as a sin against the other nine, and to
entitle his several Chapters of the Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, murder,
adultery, stealing, false witness, etc. and at last of the concupiscence of
the Cross, as well as the idolatry of it, the reasons being much alike for the
whole charge. 2. That the signing with the sign of the Cross in that
Sacrament, is somewhat distant from that which the Papists use, and an act of
departure from them, in King Edwards second Liturgy, more then had been in the
first Reformation. The former custom was to cross the child at the
Church-doore, when it was brought to Baptism, but this of ours as a mark of
initiation or reception into Christ's flock, immediately following Baptism, and
a kind of tessera, or military sign that the person thus consigned into
Christ's militia, shall for ever after think himself obliged manfully to fight,
etc. A change made merely out of compliance with them who were jealous of too
great an inclination to Popery, and yet now charged with the guilt of that
which it was on purpose designed to decline.

Liturgy, and of all set forms of prayer from this charge of Idolatry; It is
true it has been printed, that words in a book are images, and consequently
that to pray before a book, or use a book in prayer, is Idolatry, or
Image Worship. But till this argument be extended to all words spoken, as well
as written, and so all vocal (though it be extemporary) prayer, condemned for
Idolatry also, I shall not conceive that disputer to have believed himself, nor
consequently give him or my reader the trouble of an answer. In stead of
extending this enquiry to the survey and vindication of those many other
particulars, to which the fancies or furies of this last year have affixed
this charge; all that I have now to add is only this, that I shall beseech
God to give such mistakers understanding first, and then Charity, to make use
of it to edification, and not to destruction, to the reforming their own sins
and not condemning or reproching other men's laudable, at the least innocent
actions.

Judge not, that ye be not judged of the Lord.
SOme few testimonies, which may tend to the clearing of the precedent
observations, but could not conveniently be put in either, in the Text or the
margin of the Book, I have here thought fit to affix by way of Postscript.
Add. p. 11. ad lin. 32. in marg. Thus among the Romans in their lustrations,
(...), Sybil. orac. l. 3. p. 231. and speaking of the Christians giving over
Idolatry, (...), etc.] it is added immediately, (...) etc. naming all the
several nations of the heathen world that were guilty of it, p. 264. and
exhorting against Idolatry, (...) etc. (...), p. 279. and that true piety, as
it is opposed to idol-worship, so to (...), and (...), l. 4. p. 287. and p.
296. and of the Romans again, (...), p. 315. and so again, p. 332.

Add. p. 12. ad lin. 24. in marg. In this sense I conceive Plato used the word
(...). l. 9. where speaking of sensual men, and comparing them to beasts,
(...), full fed and lascivious, he adds, (...), etc. Or if you will needs have
the notion of covetousness continued, yet I conceive the company that the word
is so often found in the New Testament, will have such an influence on it, that
it shall belong to that (...), getting wealth by these unclean prostitutions,
which sure is expressed by the Author of the Sybylin oracles, l. 3. p. 231.
where immediately after the mention of those impurities is subjoyned, (...).

Add. p. 14. ad l. 4. in marg. to the word (...). So in the Sybil. or: is this
sin expressed by (...). l. 3. p. 231. and the men guilty of it called (...),
page 232. (the word (...), noting all immoderate desires or attempts, (...),
says Phavorinus) and as it is immediately specified, (...) So in Phocylides,
(...), and (...), does seem to import also.

Add. ad p. 15. l. 10. in marg. So in the Sibyll Oracles, l. 2. p. 172. with
(...), those that had put off all shame,] are joined (...), ravishers, and page
216. with (...) (which sure belongs to the fury of inordinate lusts) there is
joined (...), rapes and shameless lusts, and (...), secret loves; and a (...),
the judgments of Brimstone (the portion of Sodom for such sins) follows in
the end of that Book. All which passages, though they cannot be thought to have
that antiquity or author, to which they pretend, are yet by our Country man
Joannes Opsopaeus, or Cook, with great reasons supposed to be as ancient as the
Emperor Commodus, and so will be worthy our heed, for a matter of no greater
weight then is now laid on them.

FINIS.

