A view of some EXCEPTIONS Which have been made BY A ROMANIST TO The LD
Viscount FALKLAND'S DISCOURSE Of the INFALLIBILITY of the CHVRCH of ROME.
Submitted to the Censure of all sober Christians. Together with The Discourse
it self of Infallibility prefixed to it.

The second Edition newly corrected.

LONDON. Printed by J. G. for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane. M.DC.L.

To the READER.
THE Length and quality of this ensuing trouble will seem to have been given
the Reader somewhat impertinently, if a brief account be not first rendered of
the occasion thereof.

The sad effects of the present differences, and divisions of this broken
Kingdom, having made peace, and unity, and infallibility, such precious
desirable things, that if there were but one wish offered to each man among
us, it would certainly, with a full consent, be laid out on this one treasure,
the setting up some Catholic Umpire, or Daies-man, some visible, infallible
Definer of Controversies; the Pretenders to that Infallibility, having the luck
to be alone in that pretension, have been looked on with some reverence, and (by
those who knew nothing of their grounds, or arguments) acknowledged to speak,
if not true, yet seasonably; and having so great an advantage upon their
Auditors (their inclinations, and their wishes to find themselves overcome,
going along with every argument that should be brought them) and so a fair
probable entrance, by that inlet of their affections, to their minds, they
began to redouble their industry, and their hopes, and instead of the many
particulars of the Romish doctrine, which they were wont to offer proof for in
the retaile, now to set all their strength upon this one in gross, and by the
compendiousnesse of that course to expect a more easy reception, then formerly
they had met with; the very gains, and conveniences, that attend this doctrine
of theirs, if it were true, being to flesh and blood (which all men have not
the skill of putting off) mighty Topics of probability that it is so.

To discover the danger of this sweet potion, or rather, to show how far it
is from being what it it pretends, and so to exchange the specious for the
sound, the made-dish for the substantial food (allowing the Universal Church
the authority of an irrefragable testimony, and the present age of the Romish
Church, as much of our belief, as it has of conformity with the universal of
all ages) but not a privilege of not being able to say false whatsoever it
says, and so to set us in the safer though longer way, thereby to whet our
industry in the chase of truth, in stead of assuring our selves that we cannot
err (which is not a virtue, but an excellency, not a grace to be crowned, but
a great part of the crown it self, reserved for another world, a felicity,
but not a duty) this Discourse of the Lord Viscount Falkland's was long since
designed; as also to remove the great scandals, and obstacles, which have
obstructed all way of hope to that universal aim of all true Christians, that
(...), Catholic harmony which Iamblicus talks of in the spheres above, but
would found better in this vault (this arch to bear up those spheres) the
Church below, the Universal peace of Christendom; for to this nothing is more
unreconcileably contrary than pretensions to Infallibility in any part of it;
all such making it unlawful either for themselves to mend, or others to be
endured, shutting out all possibility either of compliance, or charity, or
reformation in their own, or mercy to other men's errors. What was thus by his
Lordship designed in all justice, was by an entire lover of peace and truth
published in all charity, to resist and check a threatening tempest, which
rising from out present evils, was apt (if it did not begin) to shake some. The
Printing of this Tract presently provoked an Assertor of that Infallibility, to
take upon him the answering of it, and to complain that an Answer which had
been by the same hand given it formerly, was not permitted to attend it into
public. This then being a second Care, was probably to have arrived to a
higher degree of perfection, and indeed among the Favorers of that pe^swasion,
was cried up for so satisfactory a piece, that it was delivered to a Member of
the Church of England, as unanswerable. From him it came to those hands, which
returned it to the Author with this ensuing Rejoinder, withal intimating,
that since in his, he seemed to wish the same freedom of the Press, which his
Lordship had found, both the Answer and the Reply should be recommended
thither, if he pleased.

After he had detained the Reply some weeks, he was pleased to return it with
a protestation, That he neither intended, nor would permit his to become
public, pretending (that I may give you his own words) his Treatise to have
been no finished work, but only a first draught, or inchoation, ventured
abroad, to explore the judgments op one of two intelligent Adversaries, that
so the Author by his second (he might have said third) thoughts, might be
better able to understand, what was to be altered in it, what added or what
taken a way, either as superfluous, or offensive, and till that act was done,
and withal till an approbation and license given by those, to whom it
belonged, neither the work, nor any line of it, is to be acknowledged or
vouched by the Author. And so both were returned with some few alterations and
additions in his Answer, and marginall Notes on the Reply, and one sheet at the
end of them, containing a new Scheme of probation, of the pretended
Infallibility, and a preloquium to it, wherein the passage just now mentioned,
is interminis recited.

This the Replicant (to avoid all appearance of severity) was content to accept
for sad earnest, and therefore freely expressed his willignesse to give the
Author leave to provide a new Answer to his Lordships-Treatise, which he might
be willing to own in public, which when he should do, promise was made to
prepare a speedy Answer thereunto, and on those terms to be content to lay
aside the former.

That this should be done, was affirmed on one part, and on the other expected
some months with patience, till at length the Answerers pleasure was made
known, that that resolution was put off, and that in stead of so mean a
combat either with his Lordship, or this Replicant, he was pleased now to
design a full discourse on that Subject, without taking notice of either, any
farther, than he should think fit to take in his way any thing by them
objected against his position, and that this should be printed beyond the Seas.

When this will be performed I cannot tell. Only this is now discerned
(somewhat contrary to expectation) that what has been disclaimed by him, is
extolled by others, and the weakness of the Replicant sufficiently despised;
Wherein though he has not much temptation to think himself injured, being
ready to acknowledge the emptynesse of these Papers (and more then so, to
render a reason of it, viz: the fate which they were under, by a necessity of
attending this Apologist (...), which yielded them occasion of little variety,
unless they would extravagate.) Yet could he not resist the Reasons which
charged it on him as a duty, thus confidently to importune the Reader with the
view of the whole matter, as far as it has past between them; setting down
that Answer to, and this Vindication of his Lordships Arguments by Chapters,
and then (not do him the least injustice) adding in the end of all, the
Answerers marginall Replies, and that concluding Sheet (that even now was
mentioned) with a Rejoinder to that also.

By all this, endeavoring to lay grounds, for all men to judge, how little
truth there is in that so Epidemicall persuasion, that there is no middle,
betwixt asserting an Infallible Judge, and the falling headlong into all the
Schisms, and Haeresies of this present age.

My Conscience assuring me, that the grounds on which the established Church of
England is founded, are of so rare an excellent mixture, that as none but
intelligent truly Christian minds can sufficiently value the composition, so
there is no other in Europe, so likely to preserve Peace and Unity, if what
prudent Laws had so long ago designed, they now were able to uphold; For want
of which and which only it is, that at present the whole Fabric lies
polluted in confusion and in blood, and hopes not for any binding up of wounds,
for restoration of any thing, that looks like Christian, till the faith of
the reformed English have the happiness to be weighed prudently, and the
military Sword being timely sheathed, the Power and Laws of Peace be returned
into those hands, which are ordained by GOD the Defenders of it.

H. H.

Of the INFALLIBILITY of the CHURCH of ROME. A Discourse written by the Lord
Viscount FALKLAND.
Rome have any errors, they answer, that She has none, for She never can have
any. This being so much harder to believe than the first, had need be proved by
some certain arguments, if they expect that the belief of this one should draw
on whatsoever else they please to propose: Yet this is offered to be proved by
no better ways than those by which we offer to prove she has erred: Which
are, arguments from Scripture, Reason, and Ancient Writers; all which, they say
themselves, are fallible; for nothing is not so, but the Church; which if it be
the only infallible determination, and that can never be believed upon its
own authority, we can never infallibly know that the Church is infallible: for
these other ways of proof (they say) may deceive both them and us; and so
neither side is bound to believe them.

Scripture is sufficient ground of Divine faith, why are they so offended with
the Protestants for believing every part of their Religion upon that ground,
upon which they build all theirs at once? and if following the same Rule with
equal desire of finding the truth by it, (having neither of those qualities,
which Isidorus Pelusiota says, are the causes of all Heresies; (...), pride
and prejudication) why should God be more offended with the one than the other,
though they chance to err?

Church is therefore made infallible by God, that all men may have some certain
Guide; yet though it be infallible, unless it both plainly appear to be so,
(for it is not certain to whom it does not appear certain) and unless it be
manifest which is the Church, God has not attained his end; and it were to set
a Ladder to Heaven, and seem to have a great care of my going up, whereas
unless there be care taken that I may know this Ladder is here to that
purpose, it were as good for me it had never been set.

may know it, for that general and constant Tradition instructs us in it; I
answer, that ignorant people cannot know this, and so it can be no Rule for
them; and if learned people mistake in this, there can be no condemnation for
them. For suppose to know, whether the Church of Rome may err, (as a way which
will conclude against her, but not for her; for if She has erred, certainly
She may, but though She has not erred hitherto, it follows not that She
cannot err) I seek whether She have erred; and conceiving She has
contradicted her self, conclude necessarily, She has erred, I suppose it not
damnable though I err in my judgment: because I try the Church by one of
those touch-stones her self appoints me; which is, Conformity with the Ancient.
For to say I am to believe the present Church that it differs not from the
former, though it seem to me to do so, is to send me to a Witness, and bid me
not believe it.

say the Church is provided for a Guide of faith, but must be known by such
marks as the ignorant cannot seek it by, and the learned may chance not to find
it by, though seeking it with all diligence, and without all prejudice, can no
way satisfy me.

reveal the truth to whosoever seeks it in these ways sincerely; this saying
both sides will (without means of being confuted) make use of; therefore it
would be as good that neither did.

Church to be infallible; yet to my understanding they have proceeded nothing
farther, unless we can be sure which is it; for it signifies only that God
will always have a Church which shall not err; but not that such or such a
Succession shall be always in the right; not that the Bishop of such a place,
and the Clergy that adheres to him, shall always continue in the true faith.
So that if they say the Greek Church is not the Church, because by its own
confession it is not infallible; I answer, that it may be now the Church, and
may hereafter err, and so not be now infallible; and yet the Church never
err, because before their fall from truth, others may arise to maintain it,
who then will be the Church; and so the Church may still be infallible; though
not in respect of any set persons whom we may know at all times for our Guide.

Church of Rome to be the true Church, and not the Greek, because their
opinions are consonant either to Scripture or Antiquity, they run into a
circle, proving their tenets to be true; first, because the Church holds them,
and then theirs to be the true Church, because it holds the truth: which last,
though it appear to me the only way, yet it takes away it is being a Guide
which we may follow without examination, without which, all they say besides is
nothing.

some succession were infallible, and so had proved to a learned man that the
Roman Church must be this, because none else pretends to it; yet this can be no
sufficient ground to the ignorant, who cannot have any infallible foundation
for their belief, that the Church of Greece pretends not to the same; and even
to the Learned it is but an accidental argument, because if any other company
had likewise claimed to be infallible, it had overthrown all so proved.

arbitrary Argument, and depends upon the pleasure of the adversary; for, if
any society of Christians would pretend to it, the Church of Rome could make
use of it no longer.

Scripture for Judge, is, because when differences arise about the
interpretation, there is no way to end them; and that it will not stand with
the goodness of God, to damn men for not following his will, if he had
assigned no infallible way how to find it. I confess this to be wonderful
true, (...), and let them excuse themselves that think otherwise. Yet this will
be no argument against him, who believes that to all who follow their reason in
the interpretation of the Scriptures, and search for Tradition, God will either
give his grace for assistance to find the truth, or his pardon if they miss
it: and then this supposed necessity of an infallible Guide, with this supposed
damnation for want of it, fall together to the ground.

infallibly the contrary to this, they are to prove it false by some infallible
way, (for the conclusion must be of the same nature, and not conclude more then
the premises set down,) now such a way, Scripture and Reason, or infused
faith cannot be, (for they use to object the fallibility of them to those that
build their Religion upon them) nor the Authority of the Church, for that is
part of the question, and must be it self first proved, and that by none of
the former ways, for the former reasons.

Popes infallibility can be no infallible ground of faith, being it self no
necessary part of the faith; (and we can be no surer of any thing proved, then
we are of that which proves it) and if he be fallible, no part is the more
infallible for his sideing with them. So if the Church be divided, I have no
way to know which is the true Church, but by searching which agrees with
Scripture and Antiquity, and so judging accordingly. (But this is not to submit
my self to her opinions as my guide, which they tell us is necessary.) Which
course if they approve not of as a fit one for a Learned man, they are in a
worse case for the ignorant, who can take no course at all, nor is the better
at all, for this Guide, the Church; whilst two parts dispute which is it, and
that by arguments he understands not.

Pope, or a Counsel by him called, to be infallible, yet I conceive their
Decrees can be no sufficient ground (by their own axioms) of Divine faith.
For first (say the most) No Council is valid not approved by the Pope, (for
thus they overthrow that held at Ariminum) and a Pope chosen by Symony is ipso
facto no Pope. I can then have no certainer ground for the infallibility of
those Decrees, and consequently for my belief of them, then I have that the
choice of him was neither directly nor indirectly Symoniacall; which to be
certain of, is absolutely impossible.

Secondly, suppose him Pope, and to have confirmed the Decrees; yet that these
are the Decrees of a Council, or that he has confirmed them* I can have but
an uncontradicted attestation of many men, (for if another Council should
declare these to have been the Acts of a former Council, I should need again
some certain way of knowing how this declaration is a Counsels) which is no
ground (say they) of faith, I am sure not so good and general a one as that
Tradition by which we prove that the Scripture is Scripture, which yet they
will not allow any to be certain of but from them.

Thirdly, for the sense of their Decrees, I can have no better expounder to
follow then Reason; which if, though I mistake, I shall not be damned for
following, why shall I for mistaking the sense of Scripture? Or why am I a
less fit interpreter of one, then of the other, where both seem equally
clear? And where they seem so (I mean equally clear) and yet contradictory,
shall I not as soon believe Scripture, which is, without doubt, of at least as
great authority?

Counsels be fit deciders of Questions; for such they cannot be, if they beget
more, and men have cause to be in greater doubts afterward (none of the former
being diminished) then they were at first.

many out of this way, that the Learned cannot end all, nor the Ignorant know
all. As (besides the forenamed considerations) Who is to call them, the Pope,
or Kings: Who are to have voices in them; Bishops only, or Priests also:
Whether the Pope or Council be Superior; and the last need the approbation of
the first, debated among themselves: Whether any Countries not being called, or
not being there (as the Abissines, to great a part of Christianity, and not
resolvedly condemned by them for Heretics, were absent at the Council of
Trent) make it not general: Whether if it be one not every where received (as
when the Bishops sent from some places have exceeded their Commission, as in
the Council of Florence) it be yet of necessity to be subscribed to: Whether
there were any surreption used or force, and Whether those disanull the Acts:
Whether the most voices are to be held the Act of the Council, or those of all
are required, (as Canus says, All the Council cannot err, the most may;
which never yet agreed) or Whether two parts will serve (as in the Tridentine
Synod,) a considerable doubt, (...). Tom. 2. pa. 272.
because Nicephorus Callistus relateing the resolution of a Council at Rome
against that of Ariminum makes them give three reasons. One, That the Bishop of
Rome was not present. The second, That most did not agree to it. Thirdly, That
others thither gathered were displeased at their resolutions: which proves,
that in their opinions, if either most not present agree not to it, or, all
present be not pleased with it, a Council has no power to bind. All these
doubts, I say, persuade me that whatsoever brings with it so many new
questions, can be no fit ender of the old.

before a General Council have defined, it is lawful to hold either way, and
damnable to do so after; I desire to know how it agrees with the Charity of
the Church, to define any thing, and so bestow upon the Devil one path more for
us to walk in to him?

infallibility of a General Council be a point of faith, I desire to know why
it is so? Scripture and Tradition seem to me not to say so: But if they did,
so, I suppose, you will grant they do of this doctrine, [ That the souls of
the blessed shall see God before the day of judgment, and not be kept in secret
Receptacles:] For, else the doctrine of prayer to Saints cannot stand: and yet
for denying this, does Bellarmine excuse Pope John 22. (of which belief they
know he was not alone) because the Church (he means, I doubt not, a General
Council) had not then condemned it. I desire to know, why should not he be
condemned as well without one as many Heretics that are held so by their
Church, yet condemned by no General Council? which if he makes to be the rule
of Heresy, it had been happy to have lived before the Council of Nice, when
no opinion had been damnable, but some against the Apostles Council at
Jerusalem, because there had yet been no General Council:

Council to be infallible, since I never heard that any Council has decreed
that they are so? Neither, if it have, can we be bound by that Decree, unless
made certain some other way that it self is so.

Tradition; I answer, sometimes you will have the not believing any thing,
though not declared by a Council, to have power enough to damn; (that is,
when it makes against us) at other times the Church has not decreed, unless a
Council have, and their error is pardonable, and they good Catholics.

Next, (as I have asked before) how shall an ignorant man know it? for he, in
likelihood, can speak but with a few, from whom he cannot know that all of the
Church of Rome's part do now, and in past Ages have believed it to be
Tradition so certainly as to make it a ground of Faith, (unless he have some
revelation that those deceive him not.) Neither indeed can those that should
inform him of the opinions of former times be certainly informed themselves;
for truly if (as they would persuade us) the relation of Papias could cosen so
far all the Prime Doctors of the Christian Church into the belief of the
doctrine of the Millenaries, so as that no one of those two first Ages opposed
it, (which appears plain enough, because those that after rose up against this
opinion, never quoted any for themselves before Dionys: Alexandrinus, who lived
at least 250 years after Christ.) Nay, if those first men did not only
believe it as probable, Dial. cum Tryph. page 307. lib. 5. cap. 33.
but Justin Martyr says he holds it, and so do all that are in all parts
Orthodox Christians, (...). Irenaeus sets it down directly for a Tradition, and
relates the very words that Christ used when he taught this; (which is plainer
than any other Tradition is proved, or said to be (out of Antiquity) by them.)
If (I say) these could be so deceived, why might not other of the Ancients as
well be by others deceived in other points? And then, what certainty shall the
Learned have, when after much labor they think they can make it appear that
the Ancients thought any thing Tradition, that indeed it was so? And that
either the folly, or the knavery of some Papias deceived them not? I confess
it makes me think of some that Tully speaks of, who (arcem amittunt, dum
propugnacula defendunt) lose the fort, whilst they defend the outworks; for,
whilst they answer this way the arguments of Tradition for the opinion of the
Chiliasts, they make unusefull to them the force of tradition to prove any
thing else by. For which cause it was rather wisely than honestly done of them,
who before Fevardentius set him forth, left out that part of Irenaeus which we
allege (though we need it not much, for many of the Fathers take notice of
this belief of his:) Yet he justifies himself for doing it by a worse blow to
them than this it self, which is, saying, that if they leave out all Errors in
the Books they publish, (that is, I suppose, all opinions contrary to the
Church of Rome) bona pars Scriptorum Patrum Orthodoxorum evanesceret, a good
part of the writings of the Orthodox Fathers must vanish away.

Tradition that can be found out of Ancients (since their witnessing may
deceive us) has much less strength when they argue only thus: Sure so many
would not say this is true, and join in opinions, if there were no tradition
for them. I would have you remember they can deliver their opinion possibly,
but either before the controversy arise in the Church (upon some chance) or
after. If before, it is confessed that they write not cautiously enough; and so
they answer all they seem to say for Arius and Pelagius his faith, before
themselves, and so consequently their controversy (though it may be not their
opinion) arose. If after, then they answer often (if any thing be by them at
that time spoken against them) that the heat of disputation brought it from
them, and their resolutions to oppose Heretics enough; I desire it may be
lawful for us to answer so too, either one of these former ways; or that it
is (as often they say too) some Hyperbole, when you press us in any thing with
the opinions of Fathers. At least, I am sure if they may deceive us with saying
a thing is a Tradition, that is not, we may be sooner deceived if we will say
and conclude it for a Tradition, when they speak it only as a Truth, and (for
ought appears) their particular Opinion.

Salvian, comparing the Arians with evil Livers, (and that after they were
condemned by a Council) extenuates, (by reason of their beleiving themselves
in the right) with much instance the fault of the Arians, and says, How they
shall be punished for it in the day of Judgment, none can know but the Judge.
If (I say) they confess it to be his opinion, they must also confess the
doctrine of their Church to be different from that of Salvian's times; because
he was allowed a Member of that for all this saying; whereas he of the Church
of Rome that should say so of us would be accounted Sesqui haereticus, a
Heretic and a half: Or else they must say (which they can only say and not
prove) that he was so earnest against ill men, that for the aggravation of
their crime he lessened that of the Heretics, and said, what at another time
he would not have said; which if they do, will it not overthrow wholly the
authority of the Fathers? Since we can never infallibly know what they thought
at all times, from what they were moved to say by some collateral consideration.

damning of all out of the Church of Rome, which averseth me from it; comes
their putting all to death, or at least pains, that are so, where they have
power: which is an effect, though not a necessary one, of the first opinion;
and that averseth me yet more; for I do not believe all to be damned whom they
damn, but I conceive all to be killed whom they kill. I am sure if you look
upon Constantine's Epistle, written to persuade concord upon the first
disagreement between Alexander and Arrius, you will find that he thought (and
if the Bishops of his time had at first thought otherwise, he would have been
sure better informed) that neither side deserved either death or damnation,
(and yet sure this question was as great as ever rose since:) For having spoken
of the opinions as things so indifferent, that the Reader might almost think
they had been fallen out at Spurn-point or Ketle-pins, he adds, Niceph. Tom. 1.
page 555.
(...), For that which is necessary is one thing, that all agree and keep the
same faith about divine providence. I am sure in the same Author, Moses, a man
praised by him, refusing to be made Bishop by Lucius because he was an Arrian,
and he answering, That he did ill to refuse it before he knew what his faith
was; Answered, Tom. 2. p. 206.
(...), The banishing of Bishops shows ENOUGH your faith. So that it is plain
he thought punishing for opinions to be a mark which might serve him to know
false opinions by.

death, unless it be such as begin to kill first, (as the Circumcollians or
such like) I am sure Christian Religions chief glory being that it increased by
being persecuted, and having that advantage of the Mahumetan (which came in by
force) me thinks, especially since Synesius has told us, and reason told men
so before Synesius, that (...), De Regno.
Every thing is destroyed by the contrary to what settled and composed it. It
should be to take ill care of Christianity, to seek to hold it up by Turkish
means: at least, it must breed doubts, that if the Religion had always
remained the same, it would not be defended by ways so contrary to those by
which it was propagated.

Calvin has done it, and the Church of England a little, (which is a little
too much) for, Negare manifesta non audeo, and excusare immodica non possum,
yet She, confessing She may err, is not so chargeable with any fault as those
which pretend they cannot, (and so will be sure never to mend it:) and besides,
I will be bound to defend no more than I have undertaken, which is, to give
reasons why the Church of Rome is fallible.

damning so many, and this custom of burning so many, this breeding up those
who know nothing else in any point of Religion, yet to be in readiness to cry,
To the fire with him, and, To Hell with him, (as Polybius says in a certain
furious Faction of an Army of several Nations, and consequently languages,
(...), All of them understood only this word, Throw at him) this I say in my
opinion was it chiefly which made so many so suddenly leave the Church of Rome,
that indeed, to borrow the Authors phrase, (...) -- They needed not persuasion
to do it, but only news that others had begun: For, as this alone, if
believed, makes all the rest be so too; so one thing alone mis-liked,
overthrowes also all the rest.

Goodness of God to let men want an infallible Guide, therefore there must be
one; and that the Church of Rome were that one; yet if that teach any thing, to
my understanding, contrary to Gods Goodness, I am not to receive her doctrine,
for the same cause for which they would have me receive it, (it being as good
an argument: This Guide teaches things contrary to Gods goodness, therefore is
not appointed by God; as to say, It is agreeable to his goodness there should
be a Guide, therefore there is one.) And sure it is lawful to examine
particular doctrines, whether they agree with that principle which is their
foundation; and to that (me thinks) to damn him that neither with negligence
nor prejudication searches what is Gods will, though he miss of it, is as
contrary as the first can be supposed.

whether he that never heard of the Church of Rome shall yet be damned for not
believing her infallible. I have so good an opinion of them, as to assure my
self they will answer, he shall not. I will then ask, whether he that has
searched what Religions they are, and finds hers to be one, and her
infallibility to be part of it, if his reason will not assent to that, shall he
be damned for being inquisitive after truth? (for he has committed no other
fault greater then the other) and Whether such an ignorance (I mean after
impartial search) be not of all other the most invincible?

Church to be infallible, yet, me thinks, he that denies it, and imployes his
reason to seek if it be true, should be in as good case as he that believes
it, and searches not at all the truth of the proposition he receives: for I
cannot see why he should be saved, because, by reason of his parents belief,
or the Religion of the Country, or some such accident, the truth was offered to
his understanding, when had the contrary been offered he would have received
that; and the other damned that believes falsehood, upon as good ground as the
other does truth; unless the Church be like a Conjurers circle, that will keep
a man from the Devil though he came into it by chance.

Heretic that believes not his Heresy obstinately; and if he be no
Heretic, he may sure be saved. It is not then certain damnation for any man
to deny the infallibility of the Roman Church: but for him only that denies it
obstinately, and then I am safe; for I am sure I do not.

Schism, though not for Heresy, for he is as well no Schismatique, though in
Schism, that is willing to join in communion with the true Church, when it
appears to be so to him; as he is no Heretic though he hold Heretical
opinions, that holds them not obstinately, that is (as I suppose) with a desire
to be informed if he be in the wrong.

necessary always to believe the truth, so one believe in general what the
Church would have believed, (for so they excuse great men that have held
contrary opinions to theirs now, before they were defined, or they knew them to
be so) why (I say) shall not the same implicit assent to whatsoever God would
have assented to (though I mistake what it is) be sufficient? When indeed to
believe implicitly what God would have believed, is to believe implicitly
likewise what the Church teaches, if this doctrine be within the number of
those which God commands to be believed.

have no harm for not believing the infallibility of the Church of Rome,
because of my being so far from leaning to the contrary, and so suffering my
will to have power over my understanding, that if God would leave it to me
which Tenet should be true, I would rather choose that that should, then the
contrary. For they may well believe me, that I take no pleasure in tumbling
hard and unpleasant books, and making my self giddy with disputing of obscure
questions and dazzled (...), always be (whom I might always know) a society of
men, Coesarius.
whose opinions must be certainly true, and who would (...), Synesius.
labor to discuss and define all arising doubts so as I might be excusably at
ease, and have no part left for me but that of obedience, which must needs be a
less difficult, and so a more agreeable way then to endure endless volumes of
commentaries, the harsh Greek of Evagrius, and the as hard Latin of Ireneus,
and be pained by distinguishing between different senses and various lections,
and he would deserve not the lowest place in Bedlam that would prefer these
studies before so many, so much more pleasant, that would rather employ his
understanding, then submit it; and if he could think God imposed upon him only
the resisting temptations, would, by way of addition, require from himself the
resolving of doubts. I say not that all these books are to be read by those
who understand not the languages, for them, I conceive, their seeking into
Scripture may suffice. But if I have, by Gods grace, skill to look into them, I
cannot better use it then in the search of his will, where they say it is to be
found, that I might assent to them if there I find reason for it; or if I do
not, they may have no excuse for not excusing me.

pride makes us doubt of their infallibility; I answer, that their too much
laziness and impatience of examining is the cause many of them do not doubt.

Next, what pride is it, never to assent before I find reason for it, (since
they, when they follow that Church as infallible, pretend reason for it, and
will not say they would, if they thought they found none) and if they say, we
do find reason but will not confess it, then pride hinders not our assent,
but our declaration of it; which if it do in any one, he is without question,
(...), condemned by himself, and it must be a very partial advocate that
would strive to acquit him.

dissension between themselves, whereas they in the mean while are always at
unity. I answer, first, in this whereof the question is now, they all consent.
Secondly, when there is fire for them that disagree, they need not brag of
their uniformity who consent. Thirdly, they have many differences among them
(as whether the Pope be infallible; Whether God predeterminate every action;
Whether Election and Reprobation depend upon foresight;) Which seem to me as
great as any between their adversaries; and in the latter the Jesuits have
Ancienter and more general Traditions on their side; then the Church of Rome
has in any other question; and as much ground from reason for the defense of
Gods goodness, as they can think they have for the necessity of an infallible
guide; yet these arguments must not make the Dominicans Heretics, and must us.

Church has not resolved it (which signifies only, that they are not agreed
about it, which is that we object) I answer, It ought to have done, if
conformity to the ancient Church be required; in which all that ever I could
hear of before Saint Austin (who is very various I confess in it) delivered
the contrary to the Dominicans, as not doubtful; and to say, it is lawful for
them to disagree whenever they do not agree, is ridiculous: for they cannot
do both at once about the same point.

not having concluded it, that a Council has not, I answer, that they
condemn some without any, and why not these? Next, I say that the opinion of
the Diffused Church is of more force then the conclusion of a Representative
(which has its authority from the other) and therefore if all extant for four
hundred years teach any thing, it is more Heresy to deny that, then any Canon
of a Council.

any other company of People (that would maintain themselves to be infallible)
say as much, that all other Sects differ from one another, and therefore should
all agree with them? Would those not (think they) ascribe all other men's
dissentions, and learned men's falling into diverse Heresies to their not
allowing their infalibility? to their not assenting to their Decrees? and not
suffering them, (...), to sit as teachers of those things that come in
question, and to have all others in that place of Disciples obedient to them?
which is that which Nilus, a Greek Bishop, professes, that because the Greeks
would not allow the Romans, was the only cause of separation between them.

Opposition and mention both of that opposition in History? I answer, they
might come in not at once, but by degrees; as in the growth of a child, and the
motion of a clock, we see neither in the present, but know there was a present
when we find it past. Next, so many Authors being lost, who can make it
certain to me that from none of those, we should have had notice of this
opposition, if they had come to us? Next, I say there are two sorts of errors,
to hold a thing necessary that is unlawful and false, or that is but
profitable and probable: Of the second sort that errors should come in, it
appears not hard to me, and especially in those ages where want of Printing
made books, and consequently learning not so common as now it is; where the few
that did study busied themselves in School-speculations only, when the
Authority of a man of chief note had a more general influence then now it
has, and so (as Thucydodes says, the Plague did in his time, (...), the
disease that first settled in the head easily passed through all the body)
considering how apt all men are to desire that all men should think as they
do, and consequently to lay a necessity upon thee reciving that opinion, if
they conceived that a way to have it received: And then if it were believed
generally profitable, (as for example, Confession) who would be apt to oppose
their calling it necessary, for the same cause for which they called it so?
Besides, if this error were delivered by some Father in the hot opposition of
some Heretic, it may be none of his side would oppose it, lest they might
take advantage by their dissension, and he that disputed for the Orthodox side,
might lose by it much of his authority.

necessary] it self is often used for very convenient; and then from necessary
in that sense to absolutely necessary, is no difficult change, though it be a
great one. The Fathers use Heretics sometimes in a large sense, and sometimes
in a stricter, and so differ in the reckoning them up; Some leaving out those
that others put in (though they had seen the precedent Catalogue:) The
doubtfulnesse of the sense of those words might bring in error. Names, as an
Altar, Sacrifice, Mass, may have been used first in one sense, and the name
retained, though the thing signified received change; which may have been the
art of the Church of Rome, as it was once of an Emperor of Rome, Cui proprium
fuit nuper reperta (I leave out S^^lera) priscis verbis obtegere, whose
property it was to cover things newly found out with ancient terms. And the
same Author tells us, that the same State was as it were cheated out of her
liberty, because there did remain, Eadem Magistratuum vocabula, The same
titles of Magistrates; and I believe that if the Protestants beyond the Seas
would have thought Bishops as good a word as Superintendents, (and so in other
such things) many, who understand nothing but names, would have missed the
Scandal they have now taken.

opposition, from being thought profitable to be done, and probable to be
believed, to be thought necessary to be both: and how many things little by
little may have been received under old names, which would not have been so at
once under new ones? (the first of these being no such small fault but that
part of the Montanists heresy was thinking uncommanded fasting-daies necessary
to be observed, which without doubt might lawfully have been kept.)

opposition, be a certain note of being received from the beginning, let them
answer, how came in the opinion of the Chiliasts not contradicted till two
hundred years after it came in.

them then to us, so that they may conclude the infallibility of the Church out
of it, and we nothing; If they can prove the Churches infallibility to be a
sufficient Guide for him that doubts Which is the Church, and cannot examine
that (for want of learning) by her chief mark, which is conformity with the
Ancient; If they can prove that the consent of Fathers long together (if they
had it) is a stronger argument against us, then against the Dominicans; If they
can prove that though the first of them affirm that such a thing is Tradition,
and believed by all Christians (and this assertion till a great while after
uncontradicted) yet they are not bound to receive it, and, upon less grounds,
we are; if indeed any can prove by any infallible way the infallibility of the
Church of Rome, and the necessity under pain of damnation for all men to
believe it, (which were the more strange, because Justin Martyr, and Clemens
Alexandrinus among the Ancients, and Erasmus and Ludovicus Vives among the
Modernes, believe some Pagans to be saved) I will subscribe to it, And Sophoc.
(...)
(...).


this, or the Author of it, of value enough to confute the one, and inform the
other, I shall desire him to do it with proceeding to the business, and not
standing upon any small slip of mine, (of which sort this may be full) and with
that Civility which is fit to be used by men that are not so passionate as to
have the definition of reasonable Creatures in vain; (remembering that truth,
in likelihood, is where her Author God was, in the still voice, and not in the
loud wind; And that Epiphanius excuses himself if he have called any
Heretics in his anger, Deceivers, or Wretches, (...)) and I request him also
to bring me to the Truth, (if I be out of it) not only by his Arguments, but
also by his Prayers: which ways, if he use, and I still continue on the part I
am of, and yet do neither (...), nor (...), neither am wilfully blind, nor
deny impudently what I see, then I am confident that neither he will have
reason to be offended with me in this world, nor God in the Next.

FALKLAND.

A view of the Exceptions, which have been made by a Romanist to the Lord
Viscount Falkland's Discourse, Of the Infallibility of the Church of ROME.
SEPTEMBER. 11. 1645.
THis day there came to my hands, A Treatise Apologeticall, touching the
Infallibility of the Church Catholic, in answer to another of the like
argument lately published. And although I have no temptation to spend any more
time upon it then a single reading has cost me; nor to think it so dangerous a
piece, that I should not venture it abroad with the weakest sons of my
mother, without an appendant antidote, or defensative against the poison of it,
especially being not obliged (in any other notion, then that of the respect I
bear to the honor and memory of that noble Lord) to vindicate his discourse
from the exceptions here offered; yet being not sure, that I can excuse the so
excessive thrift of a few hours (which yet I could very gladly otherwise
employ, then in drawing one end of a saw in a controversy of this nature) I
shall give the Author of the exceptions or Apology, (in as few words as is
possible) the reasons why I am not moved by them, much less persuaded that
they are so extraordinarily lucky, as to give, as is pretended, full answer, to
all that Master Chillingworth's large Book has superstructed on this
foundation. And this I shall do in such a manner, that it may appear, that I
desire only to satisfy his reason, and not make him payment of his scoffs or
triumphs, in that spirit of meekness, which is proper for the restoring of one
overtaken in an error, (hoping in charity that he is such) of an infirm, not
a malicious mistaker. And the first thing we have to view, is that which is
entitled,

A note upon the title of the Adversarie's. C. 1.
We against whom this enquirer writes, or rather to whom he propounds his
difficulties, with a pretending desire of procuring a satisfaction, are
defenders of the Catholic Churches Infabillity; which Churches chief Pastor,
or Metropolitan, though he be particular Bishop of Rome, as of some one place
or other he must be, yet nevertheless from that one portion of it is not the
whole and universal Church aptly to be styled the Church of Rome, as in the
Enquirers title it is called, no more then the Church of England can be rightly
termed the Church of Canterbury, or the Protestants of England the
Canterburians, as the Scotch Puritans have called them, only because the chief
Bishop and Primate of the whole Kingdom has his seat at Canterbury. By the
self same reason then cannot we justly be called Romanists, as it has pleased
some Protestants to entitle us. The reason of this assertion, is, That Rome and
Canterbury are but small, and only material portions of either Church, and
therefore no way sufficient to give a denomination to the whole. As then the
Church of England is wrongfully called the Church of Canterbury, so, in like
manner is the Church Catholic wrongfully styled the Church of Rome, or as
such, controverted to be fallible, or infallible, forasmuch as this perfection
of being infallible is not claimed by her as she is Church of Rome, but as she
is the Catholic, and, according to the appointment of Christ, governed by S.
Peter, and his successors. For this cause we have altered the title, and
stated the question in terms more proper and formal, enquiring not Whether
the Roman Church, but whether the Catholic be infallible, and this ought to
be the title.

But before we enter upon the examination of particular difficulties, the
Reader may please to know, that this same Enquiry was written by the Author
diverse years ago, in his Catholic Mothers life time, and was by her
mediation forthwith answered at large, and the answer sent unto the Enquirer
fairly bound up; in whose hands, though it rested long, yet had it never any
reply made unto it, though it was sometime threatened it should. At that very
time Chillingworths Book began to be in moulding, and it may be that same new
labor diverted the Enquirer, and altered his design. Now at length in a time
most unseasonable, by the frivolous officiousness of I know not whom, these
old papers are forced to see the light, and to leave their answer behind them.
After so mean and creeping a fashion do they appear now unto the world. But
although no notice has been taken of any answer made already, or of giving
license for any other to be made hereafter, or, if made to be published in
print, and have the advantage to be dispersed abroad in many copies; yet are we
not by this discouraged from composing one, for, though for want of the
Printers help, it shall lie concealed, and in much restraint, yea and be in
danger to perish, as the other did before it, yet may this small labor fall,
at least, into some few hands, and remove out of their way such dangerous
stumbling blocks as have been cast into it by this Enquirer, who, by his
casting of doubts, about the method of resolving faith, has thereby, amongst
all those who are not much versed therein, endangered the stability and safety
of the whole fabrique, not of Catholic Religion only, but of Christian in
General.

As for the Papers themselves, and their particular contents, they, in a word,
are Chillingworths Book in little, and an Embryo of his large volume grown up
after, made big and bolstered out with many new materials borrowed from Baron
the Scotch Minister, and that impious author Volkelius, the veins of whose
poisonous doctrines and discourses, are observed to run branching throughout
all Chillingworths work. Wherefore this small collection containing the
substance of the other larger book, the confutation of this Enquirers
allegations, cannot but in substance contain a confutation of all
Chillingworths delated errors and sophistications, wherewith so many souls
have been perverted, or brought into great troubles and perplexities.

C. 1. Answer to C. 1.
To the exceptions made against the title of the Lord Viscount Falklands
discourse, I answer, by saying these few things,

Catholic Roman Church; it has frequently been used and avowed by your own
writers, and as I conceive, is by your self acknowledged, when you say, the
perfection of being infallible it not claimed by her (i. e. the Church
Catholic) as she is the Church of Rome, but as she is the Catholic; which
words by the rules of discourse must suppose you to think the Catholic
Church to be capable of a double appellation, Roman and Catholic, though the
perfection there spoken of, belong to it only under the second notion. And
beside you say in another place, that the Roman; whence it will follow, that
the Catholic is the Roman; And if this be not propriety of speech, his
Lordship is not to be blamed for it, but you, whose dialect he is feign to use.

Roman Church is the Catholic Church, or that the Roman and Catholic are
two names for the same Church, it will certainly follow, that he that affirms
the Catholic Church to be infallible, must affirm the Roman Church to be so
too, though not quatenus Roman. For any particular man being affirmed to be a
Christian, whatsoever will be true to be said of this Christian, will be true
to be said of this man (by the rule of quicquid praedicatur de praedicato,
praedicatur de subjecto) if this Christian have a promise made, a privilege
Christian, and not as a man; for the whole man being a Christian, and not only
some part of him, even that which belongs to him only for Christianities sake,
does as truly belong to him, as that which his humanity gives him title to.

subtlety, and by help of that mean to disclaim the expression of other your
friends, and therefore will not allow the Roman Church, to be in propriety of
speech, the Catholic Church, and yet will agree with them in all but in the
expression; truly you have revealed no great mystery to the world. And as long
as you define (as you do) the Catholic Church, (as it is the subject of the
pretended Infallibility) to be that which is governed by Saint Peter and his
Successors, we that mean no more by the Roman Church then that which is so
governed, shall as soon believe the Roman Church to be infallible, as the
Catholic under your notion of it.

Catholic Church you mean the Universal all the world over, without any
kind of restriction, and not that only which is governed by the Pope of Rome,
which is a great restriction of the word Catholic, (and must be not only
affirmed but proved by you to be none) And then I shall thus far consent with
you;

Universal Church is in fundamentals infallible (not from any thing inherent
in it self, but by a prerogative acquired, i. e. by the promise of Christ,
that his spirit shall lead them into all truth, and that he will be with them
to the end of the world, and the like;) but then this Infallibility must
signify no more, or be no farther extended, then that Christ does and will so
defend his Church, that there shall be for ever, till the end of the world, a
Church Christian on the Earth, i. e. that the whole Church shall not at once
make an universal defection, err from the foundation, or do any thing by
which there shall cease to be a Church on earth.

Universal Church, though it be in the sense infallible in fundamentals, is
not yet a rule, or Canon, or guide, or Judge infallible, even in fundamentals;
visible it is, infallible it is, but it is not a visible judge, or rule
infallible. And the reason of this assertion is this, that its Infallibility,
explained as we have explained it, is all that can be certainly inferred from
Christ's words, (and that belongs not at all to judicature) and so any other
Infallibility that shall be pretended to belong to judicature, must be inferred
from some other tenure, or else it will not be inferred.

Catholic in this question, you mean that Catholic without restriction;
Tell us then Secondly, that you mean a representation of that Catholic, i.
e. a Council General, Oecumenicall, and then I shall acknowledge many
privileges to belong to that; An humble, though not an absolute obedience, and
in a word, that nothing is to be preferred before it, but the Word of God, or
the Church truly Universal. Yet after all this, that it is not infallible or
inerrable, I have the judgment of Panormitan, and shall add his reason also
to back it; Because, says he, Licet concilium generale representet totam
ecclesiam Universalem, tamen in veritate ibi non est vere Vniversalis ecclesia,
sed representative, quia universalis ecclesia constituitur ex collectione
fidelium, and ista est ea ecclesiae quae errare non potest. C. signific. ex^:
de Electio.
the General Council is not truly, but only by representation, the
Universal Church, and supposing such a Council to err, it would not yet
follow, that the Universal Church or multitude of all Christians do err,
because it is possible that some out of the Council do not err, yea, and in
the Council too, though a major part overcome the better. In this I have the
concurrence of Occam. dial. p. 3. tr. 1. l. 3. c. 5. Cardin. Cameracensis. c.
1. Waldensis Doctrine. fid. l. 2. artic. 3. c. 26. and quest. vesp. arg. 3. ad
lit. O. Antoninus, to. 1. de sacram. l. 2. c. 19. Card. Cusanus in summarum
par. 3. tit. 23. de council. general. c. 2. sect. 6. l. 2. Concord. Cathol. c.
4. Et Nic. de Clemangis, Collat. 2. p. 64, and 73. with this farther
confirmation of it from the opinion of the Antiquis patribus concilium
celebraturis solenne suit jejuniis, orationibus, spiritus assistentiam
implorare, inutili sa^e diligentia si exploratum habebant se non posse falli
aut deficere in his propter quae fuerant congregati.
Ancient Fathers, evidenced by their practice; In that (says he) it was
solemnly accustomed by them at the beginning of such a Council, by fasting and
praying to implore the assistance of the spirit, which had been a piece of
useless diligence, if they had been before assured, that they could not be
deceived or fail in those things for which they were assembled. Which
argument, if it do not infallibly induce the conclusion to those that pray for
those things which they are sure of; yet is it an evidence, that they that use
it are of the opinion which they infer by it, and will be of force to those,
that from the mention of some of the Ancients praying for the dead, conclude
them to be in a mutable state; as I conceive some of your friends are wont to
do. To this assertion of ours I might also cite the Concordance of the Jesuits
generally, who that they may fasten all Infallibility in the Pope alone,
attribute nothing at all to a Council but this, that the error of a Council
cannot be confirmed by the Pope, which is in effect no more, then that
Counsels begin to be infallible, when the Pope confirms them, i. e. when the
Council is at an end (which kind of Infallibility they will afford, I presume,
to every Heretic, (and to me while I thus write) that my error cannot be
confirmed by the Pope) unless they will be so bountiful to add also, that
such a Council cannot err, if it follow the instructions of the Pope, which
will also be acknowledged true of any the meanest Lutheran, or Calvinist, as
well as of that Council.

Pope of Rome, as the Jesuits do, or else that you mean those parts of the
Catholic that are governed by him, and then as we shall tell you, that it is
the very thing which we learned from you to mean by the Roman Church, so you
that affirm that to be the notion of the Catholic Church, must acknowledge
to affirm the same thing to be Infallible, which we say you do affirm, when
we propose the Question of the Roman Churches Infallibility; and in this there
is no matter of deceit or difficulty, but that that Church under the government
of the Pope, which we affirm to be fallible, even in the highest degree,
fallible in fundamentals, you undertake and contest to be infallible. It Is
true, this we call the Roman Church, conceiving it to be your Dialect, and if
you say it is not, we will consent to you, and in obedience to your example,
call it so no more; on condition you will be but as reasonable, and give it
some other title; whether that of the Western Church, which were a good large
Province, (and yet of that Saint Basil complains in no lower style then this,
Ep. 10.
That they neither know nor endure the unity of Faith) or any other title,
besides that of the Catholic Church, which we are sure cannot properly be
allowed it, unless it appear, First, that all Christians ought to be governed
by the Bishop of Rome; and Secondly, that all they which are not so governed,
are no longer members of the Catholic Church; and if you affirm both these,
we profess to deny them, and then that must be the matter of debate; and till
that be agreed, there will be no other question seasonable to be proposed in
this matter, and wen it is, there will be no other needful.

Canterburians, which you use to prove the unfitness of the question under
these terms, it is but a thin fallacy (easily seen through) if it be thought
to conclude any thing. To the clearing of which, be pleased to observe, that
the Bishop of Canterbury may be considered in a threefold relation: First, to
his particular Diocese of Canterbury, of which he is Bishop; Secondly, to the
whole Province of Canterbury, of which he is Metropolitan; Thirdly, to the
whole National Church of England, of which he is Primate; his two former
relations are terminated in Canterbury, under the two significations of the
word, but the third is terminated not in Canterbury, in any notion of that
word, but in all England; and thence it follows, that the Church of Canterbury
(whether as a Province, or a Diocese, which are the only two Notions we in
England have of it) being not of the same latitude with the Church of England,
it will be improper to call the Protestants of England Canterburians: But then
on supposition that there were a third notion of it, whereby the Church of
Canterbury, and the Church of England were of the same latitude, or to him that
were confidently persuaded that they are so, it were no impropriety at all to
call all English Protestants by that denomination; and if to prove it were
improper, it should be affirmed that it is but an accident that he that is
Primate of all England should be Bishop of the particular See of Canterbury,
there would be no force in that proof; First, because that which is true per
accidens, is nevertheless true, and denominations being ad placitum, are many
times accidental; yet for all that denominations as much, as if they had been
by nature or per se; and Secondly, because we are now upon a supposition
(though it be but a supposition) that there is a National Church of
Canterbury, as well as a Province and Diocese. And therefore I say on this
supposition, if it had so happened, or been agreed on, that all that are under
the Primate of Canterbury should be called the Church of Canterbury, as it has
been agreed on, that all that are under the Metropolitan of Canterbury, should
be called the Province of Canterbury, we should never challenge any man of
improper speaking, that should call us Canterburians. As for the Scotch Puritan
you speak of, that calls us so by way of reproach; you cannot be ignorant of
his meaning, or think it pertinent to the purpose, to which you apply it; It
was used by him only in relation to the present doctrines of the then Bishop
of Canterbury, (and only some men scoffed at under that title, as followers of
his (as they erroneously conceived) particular, or personal doctrines) which
is quite another notion of the word, then that which you have occasion to speak
of.

Roman Church equipollent with Catholic, and affirm the whole Catholic
Church to be governed by the Primate, or Pope of Rome, and urge the necessity
of Christ's precept, that the Church which you pronounce infallible, must be so
governed, (or else that it is no longer Catholic) to make any difference
between the style of Catholic, and of Roman Church, or of Catholics and
Romanists; no man among us fetching the denomination of Roman, or Romanist
(when he thus speaks) from the relative Diocese of Rome, as the Pope is a
Bishop, or from the relative Province of Rome, as he is a Metropolitan, but
from the relative Church of Rome; the whole number of those Christians who
acknowledge the Pope their Primate or Partriarch, which you that affirm him to
be Primate of all Christians by full right and succession from Saint Peter,
must acknowledge him to be of the whole Catholic Church; In which
acknowledgement because we agree not with you (but contend that his
Patriarchate is limited as well as his Diocese or Province) as we cannot
therefore speak throughout in your language, and call that the Catholic
Church, which is but a part of the Catholic, or debate the Infallibility of
the Catholic Church with them, that mean by that phrase only that are under
the Roman Communion, or government of the Pope of Rome, whilst we mean
Catholic without any restriction, (or if we should so speak, shall be guilty
of leaving a maine equivocation in the words of the question, which ought of
all things to be avoided by distinguishing, before we go about to debate any
thing, and after distinction made and agreed on, that by Catholic is to be
meant only those which are in Obedience to the Pope, we will then debate it
under that title also) so may we very reasonably use your dialect, when we
agree in the meaning of it, as in the phrase [ Roman Church] we do (meaning
both of us, all those who are governed by the Pope) of which Church in that
notion we now enquire, whether that be infallible or no? And so much for the
phrase of the Question, or Title of that Treatise.

excellent Lord to have been written many years since, and now not
unseasonably published at a time when some arts were used (though, blessed be
God, improsperously) to pervert unstable minds, and this pretended
Infallibility a maine auxiliary called in for that purpose; As for any answer
long since framed to it, I am persuaded that that Lord thought it not such, as
that his reputation should be concerned in providing an answer for it; And for
the Publisher it is very possible that he might never hear of any such, (which
I guess also by my self, who had long since a copy of the one, but till I
read it here, never heard of the other,) or if he did, had reasons which he can
justify to any ingenuous man, why he did not publish it also. Which being now
said to you (and which you had before no ground of thinking to be otherwise)
you will hardly give a civil account, why you should charge (and now not ask
pardon for charging) on the Publisher a frivolous officiousness, by which that
answer is forced to stay behind (though it were also sufficient to tell you,
that when you set out all your Books at Rome or Doway, with our answers annexed
to them, we will then publish this of yours at Oxford) or on the Edition, the
style of a m^ane an^ creeping fashion of appearing to the world; which words
being so contrary to truth, (which is punctually this, the Book was licensed
by the Vice Chancellor; Printed by the Printer to the University; the
Author's name put in the Title page; and all this proclaimed on every wall and
corner of the City, on purpose that every one that had kindness to the Roman
Church might read it) if they signify any thing, have only this
interpretation of which they are capable, that he that wrote them cared not how
absolutely groundless his accusation was, but only was willing to accuse.

that no notice has been taken of giving license for any other answer to be
made hereafter, or if made to be published in print, and have the advantage to
be ] I profess I cannot tell, and yet was insolent enough to think, that I
could have constituted a piece of plain English, of which I understood every
word single, but now find, I had overvalued my own abilities, and should be
more modest hereafter, but that by finding in the The place to which these
words reply, are upon this admonition mended by the Apologist in his revisall,
by putting in after the word [ Metropolitan] these words [ is the Pope, who]
and two lines after in stead of [it] [His Diocesse] he might as reasonably have
mended the other also.
sixth line of the Book the nominative Metropolitan without any verb after it,
I am inclined to think that it is part of your style to neglect those vulgar
rules in which I had been instructed.

this other answer of yours shall lie constrained, and in much restraint, yea
and ] Though that be a heavy aggravation of the misery of these wicked times,
yet sure this paper is not the only sufferer in that kind, and may both be
thought to have deserved it as well, and be as able to bear it with some
patience, as many other good sons of the Church Catholic have been; and yet
if it will but sue out its habeas Corpus, I doubt not but the law will be open
for its plea, and in the mean I have designed this present paper to offer it
bail, and obtain its enlargement through this City, so it will promise
faithfully not to go farther, then its surety is ready to attend it. By this
means, if it be accepted, it shall have leave to visit all its Catholic
friends, and others to whom it desires to perform any civility, or from whom
to receive any kindness.

has cast dangerous stumbling blocks, which may endanger the stability and
safety not only of Catholic Religion, but of Christian in generall] I shall
promise to consider with you when you proceed to any proof of it, and till
then only advise you and all my fellow Christians to conclude no more against
any creature, then you produce premises to justify; For by so doing you will
appear not only injurious to him with whom you deal, (in rash causeless
anger and censure) and secretly reproachful and contumelious to the Reader (by
conceiving him so tame, so unworthy of the reasonable soul, which God has
given him, on purpose to distinguish betwixt reason and no reason, betwixt
proof and libell, betwixt argument and confidence) but withal you will teach
others an evil lesson against your selves. If you please I shall give you an
Example of each of these.

Chillingworth's Book, besides that it is utterly impertinent to the confuting
of this, which is the present business (nay it is an argument on this side,
both for the seasonablenesse of publishing it (as an Epitome useful and
gainful to supersede the trouble of reading the larger Book) and for the
leaving the former answer behind, if the Publisher had known there had been
any; because, as you before intimated, the publishing of Master Chillingworth's
Book then was conceived to have taken away all force and considerablenesse
from that answer) is first, very unjust to Master Chillingworth, in saying
without any proof, that he borrowed his new materials from Baron and
Volkelius. Secondly, it is contumelious to the Reader's judgment, who is
supposed to be so easy, as to conclude that to be an ill Book, which is
affirmed to borrow materials from a Scotch Minister, and an impious Author;
from which contumely I conceive he is able to vindicate himself, by telling
you, First, that what is supposed to be borrowed from the Scotch Minister, is
very authentic English Divinity, and indeed that Baron is content to profess
himself to have borrowed (and that in this particular) from our Writers,
especially (if my memory fail me not) from Bishop White, and the first edition
of the Bishop of Canterburies Book under his Chaplaine's name, from whom also
Master Chillingworth might borrow, if he were in any want, and not from him,
and yet I believe would not, if he were alive, be ashamed to have profited by
so worthy a Scotchman as Baron was. Secondly, that Volkelius his being an
impious Author, cannot extend to every part of his work, nor conclude, that
that which is supposed to be borrowed from him, is therefore impious or
poisonous (if it be, let it be produced and proved to be so by some other
proof, then that of the impiety of the Author) but rather that Master
Chillingworth had the skill of discerning, and took nothing but balsome, and
antidote, where if he had been apt to mistake, he might have fallen on poison.
Thirdly, this will teach others, if they be apt to learn, an evil lesson
against your selves; I mean not that of repaying evil with evil (God forbid
that any injustice in others should so provoke us, (...), to be like them) but
only this particular lesson, which has cost us little pains to pierce or
construe, that if this Tract of yours be a satisfactory answer to all Master
Chillingworths Book, then a satisfactory answer to this your Treatise, will be
sufficient answer also to the three great Latin Volumnes, which they say, you
have written against Master Chillingworth. And this I shall be more glad to
have obtained by your own rule of concluding, then patient to try by reading
them over, whether it be truly so, or no; especially if those that have tasted
them, pass a right judgment upon them.

patience to examine it so strictly; I mean not patience, as it is opposed to
anger or passion (for by Gods help I shall not yield to any temptation, that
shall bring me into that) but as it is opposed to weariness and lassitude; and
I must be pardoned, if I think I could spend my time better to my self and
the benefit of others, then in following the exceptions line by line, and
giving them a large answer; for that any man may be patient to do so, or to
read it when it is done; it is necessary, that the Text, which must bear that
Comment, must have somewhat either of difficulty, or subtilty, or profit in it;
either of which, whenever I can find, I profess I shall be most ready to
enlarge upon it, (and now acknowledge it an obligation from the Author, if he
will point out to me, where I shall have failed) and in other particulars be
more merciful to the reader, and my self.

To the 1.. Chap. 2.
a notioribus, and that every sure conclusion must also be deduced from no
other premises or principles, then such as be known, and, at least, be as
certain as we desire the conclusion should be. Nevertheless we do absolutely
deny, that this assertion of ours touching the Churches infallibility, is by us
offered to be proved by ways no better then our Adversaries offer to prove
that she has erred, as this Inquirer pretends we do; for we affirm that our
Churches infallibility is proved by reasons which are real and true, and that
on the other side, the adversary offers to prove the contrary, only by such as
be no more then seeming and pretended. Now true reason or authority is a way
quite different from pretended, and much better then it, and therefore the
Inquirers charge is false, or, at least, light and ineffectuall. Must all
controversies in Philosophy be undecidable, because both sides pretend reason;
or no suits of Law be judged, because both sides pretend Law? Certainly,
whatsoever both sides do pretend, yet there is but one side that has it, as
namely, but one side of Philosophers have true reason, and but one side of
contendents have true Law, and so in like manner but one side of contending
Christians have true reason for them, Scripture, or Tradition, howsoever both
may pretend it, and therefore we do not go about to prove the Church is
infallible by the self same ways that you go about to prove that she has
erred, but by ways that are quite different from them, and the same but in
name only, and no farther; By which it follows, that, either you are
deceived, or we, and it is not necessary that both. And so much for this great
and principal difficulty which troubled the Inquirer so much as he writ to
London for the solution of it, which thing, surely, was more then needed, for
it might have been done at Great Tue without consulting London about it, or
either of our two Universities.

We do not maintain, as he falsely supposes, that Reason, Scripture, and
Fathers be all fallible, universally speaking but, in some cases only, as,
namely, reason is not fallible in such verities as be evident, but in other
that be not so, it is. Again, Scripture is a most certain rule whenever it
is certainly expounded, otherwise it is not. Lastly, the Fathers be assured and
undoubted witnesses of the Doctrines which were held in their time, though not
undoubted definers of them. And, by this answer, all the three main propps of
this Authors discourse are overthrown, and fall unto the ground. In this place
the Apologist in his revisal put in these words [ So that in fine all these
three be infallible] I must a little wonder to what purpose. For if they belong
to the words immediately precedent, they will then signify, that the three
propps of his Lordships discourse are infallible. But if to the former part of
the Section to signify Reason etc. to be infallible, they are then either to be
understood, that they are infallible in all cases, and then that is point
blanke contrary to what he had said [that they were fallible in some] or else
that they are infallible only in some; and then that he had said distinctly
before, and needed not to have again a new repeated.


C. 2. Answ. to the 2. Chap.
the ways of proof that the Church of Rome can never have any errors, are no
better then those by which we offer to prove she has erred, and names three
heads of Arguments, from Scripture, Reason, and Ancient writers, and proves
you to affirm all these are infallible, because nothing is in your opinion
infallible but the Church; and from thence concludes that we can never
infallibly know that the Church is infallible, because all the means proposed
to induce that knowledge, being of necessity somewhat else beside that only
infallible, must needs be fallible] it will be very unsufficient in you to
reply, that his Lordship has not said true in the first particular, upon no
other ground of proof, but only because you [ affirm that the Churches
infallibility is proved by Reasons which are really true, and that the contrary
is by us offered to be proved only by such as be only seeming and pretended]
for this very thing that you affirm, viz. that those your reasons are real
and true, is a part of the very question in hand, and as much denied by us, as
the infallibility of your Church, and therefore, by your own rule of proceeding
a notioribus, cannot be proper means to conclude, that his Lordship erred, to
him that will far more easily be brought to believe that your reasons are not
real, then that his Lordship erred in this particular, and that will as
readily confess he erres, as that those reasons are real.

petitio principii, until by reading on, I discerned that this one mean
Sophisme has run through most Paragraphs of your following Treatise, which is
a shrewd infirmity in a confutation, to take that for a principle granted, and
so bestow no proof upon it, which is by you known to be denied by us, and yet
to conceive that this will be able to satisfy our other importunities.

infallibility is offered to be proved by no better ways, than those by which
we offer to prove she has erred] which is an undertaking of his Lordship, and
not a bare assertion, and sure you cannot say he offers to prove it by reasons
only seeming, for you as yet know not particularly, what those reasons are,
any farther, then that they are from the same heads, by which you offer to
prove the contrary.

seeming on his side, yet if you mark it, they are so seeming to him, and as
long as they seem to him to conclude that the Church has erred, the very same
arguments, or those that are no more seeming, cannot assure him, that she is
infallible; for by your own confession every solid proof must be ex
notioribus, i. e. not only by media which are more true, but which are more
known to him, to whom this proof is offered; and, if you mark, that is it to
which his Lordship's argument drives, that the reasons by which you prove the
infallibility of your Church, are such as you confess your selves to be
fallible: Mark, not which you confess to be false, but fallible, your
confessing them fallible is enough to his Lordship's turn, though they should
have the luck to be true, because the infallibility of your Church, on which,
as on a foundation and principle, you must build in many after difficulties,
had need be infallibly asserted and known, or if it be but fallibly, will it
self be fallible (no conclusion ascending higher, then the premises have
ascended) and so, though it were true, yet not fit to commence a principle of
all other truths.

because with you nothing is not fallible but the Church. This may be dissolved
into an hypotheticall syllogism, whereof you must deny one proposition, or
else the conclusion is forfeited. If with you the Church be the only
infallible, then with you any other reasons, by which you prove the
infallibility of the Church, are not infallible, but with you the Church is the
only infallible, therefore with you any other reasons by which you prove the
infallibility of the Church are not infallible. Now if you look over your
answer again, you shall find that your only exception comes not home to any
part of this syllogism, for you do not so much as say, that any thing is
infallible but the Church; Or, if now you will see your want, and make
additions to your answer, then say distinctly, is any other thing beside the
Church infallible, or no? If it be, let it be named; if it be not, the
conclusion is granted us. And till this addition be thus made ( i. e. for this
present answer of yours) it is, I conceive manifest, that you have said no
syllable to the prime part of his Lordship's first Section.

Philosophy and Law suites, they can prove nothing against his Lordship,
unless you can name some sect of Philosophy, that has not only truth, but
infallibility, and tell us which it is, and prove that by arguments which are
confessed to be infallible; till you have done that, your instance is not
pertinent, and if ever you shall do it, 'twill not be concluding against us,
unless you produce the like arguments for the infallibility of your Church
against us, which must be some other then are yet proposed.

Lawsuits, that they are determined to one side by the Judge, does not prove
that that Judge is infallible (which is the only matter of debate,) and if the
contenders are bound to stand to his award, it is, because the Law and supreme
Magistrate have commanded them to do so, and because this is evident and
infallible, that they have done so, by the commission which the Judge has from
them. And when the like is produced for your Church, I hope all your Subjects
will submit to it, but then it must be moreover proved that all Christians are
such Subjects, or else we hope we shall not be involved under that obligation.

fallible, yet only you are, or can be deceived in this particular, (which we
conceive is clear, because only you pretend Infallibility, which we not
pretending, but affirming that we are not so, cannot in this be deceived,
unless we be infallible) but see not what it concludes against his Lordship,
whose argument depends not on any such assertion, that both parties are
deceived, but only that your pretended Infallibility is by you proved by no
other arguments, then those which you confess are fallible.

triumph and scoff I must not answer, but by yiedling you free leave thus to
please your self, and (if this recreation tend at all to your health) to
advise you to do so still, and (whenever it may be for your divertisement) to
reckon up the names of London, Great Tue, and the two Universities.

Lordship had affirmed, that Scripture, Reason and Fathers, are by you
maintained to be all fallible; and to this you answer by a distinction of
universally speaking, and in some cases only, and acknowledge that you affirm
them all to be fallible only in some cases. Now first you ought to have given
answer to his Lordship's proof for what he said, which was this, that you
affirm that only the Church is infallible; from whence it is a conclusion,
that therefore Reason, and Scripture, and Fathers, are by you affirmed to be
fallible, whereas you letting the premises alone, apply answer to the
conclusion, which is as much against Logic as to deny it. without denying the
premises, or showing the falsenesse of them. But then Secondly, that which is
fallible in some cases only, is by that acknowledged to be fallible, and by
that is proved unsufficient to prove another thing to be infallible in all
things, for if it be fallible in any, case, it may be fallible in this, that it
pronounces that other to be infallible; and till there be some infallible
argument produced that it is infallible in that particular pronouncing, its
Infallibility in other things will avail nothing; or if it do, it may avail
also for us to prove what we offer to prove from it, that your Church has
erred.

infallible in inducing your conclusion, and false as well as fallible in
inducing ours, (for if it be true, though it be fallible, it will serve our
turn, but it must be both, or will not serve yours, you being obliged to prove
the Infallibility of your Church by something which is it self infallible,
because it must be matter of faith with you, which nothing is, but what is
infallibly induced, but it is sufficient for us to believe you and your Church
fallible, though we should make it no matter of faith that you are so) which
because you endeavor not to do in this place, it will be impertinent to
examine the truth of what else you add (concerning the cases wherein you
affirm Reason, and Scripture, and Fathers to be infallible) any farther then
thus, that by your own explication of the distinction, and enumeration of
cases, I shall conclude, that Reason does not prove infallibly that your Church
is infallible, because the Infallibility of your Church is not an evident
verity; Scripture does not prove it so, because it is not certainly expounded
to that probation; Fathers do not prove it so, because it was not a doctrine
held in their time, and affirmed by them to be so. Each of which negations of
mine though they were as sufficient proof as what you have offered to the
contrary, yet I shall undertake to make good against you, if you shall think
fit to call me to it, by setting down your reasons to the contrary.

three maine props were fallen to the ground (which is another boast that had
no more relation to the present matter, then ground in truth; and therefore I
beseech you leave out such excesses hereafter) yet your supposition being not
so much as endeavored to be proved, the props stand as firmly as is desired.

To the second. Chap. 3.
The Enquirer is here much mistaken, for we are not at all offended with
Protestants for their alleging Scriptures, but for their doing of it after a
way which is fallible and uncertain; in which case we say Scripture can be no
foundation of faith. Wherefore though they allege Scripture and we also, yet
does it not follow thence that the Protestants disprove the infallibility by
the self same media or means, by which we endeavor to prove the same. It is
true, they attempt to do so, but that they do it, is denied. The Scripture
when surely sensed or expounded, is a different medium from the same Scripture
sensed unsurely or expounded falsely. Now he that takes an unsure way, which no
reason or discretion commends unto him, and leaves the sure, which Reason does
persuade him to be such, if that man chance to err, it is easy to understand
why God should be more offended with him, then with others that do not so but
hold a prudent and contrary course.

The sum is, that holy Scripture, after such time as it comes to be known
certainly for Canonical and shall be expounded according to the interpretation
of the Church, foundeth an argument strong and invincible; but when otherwise,
one that is probable only, or ad hominem; and this latter we say is your case,
and out of this give a reason why your resolves are temerarious and
presumptuous, and, in fine, such wherewith God may be displeased justly,
forasmuch as no man ought to go about this work unadvisedly, or expose his
salvation without all need, to chance and uncertainty, as if he meant to build
upon the sand.

C. 3. Ans. To the third Chap.
Lordship, viz. that your alleging of Scripture for the infallibility of your
Church, is by an infallible and certain way, but our alleging of it for
every part of our religion is by a fallible and uncertain.] (For though you in
terms affirm only the latter of these, that which is against us, yet in
charity to you I shall suppose you imply the former, or if you will say you do
not, I shall then answer, that the granting of what you say, does not vindicate
your Infallibility, but only accuse us, not clear your selves) or if that
which you add by way of explication, may pass for a proof of it, viz. that
Holy Scripture when it shall be expounded according to the interpretation of
the Church, foundeth an argument strong and invincible, but when otherwise,
only probable and ad hominem.] I answer, that this being applied to the matter
in hand to you and us, must, if it signify any thing, have this importance,
that the places of Scripture which you bring for the Infallibility of your
Church, are expounded according to the interpretation of the Church, but the
places which we bring for the several parts of our religion, are not so
expounded. And then I answer, that by the Church you may (and I conceive ought
to) mean the Universal Church truly so called, without your ordinary clogge
or restriction; and then all that we require of you is to make your affirmation
good, and produce the places of Scripture which that Universal Church has so
expounded to the asserting the Infallibility of your Church, (which till you
do produce it is petitio principii again) and then we shall show our selves
ingenuous, and (though we might reply something which ad homines might be
answer) yet shall we part with all other advantages of defending our selves,
and in plain ground yield you the cause, and contend no longer with you.

interpretation of the Church the interpretation of the Church in the notion
wherein we enquire, whether it be infallible, viz. that society of Christians
which have been governed by the Pope; Though then we might deny, that you have
any such interpretation of Scripture for your infallibility, and justify the
denial, (for if you please we will undertake to show that some eminent persons
in the Church of Rome, perhaps Popes themselves, never interpreted any
Scripture to the asserting the Infallibility of your Church, and that many
other differ among themselves, what is that Church which they affirm from
Scripture to be infallible, and that will amount to the same also) yet we shall
content our selves with this other answer, that the interpretation of that
Church, unless Saint Peter himself, or some other acknowledged to be
inspired, join in it, is not Infallible, and for you to say it is, and not to
prove it, is a petitio principii again; And for any other notion of the Church
which shall be said so to interpret, when you shall fasten on it, we shall
undertake to make good either that it does not interpret the Scripture to the
asserting the Infallibility of the Church, or else that the Church in that
notion is not infallible.

that we found not our religion on Scripture expounded according to the
interpretation of the Church, we utterly disclaim it, (and for you to affirm
it without proof, is petitio principii again) and to put it to a fair issue,
we make this offer, that what ever proposition we affirm without showing
Scripture for it, and that expounded according to the interpretation of the
ancient Church, we will presently forgo on your first instance; and if you
would pay us the like offer, and your party make it good, I doubt not but as
turbulent a Sea as the state of Christendom is at this time, the whole Church
might quickly be at, peace, or at least the dissentient party not be
considerable. I remember a passage in Saint Hilary, depredicating the Bishops
of France as very happy men, quod aliam non cognovissent confessionem^, etc.
that they knew no other confession then that ancient and most simple which
through all Churches from the Apostles age had been received. And I am a little
confident that that which first made, and has ever since fomented the breaches
of that precious body, is the multiplying and imposing of new confessions and
articles of belief from the suggestion of private or less public spirits,
and that has made the body like Aristotle's insectills, which for want of
blood run out into a multitude of legs; every such new article so multiplied
(above the number of those which Scripture in the truly Catholic
interpretation of it, will authorize, not only as true, but necessary to be so
acknowledged) being an effect of some want of blood, I mean charity in the
Authors, (for though to teach any man any certain truth be an act of charity,
yet to make an article, i. e. to require every man to believe whatever we
conceive to be truth, is a great uncharitableness) and a cause or occasion of
more; the adding to the necessary truths, ordinarily being a forerunner of the
abatement of the inventory of the necessary performances, I mean of those
which are indispensably required of us under Christ. These last few lines I
confess to be a (...), which I hoped might not be unwelcome to you; If they
be, I am sorry you were troubled with it, the seeing that there was nothing
more in your Chapter, which wanted answer, gave me temptation and liberty for
it.

To the third Section Chap. 4.
The third Section is all true, but concerns us nothing, because amongst ours
there is care enough taken for showing which Church it is that is the true and
infallible, and on the other side much negligence and partiality in the
enquirers after it, in many of them, at least, though not in every one.

C. 4. Answ: To the fourth Chap.
Reason (for such is that which is mentioned there, as in the second paragraph
the argument from Scripture, and in the fourth the argument from Fathers or
tradition) which you use to prove the Infallibility of your Church, viz. that
it is therefore so made by God (or that it is reasonable to think that God
therefore so made it) that all men may have some certain Guide] can never be
able to conclude any thing, unless it be made known by God as certainly (or
so offered by God to our knowledge, that it is our fault if we know it not) both
that there is such an infallible Church, and which it is. Now that God has so
made known these two, it being impossible for reason to assure us any
otherwise then by showing us some sure word of prophecy, I mean some
revelation from God, with sufficient evidence that it is revelation, and this
being not by you pretended to be showed, it availes little that you tell us,
that among yours there is care enough taken to show which Church it is that is
the true and infallible; for if by [ shewing] you mean demonstrating any way
that it is so, this you know we deny, and saying it again without proof, is
petitio principii; but if by showing you mean the pointing us out that for the
true and infallible, of which you are a member, we have little obligation or
encouragement to believe you say true, being a witness in your own cause; I
am sure no evidence that (if you speak according to your judgment) you are
Infallible in that showing or telling; For if we had, we must be supposed to
have that evidence of your infallibility without (because before) your showing,
and so to stand in little need of it.

To the fourth Section Chap. 5.
The answer is, that people illiterate may have evidence sufficient whereby to
resolve and satisfy themselves without making any search into Histories,
Fathers, or Scripture; and therefore this Enquirers supposition is false, and
indeed it were a hard case, if no man might be able to understand what he was
to believe, without looking into all these; and yet as hard as it is, does this
Enquirer impose it upon all, if not in express terms, yet by the consequence
of his doctrine. As for our selves alone, what need can we have for seeking out
the true sense of Scripture, and a conformity of doctrine with the Ancient,
more then other Christians have? Surely according to this method of his, all
true religion, whether in our Church, or any other, would be impossible to be
learned by the illiterate, and very hardly by any other men.

But what evidence can the illiterate have, or rather from whence? Out of the
present face, condition, and visible practice of religion in the Church, out of
the ancient monuments yet remaining that give in their depositions, out of
common fame and unsuspected testimonies, out of the manifest perfections and
excellencies both of the Church and Religion; out of all which, as from so many
clear signatures and characterismes of truth, arises an evidence of
credibility that this Church and this Religion are the true, and whatsoever is
once so creditable, cannot possibly be false, because for the verity of that,
the veracity of God does stand engaged, as Ric. Victorinus has long since
declared. For it is a clear case that all such things be true which God makes
evidently credible and worthy of acceptance by the public acts of his own
providence; for otherwise that providence should publicly entangle and
deceive us by obliging us, or, at least, publicly and potently inducing and
persuading us to believe that which were false; and so by following that way
which God has signed out for us, we should go astray; which thing can neither
be done, nor yet permitted to be done, without imposture, as all the ancient
Schoolmen do observe. By this means then are prudent public motives able
to make a certainty, though not by their own virtue, yet at least by the
virtue of the Supreme veracity which goes annexed with them.

Moreover, this measure of evidence perceptible by the illiterate and weak,
though it be not so ample as others have, or stand in need to have, yet is it
sufficient to sway their understanding, and to call in the divine assistance
for the supplying of whatsoever by reason of ignorance or incapacity, Prove.
3.32.
is wanting in them. Cum simplicibus est sermocinatio mea? says the Wiseman.
Therefore it is false and injurious to say, as this Enquirer seems to do;
namely, That such men as these do assent to truth upon no better grounds then
others do to falsehood.

The Enquirer's inference against the Church is this. We think she has erred,
therefore she may: The Inference is good, but the Antecedent is infirm, and
ought not to have been made, because he cannot have so great reason to judge
she has erred, as on the contrary that she has not; in regard that it is
far more likely he himself erred in making that judgment of the Church,
then that the Church erred in making that judgment of the truth, or that she
has contradicted her self; it being far more probable, that a private man
should be deceived, then a whole Church. Wherefore it is a great act of
presumption and temerity in any single man, though never so intelligent, to
judge the whole Church has erred, rather then himself.

The Enquirer says, that he tries the Church by her conformity with the
Ancients, as she her self appoints. But what then? Doubtless she is not that
way to be c^nvinced, forasmuch as every intelligent man will suppose that no
particular man is able to examine that so well at she her self has done
before him, and therefore may be pleased to understand that this pretended
nonconformity of hers ought to be discovered very clearly and perfectly before
he adventure to condemn her; and this great discovery having yet not been
made and manifested to the world, may justly be thought an act impossible, and
be judged in such as make pretensions of it, a work rather of a strong
apprehension, then of any solid judgment. If then our Enquirer in this case
should be rejected, let him not complain of us, as if we sent him to a
witness, and after bid him not believe it, but rather bid him not believe
himself, and his own judgment more then the Churches; that is to say, more
then he ought; nor suffer himself to be misled by the testimony of a witness
to whom we did not send him, I mean himself, in harkening unto whom self-love
too much inclines him, and made him over credulous, as to their great grief it
has made very man.

Now for the better understanding this point of conformity with the Ancients,
of which this Enquirer, and Chillingworth his confederate do talk so much,
and seek to urge against us; the reader may please to know, that they
themselves are bound to solve this knot, as well as we; for it will be both as
necessary and as hard for them to find out the conformity of their doctrines
with the Ancients, as it is for us to find out ours; and again, the
conformity of this modern Scripture with the Ancient; and these present copies
of the Greek and Hebrew with the Original, or Archetype of the same
languages, as it is to find out a conformity of this Church and her Doctrines
with the Ancients; and so these Authors have made a rod wherewith to whip
themselves, as commonly wrangling people do.

Secondly, That there be other notes of truth besides this conformity, and
therefore the enquiry after it is not necessary for any man.

Thirdly, That we may know this conformity by the truth a great deal easier,
than the truth by conformity; because truth may be known by the present notes,
and such as are before our eyes; but conformity must a great way off, and
through a thick mist of many Ages, if it be sought after by examination of
particulars.

Fourthly, That the enquiry after conformity by examining the Ancient rites,
and the innumerable dark passages and decisions of Antiquity cannot be a
general method for the instruction of all, or of the greater part of Men; for
it is a long business, and so cannot be ready at all times, but rather after
diverse years: it is also so difficult, that few have learning or ability to go
through with it; for the passages of Antiquity be very intricate, and require a
great light of understanding for their discovery. You see the Enquirer, Sect.
37. confesses he was much vexed with the harsh Greek of Evagrius, and the hard
Latin of Irenaeus, and with distinguishing between different senses, and
various lections, etc.

If this learned Gentleman found so much difficulty in the search; what must
become of the greater part of Men, if there were no way but this? for in
comparison of the rest, few have so much wit as he, or so much leisure; few
understand Greek or Latin either, whether harsh or pleasant, few so painful.
Must no man that is not acquainted with Evagrius or Irenaeus, come to the
knowledge of the truth? nor any man be able to know the Creation of the World,
and the Old law, without he can read in Hebrew, or learn the New law without
reading the New Testament in Greek? These were very hard conditions, and
certainly such at God never imposed upon us.

Doubtless we are not obliged to find out the Original Copies of Scriptures
and Fathers, of which sort, as I suppose, there be none extant, nor trouble our
spirits with judging about various lections; we are not bound to
impossibilities for our instruction and salvation, but have a ready way
assigned us, which is the conspicuous body of the present Church, which body is
like a City built upon a hill, and that hill is a rock not to be undermined.

It will be therefore sufficient that we can any sure way come to the knowledge
of the truth without taking care whether it be conform unto the Ancients or
no; for sure we are, all truth is conform to that it should be, abstracting
from the consideration either of Ancient or New, and this alone may be
sufficient to content any Man.

Yet if he would know conformity, I will show him a readier way than
examination of places; let him but take the voluntary confession of the
Magdeburgians in their several Centuries, and he need seek no further; for
they acknowledge all that we desire, and this acknowledgement of theirs cannot
but satisfy, for they make it neither out of ignorance of the truth, nor out
of affection to us.

C. 5. Answ. To the fifth Chapter.
Lordships Argument in the fourth Paragraph, you will spare me the pains of
showing that you have not answered it, by confessing you have not said one word
to the (...), or rational importance of it.

tradition or Authority of the Ancients is not a proper means to prove the
Infallibility of the Church. The means of inferring the conclusion are, First,
the division of men (to whom this Argument is supposed to be brought) into
ignorant and learned. Secondly, the insisting on the proposition in relation to
each of them, to the ignorant because they cannot know, to the learned because
they cannot infallibly know that tradition does prove this Infallibility.

ignorant, proving that tradition cannot prove the Infallibility to them,
because the ignorant cannot know what is the voice of general and constant
tradition; Which if it be true, is an infallible argument to induce the
conclusion; (for that tradition cannot prove another thing till it self be
proved, which it is not to him at least, who neither does nor can know it) and
that it is not true, you do not so much as pretend, but rather help to prove
it more plainly, than his Lordship thought necessary to do. And this is all
that you do return to the first part of the proof, save only by pretending
that this knowledge or trial of tradition cannot be necessary to the ignorant;
which as it is true, so is it nothing against his Lordship, who had no use of
saying that it was necessary, but rather the contrary; and by saying it is
impossible implies he cannot think it necessary; and therefore when you
affirm of his Lordship, that by consequence of his Doctrine he imposes this
impossible task upon the illiterate, and do not so much as pretend to mention
that consequence, this is so clear a prevarication, that you cannot take it ill
at any friends hands, to call upon you to confess and retract it; and of that
nature is that other suggestion here, that his Lordship seems to say, that
ignorant men do assent to truth on no better grounds than others do to
falsehood,] there being no such syllable here affirmed, (and if afterward there
be, we shall there meet with it.)

Argument is in relation to the learned, proving that tradition cannot to them
infallibly prove the Infallibility of your Church, or be a rule by which to
square your belief in this particular, so far at least, as to make it to
them necessary to be believed, (as your friends do and must say it is) because
it is possible they may mistake in it, and that mistake will not be damnable in
them, if they fall into it with a good conscience, as possibly they may ( i. e.
if they use their best diligence to find the truth by tradition, and are not
kept from it either by prejudice or passion) though it should fall out they do
not find it.

Lordship confirms by a clear and pertinent instance; suppose me in my
inquest, whether the Church may err, to enquire whether it ever has erred,
and in that inquest suppose me to meet with some motives which really persuade
me that the Church has contradicted her self, (which if she has done she
has certainly, erred, because both branches of a contradiction cannot be true
but one of them must needs be false) in this case it follows, that I believe
she has erred; Wherein though it is possible that I may err (because the
premises which I believed true may be false) yet because it is but an error in
my judgment that did so think (and that being reconcilable in this case with
sincerity, will not be damning to me) it will follow, that it will be
pardonable in me, though never so learned, that Tradition does not convince me
of the truth of that, which I did really conceive it showed me to be false; it
being as pardonable in the learned to believe that error which they conceive
Tradition tells them, as it was impossible for the unlearned to know what is
Tradition.

Argument lies in this, that what ever is necessary to be believed must be
offered to be proved by a means wherein the learned at least cannot err
pardonably, and therefore the Infallibility of the Church offered to be proved
by Tradition (that Tradition being a thing wherein the learned may err
pardonably) is not proved by that means to be necessary to be believed. Or in
a Syllogism thus; That wherein the learned may err pardonably, is not a
means to prove the Infallibility of the Church to be necessary to be believed,
but Tradition is a means wherein the learned may err pardonably, therefore
Tradition is not a means to prove the Infallibility of the Church to be
necessary to be believed.

Minor, First, by using Arguments to prove, that it is a difficulty and knot,
common to Papists with Protestants, to find out the conformity of their
doctrine with the Ancients; which difficulty being granted, will prove that in
that matter the learned may err pardonably. Secondly, by asserting that there
be other notes of truth besides this of conformity with the Ancients, and
therefore that enquiry after that is not necessary to any man; which seems a
disclaiming of that as of an unfit Argument. Thirdly, by saying that we know
the conformity by the truth, much easier then the truth by conformity. From
whence it will follow, that conformity is a very ill Argument, and the worse
the Argument the more pardonable the error in it. And fourthly, by the
professed unfitness of this Argument, at large dilated on by you, with this
conclusion, that the conditions for the understanding of Tradition are so very
hard, that certainly God never imposed them on us. On which grounds you offer
us another means of proving it, (which shows that this was unsufficient in
your opinion) viz. the conspicuous body of the present Church; which if it be
not a very fallible means also (as in many respects I might prove it were
particularly by this, that the compass of Christians that are of that Church
of yours, is not by common computation a third part of the Christian world) is
certainly very distant from Tradition; which that it is not a means infallible
in this matter, is all that his Lordship now contends in that present Argument.

reading of the Magdeburgians as a readier way to know conformity, then
examination of places.

Roman Church, then have you fitly cited them; if they have not, or if upon my
present instance you do not show that they have either directly, or by
certain consequence, then have you wronged them in this your affirmation, and
left your self no means to prove your conclusion by that medium.



evidences (that your Church and Religion is the true) which you mention for
the illiterate, and are no one of them evidences, may be added to the number;
which I need not prove, because you have not attempted to prove, but only
assert the contrary. And so also your Divinity cited out of Ric: Victorinus, if
applied to your purpose: [ that whatsoever is once so creditable (as you have
there made the Infallibility of your Church) can never be false] Which beside
other falsities, must infer other things to be infallible, beside that only
infallible; for it is sure that other things may by you be made so creditable,
and as sure, that what ever else cannot be false (God's veracity standing
engaged for it) is infallible also; and (not to mention your proofs of that
Divinity) such is your assertion, that the Enquirer's inference against the
Church is, [ we think she has erred, therefore she may erre] for his
inference is only this; if she has erred, certainly she may; which I should
say is another great injustice, by changing his Lordship's words, but that it
is repaired and expiated with another act of more kindness to us, though of as
little force of reason; that the i^ference is good, but the antecedent is
infirm; whereas in truth the Inference had been naught, but the Antecedent
either true, or only in the power of the Searcher of thoughts to disprove in
him; so again, that the discovering the nonconformity of your Church with the
Ancients, may justly be thought impossible; when if we had not actually done
it, yet hereafter we might; and when in the present business we affirm (and
you go not about to disprove) that your pretending to the Infallibility of
your Church is inconformable to the Ancients, because they did not so pretend;
and surely such is your affirmation, that to send one to a witness, and yet
bid him not believe himself in what he conceives that witness tells him, is
not as bad, as to send him in like manner, and bid him not believe the
witness; there being no possibility of believing what the Witness says, but
by believing himself, affirming that that Witness said it: For if you say it
be by believing of you ( i. e. another Witness) that that Witness said it; I
answer, that that will include a believing himself also, viz: himself
affirming that you testified that the other Witness said it.

any sure way come to the knowledge of truth (mentioning at that time only the
conspicuous body of the present Church for such) without taking care whether it
be conform to the Ancients, or no, etc. By which as you acknowledge your
preferring the conspicuous body of the present Church (for the finding out of
truth) before Antiquity, which is the strangest speech I could have looked for
from a defender of Tradition, so I confess I see the reason why a Section that
undertook to prove that Antiquity was no infallible proof of your Churches
Infallibility, had in a long Chapter of answer to it, never a word said in
confutation of it; and so I very friendly take leave of it.

To the fifth Section, Chap. 6.
Out of that which hitherto has been said, it appears plainly how the
conclusion which the Enquirer would infer in this fifth Section, is no way
applicable to our manner of probation of the Churches Infallibility: for we do
not, as he surmiseth, maintain that our Church the Guide of Faith, is to be
known by such marks by which the ignorant cannot seek it, and the Learned
may chance to miss, although with all diligence and without prejudice they
enquire after it; for we affirm that our first principles of probation are
certain and manifest, and out of them, we with certainty, though not with
evidence, evict the Church. By which manner of proceeding it is clear, that
our probations are Logical and conformable to the rules prescribed for the
hunting out of truth by Aristotle in his Analytiques, and the Philosophers in
general.

Some peradventure will deny our Churches verity to be evidently credible: If
any do it, the matter must be remitted to an equal trial between us. But,
say you, who must be the Judge? I am no Socinian, nor inclining to that sort of
mis-believers, yet nevertheless, I say, right reason must be he, and every
man's own conscience; and of these Judges, I hope all men will allow, and it
is reasonable sure they ought to do so, because reason is in all questions the
last and the interior Judge, without whose assent and approbation, no exterior
is sufficient and complete. For exterior Judges be as spectacles to the eyes;
and as spectacles, be they never so good, cannot see without eyes, so cannot
revelation, be it never so manifest, give the last sentence about any doctrine,
nor be sufficient without reason.

It may be further replied, that these principles of ours are also questioned.
Admit they be, yet nevertheless may they be certain and evident, otherwise we
should grant nothing to be certain; for there is no one thing so evident,
which is not questioned by some or other.

C. 6. Answer to the 6. Chap.
conclusion, when the premises are either not denied, or not confuted; for that
which his Lordship says in that Section, you acknowledge to be a conclusion,
and is so indeed of all that went before; all directly tending to this, That
the Church provided for the guide of faith, it offered by you to be known by
such marks as the ignorant cannot seek it by, and the Learned, though never
so honest in his search, may chance not to find it by. This then being the
conclusion of all the discourse you profess to deny, upon no other proof but
by affirming, that your principles of probation are certain and manifest, i.
e. by saying the direct contrary to his conclusion, Logic, there is petitio
principii again.

your principles of probation are certain and manifest, and out of them you
evict the Church with certainty, though not with evidence: where either you
must affirm to think that [ evident] and [ manifest] are not all one, or else
that the conclusion is not evident, when the premises are; either of which you
shall have free liberty to take the choice of, and maintain in your reply. And
when you have showed your skill in so doing, you then shall have leave to boast
that your probations are Logical and conformable to the rules of Aristotle in
his Analitiques, and the Philosophers in general; but till then 'twas to no
more purpose to say that of your self, then 'twill be to the edification of
any that I have repeated it to you.

Churches verity to be evidently credible. Good Sir, what is this but to
suborne a weaker adversary to challenge you, that you may be excused from
fighting with the stronger? we desire plain dealing, that you will prove your
principles of probation to be certain and manifest (which is the thing you
affirmed) and not to think to put us off with more obscure and less
containing terms of your Churches verity being evidently credible. For first,
your Churches verity (i. e. I conceive its being the true Church for I hope you
speak not now of its Metaphysicall verity, or its being truly a Church, for so
it may be, and be very fallible, and very corrupt) is an equivocall phrase,
and, in what ever sense, is not so much as your Churches infallibility; for it
may be a true Church, and not be infallible, i. e. upon supposition, that what
ever now it taught were actually true, 'twere yet possible it might err, even
when it does not; nay, if its verity should signify that it were a true Church
(as perhaps you mean) exclusively to all others, i. e. that the Catholic
Church were the Roman Church, and the Roman the Catholic; yet speaking of the
present state of the Church, i. e. of the present Roman Church, though it were
supposed to be the present Catholic Church, yet may that be fallible again,
because those that are now in the truth, may fall into error, and others rise
up, as they fall, to be defendors of the truth, and so the promise of God of
keeping his Church from final or total falling, be made good still.

Catholic Church (under which we confess it to be infallible) that of the
universal Church all the world over, without any restriction; I conceive it
impossible, that by your Church (which is the Church with an eminent
restriction) you should mean that; and upon that ground it was, that I
affirmed, that the verity of your Church, in what ever sense, is not so much as
its infallibility.

evidently credible, is not sure so much as certain and manifest; for though
evidently credible sound strangely, (and if it have any sense in it, has also
some obscurity) yet I shall suppose you mean by it, that which is credible, or
may be believed, and of which it is evident that it may, the words
Grammatically can bear no other sense then this, that it is evident that they
are credible; now certainly to be evident and certain, is much more then to be
credible, though it be never so evident that it is credible. For suppose me
actually to acknowledge that you have some probable arguments that your Church
is the true Church; nay suppose it is so evident that you have such arguments,
that every man that has common understanding will be ready to acknowledge you
have so, does it thence follow, that I, or all others, do and must acknowledge
that you have demonstrated it? this is to make no difference between the two
sorts of Arguments in Logic, Topicall and Demonstrative; or in a word, to
conclude that to be infallible, which you durst not say was any more then
credible; for as for the word [ evidently] added to it, it cannot have such an
influence on the word, credible, as to make that quite another, or higher sort
of things then it was; Credible in the clearest or highest degree is but
credible still, as the eminentest or excellentest man in the world is a man
still; and therefore in brief, if we should help you to fewer adversaries
then you have, and take off that suborned enemy of yours, whom you suppose to
deny your Churches verity to be eminently credible, you would have gained by it
but little peace from his Lordship, who would still require you to make good
your pretension of infallibility, which will be a much harder theme to declaime
for popularly, (I am sure Logically) then the credibility of the verity of your
Church.

credibility of the verity of your Church (I must be feign to use your phrase)
right reason and every man's own conscience must be the Judge; which being so
great an act of compliance and favor both to those which assert reason, and to
those that maintain the private spirit to be the Judge of Controversies, i. e.
to two sorts of men, which have hitherto been believed opposite enough to your
infallibility, it will be but gratitude to reward so great a bounty, with a
favorable interpretation of a good meaning, and he should be very rude and
uncivil, who would not grant upon such your demand, that you are no Socinian,
nor inclining to that sort of mis-believers; for sure he that makes right
reason the Judge of his very principles, must needs be so rational, and
ingenuous, that he can never be an Heretic, though he say the very things
that Heretics do.

eyes and the spectacles, I shall not have a word to say to it, save only
this, that although you have gotten the enclosure and monopoly of spectacles,
(I mean of imposing of an exterior Judge upon us) yet other men may be allowed
to have eyes, as well as you, i. e. to have reason and conscience to Judge of
your Judge, and then the issue (according to your premises being granted to
you) will be this, that they whose reason and conscience tells them, that it is
not evidently credible, that your Church should be the true Church, exclusively
to all others, shall not be obliged to believe it is so (for their own reason,
say you, and Conscience is to be judge) that they whose reason, etc. tells them
it is so credible, may believe it, if they please; nay, if they have no
arguments as credible to the contrary, and upon impartial search can find
none, it is very reasonable for them to believe what to their conscience is so
credible; but if they have such arguments to the contrary, or if it be their
fault that they have not, they are sure no farther bound to believe it (if they
are not Subjects of your Church) then those dictates of their conscience do
extend to oblige them, or (if they are Subjects, yet) no farther then the
doctrine of obedience rightly stated (which will be too long a work for a
parenthesis) has influence on men's opinions; but then still, what ever their
case be for believing the verity of your Church, they can no way from thence be
obliged to believe your infallibility.

questioned, and no reason that were not by you easily answered, brought to
justify such questioning, it were sufficient which you say, that questioning
does not disprove certainty; (and yet if every man's conscience be the Judge,
as you acknowledge, then unless you can make it evident that that man's
questioning is against conscience, you will have no way to keep it from being
certain, and evident to him) but when there be arguments produced to back
that questioning, which you have no way to answer, but by saying they may be
certain and evident for all that; he that disputes with you, will be excused
to think he has more reason to say (and that you say must be judge) that it
may be otherwise.

To the 6. and 7. Sections, Chap. 7.
No doubt there can be, but God will reveal his truth to all such as seek it
with sincerity of heart; and though both sides, as the Enquirer objecteth, may
make use of this for an exterior allegation, yet not as of interior help and
preparation; and therefore this sincerity is not a disposition unprofitable,
though it be a proof inefficacious, and thus much we grant willingly, neither
do we challenge it as an argument of truth.

We grant him also, that before such time as we can believe the Church, we are
to acquire sufficient principles for informing us which is she; and also before
we can believe upon her determinations, we must have principles of knowing she
is infallible, and all this we make profession we do, de facto, know. Neither
do we take this Church to be a Proteus, that is to say, sometimes of one
shape, sometimes of another, but a conspicuous body constantly adorned with the
robes of truth, and annexed to a Succession of Pastors legitimate from one age
to another.

C. 7. Ans. to Chap. 7.
pretense of seeking truth sincerely] and concludes, that sincerity is not a
disposition unprofitable, proof inefficacious; which because you are willing
to grant, I will contain my self from springing any game or recreation for
the Reader at this time (of which he that were playsomely disposed, would find
abundant matter in the review of your distinction here applied) and give you
present payment for your favor by acknowledging, that that which you grant, is
all that is begged from you, viz. that God's promise of revealing of truth to
those who seek it sincerely, is not at all an argument, that they that pretend
to the benefit of that promise, must have real title to it; or consequently,
that they that have no other arguments to prove their Churches Infallibility,
but that they seek truth sincerely, and yet after that sincere search are of
that opinion, are to be heeded in their pretensions. This justifies his
Lordships sixth paragraph, as fully as if you had subscribed it without your
distinction.

supposing the Church were proved to be infallible, yet were not that
sufficient to give any man certain knowledge which were it:] Secondly, a solid
proof of this affirmation, by plain reason, because the granting the
Infallibility of the Church did only conclude, that God would always have a
Church that should not err, but not that this was appropriated to any
particular Church, to such a Succession, to the Bishop and Clergy of such a
place, etc. Thirdly, by a lively instance of the Greek Church, which though it
were now in the right, might hereafter err, and so the Greek Church be now
fallible, and yet at the time that that erred, another Church might arise the
Champion of truth, and so still the Church be infallible.

Paragraph your dispatch is short, (and annexed to the nothing that was replied
to the former Section) to the first, a liberal Grant of that which no man
thanks you for, (that it is as necessary to know which that infallible Church
is, as that the Church is so) but then saying and professing, that you do, de
facto, know which is the Church, and that she is infallible; which (beside that
it is your old beloved petitio principii, to say you know it, and offer no
proof for it, but your profession and a Latin word, (when the very thing that
his Lordship was just a proving, was, that you neither did nor could know it)
comes not at all home to his Lordship's matter of showing, that the
acknowledgement of the Infallibility of the Church does not evict, which is
she: For if 'twere acknowledged that you did know it, yet might it be by some
other means, and not by proving or confessing the Church to be infallible.

the Infallible Church was not a Proteus, but a conspicuous body constantly
adorned with truth, etc. which is again the meanest begging of that which was
just then denied, and disproved; and must so stand, till you can annex reasons
to your opinion, and answers to his Lordships reasons.

To the 8. Section. Chap. 8.
We never go about to prove our Church to be the true, therefore, because it
holds with the truth, or teaches true doctrine, as this Enquirer seems to
suppose we do; but rather contrariwise, because it is the true Church of
Christ, therefore we infer it teaches true doctrine; but that it is the true
Church, we prove first of all and originally by real revelations, called in
the Scripture, Verba Signorum, that is, by signs, ostensions, or motives of
credibility; Psalm. 104.27.
which motives for a great and sufficient part of them, are the same by which
we prove to Infidels the truth of Christianity it self. For these same
motives, though when they are considered but in general, and as it were afar
off, do persuade Christianity but in general, without designing out in
particular this or that Individual Christianity; yet nevertheless the
selfsame being understood distinctly, do design out a distinct and
individual Christianity, and are applicable to none else; as for example, the
same species which show me a man in general afar off, the selfsame
afterward, when he comes nearer, being distinctly perceived, do show me that
man is this individual; as Plato for example, and no other: For real species
do not represent unto us, Entia rationis, or, Individua vaga, but determinate
Individuals, namely, as often as those species are distinctly and completely
understood. As for the Circles into which both this Enquirer and Chillingworth
would cast us, and make us dance within them whether we will or no, they are
but Chymaericall conceptions of fidling and trifling dispositions, which love
to have toys wherewith to entertain themselves, and in this point of
resolution, as we have declared it already, have no semblance of reality.

C. 8. Ans. to the 8. Chap.
Lordship supposing in charity that you had attempted to prove the Roman Church
to be the true Church by its agreement with Scripture and Antiquity, which is
in effect, by holding the truth; You plainly tell him he is mistaken in you.
It seems Scripture or Truth, you must have it by some more noble way of
demonstration; and if you would stand to this piece of gallantry, and never
urge Scripture or Fathers to prove your opinions, but content your self with
your being the true Church, to prove all after it: As I confess I should not
charge on you that Circle which his Lordship does in this particular
(supposing, as he thought favorably to you, that you had proved the truth of
the Church by the truth (and consonancy to Scriptures and Fathers) of your
doctrines) so I should have two quarrels more against you, in stead of that one
composed. First, that you would disclaim Scriptures and fly to miracles, (for
such real revelations, as you interpret them by the verba signorum, in the
Psalm, the signs being there interpreted by the wonders that follow) that you
would fly to Gods extraordinary providence, when I presume you conceive his
ordinary would have served your turn; for sure if at another time a man should
have asked you, is not your accordance with the Scriptures and Fathers a prime
proof that you are the true Church, I doubt not but you would be so well
natured as to confess it; and why now should the Devils infirmity, the fear
of a Circle, make you so cowardly, as not to dare to own so popular an
argument, especially when your fire comes down slowly, or your bath Col the
voice from Heaven, (which is the only proper notion that I know of a real
revelation) is not very audible to us that are afar off: nor if we were, to
be put upon the rack; do we know, or can confess at this day, that we or any
of our Fathers ever heard that 'twas so ever revealed, that the Roman Church is
the true, or the infallible Church. And besides when you know, we Protestants
are a little hard of belief, and dare not credit your own report, that you
have such ostensions, and revelations, and signs, when you neither produce
witness, nor tell us, when or what they were, but give us farther ground of
jealousy, by an odd phrase let fall by you, that those real revelations of
yours are motives (no more then) of credibility, when as true miracles
acknowledged to be such, are grounds of Faith, and he is an Infidel that
believes them not; and to be but a motive of credibility, is but a petty thing
that every topicall argument will take place of, probable being more then
credible in the ordinary notion of the words.

is your telling us (without proof that it is so, but only by giving a
similitude to show it may be so, and so, in your phrase, to be a motive of no
more then credibility, which in him that concludes petitio principii again)
that the same motives you use to prove the truth of Christianity against
Infidels, will prove yours to be the true Church; which being confidently said,
we are so vile in your eyes, as not to be vouchsafed so much as the mention
what they are, (unless by your former words we conclude you mean miracles)
much less any evidence concerning them; And yet by the way, the miracles by
which we prove the truth of Christianity to Infidels, must be those which we
meet with in Scripture, and not those other in your Legends; and upon a strict
survey and recollecting of all them (and so coming as near to them as can be)
I must profess I cannot see your Churches being the true Church in those
miracles, near so clearly and distinctly, as I can see the man afar off to
be one of my acquaintance, when he comes near me, which you undertook I
should, and made me try; and therefore I hope will recompense me for the loss
of my labor, by giving me your reasons next time for your assertion, that I
may try again whether your proofs are more lucky then your experiments.

Lordship and Master Chillingworth, for thinking you were in danger of the
Circle, in which sure Baron had deprehended your Turnbull, and in which you had
been engaged infallibly, if you had but gone about to prove your Church the
true Church by the truth (or consonancy to Scriptures and Fathers) of your
opinions; which way of proving me thinks it is possible you may stand in need
of, before you come to the end of your answer. In the mean, as the calling
down Hercules upon the Stage, was wont to be a Character of a Tragic Poet,
i. e. of a fabulous, wonderful undertaker, Cum fabulae exitum explicare non
potuerit, miracles and ostensions, to prove that divine truth that you confess
must not be proved by the Scripture, will pass for a piece of Poetry, I fear,
instead of a motive of credibility; and those that are cheerfully disposed,
will be apt to tell you, that you were feign to conjure hard, and do, or
pretend miracles, or else you had been enclosed in that Circle.

To the 9. and 10. Sections, Chap. 9.
To these I answer in a word, that neither the Greek, nor any other Church can
pretend the Primacy or Principal succession of Pastors, that is to say, from
the President of the Apostle Saint Peter; none, I say, besides Rome, can
pretend this; and without this one, no^e can be authentical or sufficient to
prove a Church, or a succession of Pastors Ecclesiastical; and so the
Enquirers starting-hole in the Greek Church, into which he always makes his
retreat, is prevented and shut up against him.

By this also is the 10. Section answered, for whatsoever Churches claim unto
succession shall be alleged, it can no way evacuate that of Rome, as has
before been showed.

Chapter 9. Answ. to Chap. 9.
viz: that you were so put to it by the conviction of his Lordships argument,
that to dis-intangle your self you have ventured to vent a piece of very
severe divinity, which my charity to you makes me hope you will not justify;
and if you will, yet your no argument produced, gives me nothing to answer, nor
otherwise to reply, then by denying as mercifully and obligingly to the world,
as you do cruelly affirm; viz: that without succession sufficient from Saint
Peter, there is no succession sufficient to prove a Church, or a succession of
Pastors Ecclesiasticall] and this is so strange a news to our ears (who were
confident that what ever you deem of the other two parts of three of the
Christian world at this present, you had allowed liberty to Apostles to ordain
Churches, as well as (and without succession from) Saint Peter; and indeed that
that which in the second and eighth line of your Chapter, you call the Greek
Church, might have been acknowledged to be a Church in the seventh) that had
you not said it in the most evident terms ( None beside Rome can pretend
this, and without this one, none can be sufficient to prove a Church, etc.) and
had there been any way imaginable but this, to answer his Lordship's argument,
I should never have thought this had been your meaning; till I see you again
own this severe doctrine, I shall not take pains to confute it; and when I
see that, I must say, that his Lordship presumed you had not been so bloudily
minded when he proposed to you the argument in those two Sections.

Lordships argument will still hold against you, even after you have ventured
on such strange practices, to secure your self from it, Thus; suppose you had
evinced that the succession from S. Peter were infallible, and so proved the
Roman Church to be so, because none else pretended to succeed S. Peter, yet
this can be no sufficient ground of belief to the ignorant, who cannot have any
infallible foundation of belief, that the Greek Church does not pretend from S.
Peter, whether by S. Mark at Alexandria, who might be ordained by S. Peter,
whose right hand, they say, he was in the penning of the Gospel; or by Evodius
at Antioch, where S. Peter was Bishop seven years (as your own Baronius) or
by any other, or (to the ignorant it matters not) by no other known way; and
even to the learned it is but an accidental argument, because if any other
company had likewise claimed Succession from Saint Peter (as they of Euscb.
hist. l. 3. (...).
Antioch do) it had overthrown all that probation; nay it is but an arbitrary
argument which the adversary can confute by but denying; for if any society of
Christians so called, would pretend to be from Saint Peter some other way, then
by succeeding him at Rome, or submitting to his government, your Church could
make use of it no longer.

Churches claim unto succession, shall be alleged it can no way evacuate
that of Rome; if it be applied to his Lordship's argument, it is absolutely
false, for if Rome's claim to Infallibility together, and to succession to
Saint Peter, be to be proved by this, because none else pretends to it (which
is the argument which his Lordship here confutes) then sure any other Churches
claim, or pretending to it will evacuate that claim or title, that by that
argument is pretended, and contrary to this there is yet nothing showed.

To the 11. Section, Chap. 10.
What mercy God will use in pardoning the errorurs of those men who do seek
sincerely and yet miss, makes nothing at all against the ordinary provision
and necessity of a guide, because those misses or mistakings be cases
extraordinary. Besides, I would know why any pardon should need for such
innocent errors which be defects involuntary, and so can be no crimes;
wherefore me thinks the discourse of our Enquirer in this Section is not
coherent.

C. 10. Answ: To the Chap. 10.
Lordship's argument Sect. 11. is very strong against the collecting a
necessity of an Infallible guide for the interpreting of Scripture from the
topic of God's goodness, by proposing another way of reconciling God's
providence with his goodness in this matter, (which if it may be done,
concludes that other unnecessary) viz. by mentioning a doctrine of more
Evangelicall economy; in which errors may be reconcilable with mercy, when
God does give grace to the diligent seeker to find out truth, or by this
dilemma, that without such an infallible guide, upon the use of Reason in the
interpretation of Scripture, and search for tradition, God will either give
grace to find what is so sought, or pardon if he miss; and so though it stand
not with Gods goodness to damn him for every error, to whom he has assigned
no infallible way to find out all truth, yet to him that is confident that God
will not damn any man upon such terms, as the servant laid to his charge,
when he told him he was an austere man, etc. to him that teaches not such
legal bloody doctrine against God, this argument of the Romanists will not be
pressing at all; this expedient of the Gospell-grace or Gospell-mercy being as
fit for the turn of infirm souls, as an infallible guide would be; as indeed
the state of imperfection wherein we are placed, is as fit for our turns, when
the (...) of the Gospel is revealed, and proportioned to it, as Adam's
Paradise of Supernatural all-sufficient strength, and innocence would be.

because those misses or mistakings are cases extraordinary: To which I answer,
First, that if it were supposed that against the ordinary provision of a guide
the argument were not of force, yet sure it might against the necessity of it,
and then that is all that is pretended to by his Lordship, and that which alone
is destructive to you; and therefore it is strange you should couple them
together as so sociall things, which are so distant and separable, for sure
though Evangelicall grace and mercy do not exclude an ordinary provision of an
infallible way, but leave it in medio, that God may if he will make that
ordinary provision, yet notwithstanding this, it follows not that such a
provision is required, or nenessary; There is a wide distance betwixt [
possible if God please] and [ necessary to the vindicating of God's goodnesse]
now against the latter only it is that his Lordship argues, and is not at all
concerned in the other, and therefore I shall not need to examine whether the
first be true, it being so clear, that the second hangs so loose from it, and
will alone serve our turns as well.

because the misses or mistakings be cases extraordinary] for first, how can it
be denied errors and mistakings are very ordinary? That they are common there
is no doubt, and as little that they are agreeable to that order or course that
is now among men, and to you that say in the next words, that you know not why
such defects should need any pardon (and to us that acknowledge that they that
reform all other, and pray daily, demitte debita, shall through Christ have
pardon of course for these) sure they cannot pass for extraordinary cases in
either sense, for that would imply, that now under the Gospel it should be
ordinary, or regular to punish involuntary errors (which you say can be no
crimes) and extraordinary either for us to commit, or for God to pardon them.

misses, etc. were cases extraordinary, yet can I not see how these words can
be annexed to your former, as a proof of their being answer to his Lordship
(because how extraordinary soever the misses may be, the pardon for misses may
do as well for you, as an infallible guide) unless you mean somewhat else by
ordinary cases, then what my capacity has reached to, and till you please to
instruct me better, I shall (...), and by exercising my charity in not judging
what I do not understand, invite yours to instruct me that I may.

Coherence of his Lordships discourse, you have little temptation to doubt of
that, when you have said that he conceives that such errors or missings should
need pardon, for to that, all that he says is coherent; It seems you are not
of his opinion for the truth of that; and whether is in the right I shall not
now examine, or enlarge to any so accidental and extrinsecall discourse, but
only tell you, that believing as you do, you not true] when you mistook, and
said [ not coherent.]

To the 12. Section, Chap. 11.
To this charge we answer, that our proofs of a sure guide, are themselves
also sure; and what proofs those are, we before have signified, Chap. 8. and
Sect. 8. and before Chap. 5. Sect. 4.

Chapter 11. Answ. to the 11. Chap.
Your next Chapter being but a reference to what you had before said (and that
before examined by us) my answer shall be answerably only a reference also,
without taking more pains, to put you in mind, how unfit your Verba signorum
(which you there affirmed to be motives of credibility) are now to proceed or
commence infallible proofs, for those are they which his Lordship's argument
requires in his 12. Section.

To the 13, 14, 15, 16, Sections, Chap. 12.
The Infallibility of Popes or Councels is no point of doctrine necessary to be
known distinctly, before any resolution of faith can be made, because it is
sufficient to learn out of Catechismes and the common practice of the Church,
what is to be believed: Neither is there any more probable fear of missing
which is the Sea Apostolic, and which the Churches living in communion with
it, then there is of a Subjects being ignorant to what Kingdom he belongs;
and, as for doctrine of belief, it is found out as readily, and as surely as
the other, by those means of instruction which we have signified already. As
for the Simony objected, Sect. 14. it is no impediment of his power, so he be
received peaceably by the Church, and not (...) in question for it. The like
may be said of the decrees and definitions of Councels, together with the sense
or meaning of them. And by this the 15, and the 16 Sections are answered.

C. 12. Answ. to the 12. Chap.
in quest. after your infallible ground of faith, took into consideration the
Popes Infallibility, Sect. 13. the Infallibility of a Council by him called,
Sect. 14. and produced arguments, I conceive, convincing against each.

Infallibilities are necessary to be known distinctly before any resolution of
faith can be made, and you give your reasons for it, because, etc. which is in
plain terms to grant and prove the thing which his Lordship desires, and
proves; for if they were the ground of faith, they would be necessary to be
known distinctly before any resolution of faith, the foundation being
absolutely necessary to the superstruction in material edifices; and in
intellectual, the distinct knowledge of a ground of faith being as necessary
to a distinct resolution of faith, as the ground it self, which works not
upon any man's understanding (the seat of this Faith) any further then it is
known. This concession of yours being all that is demanded of you at this
time, we shall not need insist on, nor debate farther, what influence the case
of Simony may have upon the Popes Infallibility; If he be infallible at all,
He, or He and a Council, you say it is not necessary to ground faith, (which is
the only use we have of it in this present enquity) for it seems the
Catechismes, or common practice of the Church, are sufficient to teach what is
to be believed.

Popes and Councels Infallibility made unnecessary? and is a Catechism and
common practice of the Church sufficient for the grounding of faith infallibly?
Certainly we are grown very low, and are supposed men of very moderate
desires, if it be thought we shall thus be content with the Infallibility of a
Catechism: For whatsoever is sufficient for the grounding of faith infallibly
(remember [ infallibly] must come in, for otherwise it is not to his Lordship's
discourse) must it self be acknowledged infallible. Which if you shall please
to affirm of any of your Catechismes, as I shall first desire to be directed
which Catechism it is, that of Trent, or what others, (that I may not mistake
in the choice of my Guide) so I shall make bold to demand whence this
Infallibility, or authority of this prime guide of faith is to be fetched? It
will be sure from the authority of the Pope (or Council) of that time when
'twas compiled and confirmed, and then still we fall back to the infallibility
of the Pope, or Council, which it seems in the last resolve is become
necessary again to the grounding of Faith, and so again must be known before
any resolution of Faith be built (even upon the Catechism) which was the thing
you just now denied: As for the common practice of the Church, that that should
be a ground of Faith, or sufficient for us to learn by it, what is to be
believed (besides that this is a weaker ground then Catechismes, as much as
errors are more likely to get into the practice of the many, then into the
Books of the Learned, or Authentic Writings of the Church; and accordingly
it is observable in the particular of images, that the common practice of men is
much more gross, then the Writings of the Learned) it is impossible that that
should ever be a guide, qua cundum, which way we are to go, till it be some
other way proved, that we ought to go that way.

See Apostolic, and which be the Churches that live in communion with it, we
have no obligation lying on us to deny it; his Lordship's words gave you no
occasion to assert it; nor can we see what at this time you can get by it, when
you acknowledge the Infallibility of Pope or Council unnecessary to be known
before any resolution of faith can be made.

and as for doctrine of belief, etc.] This I should conceive you had spoken of
before in those words [what is to be believed] and then your memory was short
to put it in again within five lines, as if it had been a new matter.

Simony, which was an argument of his Lordships to defend it. Yet that you may
not complain that any word of yours is neglected, or lost upon us, I have
considered that also, and ask you whether it be not true what his Lordship
says, that a Pope chosen by Simony is ipso facto, no Pope, you (durst not, I
conceive, because you) did not before deny it; and if now you will take more
courage, let your mind be known, and we shall not doubt to bring as Classicke
Authors as your self against you. If it be true, then is your answer of no
validity, because of no truth; for either that infallibility, or whatever other
power, must be annexed to him as a man (which he may be indeed, though he be
not Pope) or under some other relation, which infallibly belongs to him,
(neither of which, I conceive, you will affirm, for then ten thousand to one,
some other will communicate with him in that claim) or else he must be Pope,
when he is, ipso facto, no Pope; or else that power must be annexed to him by
some body, that may think him Pope when he is not, and then either God must
run the error, or that power be given him from some other, for that God
should know him to be no Pope, and yet give that power of Infallibility (for if
you speak of any other power it is not pertinent) to him, as long as he is
peaceably received, must, First, conclude that a no-pope may be infallible. And
Secondly, that whosoever is so received by the Church, is so; which unless
there be some promise of Gods to assure me that he has promised it to the
Churches blind reception, will, for ought I yet see, conclude again, that
either the chair or the peoples error gives him that prerogative.

Simoniacall election has nothing to do with the decrees of Councels) I
should attend it, but the scent being cold, I am at a loss, and so must be
content to give over the game.

Popes Infallibility (because you have wholly avoided that question, and by a
kind of stratagem diverted it, and so not given me any occasion to defend his
Lordship in that matter) I shall a little consider the reader, (to whom I am
much obliged, if he shall have had patience to read thus far, i. e. to endure
the penance of so much Nothing) and give him a few collections of my own, to
this purpose of the Popes infallibility; not that I conceive they will from me
find any better entertainment then his Lordship's reasonings had done, but
because they are for the most part the concessions of your own men, from
whence I here transcribe them.

fallible, but even judicially subject to error, deviation, defection, and (in
Ocham's phrase, haereticabilis) to heresy, apostasy, Atheism, and in his
practice to sin of any the most hain us kind, and consequently to damnation
irreversible. I shall assert no farther then these honorable Names will avow
and authorize me. Among your own Writers, (I mean Pontificians) Lyra in
Matthew. 16. Waldensis, l. 2. doctrine. fidei antiq. Gerson. de exam. doct.
consid. 1, 2, 3. Adrianus Sextus the Pope, in 4. sent. de confirm. qu. ult.
Driedo de libert. Christ. l. 2. c. 2. Cardin. de Turrecrem. l. 2. c. 16.
Almainus de author. Eccles. c. 8. ad 6. etc. 10. and de dom. civ. not. and
Eccl. concl. 3. Archidiaconus Bononiensis, in Great. gloss. in did. 19. contra
Auxentium. Catharinus in Gal. 2. Yea and the Councels of Constance and Basil,
and the Fathers generally there assembled, which I hope took not up this
doctrine from Luthers or Calvin's dictates.

Childebert King of France, that he sent Ruffinus his Legate to Rome, to
enquire of Pelagius the Pope, whether he had violated the Faith, as Ad a^n.
556. n. 25.
Baronius testifies; the same was suspected of him by the Bishop of Tuscia, and
other Bishops of Italy, to whom he sent his Apology, says the same Ib. n. 30.
Baronius. So Gregory the first, being under the like suspicion, wrote his
Greg. l. 2. ^p. 4.
Apology to Theodolinda Queen of the Long^bards. So the Popes generally
labored to approve themselves to the Emperors, and purged themselves before
them; Sixtus before Valentinian concerning the crime laid to his charge by
Baessus Symmachus upon an accusation of forgery, says an Anonym: de aerat.
eccles c. 7. ap. Gol^astum in monarch. 1.1. p. 29.
Author in Goldastus; all which are arguments that the Popes infallibility was
in those days unknown to the world, and the Popes themselves were not very
perfect in it; if they had, they would have been more confident then to have
made Apologies.

Bishops of Germany met at Brixia, the Bishops of France at Mentz, condemned
the Pope for a disciple of Berengarius. Or if the condemnations of such will
not be of value against the Pope, you gave reason even now leave to be the
Judge, and that, and common sense may be so in this matter, if you will but
read the Inter Episiclas Hyber. p. 49.
Epistle of Pope Zachary to Boniface, e Cathedra, a Papal and definitive
rescript, wherein he condemns one Vergilius for an Heretic, for affirming
that there were Antipodes; which whether it were an error in him, I leave you
to judge, and profess my self to be of opinion, that though it were, 'twas yet
more tolerably discreet and pious, then that of Gregory the seventh, that there
is but one name under Heaven, that of the Pope, to whose Seat whosoever paid
not obedience, became presently an Idolater and a Pagan; and if you will
undertake to defend this, I will reward you by adventuring to justify the
other. That speech of Gilbert, Bishop of Rhemes, that after was Pope, shall
with me be sufficient to expiate for either; Audaciter dicam, etc. I shall
boldly say, In Epist. ad Scquiti Senonensem.
that the Bishop of Rome himself, if he have offended any Brother, and will
not hear the admonitions of the Church, ought to pass for an Heathen and a
Publican.

Stephanus was reprehended by Cyprian, Liberius by Athanasius, Honorius almost
by all Christians, of no less crimes then Heresy it self. Or because that is
but one piece of carnality, and there be many others beside that, as probable,
and considerable errors, and carnalities, I beseech you review either in your
memory, or in Onufrius, and Platina, the life's and manners of the Popes, the
incests, and sorceries, and cruelties of Alexander the 6. the Idolatrous
sacrifices of Marcellinus, Calestin's using the help of Magitians and Devils
to come to the Papacy, and then tell me your opinion, whether Popes may not
err; and when you have replied, by way of distinction of manners from
Doctrines, be then pleased to answer De Papat^.
Nilus (by some more satisfactory way then by calling him prattling Greek) this
question, (...), how it falls out that the Pope can deny God in his works, but
cannot by any means in his words; (what charm or amulet kept his tongue
inerrable, when his whole body was subject to those darts of Satan) and when
you have done that, I beseech you to phansy to your self what kind of crimes
you conceive those Popes would have committed, if they had been fallible.

fallibility of the Pope, I beseech you pardon me for this unneedfull
importunity.

To the 17, and 18, Sections, Chap. 11.
I noted before, that the knowledge of all these particulars recited by the
Enquirer, are no way necessary to the Believer, and therefore both this Author
and Baron the Scotch Minister struggle in vain, when as with such care and
vehemence they press them against us. I conclude then, that in the Church of
God Councels do not multiply doubts, but diminish them.

C. 11. Answ. to Chap. 11.
note, I conceive, referres to your discourse in the precedent Chapter, how
Catechismes, and the common practice of the Church teach all, what is to be
believed. And (as then the Popes infallibility, so now) that of Councels is
unnecessary to be known, and by that means all these particulars also; for if
the infallibility of Councels were necessary to be known (as it must be if
they were deciders of questions) then all these particulars mentioned by his
Lordship, would be necessary to be known also, because they are incident to
every Council, and the knowledge of its infallibility (because of its
decisions, and even being it self) depends on these.

Councels to decide Controversies being the thing his Lordship had now in hand,
and which Baron treats on, when he uses the like arguments, sure neither of
them struggle in vain; but you rather (who 'twas thought in reason would have
been no wiser then your fellows, and so would have asserted that fitness of
Councels) have become a very slippery Wrestler, gliding out of their hands,
when their arguments began to lay hold on you; and after such an escape as
this, I confess it is matter of wonder to me, how you could think fit to end
with a (...), triumph presupposing victory, and victory resistance, and none of
these here are to be heard of, but only a conclusion, that what his Lordship
had said and proved, he had said falsely (a petitio principii again) that
Councels do not diminish doubts, but multiply them. Which proposition and
proof of his Lordships, having no need of defending any farther, I shall only
interpose one caution, which I desire may be observed in his Lordships
discourse, that it being supposed, that Councels are dot deciders of
controversies, (meaning thereby infallible ones) they be yet of good authority
and use in the Church, to help to decide them, and (notwithstanding all the
doubts that his Lordship says they do multiply) be only denied by us the
privilege of infallibility, not that other of being very useful and venerable
in a lower degree, and (such the Council may be) even next to the Word of God
it self.

To the 19. Section, Chap. 13.
He maintains here a strange paradox, and one very improbable, namely, that to
define any thing of new, is to bestow upon the Devil one path more for us to
walk in toward him. If you ask why, he tells you, because, before the
definition made, it was lawful to hold either side, but after, it is damnable.
Belike then with this Author the manifestation of divine truths is the high way
to damnation; but I suppose few men are of his mind. Certainly most are of
opinion, that every such verity we learn, had rather been a new step
toward Heaven, because knowledge of things divine do enable men for the
attaining of salvation; and therefore the Apostles by their instructing our
understandings in them, showed the world so many more paths to Heaven. It may
be indeed that by accident minds blown up with self-conceit, may by their
resisting such revealed truths, take an occasion to transgress, but that is
their own faults, not the fault of them that teach, or of the verities that
are declared, and therefore this cavil of the Enquirers against the
definitions of Councels was very frivolous. It should seems he had a great
mind to be quarrelling with Councels, that was content to take such a
frivolous exception as this against them.

C. 13. Answ. to Chap. 13.
Lordships 19. Sect. comes now to be considered; wherein the paradox in, and
improbability of his Lordships conclusion will not be so great, if you observe
but one thing, that the matter of definitions of Councels, which he speaks of,
is not divine truths, (as the following words suppose them, and upon that
press them with absurdity) but, as I conceive, such things as have been
defined by Councels, being not before defined by Scripture, and so though
affirmed to be truths, yet not as divine truths, at least of which it is not
infallibly true, that they are so: of which nature I might instance at large in
your Councels of Lateran, Constance, and Trent; for to the ancient general
Councels I confess to bear such reverence, that I shall challenge any of you
to exceed me.

at this time, I must add, that in such decisions of Councels, the worth of
the matter, and inconvenience of leaving it undecided, are the maine things
worth considering; and so it is possible that the decision may be such, that it
may tend, First, to some public end, whether the clearing of obscure
Scripture, or the recovering of some venerable and useful practice, or
doctrine of the Church. Secondly, to the settling and establishing of peace, by
interposing such a judgment which may probably sway with both pretenders; And
in these, and the like cases, the advantages being so intrinsecall to the
decision, and withal so great, the inconvenience mentioned by his Lordship
ought not to prevail to the disparaging of Councels, because though it be an
inconvenience, yet is it over-weighed with other conveniences, and therefore
the argument I confess is not infinitely or unlimitedly true.

opinion probably prove opiniatour) and so the decision will then rather widen
the breach then compose it.

Lordship's argument, and it is true that then upon that present supposition
(that before decision 'twere lawful to hold either way, and damnable after) it
were uncharitable to define; my reason is, because when charity does not move
to do a thing, i. e. when no advantage shall arise to mankind by it, but on
the other side charity shall advise to abstain; some one, (though accidental)
hurt, being foreseen to arise on the other side, there to do that thing is
uncharitable.

Bishop Tunstall of Durham, who died in your communion, that if he had been
Chaplain to Pope Innocent the Fourth, he would have begged on his knees, that
he would not define Transubstantiation, as knowing it would tend to the breach
of the peace of the Church; and thus in matters of controversy about
Predestination, etc. you know the Pope has in charity abstein'd to define, and
the Apostles (or whosoever else were the composers of it) in their Creed
defined but a few things; and generally those Churches that have avoided
multiplying of articles, have by wise men been thought the most Christian,
because the most charitable; and even in matters of rites and humane laws, the
rule is, that they must not be multiplied unnecessarily; and the reason is,
because they would consequently multiply snares on men's consciences, as
unnecessarily, which is just his Lordship's reason in this place.

Lordship speaks of those things in which before a Council has determined,
it is lawful to hold either way, perfectly lawful, (not excluding also that
other circumstance that I have added, viz: when there is no real gain
expectable by defining) And when the [ those things] are by his Lordship so
limited and restrained, I know not how (to make up your paradox) you could
think fit to change the phrase from [ those things, etc.] to [ any thing] and
after to [ divine truths] and [ things divine] and [ verities] in general,
when it is improbable that he did (I am sure very possible and probable that he
did not) speak of any such, as are new steps toward Heaven, but such as only
fill men's brains, puff up their phansyes (and often make men to think
themselves pious men for being of such opinions, and to neglect works of piety
and charity, as not near so considerable) and so are to them even that believe
them, accidentally paths to damnation, much more (if the doctrine of the
decisions of Councels be to be extended to whatsoever useless definitions) to
those that do not believe them.

paradox of his Lordships, I must desire (once for all) these two things from
the Reader, which Equity will require of him to grant me; First, that his
Lordship's arguments be not extended infinitely, but only be supposed to
undertake to conclude as far as is necessary to the present matter, and no
farther, (an example of which this Chapter has afforded you) Secondly, that
his arguments being by him brought only to enervate the Infallibility of the
Roman Church, be so cautiously taken, as that they be made use of only to that
end, and not at all inclined, or wrested to the lessening the authority of the
Church or Councels universal; for this would be very unjust, and ill inferred,
there being a wide difference betwixt authority and infallibility, as also
betwixt universal and Roman, though (by reason of the manner of his Lordships
discourse, being, according to the design, wholly destructive of the one, and
not assertive of the other) the Reader may perhaps be tempted to think
otherwise; and therefore I thought it not impertinent thus to fortify him
against this prejudice.

To the 20, 21, 22, Sections, Chap. 14.
It is true, we condemn some doctrines which general Councels have not
condemned, and we have great reason for it, because though Councels be one rule
of faith, yet not the only. Again, these we hold to be infallible, because
they are the Compendium and quintessence of the Church, and the body
representative thereof, as a King and the three States be of the whole Kingdom.

The cause of Pope John the 22. is cleared sufficiently by Ciacconius in his
life, by Caeffeteau in his learned answer to Plessye's iniquity, and by many
others, and therefore needs not be argued any more. I grant it a point of faith
that the souls of the just shall see God before the last judgment, and do
deny that this doctrine was generally contradicted at any time. Nevertheless I
do not know it to be of faith that all of them shall enjoy the same vision
before that great day, and that none of them shall be detained in secret
receptacles, as the Ancients hold, till they, together with their bodies, shall
be completely purged in the great fire of the worlds conflagration, as I have
treated elsewhere.

It was not needful that Councels should define in terms their own immunity
from error, because a Council both in substance and semblance is the Church,
who needs not define her own infallibility, and therefore needs not, because
that same is to be presupposed to all her definitions as a thing known without
them, before hand; for otherwise she would not be believed in any of them at
all, either touching her self, or any other matter. Nevertheless though this
definition be not in terms, yet it is virtually done, and in actu exercito,
as often as a Council defines any thing, by the pronouncing of Anathema
against such as do not submit, and counting them as Heretics; It is done
again in the using continually this old form, Visum est Spiritui Sancto and
nobis.

For a conclusion I demand of these eager impugners both of Church and
Councels, what thing it it must regulate our belief, and keep us in
discipline and unity; for if they let all men loose upon themselves, and make
all men Judges in the Court of faith, as they, de facto, do, controversies
will multiply apace, and no means left to reconcile them; and while all men
have authority of deciding, no man has it. Reason always did teach us, that
confusion would be the effect of this new license; yet could we never
understand it, till that now costly experience, the mistress of the improvident,
has laid it open before our eyes. And now at length we smart for our leaving
the venerable decrees and definitions of Church and Councels, and do behold
all brought to misery and ruin, both Church and State; yet such is our
blindness, as we are not able to dis^erne the true causes of all these evils.
The daily growing up of new and new devices in stead of the old faith, and the
continual discords and dissentions thereupon ensuing, evict unanswerably the
weakness and inaptitude of the rule of faith, and our young and presuming wits
way see how far short they come of their forefathers wisdom, and how much
more unhappy then those who were governed by Church and Councels.

C. 14. Answ. to Chap. 14.
Chapter in the Apologist, is answer only to one of three or four proofs of
his Lordship's argument, Section 20. viz. to that against the Councels being a
rule of heresy, [when some pass for Heretics that are not condemned by any
Councell] To this I confess it were satisfactory (if it were proved) to say
that Councels are a rule, but not the only rule. But then, First, there is no
other rule specified. And Secondly, this argument of his Lordships is
complicated with three others, being joined with which, it is of force to
strengthen one of them (though of it self it were not sufficient to conclude)
and then neither of those are taken notice of. Thirdly, it is meant but as a
proof against this rule, not against any other. And yet Fourthly, his
Lordship's method being to confute every one of them single, as they lie; all
others being disproved, this must be concluded the only one, or none at all;
and however, no more can here be required, then that here he disprove this from
being the rule, not that he disprove all others in this period.

Councels are infallible] First, that is not answer to the contrary proof; And
Secondly, it is by a medium as much denied, as it self (the Infallibility of
the Church whose quintessence it is) and so your old acquaintance, petitio
principii again.

John 22. puts us off to Ciaconius and Caeffeteau, whom in obedience to your
direction I should advise with, but that I see from what you have learned from
them, that either you have proved an ill Scholar (and 'twere insolence in me
to hope to be better) or else that their resolutions are not pertinent to his
Lordship's argument; for the three things that you add (I conceive from their
Writings) are nothing at all to it.

he was not alone] you conclude, that that which he contradicted, was generally
contradicted; and then what his Lordship said, may be as truly said to be
generally granted, for he is not you see alone in so saying.) Thirdly, Not that
which you say you do not know, for his Lordship knows it as little, and
indeed says never a word of it. Whereas the only thing wherein the force of
that part of his Lordships argument consisted, viz. Bellarmines excusing Pope
John (in his denying of that which you believe) from the no-Councell that had
defined against him, has no title said to it, but continues in great security,
to make good the argument, [ that you do amiss (and withal either you or
Bellarmine are very partial) to condemn those that are condemned by no
general Council.]

Council ever decreed a Council to be Infallible, therefore as far as the
argument is drawn for belief, from the infallibility of the Council, I am
not bound to believe it infallible. To this you answer, 1. That for Councels so
to define, was not needful, because a Council is the Church, and the
infallibility of that is a praecognitum in all her definitions, otherwise it
would not be believed in any.

For Councels to define that Councels are infallible is not needful; which
sure is needful, if nothing be to be believed, but what the Council defines
to be so, and that must be granted, 1. if the Council be the rule of belief;
and 2. if the Council be the Church (as you say it is) for that is the only
rule infallible, if you be not deceived. 2. That the Council is the Church in
substance.] I thought it had been in representation only, and that nothing is
the Church in substance, but the Church in its full extent, of which you said
before, the Church is only the quintessence, which sure is not the same in
substance with that whose quintessence it is, but only the representation of
it. 3. That the Infallibility of the Church is a praecognitum; if so, then it
is a principle; and if so, then I am sure I must not look to see it proved,
and then as long as we deny it, (as we do, you know) that is petitio principii
again. 4. That unless the Church were presumed infallible before its
determination, it could never be believed in any: this supposes men very
hard-hearted, that never will believe any thing, but what some presumed
infallible tells them.

belief (as well as a certainty) cui non subest dubium, of which a man does
not doubt, as well as cui non potest subesse falsum, in which there can be no
falsity; and the Schools have told you of a certainty of adherence, where
there is none of evidence; and let me tell you, this is the difference betwixt
belief and knowledge, the latter only is inferred demonstratively, or by
premises that cannot be otherwise, the former being content with probable
arguments, so they be strongly probable, and such as have not any the like, or
of as considerable weight to be balanced against them. And this sure is the
reason that Faith is by God thought fit to be rewarded, as being an act of the
Believers choice, (and knowledge not, because it is necessarily and irregably
induced) and yet such, as that it will be all obstinacy and perverseness to
resist, when it comes well provided with arguments extremely probable.

probabilities. We eat and drink for the strengthening and refreshing of our
bodies, and yet conceive not our selves to have any certainty of evidence or
demonstration, that every bit we eat, or drop we drink, may not choke, or
poison us; yet having probabilities, on which to ground a belief, that they
are wholesome, and no strong contrary probability, that our table shall become a
snare, or death unto us, we doubt not to feed as securely, as if Euclid had
been our surety by one of his Demonstrations.

demonstrable, or certain in that sense) that there may be some flaw which may
undo me, and yet when I have searched my evidences, and have the opinion of
wise men upon the matter, I sit down, and trade, and live securely, and all
this but upon probabilities, without the (...), or full armor of infallibility
or demonstration.

perspectives and otacoustickes, I mean where we are feign to trust the
relations of others, be it that there was a Julius Caesar, or a Henry the
eight, the ground of our belief is but a probability, viz. the topic ab
authoritate, the argument taken from the authority of the relators; which
though it be never so strengthened by the universal concurrence and
nondissenting of all witnesses, cannot yet ascend higher, then to be extremely
probable, and yet sure is as firmly believed of us; and although it may
possibly be otherwise (the contrary implying no repugnance, or contradiction in
nature, and he that should be so mad to affirm it, being not confutable either
by rational, or ocular demonstration) yet as little doubted of by any man in
his right wits, and as little liable to any scruple, or matter of doubt, as
what is most visible before our eyes.

ex abundanti (yet shall not repent of it because it is useful to be
considered in order to other difficulties) to show you the falsnesse, and
inconsequence of that argument, that unless the Church were presumed
infallible before its determinations, it could never be believed in any. For
hereby it has appeared, that that may be believed, nay cannot sometimes
without pertinacy and sin be not believed, (as in case the arguments, though
but probable, be excessively so) which brings not with it demonstration, or any
thing of equal power or force with it, and such is infallibility.

Protestants to believe the universal Church in all things, wherein the
testimony appears to be universal; nay to believe the Church of Rome in many
things, wherein the arguments produced by her, do actually persuade with us,
(such are her consonancy with antiquity, and the like) and yet to remain
constant to our present undertakings, that she is not infallible.

Council does virtually, and in actu exercito, define its own infallibility;
and that you prove, First, because it pronounces anathema's against those that
submit not; Secondly, it does it by saying [ Visum est Spiritui Sancto, etc.]

actus exercitus, as it is here applied; To your arguments we answer, First,
that our Councels denounce anathema's too, yet you know do not pretend to
infallibility.

believe, but that all they that shall dis-believe may be excommunicated, if
they be refractory; and that again only in reference to those that are under
dominion; but not that all others that are not under us, should by us be so
handled; or that those that are not excommunicate, are in that other danger; or
if these are, yet not for the sin of dis-believing an infallible doctrine,
but for not believing our lawful superiors; which may be a damning sin,
though they be not infallible, their being in the truth, when they make such
constitutions, is sufficient for that. Secondly, the form of [ Visum est
Spiritui ] is only a form transcribed from the Acts, arguing it their opinion
(that use it) that this particular is the dictate of the Holy Ghost, not at all
their belief, that the Holy Ghost was bound to assist irresistibly: which he
must (as well as assist) to make the infallibility; for otherwise when he
assists, we may possibly not make use of his assistance. In plain, it is an
evidence that they think they are in the truth, not that they cannot be in the
wrong.

Question is pertinent enough (though not to this Section, yet) to the
business in gross, and we answer it in a word, that the Word of God must
regulate our belief, and reason, in the use of all the means that you will
commend to us, and you have given us a pledge already, that you will not
quarrel with us for this answer; as for discipline, and keeping in unity, we
had, blessed be God, means very sufficient to that end, till the sword wrested
them (as all other our lawful possessions) out of our hands; and I believe the
Infallibility is not weapon-proofe, or able to keep Resisters in obedience, or
Schismatiques in unity.

Infallible Church (which must be but want of that insolence to undertake our
selves to be Infallible) is (that and no other) the That passage in the
Apologist to which this was returned, is by him in his last thoughts held
better to be omitted, and accordingly I have left it out there.
cause of all our present miseries; and his Lordships doctrine in this Book,
(although never so remote) the cause of his death: This is but to let us see
your change or variety, that you can use non causa pro causa, and not deal
only in petitio principii; thus was Tenterden Steeple the cause of Goodwin
Sands, and that is all I shall return to your State-observation; the cause of
our present calamities, I conceive, came not out of the Church, but when it was
infamous, it fled to it for a Sanctuary, to give it an honest Name, and a
protection together; and I could tell you that the League in France was once
pretty parallel to ours, and then 'twas the observation of a knowing man, that
if a true story of the causes of that War should be written, the business
would be traced into such or such a brothell house, that made as if it came out
gravely from the Church; a competition or animosity, the (...), or true cause,
when religion was only the (...), or the pretended. Besides, let me tell you,
that decisions and anathematizings have sometimes done as much hurt toward
occasioning of breaches, as license and acknowledgement of fallibility has
done; (and if you mark, the only color of charge at this time against our
Church, has been the imposing too much) and truly whatever your opinion is, I
conceive meekness has the promise of this life, and I never knew that
pretending to Infallibility is the only Symptom of that.

To the 23, 24, and 25, Sections, Chap. 15.
The argument of these three Sections, is, how an ignorant illiterate man
cannot be able to trace out all traditions which be truly Apostolical: and
this is sought to be persuaded and made good, by sundry intricate discourses,
all which I willingly do pretermit, and only signify that they all fall wide
of the mark; for, in a word, our answer to them is, that private men stand in
no need at all of having any particular information of them, but, that it is
sufficient for them if they do learn what is the common doctrine of the
present Church, without looking any higher to the Primitive and elder times:
because this doctrine now taught is credible and persuasive enough for
satisfying of any wise man's understanding, and the settling of his judgment
upon it: as for example, it is sufficient for any man desirous of knowing which
is the River Thames, to see it at Gravesend or London, without any laborious
ascending by it higher and higher, and tracing the shoares thereof, till he
come unto the springs; and more then this would not be needful for the
distinguishing of it from Severne, or Trent, or any other River. For if this
kind of assurance might not be sufficient, then certainly few or none could
ever have come to know which water was the famous River Nilus, of which few
have ever seen the springs, and which, as it is very likely, do lie concealed
in Aethiopia, and wholly undiscovered even to this day.

Against the possibility of searching out traditions Apostolical, and
discerning them from others that be spurious and false, his principal
instance, and that in which he most confides, is the doctrine of the Chiliasts
or Millenaries; and the same example is vehemently pressed and repeated often
by his Friend Chillingworth. The substance of all they say consists in this,
namely, that their doctrine, although now generally received to be erroneous,
was received in the first 200. years with one consent, as a tradition
Apostolical. For making of this charge good, they both of them do jointly
allege Saint Justin as their witness. But that we may judge most favorably
of this their allegation, we needs must tell them they are mistaken grossly,
for Saint Justin speaking there of three several sorts of Christians which
were in his time, affirms, that of those three but one of them held the
doctrine of the Chiliasts: Justin in Dial. cum Tryphone.
The first of these three sorts was, as he describes, (...), Those, who as he
conceived did in all points hold aright. The second class consisted of such
other, who although they did not, like the former, in all things hold aright,
yet nevertheless were, (...): men of pure and pious judgment or belief, for
so he expressly styles them; the third and last sort were such as denied the
resurrection, and were therefore censured by him to be Christians rather in
name then in reality, and justly to be compared with the Sadduces amongst the
Jews. Those of the first sort he tells did hold the doctrine of the thousand
years. The second sort, as he expressly witnesses, although they were
orthodox and good, yet did not hold that doctrine. Those of the third sort, as
he says, were Christians, but feignedly, and in name alone, and resembling the
Sadduces, yet not for their denying the error of the thousand years, for what
relation could that have unto the Sadduces? But, contrariwise, for their
denying the resurrection, as the Sadduces did, and all this appears clearly,
within the compass of a few lines, in the Greek text of Saint Justine;
Besides, if all at that time had been persuaded of the truth of the
Millenaries fancy, what needed Saint Ireneus have labored so much, as he did,
and spent so many Chapters in the proving of it? This being so, it appears as
plainly that the Enquirer and also his Partner Master Chillingworth, were both
of them deceived in seeking to father upon Saint Justin, that all Orthodoxall
Believers of his time received the doctrine of the Chiliasts, and that such as
did not, were held as Sadduces, or Heretics; for, in the Text of Justin,
there is no such matter, but rather the quite contrary to it, as may appear
fully by the Text it self, and partly by the words before recited out of him;
for, without all doubt, Saint Justines many of pious and pure judgment or
belief, and were no Chiliasts, must needs be Orthodox, and could not be
Heretics, nor as the Sadduces amongst the Jews, unless we will say that
with one breath, he called them by both contrary names. Again, if, as these
men say, all the whole Church were Chiliasts during the first, second or third
hundred years, how could or durst Dionysius of Alexandria have opposed them,
either without forcing his own Conscience, or incurring the blame of Heresy?
Now, it is certain he was not counted an Heretic; and again, very unlikely
he would strain his Conscience, by opposing any doctrine, received as
orthodoxall by the whole Church. Again, it is probable Saint Dionyse the
Areopagite opposed that doctrine, therefore it cannot be certain, that during
the first 200. years, it was not opposed: that Saint Dionyse did it, appears
by the works now extant bearing his name; and, that these works be his, is
very probable, first, because they are received for such by the major part,
both of the Western and the Eastern Church; secondly, because they were cited
for his a thousand years ago, and numbered amongst the rest of the Fathers
ancient and undoubted Monuments, by an intelligent Author, Philoponus, l. 2. de
Operib. Creat. c. 21. and l. 3. c. 9. and 13.

The like may be said of the pretended tradition of the Quartodecimanes
touching the celebration of Easter after the manner of the Jews, which was
wholly rejected and forbidden in the first Nicene Council, and before that
time opposed by many, and principally by Pope Victor, who, as Ciacconius
conceives, did not cut Polycrates and his Associates from the body of the whole
Church, but only threatened it, or, as Eusebius seems to say, did do it, but,
yet at the instance of Saint Ireneus, and some others, if he had once past it,
did not prosecute the censure against them, but let it fall; and, that it was
so, is very probable, because there is no memory made how the sentence was
received, whether with obedience, or otherwise; which particular, doubtless,
would never have been omitted by Historians, no more then the sentence it
self, or the intention of it was, if there had been any thing to register;
and besides, because we find not by any record, but that all proceeded with
those Asian Churches, as formerly it had done, without any note or alteration.
And, by this, is solved all that Chillingworth with so much animosity,
objecteth against the learned Cardinal Perone.

Salvian lib. 5. de Gubern. Dei, where he speaks in excuse of some Arian
Goths, speaks not at all in excuse of their Heresy, but supposing that sundry
of them might have been innocently mis led, conceives more hope of such men's
salvation, then of such Catholics, who lived carelessly and lewdly. Now, what
can this make against the tradition, or definition of the Church? Only this
Inquirer must say something to his Mother, and be making difficulties where
none is.

Chapter 15. Answ. to the Chap. 15.
i. e. such as you cannot easily accommodate answer to; but especially, because
it is sufficient for private men to learn the common doctrine of the present
Church, and therefore there will lie no obligation on me to reply any thing,
save only this, that his Lordships arguments do still prove sufficient to the
end, to which he designed them, to show that Tradition is no infallible guide,
which that you acknowledge, your diversion seems to intimate, and your many
proofs, that it is not needful it should be.



Church (as before you did from the Catechismes) does intimate your opinion,
that your present Church is infallible, but is no show of proof that it is so
(and so Petitio principii) nay if your words signify, as they sound [that your
doctrine thus taught is credible and persuasive enough] I may conclude that
your Church is not infallible; for whatever is taught by such an one, is more
then credible and perswasible.

Thames will as little come home to the business of Infallibility (though to
Credibility it may) unless every Water-man on the River be as infallible as
your Church, for of him it is that I learn it; and though his credit be great
enough for a matter of this moment, and in it I would as willingly be ignorant
or uncertain, as be at the trouble to seek out a better security: In matters
of greater moment, I may be excused if I am not so credulous, if I choose not
to believe them, whose interests are concerned, at least if I think every
Catechism on the stall to be somewhat less then infallible.

Churches infallibility) and so granted as much as his Lordship attempts to
prove, yet for some former profession of kindness to it, you will now take its
part a little (rather then his Lordship shall be permitted to say any thing
true) and vindicate it from the argument about the Chiliasts. In which I must
tell you, that what you here affirm of his Lordship and M. Chillingworth is
not true of his Lordship (whether it be of M. Chillingworth is not tanti, as
that not having the book by me, I should take the pains to examine it.)

Justin, that all orthodoxall beleivers of his time received the doctrine of
the Chiliasts, whereas all that his Lordship says, is but the repeating of
Justin's own words (wherein he cannot be deceived in your opinion, for you
before recite the same) and translating them (wherein he is not deceived, for
he does it ad literam) and in a word affirming, that Justin says he holds it,
and so do all that are in all parts orthodoxe Christians, which phrase [ all
that are (i. e. which he says are) in all parts orthodox] that it differs from
this other of yours [ all orthodoxall beleivers] I shall appeal to no other
judgment then that of your own conscience, who in the former page affirm,
that Justin spoke of three sorts of men; First, Those that did as he conceived
in all points hold aright: the second, which though they did not so in all
things, yet were (...), of a pure and pious judgment, (and those which are
such I shall suppose to be orthodoxall beleivers, though as it appears by your
acknowledgment, they did not hold right in all things.) Or if your analyzing of
the place do not sufficiently convince you of this difference, (and the injury
that consequently you have done his Lordship) I shall then, (having long ago
seriously weighed that place) First, give you an account of it, such as I doubt
not will satisfy you; and when I have done so, Secondly, confess the
weakness of that place to conclude any thing against Catholic tradition;
and yet Thirdly, make it clear, that you have wronged his Lordship in your
report of his citation.

millennium, I profess to believe, that it appears not to be Justin's
affirmation, that it was not opposed by his contemporaries, but rather the
contrary, P. 306. C.
which I conclude from these words, (...). I have signified to you that many
do not acknowledge this doctrine of the 1000 years, and those many,
Christians that are of pure and pious opinion or judgment. And that you may be
beholding to me, I shall also profess, that I am not of the opinion of those
learned men that have conceived that period false written; and that either
(...) should be changed into (...), (which would be a strange and bold
Criticisme, of very ill example, if it were admitted against the consent of
copies; and then Secondly, it would leave a very perplexed period of it) or
that (...) should be left out; For first this would be as dangerous a
Criticisme, and of as ill example, which would make Authors opinions mutable
into the quite contradictory; and yet such, as is not without example among
you, witness the disputation between the Regulars and Seculars in the
controversy about the necessity of having an Ordinary here in England, upon
occasion as I remember, of a Canon of a Council concerning Confirmation, one
side contending that [ non] should be in, the other that it should be left out,
a controversy about a word, nay a syllable, but yet that of some concernment.
Secondly, if either of these emendations should be admitted, the antecedents
and consequents would not naturally and in good style connect, but the sense of
this period would be just all one with that that went before immediately.

Trypho in that place (though Justin had told him that he denied not the
Millennium, yet) suspected that Justin had equivocated with him on this ground,
because other Christians were not of this opinion, and therefore begins with
(...), tell me whether you confess it sincerely, (...), etc. and Justin
answers, that sure he would not say it if he had not thought it, and thereupon
repeats, that he had confessed to him, (...), and promises he would set out a
Book of this disputation, and profess it openly to others as well as him, and
adds that he means not to follow men and their doctrines, but God; all which
argues his acknowledgment that the opinion was not uncontradicted by men, nor
generally consented to by Christians.

P. 307.
that those words which seem most to the contrary [(...) (...)] will not come
home to the proof of it, nor indeed of any more then this, that he was of that
opinion, and some others in all things consenting with him; for it being
supposed that he was of that opinion, it cannot be expected of him that he
should affirm any that hold it not (though never so orthodox in other things)
to be (...), of right opinion all things: because every honest man supposing
his own opinions to be right, (for else he will change them) must also
suppose, that they that differ from him in one of those are not in that, (and
so not in all things) of right opinions.

denied the resurrection and the 1000 years, and those he calls (...),
nominall Christians, Atheists, impious, haereticall leaders; the second, those
that acknowledged the resurrection and denied the Millennium, and those are
contained under (...), Christians of pure and pious opinions; the third sort,
those that held both, as him self, (...), P. 306.
many others, and (...), P. 307.
if there were any that were orthodox in all things.

Justin it cannot be concluded, that the 1000 years was a matter of Catholic
belief in his time, but only favored by him, and many others, and
consequently, though that were after condemned in the Church, would it not be
from this testimony inferred, that a Catholic doctrine, (much less a
tradition) were condemned.

Lordship spoke very cautiously, and (as any man will now conceive) very
critically, according to the importance of Justins words, that Justin held it,
and said, that all that were in all parts (that is in all particular points)
Orthodox Christians did so too, but no more, which is much less then what you
lay to his Lordships charge, in the first place, that he fathers on Justin,
that all Orthodoxall believers of his time received; And infinitely less, then
that which you lay to him in the second part of the charge, that he fathers
again on Justin, that such as did not receive that, doctrine were held as
Sadduces or Haereticks; To which I answer in a word, that sure your memory of
things is confused, and so apt to betray you to write things, which are
apparently false, for so this particular is, his Lordship not saying one word
to this purpose in this paragraph.

Lordship mentions from Irenaeus in this matter.

Lordship says, that he sets down the doctrine of the Chiliasts directly for
a tradition, and relates the very words that Christ used, when he taught this.
And to those words of his Lordship's, I shall make bold to add the words of
Irenaeus on which they seem to be grounded: P. 497.
Presbyteri qui Johannem viderunt, meminerunt audisse se ab eo. and haec Papias
Johannis auditor, Polycarpi contubernalis vetus homo, testata reliquit. The
Presbyters that saw John, remember that they heard this of him: and Papias,
Saint John's Auditor, that dwelt with Polycarpus, P. 498.
an ancient man, left these things testified. This surely sounds somewhat
toward a testimony of Apostolic Tradition, and if it be capable of an answer
reconcilable with your doctrine of Tradition, may yet certainly be
acknowledged a difficulty worth your taking notice of. And yet you that were so
large on that of Justin to little purpose, have not vouchsafed to take notice
of this of Irenaeus, but on the other side affirm, that Irenaeus labored very
much, and spent many Chapters in proving of it. From whence, I confess you are
willing to assume, that all at that time were not persuaded of the truth of the
Millenaries fancies; but as that is a strange way of concluding, from his
spending pains and Chapters to prove it, to infer that it was not generally
believed in his age (when it is possible his so large a proving did make all men
then of that opinion, and his proving it positively, and not against any
adversary, though it does not prove he had then no adversary, does much less
prove that he had) so is there not added by you any other, or indeed, any
tittle of answer to what is brought by his Lordship out of Irenaeus.

after against the Millenaries never quoted any for themselves before Dionysius
Alexandrinus, who lived 250 years after Christ: this indeed sounds somewhat
toward concluding, that that was the doctrine of the first age not opposed by
any prime Doctor, and might be worth your pains in answering too, but you
endeavor not that neither, but would make it improbable, that if it were so
general a doctrine, Dionysius should dare to oppose it. This is very ill
arguing against a matter of fact, to ask how could or durst he? there is
nothing done so many years since, but some probability may, by a witty man, be
brought against it; I confess I acknowledge my opinion, that there were in
that age men otherwise minded (as out of Justin it appeared) and his Lordship
says nothing to the contrary out of any other evidences, (no more then we made
it clear he did out of Justin) all that he says is, that Papias had gotten
the Prime Doctors into the belief of it, and that no one of those two first
ages opposed it, that is, wrote or interposed in any considerable manner
against it.

Scripture, and Papias his report from Saint John, it would not yet be very
difficult for a learned man, Dionysius Alexandrinus (when no act of Council
had interposed or bound up that doctrine) in the degree that he thought that
those places of Scripture were misunderstood, and that Papias had abused them,
in the same degree I say, to declare his opinion and the grounds of it, and
never force or strain his own conscience, or incur the blame of heresy by
so doing.

Irenaeus took up just upon the same terms, of Christ's being betwixt 40 and
50 years old, for which he vouched Scripture, Advers. haer. l. 2. c. 39.
as he did for the other, and the authority of omnes seniores (larger then
Presbytery in the other) testantur qui in Asia apud Johannem discipulum Domini
convenerunt; id ipsum tradidisse eis Johannem etc. All the Elders witness it,
that were in Asia with John, that he delivered it to them; and qui alios
Apostolos viderunt, haec eadem ab ipsis audierunt, and testantur de ejusmodi
relatione, they that saw the other Apostles, heard the same of them, and bear
witness of such a relation. This is as high an expression of Apostolical
Tradition (if we will believe Irenaeus) as universally testified to be so, as
any could be thought to be. And yet sure you would not think it a sin
against Conscience, or obnoxious to the censure of Heresy for any man of meaner
parts and authority then Dionysius Alexandrinus to have opposed this phansy,
and professed his opinion to the contrary; infallible Church does glory of, that
no man must oppose any the meanest assertion or opinion of the Doctors of the
Church, (though not at all defied) but presently he must be an Heretic; at
least divinity was not turned into such an art, that it must receive no grouth,
or sensible change, but all go on in the same tracke, believe (nor understand)
no more in Scripture, then the present Church understands, and so in effect
have all their skill in tongues and fathers, and even their judicative faculty
as so many unprofitable burdens upon them, that must not be made use of to the
discovery of an error, to the helping of the world to more light, reforming
any thing that is amiss in it.

Christianity, was not so ancient as those purer days, wherein life was as
censurable, as now false opinions, (I mean such as though supposed false, are
yet perfectly extrinsecall to the anology of faith) wherein (...) and (...),
impiety and piety, divided the Church into erroneous and true members, and
teaching of opinions not before embraced (so it were not with pride, or judging
of others) could be well enough endured. And so (according to the old rule of
distingue tempora) do but consider how distant those times are from these
amongst you on one side, and your opposite extreme (that run from you so
far, till they meet you again at the Antipodes) on the other, and you will
give Dionysius Alexandrinus leave to dare oppose that doctrine of the
Chiliasts, though it had (more generally then it did) prevailed amongst them.

that it is probable Saint Dionysius the Areopagite opposed it] I wonder one
that asserts an infallible Church should deal so mightily in probabilities,
just as if a profound Geometer should use but Topicall arguments. Now to see
how you prove this probability, It Is proved by the works now extant bearing
his name.

What works those are, and how improbable to be his, I could give you a large
account by some hints which I remember Photius in his (...) helped me to, but I
shall satisfy my self only with answering your argument out of Philoponus,
briefly Epistle of Dionysius to Polycarpus, in which you know, or may know,
there is no word of the Chiliasts, and then that will be a very aliene
testimony, and very unable to countenance the bulk of those books under
Dionysius his name; which may all be spurious, (and in them the testimonies
against the Chiliasts) though that letter should be canonical; and now see, I
pray, what your probability is come to.

Quartodecimani, I will not divine how it came in here, but am sure it has no
right to be taken notice of by me; his Lordship having not said one word of
them, nor of any friend of theirs, whose interests lie common with them; and
therefore shall I return no word to that part of your discourse, till you show
how I am obliged to it.

Lordship says out of Salvian you confess to be true, but see not what it
makes against Tradition; If you be not modest Lordship proves by this, that the
Church that suffers Salvian to be a member of it while he refuses to pass
sentence of condemnation upon Arrians (after they were condemned by a Council)
either differs much from your Church (that will condemn any man for an
Heretic, that shall profess not to condemn all Protestants) or else must
suppose and admit the plea for Salvian, that he was so earnest against ill men,
that for aggravating of their crime he lessens that of Heretics. And then if
it may be accepted in one Fathers behalf, that he could speak hyperbolically,
or passionately, why may it not be admitted in another, that one of those, or
some other collateral consideration might have influence on any speech that
should be cited from them, and then the authority of fathers will cease to be
infallible.

tradition and authority of fathers, (which before I gave warning of) that they
are not designed, or fitted to the taking away all authority from them, to make
them vile or mean to any, but only to reduce them in ordinem to prove them
not infallible: the Topicke a testimonio humano, is but a Topicke still, and
though sometimes being heightened with circumstances (of which it is capable)
it is a very convincing Topicke, yet is not for all this a demonstration; and
so there is a difficulty which may exercise you in stead of scoffing of his
Lordship in the close of the Chapter.

To the 26 Section Chap. 16.
The Enquirer seems to be troubled not a little, because we will not say with
him, that men may be saved in a false religion, or because we do not think
our religion false, or any other religion true besides our own; and in the
same vein Chillingworth his Commentatour runs very fluently, and upon this
ill sounding string is harping continually. Yet for all this harping, it will
not be easily understood what offense against Charity it can be for us to
judge, either that Christianity alone is the saving religion, or that our
religion is the only true Christianity. For say we should be deceived in
making this judgment, yet this same at the most can be but a want in our
selves of right understanding, and not any breach of charity toward others, or
any matter of exclamation, as some frivolous men of late have made it.
Wherefore, if we will state the question rightly, we are not to enquire whether
we want charity in holding that none but Catholics and true Christians can be
saved, or in our holding that we only are of that sort; or again, whether our
adversaries for their accusing us, want not wit and charity together, or at
least one of them; but the question between us ought to be, whether there be
more saving religions then one? or whether ours be not that one? and this is
the old controversy in Bellarmine and others, and may be disputed without any
anger, or without disguising, or multiplying of controversies on set purpose,
done by these Novellists, as it seems, for making more business then needed,
or causing more distaste and alienation then was before.

The Enquirer is much displeased with us for damning, as he calls it, all that
are not of the Church of Rome. But for pacifying of his angry spirit, I demand
of any for him, what sin he thinks it in us to judge that all who die out of
the Church of God, die in an evil state; or what other, to think that our
Catholic Church, which he diminitively calls the Church of Rome, is the only
Church of God. Let him satisfy me in this, and I will easily satisfy him in
the other. In the mean time we are not nice to declare, That there is but one
saving Religion. That there is but one true Christianity, and that one is the
saving religion. That there is but one Catholic Church, and that this one
Church is, by the institution of Christ, and according to the consent of
antiquity, to be governed by the Sea Apostolic, and by the Successor of
Saint Peter, as chief Pastor and President of the rest. Now what hurt is
there in all this, or what want of Christian charity? It is not uncharitable to
say that some offenders shall be damned, and if any, then why not those who are
truly and really Sestaries and men obstinate, for it is like that they deserve
it as well as any. There wanted not one of this Enquirers confraternity, who
fancied sometimes to himself, that all the damnation that was to fall upon the
wicked, was an annihilation of them and extinction, and not a perpetuity of
torments; which conceit is so charitable, that it exceeds the charity even of
God himself, and controules his revelations made to the contrary in the Holy
Scripture, and condemns them as guilty of too much rigor and severity, and
therefore no marvel though we poor mortals cannot escape their censure.

But now, lest any man should think our doctrine to be harsh and rigorous, he
may please to be informed, that we do not hold every man for a Pagan and an
Infidel who embraces Paganism, but only so many of them as be guilty of their
error through affected, or culpable ignorance; which defect though it be a
formal ignorance of the truth, yet it is a virtuall knowledge of their error,
and an interpretative rejection of the truth, and also a resistance to God and
his divine veracity, manifested in his revelations; and therefore all these,
whether Pagans os Heretics, be heinous offenders, and (...), that is to say,
judged and condemned by their own consciences, of which doctrine it seems
both this Enquirer, and after him his second Master Chillingworth, were
ignorant, by their insinuating that no man is an Heretic, or selfe-condemned,
but only such as adhere to a doctrine which he formally knows to be
erroneous, that is to say, only such as do that which is impossible to be
done; which conclusion is a covert affirmation that there be no Heretics at
all, nor can be any; and so all is safe, whether sound or no.

In like manner we do not hold to be an Heretic, or to be out of the
Catholic Church every one who embraces an heresy, but such a number of them
only as do it with an obstinate mind, and without preparation to be reformed,
or to hearken unto reason when it is told them. By which doctrine it appears,
that we are not so strict as we may seem, nor yet so large as some would have
us. For on the one side, we do not maintain that Heretics can be saved, or
that heresy is not a deadly or damnable sin, as some Socinians and other
Libertines would have us think; And on the other side, we dilate the spaces of
the Church Catholic farther then every body conceives we do, and by that
means comprehend within it many that in the eye of the world, seem aliens
unto it; so that our charity is not irregular in judging Heretics to be in
good state, but it is rather in concluding that very many are not Heretics
really and interiourly, though outwardly they seem to be. And thus you see we
do not cry all men down to hell, not yet any more then we are compelled to
do by the doctrine delivered to us about that point in Holy Scripture.

After this damning and firing men in the other world, of which the Enquirer
has wrongfully accused us, he proceeds to blame us for sending Heretics to
the fire in this, and therefore says that he beleives that throughout
antiquity we shall not find the putting to death of any (for religion) but
only of such as began to kill first.

This provocation to antiquity, howsoever the matter be, can be of no force,
unless antiquity did condemn that practice as unlawful, because antiquity
did not all it might do, but left diverse things for posterity to add as it
should see expedient.

Besides forasmuch as concerns punishment of impious men and innovatours both
by death and other ways, if the Author had looked better into antiquity, he
could not but have believed otherwise, as our Authors do show at large; for
it is clear that amongst the Jews in was the practice to punish impious
people very severely, and all such as with new doctrines sought to infect
others, punishing according to the prescript of Moses law, some with death,
other some by other temporal punishments.

The Canon law also and the Imperial decree the same, to all which the
practice of the Church accords; and lastly, reason her self, and the common
rules of equity and justice do permit, yea and prescribe the same: and these
suffrages are so powerful and prevailing, as they suffice, not only for the
justification of the Churches present practice, but also for the condemnation
of high presumption and arrogance of all who should be so hardy as to impugn
or question it.

Nevertheless this same practice of infliction of temporal punishments upon
offenders against religion, is not general without any limitation or
restraint, as some may imagine it to be, as if forsooth none of a different
religion from ours could be exempted from them; but contrariwise it admits
exception in many cases, as we are about to declare presently.

Know therefore that wheresoever any Kingdom or Commonwealth is settled in a
just and a peaceable possession of Catholic religion, without any notable
commixture of contrary professions, as for example, in Italy or Spain, at this
present. In this case it is no cruelty or rigor to inflict temporal
punishments upon all such as shall adventure to disturb that settled peace by
introducing thither any new doctrines upon pretense of whatsoever reformation;
and that this may be done stands with so much reason as cannot be probably
contradicted. Neither is this course of severity any defense unnecessary,
forasmuch as vicious and overweening spirits are most efficaciously repressed
and withheld from evil by fear of temporal punishments in this life, because
their chief aim is at temporal contentments in the same, being moved more
with the present, then with those other that are spiritual and to come,
conscience and religion having little influence into what they do. In fine,
they are governed more with sense then reason, with stripes then with
Philosophy, insomuch, that neither the schools of Philosophers, nor the
Temples of God, can work half so much with these worms of the earth, as
temporal tribunals can. Now though the enemy be never so despicable, is he
therefore to be neglected because the meanest Seducer may do mischief, as we
find by the effects of the Tubmen; and again, because the grossest errors,
if they tend to liberty, or be but new, may be persuaded to the multitude, as,
by the successes of Mahomet, it is manifest; and the rather in this case of
ours, because we experience daily, that our people having been once possessed,
that the Religion of the Sea Apostolic, and of their own forefathers was
superstition, they are easily persuaded, that the farther they depart from that
Religion, the more pure and reformed they shall be, and so will be forward to
run blindly on, till they pass all the bounds of Christianity, and reform all
to nothing; for with such bewitched minds as these, every new nonsense will be
more acceptable, and be received sooner, then any old sense, and this is the
effects of those raylings against Rome which they have heard continually out of
the Pulpits now for so many years together, without any intermission.

But, although this course of severity be necessary for the preventing of
disturbances by innovation, yet nevertheless it is not to be extended unto all
that any where amongst us do teach, or profess erroneous doctrines, or
Religions different from our own, but only against corruptors or invaders, that
is to say, such as break in by fraud or violence, and disturb the quiet of the
Church. For, after such time at the invasion is past, and the invaders gone,
and that they are succeeded by another generation, which is not guilty of
making any irruption, but, with whatsoever error they are tainted, it is
contracted by the vice of education from their Parents and other such
instructors, and withal do behave themselves peaceably, I say that against
such as these the Church does not proceed, nor execute the severity of the
Laws in force against Heretics; of this sort be at this day, the descendents
of first Protestants in this Kingdom, whose ancestors that were the invaders
lived about King Edward and Queen Mary. Against these descendents the Church
does not press the Canon Law, though against the former sort it did, and had
just cause given so to do. Conformable to this difference between Protestant
and Protestant, do the Catholics in France and Polonia suffer the
Protestants to live with them, without molestation, and to enjoy the liberties
and Privileges of the Kingdom, as formerly they had done in Austria, Stiria
and Carinthia, till such time at they became seditious, and conspired against
those who gave them freedom.

But now let it be noted and borne in memory, that notwithstanding this gentle
proceedings of Catholics toward the Protestants after so many losses and
injuries fuffer'd from them, the same Protestants being themselves but juniors,
and living by sufferance, fall hotly upon persecution of Catholics
wheresoever they grow to be the stronger side, and that also in most Provinces,
after a very violent, merciless, and desperate manner, slay, imprison, rob,
banish, defame, in fine suffer Catholics in no place where they are
predominant, and this against all right and common equity. Which manner of
proceeding I must tell the Inquirer, is much worse and more unreasonable then
Turkish, for the Turks though aliens, Barbarians and Conquerours, are sensible
of the right the Christians of their conquered Provinces have for the free
exercise of their Religion, and therefore do not go about to restrain them
from it, but let them continue quietly in that right of theirs, and so they do
even to this day, to the great shame of Protestants and Puritans here in these
Kingdoms, may it be spoken without offense, being, as all men see plainly
exceeded in justice and civility by the Turks. Wherefore no marvel that our
Inquirer is forced to confess that Calvin is too blame in this point, and the
Church of England a little, which is a little too much for, adds he, Negare
manifesta non audeo, and excusare immodica non possum. Sure this Inquirer came
with very little indifferency to give his judgment here, when he says, the
Church of England is guilty but a little, I would know of him what is a great
deal, if all that we have suffered from it be but a little. But it is well he
would acknowledge thus much, for it is more then others have done, and more
ingenuity appears in him, then in them, and perhaps he would have said more,
if it might have been well taken, though in confessing this little he
insinuates all. Doubtless, no manner of proceeding can be more unworthy then
for a latter generation to forget from whose Ioynes they came, and to become
harsh and contumelious to their own forefathers children, and persecute them
with all rigor, as if they were enemies and invaders, and aliens, only for
their honorable continuing in that faith which their Ancestors did leave them
and commended to them as chief inheritance in that faith, which hitherto they
which assail it have never been able by any argument to prove it false; nor
yet on the other side, to evict by any unanswerable demonstration that their
own new faith was true. Wherefore since, if any have more right one then
another for the exercise of their Religion in this Kingdom,it is we, and this
right cannot be taken from us by any power under heaven, and again were your
reasons never so good, yet you are not to school us, or to be our Tutors, or to
compel us unto change. Therefore the severity that has been used over us has
no warrant for it, no president or example, nothing wherewith to countenance it
in the sight of the World, or to justify it in the sight of God, but is every
way abominable and foul, such in fine as neither the Christians used to the
Pagans their predecessors, nor Catholics to the descendents of the foremost
and invading Protestants, nor any civil man would offer to another.

If the Religion, says the Inquirer, had always remained the same, it would
not be defended by ways so contrary to those by which it was propagated. But
now what ways are these? he means force and violence, and saying, To the fire
with him, and To he^l with him, for these are the Inquirers own expressions.
To these I add the slanderous and diabolical charges of Chillingworth, who
knew much of the Inquirers mind, although in all things he did not follow his
direction. You profess, says Chillingworth, c. 2.. 101. that it is lawful
for you to use violence and power whenever you can have it for the planting
of your Doctrine, and extirpation of the contrary. Thus he, but because he
cites no Author for this so heinous an accusation, we may justly suspect that
you your selves hold it lawful for you to slander and calumniate for the
defense of your own bad cause, and the overthrowing of the contrary whenever
other means of doing it does fail you, as indeed it falls out continually. The
same heavy charge he in foul terms reiterates, c. 5.. 96. You, says he,
teach plainly you may propagate Religion whenever you have power, by deposing
of Kings, and invasion of Kingdoms, and think when you kill the adversaries of
it you do God good service.

For clearing of us against this malicious charge, I call into the Court Saint
Thomas of Aquine and all his with him in 2.2. q. 10. art. 8. as witnesses
sufficient to justify our cause, and show our innocence, even against the
Devil himself that great calumniator of our Brethren, and to them I add
Acosta in his book De procuranda Indorum salute, and Mariana in his history of
Spain in sundry places, and might add many more sufficient to confute the
Adversary, and make him hateful to every honest heart. Besides though in some
cases we, as other professions also do, make use of penal Laws wherewith to
keep off invaders, and yet not for any interior preservation or defense: In
like sort we seek, by the help of the sword and force of Arms to keep the
Turks out of Christendom, shall we all be blamed for doing so, or shall it be
said therefore, that we defend the Christian Religion by Arms and violence,
and by other means then it was propagated at the first? nothing less, we use
reasons to persuade and plant our faith, we use the like to defend it against
Infidels, Soci^ians, and all other Sects, how then is our Religion planted,
propagated, or defended by violence? It is one thing to be fenced exteriorly
and a far off with Statutes of temporal severity against invaders, which
course is a thing expedient and avowed both by us and all, and it is another
thing to defend it interiorly by the same means, that is to say, to justify
the right truth of Religion by them, and this we disavow, neither do we
practice it any where, as it is most manifest.

The Inquirer was very provident when he desired that, in these accusations of
violence, no recrimination should be used, for he must needs see there was more
matter returnable, then either could be grateful, or they could justify, yet
since he will needs talk of killing, and cast the blame upon our side, he must
be content if we make some reflection upon the misdemeanors of the Adversary,
as well as upon our own innocence. I desire therefore, the intelligent reader
to consider, whether in this last age, the Catholics have put to death more
Ministers or half so many, as the Protestants of England have done Priests, who
it is well known they have slain and butchered with great barbarism and
immanity.

But setting aside these heavy crimes of blood deliberately shed, who is it
have afflicted others more in their Estates and Fortunes, they, or we? and for
proof of this, we will offer fair, let them restore all they have taken with a
strong hand from us in livelyhoods, both spiritual and temporal in all the
Provinces of Europe, and we will restore all we have taken from them, and in
that go no farther then this Seventeenth age which is now passing, be it in
this Kingdom, or in those about it. It is well known that in all those
Provinces, where both Religions are professed and live intermingled, none be on
the suffering hand but we, none persecutes but they; and it is we who are the
Aborigines, as I may so term us, and thereby have at much right for all
indemnity as our Ancestors could divolve upon us. Master Pym in the Parliament
House.
We are not insensible of the wrong we suffer daily by having it printed and
pronounced in public Assemblies, on purpose to countenance injuries, and to
excite against us the ignorant multitude, that our religion it destructive of
all others, and that amongst us it is a maine principle or maxim, that all
other are to be invaded and destroyed by us, and this it affirmed confidently,
though against all probability and experience. It cannot indeed be denied but
truth is destructive of falsehood by the own power, as light is of darkness,
and one contrary of another, but for external coaction or violence, we leave
that to the Accusers, and do not own it.

By this it is not hard to make a judgment who have been the encroachers, and
who have propogated and maintained themselves by violence, you, or we? And who
are the destructive party and live by the spoils and oppression of others, let
not those who possess other men's goods cry out of wrongs, or make any brags of
just dealing, for neither of these can come well out of their mouths.

This Enquirer confesses both sides are in fault, but we in more, and for this
assertion of his brings in some light sophistry, because forsooth Protestants
hold that they may err, but we maintain we cannot, and so will be sure never
to mend. That Protestants may err is granted him, and needs no other probation
then experience, whereby we find thy have filled all this Kingdom with
dissentions, and these dissentions with civil wars, so that by this that you
have erred, we know you may. But so frequent possibility of erring does not
extenuate but aggravate your crime. For if you may err so foulely, how dare
you undertake to tutour others? how prescribe Laws? with what face Persecute?
If your rule be so weak as it cannot contain you all in one body, but lets you
disperse into multitude of Sects, and fall in pieces as now you do; why do
you not forsake it and seek a better for it, or else have none at all; if you
can find out a surer, why do you not learn wit by experience, but wallow on
still in the same mire? If this Enquirer speak so ill for his Clients, we will
not entertain him for our Advocate. The Protestants side sets down for a rule
of religion every ones private judgment in the interpretation of Scripture, and
so does Master Chillingworth the disciple of Volkelius. We do all that, yet we
do not please them; nay more, we must be punished by them for the result; what
is this but to bid us do a thing, and then punish us for doing it? Is not this
extreme perversity? certainly if the rule they give be a sufficient warrant
for their receding from the faith of their Ancestors, and for their breaking
off from the Church, and standing in defiance of her, then doubtless much more
may it warrant us to continue on and to keep off from any new doctrines, either
of the Protestants, or any other Innovatours whatsoever, and sure this is great
reason and cannot be gainsayed.

Besides if we were to yield, to whom were it to be done? There is a world of
distracted Sectaries now in this Kingdom, all sprung from the same roll, or
from the rule of faith which it common to you all, of which one sort imagines
there is no Papacy, and these were the first ringleaders of all the rout;
another, that there is no Episcopacy; a third, that there is no Clergy, but
that Lay Elders is all in all, and must rule the roast; a fourth, that there is
no Church nor Church Government at all, but that the Church is like a School
of Philosophers, where every man may believe and do what he pleases without
being accountable to another, or any obligation of conformity; and peradventure
the Inquirer was one of this number together with his confederate M.
Chillingworth; a fifth sort that there is no Trinity; a sixth that there is no
Sacrament, or at least none necessary, or effectual. Is it not fit think you
that these divided Christians should come and write Laws to others, or punish
any man for nonconformity? nothing more improbable. It is a Comedy to see D.
Featly a Protestant, and Page a Puritan make Cat^logues of Heretics, and when
they have done, can find no way whereby to exempt themselves, nor give a
reason why they themselves should not be of the number, as much Sectaries as
any other of the Catalogue.

The Inquirer charges us that because we pretend to be infallible we have less
reason to prescribe to others; but on the contrary, me thinks we should have
more, for, as he who is really infallible is fittest to guide and govern
others, so he that thinks himself to be, is at least in his own judgment
more fit than he that does not. He adds that this pretense of infallibility
makes us sure never to mend, or as his Scholar Chillingworth speaks, makes
us incorrigible. True if it were a mere pretended one, but that is not yet
proved, either by him, or any, although he say here in this 28. Section, he
undertakes to give reasons why the Church of Rome is fallible. But, if, on the
other side, it be a reality, and that the Inquirers reasons are but pretended,
then surely will not this infallibility keep us from mending, but contrariwise
from erring or having any thing to mend, or, which is all one, from any errors
to correct. And thus we see that our Religion is maintained by the self same
arts that bred it, that is to say, not by force, or violence, but by reason,
and revelation, and spiritual industries, contrary to the surmises of this
Inquirer.

C. 16. Answ: to Chap 16.
Your doctrine of damning all that are out of the Church of Rome, you have
enlarged much above the occasion that invited you to it, for all that his
Lordship had said on that theme was only this, that your certain and
undoubted damning of all out of the Church of Rome, averseth him from it. Which
if it be true, you cannot blame him; (for sure they that hear the punishment
of judging, Mat. 7. [ being judged of the Lord] will have little love to that
piece of sensuality, (or consequently to the religion that requires them to
run upon this danger.) And that the charge is true of you, you do at first
acknowledge, by laboring to prove that there is no uncharitableness in it.
Secondly, that it is necessary for you to maintain, or that otherwise you must
fall into some great absurdity, particularly this, that there is any Church but
that which is governed by the Sea Apostolic; which is a rare petitio
principii again, and saves us the pains of saying one word more in defense of
the truth and justice of those true words of his Lordship.

For indeed that enclosure of the Church Christianity, and Salvation, to those
that are under the Roman submission, is the uncharitableness that you are
charged of. The envy of which it seems (after all your confidence) you are
willing to remove from you, and therefore add an handsome lenitive, to keep
any from thinking that your doctrine is rigorous or harsh. And truly if you
might be taken at your word, he were very unkind that would require more
charity of you then you yield even to Pagans themselves, whom you will not hold
Pagans, unless they be guilty of their error through affected or culpable
ignorance; and then sure you will be as good to us, (that would be a little
above Pagans) and till you can prove us to be guilty of error, and that
through affected or culpable ignorance, with an obstinate mind, without
preparation to be reformed, or hearken to reason when it is told us, (which till
your arguments are more convincing, undoubtedly this discourse of yours will
not evidence us to be) we are in full capacity of your charity, and therefore
shall not follow you any further; (lest we provoke you again) in this point.

On occasion of this or the like speech of mine answer, the Apologist in his
review thought fit to add these words at the end of his 16 Chapter: [Three
propositions there are which we maintain; First, that none but true Christians
can be saved. Secondly, none but true Catholics can be saved, for true
Catholics and true Christians be all one. Thirdly, none be true Catholics
but such as live under the obedience of the Sea of Peter, and many do so that
through ignorance do not seem to do. The Gentiles find fault with the first
proposition, diverse Sectaries with the second, and now the Protestants with the
third. All these have been pretended by some or other to be false, but how to
be uncharitable is very hard to be understood.] To all which being only said
not attempted to be proved, I shall only say that I am sorry to see him out of
his good mood so soon, and desire he will not expect we shall be so tame as to
think him charitable that says none of any other See but Saint Peter's can be
saved.
I beseech God to confirm you in this temper, and desire you may be taken at
your word, and that witness may be called of this charity of yours, for sure
there be others of your brethren that have not used to grant so much.

antiquity in this point, because, say you, Antiquity did not all it might, but
left somewhat to posterity to add; yet sure this was a little unlucky that
your additions to antiquity should be of this bloody complexion; Christ's
addition to the Ancients was to love and bless and pray for enemies, not to
retaliate injuries upon any terms, and your (...), your improvement of the
ancient doctrine and practice, is of somewhat a distant making, your Sermon on
the mount (Ebal it seems) to your disciples, is persecuting and massacring of
friends, which never provoked you but by not being entirely of your opinion.

antiquity, and your first proof is from the Jews, whose practice it was to
punish impious people, and such as with new doctrine sought to infect others;
To which I answer, that those against whom those Jewish severities were in
force, were Atheists, and Idolaters, and false Prophets, that would take men
off from the acknowledgment of the one God to Gentilisme, which is sure
somewhat a distant state from that of Protestants at this day.

Canon, and your third from the Imperial law, of which seeing you give us no
taste in either, and yet because some men may have appetite to see what grounds
you had for such affirmation, I conceived it a probable course to know your
mind by looking into Bellarmine your great Champion; from the view of whole
Collections, l. 3. de laicis. c. 21. this will be the result.

Canon law, the authorities are not fetched from the ancient Canons of any of
the first or general Councels, but only c. ad abolendam; cap. excommunicamus.
ext. de haeret. and cap. super eo, de haeret. in 6. (all which is no more then
if you had cited it from your Popes (who must not look to be so authentical
in this case) and yet will hardly come home to the burning of your fellow
Christians, only because they will not submit to the Pope of Rome, the only
thing for which we were even now to be damned) and from the Council of
Constance; which besides that it is of a short standing about 200 years ago is
made no Faith to be kept with Heretiques] the grossness of which position may
make it reasonable to expect this bloody doctrine from them, but withal to
deprive it of all authority with others.

Imperial law, these places he produces; First, L. Manichaeos, cod. de haeret.
and to this I answer, that that law makes not heresy capital, but at the
utmost makes it capable of an action after death, such is the action of infamy,
etc. and so they that have died Heretics, may for the warning of others be
proceeded against, (as you know Traitors after death are infamous, i. e. their
children deprived of their honor, though the Father dyed unpunished, because
undiscerned) but that comes not home to our present purpose of burning or
killing. Then L. Arriani, Cod. eodem. where indeed death was the punishment of
the Manichees, who you know were a high rank of Heretics, making two
principles (which is in effect two Gods) the good and the evil, God and the
Devil. But for others, viz. Arians and Macedonians, though those were
Heretics, condemned by the first general Councels, and are expressly there
named, there is yet no such punishment appointed them; and Lastly, L. quicunque
cod. eodem. in which says Bellarmine, jubentur occidi omnes qui prava docere
tentant, all are commanded to be put to death who attempt to teach wicked
things. But you must observe that that law being against the Eutychians, many
penalties are there assigned to the several degrees of the guilt of that
heresy; poena exilii, si Episcopos and Sacerdotes constituerint, scripta eorum
nemo habeat sub poena deportationis perpetuae, nemo eos audiat sub poena 10
librarum auri, ultimo supplicio coerceantur qui illicita docere tentaverint.
Banishment if they constituted Bishops or Priests, perpetual banishment upon
having any of their books, 10 pounds or libres of gold to any that heard them,
and capital punishment to those that attempt to teach unlawful things. Which
last clause (that cited by Bellarmine, and by him extended to all false
doctrine) belongs peculiarly to the Eutychians, for of them only before the
discourse was; and beside the rule is, odiosa restringenda, laws of
punishments, etc. must always be taken in the most restrained sense; and so
the utmost that any of these extends to, is only in these two heresies of
Manichaeisme and Eutychianisme, and that in case of teaching the contrary to
law, and abusing the people, and that after fair warning and prohibition; and
all this, if it were granted (as truly I know no obligation that lies on all
Christians to think themselves regulated by the laws of the Emperors) would
amount to very little against Protestants, who may well pass for as moderate
Heretics, as Arians and Macedonians, who were not punished with death.

Donatists (though Bellarmine mentions it not ( L. Si quis rebaptizare C. ne
sanctum baptisma iteretur; but this was not again for opinion, but only in
taking upon them to rebaptize any, and peculiarly on the Circumcellions, which
were a bloody kind of people, and their vileness of this nature, guilt enough
to own that severity: whereas on the other side we find that Idacius and
Ithacius were condemned by the Bishops of France for being authors of punishing
some Pricillianists with the sword; and in the East a whole Synod was condemned
for consenting to the burning of Begomyle; and so much for your authorities, or
more whenever you please to produce them. From whence will appear the wide
distance of your practices in these and other Kingdoms from that, that the
most Popish Canons or Imperial Constitutions were bloody enough to determine;
there neither Arians, nor Macedonians, but that prodigy of Manichaisme, and the
Eutychians teaching, and that (as I conceive by prava and illicita) things
contrary not only to wholesome doctrine, but to the laws of the Empire; This I
say, opinions, I cannnot imagine why the Arians and Macedonians should fare so
much better then the Eutychians, nay why Apostates should only be fined, and
Jews only under some restraints (as from Polygamy) and payments, and not put
to death, save only in case of keeping there Purim (which was for the great
contumely done to Christ in that feast, the hanging Haman in effigy, and
Christ next to him) and I say, only Eutychians put to death, unless there
were somewhat else in it beside their doctrine. And then if you will make the
comparison to go no farther, then our selves, what sholes of poor persons
(far enough from the docere illicita and prava, teaching illegal things,
even from teaching at all) were in Queen Mary's days (...), whole hecatombes
at once offered up to your fury.

Geneva, Servetus occidendus est, ne apud exteros Ecclesiae nostrae male
audiant; That Servetus was to be burnt that their Churches might not hear ill
abroad, i. e. that the Papists might not be scandalized; which if it were the
consideration that moved in that matter, then have you more blood lying at your
door, then what you have spilt, even that which in care and caution, those
whom you recriminate, shed by your example, and that you might not be
scandalized at their mercy and lenity.

Erasmus among you, and Castellio among us were about the beginning of the
reformation very bitter against such dealing: the former, you may see his notes
upon Saint Jer. Ep. ad Laet. t. 1. p. 39. where he can hardly allow them the
name of Christians that fight for religion (kill for religion) though against
the Turk, as if war were wont to make Christians, cum ipsi Turcam in pectore
geramus, when the very using of this violence is a prime piece of Turcisme. The
latter wrote a book on purpose against that practice; I wish the whole
Christian world of both parties would suffer themselves to be represented by a
couple of such meek and honest proxies; be you pleased to convert as many as
you can to the doctrine of neither kiling nor damning, and I will promise you
to do the like, and that will be better employment for us then this debate.

examples are the most popular arguments, I will help you to one of this
nature, and leave you to apply it; Nero went through Greece a contending in the
Musica certamina with all that pretended to that skill, if he had the better of
it he was crowned, if not, he took care that they that had the better of him
were put to death. The issue of it was, that they that had skill did on purpose
play as ill as they could; he conquered wherever he came, was crowned when he
was there, and when he was gone, was counted a madman.

Canon law I find, that the elder Canons or decrees of Gratian as they never
mention the putting Heretics to death; so in many passages out of Saint
Austin they do dissuade the Emperor from it, and only mention some other
mulcts and restraints for them. The new Canons or the Decretals of your Popes
are generally for delivering to the secular arm, but name not poenam mortis
neither; but what that signifies the Christian world now knows well enough;
only one piece of hypocrisy I heard of (and by request or proposal of
Spalatensis. L. 6. c. 5. Sect. 171. do guess the truth of the report) in your
proceedings in this matter; your Spiritual Courts when they so deliver up, are
wont to interpose [ ita tamen ut non admittant poenam mortis (or to that
purpose) but so that they proceed not to death, when yet they knew well enough
that that is the meaning of your delivering. Nay the Canons that require that
the secular hand must proceed with all rigor against Heretics thus delivered
to them, will soon excommunicate any that do not thus understand their
meaning.

ab authoritate, you have another drawn, as you say, from Reason, and the
common rules of equity and justice, (but add not one word to prove what you
say so very improbably, but only condemn all of high presumption) one would
think you an enchanted Knight that when you have never a weapon in your hand,
nor second near you, (but only the names of so many men, and arms to call
for) it should yet pass for arrogance, presumption, and hardynesse in any to
combat with you.



Kingdom is in a peaceable possession of Catholic religion, there it is no
cruelty to inflict these punishments on the Teachers of new doctrines. And for
this you say there is reason, which cannot probably be contradicted, but are so
very uncourteous and contemptuous to us, as not to think us worthy to partake
of the least syllable of such reason, unless that must go for one, that
wicked men aim at temporal contents, and are consequently withheld by
temporal punishments, which shall be acknowledged a reason, when difference in
opinion appears to be an impiety of so much design, and all whom you call
Heretics, are by you proved to be worms of the earth, deep worldly
designers also.

For truly I confess, to all those things which are committed by any, who may
justly be presumed to commit them against conscience, for some worldly
interest, I should give my willing suffrage that some temporal bitterness
should be opportioned; that so seeing their Error, and finding temporal pains
in stead of temporal advantages to be their portion, they may be disciplined
to better and more honest thoughts; nay if the doctrines tend to liberty, I
mean either as Mahomets did to all kind of voluptuous living, or that other
liberty (that some of your friends and some others that call themselves
reformed, but in my opinion are very far from it, have been guilty of) the
shaking off the yoke of civil obedience to the Magistrate set over them by
God, it is then lawful to coerce such innovators, if the prudence of the State
shall think fit. But difference in opinion (though it be in a Kingdom never
so peaceably possessed of the Catholic Religion) if it tend not to any of these
dangers, nor be convincible of those impieties and designs, will by no reason
or consequence be involved in that number.

that this severity must not be extended to all that any where teach or
profess erroneous doctrines; but upon better consideration of your following
words, it is clear that your restraint or exception looks another way, viz.
that against those that are not the first invaders, but another generation
succeeding them, whose error is contracted by the vice of education, etc. the
Church does not execute the severity of the laws. In which words, though we of
this, and all other Protestant Kingdoms at this day have so far our parts,
as that, if it were never so much in your power, you ought upon these grounds
not to hurt us, because we are the progeny, and not the first invaders; yet
seeing all the restraint is for the execution only of the severity of the
laws, and those laws are supposed by you to be in force against Heretics,
and so against us, whom you call by that name; we have great reason to think,
there is little kindness in this present restraint of yours.

dilemma; either you are invaders, (and seeing beginnings are always weakest,
all that are not able to resist or defend themselves, shall go for invaders)
and then you have no title to mercy by this tenure; or else you offspring and
progeny of them (and so possibly able to resist) and then you shall have mercy;
If we stand on these terms with you, and your order for restraint of severity
hold no longer then our strength to resist you, then we shall scarce
acknowledge the obligation, but think our enemies on the other extreme as
kind as you; for both of you are good at being merciful, when you are on the
weaker party, but both very tyrannical when you begin to be strong.

corrupter and invader) or two in an age, I might then have reason to think I
might have mistaken your meaning, but certainly you have been as cruel on the
cubs, as ever you were on the old foxes, and made as little scruple to put many
thousands to death in one night (whom you could not think to be all leaders in
factions, or invaders) (as the stories of France will testify, and the very
words of the bull of Urban the eighth, to encourage the King of France, to root
out the quadrupedes in Gallia stabulantes, etc. as any one John Husse alone by
himself at another time. And that you will have this latitude to let loose
your restraint again, when time serves, it may seem probable by what you add
of Austria, Stiria, and Carinthia, whose privileges it seems lasted no longer
then you thought fit; For as soon as you thought it seasonable, they were
presently pronounced seditious and conspiratours, and so put to the sword;
France and Poland, I wish the names of Massacres had never been heard in
either of them, or at least that the Pictures of them with words of papal
approbation, were not to be seen at Rome to testify what is the cause of your
present kindness, ( viz. the difficulty of the work) that the Protestants
there at this time are not molested.

Protestants, seeing it is very universal (suffer Catholics in no place) and
very sharp, (that they persecute Catholics wheresoever they are stronger,
after a very violent, mercylesse, desperate manner, slay, imprison, rob,
banish, defame, etc.) I must beseech you either to prove it against this your
Country, or else to make it reparations, and remember when time serves, that
when Protestants are thought to persecute you, then presently it is a proceeding
much worse and more unreasonable then the Turkish.

Protestants has for many years surmounted that of Papists in this Kingdom;
and yet I shall be confident you will be posed to produce the example of any
one since Queen Mary's days that in this Kingdom was put to death merely for
religion, without being guilty of something else, which by the known laws of
the Realm is liable to the punishment of treason. And for the other penal
laws in this Kingdom, which are not Capital, but pecuniary mulcts, etc. I
shall say that it is somewhat hard, that we must be thought worthy of all those
bitter invectives, which you yet farther add, because I conceive there was
never any Kingdom, that owned any religion, but there was some difference made
betwixt that, and all other, in respect of temporal privileges, and favors,
and immunities, and any such difference reaches near as high, and goes as
deep as pecuniary mulcts. And beside it is not irrational to say, that the
inflicting such mulcts may very probably tend to the quiet, and so to the
advantage rather, then to the oppression of such sufferers; it being not
without example that the suspicions of the people, and jealousies that the
established religion shall be discountenanced, (having no deeper ground then an
imagination that the Prince may have inclined to give toleration to the other
party, or but immunity from these punishments) has brought such odium upon the
present government, and sharpness on those thus thought to be favored, that
in comparison with these ill accidents, a few pecuniary mulcts might pass for
a privilege, as the letting of blood is to be esteemed by those who are
entering into a plurisie for want of it.

from his Lordship's acknowledgment, that the Church of England is a little too
blame in this point, conclude, that in confessing this he insinuates all. This
it is to deal with men who cannot imagine it possible, that a man's words and
thoughts should be of the same latitude. Should I by the same Logic conclude,
that you, by confessing that all invaders for Religion must be put to death,
do intimate, that all kind of Protestants must be executed, I hope you would
say you had wrong done you. And yet to tell you truth, the subtlety of your
next distinction would give any man that observed it, great temptation so to
conclude of you. For after your citation of S. Th. of Aquine, and the
Schoolmen, you are pleased to communicate to us a notable Mystery, [that you
do use reasons to persuade, and plant your faith, (and truly the telling us
you cannot err, and upon that bottom building all your most irrational
conclusions, is no special exercise of the reasonable faculty) and only fence
it exteriourly, and afar off, with statutes of temporal severity against
invaders, which, say you, is another thing from defending it interiourly by
that means, i. e. from justifying the right and truth of religion by them.

arms, because your swords do only force men to be of your minds, do not
give them any reasons why they should. And truly I have not heard any man say,
that your arms did fence religion interiourly, (being the unaptest thing in
the world, to justify the right, and truth of religion; and therefore you need
not disavow that so providently) the great Turk could send a letter to your
Pope, and answer and confute his bull of inciting the Princes of Christendom
to take up arms against him, for crucifying their god, and tell him, that as
'twas a great falsity to charge on him what was proper to the Jews, the
crucifying of Christ, (the Turk being descended from the Trojans, and
therefore desiring the Popes aid against the Grecians, to avenge their murder
of the Trojan Hector, a kind of god of theirs) so if the Pope were truly a
worshipper of Christ, he would never invade any nation upon quarrel of
religion; so far is this kind of fighting (in the knowledge of all, even of
Turks themselves) from justifying of the truth, that if is a very great
argument of the falsenesse of any sect of Christian religion; a plain
demonstration that they do not obey the Christ whom they worship.

the sword as an exterior means of propagating your religion, is all that is
laid to your charge, and that it seems you are content to yield us. Though,
within a page or two more, you have forgotten your self again, and say, that
for public coaction or violence you do not own it. I wish you did not.

Valens his time; It was Themistius, who before his death turned from
Aristotelian to Christian, but I conceive was not yet converted, when this
story is related of him. Valens in Antioch, says the Hist. Trip. l. 8. ex
Zozomen.
Historian, had vehemently persecuted the Christians that were not of his
opinion, had not a book of Themistius the Philosopher recalled him, in which
he persuaded him, that he ought not to be cruel to any Propter discordiam
Ecclosiasticorum dogmatum.
for a difference of Ecclesiastical opinions, seeing among the Pagans
themselves there were more than 300 sects differing all from one another; And
perhaps this might be wore Forte hoc deo gratum magis esset.
acceptable (at least more pardonable) before God, because God is not easily
known, and is glorified in different manners, on purpose that every man may
Magis timeat, i. e. be more humble, as fear by Saint Paul is opposed to
high-mindednesse, and fear and trembling is by the Greek fathers rendered
humility.
fear the more, the more he wants of the integrity and perfection of that
knowledge of him, either how he is, or how qualified, or how great he is. By
the reasons of Themistius, says he, mitior factus est Imperator, the Emperor
became more mild. It may not be unfit for your friends to consider the example,
and do so too.

Papists in Europe, you will restore what you have taken from us, it is a good
safe boast; you know that it is not in any replyers power to strike the
bargain. Yet, if all the pecuniary mulcts under the reign of the three last
Princes in this Kingdom be price enough to ransom and fetch back the blood
shed by you in Queen Mary's days, I doubt not but I shall be as forward as
you to accept that challenge.

Kingdoms strong presumptions have been thought sufficient to make liable to
punishment. In the Canon law the proving of nudus cum nuda, that such a man and
woman were taken naked together, is presumption enough to bring the punishment
of adultery on any. And when our Queen had run so many dangers by Priests,
Capital laws were made, that no such should come into the Kingdom, or if
they did they should be presumed traitorously disposed, and punished
accordingly; and this Statute thus legally made, conveyed to the knowledge of
all such, it has been a very rational presumption against any that should be
so found; Though as it is possible that nudus cum nuda may be no adulterer, so
such a Priest may have no traitorous purpose. And yet if you mark it, (unless
since these times of troubles) very few of you have suffered among us by this
Statute.

Church fallible, and profess to discharge his Lordship from being your
Advocate, if he speak so ill for his Client. This you might have done long
since, and unless your favor may be had upon some other terms then
undertaking the Infallibility of mere creatures, we must all be content to be
discarded by you.

punish you for the result of what we prescribe you. If your best use of reason
in the interpretation of Scripture (and not any prejudice, or passion, or fault
of yours) charity enough to cover in each other, a multitude of errors.

Sects in this Kingdom, I shall not go about to examine, but only tell you,
that your infallibility has been liable to such misadventures also, and had
not the charm or skill of keeping all within its circle; if it had, there
would then at this time have been no body to dispute against you.

Lordship, that he charges you, that because you pretend to be infallible, you
have less reason to prescribe to others; whereas his Lordship charges no such
thing upon you, but only says, that she that confesses she may err, is not
so chargeable with any fault, as they that pretend they cannot; which is quite
another matter.

infallibility is not yet proved to be only pretended, and yet you have no
other ground of saying so, but because you say it is not, (though all his
Lordship's arguments for so may Sections have driven all to that conclusion,
and never an one of them is yet answered by you) it will be a most unreasonable
thing (and a sound petitio principii again) to affirm without any one word of
proof, that that infallibility is a reality, and so will not keep mending,
whereas nothing can keep you from mending, if this do not; this contemning of
arguments against you, and affirming magisterially without any.

To the 29 Section, Chap. 17.
This opinion, says he, of damning so many, and this custom of burning so
many, this breeding up of those who know nothing else in any point of religion,
yet to be in readiness to cry, To the fire with him, To hell with him. All
these be empty words, as we have showed before. As for our breeding up of men,
I think we do it as well as any of our neighbors do; and by the way, must
tell you that we do not take children from their parents only to breed them
up in our religion; we do not offer that hard measure either to Turks or
Jews, but hold it an act flatly against the law of nature, an impious
violation of Parents right, which ought to be held sacred; and lastly, away of
propagation of religions wholly violent and Unchristian, so far are we from
propagating our religion by force; and if all others with whom we have to do,
had been of that mind, it had been better with them; for God has not blessed
that way, forasmuch as by sad experience we have found, that none have proved
greater scourges to their King and Country, then such as have had that sort of
breeding given them, and contrary to their parents will, been violently
seduced in their youth; and this is no secret, but known to all the three
Kingdoms to their cost. But enough of this, for it is a distasteful business.

C. 17. Answ. to C. 17.
these are empty words as you have formerly showed (and I fear we have showed
they are not, but should be very glad to be mistaken, and can truly say, that I
wish vehemently that your judgment were right in this matter) But upon occasion
of his Lordship's mention of [ your breeding up those that know nothing else in
religion, To cry to the fire, to hell with him] you are pleased to take
occasion of some liberty, in showing what good breeding you bestow upon men in
your Church, and so divert to a complaint against those that take children from
their parents, etc. and are somewhat passionate and tragical on that subject;
but this being nothing to his Lordship's words or argument, I desire to see
that better answered by you, before I will enter any new combat about so
extrinsecall an impertinency. And so enough of this also, for what ever it is,
it is nothing to the matter of present handling.

To the 30 Section Chap 18.
If it were granted, says the Enquirer, that because it agrees not with the
goodness of God to let me want a guide infallible, and that the Church of Rome
were that one; yet if that teach any thing contrary to God's goodness, I am
not to receive her doctrine, for the same cause they would have me receive it,
it being as good an argument. This guide teaches things contrary to God's
goodness, therefore it is not appointed, by God; as to say, it is agreeable to
God's goodness there should be a guide, therefore there is one. So he.

The Enquirer seeks to delude us with a fallacy, by altering his terms; for
in the first place, he speaks of a thing contrary to God's goodness, not
absolutely, but according to his understanding. In the second place he speaks
of it, not as it is in his understanding, but as it is simply in it self,
which is a thing quite different from the former; for many things may be in his
understanding thus or thus, or as he says, contrary to God's goodness, which
in themselves are not so, but rather, quite otherwise, for indeed it is no good
consequence to argue on this sort. This in my understanding is contrary to
God's goodness, therefore it is so, because your understanding is subject to
error, and therefore some things may seem to it to be, which are not.
Chillingworth who follows this Author's footsteps, argues after the self
same manner, and has been answered elsewhere by himself. I grant then the
consequence when as he says, this guide teaches somewhat contrary to God's
goodness, therefore it is not appointed for a guide. But I deny the
Antecedent; and afterward when he proves it, saying, it seems so to my
understanding, therefore it is so, I deny the consequence, and admit the
Antecedent.

At least, says he, if it seem so to my understanding, whether in the mean
time it be so or not, I am not to receive it, because I am to be guided by my
own reason and understanding. If it seem so to your understanding after such
time as you have weighed all things as rightly as you can, I grant it; But if
it seem so only before you have done that, then I deny it, for then it is not
to be followed but forsaken, or reformed if it be found erroneous, as in this
case of yours it is. For in this case your understanding is to consult other
understandings wiser then your own, if you can find any such; and according
to that is to determine of the matter, and not to rely wholly upon your own
single understanding. But if you do so, you will find your own single
understanding was deceived, and that the guide of which we treat, teaches
nothing that is against the goodness of God. For it is to be supposed her
understanding is brighter and more capacious then yours, and therefore is to be
thought knows much better what doctrines be agreeable to the goodness of God,
then yours can do what is against it; and therefore your own reason and
understanding teaches you, that the Churches understanding is to be preferred,
and that yours must submit; and again, that this is the rational way, and not
the other: this the way of understanding, and that of error. And so much in
answer to this fallacy, wherein I perceive, both he and Master Chillingworth
confide very much.

As for particular doctrines, it is true, as you say, you may examine whether
they agree with the Principle, that is foundation, yet nevertheless cannot you
from thence conclude any thing against the doctrines or Infallibility of the
Church, but rather for it, and this for the reason before specified. Neither
do we, therefore, send you to a witness, and bid you not believe it, but
rather, to believe it as far as in right reason you are to believe it, and
not farther, that is to say, you are to trust to your own particular
discourses, as to particular discourses, and no farther, but to the resolves of
the Church as to the dictamens of a higher understanding, by the light of which
you are to judge and censure of the rest, and by doing thus, you are sure you
do wisely and safely, and, in fine, so, as although you should chance to err,
you might answer the business at the latter day, by saying, I did in this case
what I ought to do, for I followed what my reason taught me, and more then
this was not required at my hands. But if I follow my own judgment, and in
confidence of that do adventure to condemn the Church, In that I offend
against my reason and true judgment, and should not be able to make a good
apology for my self, or any way make it good that I followed my reason, which
faculty is the rule that God has set me.

For a conclusion of this dispute, I answer in brief, that putting the
Inquirers argument as he ought to have put it, namely, thus as follows. This
guide, to my understanding; or, to my seeming, teaches things contrary to Gods
goodness, therefore it is not appointed by him for a guide, putting I say, the
argument on this manner, it is nothing so good, or so concluding an argument,
as this other is, videlicet; This guide teaches such and such doctrines,
therefore they are not against the goodness of God, and therefore again, my
understanding was deceived in holding them to be so; and therefore lastly
notwithstanding all this, she may be an infallible guide and appointed by God
for such: Note, that we infer hence she may be, but not that she is, as the
Inquirer would impose upon us: for, we do not say that the Church is appointed
a guide therefore, because it is agreeable with God's goodness to make her so,
but because we for other reasons know he has so made her: because we are not
now to learn but that many things are agreeable to Gods goodness to be done,
which yet are not done, nor peradventure ever will be. Wherefore, when we are
to judge what is, or will be, we are to consider, not what his goodness may
admit, but what his will determines shall have a being, for of that lastly
depends the existence of things, and not of the other.

C. 18. Answ. to C. 18.
Section 30. you leave out those words [ therefore there is one] and so make
nonsense of that period, which in his Lordship's setting of it is excellent
reason. But I can believe that this was but a slip, As for your answer to the
parrallel cases, wherein, says his Lordship, Gods goodness is equally
concerned; do you think you can ever satisfy any reasonable man in saying, [
that the first thing he speaks of is only contrary to Gods goodness in his
Lordships understanding, not absolutely; but of the second, he speaks, not as
it is in his understanding, but as it is simply in it selfe] from whence you
conclude, that he changes the tearmes] Certainly, Sir, in despite of your
exception, argument is good, Thus;

infallible guide because it agrees not with Gods goodness to let men want
one, then any man that conceives that Church to teach any thing which he
conceives against Gods goodness, by the same reason is not to receive her
doctrine; The case is clear, because nothing concludes to any man any farther,
then it is conceived by him; and that is not a proof to me, which I do not
conceive to be so; which makes his Lordships arguing to be far from
fallacious; paragraph is not whether it be really true, that it agrees not with
Gods goodness to let men want an infallible guide, but (supposing it to be so)
whether it will follow the Church is infallible, or whether he whose
understanding is convinced and persuaded of that truth, [that it is not
agreeable to Gods goodness to let us want such a guide] be enforced to
confess it infallible.

Lordship disputes not against (but will willingly acknowledge the consequence,
supposing that the Antecedent were true) only by the same argument proves
another thing, that he that conceives the Church to teach any doctrine contrary
to Gods goodness, or that, which is such to his understanding, or he that
supposes the Church to teach so, must not believe that Churches doctrine. So
that if you mark, the supposition is equal on both sides, not taken for true
one side, and only pretended on the other, but one taken to be true by you,
(that, not to provide an Infallible guide is contrary to Gods goodness) and
the other taken to be true by his Lordship (that Gods damning those that err
without either negligence or prejudication, is contrary to his goodness also)
and if the Argument be of force on one side, it must be so also on petitio
principii again, and no ground of a confutation against his Lordship; The
ridiculous arguments that you put in his Lordships paper, without his privity,
will be matter of reproach to you, (who if you understood (as I suppose you
did) were willing to deprave his discourses) and not unto his Lordship.

because the Church knows what is so, better than he] 'twill sure prevail
little with any, that is a disputing whether the Church is infallible or no,
(as you see his Lordship now is) for if she be fallible, she may mistake in
that judgment, and that Infallibility, which to affirm not to depend, or to be
no controversy, is petitio principii again.

This Guide to my understanding teaches things contrary to Gods goodness,
therefore it is not the Guide] and this will be as good an argument, as this
other, [ It Is to my understanding contrary to the goodness of God, that the
Roman Church should not be an infallible Guide, or that there should be no
infallible Guide, where there is none but the Roman Church, therefore the Roman
Church is so] In this comparison the consequences are equally true, and built
upon the same ground, that that which is against Gods goodness cannot be; and
the Antecedents equally affirmed according to several understandings, and then
whether the other Argument which you bring, be comparable to either, it matters
not.

God's goodness does not conclude that your Church is infallible, but only
that it may be so; I confess you make me repent of all this unprofitable
attendance I have paid you, in following your argument thus far, when your
self have given me directions to a shorter cut of answering, viz: by granting
that it may be infallible, that is, that nothing in nature resists, but that,
if God's pleasure were so, it might be infallible, but say we, we have no
evidence from God that it is his pleasure it should, and therefore fallible;
betwixt which two, though there may be some difference, (as there is betwixt
falli and fallibilem esse) yet unless some evidence can be brought against
one, which cannot against the other, they will be both equally true, as far
as respects our knowledge or debate of them.

infallible, and not from this of Gods goodness, I answer, that it is clear
that his Lordship was now disputing only Gods goodness, which it seems you
confess was no reason; and for your other reasons, they are either confuted in
other paragraphs of his Lordships Treatise, or when you produce them, shall be.

To the 31. Sect. Chap. 19.
This Section is spent in the enquiring whether a man shall be damned for
making a diligent and impartial enquiry after the true religion, of which he
finds the infallibility of the Church to be a part, supposing that his reason,
when all is done, will not assent. This is his Quaere, and the same may be made
concerning any other verity, or point of doctrine; as namely, of the holy
Scripture, whether or no it be the word of God; and what shall become of that
man whose reason, after an impartial search made, will not assent; or again,
about the truth of Christian Religion, unto which, after such a search made,
his reason will not condescend.

I answer first, that it is a mockery to ask whether or no any Man shall be
damned for making a good enquiry without success; and in effect it is the same
as to enquire whether a Man shall be damned for doing a deed that is commendable
and good. For this Question supposes that either the Enquirer, or we were very
simple Creatures, and did not understand our selves, or else that the
Gentleman-demander was not in earnest, but propounded it only for his
recreation, though at a time ill chosen and unseasonable, and also in a matter
about which there ought to be no jeasting.

I answer secondly, that in a place where instruction and information may be
had, the case he puts is morally impossible to happen out; for we deny that
where the search is diligent, impartial, and without prejudice, and where
again information sufficient is to be had, that there the reason shall not be
able to assent, and that wheresoever it cannot, that same happens, either
through weakness, or inhability of judgment and capacity, or else by reason of
some disordinate passion of the will, by which the understanding is misled and
darkened, as in those, who are refractary, it for the most part falls out.
Which passion and prejudices arise, sometimes from custom and education,
sometimes from vicious inclinations, sometimes from a crookedness and
perversity of nature, which does refuse instruction. Wherefore as it is no
sufficient excuse for an Infidel to say, I have searched diligently whether or
no Christ be the true Messiah, or whether the Scripture be the word of God or
no, and after all endeavors used, my reason will not assent; so in like manner
it is as little sufficient to allege, that after enquiry made about the true
Church and her Infallibility, your reason would not assent, for in these cases,
we cannot grant any ignorance invincible; or free that error which possesses
them from guilt. Now what shall become of others who want instruction
sufficient, and have no crookedness or backwardness in their will, and die in
ignorance, is another point, and different from this of ours, and is to be
resolved in the Question about the efficacy of Implicit faith, to which I
refer my Reader.

Chap. 19. Answ. to Chapter 19.
that he that never heard of the Church of Rome, shall not be damned for not
believing it infallible] it can be thought, that he that has made diligent
search, and used honestly all means afforded him, and yet does not believe the
Church infallible, shall be damned for that not-believing (this is the
Question, and to weigh it down on one side [ that that latter shall not be
damning when the other is not] this reason is put in that in this matter all that
that Man has done in the second case more than in the former, is only the
having diligently enquired, which is presumed to be no damning sin.

infallibility of your Church.

impossible, yet you must give us leave from your stating of the case, wherein
you say it is so, (viz: when information sufficient is to be had) to conclude
your proof a petitio principii again; for when we deny your Church to be
infallible, and infallibly known to be so, how can you think that we shall
ever yield (without any offer of proof) that there is sufficient instruction
to be had for any man in this point? besides, for you to say that every Man's
not acknowledging this, proceeds either from Weakness or Petitio principii
again?

To the 32. Section, Chap. 20.
Whosoever admits of truth upon no better grounds than others do admit of
falsehood, does not receive it rightly, solidly, and as he ought, but after a
way defective and infirm. Again, whosoever searches and is loath to find,
and would not see it when he might, this Man refuses truth as badly and weakly
as the other does receive it; and as the truth will not benefit the one, so the
enquiry will not advantage or excuse the other. As for such as are bred up in a
true Religion, and which, without particular examination, they accept, it were
rash judgment to say all these received truths upon no better grounds, then
others did falsehood; for first, according to this account, the greatest portion
of Christian men on all sides would be in a hard condition: amongst whom the
simple and illiterate, who are not able to read Evagrius either in Greek or
Latin, nor yet the Bible either in Hebrew or Greek, or otherwise to make any
strict search into antiquity, for their making discoveries which faith was the
Ancient and Apostolic. But though they be unable to do this, yet do they
not therefore take up their Religion at random and by chance, or consult
passion about it, and not reason, but contrariwise, do find their reason
satisfied each one according to their several models, or measure of capacity,
by the present view of the majesty and divine perfections of the Catholic
Church and faith therein professed, together with the assurances from public
fame and creditable relations. By means of which the divine providence and
veracity shows them infallibly what ways they are to take, and what doctrines
to receive as revealed from above. And thus, regularly speaking amongst
orthodox Believers, where Religion may appear like it self, every Man of
capacity, though illiterate, may see sufficient to resolve him, which
satisfaction from any false Religion he could not receive; for though to a
heedlesse eye, and before a diligent exquiry made, some grand falsehoods may
seem more probable than truths, and that as Aristotle teaches, multa falsa
sunt probabiliora veris, many falsehoods are more probable than truths; yet, not
to a diligent Enquirer after the search is made, and especially, in businesses
of great concernment, because God and nature have laid these kind of truths
more open to our view, and set marks upon them by which they might be known
and discerned from falsehood. Wherefore, in the law of nature, it was more
credible, even to the illiterate, that there was a God, then that there was
none; and now Judaisme is not so probable as Christianity is, though sometimes
it has been, nor Mahumetisme at any time so perswasible as Christian Religion,
or Heresy so credible and satisfactory as orthodoxall Christianity, or the
Greek schism as the Greek unity; wherefore though the Parents belief, and
the Religion prevalent in the Country have great influence into the minds of
Man, and are great and powerful Perswaders, yea oftentimes Seducers also, and
those very dangerous; yet nevertheless in those places where truth is taught,
they do not hinder Men from the right apprehension of it, and from making true
judgments about it, but rather like a prosperous gale of wind to Vessels
under sail, cause them to move toward the Port desired more swiftly than
otherwise they would. And thus much may suffice for taking off the slander and
scandal which this Enquirer, and after him Chillingworth, with great acerbity,
have almost in the very same terms, labored to cast upon right believing
Christians, therewith to disparage their faith, as if forsooth, they believed
truths invalidly and upon no better reasons then others believe falsehood. Thus
have both these conspired against the truth, for both indeed are but one Author
in effect, one the Text, and the other the Commentary; wherefore the Publisher
of this small work has showed us all the well head to which Chillingworth
went to draw, which Well before was unknown to the most part of Men, and so
might have still remained, had it not been for this Publishers unseasonable
diligence.

Chap. 20. Answ. to Chapter 20.


infallibility true, yet he that denies it, and withal uses his best reason to
seek if it be true, will sure be in as safe a condition, as he that believes
it, and searches not. And this he proves, because the one believes that
supposed falsehood on as good grounds, as the other does that supposed truth.
Which is so fully concluded from those premises, (and so needs no farther
proof) that indeed these premises are able to conclude more; viz: that in that
case that Man believes that supposed falsehood on better grounds (viz: upon
impartial search) then the other believes that supposed truth; and then 'twere
unreasonable to think, that God that rewards men's actions, and not their
fates, their choices, and not their stars, should condemn the one, more
ingenuous and guiltless, and reward the other meaner and more criminal part
of the parallel.

he that thus admits of truth, admits it not solidly, rightly, and as he ought,
but after a defective and infirm way. Which being borrowed from you out of
this Chapter, the rest will appear to belong very nothing to his Lordship's
argument, and therefore I choose not to insist on any reply to it. For of those
which do find their reason satisfied in your infallibillity, of which you
speak a while, his Lordship speaks not; and for the truths that God and
nature have laid so open to our view, of which you speak again, sure this of
infallibillity is none.

pray for, and study the peace of Jerusalem, and not too active Infusers and
Enterprizers in these troubled waters, might indeed be acknowledged less
seasonable) it is the very thing you said before, and then was sufficiently
proved to be unseasonable.

To the 33, and 34. Sections, Chap. 21.
That the Enquirer did not deny with obstinacy the infallibility of the Church
of Christ, or any other Article, we are willing to believe, yet nevertheless
how safe he was we know not. For a man may be obstinate and yet not think so,
though he may peradventure have just reason to suspect it. It is not likely
that Arius for example, or any other Arch-heretique did think themselves to be
obstinate, although it is not to be doubted but they were, for in the heart of
Man there be many dark corners in which obstinacy may lurk and be unseen;
many passions that do corrupt the intention, which without great diligence are
not espied, especially in Men that are Lovers of the world, or be possessed
with prejudices hefore hand. For which the wise Man wisely said, Verebar omnia
opera mea, I distrusted all my works. And so has every Man reason to do in
this universal corruption of nature and manners. The 34 Sect. has no
difficulty in it which may require an Answer.

Chap. 21. Answ. to Chap. 21.
believe that his Lordship did not deny with obstinacy the infallibility of
your Church; and yet in your next words you interpose against him, that a man
may be obstinate, and yet; and on that, ground your Answer to that Section. But
sure, Sir, whosoever else maybe obstinate, or what grounds soever he may have
to suspect he is, yet this cannot by you be said of him at the same time when
you acknowledge he is not obstinate.

ergo: and to the major I should answer by silence, ( i. e. consent) and to the
minor, [that you are an honest Catholic I am willing to believe:]
Nevertheless whether you ought to have the liberty of this Town, I know not,
for you may be a dishonest Catholic, and yet not think so.

i. e. make scruple how you should be dealt with, after I had acknowledged both
that all honest Catholics ought to be used as you desire, and that you are an
honest Catholic? And Secondly, that I did suck in my concession of your being
an honest Catholic, as soon as I had made it; for if that Reply belong to me,
then is it doubted, whether I am such or no. Be pleased to compare the cases,
and this is directly your answer.

no-difficulty in the 34 Sect. (which you confess, and which therefore
requires no Answer) I do not perfectly know, but shall suppose you mean, that
there is nothing of doubt or question in it, and then I am sure I have nothing
to reply, but that by the same reason the 33 Section must be granted also, for
the medium is the same to infer both those conclusions.

To the 35, and 36, Sections, Chap. 22.
To believe, says he, implicitly what God would have believed, is also to
believe implicitly what the Church teaches, if this doctrine be one of those
which God commands, to be believed. My Answer to this is negative, and my
reason of denial is, because one implicit faith does not contain another,
but it is an explicit assent and no other that contains within it an
implicit. To the point then I answer, that if that same general belief,
which he falsely calls Implicit, be sincere and cordial, we then grant that it
may, as he says, implicitly contain the other. But what will he deduce from
thence? what? that all who pretend to believe on that manner do it sincerely?
It is improbable, for if it were sincere, it would in knowing Men, not stay
within the narrow compass of an implicit assent, but quickly dilate it self,
and become explicit. Indeed this great profession of believing in a
preparation of mind all which God would have believed, and goes no farther,
seems in most Men to be but feigned and delusory, and so no great trust can be
reposed in it.

Chap. 22. Answ. to Chap. 22.
subtlety, because, say you, one implicit faith does not contain another.
This you affirm, but afford us not the least offer of proof for the
affirmation. I must therefore beseech you to look over your principle again.
Suppose me to believe by an implicit faith, that you are an honest Man, may
not that belief contain in it an implicit belief to every proposition by
you asserted? Nay, what need this circumlocution? is not his Lordships argument
most clear being put into a Syllogism?

ergo. See now which Proposition you will deny, the major is evident, the minor
I presume you will not deny, whosoever else does, and then I beseech you be
good to the conclusion.

general belief is not sincere and cordial; But that I am sure is not for us
to dispute of, or discern, and I am as sure it is nothing to the case where
it is supposed to be sincere, and if it be not, no Man ever thinks it can be
relied on.

To the 37, 38, and 39. Sections, Chap. 23.
Admitting the foremost of these Sections as probable. To the 38, I answer, that
as some are made obstinate by pride, so again othersome laziness detaines in
ignorance. But what of that? I grant you that it is not pride in you or any Man
never to assent, till you find good reason for it, but rather wisdom.
Nevertheless it may be pride which blinds a Man and hinders him from the
seeing a just reason of assenting, yea even then when it is not only
perceptible, but also easy to be perceived; for the eye of the proud sees not
the truth, but overlooks it. The 39 Paragraph contains in it no business
considerable in the matter of controversy between us.

Chap. 23. Answ. to Chap. 23.
admitting as probable] signify [ not understanding?] Truly it had been more
ingenuously done to have used that other phrase; for the truth is, it might
have been done at this time without any disparagement to your understanding;
for in the beginning of this Section there was at the first Edition clearly an
error in the print. It should be thus as it is now mended; To the Greek that
concludes the former Section should be adjoined in the same period, If I could,
etc. and no new Section be there made; and as the sense, by that mistake of the
Printer, lies broken in the first Impression, it is nonsense.

probable. But this was but a misfortune. Your Answer to the 38 is not so
excusable, being not one syllable to the matter in hand, [that sluggishnesse
may as probably bring a Papist to grant your infallibility, as pride a
Protestant to deny it] In stead of denying or answering of which, you only
reply, that pride may possibly blind a man. Sure this paragraph you might have
admitted also, (as well as the other two that encompasse it) much better then
to have said nothing to the purpose.



To the 40 Section Chap. 24.
We Catholics do not disagree in points of faith, neither where there is
fire to keep us in awe, nor where there is none, and therefore this exception
against our unity is frivolous. It is the clearenesse and perfection of our
rule that draws us all to unity, and not any of the four Elements. If we
follow this rule we are at peace, and we do well know how to follow it:
contrariwise, follow your rule as well as you can, and yet you are at variance;
wherefore you assign a rule, which though it in it self be not uncertain,
yet which is as bad, you are uncertain of it. Now as in Logic a maxim, or
axiom, if unknown, or uncertain, is no good principle of argumentation; so
in matter of belief, a rule not certainly discernible and understood, is no
good rule of faith, though never so perfect in it self: and this is just your
case.

The differences amongst those of our Church are not differences in matters of
faith or religion, as it is evident; but on the other side it is manifest and
confessed, that yours are. Our differences are in Philosophy only, or in some
Scholastique and undefined point, and such in particular is, that now some
years agitated between the Dominicans, and sundry of their party on the one
side, and the Jesuits, and Sorbon Doctors, and many more, on the other. For
these contend not as we do, with the Calvinists, namely, whether we have free
will or no: all of them agreeing in that verity of faith, but they contend
about a question only Philosophical, which has some relation to it, namely
whether with this freedom of will acknowledged by both sides, Physical
predeterminations or praemotions can consist: which question is no question of
faith. Now admitting as many think, that these predeterminations could not
stand with the doctrine of free will, yet the said doctrine of faith is not
hurt thereby: for the opposition between them and free will, is either
discovered by the Dominicans, or not. If not, then is it dormant, and so,
though never so ill, it cannot do hurt to faith, or work it any prejudice. If
it be discovered, then it can work nothing, forasmuch as thereupon it will be
relinquisht and abandoned presently: because the doctrine of free will is
received by an assent of faith, and the other but by a philosophical or
opinative; the former being the stronger, must needs command and expel the
latter, as soon as they begin to fall at variance. Wherefore it would in that
case be a good consequence with them, viz. Man has free will, therefore there
is no predetermination and not contrariwise, (as it is with the Calvinists)
there is predetermination, therefore no free will. Therefore in the holding of
predeterminations there is a vast difference between a Calvinist and a
Dominican, even as much as between an obedient Catholic, and a perverse and
obstinate Heretic, and that is difference enough. And since you would needs
know, this is the reason why these arguments make you Heretics, and not the
Dominicans. That the Church ought to have resolved the point in difference,
between those two orders, is more then the inquirer can prove, for neither of
their doctrines do hinder conformity with the ancients in any one thing,
wherein conformity was requisite; for men are not bound to conform with the
ancients in the reasons of their belief, but in their belief only. The 42.
Section we grant as making nothing against our doctrine. And thus Chillingworth
is also answered who insists upon this same point, and also in the same fashion
with this Inquirer, so that all things considered, both these make but one
Author and require but one answer to what they have objected. And by this the
41, and 42. Sections be also answered.

C. 24. Answer to C. 24.
fear, when there is fire for them that disagree. To this you answer, that you
disagree not in neither where there is fire to awe, nor where there is none.

fire to awe disagrees in all matters of faith, and consequently no matter of
faith, where there is no fire to awe? By this it appears that that exception
of his Lordships against your unity in matters of faith is far from
frivolous, and to get quit of it, you are feign to make a distribution, of
which only one species belongs to the Genus, which being put into form
betraies it self presently: It must be thus, of matters of faith, some are
required sub poena ignis, some are not. Can you stand to it, that this shall
hold? are there any things de fide, which a Man may safely disbelieve? if not,
all the rest you say in that Section is nothing to the purpose. But then you
add, that all the differences are faith, to which the answer will be very
obvious (if I troubled you with no other) that ours are so too, and then you
have little matter of triumph over us in that excellence.

ad homines, though in it self it be no Argument.

Clemens (by way of Answer to your Objection, both of Jews and Heathens
against Christianity, taken from the Dissentions of Christians in the Primitive
Church) (...) (...), The cause of them is, because all things, that are
excellent, are subject to the envy of Men, and Devils, and from thence to the
sowing of seeds of Dissentions amongst them; agreeably to that of our Savior,
that as soon as the wheat was in the ground, the envious sowed his tares.

infallibility, and threats of fire to restrain Men from them, yet we have
other rules more agreeable to ancient Church practice, than either of these;
and though the weapon of our warfare are not carnal in your sense of (...), to
the taking away of life, yet are they if they were executed, mighty to bring
down or shut out Heresies. For, if you know it not, I can tell you, that
Excommunication (that sovereign receipt of Christ and his Apostles, the most
perfect design of charity, to save and recover that which is lost, to shame
Men to reformation) and upon contempt of that, that secular rougher hand
interposing, the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, and the Statute of Abjuration
are very strong restraints; and if they have not been so diligently executed as
they ought to be, though I hope you will pardon this fault, yet he that will
not, must charge it only on the Persons of our Magistrates, and not on our
Religion, or the state of our Reformation. And then let me add that even these
laws, and this execution of them, or the like, whether among you or us can
extend no farther then to outward restraints, and that only of those that will
be so terrified, or to punishment of them that will not; but not to preventing
of Heresies in the inward rise or growth, or sometimes in the breaking out,
whenever ambition of being Leader of a Sect, etc. are more prevailing than
fear of punishments, which cases must be looked for in every Church.

Irenaeus, and Epiphanius, and Saint Augustine, and Philastrius have abused us
in their Catalogues; and I beseech you, but to remember the ridiculous Heresies
of Galatia (which Saint Jerome mentions on occasion of Gal. 3.1. in respect of
which he conceives the Apostle calls them such fools, and thinks they were
bewitched) particularly those of the (...), that would have Cheese mixed with the
Bread in the Sacrament, which with two others of the like stamp, there
mentioned, came from Ancyra the Metropolis of Galatia. And yet I believe you
would not think the Argument of much force, if it should (from your example
against us) be made use of by us either against those Apostolical Churches, or
against the Roman Church ever since, that so many Heresies are gone out of it;
and yet that would be as reasonable in us, as in you it is to charge all the
Heresies which have been in the World since Luther, upon the Reformation.



England even in these (which I suppose you will count the) worst times of it,
you cannot find any greater or more dangerous Heresies avowed by any
considerable Party than are owned by some of the Jesuits among you.

Bellarmine, resumed and confirmed not long before his death, with his most
advised care in his Recognitions. Secondly, the doctrine and practice of
resisting and deposing lawful Magistrates under color of religion (that I set
it no higher, even to killing of Kings.) Thirdly, the opposing the Order of
Bishops, as expressly contrary to the sole-power enstated by Christ on S. Peter.
And also Fourthly, the affirming it lawful that evil may be done, so it be in
order to a public good; and that I trouble you with no more (and yet give you
reason to think that it is in my power) I beseech you to believe that I have
read Watson's Quodlibets, (and I could without much difficulty make a parallel
betwixt these whom you so much charge, and those whom you defend, your hatedst
Enemies, and your dearest Friends, that Book being so richly able to furnish
me with hints) and that I have surveyed the Writings betwixt the Seculars and
the Regulars (with the late controversy among you about the Bishop of
Calcedons being appointed Ordinary in this Kingdom, produced) and in them the
difference about the necessity of Confirmation, and the [ non] (even now
mentioned) in the Canon of the Council, as also the Symbolum Jesuiticum, etc.
and if we have any greater divisions among us yet, than these, I beseech you to
let me know it from you (for I believe 'twill be no easy discovery) and I
shall promise to do and pray my utmost, that they may be avoided.

de fide; though in that there would be a large field to amplify in also.

the Church ought to have resolved these questions if they desired conformity
with the ancient Church] you answer, that neither of these Doctrines hinder
Conformity with the Ancients in any thing wherein Conformity is required; and
confirm that by an implicit Assertion, which you will never be able to prove,
viz: that the Fathers did not deliver doctrines (as well as reasons) directly
contrary to the Dominicans; Whereas it is clear they did, viz: to that, that
physical predeterminations can consist with freedom of will. Which even now
you thought good (not to deny but) to excuse by a dilemma, that if this
opposition were not discovered to the Dominicans, it would do no hurt, if it
were, it would be relinquisht. It seems by this, that if they are discovered,
and not relinquisht, the danger would then be great, and so that if they knew
this conformity, this conformity would be requisite also, and so is requisite
in it self, though by the excuse of blameless ignorance it be capable of
mercy.

say also Master Chapter is answered, and truly so any Man will be content to be
answered; I would all his Lordships Treatise had been so answered, it had been
more ease to your self, and advantage to somebody else.

To the 43 Sect. Chap. 25.
We do not formally infer, that because our rule breeds unity, therefore all
dissenting Parties ought to yield to that; but that dissenting Parties have no
rule on which it is fit, or safe to rely; and again, that in place of it, we
ought to seek out one which causes unity, because no rule can be good without
that quality. Nevertheless it follows also, ours is the true rule, because,
de facto, none but ours either does it, or is apt to do it, and one such rule
there must be, we are sure. Ours then is not therefore to be accepted, because
it breeds unity, but because it alone does breed it. As for Nilus, he is a
prattling Greek, and besides that in his several sayings he overthrowes
himself, and confirms our Doctrines; in this point no heed is to be taken to
what he says.

Chap. 25. Answ. to Chap. 25.
you do not infer, because your rule breeds Unity, therefore all dissenting
Parties ought to yield to it] and affirm it in these [That dissenting Parties
have no rule, that they ought to seek out one that causes unity, that yours is
the true rule, and none but yours:] your meaning is, it seems, that you do
infer it, but you do it not formally; and sure it matters little for
formality, when the thing is so granted by you.

onely] it matters little; because any other company that should deny that
infallibility, and usurp it themselves, would soon get the monopoly of it
also, especially from any that differed from them in any particular. As for
Nilus, it is far cheaper and easier to call him prattling Greek, than to
confute his saying, which yet, if you please to mark his words in this place,
is no more than you say in the very undertaking to answer this Treatise, that
your Church must by all be looked on as infallible.

To the 44, 45, 46, 47, Sections, Chap. 26.
In these four Sections the Enquirer busily endeavors to persuade that
errors might secretly creep into the Church by degrees, as a Child waxes
bigger, and as the index of a Clock moves about. Be it so as the Enquirer
says, yet nevertheless, might all such creeping errors, if there were any,
be espied, at least, when they had once got in, if not while they were stealing
thither. Thus the growth of a Child is seen plainly, though not the growing,
and the hand, or shadow of a Dial is seen at what hour it is, though the
slow pace thither was not perceptible; and Men may give a judgment whether it
go false or true. Why then could not errors be espied as easily after they
were once stolen in, though by never so small degrees, they made their
approaches thither? Thus were the errors of Arius, Pelagius, Wicliffe,
Socinus, and others, presently discovered, notwithstanding all their Authors
counterfeiting and sly manner of divulging them; even as tares, which were
sown while Men slept: as soon as grown up were seen and noted. What then should
hinder all other pretended errors of the Church from being seen and registered,
although crept in never so insensibly?

What matter is it that sundry Books are lost? Are they more lost for those
errors, then for others? or were these more invisible then all the rest? It is
strange with what improbable conjectures this Enquirer deludes himself.

He tells us afterward of another sly way of breaking in, that is to say,
under old names and titles, altering the signification, but not the words. But
I would know how the errors of the Church could by this art be concealed, more
than the errors of Calvin, who sought with old appellations to palliate his
new Doctrines.

But, in conclusion, his principal device is, that if no precedent opposition
were a note of the being taught from the beginning, that then the doctrine of
the Chiliasts would pass for right and Apostolical, because, as he affirms,
it was not contradicted till two hundred years after the coming in. But my
answer is, it is more than any Man can prove, that it was contradicted no
sooner: nay, it is more than probable, that it was contradicted in the time of
S. Justin, as we have showed before, and also highly probable, that it was
opposed and rejected in the time of Dionysius the Arcopagite, as also has been
noted before.

Besides, it is no way necessary that every casual or innocent opinion should
be forthwith contradicted, or noted as an error against faith; and of this
sort was the error of the Chiliasts during the time it was held but as an
opinion, without censuring or condemning others, to which height, as soon as it
arrived, it was cried down presently and rejected.

The 48 Sect. contains but a recapitulation of what was before propounded, and
therefore requires no new answer to it.

The last Sect. contains nothing that deserves not commendation, or is
unworthy of the Author, but is rather to be extolled and imitated by all that
make Enquiries after truth, and his resolves there be such, that if they be
truly and sincerily put in execution by any, no man can have reason to be
offended with him in this world, nor is it likely that God will be displeased
with him in the next. But whether the Enquirer was not very unhappy in his
searches after truth, or no, I leave it by the searcher of all hearts to be
determined.

C. 26. Answ. to C. 26.
undiscernablenesse of errors, that though they are not seen at the time,
they may be seen after. I reply, that I confess it possible they may be seen
after, and that some are so, very soon after, but yet sure not all presently
after, publicly and vulgarly seen; As they are seen, so they may be made
known to the world, some a long time after others; and this is sufficient to
show, that the Authors of the errors may possibly not be seen and discovered
at all, though the error in process of time chance to be so, which will be
most evidently true, if it be farther considered (what his Lordship affirmed)
that errors came in by degrees, and not at once.

matters that sundry books are lost? infallibly, that it is possible there
might be opposition against any doctrine, though in the writings we have, there
be none mentioned, and as you disprove not that, so his Lordship desires not to
have more acknowledged.

Calvin will be of no force, unless Calvin undertook to be infallible.

Chiliasts as you refer to your answer before, so do I to my reply, only
from your favor or indulgence to that opinion, during the time that it was
held but as an opinion, without censuring or condemning others; but then
withdrawing that favor when it arrived to that height; I am very glad and
joyful to join issue with you, and charitably to suppose (though I affirm it
not) that till you took upon you to condemn and censure others, any opinion
you held, merely censure not, condemn not, are confident to hope for some
kindness from you, though not from other men.

Sect. I shall take your example likewise, and to the last commend your
ingenuity for commending that, that deserved it so much; and only demand with
what conscience you could think him very unhappy in those searches, which you
confess to be so happy in proposing; for sure if unhappiness signify the ill
success of his searches, there can be (according to your Principles) no fear
that they should by God be permitted to be unhappy; or if it signify any fault
in them, you uncharitableness, and judging of hearts pronounce him guilty of
it.

The Conclusion.
The general result of all that which has been debated hitherto betwixt the
Enquirer and me, is, in effect, no other but that, First, the Catholic
Churches infallibility is a sovereign preservative against error; and against
all dissension or disunion in believing, unto all those who do acknowledge
it, and yield submission thereunto. Secondly, that each new verity defined by
that Church is to them a new path to heaven, though on the other side, to all
such other as refuse to be directed by her, it may prove just as the Enquirer
is pleased to express himself, a new path to walk in toward the Devil, or
one step more unto damnation. And in this he was in the right, and spoke
truer then he was aware. Now it is well known that all we Catholics are
guided by that same infallibility; and again, that on the contrary all
Anti-Catholiques do resist it, and what will follow out of this, is no hard
matter to collect. Moreover, this same infallibility, a quality so unpleasing
to the Enquirer, cannot, as he surmises, make us sure, if we be in error,
never to mend, for we all do offer freely that if either he, or any of his
side be sure to disprove soundly and clearly the infallibility, we will be as
sure to mend and forthwith to relinquish it; by which expected act of theirs we
shall be reduced unto such good terms, in which all Anti-Catholiques
continually are, that is to say, to believe at random, reele wildly up and
down unconstantly, and fall at variance amongst our selves, as they do; and
then I hope the Enquirer will be contented with us.

But the want on their behalf of such an efficacious proof as this, has
been the true reason why we have not hitherto thought of any alteration, or
coming toward them. Certainly it is much better to be persuaded though
falsely, of an infallibility, then to be sure to have none, as you now are, but
to be wrangling perpetually, falling out and fighting amongst your selves;
whereas, before you were, when as our Religion prevailed, this inconvenience
happened not. So that, in fine, all the goodly fruits you have reaped from your
impugning Church and Councels, and in bringing in instead thereof a new
invention of your own, is but the making of your selves and your Country
miserable, which daily, by dear experience we find. And so much for the
Enquirer's unadvised impugnation of the infallibility of the Catholic Church.

Chap. 27. Answ. to the Conclusion.
infallible; but then whether it be or no, that is the question still,
infallible, equally obliges us to believe all that your Church can possibly
ever affirm, as what you do already, and then we must have a strong faith
indeed to be able to bear such a burden. Whereas if you could but be brought
to think it possible, you might be deceived, we could then find place in you
for Scripture and reason to make impression: but till then, you have that
terrible







possibility (if no more) of all errors after it, and leaves no one falsity
out of the Creed; that it is possible for all temptations to persuade your
Church, is certainly a complicated error, and may well be called Legion, for
nothing else can be so numerous as this; I Am sure not the believing you
fallible, though you were not so; For, that would be but one error, and no
other necessarily consequent to it, it being very possible for him that has
that opinion of you* to think every thing else that you think, to think you
actually in the truth, although it be possible you

in putting your Papers into so many hands, that, to tell you tru^, after I had
read them over, and declined the having any thing to do with them once, then
within few days after found another way to come to my hands again; so that it
had not been civility toward you to have put you to any more trouble, or
farther to have tempted you to think your self victorious. To fortify you
the better against that temptation, I have been perhaps more plain and
punctual sometimes then would otherwise have been necessary; and if when you
have read it over, you find any such plainness to have been without cause,
upon your signification of your se^ce of any such my offense, I will promise to
ask your pardon; mean while I shall not trouble you with any farther thoughts
of continuing this Controversy, (peace and unity and ami^y of pens and
hearts being much a more lovely thing) but desire that if any thing in your
Paper (as far as it presses his Lordship) be in your opinion unsatisfied, it
may in few words, without such a large trouble as this, be mentioned by you*
and then friendly debated betwixt us at any time of meeting; of which
whenever by the means that this came to my hands, you shall signify to me
your pleasure, I shall not fail to serve you, being indeed resolved never to
be thus injurious to my Reader again in civility to any man.

From my Study Sept. 23. 1645.
An Appendix, or Answer to what was returned by the Apologist.
TO this Reply of mine what was by the Apologist returned in the Margent of my
Paper, shall be now distinctly set down, as the Preface promised, with a
direction (by some Letter of the Alphabet) to that part of any Chapter of the
discourse, to which each of his Annotations were applied, and affixed. And for
Answer to them I shall not need enlarging.

In the Introduction, at the letter [ A] this Annotation was set in the
Margent. [ I know of neither Scoffs nor Triumphs.] Answ. That there are such,
the Reader will give credit to his own eyes, if he review the latter part of
your first Chapter, as also the close of the 8 and of the 15 Chapter; And that
you ought to know them, i. e. acknowledge and reform them, as being contrary,
the former to that Charity, the latter to that Meekness, which our Savior
left in charge with those that would be called by his name, I hope you will
discern, and confess with me.

C. 2. B. the Annotation is [I do not treat here what is done by some, but
what in propriety of speech ought to have been done.] To this I answer, first,
That it being true (as this Reply confesses) that some Romanists used that
style of Catholic Roman Church, (though this Apologist did not) This is fully
sufficient to justify his Lordships title, because he was not bound to foresee
that this Apologist would reform the style of others; And secondly, though it
be not propriety of speech, yet was that no argument neither, because his
Lordship that holds that Church fallible in greater matters, might conceive it
possible for them to be so in matter of propriety of speech, nay was confident
that so they were, being not able to disbelieve his eyes and ears, that of
this they were guilty, as improper as it is. But then thirdly, the matter is
yet more clear against the Apologist, for though his Lordships title did not
presage, yet I which had read that Answer, could see that he himself said that
the Church Catholic was the Roman, and the Roman the Catholic, and that is
the thing which I affirmed from his own words in that place to which that
Annotation is prefixed. And therefore for him to say, that in propriety of
speech this ought not to be done] as it is an accusation of himself, who was
guilty of that impropriety, so is it not a confutation of me, who only said he
was so.

Ib. C. [We speak here according to the rules of formal predication, not for
reprehension of the Enquirer, but for rectifying the manner of speaking, and
stating the Question rightly.] Answ. It Is not imaginable how this note could
advantage the Writers cause. In the very place to which this note is affixt, I
am a proving by rules of formal predication, that, by what is said by the
Romanists, and particularly by your self, it is apparent, that you affirm the
Roman Church to be Infallible, though not quatenus Roman. this conclusion you
deny not to follow from those rules, but say [ you speak according to those
rules.] And truly I have as yet no necessity to d^ny that you do so, nor shall
I, until having affirmed the Roman Church to be the Catholic, you proceed to
deny the Roman to be Infallible, though the Cathol^que be. This you do not yet
distinctly deny, (though the whole controversy about the title of his
Lordships book shows that you are not very willing to stand to the
affirmative.) When you do so, I shall make bold to put you in mind of those
rules, and in the mean only to take notice of your own confession, that what
you said was not for reprehension of the Enquirer: which I must affirm to be a
retrataction of your former writing, which pretended to prove that in truth it
was not so, as in the Enquirer's title it is called. This was then surely a
reprehension of the Enquirer, and if now you say you meant not to reprehend
him, this is to say you did not mean to do what you did, which being a ^^ile
of humility I shall never repro^ch or find fault with in you; ^ut yet tell you,
that what you call in the next words of your Annotation, your [ rectifying the
manner of speaking, and stating the Question aright] is in my Answer proved to
be contra^y to your own manner of speaking; and a clear mis stating To which
proofs as here you reply nothing, (nor is it imaginable how you should, the
matter being so evident, viz: that they that affirm the Roman Church, to be
the Catholic, and the Cathol^que to be infallible, must needs affirm the
Roman to be infall^bl^) so do you in effect confess that you had nothing to
reply to the remainder of that whole Chapter, which as it is the longest in the
Book, so by vindicating the fitness of his Lordships title, and stating of the
Question against your exceptions, does l^y very useful grounds for the voyding
your pretensions to infall^bility: For if it be cleared by my first Chapter (as
I conceive it is, and your Ann^tations do not deny it to be) that the Question
is of the infallibility of the Roman Church, then we that deny the Roman to be
the Catholic must never be charged of denying the Catholic to be
infallible, nor be liable to the arguments that are brought against us upon
that head, (which without question are the b^st you have) though we deny it
never so confidently of the Roman.

Id. D. Surely the meaning is very obvious.] Answ. If it be, I am sure the
words do not clearly express it, for how should the editor of his Lordships
tract (to whom the former part of that period belongs, in these words [ though
no notice has been taken of any answer given already]) take notice of giving
license for any other answer? Give notice he might, but that in my judgment is
not to take; and take notice you might, but that I conceive would not cohere
with the antecedents, and any third way of rendering, I confess I imagine not;
and therefore still if the meaning be obvious, it must be met with somewhere
else, then in the sound, and contexture of the words, but this (...) shall not
be imputed to you, it was only an officiousness in me then, to show you it
was such.

Id. E. These are bitter scoffs, and no way grounded upon my words. Answ. That
the phrase [ sad newes] was grounded on your words there recited by me, I must
still affirm, for they are most evidently a form of complaining, and that is
all I meant by [ sad news:] yet if to you it seem to be a scoff, or bitter,
and both those in the plural, (more scoffs than one in that single
expression) though my conscience does not accuse me of any such intention, yet
I will fall at your judgment, and beseech you to pardon me for it, and to make
you reparations, promise to endeavor to offend no more against you, or any
other Adversary by any kind of bitterness; and for once be you pleased to
imitate my resolution, and remember, that when another man spoke it [ sad
newes] was a bitter scoff, and then perhaps your reprehension of me may work
a double cure, and heal you also of some excesses.

Chap. 2. Answ. to Chapter 2. A. I do not beg the Question, but deny what the
Enquirer assumed as true and granted, namely that our proofs of the Church are
no other nor better than those by which you impugn it: which assumpt of his we
deny, and whether justly or no, must depend upon the trial and the examination
of his proofs to follow after; and therefore this denial of mine is no
petitio principii, but a right and Logical denial, which either the Enquirer
or you were bound to disprove, and not to tell us as you do that we are bound
to prove against the Enquirer, who here charge us, and susteineth the Person
of the Opponent, or one that argues against our Infallibility.

I am the Defendent, and no Defendent can beg the Question, my discourse is
Apologeticall as the Title tells you.

Answ. I did not venture to tell you that you were guilty of a petitio
principii, until I had, as I conceived, made an ocular demonstration to you
that it was such, which you may please to review in the place; or to save you
that trouble, I shall tell you the sum of it; you deny a proposition, which
in that place it is clear that his Lordship proves, and having not answered one
word to his proofs (which is in effect to deny the conclusion) you then give a
proof or reason of your denial [ for we affirm that our Churches
infallibility is proved by reasons which are real and true, etc.] this reason
of yours being as much denied by his Lordship, as your maine conclusion against
which he disputes, ought in any reason to have been backed with some firm
proof, and of that kind you give none but your own affirmation; and because
you do not, this I there call a petitio principii, agreeably both to
Aristotle's notion of that Sophisme, and to the notation of the phrase. For
principium, or (...), being acknowledged to signify the question, for that or
any part of it to be brought in to prove any thing that in that disputation is
denied, is either (...) or (...), to beg the question, or take it for
granted, and in effect, to prove a thing by it self, (which is the most
irrational proceeding that can be.) If you are not yet convinced of this, I
shall yet farther give you a proof of it from those ancient Authors, which
can best judge of this matter, the Interpreters of Aristotle; Take one for all,
(...). fol. 28.
Magentius, in his definition of this Sophisme. (...), A begging of the
question is, when any thing is proved by it self, which ought to be proved by
something else. Or again, (...), when that which is proposed to be proved, is
used as a medium, to prove it self. Or again, (...), when we use a medium
which seems to differ from the question (or the thing to be proved) but is all
one with it. As if to prove that pleasure is good, I should assume, that
pleasure is to be chosen, whereas, says he, (...), that which is good, and
that which is to be chosen are all one: and therefore unless that be farther
proved, that pleasure is to be chosen, there is nothing done toward the proving
it to be good. That this is your very manner of proceeding, I need not farther
prove, having done it so newly by laying your whole process before you; I
shall only add the note of that Scholiast, that (...), The not demonstrating
of what we undertake, is the genus of this begging the Question; or Begging
the Question is a special species of not demonstrating; and unless you will
discern first, and then labor to repair this infirmity in your discourses,
all your mentions of the Philosopher in his Analytickes, will not persuade us
that you are likely to demonstrate.

Thus much I had briefly said to you before, but now have been forced to lay
down more largely; and let me tell you, that when I had not only affirmed,
but proved you guilty of this Sophisme, you ought either by denying my
premises, or by some other way to have answered my proof.

And in stead of so doing, To say only [ you are not guilty] is a denying my
conclusion, and petitio principii again. And from this you cannot be cleared
by what you add [that you deny what the Enquirer assumed as true and granted;]
For First, I say you were to have answered or denied my premises, and you only
assay to prove your own conclusion; Secondly, your way or medium of proving
that, is not concluding neither; For the thing assumed (by his Lordship) being
this, [That the means brought to prove your Infallibility were fallible
means, and so granted by you] his Lordship did not assume this as granted or
true in it self immediately or without proof, but proceeded to prove it to be
true and granted by you, and that by this medium, because with you nothing was
conceived infallible, but the Church: That conclusion then (being not set down
as a premise or principle of probation, but as a conclusion proved by that
medium) you again profess to deny, (remember I say you deny the conclusion)
and then sure we want no trial to discover the justness of so doing; and
whereas you say his proofs follow after, I answer, that some other proofs
follow after, but one sufficient proof is brought in that place; and the
denying the conclusion without answering of that one proof, is it which
brought all this charge and inconvenience upon you, and therefore you now see I
do not require of you (as you say I do) to prove against the Enquirer, but
only to answer his proofs; But if in stead of doing so, you will take upon you
to prove the conclusion which the Enquirer has disproved, and do that only
by a bare saying somewhat which you know he denies, this is a petitio principii
still. And your second Argument that it is not, taken from your being Defender,
or Answerer, or Apologist, will no more quit you from that charge; for though
an Answerer as long as he does no more but either deny the major or minor, or
answer to either of them by distinguishing, limiting, etc. cannot be guilty of
that fault, yet if he deny none but the conclusion, he does in effect, and
interpretative beg the Question, and if instead of denying of, or answering
to the premises, he go about to prove the Question in hand, or any part of it,
he does by so doing, take the place of an Opponent upon him. Now because it is
possible for an Answerer to do one of these, though he ought to do neither,
it follows, that by either of those ways the Answerer may beg the Question,
and both those are your case at this time, as has, I conceive, already been
manifested, and therefore I must be excused, if I still conceive my conclusion
is regular, the Apologist is guilty of that Sophisme.

C. 5. Answ. to C. 5. A. An Answerer is not bound to prove but to defend; This
Arguer and the Replyer, which is your self, are bound to prove. Answ. He that
keeps himself strictly to the Respondents task, i. e. either to deny, or
limit, or distinguish of either of the premises in the Objection, is not, I
confess, bound to prove, because he is not supposed to affirm any thing, his
repelling the Enemies weapons, or avoiding of them, is enough to defend
himself. And if this were your case, I should be unjust to require any proofs
from you. But you must be a very great Despiser of my Papers, if you did not
take notice in that place, that I was forced to be plain with you, and tell
you that you had not answered (either by denying or distinguishing, etc.) any
one word to his Lordship in your whole fifth Chapter, but fell into other
discourses of your own, which course as it is not the part of an Answerer
strictly taken, so if it be permitted him at all, it must oblige him to give
proof for all such assertions as he shall bring in thus casually, or else never
to expect, or require to be heeded by his Adversary.

And of such assertions as these, (which were casual and extrinsecall to your
discourse, and by me conceived false) it was, that I required proof from you,
and you are still my Debtour for it.

Chap. 6. Answ. to the 6. Chap. A. If we affirm our principles be certain,
contrary to the Enquirers surmise, you, if you can, are to prove they are not,
or else leave off contending. Answ. Certainly this is very strange usage, when
that which you call the Enquirers surmise, is a conclusion induced by the
Enquirer by many strong proofs. This you know is there evidenced by me, and if
I had been mistaken, you should have said so.

This being supposed, I must tell you, that it is far from being sufficient
for you, to affirm your principles to be certain; for when the Enquirer has
proposed many Arguments to prove they are not certain, and among the rest this
convincing one, [That your Church (which is your infallible) is offered to be
proved by such marks as the ignorant cannot seek it by, and the learned,
though never so honest, may chance not to find it by] for you still to affirm
they are certain, and to add no more, is but to deny the conclusion; and
against such an one it is to little purpose for me to bring farther proofs,
when those that are already brought are so dealt with; and truly unless you
please to give over this course of denying conclusions, and not considering
premises, I will soon obey your advise, and resolve to leave off contending.

Ibid. B. Our Authors have proved all that we in defending do affirm, and if
the Enquirer had impugned their proofs, we then would have tried to defend;
wherefore that which we affirm and declare, does not rest upon a bare
affirmation, although I prove them not in this place, as being here a mere
Defendant, and not an Arguer. Answ. This annotation being upon the same
occasion, and in substance the same with the former, is already answered. Only
I shall add, that if you affirm ought which your Authors in other Books
bring proof for, this will not excuse you from a necessity of answering his
Lordships arguments against that conclusion of your Authors; or if it do, you
must not pass for a Defendant. His part it is to ward the Adversaries blows,
and if he make a thrust himself, he then turns Offendent or Arguer, and when
he does so, he must take care his weapon have some edge (I mean, his
affirmations some proofs annexed) or else they will wound no body. As for the
Enquirer, i. e. his Lordship, it was not his present task to descend to an
enumeration and impugning of all your Authors arguments (though yet those
which he could think of as your chief, he has insisted on; and were he
alive, he would from your dealing here have little encouragement to seek out
for others) his intention was to frame arguments against your conclusion, and
if you had denied or answered them, you needed not to have troubled your self
to affirm any thing; or if out of design, or ex abundanti, you will, you must
be content to be called upon to prove it; For call your self what you please,
you must be an Arguer when you so affirm.

Ibid. C. Yes sure by consequence it is. Answ. I am forced to ask your pardon,
if I know not certainly to what part of my discourse this Annotation belongs,
whether to the end of one period, or the beginning of the other. Yet it falls
out luckily, that which soever it is, it is again the denying the conclusion
(which you are very subject to) for the end of the former period is the mention
of a conclusion deduced from grounds immediately before specified. And the
beginning of the second period is a negation of mine, with proof immediately
following it, and before I come to the proof, [ For though, etc.] you
presently interpose your [ Yes sure by consequence it is] but will not consider
me so much, as after my example to give the least proof for what you say, or
take notice of that proof of mine.

C. 7. Answ. to C. 7. A. I make no distinction here, but suppose it made and
also manifest. Answ. I only said you had given a distinction (not made it) and
that supposed it made also; and I then contained my self from taking any
exceptions to it; only I told you the applying of it to that place would have
afforded some game if I had been so sportingly disposed. And to that I pray
consider how pertinent your Annotation has proved. I will not be provoked to
add more.

Ibid. B. Your part was to have confuted what I say, and not so often, and to
no purpose repeat this Petitio Principii. Answ. If it be a sufficient
confutation of any Sophister to find out, and tell him of his sophisme (which
ipso facto is worth nothing when it is discovered, as the title of Aristotle's
Book of Elenchs supposes, (...) being defined by Varinus, (...), a discovery
of that which was hid; and it is manifest by comparing 1 Cor. 14.24. with v. 25.
and Ephesians. 5.13.) then have I obeyed you in confuting what you say, though I take
not your advice for the way of it. And indeed if it should be in any Duellers
power to prescribe to his Adversary (when he is in his danger) that he shall
not wound him this way, but some other, or if it were regular for you to forbid
me to tell you of a Petitio principii, (when you are clearly guilty of it, and
when to evidence that against you, is not only the shortest, but most
logical, most expedite and most clear way of redargution) your Adversary might
be weary of playing out the prize, though he were sure to conquer in it. I
showed you that an Answerer might so carry the matter; as to be guilty of
Petitio principii, and 'twas but passion in you to check or tell me, 'twas to
no purpose, that I said you were so.

C. 8. Answ. to C. 8. A. We have done it, and do it continually when occasion
requires. Answ. I beseech you read over those lines of mine to which your
Annotation is affixt, and speak your conscience, whether you think 'twas fitly
noted, If you can be so partial to your own creature, I will not contend with
you, but only tell you, that as I conceive it impertinent, so I see
apparently, that it is contrary to that other speech of yours, which within
three lines I there recited from you. For if you do it continually ( i. e.
prove the Roman Church to be the true by its agreement with Scripture, etc.) as
here your Annotation says you do, how could you say his Lordship was mistaken
in supposing you did so? I wish you had first read out to the end of the
period, and then I suppose you would have fitted your Annotation to it the
better.

Ibid. B. I do not disclaim Scripture, though I do not hold it to be the
first or foremost proof either of the Church or of Christian Religion, and would
know how you your self would convert an Infidel or Atheist by Scripture,
beginning with that proof. Answ. You must again remember (what my last Answer
mentions) that in that place when his Lordship had supposed you to prove the
Roman Church to be the true Church by its agreement with Scriptures and
antiquity, which is in effect by holding the truth, you plainly tell him he is
mistaken in you. On this ground I must conclude (and think it proved by that
confession) that you do disclaim Scripture, as far as I said you did, i. e.
not to all purposes, but to that of which the discourse was, viz: to prove your
Church to be the true Church. And it is not enough to say that you do not hold
it to be the first or foremost proof, etc. For if it be used by you as any
proof at all, that will also be a very probable means, (besides that it makes
it evident, that his Lordship was not mistaken in supposing it so) to bring you
into the circle which you were so careful to avoid. You see I am clear from
your Animadversion, and so have no occasion to enter into that new
controversy, whether the Scripture be the foremost proof either of the Church,
or of the Christian Religion, (though sure it may be one without being the
other, it may be the foremost proof of evidencing which is the true Church to
them that are supposed Believers (and none else will be fit for that enquiry)
yet not be the first means to prove Christian Religion to Unbelievers:) And
yet I shall not be over-coy, nor make much scruple to tell you my opinion of
this also, that I would not begin with an Infidel, with that proof to either
purpose, as supposing he did believe it, or that it would of its own accord
attract his belief infallibly; but for Christianity it self, I should first
labor to win somewhat upon his affections by converse, and by showing him the
excellency of the Christian precepts, (and the power of them in my life) bring
him to think my discourse worth heeding, then when I had gotten that
advantage, I would relate the rem gestam of Christianity, where all the acts,
and miracles, and passages of Christ's life would come in; then, if he doubted
of the truth of it, tell him the authority, by which it comes down to us in a
continued, undistributed, undenied tradition; from those that were (...),
oculate Witnesses of Christ, and the whole matter; and to as good an advantage
as I could, compound the several motives of Faith together, which if you
please you may view at leisure in Grotius de verit. Chr. Rel. and when by these
means I had converted him, I should then by Scripture and antiquity, (which
would now be of some authority with him) and not by miracles, attempt to
manifest to him which were the true Church. To which end it may be worth your
remembering, that your Apostle of the Indies Xaverius* thought fit for their use
to compile a double Gospel, one of Christ, another of S. Peter, by the
authority of one of them to teach them Christianity, of the other, the
supremacy and infallibility of S. Peter's chair. But I shall not give my self
liberty to enlarge on this.

Ib. C. I deliver the method, and how it may be, I also affirm or declare that
it is, I was not in this place to prove, but to defend against the Enquirers
arguments, and no other, and therefore those two quarrels needed not. Answ. The
design of most of your Notes is to save your self from the necessity of
proving any thing that you affirm, whereas it might be but an act of a little
supererogating charity if you would sometimes prove your assertions, even when
by strict law you were not bound to it. But, Sir, I will not require your
alms, but only your justice, and though that will not oblige you to prove,
when you only defend, i. e. when you only deny the premises of his Lordships
arguments, etc. or when you are strictly an Answerer; yet when instead of that,
you confront any affirmation of yours to his Lordships conclusion (as here you
do, and in all places when we charge petitio principii upon you) I must then
be pardoned to put you in mind of your duty (which is that of Arguers then, and
not of Respondents) either to prove what you so say, or not to think you have
convinced any man. They that cannot answer one argument produced against them,
may yet think fit to make use of some argument for them, hoping that may prove
as convincing on their sides, as that against them: and so by divertisement put
off the heat of the impression; and this you have been proved to be often
guilty of, and 'twill satisfy no man to say, that you neither are, nor
(because Defendant) can be guilty of so doing.

Ibid. D. Sure he has not, for Turnbull has vindicated himself. Answ. If
every reply were a Vindication, then you may have affirmed truth, and then
these few marginall notes of yours (such as they are) would be your Vindication
also; and then I suppose you will give your free consent that they be printed.
But the task would be too long to disprove what you have now said, (for it
would require the examination of all those writings betwixt the two Combatants,
and when that were done, you would think perhaps, that Turnbull were
vindicated, and I that he were not) I shall only tell you that you had been
so concluded in a circle infallibly, if you had asserted that method, which his
Lordship there disproves; which is enough to vindicate his Lordship against
those that do assert that method, (as sure some Romanists do) and against
them he there argues and not against you, or any in that place which renounce
that method.

Ibid. E. If our Church be the true Church, it must be proved firstly, as
Christianity is first proved; that is to say, by motives of credibility, and
supernatural ostensions, or acts not of natural and ordinary, but
supernatural and extraordinary providence; and he that will not prove
Christianity by this way, will not prove it at all. After this done, Scriptures
and Fathers do come, but not before, and this way is not new, but the way of
the Ancients. Answ. I have here no necessity of re-examining of the means of
proving Christianity to an Infidel, it will suffice to remember that those
means which are necessary to that, may be unnecessary to prove, which is the
true Church, because now to him that is converted (as he that will judge
betwixt true and heretical is supposed to be) other means may suffiently
supply the place; such are Scripture and Antiquity, which to an Heathen are of
no authority, but to a Christian, or supposita fide, are, and being so (as I
conceive you will not think fit to deny) may well be made the umpire betwixt
us, who are, I hope, allowed to be Christians still by the consent of parties,
or if we are not, our pretensions to miracles will hardly gain any credit with
them that have that prejudice against us.

Mean while I must remember you that motives of credibility, as you call them,
are but weak premises to induce a conclusion of such weight, as the choice of
religion is. I will tell you what I should have said instead of it. Motives of
excessive probability, of the same, or greater force then those, on which I
ground and build the most considerable actions of my life, and which (as Answ.
to C. 14.
formerly I told you) if I will dis-believe, I have as good reason to mistrust
the wholesomenesse of every dish of meat I taste on, (which it is physically
possible may poison me, but yet none but Hypocondriackes think it will, or
fancy it so strongly, as to abst^ine) the security of any title of estate I
purchase or possess, the truth of any matter of fact in the most acknowledged
history or tradition among men, that I daily talk of.

All which though they produce not (nor are apta nata to do so) a science or
infallible certainty, cui non potest subesse falsum, yet do they (or are very
sufficient to do so) a Faith, or fiduciall assent, cui non subest dubium; of
which I doubt no more, then of the demonstrated problem before me, a certainty
of adherence, of which the believer is as fully possessed, and from it receives
as strong motives to do any thing proportionable to that belief, as if the
certitude of evidence were allowed him. And this I conceive is a degree
prettily advanced above motives of credibility, for such is every the lowest
probability* nay almost possibility, and non-repugnance, whatsoever is possible
to be, being (in it self, and in case the opposite balance be not otherwise
weighed down) credible, i. e. possible to be believed also. But this by the
way, and ex abundanti.

C. 9. Answ. to C. 9. A. Why cannot the simple know this ( viz. that the Greek
Church does not pretend from Saint Peter) as surely as they know the whole
Christian Church pretends from Christ, and from no other? Answ. Sir, you are a
little too hasty in your annotation, for if you had but read on to the next
lines, you had received the answer to your question, so far as my discourse is
concerned in it, viz. a specifying of diverse ways, by which it is possible the
Greek Church might (and one, whereby one part of it does) pretend succession to
S. Peter. And then that which so manifestly may be, and is, will not I hope be
so easy for ignorant men to know surely that it is not, or so surely as that
the Christian Church pretends from Christ, and from no other. Which yet if it
have any difficulty in it not intelligible to some ignorant men, I take no
pleasure in frighting any with an apprehension that God will ever damn those
ignorants for not being sure of what is so difficult, so their lives be
believing and Christian, and agreeable to what they do know of Christ.

C. 10. Answ. to C. 10. A. No sure, not against the ordinary necessity. Answ.
The thing I say in that place is, that his Lordships argument might be (I shall
add, is) of force against the necessity of a guide, (meaning thereby an
infallible one, for such only is to our purpose) and that that will serve his
Lordships turn, and destroy you, I there farther prove by a full explication
of the whole matter. And therefore you must give me favor to leave out your
epithete of [ Ordinary] which you would have me interpose, when my discourse in
order to its end, has no need of it. And if you tell me you put it in in your
answer to his Lordship, and that therefore I have not vindicated his Lordship
from that answer, unless I take it in also; I must then confess to you, that*
I did not so understand your words, [ all this is nothing against the ordinary
provision and necessity of a guide] that the word [ ordinary] was (...) to be
repeated to the word [ necessity] but only that it belonged to [ provision]
And now that I know your pleasure, I shall more clearly return my answer, that
his Lordship supposes some men (and I confess my self to be one of them) to
believe, that to all who follow their reason in the interpretation of
Scripture, and search for tradition ( i. e. the constant interpretation of the
Catholic Church concerning any difficulty) God will either give his grace of
assistance to find the truth, or his pardon if they miss it. To which purpose
you may please to compare Justin. Mart. quest. ^. ad Orthod. and, to omit many
more, Facundus Hermian. in def. 3. capit. ad Just. l. 11. p. 491. and p. 496.
and l. 12. page 513.

Now to them that so believe, the argument which you fetch from Gods providence
to conclude an infallible guide, will not, says his Lordship, be sufficient to
prove it; because he still will be able to say, that where imperfection is
accepted, means of perfection are not necessary; if God will pardon
weaknesses, he need not give such a measure of strength, as excludes all
weaknesses; if sincerity, though with some mixture of sin, will serve turn
here in via, we need not expect from God that integrity of faculties, which
either was bestowed in paradise, or will be in heaven, to give us an unsinning
innocence. And if you will still interpose, that this is nothing against the
ordinary necessity, because these are cases extraordinary. I answer, that this
is a great mistake; For under the Gospel or Evangelicall State (under which
all men have been since the promise of Christ upon Adams fall) there is no
ordinary necessity of never missing or mistaking; our natural state being an
estate of weakness, is advanced by Christ into such a condition, not wherein
all weakness is excluded, but wherein sincerity with mixtures of slips and
errors shall be accepted, and this as infallibly as innocence had been
rewarded under the first covenant made with Adam in the first state. To the
first Covenant, which is stricti juris, such pardon for slips might be
extraordinary; but to this second (whereof (...) or gentleness, is as much
apart, as (...), or strict justice, was before) this pardon for invincible
infirmities is as ordinary, as obligation to punishment for every slip had
been before, this being a prime ingredient in that Covenant, and not
extraordinarii, but ordinarii juris, that under it such slips shall not be
remembered. In like manner as in this Kingdom Chancery, though it be opposed to
Common Law (in one sense, as that signifies strict law) yet it is a part of our
common law, as that signifies the Municipall law, or total body of laws by
which this Kingdom is ruled; Equity (though perhaps it came in later, and to
repair defects or excesses in the strict law) being now as much every Subjects
right, and Writs out of that Court as legally required and granted, and the
whole process in Chancery, as clearly sec. jura and consuetudines Angliae,
and so as much Ordinary, or secundum Ordinem, as any thing that passes in the
Common Pleas. And so much for your nice interposition of the word [ Ordinary]
to your pretended necessity of a guide; where yet I might farther tell you,
that infallibility is not essential to, or inseparable from a guide; and
therefore though the Guide were granted to be ordinarily necessary to the
finding out of truth, yet this would not come home to infallibility. The
antecedent I could make good at large, if it were now seasonable.

Ibid. B. They (i. e. misses and mistakings) are called extraordinary, because
happening accidentally besides the provision of the law, and not because they
happen seldom. Answ. That misses and mistakings, infirmities and ignorances,
do happen besides the provision of the second, or the Evangelicall Covenant,
is a mistake, as was intimated then (within few lines after those, whereon your
annotation was fastened) and now at large proved in my last answer to your
former annotation, and I shall not need repeat it, but only tell you there is
a law of Faith (as well as of works) and that in that law there is provision
for errors, as well as sins, and that I hope belongs to all Christians, for
we are not under the Law, but under grace.

Ib. C. And why so? Answ. I had before given you the reason, viz: because your
discourse has tended to infer the one, and not the other.

C. 14. Answ. to C. 14. A. No man can bind another under pain of Anathema to
believe as he defines, unless his definition be certain. Answ. There was here
very little occasion for this note. For the business of Anathema's, I had
sufficiently restrained; First, by limiting them only to excommunications, as
an act of Ecclesiastical discipline upon the refractary; and therefore
Secondly, not for matter of simple beleiving or disbeleiving; but Thirdly, for
matter of disobedience to our lawful Superiors, and that disobedience again
not in refusing to submit our understandings, but our wills, and our consequent
actions: and Fourthly, all this with stubbornenesse and perverseness, after
the using of all milder courses. And with these and the like limitations there
will be no more difficulty to say an Ecclesiastical Magistrate may
excommunicate a disobedient refractary perverse Gain-sayer, without undertaking
to be infallible, then to say a civil Magistrate may punish a Malefactor
without being inerrable. And therefore when you talk of binding to believe
under pain of Anathema; there is some mistake in that, or if there were not,
yet Truth (if it were on grounds of Scripture believed to be so) would be as
sufficient a foundation of so doing, as the infallib^lity of the Judge. For not
only every truth is in it self as certain, as that which is infallible,
(every matter of fact that is so, is as certainly true, as any demonstration in
Euclide, and he that speaks it, speaks as certainly true, as if he did
demonstrate, yet is not in other things infallible for all that) but he that
beleives it with a full assent, has as little doubt of that truth, as if it
were before his eyes; yet does it not fide cui non potest subesse falsum, on
any supposition of its infallibility; by which means (though he pretends not
to infallibility, yet) having no degree of doubt, he has that, on which he
will confidently build any action, and even lay down his life for such truths,
if they be of weight: which if it be not ground enough to proceed on to an
Ecclesiastical censure against the stubborn and perverse you are very
mercifully disposed, and I will not provoke you out of it, but rather give you
my suffrage, that no man be thus censured for matter of opinion but upon that
light which is clearly deducible from the Scripture, or universal tradition;
and then I shall confess my sense, that to anathematize men for any matter of
doctrine, of any lower alloy, is though not formally, yet interpretative a
kind of pretending to infallibility, usurping as much, as if men were
infallible, which they that have the spirit but by measure, should have so much
humility in themselves, and charity toward others, as not to be guilty of.

Ibid: B. The sword preserves not inward unity, nor satisfies the mind. Answ.
I had no occasion to say it did. I was speaking (as your answer called me to
it) of discipline, and unity, or such unity as discipline produced, which is
outward unity, as opposed to division and Shisme; and yet let me tell you, it
were not unpossible to extend my speech to inward unity, and satisfying of the
mind. For suppose a particular Church to have sufficient means to work in
the hearts of her sons this inward unity, viz. by setting up the authority of
Scripture, as it is interpreted by the Fathers, and receiving with due respect,
and obedience all Apostolical Traditions; These, if duly revered by all
Sons and Subjects, would be able to keep all of one mind in all matters of
Faith (and for lower points some kind of liberty being allowed, would preserve
Charity as well) and then while that Church were in this happy temper, you may
farther suppose the sword of violence to come in, and disturb all, wresting
out of her hands the use and exercise of those means, and beating down the
authority, and taking away the reputation of them. And then in the case thus
set, you will surely grant that the rightful sword, if it might be so
prosperous as to vanquish the disturber, and restore what was thus violently
taken away, may prove no improbable means of preserving even inward unity in
this sense; and if you mark it, we spoke it not in any other. And yet once
more, if we had, we might have been justified perhaps in our saying. For
Heresy being a piece of carnality in the Apostles judgment, it is possible
that the outward smart, that comes from the exercise of the power of the sword,
i. e. from temporal punishments, may cure that disease, and persuade them, who
instead of pleasure from their heresy, reap nothing but pain, and sorrow, to
make better provision for their own flesh and blood, and think of hearing
that reason, to which other honest men's ears are open, and then that may
produce inward unity also, and these men's minds may be sufficiently satisfied
with that truth coming thus to them tempore congruo, at a fit season of
working, which at another time had been rejected. You see how little reason
you had for that annotation.

C. 15. Answ. to C. 15. A. Chillingworth says it in terms, and him also I
desired to answer. Answ. Can you think this fair dealing? His Lordship, I
made appear from his words, said it not. And you cannot say he did. But Chil:
say you did say it. What is that to his Lordship, or to me who undertake only
to vindicate his Lordship, and had not that rich harvest of leisure to think
fit to be retained any more in other men's causes on such joylesse terms as
these? in which rather then I would adventure to be engaged, I should be
content to be thought to have no degree of kindness to him, especially hearing
that you had three great volumes prepared against Master Chill: But then I pray
what is the meaning of [ him also I desired to answer?] Can you think fit to
impose a thing on his Lordship, which was said only by Master Chillingworth,
and when you were disproved, think you had still confuted Master Chillingworth
also, when you had only falsified, not confuted his Lordship? Sure, Sir, this
is not fair.

Ib. B. I know very well this was objected by both of them, and this I desired
to answer, whether it were in their books or no. Answ. Here is more of the
same streine. But I did conceive by your title, that you had confuted his
Lordships tract that was published, not any unwritten discourses, which we have
no way of knowing, whether they past or no, I am sure were not undertaken by me
to be vindicated. I never resolved to justify all that you could say either of
them said, and I might be forced to be uncivil with you, if I should enter any
such debate with you.

Ib. C. Neither Arius, Nestorius, nor others could peep out for saying any
thing against the doctrine received. How then could this Dionysius have
escaped, if he had adventured any thing against all the Orthodox? Answ. You are
very much given, in stead of answering Reasons, to deny Conclusions, and if
that were backed with Reason, 'twere yet very improper for a Respondent, which
you told us was your office at this time. But then secondly, in this matter you
know, that neither I, nor his Lordship have said that all the Orthodox were for
the Millennium. And yet thirdly, if they had, yet the denying the Millennium
being a more tolerable opinion than those other of Arius, and Nestorius,
Dionysius's opposition of the Chiliasts might pass more unresisted, than
Arius, or Nestorius could do.

Ib. D. Photius tells us there were Answers given, though he recites them not,
and Schottus in his Notes has resolved them. Answ. I will not take the pains
to see or examine whether Photius say there were Answers. If he recites them
not, I shall not be much moved with such blanke Papers. The truth is, this has
been the way to satisfy the hardest Arguments that ever were brought, and
confuting whole Books at once, by having it given out, that they are confuted,
or that Answers are made to them, when what those answers are, is not so much
as intimated; this is a very cheap way of confutations; As for Schottus's
Solutions, if he have any, they prevail little with us, I am sure they will
not conclude that Photius foresaw, or would have counted them of any moment to
alter his opinion, which was the only thing I there had occasion to take
notice of.

Ib. E. Though Philoponus cite but one Epistle, yet elsewhere he numbers him
among the famous Doctors. Basil, Gregory, etc. thereby insinuating he had left
works as they had, and not one single Epistle to Polycarpus. This is but a
conjecture, but such both we and all must use in matters of fact, and when we
are to walk through dark passages of Antiquity. Answ. Sir, you cited three
places out of Philoponus, to prove that Dionysius Arcopagita wrote those works
now extant bearing his name: This testimony I told you would be nothing to your
purpose, unless it testified (if not all those Books, yet) of some one
wherein he wrote against the Chiliasts. But this I showed you was not done,
because those places mention nothing of his, but an Epistle of Polycarpus, and
in that I advertized you there was nothing against the Chiliasts. This it seems
you cannot deny, but being willing to say something, say that elsewhere
Philoponus numbers him amongst the famous Doctors, etc. I have not now leisure
to read over all Philoponus, for that [ elswhere] (though I have reason to
think that you that before cited the Chapters in Philoponus so punctually,
would have had the same charity to me again, if it had suited with your
interests) considering how little can be concluded from what you now cite out
of him. Dionys. was numbered among the famous Doctors, Basil, Gregory, etc. does
it follow thence, that all the works now extant under his name were his* or
particularly that wherein he opposes the Chiliasts? Nay, would not a man rather
conclude from that pretended testimony of Philoponus that the Author under the
name of Dionysius Ar^op. was some Writer about S. Basils or S. Gregory's time,
with whom he is there consorted, and that is somewhat later then Dionysius in
the Scripture. Nay, if Philoponus really meant him, would he not rather have
given him the title of an Apostolical Person, than of a famous Doctor, such as
S. Basil, etc. As for the insinuation which you mention from this of
Philoponus, if it did conclude as you would have it, that he left Works as
they did, and not only one single Epistle, yet sure 'twill not so much as once
insinuate that they were the Works, that we have under his name, much less
that peculiarly, which opposes the Chiliasts, least of all, that 'twas the
Apostolical Dionysius that really wrote all these. But you confess these but
a conjecture, and therefore sure 'twill be a very weak prop to hold up
infallibility, especially when the conjecture if it should be supposed true,
would tell us that which we had not before been told from you, that the
Chiliasts doctrine was taught, (and so capable of being confuted) so early as
the Apostles times, for with them this Dionysius lived.

You conclude that such conjectures as this, you and all must use in matters of
fact, etc. To which I answer that it is possible you may be forced to it, on
supposition that you think your self obliged to vindicate your Churches
Infallibility, for it is very possible, there may be no better, then such
conjectures to sustain it. But believe me, Sir, I will never maintain cause,
as long as God keeps me in my right wits, which has no better conjectures,
than these to sustain it. And for matters of fact so long ago, they are of
all things in the World the unfittest to be believed upon such conjectures.
Because nothing but an authentic express witness can be ground of faith for
such. There is no matter of fact done yesterday, but may if we will go by
conjectures (I am sure as good and as probable as yours here) be related 10000
ways, for whatsoever may be, some bold Affirmer may conjecture was, and the
more ancient, and more dark the passage was, the more liberty there will be
for such Conjecturers, because the less possibility to confute any of them.

Ib. F. Salvian does not refuse to condemn the Arian heresy, but some of the
Gothic Arians for it, as men not guilty of the malice of it. Answ. If you
look again you will find that both his Lordship, and I say that Salvian
refused to condemn the Arian Heretics (not heresy) and this it seems, you
confess with the restraint of [ Gothic Arians] and this will serve our turns
perfectly, and so we shall not quarrel about that, but hope from your own
confession, that he that is not willing to condemn all Protestants, may escape
as well as Salvian even in your censure.

C. 16. Answ. to C. 16. A. The Council of Constance does not teach this [viz:
that no Faith is to be kept with Hereticks] neither our Doctors hold it, as
Molanus, Becanus, Tannerus, Layman, Coeffecteau, Coquaeus, and others do show
us. Answ. To teach is an equivocall word, and may signify to define by way of
position or doctrine in universum; In this sense I said it not, nor do now
mean it of that Synod, that they made any such determination, that it should
be unlawful to keep faith with Heretics, or lawful for any man in any case
not to keep it. But then to teach may signify also, to teach by example, and
to lay grounds of doctrine for the justifying of such example. And thus the
Council of Constance did teach it; The Emperor had given safe conduct to John
Hus* etc. and the Synod declared that that safe conduct should be no prejudice
to any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and that non obstante any such concession,
any competent Ecclesiastical Judge might enquire, and proceed against any such
Persons, and punish them as much as justice should persuade, if they would not
retract their errors. And this cost those poor men their lives, whose
presumption on the Emperors safe conduct, made them venture themselves in that
snare, never suspecting, that such a distinction as that could have proved so
fatal to them. That you may not hereafter say I charge you unjustly, I shall
set you down the very words in the Council in Binius Sess. 19.

Praesens sancta Synodus ex quovis salvo conductu per Imperatorem, Reges, and
alios saeculi principes haereticis vel de haeresi diffamatis, putantes eosdem
sic a suis erroribus revocare, quocunque vinculo se astrinxerint, concesso,
nullum fidei Catholicae vel jurisdictioni Ecclesiasticae praejudicium generari
vel impedimentum praestari posse seu deb^re declarat, quo minus dicto salvo
conductu non obstante liceat judici competenti and Ecclesiastico de ejusmodi
personarum erroribus inquirere, and alias contra eos debite procedere,
eosdemque punire, quantum justitia suadebit, si suos errores revocare
pertinaciter recusaverint, etiamsi de salvo conductu confisi ad locum venerint
judicii, alias non venturi: nec sic promittentem, cum fecerit quod in ipso est,
ex hoc in aliquo remansisse obligatum. I shall not trouble you with the
English, but only ask what this differs from teaching that Faith is not to be
kept (i. e. not necessarily, but in some case may be broken) with Heretics?
They that shall after safe conduct given, proceed to judgment (be it
Ecclesiastical) against any man, and condemning him for heresy, deliver him
up to that secular hand to punish him with death, who had given him the safe
conduct, and tell him, that he, having done what in him lies, remains not
obliged by his promise, but may and must put him to death, who came to that
judicature, only on confidence of that his promise and safe conduct, have sure
proceeded upon other notions of justice than those with which my education has
embued me, and I must profess to appeal from their judgments, as in my Reply
to that citation of them, I was bold to do; and whatever your friends Molanus,
etc. have thought fit to say for the saving the reputation of that Council,
the matter is too gross to be palliated, and I shall not trouble my self or
you to examine their excuses.

Ibid. B. Heresy is punished not for the accidental grievousnesse of it, but
for the essential. Answ. This is again a denying the conclusion, (and not so
much as endeavoring to prove the contrary) for this was the thing in this
place clearly proved by the citation of those Laws, that all Heretics, viz:
Arians and Macedonians by name) were not to be so punished, when only
Eutychians were, the former of these acknowledged by you as much Heretics in
respect of the essential grievousnes of their doctrine, as the latter* From
whence it follows, that either there was great partiality, or else the
difference arose from the accidentalls. And truly, Sir, your saying in general
that it is not so, will little persuade any, when here is such evidence in the
particular, that it is.

Ib. C. The title of defense is the Argument. Answ. There is not in that place
any one word of this Title of defense, or of any other argument; And that was
all I affirmed. If you please to survey the place, that will judge it betwixt
us.

Ib. D. This is a hard censure, and hardly to be proved. Answ. I confess it is
hard in some sense, i. e. to them that suffer under you for being Heretics
(as you call those that depart from your deformations) and for being invaders
(which all may at pleasure be called that are not able to resist) As for the
censure it is but that for which the grounds are gathered from your own words.
Which till you disprove, it is but your bare saying that it is an hard censure;
or when it is proved, it matters little what difficulty there was in doing it.

Ibid. E. These were not settled violences, but tumultuous, and outrages not for
religion, but for other quarrels occasioned by religions. Answ. The passage to
which this annotation was affixt, was about the pictures of Papal approbation
of Massacres, to be seen at Rome. Which if they were, as you now say,
tumultuous and outrages, then it seems there is papal approbation for such;
and then either that or you are fallible. But since you see it necessary to
add another limitation, that the Massacres so approved were not for religion,
I would feign persuade my self that you disclaim massacres for religion (the
lawfulness of which you were so long defending.) And if you be now in that
good mood of mercy, I shall not go about to confute or provoke you out of it,
but rather pray that God confirm you and all your friends in it for a longer
space, then your charitable not damning us did last in the former part of the
Chapter.

Ibid. F. Those of Queen Mary's days had spoiled and stripped the Catholics
of all they had, and therefore no marvel they did seek to punish them
severely, and to suppress them as men would do wild Boares broken into a
park or garden. Answ. He that should compare this annotation with the text
would wonder how it came in, so without all temptation or occasion. I was there
a challenging him to name one, that since Queen Mary's days was in this
kingdom put to death for religion. And to the mention of Queen Mary, the
annotation is affixed. But I shall excuse the impertinence; that very hint
might well put him in mind of that sea of blood in Queen Mary's days. Which
if it were by way of punishment for spoiling and stripping Catholics, and nor
for religion; I beseech you produce one such bill of indictment brought in
against the sufferers. Our stories have told us otherwise, If you have any
authenticke records in your Archives, I pray make us partakers of the truth; In
the mean, I fear a Protestant son of a Romanist father, may when
opportunity serves, pass for such a wild boar and a spoiler.

Ib. G. My sense is that religion may not be planted by arms, but being once
planted and in quiet possession it may. And this I suppose no learned man will
deny. Answ. I may believe you that this is now your sense, but that it is the
sense of those words of yours, which I was then confuting, I shall be confident
to deny, not only because the words bear no such sense, but because you did
there your self interpret them thus, that the thing which you disclaimed the
designing by arms, was only the justifying the right and truth of religion by
them. Which I then conceived to signify, that your swords do only force men
to be of your minds, do not give them reasons why they should. Yet if after
all this, you tell me in earnest, that this was not your meaning, I shall cry
you mercy for the mistake, but not now enter into a dispute with you of that
new question now proposed by you, [ Whether religion (that must signify your
doctrines as they are distinguished from, or opposed to ours, or else 'twill not
be pertinent to our purpose) being planted and in quiet possession, may]
because I cannot imagine what verb that syllable [may] is the mood of.
[Plant] it cannot be, for that which is in possession, is already planted: But
what it should be, I must not divine for you. Only at an adventure I shall make
a plain state. If your doctrines were in quiet possession here, and you should
know of any man that taught the contrary to them, must your sword be drawn
against him, or no? I beseech you answer out of the sense of your brethren,
that we may know what to expect from you. For my own part, I shall make no
scruple to tell you, that though the defender of the Faith have the power of
the sword given him by God to that end, to govern in godliness and quiet, and
may therefore draw it effectually against any that raise sedition to bring in
some other religion against that which is by law established, or that vent
doctrines that are in themselves seditious, yet ought he not, only in case of
any single doctrine or difference in religion (where none of the civil
interests are concerned, no violent assault made, or feared from the
dissenters) to unsheath his slaughtering sword against any such dissenter,
provided always that that doctrine be not blasphemous. (And they that
consenting to this truth, will yet tyrannize over men's souls in ordine ad
temporalia, as you and some others have done over men's bodies and estates in
ordine ad spiritualia, shall never be excused by me) and of this opinion I
conceive there might be vouched as learned, and as primitive-tempered
Christians as any that are more zealously, and so more bloudily minded.

Ibid. H. Aspersions be easily cast, but should not be admitted, when there are
strong presumptions to the contrary, without evident proof; The Catholics
were known good Patriots under our former Kings, and under this our most
gracious Prince we have good testimony, greater then which cannot be given.
Answ. The case is not here of aspersions, but of matters of fact, or attempts
of Priests, whereby Queen Elizabeth was known to have been in danger. On which
provocation the laws forbidding all such to come into the Kingdom, made it
such a legal presumption, that if they did, they should incur that
suspicion, and sentence of the law. And so every man knowing what measure to
expect from the laws, were farther to be presumed either traitorous or mad,
if on those terms he would adventure on such a forbidden journey. As for
evident proof, which you require, it belongs little to this matter, because
the very being in the Kingdom was a demonstration of contemning the law, and
an evidence that they were the men that were under that legal presumption;
which is far more then a prooflesse aspersion, with evidence to the contrary.
As for the fidelity of your Patriots under our foremost Kings, when they were of
their opinions, I shall not question it; neither in like manner your behavior
to our present Sovereign, but only tell you, that the Queen Elizabeth laws
might be just for all that; (which was all we had now in hand) and for the
execution of them in latter times, I before gave you an account.

Ibid. I. We do profess our best reason has brought us to our religion, not
our passion, and we have as much reason to be believed as any others can. Answ.
It Is possible you may not; for if men's actions give in any testimony against
their words, there will not be so much reason to believe such, as when there is
a concordance of them; But if upon serious shrift you are able to profess this
sincerity, I shall be so charitable to believe you and allow you any hope of
mercy for your errors, which you can wish; but yet tell you, that by making
this profession in the plural number, you do somewhat prejudge it; no man
being so privy to the hearts of his fellow professors, as to be a fit voucher
for them, every man must stand or fall to his own Master.

Ibid. K. I was to answer and not to prove, and therefore might in right deny
what the Enquirer falsely supposes without proof. It is the respondents right
to affirm the very point in question, or to deny it, without caring whether it
be granted or no, so he himself be ready to defend it; and so he that can
exact this as his own, shall not need to beg any thing, and if he do, he
cannot beg more then what he has, and what he affirms or denies already.
For example, I deny against Copernicus that the earth moves, or I affirm that
it is quiet, and I stand to maintain my saying. Certainly this is no begging,
but yet to say that it is so, may be a begging, or if I should say it stood
still, because it does not move, were a frivolous speech, but yet for all that
no begging of the question. Answ. This vindication of your beloved petitio
principii, (that stands you in such stead, and returns so frequently upon you)
I have already examined, and discovered the mistakings of it; and must now tell
you again, that when the question is by the opponent proved by any medium, it
must never be lawful for the respondent to deny it again any farther then by
denying the proof on which it was inferred; for this would be the denying the
conclusion, and petitio principii again. The respondent in this case cannot
exact the question as his own, nor any otherwise defend it, then by repelling
the weapons brought against him. As for your great simile of denying the motion
of the earth, and your standing to maintain your saying; if you do this by
any other means then by denying or answering the proofs produced against you,
this is not the respondents part, but will, when you have done what you can,
appear to be that vulgar Sophisme. It being certain that when a thing is
questioned betwixt two, the affirming without proof is begging it, and it
being not the respondents part to prove (or if he do, he becomes opponent) it
follows necessarily, that the respondent that in time of disputation affirms,
must either cease to be respondent, or else beg the question.

C. 18. Answ. to C. 18. A. We are to consider here not what is conceived but
what is to be conceived. Now what is to be conceived I have showed, namely that
the Church understands better then he does, for right reason will tell him
this. Answ. This is the very thing which is disproved in that place, and then
the bare repeating it over again, will be but a mean kind of vindication. Be
pleased to look over the place again, and if you will still think that there
was any place for this annotation, I shall be sorry I have been thus
troublesome to you.

Ibid. B. I have showed the reason why. Answ. When an argument is framed on a
double supposition; without disputing the truth of either, it is not to be
allowed the respondent to answer, by denying the truth of either of the things
supposed, for they are supposed in that dispute, but not disputed of. As for
example, if the question were, [ Whether supposing Adam were not fallen, and
Christ were come, the coming of Christ could be for the sin of Adam.] do you
think 'twould be tolerable for the respondent to avoid some argument brought
against him, by saying that it was absolutely false to say that Adam was not
fallen, whereas 'twas true that Christ was come? This would certainly be so
gross and impossible to be justified, that I should suspect any man's fidelity,
that should tell me, he had rendered a satisfying reason why this should be. And
this is your case at this time.

Ibid. C. Whether she be infallible or no, she is like to be wiser than any
private man. And this point cannot be in controversy with a wise man, and
therefore here is no petitio principii. Answ. This is a rare way of replying,
when a discourse has been proved guilty of a petitio principii, to say it is
impossible it should, and when a thing is denied, to say it cannot be in
controversy.

But, Sir, I shall yield you the Church may be wiser than any private man, yet
not conceive it to follow (unless she be also infallible) that when a private
man and the Church differ, she must always be in the right. He that is much
wiser than another, may yet in some particular be mistaken, when that other is
in the right, yea and may be advised and reformed in such a particular, by one
that is not so wise as he. This you may apply to the matter in hand, not so
far as to prefer the authority of any one man before the Church in
general, but only so, as not to pronounce it infallible. I might tell you
farther, that a member of the Church of England assenting fully to the doctrine
of that Church, and so discharging the duty of a private man in preferring the
judgment of the Church (whereof he is a member) before his own judgment, may
yet doubt of some things affirmed by the Church of Rome, and not make the
comparison between a private man's judgment, and the judgment of the Church,
but only betwixt one particular Church and another. But after all this, I
might have spared any, or all these Answers, and do now only desire you to
look back upon the place, and you will soon see what no ground is to be found
there of your Annotation.

Ibid. D. If you have no evidence (that it is Gods pleasure that your Church
should be infallible) nor can have, you say true, but this latter is denied.
Answ. It Is easy to deny conclusions still. But if you will either answer the
arguments, which have proved there is none, or produce any such evidence that
it is infallible, you shall be victorious indeed.

Ib. E. This argument which the Inquirer impugnes, is an argument of his own
making, and none of ours, yet for all that, the argument is not like a Ballad
as good backward as forward, as M. Chillingworth, putting it a little
differently from the Inquirer, would have it. Answ. If you had pleased to
disclaim and not defend this argument at the first, you might have saved us
some pains, and if you will yet promise me that no man shall out of M. Knots
Book make use of this argument any more, I will be very well content that
argument shall be no longer insisted on, yet must tell you my opinion from my
own express knowledge, that they which read that Book before 'twas confuted
by M. Chillingworth did verily believe that that argument to prove an
infallible judge, taken from the topic of Gods goodness, was M. Knots
masterpiece, and the founation on which the maine weight of his structure was
supported.

C. 19. Answ. to C. 19. A. In a Respondent there can be no such thing as
Petitio principii. Answ. We have showed you that a Respondent may so ill behave
himself that there may. As for example, when a man has used Arguments to prove
that you have been guilty of begging the Question, For you to despise and not
take notice of the arguments, and to say only that there can be no such thing,
is the very thing called Petitio principii.

Ib. B. But we again deny it is [ Petitio principii] and the contrary ought to
be proved. Answ. It is clearly proved in the place, and not to consider the
proofs, but to deny the conclusion is another guilt of that sophism.

C. 20. Answ. to C. 20. A. If the Enquirers meaning be as you put it, it makes
nothing at all against us, nor needs any Answer. But Chillingworth goes
farther, and says that many of the simpler sort amongst us believe Truth upon
no better grounds, than others believe Falsehood, and yet our simpler sort
believe Truths, upon all the motives that yours do, and somewhat more. Answ.
That that is his Lordships meaning is plain, viz: That he that denies your
infallibility, and yet uses his best reason to seek if it be true, will be in
as safe a condition, as he that believes it, and searches not. And if this be
nothing against you, I shall hope this quarrel is nearer an end then ever I
had thought to see it. And then sure many of us shall be capable of that
charity, which you bestow upon your own, for I am confident what we do, we
do upon search, and use of our best reason; and yet that we deny your
infallibility, you are sufficiently assured.

C. 21. Answ. to C. 21. A. He might be secretly obstinate, and yet both he and
we conceive the contrary. Answ. It Is true he might. But yet sure you that
believe he was not obstinate, cannot believe that the punishment of obstinacy
should belong to him, but must either think God unjust, or else believe him
safe in the same degree that you think him not obstinate. And this is all I
required from you.

C. 22. Answ. to C. 22. A. Every implicit assent must be resolved lastly into
an explicit, or else there will be an infinite regression, for every implicit
presupposes something in which it is involved or implicit. Answ. I beseech you
observe the nature of this Annotation of yours. You say in your Apology, that
one implicit Faith does not contain another. I proved that false by this
instance, that supposing I believed by an implicit Faith, that you were an
honest man, this might contain in it an implicit belief of every Proposition
by you asserted, and farther by putting his Lordships affirmation by you denied
into a down right Syllogism: you after your wont answer no proofs, but prove
against the conclusion. And truly your proof is a strange one, every implicit
assent must be resolved lastly into an explicit: Ergo, One implicit faith
does not contain another. As if you should say, Every subordinate cause must
be resolved lastly into a first cause; Ergo, One subordinate cause does not
contain another, the Genealogy of Abraham must at last be reduced to God,
therefore Abraham's Grandfather was not Father to Abraham's Father: what sound
of reason is there in this arguing? The antecedent is the only thing which you
go about to prove, and the consequence that which we deny, and therefore I
shall need say no more to this Annotation.

C. 24. Answ. to C. 24. A. We mean the fire of this world, and that fire we
are sure is not in all Countries appointed to burn such as do dissent from
us. Answ. What? not to burn such as dissent in matters of faith? Is there any
matter of faith which is not required sub poena ignis? (I mean also with you,
the fire of this world) If there be, speak out. But you have by your next
Annotation in effect confessed there is not, and so by that confuted this, for so
you add.

Ib. B. I make no such distinction. Answ. i. e. No such distinction, that of
matters of faith some are required sub periculo ignis, some not; which is in
effect that in respect of that penalty all matters of faith are of the same
nature. Which is absolutely contrary to that former, unless in that your
meaning were, that fire was not in all Countries appointed to burn Dissenters
from you, i. e. not in those Countries, where you had not the power. And that
will be but a slender obligation from you, if it be acknowledged.

Ib. C. If you could make that appear we were satisfied. Answ. It is made
appear as much, as your like Assertion of your selves, i. e. by our affirming
it. But if you will have patience to read on in that place, you shall see the
point stated, and as much of it proved, as we have need to assert in this
matter.

Ib. D. In some places we do (make use of the Argument from Mutual
Dissentions) but in this it is brought against us. Answ. This is clearly false,
for in the 40. Sect. his Lordship there mentions it as an Argument of yours,
and in that place becomes Respondent, gives an Answer to that Argument, and
that is the ground of the present debate.

Ib. E. Our Criterion or rule of Faith keeps off dissentions when it is
followed, yours does not. Lutherans and Calvinists follow the same rule, and
yet dissent and condemn one another, ours do not so, but remit the
differences to be decided to one and the same judge both exterior, and
interior. Answ. I was a proving by the ancient Catalogues of Heretics, that
there were good store of Heretics in the world before the Reformation, (from
which it follows that either your infallible Judge was not then in fashion, or
else that it is not such a sovereign means or antidote against Heretics) you
seem to distinguish that your rule keeps off dissentions, not always, but when
it is followed; and prove that farther, because you remit the differences to be
decided to one and the same Judge. I might answer, that our rule, the word of
God does so too, at least in matters of faith, and that any such dissension, at
least uncharitable censuring of Dissenters, is absolutely against that rule.
But I conceive that is not the thing that commends a rule as a means to prevent
dissentions, that they that follow it dissent not, (for the rule if it be but
one rule, what ever it is, will do that) but that it is able and apt to keep
men obedient, and to restrain them from excesses and not following of it. Now
this is an excellence that these many Catalogues of Heresies proved, that you
had no right to pretend to, and if we have not so neither, we are but Partners
in this piece of humane infelicity, to which, as long as we carry flesh about
us, it will be incident, for there must be Heresies among you. As for your
instance of the Lutherans and Calvinists dissentions, and condemning one the
other, I must tell you that this little concerns the Church of England, which
always disclaimed the being called by the names, or owning the dissentions of
Lutheran and Calvinist, and professes only the maintaining of the Primitive
Catholic faith, and to have no father on earth, to impute their faith to. I
might add more even for those Lutherans and Calvinists, that if they did
really follow (I say not only profess, but follow) the same rule, they would
certainly agree also.

Ibid. F. I do not excuse all (the Jesuits from the doctrine of resisting
Magistrates under color of Religion, killing Kings, opposing the Order of
Bishops etc.) nor ought you to have accused all; For neither all the Jesuits,
nor near all be of that mind, but of the quite contrary. Bellarmine, Valentia,
Petavius, and other Jesuits have written for the Order of Bishops against
Salmasius and others, but none at all have written against it. Neither was the
controversy between the Saeculars about that point, as it is most evident.
Answ. I have already obeyed your commands; and indeed had no necessity to
accuse all of that Order in all places. It was sufficient to prove the point in
hand, ( dissentions among your selves) that any considerable number were of
those opinions, which are the worst that are to be found among our S^ctaries,
And it seems you cannot in your own heart excuse all, as kind as you are to
them. If others in a matter of such moment are of a contrary mind, this is an
argument not against, but for the truth of what is laid to you, dissentions
after all your infallible judgments. For the Jesuits opinion of Bishops I
appeal no farther then the disputations in the Council of Trent, and the
general pretensions of that Order to an Independency, and absoluteness from
any but their own superior, and the Pope, and this, though it allow Bishops
over other men, yet is sufficiently contrary to the Apostolic institution, and
practice of having all the Churches and Presbyters in them, subjected to them.
You add, that the controversy of the Saeculars (I suppose you mean and
Regulars) was not about that point, i. e. of Episcopacy, I did not say it was,
any farther then thus, as the necessity of Confirmation is all one with the
necessity of Episcopacy, (which truly to me seems to be very near it* and I
am sure the business was whether the Catholics in England should have an
Ordinary here resident or no, and that Ordinary was a Bishop; so that though it
was not of Episcopacy, in universum, yet it came to a debate, whether the
having Bishops was necessary, or no) On which soever it is, it is enough to
prove dissentions.

C. 26. Answ. to C. 26. A. At least they might have been discerned, as well as
other errors were, and the Authors of them also. Answ. This note being reduced
to intelligible sense, will I conceive be, that the now Romish errors might
have been discerned, etc. To which I answer, that though they might, yet First,
it is possible that they might not; Secondly, very possible that being favored,
if not brought in by those in authority among them, they would not be branded
or recorded for errors, and then all that we their posterity can see, may be
only, that the tares are sown, but not punctually at what point of the night,
or who the man was that sowed them.

Ibid. B. No more for these then for other errors. Answ. His Lordship had
occasion only to speak of these, but will say the like of all others whose
original is not discernible.

Ibid. C. In all ages errors were censured and condemned. Answ. All kind of
errors were not thought to be of such weight, as that such heavy censures and
condemnations which you lay on us, should be fastened on them. And therefore in
case ours be not errors, or but in materia non gravi, in disputable parts, (as
if you please to descend to particulars, we will undertake to prove them) those
severe censures of yours, being more contrary to charity, may prove more
dangerous to you, then we shall otherwise affirm your opinions to be.

Ibid. D. I judge one of these two by the event, and the other by the semblance
of his making a search in manner as he ought. Answ. This is a dark speech
which I do not clearly understand: if the meaning be, that you judge the ill
success of his Lordships searches by the event, and the fault of them by the
semblance, etc. I must then tell you, that the first is a very ill grounded
judgment, for no event has proved the illness of that success, (unless like
those in the Gospel, you count them the greatest Sinners on whom the Tower of
Siloah fell; or like him of late, that being willing to pass his opinion on a
learned man's choice of a side in the differences in the Low Countries, said
only this, Illud notum est, parts quas secutus non est praevaluisse; si quis
infelicitati hoc tribuat, ego prudentiam non probo minus felicem; and
Busbequius tells us somewhat like of the Turks judgments of good and bad
enterprises) but rather on your own principles I have already proved, that
they must be good in the success, which were so happy in proposing.

But then what you mean by the semblance of his making a search in manner as
he ought, by which you judge the fault in his searches; I must confess I do
not at all understand, and therefore must be feign to confess my self
overcome and mastered, though not by the reason, yet by the obscurity of your
writing; and if that be a victory, I wish you much good of it.

To the Conclusion. A. I here contend no more, but that our Church may be
infallible, notwithstanding any thing the Enquirer has objected. That she is
so, has in due place been proved by others. Answ. If you had performed the
former, I mean satisfied all his Lordships arguments, I should not require at
this time the latter from you, i. e. proving your Church to be Infallible. I
must then only ask you in earnest, whether you do believe that no one of his
Lordships arguments against your Infallibility (for any one will serve our
turn) remains unanswered by your Apology; and then whether all that I have
said to vindicate his Lordship, be effectually answered in your marginall
Notes, and whether you can justify all them against his last Reply. If you are
of this opinion in each, I am to crave your pardon for this so gainlesse
trouble, but refer the matter to God and impartial men to judge between us.

Ibid. B. If you would do it, we then would think it more than possible.
Answ. The meaning of this annotation if it be sense, must be this, that if we
Protestants could or would find place in you for Scripture and Reason to make
impression, you Papists would then think it more then possible you might be
deceived. Which if it be the meaning, I must then only reply by prayer, that
God would so soften your hearts, that they might be capable of that impression.
But if the words be indeed no sense, but yet mistaken for some other words,
which would be sense, then the likeliest thing that I can imagine, is, that you
would have said somewhat to this purpose. [ If you Protestants could by
Scripture or Reason disprove our Doctrines, we then would think it more than
possible for us to be deceived] Which though it were no huge Concession, yet I
should be glad to have it from you, for then in effect your grounding of Faith
on your Infallibility would be laid aside, and then there would be no more
truth in any individual Doctrine of your Church, than Scripture or Reason
would infer, abstracted from the Authority of your Church, which is all that
at this time we demand from you.

And in that we are a little importunate (seeing we have you now in a seeming
good humor:) First, because there is so much danger in insisting on that
privilege of Infallibility, even in any particular, wherein men are in the
right, because he that really does stand, yet may (and therefore ought to take
heed lest he) fall, but most eminently, when a man chances to be in the wrong.
He that mistakes first in a piece of Divinity, and after in a persuasion that
he cannot mistake, seals up that error, obstructs all entrance, all
approach, all possibility of Reformation, is fortified impregnable against all
assaults either of reason, or even the spirit of truth; and by that one error
has a kind of propriety in all other that can by the same hand be represented
to him. Secondly, because we cannot but observe the prudence of your
fellow-Champions, Master Knot etc. now of late, who have chosen to vary the
method from insisting on the several points of difference betwixt us, and them
(proving themselves to be the only true Church from the particular truths
professed by them, and by no others) to this other more commodious way of putting
off all together by wholesale, of concluding the truth of all their assertions
from the unerrablenesse of the Asserter, manifesting that they are in the
right, because it is impossible they should be in the wrong, using all skill to
persuade this one point, and then confident on good grounds, that no other can
be resisted. These two things put together, will advertise you, how seasonable
an admonition it is to you, that you will bestow a little pains on your
Brethren, to persuade them they are mortal or fallible; and then again Reason
and Scripture may find reception, and be agreed on the umpire betwixt us and
we shall promise sincerely, that whatever that shall, sententia lata, award to
you, we will most gladly yield, and never break with you, till you break from
that umpirage.

Ibid. C. The words are applicable against our belief of Christianity, as well
as against our belief of our Churches doctrine. Answ. The words are applied by
me only against your infallibility, and if that be as infallible as
Christianity it self, I beseech you either show as plain testimonies from the
consent of all Ages, that the Church of Rome is infallible, as there are for
the Canon of the Scripture, or as plain places out of the Scripture for it, as
we can for the several parts of Christianity, and then I will give you leave
so to apply the words; In the mean, you may spare your labor of applying my
words, or else prove demonstratively that they are so applicable.

Ibid. D. A possibility perhaps of more errors, but a probability of fewer,
for if she were fallible, yet she would not be fallible, as a private man; so
that with these fewer errors we should have quiet and unity, you with more
errors should have disturbances and dissentions. Answ. In this place, whereto
your Annotation was affixt, the discourse was upon a supposition, that your
Infallibility were an error, (which I in that case affirmed, would be the most
dangerous, because most prolificall complicated error imaginable) and will you
say that upon that supposition, there would be a probability of fewer errors?
Will the thinking I cannot fall make me stand the longer? is there no advantage
to be made of care, and caution, and fear? or is there a disadvantage in them?
This is brave fiduciary doctrine, I must think infallibly I shall be saved,
and that I cannot fall away, and the thinking that, will make it more probable
that I shall be saved, and shall not fall. I confess I had thought that
humility were a readier way both to truth and Heaven, then either of these
presumptions. What you mean by adding (by way of proof of that saying) that
if your Church were fallible, she would not be fallible as a private man, I
confess I cannot guess. If she would not, I conceive, this would be but
little advantage on her side, for her fallibility would be a greater snare and
scandal, and more apt to draw into error those that conceived her infallible,
than any private man's fallibility would do. For that which you add of quiet
and unity, if it were supposed to be joined with fewer errors, I grant it
would be an advantage, but at a time, when that infallibility was supposed to
be one error, and that proved most apt to produce a multitude; surely this
ought not to have been supposed, any more, than that we should have more
errors still, though 'twere not at the same time supposed that we have.

Ibid. E. It was never put into more hands than two, but what those hands might
do, I know not; and to those on purpose to make trial what exceptions might
be made against it, that so upon a review, I might know better what to alter in
it, what to add, and what to take away. Answ. I conceive one man has two
hands, and therefore it is possible you may mean, it was never communicated to
above one man. If you do, it is certainly false; But if you mean two men by
two hands, you acknowledged what I said, for I said no more. As for your
affirmation that 't was put into those hands only for trial, etc. This cannot
be said of one of them, for to him it was delivered by one of your friends, as
an unanswerable piece, but yet if it were, as you pretend, that you might know
better what to alter in it; I am then glad I have given you occasion to do so,
but must tell you, that now you have altered it, and delivered it from some
infirmities, which appeared to be in it, there be yet enough behind, to be
reformed by any body else, and when that is done, there will remain somewhat
else perhaps, but I am sure no answer to my Lord of Falkland.

Ibid. F. Sir, your noble courtesy is gratefully acknowledged, and I desire
with all due respects and services to correspond. Answ. This I conceive to be a
civility, and I shall never go about to confute that, or answer it, but by the
return of the like, and my prayers also, that the Lord give you a right
judgment in all things.

HEre it seems was once an end of those annotations, and it had been for the
readers ease and mine, that you had continued in that mind. But upon better
thoughts, either that which had been here noted, was thought not quite
sufficient, or else, ex abundanti, this superfoetation is bestowed on us. The
closing sheet which I mentioned in the Preface, and promised to annex also.
Which here in justice to the Apologist, I shall give you, though I conceive I
had been as kind to him, if I had forgotten it.



28. undertakes to give reasons why the Church of Rome is fallible. So that our
drift is to make it good that this same Church may still be infallible,
notwithstanding any thing that he has said unto the contrary.

1. Sect. videl. that with us both Reason, Scripture, and Antiquity, be
fallible; his proof of this assertion is a supposed maxim of ours, namely,
that nothing is infallible but the Church. The assertion is first denied, and
afterward the proof, and against these denialls no reply can be made, because
we know best our own inward acts and judgments, and no man is able to tell us
what we think, but we must tell them.







3. reason can assure us, by showing us some words of prophecy, or revelation
from God, with sufficient evidence that it is a revelation, and thus reason can
prove a verity be it never so inevident. After this manner it is that we say
reason proves our Church, against which proof the inevidence of it, as we see,
can be no impediment.

Bellarmine, Valentia, Petavius, Veron and others.

3. I answer, first, that 1. Irenaeus, 2. Augustinus, 3. Lactantius, 1. L. 5.
c. 20. l. 3. c. 4.2. L. 2. advers. Crescon. c. 33. item ep. 118. item l. de
unitate Eccles. c. 22.3. l. 4. c. 30.4. L. 12.
and 4 Facundus Hermanensis do absolutely teach the Church to be infallible.
Secondly, I deny that the Fathers teach not the Roman Church to be the true
Church and contrary to your tenet, I affirm that they hold that Church to be
the true Christian Church, as the forenamed authors have declared out of them,
as also Card. Perone and Co^ffeteau have ex^ellently showed. Also I my self
have endeavored it elsewhere out of the several Testimonies of Antiquity not
to be in this place repeated.

Irenaeus, called Ostensions, their place, use and efficacity needs only
explanation, and ought to be admitted by every Christian, and therefore,
begging your patience, I will tarry longer upon it.

Psalm. 104.27. are called verba signotum, and fitly may be termed signa
realia, that is to say, sings and ostensions, which be the acts of Gods
omnipotence and sovereign Government, and, by a moral certainty and rational
way are showed for humane institution and instruction. This sort of signs is,
by order of nature, to have the precedence before all artificial signs, or
vocal expressions of the divine will, and therefore as Raymund Sebund
observes, liber factorum is to be perused before liber dictorum; By these
signs, as, by the apparentiae, or (...), in Astronomy, we are to get the first
notions of these celestial revolutions, or resolutions of faith; and though
these be sure, yet are they not demonstrative, because no way intrinsecall,
neither to the revelations which they assure, nor to the objects revealed,
which are assured by the revelations, as being no causes, nor effects of
either, nor signs inherent of those objects.

Apparences, or Ostensions, more or less expressly understood. Now, while we
draw nearer unto these signs, and learn them more and more expressly, amongst
other things we may discover as good characterismes and signatures of revealed
truth, the Concordance of our Faith with holy Writ and venerable Antiquity,
which two signs, without the preceding could have little force to persuade
belief. For, say I were to convert an Indian, I would not seek to do it by
telling him first of all of these two Concordances mentioned, which it is like
would move him but a little, for, though I could show him the Bible was ancient
and Godly, and the Fathers wise, yet this would not be enough to persuade him,
and therefore I should hold it fit, First to represent unto him, some other
motives, as namely, Prophetical predictions authorized by event, miracles and
miraculous operations and effects, creditably recorded from age to age, both in
the Evangelists and other sequent Histories, of whose faith a man rationally
cannot doubt, at least in the sum of them, or the chief bulk. I speak not
here of fabulous Narrations, or suspected Histories, Et est plenissima haec
ostensio unam and eandem vivificatricem fidem, etc. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 3.
but Authors of credit and esteem; Secondly, the excellency of our Faith it
self, and manner of propagation of it. Thirdly, the perfection of life and
heroicke actions of such as do profess it, and all this after a manner not
interrupted, but continued from age to age, and conveyed down to us by the
prime Ecclesiastical succession, not of persons only, but of Pastors in the
chief seat, and other inferior, prized so highly by Irenaeus, and held a
most sure note of truth, and a way to confound all that do gainsay it. Lastly,
a consonance with Reason, Scripture, and Antiquity. These and such like be our
(...), these our Ostensions; these be the received notices and signatures of
revealed truth; by these God invites us and induces us to believe; and by
these, engages his own veracity to warrant the act of our assent, it being
repugnant to the high perfection of his truth, to lay upon man a rational
obligation, and then desert him, and to permit that the public acts of his
providence should be a snare, not a direction, not an introduction to truth,
but a seduction from it. Though therefore these motives make our faith but
credible in an eminent and a high degree, yet the veracity of God is at hand to
supply, seal and confirm all, and with the authority thereof, to make the
assurance absolute. This method of resolving and reducing faith, Iren. l. 3. c.
4. Augustine, ad Honoratum Manichaeum.
was signified by Irenaeus, when as he said, Post tot Ostensiones factas non
oportet adhuc quaerere apud alios veritatem quam facile est ab Ecclesia sumere.
This way designed by Saint Augustine, this is conformable to the Analytique
principles delivered by Aristotle in his Organon; this the beaten path of all
Divines, and no new invention or exotique stuff.

This method we are ready to maintain as strong and solid, not permitting the
believer to sit down with a slender Socinian certainty liable to deceit, not
enclosing him in any maze, circle, or semicircle, not enforcing him into
endless and wearisome regresses, neither producing evidence, nor destroying
liberty, but by these motives fortified with the divine veracity, leading him
assuredly to the Church, and by the Church to the entire and determinate Canon
of holy Scripture; and so at length by both these joined together, to the full
discovery and distinct knowledge of the doctrines of our faith, after the
manner following.

Praetorian, or Admiral, with which all the rest were to join company, and by
the separation from which, we are to judge which vessels be fugitive, or
pyraticall, and which not; which assembly of Christians legitimate and
approved, and by this association to be distinguished from the broken and
dispersed troops of Anti-Catholiques, and by the same the army of the living
God in the Church militant, discerned from the straggling companies of divided
and disagreeing Sectaries, how numerous soever they may seem, when summed up
all into one inconsistent body, or confused rout. This way and method we hold,
which if it do not satisfy any, let them set us down a better, and not leave
us without any; but let them take heed, that while with the Enquirer, we
receive and admit the fallibility of the Church of Rome, or of any other
determinate Church, and of one denomination we fall not, with Master
Chillingworth, to the fallibility of the Christian faith, and so presently to
Infidelity. It is easy to impugn the Organon of faith, or Doctrinall
principles, but not easy to compose it, easy to pull down, but not to build.
The Enquirers judgment uttered to me, was, that Baron, when he writ against
us, was lusty and strong, but when he spoke any thing for himself, he was
weak and languishing; and I believe this is the Enquirers own case, and that
he was able to say more against an infallibility then for it. In the one he
has showed his strength, in the other not.

Lex is the dictamen rectae rationis practicae in eo qui potestatem habet; but
an unjust law, is neither dictamen rectae rationis practicae, nor potestatem
habentis, for no man is prescribed to do wrong by reason, nor has God the
chief Legislatour given power to make them. Durandus concurres in terminis in
Opusculo de legibus, saying, Injusta leges magis sunt violentiae quam leges,
nam secundum quod dicit Augustinus, l. de libero arbitrio, Lex esse non videtur
quae justa non fuerit. Et tales non obligant quantum ad Deum. So Durandus. To
him Suarius subscribeth, l. 3. de legib. c. 19. n. 11. Lex injusta non est lex,
praesertim quando ex part materiae est injusta, quia rem iniquam praecipit;
tum enim ad acceptandum eam non obligat, verum etiam, neque si sit acceptata,
And presently after, giving a reason hereof, he adds, Quia excedit potestatem
legislatoris.

Secondly, so much veneration is due to laws, though never so unjust, that
they are nevertheless in conscience to be obeyed, unless they should be
publicly and knownely found contrary to a greater authority then that was by
which they were enacted; that is to say, to the law of God, or Nature,
Therefore they are not to be judged or censured by any private man.

Thirdly, being discovered to be unjust, they derogate nothing at all from the
authority of the rest, no more then the unjust laws of some Emperors did from
the body of the law Imperial. For though all of them were made by the same
Authors, yet not by the same authority; because for the making of one sort,
there was good authority derived from God; but, for the making of the other,
there was none at all, but such as could not make it.

Fourthly, in case of such laws, no man is to take arms, or make resistance,
but contrariwise, to suffer with humble patience, remitting the righting of his
cause only to God, per quem Reges regnant and legum conditores justa
decernunt. And thus, Sir, I rest your humble servant.

1. Dispositive, as one of the motives, or inducements. 2. Negative, as a
property, sine qua non. 3. Positive, as a foundation or principle. The 1. as an
ancient and godly book. The 2. as a rule, without concordance to which faith
could not be acknowledged; for every doctrine must be consonant to its rule,
whether that rule be true, or false, certain, or uncertain. The 3. as a
settled principle, and a book known to be Canonical.

TO all this I shall answer as briefly as I can.

First, to the 1 Sect. That for the matter of fact which concerns this
treatise, I have already averred those truths, that will not permit any
reasonable man to believe that this was so indeed, [ a first draught, etc.] for
it was confessed by him, Chap. 1. to be a second draught. Secondly, it was not
sent out only to explore, etc. for it was, In Conclus.
says he, delivered but to two adversaries, and to one of them (as I said
before) it was delivered as unanswerable. Thirdly, if there were any such
design of exploring and mending, etc. I must conceive that that work is now
done; for when it was sent home to me again with these notes, many places
which I had charged, were altered or taken away, and for additions, sure such
were the marginall notes, and this appendage. Fourthly, For the license I can
say nothing, (but that I conceive it might as easily be gotten, as to what you
have already made public, if you had a mind to it) nor indeed force you to
acknowledge or vouch any line of this book, but only tell you, that those
words in your first Chapter of complaint, [ That there was no notice given of
license for it be published, and have the advantage to be dispersed abroad in
many copies] and that [ for want of the Printers help it shall lie concealed,
and in much restraint, yea and be in danger to perish] seemed to me to signify
your willingness then to make it public; and if you have since retracted
that design, I hope so weak an answer, as some of your friends boast this to
be, did not discourage you. I shall rather think it was modesty, or else
design, that you chose rather to have disclaimed, then commended your own,
and thought it would appear more glorious for you to have it extorted from you,
or (if it should prove less splendid) yet more tolerable, to have been
ravished from you then prostituted.

To the second Sect. I answer, that you had said that before in annot. to the
concl. A. And the answer there belongs to this Sect. and if you had made good
what you say was your drift, you should be pronounced conqueror.

To the third Sect. You have taken a good course to defend infallibility, by
setting up for it your self, and affirming that no reply can be made to you in
that matter, because it depends only upon your judgment, which none can know
but whom you tell it; But, good Sir, your Authors do tell us, that there is
nothing infallible but the Church, and when they have done so, we may know your
outward acts, for such are your writings, though your inward we pretend not to
pry into.

To Sect. 4. I answer, that one argument of his Lordships, taken from your
affirmed fallibility of Reason, Scripture, and Antiquity, is most prodigiously
by you called three pillars. And how Sampson-like you have broken them down,
the Reader must judge; if you are so confident, I have here expressed my self
your servant, by helping you to a public trial.

To Sect. 5. I acknowledge that from your own confession I make those three
arguments, that neither Reason, Scripture, nor Antiquity, can infallibly prove
your Church to be infallible. And

To the Sect. 6. I say that the want of infallibility in those three mentioned
Sect. 6. and by you confessed, is sufficient to prove his Lordships conclusion
that they cannot infallibly prove your infallibility, and this is the same that
was meant by his Lordship, though more explicated by me, and brought home
against you by way of retortion, and Argument ad hominem, upon your own
confession. And so your (...) was sung much too early, and you must to your
task again, if you will make an end of it.

To Sect. 7. I answer, that if you had showed the revelation, on which reason
inferres your infallibility, your section had stood good, but the total want
of that is your maine impediment.

To Sect. 8. Be you also pleased to produce your consent of Antiquity certainly
expounding Scripture to infer your infallibility; and that shall be yielded
you also, but I conceive those writers of yours have not done it, and
whenever you please, I shall be ready to examine their testimonies with you.

To Sect. 9. I answer. That we have allowed a sense, wherein the Church
universal may be styled infallible, and that to save my self the pains of
examining your testimonies (though some without examining I know to be ill
cited) I shall grant it in that sense to be so; But then to your second
proposition, (be it either [ I deny that they teach not] or [ I affirm that it
holds] it matters little) that the Roman Church is the true Church, I answ.
That if there be emphasis in the particle [ the] in the praedicate, so that it
signify the [ Catholick] Church in the former proposition, it is then
absolutely false, that the Fathers say any such thing. And you are prudent to
cite none to that ridiculous purpose. But if you mean, that the Roman Church
is a true Church, (so you do not mean that all it says is true) as we grant
that, so we challenge you to prove, that ever the ancient Church thought any
such particular Church of one denomination to be infallible, When you please to
produce your testimonies, you shall receive answer to them.

To Sect. 10. Concerning the motives of Faith, You might have spared that
pains, it being not at all concluded by you here or before, that that
infallibility is built on the same grounds with Christanity.

To Sect. 11. If you had never such solid reasons to persuade you; that your
Church had the truth (as I should not need to deny, were it not for your
denying the cup to the Laity against Scripture, and your keeping the Scripture
in an unknown tongue, and some other such defects in faciendis, but rather
charge you that you have more then the truth, viz. many errors mixed with the
truth) this would prove but a very weak probation, that your Church is [the
true Church] in the exclusive notion, i. e. that no other is the Church, but
that: for having the truth, does not signify a Monopoly, or enclosure of it,
or that no body else can have it; And if by [the true Church] you mean no
more, but a true part, you know we do not question it, nor affirm that your
errors though many, have turned you in non Ecclesiam, into a no Church. As for
your Concordance with the Fathers which you say you have, I answer, that in
those things wherein you and we consent, we shall not be unwilling to grant it
to you (but yet must remember you, that you would not allow that to be a proof
of your being infallible) but in those other which we call errors in you, we
challenge you to produce an universal Concordance. You go on; that you prove
your Church by no other way then Christianity is persuaded unto Infidels. I
hope your meaning is, that you prove your Church to be a true Church, and that
shall be granted you without your proof: but that it is the only true one, or
the infallible one, I hope you have not miracles for that, (if you have, you
have trifled away a great deal of time in not telling us of them) nor
revelation from Heaven, nor universal tradition to assure you, (what you
affirm so confidently) that the Infallibility of your Church is the whole
frame of Christianity. And therefore what you learnedly add about the verba
signorum, or signa realia, signs and ostensions, etc. by which you go about to
prove Christianity, I must profess to edify me but little in point of the
infallibility of your Church, because that is so distant a thing from it.

To Sect. 12. Your affirmation, that the true Catholic Religion is the true
Christianity, (if that be the only thing you aim at) shall be willingly
granted you, all the question will be, whether all your doctrines, that of
denying the cup to the Laity etc. be that Catholic Religion. And sure to him
that questions that, all the characterismes, etc. all your Prophetical
predidictions will give but little satisfaction, and no more will the
excellency of Faith, perfection of heroic actions of professors, nor the
conveyance from age to age, by the Prime Ecclesiastical succession of Pastors
in the Sea of Rome, because that of the sub unica specie, etc. which we
quarrel at in you, might as well be pretended to have testimonies out of the
present Articles of our Church, as out of these. If there be any of these
evidences, or moreover of Reason, Scripture, Antiquity, on your side for such
controverted particulars, I beseech you let them be produced, or else you may
be Christians, but yet corrupt in these particulars, your being a true Church
will not pronounce you infallible, your Church of Rome Primitive may have the
truth, and your Modern Rome be filled with errors. And therefore you may spare
the pains of proving (what we have no occasion at this time to deny) that God
engages his veracity to make good those things, for which he gives us such
rational means of proof to induce our assent, For what ever else is, your
infallibility, or your other errors, for which we charge you, are none of
these things. And if you mark it, that which (according to your discourse)
gives us such assurance of the truth of Christianity, is the ostensions,
miracles, public acts of Gods providence, not the Infallibility naturally
inherent either in your Church, or in any particular society of men, nor the
promise of God that any such society shall be infallible, and visible to all
that it is that infallible. As for that which you covertly cast into the heap
of the motives of Faith, [that 'twas continued from age to age in the
succession of Pastors in the chief seat] that is no more a ground of the truth
of Christanity, then its succession in all other seats, as I conceive you have
your self let fall also. The truth is the Preaching the Gospel over all the
world, and the reception in so great a part of it, is an argument of the truth
of Christianity (among many others) because it is the fulfilling of a Prophecy
of their sounds going out into all Lands, But this is far from concluding the
peculiar privilege of infallibility of those, who are under the Roman
subjection. By which it is clear, that what you cite out of Irenaeus, and Saint
Aug. comes home no better to your point of infallibility, then Aristotle's
Analytick principles, which in the same place (and elsewhere) you cite also.
And therefore if all you say in that long Section were yielded, (concerning the
motives to Christianity, and your way by bringing to the Church, etc.) yet
would you be as far to seek as ever, concerning your pretended infallibility.

To your 13. Sect. which is nearer indeed to your purpose, I answer, that
being by your means brought to Christianity, there is no need that I should
find out any particular body of professors (or Church of one denomination) to
which those motives to Christianity should so belong, as to belong to no othey
but that; This sure I may better say without proof, then you have affirmed the
contrary, For do you think it reasonable, that Christianity being planted all
the world over, each man that is converted to it, must find out the Roman
Bishop, and those that are in subjection to him, or not be accounted a
Christian? If he be borne at Jerusalem, or converted there, will it not serve
his turn to communicate with that Church, which has given him Baptism? Was
there any thing in his Creed could send him thither, till the holy Catholic
Roman Church was (by mockery I conceive) put in thither? As for the line of
succession of Ecclesiastical Magistrates, you must know, that is to be found
in other Christian Churches, as well as in Rome, and the Scriptures and
Apostolical verities descend down to us in them also. And what if in some
passages of Antiquity the Sea of Rome should be found to be the Praetorian or
Admiral, in your style, i. e. the prime or principal Sea, would this prove
her infallible, the Praetorian may spring a leake, as well as any other, and in
case it should, I do not conceive, that all other Ships of that fleet, were
bound to do so too, or else be counted fugitive, because they are unwilling to
run that unhappy fate of sin, or error with her. Sure if the Praetorian
should casually, or wilfully split upon a Rock, you would not censure all
others for Pyraticall, that did not so too. The reasons are visible, why that
Sea of Rome had the Primacy at some time (and at other times other Seas put in
their plea for it, and if they obtained not, yet was that an argument that it
was never judged a matter of Faith, because the Pretenders were not condemned
for Haereticks, even when it went not with them) viz: from the Imperial Seat
being placed in that City, with which the Ecclesiastical (...), or (...),
might proportionably go along, just as your Praetorian is that ship, where the
Admiral resides, or which peculiarly belongs to him. But what is that to
infallibility? That honor which comes by sympathy with the Civil State, is
not like to be such a charm, or amulet, so to elevate above humane condition,
that it must presently set up for perfection. Let your Church have all its due
and customary respects, but do not so link inerrablenesse with Principality,
unless you can bring some ground from Scripture, for the union, and because in
all your Apology, Annotations, and Appendage you do not so much as name any
such, I shall conceive you are too wise to claim by [ Tu es Petrus] or any
other so unconcluding an argument. Believe me, your prescription for some kind
of Principality from the possession of it continued to that Sea so many years,
is a better plea than any other, and against that I am not now a disputing, but
only add that greatness saecular is no mark of infallibility. As for your
rule of judging by the Association with Rome, which Assembly of Christians is
legitimate, which not, that that is an infallible way of judging is not at all
proved by your magnificent simile. For first, the fleet may be broken asunder
by some tempest, and so without any fault of any ship, be divided from the
Praetorian. 2. The Praetorian may quarrel with all, or any of the rest, and by
threats or bullets drive them from her, and then if the cause be not just, if
it be for example upon no other crime, but that the other ships judge it
necessary to cast out some vessels or trumpery which they are resolved to be
either useless, or perhaps dangerous to the vessel and all the Passengers, or
again because the rest of the ships are resolved to obey the commission that
sent out the whole Fleet, when the Praetorian was resolved to disobey it, in
this and the like cases, it is clear, that the Praetorian is the only
Schismatic; Or if it be just, yet the ships though confessed guilty of that
other crime, or crimes, which made that severity of the Praetorian just, will
yet not be guilty of a new crime of separation: the reason is clear, because
she is forced to that, driven away, and now ever since lies under it
unwillingly, it is her infelicity, not her crime; her punishment, not her fault.
Or if there be a fault in that, viz: That she does not humbly confess the
fault, and desire to be reconciled, yet sure it will not be infinitely true,
that that is a fault, when either she was guilty before of no fault, but a
pretended one, for which that punishment was inflicted (to which purpose the
Chancellor of Paris will advise you) or when the condition of her being
received again is such, as cannot with any honesty be entertained, be it the
undertaking any Treasonable act against the King, whose Admiral he is, which
denominates that Praetorian, and who is supreme Master of the whole fl^et, or
be it, but swearing any thing to be true which is false, or subscribing to the
belief, or practice of what we believe neither true nor practicable. And that
this is the state of our Church in its separation from yours, I shall undertake
to make good, whenever you will yield the point of Infallibility, or exchange
it for the question of Schism. You see I am not much edified by your way, and
because you are not so importunate, that I should, but are modestly content
that if I am not satisfied with it, I should set you down a better, I shall
humbly crave leave to do it in very few words. The far better way, more
Christian, because more humble and more charitable, (and beyond all, probably
the most peaceful too) Is, to make the Scripture, as it is interpreted by the
ancient Fathers, the ground of our belief for all the substantial, i. e.
plain parts of Faith; to define as few of this nature, as the Primitive
Christians may be discerned to have done, to command and require obedience, and
assent to these from all our Inferiors under our authority, and to proceed to
Ecclesiastical admonitions, in case of error, to censures, in case of
contumacy, but to blood, never purely for Religion, nor too often for Religion
in ordine ad temporalia; To tolerate with meekness, those that are contrary
minded, in all things that are not either of the number of these few, very few
necessario credenda, or that have not a necessary connection and immediate
influence on practice, and good life; This as it is far from either
pretending to infallibility, or letting loose the reins to licentiousness, so
is it the happiest, most lasting, durable temper of a Church, most agreeable to
all those ends that Christ has made most estimable to us in his Gospel, and so
will be far from that fear of yours, of betraying us to a deserting of the
Christian faith* or falling to Infidelity; universal peace and charity and
humility, being above all things most contrary to that. And so you see, it is
not so unpracticable a difficulty to compose an Organon of Faith so far, as
to preserve it among Christians; And for the planting it among Infidels, that
is not hujus considerationis, nor do I much believe I shall have much reason
to differ from any learned Romanist on that Subject, on condition he would
agree with me in this. As for your judgment upon his Lordship, that he was
able to say more against an infallibility then for it, and that in the one he
has showed his strength, in the other not, I easily believe, and must think
my self bound to confess, because I have seen a Book of his against
Infallibility, but never any for it. If this must be thought a fault in him, I
must be content to lie under your severest censure for the same crime also, and
sic habes confitentes reos, patiently expecting what you will pronounce against
us.

Sect. 14. You are resolved it seems to have a word or two about Laws, upon
what temptation, or provocation from the precedent discourses, at least from
the maine business in hand, I cannot readily satisfy my Reader. The most I
can guess is, that in our meeting we fell into some discourse and difference
about the nature of unjust Laws, whether they might be said to be Laws, or
no. And perchance your charity led you now out of your rode to inform me in
this matter; if 'twere only so, I must acknowledge it an obligation, and shall
thank you for that, though I chance to dissent from you.

And that matter I perceive will be soon stated: Thus: That Laws, if
(considered in respect of the matter of them) they be found to command me to
do ought, which by any superior law, it is unlawful for me to do, they are
then unjust Laws, be the Legislatour never so lawfully my Magistrate; and in
this case it is true, that God has not given him power to make them; meaning
thereby such a power, that he may make them without being unjust; but yet
another power he has given him, to wit, such an one, as that, if he exercise
it thus against God the Doners will, yet it shall not be lawful for any man,
or society of men on earth, to call him to account, and punish him, to resist
violently, or reduce him in ordinem; Only God that has given him potestatem
in genere (which is libera ad utrosque actus, power to make good or evil
laws, but withal restrained by a command from the law of nature, and God, and
limited by that law only to the lawful exercise of it, or making the good
laws) is to receive an account of the Talent given him to trade with as his
Steward, and to enquire whet^er he has used it well or no. Thus much, unless
I am mistaken, your discourse gives me reason to think granted by you. And
from thence I must conclude, that any such abuse of power in the Lawgiver,
though it be in him aberration from the rule in respect of God, yet still is an
act that has some effect on the man which is borne, or lives under that law,
though not to oblige him to do what is commanded him, yet to oblige him to
non-resistance, and suffering patiently, if the Lawgiver be so wicked to
tyrannize over him. Which obligation to passive, though not active Obedience,
is the result of a Law, if not properly so called in your notion of it, yet
very lawfully and intelligibly so called, as I have interpreted it; And for the
propriety or impropriety of the word, I shall not much contend with you, so the
substance be agreed on; and yet 'twere easy enough to repay you with the
quotations of Schoolmen and Casuists, which make no scruple to use the word
in my sense, and to answer the places you have produced, and show that 'twas
only in that sense which we yield that they did deny it. But enough of this.

For your 15 Section. What it signifies, or whether it would, I cannot I
confess divine; 'twas I conceive in you an excessive act of liberality, that
you thought might be for my turn; and, though I know not how at this time I
shall reap profit by it, yet I cannot but accept your good intentions. And so
being extremely weary of a very thanklesse task, I bid you heartily farewell.

FINIS.

