OF Fundamentals IN A NOTION referring to PRACTICE.

By H. HAMMOND, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane.
M.DC.LIVE.

OF FUNDAMENTALS.
CHAP. I. The Notation of the word Fundamental.
. 1. IN this inquiry, the literal notation of the word [ Fundamentals] must
first be examined and resolved on, as the Groundwork of this whole discourse.
And herein the most advantageous method and least liable to mistake will be to
proceed by these degrees:

. 2. First, Foundation is a relative and figurative word.
that the word Foundation being a relative, and, as it is used in our present
disquisition, a figurative word, it will be needful to premise wherein this
relation, and wherein this figure does consist, it being evident, what
Aristotle says, that the whole being of any relative is (...), in order to
that whereto it has relation, and so likewise that some primary literal
signification is prerequired to that other of Metaphorical or Figurative. And
accordingly it will here be soon resolved, that a foundation, being primarily
of use in Architecture, has no other literal notation but what belongs to it
in relation to an house or other building, nor figurative, but what is founded
in that and deduced from thence.

The relation of it to superstructure.
. 3. But then secondly, it is not every building to which a foundation referres
(some structures being erected without any foundation) but such as is cemented
and fastened to some firm, stable body under ground, i. e. to a foundation; We
are taught this distinction by our Savior, Mat. 7. that an house may be (and
is sometimes) set upon the sand (or upon the earth, Lu. 6.49. and is then said
to be (...), without a foundation) not always (...), Building on the sand, and
on a rock.
upon a rock, and though the word (...), building, be there used of both those,
yet the (...), being founded, is applied only to the latter v. 25. And the
distant fates of those two sorts of houses, which is there set down, together
with the character of the Architects, the foolish and the wise, will assure us
that this which we now insist on, is no nicety, for as soon as ever the rain
descended, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon that house of the
fools erecting, the house fell (and brake to pieces, the fall thereof was
great) v. 27. Whereas all the violence and importunity of the same storms, and
winds, and torrents could make no impression on the other pile of the skilful
Architects erecting, upon this one account, (...), for it was founded upon a
rock. And so in like manner the difference is set by the author to the Hebrews
betwixt (...), the moveable tent or tabernacle, and (...), a city that has
foundations, Heb. 11.10. which is all one with the (...), the kingdom that
cannot be shaken or moved, Heb. 12.28.

. 4. The difference between them.
And the difference of building upon the earth or sand, from that other of
superstructing or founding upon a rock, is observable in this, that though the
whole body or bulk of the earth or sand be of an heavy, and stable nature, yet
the surfice or upper part of either of them, but especially of the sand, is so
light and soluble, that there is no way imaginable to cement or fasten any
thing to it, any more then to the air or water, whereas to a stone or rock,
which being it self firm, is also fastened deep within the earth, a
superstructure of any proportionable magnitude may be so fastened, that without
a (...) or concussion of the earth it self, (which shakes the foundations,
Act. 16.26.) the building shall not be shaken, and therefore Coloss. 1.23.
(...) built on a foundation, is equivalent to (...), firm, and opposed to
(...), moved, and so Christ supposes in another parable, that the gates of
(...), the strongest opposition imaginable in nature shall not prevail against
that house which is thus built, Mat. 16.18.

. 5. Thirdly then, the figurative or metaphorical notation of this word, and
not the primarie or literal, being that which belongs to this place, and yet
that bearing a direct proportion to the literal, and so requiring a
proportionable relation to some figurative building or superstructure, in order
to which it may be styled a foundation or fundamental, the next, and that
indeed the Principal Inquiry will be, The Superstructure to which Foundation
here relates,
what superstructure it is to which this Foundation does refer, or in respect
to which peculiarly any article of Faith may be denominated Fundamental.

. 6. And to omit the mention of all others, which have no appearance of
pretension to this matter, Two sorts of Superstructures.
two only fabrics or superstructures there are, which can come into this
competition, each called by the name of (...) or (...) house, The first (...),
my fathers house, Joh. 14.2. The second (with little change) (...), the house
of God, 1 Timothy 3.15. The first is evidently Heaven, Heaven.
the place whither Christ was then going, as their harbinger to prepare for
them; The second is expressly said to be the Church, The Church.
in the words immediately subsequent; (...), which is the Church of the living
God, the Church of God, in opposition to the Idol-Temples, the Church of the
living God, in opposition to the livelesse false deities, the Diana of the
Ephesians and the like, whose pictures were inshrined and adored in those
heathen Temples; And each of these are metaphorical buildings (answerable to
the figurative foundations) and being capable of two sorts of conceptions,
either as they are in fieri, in building, or as in facto esse, when they are
already built, they may here signify the replenishing or peopling of these
two, 1. bringing saints to heaven, and 2. proselytes into the Church, or else
by a Metonymie of the adjunct, they may denote 1. that Celestial; and 2. that
Christian condition, which is in either of them enjoyed, the state of bliss in
the one, and the state of Christian obedience in the other.

. 7. In proportion then to these two superstructures, two notions of
Fundamentals may be conceived, one signifying that whereon our eternal bliss
is immediately, and regularly superstructed, the other whereon our obedience to
the faith of Christ, giving up our names to him, is founded, the one in order
to our living happily and eternally in another world, the other to our living
soberly, and justly, and piously in this world.

. 8. And if the former were it, Heaven cannot be it, for two Reasons.
wherein our present search were terminated, if the question were, what were
now fundamental to bliss or heaven, then 1. The first.
there could be no reason to explain the fundamentals, as by consent of parties
they are explained, by the credenda, matters of belief or faith; for though the
acknowledgment of Gods veracity, and the explicit, unshaken belief of all that
is revealed to him by God, be the strict duty of every Christian, and the
disbelieving of any such affirmation of Gods, is sin, and damnable, yet the
foundation being that which supports the superstructure to which it relates
immediately, and without the intervention of any thing else, it is certain, that
eternal bliss is not immediately superstructed on the most orthodox beliefs;
but, as our Savior says ( if ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do
them) the doing must be first superstructed on the knowing or believing, before
any happiness, or bliss, or heaven can be built on it; and without all
question the agenda, the things that are to be done, works of piety and
justice, etc. are as necessarily required to found our bliss, to bring us to
heaven, as the belief of any the most precious Articles can be supposed to be;
and therefore it may be justly feared, that the title of Fundamentals, being
ordinarily bestowed on, and confined to the doctrines of faith, has occasioned
that great scandal, or block of offense in the Church of God, at which so many
myriads of solifidians have stumbled, and fallen irreversibly, by conceiving
heaven a reward of true opinions, of which, vicious practices, though never so
habitually and indulgently continued in, to the last, would never be able to
deprive them; which as it has been the disjoyning of that (...), most
excellent yoke, of faith and good works, and has betrayed many knowing men to
most unskilful and ridiculous presumptions, and securities in sin: so can it
not well be provided against, without the discovering, and renouncing of this
false, and substituting a truer state of this question.

The second.
. 9. Secondly, If this were the notion of Fundamentals, there could be no
certain way of judging what are such, the excuse of invincible ignorance being,
in the far greatest number of men, ready to be confronted against the
necessity of their believing all the severals of any such supposeable
Catalogue; And for that suppletorie of an implicit belief, which is by the
Romanist conceived to be of use and sufficient for those, who are not capable
of an explicit, whatsoever degree of truth can be conceived to be in that, it
must be founded in the contradictorie to the present pretension; for were it
once granted that the belief of such articles were fundamental to heaven, it
were not imaginable that they which have not heard, should ever arrive thither,
When that, which by S. Paul's authority is become a known maxim, was before
demonstrable in it self, and is so supposed by his argument, Romans 10.14. that
faith comes by hearing, and that they cannot believe what they have not heard.
Many other inconveniences there are consequent to this stating of this question
(and particularly that of which our experience has given us evident
demonstration, that by those which thus state it, there has never yet been
assigned any definite number, or Catalogue of Fundamentals in this sense:) but
I shall no farther enlarge on them.

Fundamental to a Church, to Piety and Christian life.
. 10. The other notion of Fundamentals, is that whereon I shall more
confidently pitch (as that which will remove, in stead of multiplying,
difficulties, and accord all, which either the Scriptures, or the Ancients have
asserted on this subject) thereby understanding that which was deemed necessary
to be laid by the Apostles and other such Master Builders, as a foundation to
the peopling or replenishing (or bringing in proselytes to) the Church, and so
to the superstructing Christian obedience among men; In which respect it is,
that as the Church of Corinth (and so any other society that has received the
faith of Christ) is called (...), God's plantation, 1 Cor. 3.9. so it is also
called (...) God's building, a structure erected by his artificers.

This notion of Fundamental confirmed.
. 11. That this has been esteemed the due and proper acception of this word, I
shall testify by this one evidence, which I acknowledge to have given me the
first hint of this notion, the words of the great Champion of the Catholic
Faith set down in the Council of Nice, by S. Athanasius.
S. Athanasius in Epist: ad Epictetum, where speaking of the Confession of
Faith established by the Canons of that Council against the Arian, and other
Heretics, he has these words, (...), The faith confessed by the Bishops in
that Synod according to the divine Scriptures is of it self sufficient for the
averting of all impiety, and the establishment of all piety in Christ. These
words of that eminent Father of the Church might be of some farther use, toward
the due understanding of the articles of the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds, but
at the present the advantage of them will be but general, that the way of
measuring and defining the necessity of any articles of faith, (the (...),
necessaries to be known, as Justine Martyr speaks, placing under that head, the
Creation of the world, the framing of man, the immortality of the soul, and
judgment to come, (...): p. 9.) is by the (...) or sufficiency of them to
enable the teacher to persuade good life, to supplant those vices, which Christ
came to banish out of the world, and to radicate those virtues which he came on
purpose to implant among men, which is directly that notion, or Character of
Fundamentals, which we have now given, thereby signifying those articles of the
Faith, on which all the parts of Christian piety and obedience (and none of
impiety or disobedience) may be regularly superstructed, or in consequence to
which, being once revealed, and believed* all rational or considering men, when
Christian life is proposed to them, must discern themselves obliged to
entertain it, to forsake in every branch their unchristian courses of sin, and
to betake themselves to an uniform obedience to the commands of Christ; From
whence, I suppose, it is, that the word (...), Edifying.
building or edifying, is used every where in the New Testament for improving
or advancing in Christian practice and the duties of good life, as laying the
foundation is preaching the faith of Christ among them, 1 Cor. 3.11. On which
says Theophylact, (...) etc. After we shall have received the Foundation of
Faith, i. e. the Faith of Christ, as the Foundation, we build upon it, every
one, good actions of all sorts and degrees, as he there specifies, making the
Christian actions of life to be the superstructure, to which this Foundation
referres, and in relation to which, it is called a Foundation. So Theophylact
on Heb. 6.1. makes the (...), their being instructed in the Faith of Christ, to
be (...), to deal only in the beginning, the elements, the first and most
imperfect rudiments, (...), such as novices, beginners, they that are but now
upon their entrance, are wont to be conversant in, whereas the superstructing
good life on this, is, says he, (...), being carried to perfection; and again
in yet plainer words, (...) (...) etc. The Faith is the beginning, and the
foundation, and that without which nothing shall or will be firmly built; still
making the Faith, or belief of the Articles the foundation, in respect of the
(...) the excellent Christian life, which was by the Apostles, and Christ
designed to be built on it.

CHAP. II. The Division of the discourse into four parts, What are Fundamental
in General.
. 1. THe notion of the word being now explained, that which is yet behind will
be regularly reducible to these four heads, First, Four branches of discourse
proposed.
What those things are in General, and then in particular, to which this notion
of Fundamentals belongs, and withal, what propriety all and each of these
have toward the supporting this superstructure, the planting a Church of
Christian livers. 2dly, What are the particular branches of this
superstructure. 3dly, What Doctrines there are infused among Christians, which
are most apt to obstruct or intercept the superstructing of Christian life,
where the foundation is laid. 4dly, What things are necessary to the erecting
of this superstructure on this foundation already laid, whether in a particular
Christian, or especially in a Church, or society of such.

. 2. The General way of defining Fundamentals,
The General way of defining what these fundamentals are, must in reason be
taken from the practice of the Apostles, as the interpreter of God's
appointment, and judgment in this matter. by what the Apostles taught every
where.
For it being certain that the Apostles, which had a commission from Christ to
preach, and admit disciples over all the world, to bring impenitent Jews, and
Idolatrous Gentiles to the obedience of Christ, were by him also directed in
their way, counseled in the choice of the fittest means of performing so great
a work, the argument will be infallibly conclusive on both sides, positively,
and negatively, that whatever the Apostles jointly agreed on, at their entrance
on their several Provinces, to be the subject of their first Sermons in all
their travails, that was by them (and consequently by God himself) deemed
fundamental, in our present sense, and whatever was not by them thought thus
necessary, must not by us be obtruded on, or forced into that Catalogue.

The foundation laid, 1 Cor. 3.11.
. 3. For the clearing of this, it is first evident that there was in the
A-Apostles times such a foundation laid ((...)) in every Church, as in that of
Corinth, 1 Cor. 3.11. styled (...), 1 Timothy 6.20. 1 Timothy 6.20.
a good depositum or trust, which Timothy had received from the Apostles, for
the direction of his ministry, (...), Jude 3. Jude 3.
the faith once, or at once delivered to the saints, (...), 2 Timothy 1.13. a
form, or breviate, 2 Timothy 1.13.
or summarie of wholesome words, or sound doctrine, which he had heard from S.
Paul, (...), one faith, Ephesians. 4.5* Ephesians. 4.5.
in proportion to which follows there (...) one baptism, wherein there was
made profession of that Faith, and to which none (of years and knowledge) was
ever admitted, who had not been sufficiently instructed by the Catechist in
every part of this foundation, (which to that end the Catechist received from
the Bishop with his short exposition of it, see S. Ambrose, Ep: 35. l. 5.) and
being so instructed made open Confession of it, and moreover, by vow obliged
himself there, to superstruct all Christian practice upon it.

. 4. Secondly, Approved in common by the Apostles.
that this was approved of by them in common upon consultation, (and so seemed
good to the holy Ghost and to them, in order to their end, the bringing of
Jews and Gentiles to repentance) and accordingly was left behind them,
delivered down to the Bishops of all Churches of their plantation, not only as
a rule of faith, but as a symbolum, or badge of the Apostles having planted
Christianity among them. All which is clearly testified by Tertullian,
Irenaeus, and other the first writers; See Irenaeus l 1. c. 11. and 19. l. 3.
c. 4. Tertullian de virgin: veland: in the beginning, and de Praescription:
throughout.

. 5. Thirdly, that all that was necessary in order to that end (the (...) the
discipling all nations) was comprehended in this form or summary, Comprehensive
of all necessaries --
it being certain that what God did not deem necessary, to the planting of a
Church;
was not necessary, and that nothing which was so deemed by God, was omitted or
left behind by them, whose office and care it was to declare the whole will of
God, and to lead others, as themselves had been led, into all necessary truth.

. 6. Fourthly, that what we thus affirm of the necessity of these things to the
superstructing of Christian practice, must not so be understood, that the
hearing, and believing of each of them be thought absolutely necessary in every
single Jew or heathen, that he may repent, and convert, not to the conversion
of every particular person.
and live a Christian life, or without which he cannot, but necessary to the
discharge of the Apostolical office, which was to reap whole fields, to bring
in whole cities, and nations to Christ.

. 7. They that were to plant a Church, were to deal with men of several and
distant affections, and tempers and interests, an heterogeneous body made up of
a multitude of various inclinations, and of different habits of sin, and
degrees of radication of those habits, and to each of these some proper
application was to be made by those that came on Christ's errand to cure their
souls (as Hippocrates advises his Physician to have (...), mollifying
preparations for all turns, and to carry them about with him) and so a whole
Dispensatorie was little enough to meet with, and suffice to all their wants,
or at least some Catholicon of a transcendent virtue, proportionable to the
obstinacy of any the most desperate malady: But this confusion of diseases and
rapsodie of difficulties was not to be supposed in each single sinner, and
consequently there was not the same necessity of the whole tale of
Fundamentals, for the converting or reducing of him.

. 8. There is no doubt but there were reformed Jews before Christ's time, Some
Jews reduced to good life without this foundation.
whom the pedagogie and rudiments, and imperfect documents of the Law, with
those influences, and assistances of God, which were then afforded, brought
home unto God, and among them some (...) righteous, and some (...) merciful
men, which had arrived to the abundance of goodness, as they style it, And of
this kind were the Esseni, who though they be not ordinarily conceived to have
been Christians, yet are described by Philo, under the name of (...) so very
like Christians, that there is no reason to doubt, but that Christian piety
might be infused into some, without the explicit knowledge of all and every of
those articles, which yet, in general speaking, or as it was to be planted
through the world, are rightly deemed, and resolved to be Fundamental.

. 9. Thus it is affirmed by Photius, and Evagrius, (and has as much authority,
Synesius a Bishop before he believed the Resurrection*
as their names can give it) that Synesius had embraced the whole Christian
Law, so far as to be advanced to the dignity of a Bishop, without any clear
acknowledging, or believing one main part of our Foundation, that of the
Resurrection of the body, and his own 105t Epistle (wherein he so industriously
declines the Bishopric) has these words, (...), The resurrection which you
preach and publish, I account sacred, and that which cannot be uttered; and I
want much of consenting to the persuasions of the multitude in this matter. And
though the Bishops, that thus advanced him, were questioned, says Photius, for
the fact, yet that is no prejudice to (what we now observe from this example,
viz) the possibility of the thing. Of which also those Bishops answer is a
farther testimony, viz: that they saw such excellent graces in him, that they
could not imagine, that God would long defer to crown them with the addition
of this eminent branch of Christian faith, the clear belief and acknowledgment
of the resurrection; And as that fell out according to their expectation, so it
is thereby evident, that that branch of belief was in him supervenient to
Christian practice, and not all Christian practice built on that.

. 10. Nay supposing that he that has not been instructed sufficiently in all,
and each branch of the Foundation, were yet with fewer helps brought to the
sincere undertaking of the whole Christian obedience, as if a Catechumenus
before every one of these articles were explained unto him, should yet resolve
(upon reading the Sermon on the Mount) to live a life of the greatest Christian
perfection, this person were not in any reason to suffer any diminution, to be
deemed the worse, but rather the better for that, (as they, that having not the
Law do yet by nature the things of the Law, are far from being disparaged by
the Apostle, nay (...), says Theophylact, are looked on as admirable persons,
(...), that they wanted not the Law, and yet fulfilled the Law;) The danger
being certainly very great to them, that by force of all the divine articles of
our Faith are not reduced to Christian purity, and not to them, who on a weaker
foundation do yet stand firmly rooted, and grounded in the love of Christ.

. 11. And this is agreeable to what was premised of the nature of a foundation
in a material building, that though a tabernacle or moveable building may, yet
a Temple or stable edifice cannot be supposed to be built and stand firm
without an entire foundation, and consequently that this summarie of wholesome
words is necessary to the Architects, in order to their superstructing a Pile,
their planting a Church of Jews and Gentiles, though not absolutely so, for
the reducing of each single person.

CHAP. III. A particular view of Fundamentals, Jesus Christ indefinitely.
. 1. I Now proceed to a more particular view of this Foundation, which is
sometimes most compendiously set down in Scripture, either under the
abbreviature of Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ the Foundation. 1 Cor. 3.11.
or with the addition of his crucifixion or resurrection, or other remarkable
passages concerning him; Or else more largely and explicitly in the Creeds or
Confessions of the Universal Church.

. 2. For the more compendious, it is S. Paul's affirmation, 1 Cor. 3.11. that
Jesus Christ is the one only Foundation, and no man can lay (...) any other,
which is the interpretation of what is elsewhere said, that Jesus Christ
himself is (...) the chief corner stone, or again the (...), head of the
corner, the principal supporter, on which the weight of the structure rests,
the foundation of the foundation.

. 3. In proportion to which it is that the deceivers, or false teachers, or
Antichrists, 2 John 7. are expressed by this Character, they that confess not
Jesus Christ coming in the flesh, This one being a comprehensive article that
supposes and contains all others under it.

. 4. For besides that the Jews to whom the Gospel was first to be preached,
and to some of whom this character of Antichrist was given, believed in the one
Creator of the world already, and so that article concerning the Deity, and the
Attributes thereof needed not be preached either to them, or to the proselytes
from the Gentiles, It is farther manifest that the belief of Christ being
founded on the testimony of the Father, Mat. 3.17. and the doctrine of Christ
containing in it the declaration and manifestation of the knowledge of the
Father, so as he was never known to the world before this Son out of his bosom
thus revealed him, the belief of Christ must necessarily suppose and
pre-require the belief of the Father, and therefore it follows in S. John, v.
9. that he which abides in the doctrine of Christ, (...), he has both the
Father and the Son.

. 5. So again the miracles which Christ did were done in his father's name, and
thereby gave all that testimony to his doctrines of piety and reformation,
which the Father's proclaiming them from heaven would have been able to do.

. 6. And that being thus supposed of all in gross, and so giving a full
authority to all that should be revealed by Christ, the several parts of the
revelations afforded us by him will soon be discerned to be extremely
conducible to this end of reforming men's lives, such as will answer all
imaginable objections and exceptions of flesh and blood against it, and make it
perfectly reasonable for any rational creature to undertake the service of
Christ, and most extremely irrational and unmanly to seek out or to continue in
any other service.

. 7. Such are Christ's promises, divine, unconceivable promises, a bliss to be
enjoyed to all eternity, and that by way of return for a weak obedience of some
few years; such are his threatenings, most formidable menaces of endless woe,
to them that will still despise the riches of his goodness, and forbearance;
Such is the treaty which he negotiates with us, an offer and tender of a
reconciliation, a (...), an act of oblivion, of all forepast sins, and of a new
Covenant, on most moderate, easy terms of sincere (without unsinning)
obedience for the future; And Lastly, such are his precepts, a sort of
commandments, which are most agreeable, and grateful to our reasonable nature,
and which tend, beyond all other means or instruments, to the improving and
perfecting the most valuable part of us, that which alone denominates us men,
and annexing incomprehensible rewards (an eternal weight of glory) to the bare
practice of those things, which are at the very present, though they were not
commanded, and if they should not be rewarded in another life (I mean
abstractively from these enhaunsments of them) infinitely estimable and
preferrable before the Contraries, which must farther cost us so extremely
dear, if we will choose and pitch our design upon them, and resolve to go
through with that unthrifty purchase.

. 8. So that this one corner stone, Jesus Christ is a most competent, ample
foundation, on which to superstruct the largest pile of building, to erect a
Church of pious livers, and to bring all rational men within the compass of
it, and it is not imaginable what could have been added to this, or what method
could probably have been effectual to any man, which is not wrought on by the
concurrence of all these.

The Christian foundation compared with the Natural.
. 9. This will more evidently appear, if we compare this one with all other
ways which have been used at any time toward this end of inducing, and
obliging, and engaging men to good life.

. 10. In the course of nature, (the first way of Oeconomie* under which the
world was governed, by a Law written in men's hearts, natural judicatoriu^,
lumen super nos signatu^, a natural judicatorie, a light sealed upon us, in our
first composure) though there were a competent revelation of our duty, and a
double obligation to perform it, 1. that of piety to our maker, 2. that of
reverence to our own souls, the (...), the superior ruling part of us, and
these two improveable into many other, and thus actually advanced and improved
by natural men, upon study and consideration, (and so all the heathen wisdom
was the farther explaining of those obligations, their natural philosophy was
but a kind of comment on the creation, and is therefore by the Jews entitled
(...) the first word of the Book of Genesis, that story of the creation, and
that a most proper groundwork of obedience to that Almighty Creator, and their
moral philosophy, especially that of Epicurus, a consideration of the most
ravishing beauty and delight and joy, the result of the practice of every
virtue, that of Socrates (which had the Oracle's Testimony and admiration) a
comment on the (...), the knowledge of a man's self, that of Pythagoras on the
(...), the revering of a man's self, and that of Aristotle, the placing of all
humane felicity in the continued actions of virtue, and that also a foundation
very fit to superstruct virtue upon) yet there were great defects and vacuities
and imperfections in this Oeconomie.

. 11. First, the prescribed duties wanted of their full stature, especially if
compared with Christ's (...) his suppletories and superadditions.

. 12. Secondly, there remained very advantageous accesses for temptations to
enter and invade men, the fortifications being very slender to secure their
resistance, little knowledge of the immortality of the soul, or any thing
beyond this life, whether reward or punishment, no assurance that repentance
would be admitted for any sin, an absolute desperation of any good without the
help of purgatives, and a perfect ignorance of all means of purging, and many
other such wants, which are all abundantly supplied in the Christian's
foundation, Jesus Christ.

. 13. And upon that account the Apostle could safely challenge the wise men of
the heathen world with his (...); Where is the wise man of the world? 1 Cor.
1.20. Let all the Philosophers, moralists or naturalists, bring forth their
richest provisions, show such engines of approach and battery, for the
supplanting or beating down of vicious life, for the engaging men to reform,
and live like men, as this foolishness of preaching' this despised, but saving
doctrine of the Gospel has afforded us.

. 14. with the Judaical.
So likewise for the Judaical or Mosaical oeconomie, though that brought many
additions to the light of Nature, and was a (...), an obscure representation as
of that Gospel, and promises of everlasting life, so of those precepts which
are now most clearly revealed by Christ, yet was that obscurity a very great
defect, the shadow was so extremely dark, that the vices of men made advantage
of it to shroud and secure them in their sins.

. 15. The ceremony and Law of circumcision etc. which was meant by God
sacramentally to impresse the duty of strict purity, to cut off the (...), the
superfluity of naughtiness, all inordinate excessive lusts of the flesh, was
yet but a character impressed on the flesh, and did not explicitly descend to
the prohibiting of the desires, but was on the contrary made advantage of by
lust, Romans 7.8. and the outward circumcision in the body of a child of Abraham
was thought to commute for all impuritie.

. 16. So again the Phylacteries on their wrists and foreheads were looked on as
spells and charms, which would yield them impunitie for their disobedience, And
the strict ordinances against conversing with Gentiles, lest they should learn
and join in their abominations, bred more of pride, and contempt, and
uncharitableness to their persons, then of alienation, or detestation of their
sins.

. 17. And so that way of Oeconomie, in many respects, was not (...) blameless;
The clear commands and the explicit promises of Christ and the proclaimed
necessity of real, substantial fruits of repentance, in stead of the leaves,
the arrogance, and hypocrisy of external performances, were a necessary
suppletorie to the Law of Moses, and to that may belong also the Apostle's
(...); Let all the Scribes, or Doctors of the Law, the searchers or profound
interpreters of the scriptures, bring forth such evidences of their efficacy,
or good successes in the reforming and purifying of men's lives, as the
Apostles had done by these so contemptible despicable means, the Gospel of the
Cross of Christ.

. 18. I might farther extend the comparison to all possible pretenders, the
Idolatrous heathens, with the heathen and Mahomedan.
the corrupters of the Law of Nature, and the Mahomedans, that have
superstructed on, and added to the Law of Moses; But both of these are so
scandalously known to have laid grounds for all impuritie, the former in their
mysteries and devotions, the latter in their sensual carnal paradise, the one
allowing it their votaries in the present possession, the other promising it
them in a reversion, that I shall not need enlarge on so remote considerations,
but conclude and shut up all that might be said on this subject, with that
judgment of an heathen Philosopher past on this matter, Chalcidius in his
comment on Plato's Timaeus, whose writings have come to us only in Latin,
Ratio Dei (no question, in the Original (...) in S. John's style) Deus est,
humanis rebus consulens, quae causa est hominibus been beateque vivendi, si non
concessum sibi munus a Summo Deo negligant, The reason, or Word of God is God
taking care of humane affairs, and is the cause unto men of their living well
and happily, if they do not neglect that gift granted by the Supreme God. A
saying that contains in it the sum of our Christian Gospel, (which, it seems
by this and other passages, he had gotten a sight of, and understood in the
simplicity of it) that Christ the eternal Word or reason of his Father, had two
great designs in his prospect, effects of his providence and care of mankind,
the first to bring men to good life, to reformation of every evil course,
subduing of passions, etc. the second to render them happy hereby so doing, and
blessed eternally, and this managed so powerfully, and effectually for them,
that nothing, but their own stupid, and obstinate negligence and contempt of
this divine donative, can deprive them of these benefits of it.

CHAP. IV. JESUS CHRIST Crucified.
. 1. AND as Jesus Christ indefinitely taken is set down to be this Foundation,
Christ crucified the Foundation.
so elsewhere is Jesus Christ Crucified, 1 Cor. 1.23. and 2.2. and accordingly
the whole Gospel is styled (...), the word which is of the Cross of Christ, c.
1.18. and that (supposing it be believed) sufficient to superstruct on it the
conversion of the whole world to a new and Christian life, and accordingly it
is there styled (...), to those that escape out of the deluge of infidelity,
the very power of God, and ver. 24. the power of God, and the wisdom of God,
the powerfullest and wisest method toward the accomplishing of this work, which
is farther explained Romans 1.16. by (...), the power of God to salvation to
every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile. If this
doctrine of the Cross be once received, there is no more wanting to engage and
oblige all rational men to that renovation of their lives, which is often called
(...) saving or delivering them out of their evil ways, and will assuredly
bring them to salvation, in the notion, wherein we vulgarly take it.

What propriety the Cross has to this.
. 2. That the cross of Christ has this propriety may appear by these five
effects or branches of it, 1. it is the highest confirmation imaginable of the
truth of all that he had delivered from his Father, He laid down his life for
the testifying of it. 2. It is the exemplifying (and that is the most
Rhetorical argument, the most powerful way of persuading) the highest and
hardest part of the Christian's duty, that of laying down our lives for the
truth, resisting unto blood in our (...) our spiritual Olympicks, our striving
against sin. 3. It is a sealing that Covenant betwixt God and us, which he came
to preach, a Covenant of mercy, and pardon, and everlasting salvation to all
that perform the condition of it, and to none else, and that is of all others
the greatest and most effectual engagement to that performance. 4. It is the
sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, the (...) or means of expiation or
pardon, upon our unfeigned return and change, and that is absolutely necessary
to found our hope, as that hope is necessary to excite our indevours, 5. It was
the ceremony of consecrating Christ our high Priest, to his great
Melchisedekian office of blessing us, in which as his resurrection instated
him, so that was by way of reward to his sufferings, Phil. 2.9. and so all that
sufficiency of strength which is required for the turning every one from
iniquity, Act. 3.25. being an effect of that blessing of his, the doctrine of
his death, from the merit whereof this quickening power does flow, is a
foundation of all cheerful attending on his service, to which he is so sure to
afford his assistance.

CHAP. V. JESUS CHRIST raised etc.
Christ's resurrection the Foundation.
. 1. ELsewhere this Foundation is determined to one other single article, that
of the resurrection of Christ, Romans 10.9. which supposing and comprehending the
crucifixion under it, and being visibly and undeniably wrought by the immediate
and omnipotent power of God, and not imputable to any other possible means, was
a most illustrious testimony, and conviction of the innocence of Christ, thus
signally vindicated, and rewarded by God, and consequently a confirmation of
the truth of all that he had taught, and thus signed with the effusion of his
blood.

an Argument of the greatest conviction.
. 2. Of this one article it is our Saviors affirmation that it was so full
matter of conviction to all gainsayers, that they which should not be wrought
upon by that, were to expect no farther signs or miracles, and the design of
the holy Ghosts coming upon the Apostles being to fit them for the great work
(for which Christ had given them Commission) the testifying and proclaiming his
Resurrection, from thence arises the aggravation and irremissibleness of the
sin against the holy Ghost, who had so abundantly convinced the world of
Christ's righteousness by his arising and going to his Father. And accordingly
in the preaching of S. Peter, Act. 2. this was the doctrine that with such an
Emphasis he inculcated upon them v. 22. Men of Israel, hear these words --
Jesus of Nazareth -- ye have nailed with wicked hands and killed, Whom God has
raised up etc. and v. 24. this Jesus has God raised up, (...) of which we all
are witnesses, or, whose witnesses we all are, ver. 32. and so made him Lord
and Christ, v. 36. And when they heard this they were pricked at the heart, and
said, Men and brethren, What shall we do? And upon this one foundation he
immediately superstructs the exhortation to repentance, and coming in by
baptism unto Christ, and three thousand were that day wrought on by that
method, v. 41.

. 3. Beside this, A pawn of our Resurrection Corporal,
the Resurrection of Christ was a peculiar pawn and pledge of God's raising up
our bodies out of the grave, and (before that time comes) of his quickening our
souls out of the most noisome vaults, the habits and customs of sin, wherein
they lay putrified, and Spiritual.
this being an act of the same omnipotent Spirit, by which he raised up Jesus
from the dead, and without which it were as hopeless an attempt for sinners to
go about to rise to new life, as it were for dead men to raise themselves out
of their graves. And consequently the belief of this, was, in the former of
these respects, of special importance to confirm our hopes of another life, on
which so many branches of Christian piety so immediately depend (that
especially of laying down our lives for Christ's sake) that if our hope in
Christ were only that of this life, we could never espouse so cold a service,
And in the latter respect it was most proper to quicken our hopes, that upon
our awaking at Christ's call, and arising (like Lazarus) out of our graves of
sin, that Christ, which gives us life* would command us to be loosed from our
grave-clothes, rescue us by the power of his Spirit from the bands and power of
sin, and enable us to live Christianly; Which we could not hope to do without
this power of his Spirit, to prevent and assist us, nor reasonably attempt to
do without this hope.

. 4. An example of new life to us.
Farther yet the Resurrection of Christ has the power of a pattern to us, and
is so made use of, and typified in baptism, as an engagement and obligation to
us to transcribe that divine copy into our hearts, and to rise to newness of
life. And accordingly that seems to be the importance of the phrase, Romans 10.9.
believing in the heart that God raised Christ from the dead, there being no
more necessary to the superstructing all piety on that one foundation, but to
sink down the belief of that one Article from the brain to the heart, to reduce
it effectually to practice.

CHAP. VI. Other Articles of Belief in Christ.
The Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.
. 1. BEside these two, a whole calogue, and climax of Articles we have set down
1 Timothy 3.16. made manifest in or by the flesh, justified by the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached among the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up with
glory. And these altogether seem to be that (...), truth, v 15. (as elsewhere
Faith) of which the Church was (...), a pillar and establishment, to sustain
and keep it (as a pillar firmly set up on the basis sustains and upholds the
fabric laid upon it) from sinking or falling; For so this truth deposited in
the Church, or with the Governors thereof (such as Timothy there) was to be
conserved and upheld by that means. And it is farther observable in that place,
that it is called (...), the mystery of Piety, and that a great one,
signifying the price and value of these articles principally to consist in
this, that they tend mightily to the begetting of piety in our hearts, and so
are the (...), the articles of our initiation, or of our religion into which we
are initiated by baptism, as the foundation on which all our Christian
practice (which alone deserves the name of piety, and is opposed to (...)
impiety) is superstructed and built afterward.

. 2. God made manifest by the Flesh.
This will be more visible by surveying the severals [1. (...), God manifest by
the stesh.] God was so intent upon this work of revealing and declaring his
will to men, in order to bringing home sinners to repentance, so very desirous
that men should reform and live, and not sin and perish eternally, that to
enforce this on us at the greatest possible advantage, he was pleased himself
to assume, and manifest his will, in, or by our Flesh, and so, not only God
from heaven, but God visible on earth, to preach reformation among us, and if
this be not able to make impression on us, it is not imaginable that all the
preaching of men or Angels, that any inferior method should be of force to do
it. From whence it was, that all the Devil's countermines in the first ages
were designed purposely against this one Article, the Deity or Godhead of
Christ incarnate, making all that he did and suffered here an appearance, no
reality, in opposition to which is the [(...)] and [(...)] so often repeated by
Ignatius, the reality and verity of Christ's eating, and suffering, and rising,
etc. and every branch of such heresy took off (as far as it was believed)
from the necessity of Christian life, not only by implying him to be an
Impostor, if he were not truly what he often affirmed himself, and was by the
Apostles affirmed to be, the Messiah, i. e. the eternal son of God, and God
blessed forever, but by evacuating that great obligation, and engagement to
reform our lives, taken from the authority and Godhead of him, that had sought
and solicited it so earnestly, and came down from heaven and assumed our flesh
upon that one errand or embassy to reveal himself more convincingly among us.

. 3. Had it been only a Prophet, though never so great and extraordinarily
furnished with signs and wonders, he had been but a servant of God, and there
were many experiences and precedents among their forefathers of the resisting
of such, but the personal descent of God himself, and his assumption of our
flesh to his divinity, more familiarly to insinuate his pleasure to us, to
admonish, and invite, and denounce judgments, and even to weep over those that
would yet be obstinate, was an enforcement beyond all the methods of wisdom,
that were ever made use of in the world.

. 4. For God, I say, himself to do all this, and to descend so low, to so mean
an estate, and to a much meaner usage, a shameful contumelious death, to work
this work most effectually upon men, was a wonderful act of grace and wisdom,
a secret, a mystery indeed beyond all former ways, infinitely considerable
toward this of turning from every evil.

. 5. The Arians doctrines against it.
And upon this score the doctrine of the ancient and modern Arians and
Photinians, which so industriously lessens the divinity of Christ in pretense
of zeal to God the Father, to whom they will not permit him to be equal, must
consequently take off extremely from this Mystery of Piety, this foundation of
a good life, laid in the eternal God's coming down to preach it to us; And as
it is a direct contradiction to those places, wherein Christ is called God,
Act. 20.28. Tit. 2.13. wherein he and his Father are affirmed to be one, Joh.
10.30. and 1 John 5.7. wherein the known title of the God of Israel (never
named in their services, but it was answered by all with (...), God blessed
forever) is by the Apostles attributed to Christ, Romans 9.5. (as also Heb.
13.21. 1 Pet. 4.11. and 5.11. 2 Pet. 3.18. Rev. 1.6.) and which, De Fide p. 53.
as Proclus says, convinces all the heresies concerning Christ, (...), and
walls up the newly invented ways of injury and contumely against him, So it is
a great diminution and abatement of the force of that fundamental argument,
whereon God thought fit, that the renovation of the world should be
superstructed, and how much soever the contrary heretics the modern Socinians
have pretended to the maintenance of Piety, it is certain they have by this
taken out one principal stone from the foundation of it, the (...) here, God
made manifest by the flesh, which could not be affirmed of Christ, if he were not
first God, before he was thus made manifest by the means of his incarnation.

. 5. The next stone in this foundation is, (...), God justified by the Spirit.
God's having been justified by the Spirit] i. e. the several ways of
conviction, which were used in the world by the Spirit of God, to give
authority to all that was revealed by Christ, as the will and commands of God.
Such was 1. the visible descent of the Spirit of God upon him at his baptism,
Mat. 3. which (as preparative to his entering on the exercise of his prophetic
office, Mat. 5. etc.) was the divine attestation given from heaven (by voice)
to all that he should ever teach.

. 6. 2dly. Such was the Spirit's leading him into the wilderness, Mat. chapter 4.
to subject him to the Devil's examination, and thereby to give grounds of
conviction to him and those infernal powers, that he was the son of God.

. 7. 3dly, Such was his power of doing miracles, works of that nature, as were
by all acknowledged to be above the power of men or devils, and only works of
the Spirit of God, Thus was his curing of Leprosy, of which the King of Israel
says, Am I a God, that this man sends to me to recover a man of his Leprosy?
1 Kin. 5.7. and which the Jews proverbially called the finger of God, and is
therefore said to be done (...), for a testimony unto them, Mat. 8.4. an
evidence of his divinity; Thus the giving sight to him that was born blind,
which since the world began, had not been heard of to be done by any, Joh.
9.32. Thus the raising of Lazarus and others, and at last his own resurrection
from the grave; All which being wrought by the Spirit of God, and being not
otherwise possible to be done by any, were the (...) or Judicial way of
approving his Commission from God, and his doctrine, against all gainsayers,
and so most eminently tends to the impressing the necessity of that
reformation, which he came to publish.

. 8. 4thly, Such was the descent of the Spirit on the Apostles, authorizing
them witnesses of the resurrection, and preachers of all that truth and will of
God, which Christ had in his life revealed to them, which consequently gave an
attestation to all that the Apostles should teach, being thus led by the Spirit
into all truth, and so was of especial concernment to the planting of a
Church, and enforcing that reformation of lives, which the Apostles pressed on
all that would not be ruined eternally.

. 9. God seen of Angels.
The third branch of this mysterious divine way of working piety on earth, is
the (...) his being seen by Angels, i. e. his divine power discerned and
acknowledged and adored by Angels themselves, both good and bad; by the good 1.
at his birth, Lu. 2.13. 2dly, when after his temptation and fasting they came
and ministered unto him, Mat. 4.12. 3dly, in the trouble and agony of his soul,
before his death, Joh. 12.29. Lu. 22.43. 4thly, at, and after his resurrection,
Mat. 28.2. And by the bad, both when he was tempted, and when he cast them out
of their possessions, obeying his command, dreading his power, and believing
and confessing him the son of God most high, and when immediately upon his
birth, the oracles, which had before so flourished among the heathens, began to
droop and decay, and from giving responses in Verse, descended to Prose, and
within a while were utterly silenced. Which as it was a most regular means to
bring all sorts of men, heathens as well as Jews, to reformation of all vices,
those especially, which they were formerly taught in their Idolatrous worships,
and were enslaved to them unwillingly by the tyranny of those false Gods or
devils, which required to be thus worshipped, Romans 8.20. and so continued to
do till they were cast out of their Temples; so was it an huge obligation on
all men to receive and obey him, whom the very devils believed and trembled at,
and a testimony of the greatest force in the mouth of a whole Province of his
greatest enemies, that he was, what he assumed to be, the Messiah of the world,
who if he were not received by consent and readily obeyed, would erect his
kingdom in the destruction of those enemies (an essay of which was thus shown
on the Prince of darkness) avenge and utterly consume the adversaries.

. 10. The fourth is, Preached among the Gentiles.
the (...), his being preached among the Gentiles, or Idolatrous nations of the
world; The message brought by him from heaven was proclaimed not only to the
Jews, but (both by himself and by the Apostles) to all the Gentiles, those
that till then had lived in all villainy and impiety, and yet had now by
Christ's mercy tendered them upon Reformation, and thereby is all encouragement
afforded to the greatest sinners, to forsake, and amend their lives, and by
God's merciful pardon to the times of their ignorance, and forepass'd sins, a
passage opened to life, and eternity, for all that will make use of it, and
this is the greatest engagement to do so, and not to forfeit and lose so
precious an opportunity.

. 11. Believed on among men.
The fifth branch is the (...), his being believed on in the world; the faith of
Christ received by many both Jews and Gentiles; Of that people of the Jews (a
most stubborn obdurate people, that had killed the prophets, and stoned them
that were sent) some considerable number repented and came in upon Christ's
preaching, the Jews;
about three thousand were added to the Faith at one sermon, Act. 2.42. before
the Apostles going out from Jerusalem (which wants but a seventh part of being
half the number of those reserved ones of the whole kingdom of the ten tribes,
in Elijah's time, which had (secretly) kept out of that Idol-Baal-worship) and
so proportionably at other sermons, so that Act. 20.21. we hear of many myriads
of believing Jews, and (taking out of these the Gnostick heretical party) an
hundred forty four thousand sealed out of the twelve tribes as faithful
servants of God, which had received the faith of Christ, and brought forth
fruit accordingly, Rev. 7. and that, though but a small number in proportion to
the greater that remained obstinate, yet above twenty times as many as they in
Elijah's time; And when the greater multitude was so terribly destroyed, then
the believers of that nation were the only (...) or remnant of it, and in a
manner that whole people, by the conversion of some, and slaughter of the rest,
were soon after, though not at the time of the Apostles resolving on this
depositum, reduced to the Faith, and became Christian.

. 12. And for the Gentiles, the Gentiles.
they were contained in the number of those which were present at that sermon,
Act. 2.11. and no doubt some of them were wrought on by it, as even in Christ's
time, the Gentiles faith is magnified for great, and above the size of what he
had found in Israel, and they were peculiarly the violent that took the
kingdom of heaven by force, whilst the children of the Kingdom neglected,
and were cast out of it; And soon after the Apostles going out and preaching to
all nations, they willingly received the Faith, and forsook their Idols, and
within a while all Asia, Act. 19. by St Paul's preaching, and other whole
nations by each of the other Apostles, and at length the whole Roman Empire
became Christian, and the kingdoms of the world became the kingdoms of our
Lord and of his Christ, Revel. 11.15. and the Kings of the earth and of the
Nations brought their glory to the Lamb, Rev. 21.24, 26. and to the same
purpose Rev. 17.14. and 19.6. and as among the Jews, so all the world over,
those that received not the commands of Christ, and his doctrines of purity and
perseverance, were signally destroyed, and they that did, were preserved as a
peculiar people unto him, to live, and continue in his obedience.

. 13. And this great success on both sides, among Jews and Gentiles over all
the world, (part of it historically true at the compiling of these articles,
and part of it prophetically true then, and fulfilled afterward, the subduing
them either by the word of his mouth, the preaching of the Gospel, or by the
word of his power, the destructions which he sent among them) was a most
effectual argument, a sovereign method to give authority to this faith, which
was thus prevailing, and becomes the greatest instance of reproach to all
libertine professors, that they should not purify their hearts by the faith,
when the most impure Idolaters were wrought on to do so, and a sad certain
abode to all such (after the example of obstinate Infidels and impure
Gnostics) of both present and future destructions.

. 14. Received up into glory.
The sixth and last stone in this foundation is the (...), his being received up
in, or with, or into glory, Christ's ascension or assumption to heaven being an
irrefragable argument of conviction to the world, that he died an innocent
person. Joh. 16.10. and consequently that what he taught was the will of God
and 2 truth of heaven, to which he was assumed after his testification of it;
To which when these two circumstances are superadded, first, that his
assumption being in the sight of many, was also solemnized by the presence of
Angels, and a voice from heaven, Act. 1.9, 10, 11. (and so (...) in or with
glory, after a glorious manner) and secondly, that it was attended with the
exercise of divine power, both in the Church by the hands of the Apostles, and
their successors, whom Christ had authorized to succeed him on the earth, and
in the world by executing visible judgments on his crucifiers etc. (and so
(...) into glory or regal power) this will be an article of great energie for
the planting of Christian faith, and purity in the world.

CHAP. VII. The Faith in Baptism.
The Father, Son, and holy Ghost.
. 1. WHat has thus been set down as so many branches of fundamental belief,
and so of the mystery of Godliness, the ground of initiating or entering men
into Christian life, is more summarily comprised in the form of baptism, the
ceremony of this initiation instituted by Christ, wherein all that were to be
baptized, were (if of age, first instructed in the doctrine, and then)
received, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
Which are the abbreviature of the larger Catalogue of doctrinals formerly
taught, and explained by the Catechist, and those, on which they that
administered baptism, are commanded to superstruct all the duties of Christian
life, Mat. 28.20. teaching them to observe all things which I have commanded
you; the authority of all and each the persons of the Trinity being purposely
engaged on this one great interest, and the gathering disciples and receiving
of Proselytes over the world, being designed to this one grand end, of
introducing the practice of Christian virtues among men, who do therefore in
baptism, sacramentally and federally, i. e. under oath and solemnest vow (as
they believe any thing of these fundamental doctrines of God the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost) undertake the performance thereof, and if they fail therein,
are the most faithless, perjured persons in the world. And certainly this
method is in the design as probable, (how improsperous soever the wickedness
of men has rendered the success of it) as any could have been invented to this
end.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Creeds in general, and first of the Apostles Creed.
. 1. THE method now leads from the more compendious, to the larger and fuller
view of this foundation, as it is set down in the Creeds of the Church, and
first in that which is called symbolum Apostolicum, The Apostles Creed.
the Apostolic badge or mark, (a tessera or token of the Apostles having
planted the Faith in any Church) the known summarie of that belief, which had
been received from the Apostles.

Proved to be the Apostles.
. 2. For although in their Epistles, which were all written to them which were
Christians already, there is not to be expected any complete Catalogue of those
articles, which they had every where taught, because they were supposed by them
to be sufficiently known, and might briefly be referred to, as such without any
perfect enumeration, yet in any city or region, where the Apostles came to
plant the faith, it is the affirmation of the first writers of the Church, as
frequently appears in Tertullian, Irenaeus, etc. (and there is no reason of
doubt of the truth of it) that all those articles, which were thought fit to be
laid, as the foundation of Christian life, were by them distinctly delivered;
And this being a matter of fact, of which (as of the Canon of scripture, or of
this or that book in it) only the records, and stories of the first times are
competent judges, that Creed which is delivered down to us by the Ancient
Churches thus planted (I mean those of the first three hundred years) and by
them entitled to the name the Apostles, and expounded in the homilies of the
Fathers, some extant, others mentioned by Ruffinus, illustres tractatores which
had gone before him in that work, is in all reason to be deemed the sum of
that Foundation. Of this if any farther evidence be necessary, it will be thus
easily made up.

. 3. The time of forming the Nicene Creed, and the occasion of it, (by way of
opposition to those heresies which had then broken into the Church) is known to
every man. Now before this was formed, it is certain, that Ecclesia per
universum orbem usque ad sines terrae seminata, and ab Apostolis and a
discipulis little accepit eam fidem quae est in unu^ Deu^ patre^ omnipotente^
etc. Iren: l. 1. c. 2.
all the Churches of the world, both Eastern and Western had a form of
confession of Faith, which they had received from their immediate ancestors,
and they from the Quid si neque Apostoli quidem scripturas reliquissent nobis,
nonne oportebat Ordinem sequi traditionis, quam tradiderunt iis, quibus
constituebant Ecclesias? Cui ordinationi assentiunt mullae gentes barbarorum,
quorum qui in Christum credunt, sine charta and atramento scriptum habentes in
cordibus suis salutare, and veterem eruditionem diligenter custodientes, in
unum Deum credentes etc. Iren: l. 3. c. 4.
Apostles themselves.

. 4. And of this there is no place of doubting, but that it was the very same
which we now call the Apostles Creed, not only because there was never any
other assigned by any, or affirmed to have had that general reception, but
because the testimonies of the Ancients are expressly for this. Ruffinus and
Vigilius cont: Eutychen testify clearly for the Western Church, and Ruffinus
again, and Cyrill of Jerusalem for the Eastern.

. 5. And Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra in the Great Council of Nice, a famous
supporter of the true Faith, (and a great sufferer for it) against the Arians,
at his taking his leave of Pope Julius, leaves behind him the Confession of
his faith, which, says he, he had received (...) from his predecessors in the
Lord, And this was the same with that which we now style the Apostles Creed, as
appears in that story, set down by Epiphanius haer: 72. All which will receive
yet farther force from that known observation of Saint Austines, that what the
Universal Church holds, and has not been instituted by Councels, but always
retained, is with all reason to be believed to have been delivered by tradition
Apostolical, (there being no other so large an Original to which so universal
an effect may be imputed) li. 4. de bapt: cont: Donat: c. 24. especially when
to that we add Tertullians words of this very matter lib. de velandis virgin:
Regula quidem fidei una omnino est, sola immobilis and irreformabilis, Credendi
scilicet in unicum Deum, omnipotentem, mundi Creatorem, and filium ejus Jesum
Christum, natum ex virgin Maria etc. The Rule of faith is altogether one, and
that alone immovable, and unreformable, to wit of believing in one only God,
omnipotent, Creator of the world, and in his son Jesus Christ, born of the
virgin Mary etc. Which being a summary reference to this Creed, and that
resolved to be one over all the world, and that unchangeable, must needs be
imputed to that Apostolic original, which alone can pretend to that dignity.

The articles thereof fundamental to good life.
. 6. And that every branch thereof in several, was a fit and proper groundwork
of Christian obedience, wherever it were planted, and all together sufficient
to found the reformation of whole cities, and provinces at once, will be
discernible by the most cursorie survey.

. 7. The Articles 1. of God the Father, the (...).
Ruler and Creator of all the world; 2dly, of God the Son, both in his titles
and offices, and in the passages of his story, from the Assumption of our
flesh to his coming again from heaven to be our Judge; and 3dly, of God, the
holy Ghost, being all amassed together, make up this plain sense, that all the
divine (and infinitely wise) ways of oeconomie that God in heaven could think
fit to use toward a rational creature, to oblige, and reduce mankind to that
course of living, which is most perfectly agreeable to our nature, and by the
mercy of God ordinable to eternal bliss, all the most powerful methods of
impressing our duty on us, the authority of the God of heaven, who has
sovereign dominion over all, of God the Son, made up of all humble and
charitable ways of condescension, to invite, and yet of all power, and
terrors, to constrain, and engage our obedience (to execute vengeance on those
that will not be wooed by him) and of God the holy Ghost, who has ordained a
succession of men, from that time to the end of the world, continually to
negotiate this one affair of reducing sinners to repentance: All these, I say,
have been so solemnly made use of, and impressed by him, that there wants
nothing but care and consideration of our own eternal weal, a tolerance or
endurance of being made happy here, and blessed eternally, to bring all that
have believed those articles, to forsake their sinful courses, and sincerely to
apply themselves to the obedience of Christ.

The article of God the Father.
. 8. The first stone of this foundation is the consideration and acknowledgment
of the one eternal God, under those two great relations of a Father and a
Prince, and both those founded in his right to the creature by title of
creation; And the one belief and acknowledgment of this intitles him, and
engages us to a ready voluntary obedience to, and dependence on him, and
prepares for such an universal reception of all that shall ever be revealed to
be his will, that every presumptuous, known act of prevarication is no less
then a (...), a rebellion, like that of the old giants, a fighting against God,
a contesting with heaven, a resisting his will and our own happiness, and that
may be one seasonable degree toward the obliging us to piety.

Of God the Son.
. 9. The second, and that which brings along with it all the force and
authority of the former (as the only Son bearing the person, and employed in
the Embassy of the Father) is the acknowledgment of Jesus Christ, who, by
being sent into the world to be our King or Lord, and by the divine miraculous
way of his entrance into it, the powers and mighty works, and piety of his
life, and the stupendous manner of his passage out of the world, to resume, in
his humane, as well as divine, nature, that regal power in heaven, which from
all eternity belonged to him as God, is fitly qualified, and prepared to take
possession of his inheritance, to rule and reign in our hearts by this faith,
and so to recall and reduce immediately all, that cordially believe the true
God (who now in this gracious pacifick manner comes to treat with them) and to
convince all the blind worshippers of Idol false Gods, of the vanity and
villainy of their former courses, and so to bring them back to their own peace.

. 10. Thirdly, the acknowledgment of the holy Ghost, Of God the holy Ghost.
in that great office of Paraclete, or Advocate of Christ, convincing the world
of the truth, and divine authority of Christ's message, and then
commissionating and assisting the Apostles, and their successors in their
continued never-ceasing Embassy to us, to pray us in Christ's stead to lay
down our weapons of hostility, and to be reconciled unto God, to live friendly
and filially, i. e. obediently before him, What is it but a continued
perpetuated voice from heaven, resounding for ever in our ears? as if it were
minutely proclaimed in thunder from heaven, to give men no rest in their sins,
no quiet from Christ's importunity, till they awake from the lethargick sleep,
and arise from so dead, so mortiferous a state, and permit him to give them
life.

Of the Holy Catholic Church.
. 11. That which follows of the Holy Catholic Church, As it is (with the rest)
an attendant on this article of the holy Ghost, the end of whose descent was to
gather a Church or society of holy Christian livers over the whole world, so is
it the interpretation of those two parts of the mystery of piety formerly
explicated [ Christ's being preached among the Gentiles, and believed on in the
world] of the (...), 2 Thessalonians. 2.1. the gathering together of a multitude over
the world, among Gentiles, as well as Jews, to that banner set up by Christ,
enrolling themselves in his musters, engaging their faithful obedience to him;
And if we will not be made the mark, and aim of all his arrows, be looked on as
the professed opposers of all his methods, and therein of all piety, and of our
own souls, we must think our selves obliged to hasten into that number, and
that in respect of the holiness, as well as the assemblies, of the practice, as
well as the profession of Christianity.

. 12. And the consideration and serious belief of this, that God has taken
such care to anticipate, and prevent every man, to draw him early into his
Church, there to instruct and oblige him to all Christian performance, to give
piety the prepossession, before other competitors (homebred lusts or vicious
customs of the world) should be able to pretend to him, and so to engage him in
holiness first, and then in bliss, is another argument of great energie to
work effectually on mankind, and recommend this obedience unto them.

. 13. Of the Communion of Saints.
So likewise the (...), which seems to me (and is elsewhere explicated) to
belong to the communication, Act. 2.42. as that signifies liberality of the
Saints which first received the Faith of Christ, and as it is there explained
by their having (...) all things common, v. 44. and that again by selling their
possessions, and distributing them to all, as every man had need; v. 45. and
again by (...), praising God, and having or exercising charity to all the
people, v. 47. (making their liberality a special branch of their Eucharist,
their blessing and worshipping of God) as it is an evidence of the great force
that the Gospel of Christ had then upon men's souls, melting them into that
liberal effusion of all that they had, into an absolute contempt of all that is
most doted on in the world, (...), possessions of all kinds, and by parting
with all indefinitely, throwing themselves absolutely upon God's minutely
providence for the sustaining of them (which is directly the Merchant's course
in the Gospel, selling all, and buying, at that vast price, the one hidden
Jewel which he had found) so is it an engagement to all that will undertake
this profession, to come with preparations of mind some way proportionable to
these examples, to exercise that charity to men, and dependence on God in the
things of this world, which shall evidence their (...), that the joys which
they depend on are in another world, and that the either having or wanting
here, is no otherwise considerable, then as it is the opportunity of exercising
the several graces, which are the properest means to exalt and perfect our
Nature, and the way to our immortality.

. 14. As for the other larger notion of this (...), so as to import the
spiritual Union of Faith and Love between all professors of Christianity, and,
(as exercises of that) the Communication of the mysteries (so ordinarily styled
(...)) of Prayers, of Fastings, of Tears, of Sufferings, of Rejoicings, of
Thanksgivings, it must be taken in by analogy with this former, and will also
fitly be comprehended under the former article of the Church (and therefore it
is, that the Nicene Creed sets [ the Holy Catholic Apostolic Church] in the
place of both these) and therefore need not be farther insisted on here.

The forgiveness of sins;
. 15. The forgiveness of sins, which now follows, is, being rightly understood,
the most eminent branch of this foundation, and the removal of an hindrance
which might otherwise obstruct all thought or design of reformation, but being
misunderstood is rendered instrumental to the most presumptuous obstinate
security in sin.

Misinterpreted.
. 16. Should it be mistaken for an absolute impunity promised freely by God, or
absolutely purchased by Christ either for all men indefinitely, or for some
special favorites of heaven, without respect to their reformation or new
obedience, it were the direct foundation of all impenitence to all that either
had, or believed themselves to have their part in it, and might by all carnal
men probably be made use of as such.

. 17. For to a carnal liver, which were once possessed of this persuasion, that
all his sins past and future were absolutely forgiven by the tenure of the
Gospel, and that without any condition of change required of him, what
imaginable motive is there to persuade him to forsake any one sin, to which he
has the slightest temptation? When God is once a favourer of his grossest
sins, or of his person in despite of his sins, all the other Articles of his
belief will sound nothing but mercy and promises to him, and accordingly those
that have imbibed this error, have extended the influence thereof to the whole
Gospel, which they will not allow to contain any thing but promises, and so all
the commands of Christ are at once outdated.

. 18. Rightly understood.
But when it is rightly understood, and confined within those due limits, which
the Gospel every where assigns it, 1. to be the pardon of sins past and
forsaken (which belongs not either to future sins, or to any that are not
reformed) 2dly, to be the admission of sinners to repentance, and so, and by no
other means, to forgiveness, (and therefore John's ceremony of admitting
Proselytes is called the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins)
3dly, to extend no farther to any sort of sins continued in or unforsaken, then
as they are reconcilable with sincere endeavors (and use of the means) to
forsake and get victory over them (which though it secure us of God's favor
and pardon to our infirmities and ignorances, does denounce his wrath against
our wilful sins) When it is taken with these restraints and conditions on one
side, and is then extended (as the general promulgation extends it) to all the
sins of every sinner in the world, who shall by repentance and syncerity of
change be rendered capable of it, When that which is mistaken to be particular
and absolute, is duly understood to be general, but conditionate (and to belong
to none, who shall not perform the condition, i. e. impartially, and syncerely,
and universally reform his ways according to the rules delivered by Christ,
his precepts of Christian purity, extending to the very heart) then is there a
sure groundwork laid of renovation and care for our future lives, and all
objections removed, that might probably obstruct that superstructure.

The want of this to Renovation
. 19. As long as we are guilty of any past sin, and have no promise (the only
due ground of hope) of remission, whatever our future care be, this desperation
of success chills all our industry, in a first,
and we sin on, because we have sinned, we cast off the care of all future
thrift, because we are already bankrupted.

. 20. a second,
So again while we make no distinction of sins, and deem every invincible
infirmity or ignorance (from which we have no hope to be freed in this life) to
be as dangerous and mortiferous as the most wilful act, or favored habit of
carnality, another face of the same desperation affrights us, and admonishes
us to provide for our ease, when we cannot for our security, deterres from
attempting what we cannot finish, and permits us to be careless, when we
cannot hope to be prosperous in our care.

. 21. a third respect.
Nay when we undertake the baptismal vow, and enter on this new life, if, as
that baptism cannot be repeated, so it were impossible that any grosser fall
after the first repentance could receive any cure or remedy; the experience of
our own frailties, and the consideration of the slipperie place we stand on, of
the watchfulness of the tempter, and the advantage he has from a false party
within us, which is always ready to join with him, and betray us, and of the
great difficulty, the moral, though not natural, impossibility, that in so long
a work, we should continue so vigilant, as to be obnoxious neither to surprise,
nor fall, would be apt (like the news of the Anakims in the way) to discourage
us from leaving the accustomed familiar wilderness, and undertaking the unknown
voyage to that good land, environed with so many difficulties: An opinion of
the fecibleness or succesfulness of the work being as necessary to found a
purpose of undertaking it, as either the authority of commands, or the
perswasiveness of promises, or pungency of menaces, or prospect of mischiefs
upon neglect, can be imagined to be.

The necessity of it.
. 22. But when all these objections are answered, discouragements removed,
difficulties provided for, (as they are by this Article of Remission of sins,
duly explained, and superadded to the former branches of the foundation) they
to whom all this is revealed and received with an undoubting faith, if they do
not presently set about so easy, and so happy a task, which has so many
grains of equity and mercy allowed in the weighing it out unto us, if they will
not be directed into a path so plained and smoothed, that the wayfaring men,
though fools, shall not err therein (that weakness, or ignorance, or natural
defects, or humane frailties, or any thing that includes not unsynceritie and
presumptuous going on in sin, shall be reconcilable with their hopes and God's
acceptance) must needs acknowledge themselves in the number of the blind
people that have eyes, of the provokers that shall not, because they will not,
enter into God's rest, of the sinners that have no excuse for their sin.

. 23. The belief of the Resurrection of the Body.
In the next place the Resurrection of the body, which includes and supposes a
future state of souls after that of this life (for to what purpose should that
world of (...), carcasses, arise, if there were not as numerous a world of
souls ready to animate them, and join with them in receiving rewards or
punishments for all that the souls have acted by those instruments in this
life?) is most necessary to found, and enforce this Renovation; For, if there
were nothing after this life, if in the death of a man there were no (...),
cure or remedy, Wisd. 2.1. if the premises of the Atheist in that chapter had
truth in them, his conclusion being founded on those premises, it could not be
strange, or irrational for him to proceed, Come on therefore, let us enjoy the
good things that are present, v. 6.

Fundamental to Renovation.
. 24. And if, supposing the immortality of the soul, the body were not
ascertained to return to that old associate, if that (...), that shop or
workhouse of the good or evil spirit, should, with all that has been wrought
in it, be consumed eternally, this would take it much out of the care of the
soul, either to stop it in its Career of sin, or to mortify those affections
that are in this earthy part, or to spiritualize and replenish it with good
works.

The want of it very hurtful.
. 25. If the upper soul, that hopes to reign in another world, can so far
preserve that degree of superiority and dignity of its nature, as to reprehend
and check what is consented to by the will or middle faculty, in compliance
with the flesh, that inferior and brutish, (as it is, as often as any sin against
conscience is committed, and can then hope, that after a few years of
sensuality, that importune rebellious servant shall be eternally cast off, drop
into a perpetual impassible nothing, take a long progress into a land where
all things are forgotten (and consequently the good which has been acted in
that flesh, as well as the evil) this would be some color for that novel
persuasion (a fruitful principle of all carnality) that the man may be
regenerate in the sight of God, though he be sold under sin, led captive unto
the law of sin, which is in the members.

. 26. But when the prevarications and irregularities of the body, The
persuasion gainful.
which are not subdued, as well as checked; mortified, as well as disliked by
the soul, shall receive their certain payment in the body (reunited on purpose
to the soul, that that which has merited by compliance, may be rewarded by
sympathy) when the flames (that by being inflicted on the body are
experimented to afflict, and enter into the soul) shall demonstrate to the soul
her close concernment in all that is permitted to come so near her, then it
will appear to be every man's interest to join good performances to spiritual
purposes and resolutions, to act, as well as to design, to subdue and quell
the exorbitances of the flesh, as well as to continue the wouldings of the
spirit; And this being absolutely required to the syncerity and reality of our
repentance and renovation, which consists not in the strife, or wish, or
purpose, but in the actual operations of good life, the belief of the
resurrection of the body, which is so instrumental and preparative to this,
must needs be fundamental to that, which is superstructed on it; and was
therefore deemed fit to be first preached to all men, before strict Christian
performances could reasonably be required of them.

Everlasting life.
. 27. Lastly, the everlasting life both of body and soul in that future state,
whether in bliss or woe, has with all reason been added as the last stone to
this foundation, and in it all the promises and terrors of the Gospel, to
persuade and drive us to repentance.

The necessity of the belief of that.
. 28. Were the state, wherein we expect our reward for the abstinencies, or
riots of this present life, under the prejudices of short, or finite, as it
has the disadvantage of absence and futurity, the promises and threats of
Christ would lose much of their virtue and energie, and being by their
spiritual and invisible nature rendered so faint in the original, and yet (to
make them more so) set to solicit us at a distance, they would want a
competent instrument to collect and convey their rays succesfully, or so as to
affect, or impresse the species with any vigor on a dull, and withal
prejudicate faculty. We know a life in reversion is not half so valuable, as
that which may at present be entered on, and this not only in the opinion of
fools, but of the most prudent purchasers; And unless there be somewhat in the
duration to inhaunse the value, and to he offered in commutation, and to reward
the patience of the present self-denial, heaven it self would be looked on
jealously, as a project to deprive us of our present portions to cheat us of
our possessions; But when the loss of every present advantage to flesh and
blood, is sure to be repaid in a far nobler coin, and to continue to be
enjoyed to all eternity, when beside the liberal harvest of satisfactions for
any the most trivial loss or suffering, submitted to upon Christ's command or
advise (the hundred fold more in this life) we are secured to reap in another
world, everlasting unperishable felicities, and when to the empty, nauseous,
afflicting pleasures of sin, for some one shortest moment, attended immediately
with a far more durable shame, and then followed with an immortal, endless
gnawing death (that is all jaws, but no stomach) shall remain (by way of
arrear) a sharp, yet sullen payment to all eternity, when every play or jest of
sin, shall engage us in that perpetual earnest, and after the transitory joy is
forgotten or loathed, the irreversible sentence of endless woe is expected,
instantly and infallibly to come out, and with it an (...) all the storehouses
of ease or mercy sealed up, all drops to cool, or oceans to quench our misery;
Then certainly upon this persuasion duly rooted (not in the brain but heart) an
ordinary orator may suffice to superstruct an admission of the precepts of
Christ, and induce in a rational creature a willingness to be happy here (by a
patient bearing of a gentle, desirable yoke) that so he may be blessed
eternally.

. 29. And so we have taken a cursorie view of the several Articles of the most
ancient and shortest Creed, and therein exemplified the propriety of our
definition of Fundamentals, and having the Apostles judgment in their
preachings to confirm us in the truth, that the laying of so large a foundation
was deemed necessary, to their design of planting the same fruits in all
soils, piety, probity, and purity, in a nation of hypocritical Jews, and a
world of Idolatrous polluted Gentiles, we have already showed how unnecessary
it is to enquire, whether any single sinner of either of those provinces might
not possibly be reduced to Christian life, without some one of these
explicitly and actually considered, and so have no temptation to enlarge this
Chapter by any such consideration.

CHAP. IX. Of the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds together; and severally of the
Nicene.
. 1. HAving viewed the Apostles Creed, and of it premised this one thing, that
it was a complete Catalogue of all, that they (being directed by the holy Ghost
in their ministry) thought fit, to lay the foundation of Christian obedience
in every Church, and consequently that there was no more, in their opinion,
necessary, in order to this end of working reformation in the world; The design
of ^^^er Creeds.
It will from this datum demonstratively follow, either that there is in the
two other Creeds, the Nicene, and Athanasian, nothing materially different from
that which the Apostles Creed had contained (nothing really superadded to it)
or else that that superaddition was not, in the Apostles estimation, necessary
to this end, and consequently that if (at the forming of them) it were by the
following Church thought necessary to be thus made, or still continues to be
so, this must arise from some fresh emergent, one, or more, which had been
observable in the Church after the Apostles time.

. 2. And which of these two is the truth, it will not be uneasy to define, For
though the omission of some words, which had been retained in the Apostles
Creed, Defined.
do not signify much, (for it is certain that they were (while retained in
that) and are still, (now they are left out in following Creeds) eternally and
unquestionably true, in the sense, wherein the Apostles and their successors
understood them) nor indeed any more, then that they were virtually contained
in other words still continued (as the descent to hades, under that of his
suffering and burial, and not rising till the third day; and the Communication
of Saints, under the Catholic Church, with the Epithet of Apostolic added to
it) or else that they were not necessary to be repeated, because already
familiarly known and confessed, and not questioned by those heretics, against
whom the variations were designed (as in the Athanasian Creed the Articles of
the holy Ghost, so largely set down in four branches in the Nicene Creed, and
the three Articles attending that of the holy Ghost, in the Apostles Creed, are
all omitted) yet those words which in the later Creeds were superadded to the
former, were apparently designed by the Compilers for some special use, either
by way of addition, or interpretation, to fense the Catholic orthodox Faith
from the corruptions, and depravations, or else from the doubtings, and
contradictions of heretics.

Of the Nicene.
. 3. Thus in the Nicene Creed, the two additions in the first Article, the
[(...), one] prefixed to [ God] and the [(...), and of all things visible and
invisible] were, upon prudent deliberation and considering, interposed, the
first of them on occasion of the Arians, in one respect, and both of them, in
another respect, by reason of the Gnostick and Valentinian, and such like
following heretics, whose heathen and Poetical Theology (taken from Hesiod,
and Orpheus, and Philistion) had rendered them necessary. For that those
heretics, One God.
beginning with their Simon and Helena, had introduced a plurality of Gods (and
so made the Profession of the Unity, part of the symbolum that should
discriminate the Orthodox from them) and affirmed that their Aeones or Angels
were begotten by Helena (Simon's (...), Of all things visible, and invisible.
first cogitation) and that the world was created by them, and that the God of
the Jews was but one of those Angels (and a great deal of the like) appears by
Irenaeus, l. 1. c. 22. And these two intersertions were clear explications of
the Apostles old form, God the Father, Ruler of all, Maker of heaven and earth,
which sufficiently contained an acknowledgment of the Unity (for how else
could he be monarch, or, Ruler of all?) and also asserted him the Creator of
all the Angels (who were certainly comprehended under the heaven and earth, the
phrase of Scripture to denote the world) but yet was capable of more light, by
these more explicit words ( visible and invisible) to exclude the
contradictions of heretics.

. 4. And though the Creed in the ancient Apostolic form were sufficient for
any man to believe and profess, yet when the Church has thought meet to erect
that additional bulwark against heretics, the rejecting (or denying the truth
of) those their additions, may justly be deemed an interpretative siding with
those ancient, or a desire to introduce some new heresies, And though good life
might have been founded without those additions if on such occasions they had
never been made, yet the pride or singularity (or heretical design) of
opposing or questioning them (now they are framed) being themselves
unreconcileable with Christian charity, and humility, are destructive of the
fabric directly, and interpretatively of the very foundation, and is therefore
justly deemed criminous, and liable to Censures in the Church of God.

One Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
. 5. So likewise the Oneness of our Lord Jesus Christ (as before of the Father
referring to the several hypostases in the one eternal, indivisible, divine
nature, and the eternity of the Sons generation, and his coeternity, and
consubstantiality with the Father, when he came down from heaven, and was
incarnate etc. for us men peculiarly (not for Angels) and for our salvation;
and lastly the perpetuity of his kingdom added in the close, all these are
assertions equivalent to those, which had been before comprised in the ancient,
more simple, uncompounded article, but were useful to be thus enlarged, and
explicated, when the Arians opposed the Apostolic tradition, and by
corrupting, detorted the words of scripture to their sense.

. 6. This is elsewhere more largely showed (in the note on 1 John 5.7.) And all
that will opportunely here be added, is only this, that they which, according
to the Apostles depositum, or doctrine in every Church, believed the descent,
and incarnation of the eternal God, on purpose to rescue mankind from all
impurities, to reveal the whole divine will for the regulating men's lives, to
attest it by his death, and evidence it by his resurrection, etc. and at last
to come to judge the world according to this determinate rule, had all those
branches of Christian faith, which were required to qualify mankind to submit
to Christ's reformation. And it is the wilful opposing these more explicit
articles, the resisting them, when they are competently proposed from the
definition of the Church (and not the not-believing them thus explicitly, when
either they are not revealed, or not with that conviction, against which he
cannot blamelesly and without pertinacy of his will hold out) that will bring
danger of ruin on any.

The H. Ghost the Lord and giver of life etc.
. 7. That which is added of the holy Ghost [the Lord and giver of life, who
proceeds from the Father and the Son, (supposing with the Western Church,
that the [ Filioque] was found in the first copies, and acts of that Council)
who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified, who spoke
by the Prophets] is in like manner an enlargement, and explication of the more
brief Apostolic form, and the substance thereof was comprised formerly in that
uncompounded style (fitter then for the belief, and memory of all) but was
afterward prudently enlarged for the repelling, and preventing the poison of
heretical invaders, the Montanists and Macedonians, etc.

. 8. One baptism for the Remission of sins.
And so likewise that addition of the one Baptism prefixed to the Remission of
sins was on purpose designed against the Novatians, whose pretensions were
considered, and condemned in the Council of Nice; The practices of the Churches
in receiving those that had fallen into gross sins after baptism, had been
somewhat different, in some parts milder, as in the Church of Rome, in others
more rigid; The Church of Rome had given some liberty for the great offenders,
murderers, adulterers, and such as had fallen to Idol-worship, in time of
persecution, viz: that after many years penance they might be restored to the
Communion, and peace of the Church, without any new baptism (such as was used
in admitting heathens) only by imposition of hands, or absolution; extending
the virtue of baptism formerly received, to the washing away of these sins
committed after baptism, in case of sincere repentance and forsaking of them;
This the Novatians disliked, and thereupon brake off, and made a schism in the
Church. And the Council of Nice taking cognizance of the matter, judged against
Novatus and his followers, that there was place for a second repentance, and
not only for that first before Baptism, as appears by the Canons of that
Council. And this was it, that was referred to, in this more enlarged passage
of their Creed, and the use of it thought very considerable for the reducing of
lapst Christians, as the Apostolical article of remission of sins indefinitely,
had been for the attracting heathens. And this, and all the former additions,
being thus settled by the Universal Church, were* and still are, in all reason,
without disputing, to be received, and embraced by the present Church, and
every meek member thereof, with that Reverence that is due to Apostolic
truths, that thankfulness, which is our meet tribute to those sacred champions
for their seasonable, and provident propugning of our faith, with such timely,
and necessary application to practice that the holy Ghost, speaking to us now,
under the times of the New Testament, by the Governors of the Christian
Churches (Christ's mediate successors in the Prophetic Pastoral, Episcopal
office) as he had formerly spoken by the Prophets of the Old Testament, sent
immediately by him, may find a cheerful audience, and receive all uniform
submission from us.

. 9. And this is all that is here necessary to be said of this second Creed.

CHAP. X. Of the Athanasian Creed.
. 1. OF the Athanasian Creed (as it is usually called) two things will be
briefly considerable, 1. The doctrine of it, 2. The curses and damnation
denounced against those, who do not entirely maintain it, without the
corruptions, and mixtures of the heretics.

. 2. The Doctrine of the Athanasian Creed.
The Doctrine is (well-nigh all of it) the asserting the Unity of the Divine
nature, and the Trinity of hypostases, whether subsistences* as the Greek
Church called it, or, as the Latin, personae, persons in it, and that in
opposition to several novel propositions, which had by heretics been
introduced in the Church, and so, (as the vices of men suggest laws)
occasioned such explications, and enlargements. And of these again (much more
then of the Nicene superadditions) it may be reasonably affirmed, that being
the explications of a Father of the Church, and not of a whole Universal
Council, or of the Church representative, they were neither necessary to be
explicitly acknowledged, before they were convincingly revealed, nor simply and
absolutely imposeable on any particular man, any farther then he was a member
of some Church, which had actually received Athanasius's explication (as it is
apparent the Western Churches did) or then it appeared concordant with the more
authentic Universal Confessions, as every doctrinal proposition of it, will be
found to do.

The Censures.
. 3. As for the Censures annexed 1. in the beginning [ that except a man keep
the Catholic faith (of which this is set down, not as the entire form, but an
explication, or interpretation of some parts of it) whole and undefiled, he
shall doubtless perish everlastingly] 2dly, in the middle [he that will be
saved, must thus think,] and [ it is necessary to everlasting salvation that he
also believe rightly in the incarnation etc.] and 3dly, in the end [this is the
Catholic Faith, which except a man believe faithfully he cannot be saved] I
suppose they must be interpreted by their opposition to those heresies, that
had invaded the Church, and which were acts of carnality in them that broached,
and maintained them, against the Apostolic Doctrine, and contradictory to that
foundation, which had been resolved on, as necessary to bring the world to the
obedience of Christ, and were therefore to be anathematized after this manner,
and with detestation branded, and banished out of the Church; Not that it was
hereby defined to be a damnable sin to fail in the understanding, or believing
the full matter of any of those explications, before they were propounded, and
when it might more reasonably be deemed not to be any fault of the will, to
which this were imputable.

CHAP. XI. Of the Superstructure, and the particular branches thereof.
. 1. HAving thus briefly taken a view of the Foundation, and therein also of
the Superstructure generally considered, together with the propriety that one
of these has toward the other, the doctrines of belief to the renewing of men's
lives, I am now by course to proceed to a more particular view of this
Superstructure, and the several branches of it.

The general nature of the Superstruction in five particulars.
. 2. Where first it must be remembered, that the (...) or filling up, which
Christ designed, contrary to the (...) dissolving or abrogating of the Law and
the Prophets, is far from evacuating or annulling the obligation of any one
substantial precept introduced by the Law of Nature or Moses, but coming as an
(...) or suppletorie to all former laws, as a new and more perfect correct
edition of the old Codex, as one general Law for the reforming and hightening
of all Laws, is wholly designed, as may be most ordinable to this end.

. 3. First in filling up vacuities, turning out shadows and ceremonies, by
explicit prescription of the substantial duties, which those shadows did
obscurely represent: 2. In binding some parts of the yoke closer then they were
before thought to be bound upon men, extending the precepts farther then they
were thought to extend: 3. In raising them to more elevated degrees of
perfection, sinking them deeper then the outward actions to the purity of the
very heart: and 4. by promises of the most amiable divine, and terrors of the
dismal unsupportable nature, confirming and binding them all upon us, and not
allowing us liberty, or impunity in any indulgent transgression of any branch
of this Law thus reformed and improved by him.

. 4. And this being the result of Christ's design, 1. the production of a
(...), an entire new creature, a new modelling of the whole soul for the whole
space of the future life; and 2. the purpose being to people the whole world,
i. e. a community of men (whose understandings are not generally deep, and so
must be wrought on by means proportionable to them) with a colonie of such
divine new creatures; and 3. the nature of man (as a rational and voluntary
agent) requiring that all this be done by way of persuasion, not of violence,
to preserve their liberty, which alone could render them capable either of
reward or punishment; and 4. the difficulty being so great, and the
improbability of attempting this successfully, It was but reason that a large
and a solid foundation should be laid, upon which this so important and weighty
a fabric might probably be erected.

. 5. But though an uniform universal obedience to the commands of Christ, which
contains every specialty under it (and is not reconcilable with our partiality,
the (...), accepting, as it were, of the person of any sin or virtue, the
preferring any one duty to the prejudice of any other) be that which alone can
own the title of the Christian superstructure, without which completely
erected, no enumeration of particular duties will be sufficient, Yet some
specialties there are which have a greater propriety to this title, The
specialties of it.
then some others, and to which our Christian institution gives us more
peculiar obligations, And it will not be amiss to mention some of these.

. 6. First Piety (the Love, and Fear, and Obedience, and Faith, and Worship of
the one true God) in opposition 1. to Idolatry, 2. to Formality, 3. to
Hypocrisy, on one side; and then I. to Sacrilege, 2. to Profaneness, or
Impiety, on the other side;

. 7. First Piety, Piety in opposition to Idolatry.
or the worship of the true God, the Creator of the world, the God of Israel,
as that is opposed to the Idol-worship, whether of devils and souls of men (in
the rites of whose religion many of the vilest sins of carnality and luxury
were practiced) and to the adoration of livelesse, breathless pictures, and
images, so it is the reforming of the vices, and sottishness that had long
overspread the infatuated Gentile world, and so a prime branch of that design
of Christ's coming, and of his sending his Disciples to all nations, to awake
them out of this dead sleep, and Lethargy of soul, and by the knowledge of the
true God, to bring them to the imitation of, and dependence on him.

Piety in opposition to Formality.
. 8. Secondly, as Piety is opposed to slight, negligent, external formal
performances, so is it the necessary Christian virtue, proportioned adequately
to the omniscience and spirituality of that infinite deity, the belief whereof
is laid as a prime part of the Foundation. And though that inward warmth, if it
be any whit intense, will necessarily extend it self to the outward man (as
motion that begins in the center, naturally diffuses it self, and affects
uniformly, and shakes every part to the circumference) and consequently oblige
the body to attend the soul in all reverences of address to that awful
Majesty, who has full title to the obediences of either (and this, in this
conjunction, is far from meriting any unkind censure, or jealousy, the very
bodily exercise being affirmed by S. Paul to be (...), profitable for a little,
and the fasts, and austerities that were to attend the departure of the
Bridegroom, being of this nature directly, and so the Publican's smiting on his
breast being added to his prayer for mercy, on which Christ bestowed that
Eulogie) Yet if, as insectile animals, for want of blood, run all out into
legs, so the want or chilness of devotion, and not the intension of it, be that
which casts the body into the solemn demure postures; if, is Julian reproacheth
Christianity, the striking of the breast, and shaking of the head, the formal
outward humiliations be all the zeal and piety of the Christian, this is no
farther then Ahab's soft pace, no part of that reformation, that Christ came to
work, none of that worship in the spirit, which is the tribute required in the
days of the Messiah, and that which the Spirituality of God, to whom the
addresses are made, and of the promises, which are rewards proportioned to our
spirits, most strictly exact from us.

. 9. Thirdly, as Piety is opposed to Hypocrisy and unsincerity, To Hypocrisy
and all falsness or foulness of intensions, especially to that personated
devotion, under which any kind of impiety, oppression, rapine, sedition, etc.
is wont to be disguised, and put off more. speciously, so is it a special part
of this superstructure, and as the defining or opining Godliness to be gain, 1 Timothy 6.5. has the brand and reproach of an heresy, quite contrary to the
Christian doctrine and practice, so certainly the designing our obedience to
any part of Christ's precepts, as the means to gain to our selves, and defraud
others, to sin more securely before God, or unsuspectedly before men, is of all
things most unreconcileable with Christianity; And that so little of this
sincere piety is to be met with in the world, the reason is clear, because
Christianity is so far from having its perfect work upon men's hearts, our
brains and our tongues being the only parts, that are ordinarily taken up and
possessed with it.

To Sacrilege.
. 10. Fourthly, the true Christian Piety looks upon sacrilege with a more
perfect aversation, then any former religion has done; The first efflux of
men's piety after receiving of the faith was the selling, and consecrating
their possessions, Act. 2. and the detaining of any such sacred portion is
looked on (and punished severely) as the defrauding of the Spirit of God, c.
5.3. And the zeal that is so exhausted, and laid out in animositie to Idols
and Sabbath-breaking, that it can easily support, and put over the Golden
wedge, and the Treasures of the Temple, and so likewise the (...), the cheap,
chargelesse piety that brings no tribute to the offerings of God, (to which
anciently it was a scandalous thing for any man to approach empty) that offers
all its sacrifices to the Lord, of that which costs it nothing, is far from
any semblance of the Christian reformation, is not ascended so far as the
Natural, the Mosaical, the Heathen, the Mahomedan piety, and is a work of more
then Egyptian darkness, that the excess of light has brought into the world.

. 11. Fifthly, the Christian piety is, beyond all other things, To Profaneness.
diametrally opposed to Profaneness and Impiety of actions, that (...), noonday
Devil, that sins barefaced and confident before the eye of heaven, that of the
practical Atheists, the (...), which though they acknowledge God in the Creed,
yet reject and abandon him in their actions, and either as Jews, candidates of
an earthy Canaan, or as Turks of a carnal paradise, live as if there were never
a God in this world, and never a life after it, whatsoever proportion of the
foundation is laid in their brains, have none of the superstructure in their
hearts.

Obedience to Superiors.
. 12. A second specialtie, which has a considerable propriety to this title,
is, Obedience to superiors, which though founded in the Law of the first
creation, and afterward precisely commanded by Moses, has this note of
eminence (above what was formerly) set on it by Christianity, that it is (...),
a prime commandment, the very title bestowed by Christ on the love of God, Mat.
22.38. Mar. 12.30. and that with promise (for that it was not the first
commandment with promise, is evident by the second of the Decalogue, which has
a promise annexed to it) and it is a compound of three of those virtues, to
which the Beatitudes are peculiarly assigned by Christ, Mat. 5. of Meekness,
and Peaceableness, and suffering for righteousness sake, and this bound
indefinitely, not only on all under subjection, (...) etc. says S.
Chrysostom, though they be Apostles, or Bishops, or any the most sacred
persons; and extended as indefinitely (...), to the most heathen, provoking,
oppressing, (as long as they be lawful) powers; and lastly this duty is
enlarged by Christ so as to belong to Ecclesiastical (as well as to Civil)
superiors, who having the Keys committed to them by Christ, as to the oeconomi
or stewards of his family, though they be not armed with the secular sword, or
any carnal weapons of their warfare, yet obedience is a tribute that belongs to
them, Heb. 13. v. 17. as to those that are to give account for men's souls,
which they could not be supposed to do, if they had not authority over them:
And therefore to make Religion a stratagem to undermine, or a banner under
which to oppose and violate government, is a thing most contrary to this
superstructure, most scandalous and reproachful to Christianity.

. 13. Thirdly, Charity to all sorts, Charity. e.
to all mankind, to neighbors, to strangers, to our own, and even to God's
enemies, Charity of all sorts, of giving, of forgiving, of loving, blessing,
praying for, of mercy to bodies, of relief to estates, but especially of
admonition, and reprehension to souls; Charity in opposition to injustice,
coveting and defrauding others, to faction, division, civil intestine broils,
schisms and ruptures in a Church (that special piece of carnalitie, 1 Cor.
3.3.) to judging, anathematizing, damning, denying the peace of the Church to
them that are qualified for it; and lastly to all guilt and thirst of blood,
all capital punishing of any, but capital malefactors, is a third specialty of
this superstructure, as certain a badge of this sinking down of Christianity
into the heart, as the Apostolical symbol is of the preaching the Faith among
us.

Purity.
. 14. Fourthly, Purity is a special part of this superstructure, and the
circumcision of the heart, the regulating and restraining of all desires of the
Flesh within the known limits of conjugal or virginal Chastity; And this in
opposition to (...) of all sorts, the unnatural, incestuous, adulterous
conjunctions, those before marriage, or after divorce, and to the several
degrees of these in the very eye (and all that is proportionable to that) Mat.
5.28. but especially in the heart v. 8. And whatsoever men's faith, or their
patience, or perseverance were, any remarkable indulgence to this sin, the
seduction of Balaam (in the matter of Peor) or the deeds of the Nicolaitans,
Rev. 2.3. were sure to bring judgments and curses upon those first daughters of
Christ's love, and if not timely repented of and reformed, will in all
probability be revenged with the removal of the Candlestick, ploughing up the
very foundation, the Profession of the Christian faith in those National
Churches that are still in any eminent manner guilty of it. The judgments of
God, and utter destructions of many Nations, not only those that were rooted
out for the implanting of the Jews, but even of all the Monarchies which are
mentioned either by way of story, or prediction in the scripture, are so
signally discernible to have been the reward of this sort of sins, especially
of the unnatural Sodomitical impurities; and the honourableness of marriage in
all (in order to the averting the (...), dishonorable affections, Romans 1.) is
so solemnly recommended in the New Testament (in opposition to the impure
Gnostick heresy, that was so unkind to marriage, as to make it a work of the
Devil) that it may be a very opportune caution to all Christian Churches, and
Magistrates, not to impose celibacie on whole callings, and great multitudes of
men or women, who cannot be discernible or supposeable to have the gift of
continence, Nor yet by offering worldly rewards and advantages to all that
shall deprive themselves of that honorable remedy, to invite the rashest or
the worst of men into that state of continual temptations, which has caused
the shipwreck of so many.

Contentedness^
. 15. Fifthly, Contentedness is most eminently one of these specialties, and
that both as it is opposed to ambition, covetousness, injustice,
uncontentedness, (each of which is a most unchristian sin) and also as it is
the maintaining and establishing of Propriety in the world, which though it be
not of any huge importance in respect of any considerable advantages, that
wealth and honor can help a Christian to, (who is, or ought to be, raised by
Christ to a contempt, and superiority over such mean empty acquisitions as
these) yet, as the disturbances which questions of right never fail to bring
along with them, are very unhappy, and innumerable, and endless, so the
inestimable benefit of peace, and quiet, and vacation for piety, and the
instrumentalness of riches to works of charity (even above that more perfect
way of absolute despising of wealth, which by giving all at once, disables for
many thousand future charities) have rendered it very politic and necessary in
every Christian Commonwealth, by Laws to settle, and secure Propriety, which he
that has learnt with S. Paul to be content in whatsoever estate, will never
attempt to invade or violate.

. 16. Taking up the Cross.
Many other branches of this superstructure there are, which it cannot be
necessary to mention here, but above all the taking up of the Cross and
following Christ with it on our shoulders: And the vigorous endeavor to cast it
off from our own shoulders, to fasten it on other men's, and to shake the
foundations of Government, in order to any such attempt, is most diametrally
contrary to the true Christian temper, an enmity to the cross of Christ.

CHAP. XII. Of the Doctrines that hinder the superstructing of good life on the
Christian belief, first among the Romanists, a Catalogue of them, especially
that of the Infallibility of the Church, 2. Among others, 1. that of the
Solifidian.
. 1. I Come now to consider what Doctrines there are, infused (discernibly)
among Christians, which are most apt to frustrate the forementioned method, to
obstruct, or intercept the cordial superstructing of Christian life, or
Renovation, where the Foundation is duly laid. For supposing the Articles of
our Christian Faith to be completely taught, and undoubtedly believed, and so
the foundation to be purely laid according to the Apostles platform; And
supposing farther that the several forementioned branches of the superstructure
be so far taught and believed also, as that they are not doubted to be the
virtues prescribed, and preached to men by Christ, It is yet possible, that
after all this, some other Doctrines may inconveniently interpose, and
intercept the uses and aims, to which God has designed the Faith, and at once
obstruct the superstructing of all Christian life upon it.

. 2. Doctrines among the Romanists.
Of this sort the Catalogue is (or soon may be) far larger, then will be
fitly inserted in this place. For upon this occasion we might be engaged to
enter on the examinati- of the Romish doctrines, 1. of Penances, 2. of
Indulgences, 3. of the Treasury of the Church, made up (beside the blood of
Christ) of the supererogating merits of some, and applied to the benefit, and
pardon of others, 4. of the Improvableness of Attrition into Contrition, by the
Priests aid, without the sinners change of life, 5. of Purgatory, 6. of
Dispensableness of Oaths, 7. of Arts of Equivocation, 8. of Cessation of
Allegiance in subjects to an heretical Prince, and some others the like; but
especially of the Infallibility, The doctrine of Infallibility.
and inerrableness, which is assumed, and enclosed by the Romish Church,
without any inerrable ground to build it on, and being taken for an
unquestinable Principle, is (by the security it brings along with it) apt to
betray men to the foulest whether sins, or errors, whenever this pretended
Infallible guide shall propose them; And seeing it is just with God to permit
those, which think they stand so surely, to fall most dangerously, and because
what some witty, and subtle men of this, and former ages have been
experimented to fall into, may in the future possibly become the Romanists
case, and because the Assuming of Infallibility is by way of interpretation the
presuming, and affirming every thing to be infallibly true, and good, which
they shall ever believe, or teach de fide, or pronounce to be duty (and there
is nothing so Subditos illi (Papae) simpliciter obligari ad credendum, adeo
irrationabile and blasphemiae plenum est, ut etiam quacunque haeresi
pestilentius inveniatur, that subjects should be absolutely and simply bound to
believe the Pope, is so irrational and full of blasphemy, that it is found more
pestilent then any heresy whatsoever. Wesselus Groningens: de dignit: and
potest: Eccl: c. 1. (written about 200 years since.)

Valde periclitaretur vita justi si penderet ex vita Papae. Wesselus
Groningens: de dignit: and potest: Eccl: c. 1. the life of a just man would be
in very great hazard, if it depended on the life of the Pope.

Summorum Pontificum plerique pestilenter erraverunt etc. Most of the Popes
have erred pestilently. Wesselus Groningens: de dign: and potest: Eccl: c. 1.
(...); What amulet has the Pope to preserve him from denying God in his words,
who so often does it in works? Nilus de prim: p. 57.


false, or sacrilegious, but it is possible they may thus teach, or pronounce
of it) for these reasons, I say, it will be impossible to free this Doctrine of
theirs, which has so vast, and comprehensive an influence on the opinions and
actions of all who have espoused it, from the guilt, of which now we speak,
that of hindering the superstructing of Christian life, and the several branches
thereof, on the Foundation.

. 3. Of the Pope.
And if (as the Jesuits define) this Infallibility of the Church be supposed
to be seated in the persons, or chair, or succession of Popes, it is presently
obvious and clear, that as Almain, and Ocham have not thought it irreverent to
aver that any such person is deviabilis, haereticabilis, Apostatabilis,
damnabilis, liable to error, heresy, Apostasy, damnation it self, So they
that believe him an infallible guide, must in consequence to their opinion, if
they pursue it, follow him to all these dangers; And when Pope Steven has been
by S. Cyprian accused of heresy, Pope Liberius by S. Athanasius, Pope Honorius
by all Christians, when the chairs of those Bishops, which have not secured
their persons from notorious impiety of liliving, that fouler guilt then
heresy, ((...), a species of Atheism, as de Primatu p. 57.
Nilus truly says on this occasion) can with no more pretense, or color of
proof secure them from defining of errors, or tolerating of sins, and when the
writers of their lives, Onufrius, and Platina, who have told us, how much more
then possible the former is, (relating the incests, witchcrafts, cruelties of
Alexander the sixth, the Idolatrous sacrifices of Marcellinus, Coelestins
applications to the devil in pursuit of the Papacy, and his disclaiming his
part in heaven, so he might obtain that earthy dignity) have given us reason to
foresee the possibility also, and all the ill consequences, and aboads of the
latter, It cannot be temerarious or unreasonable to affirm, that what has
been, may be, and in like manner, that the doctrines of any ancient heretic
may, in some new shape, be imbibed by a Cardinal, and being so, may not forsake
him when he is made Pope, but beget a desire very consequent to his belief, an
appetite of propagating his persuasions, and so that Practices may be allowed,
and Articles taught by the Pope, most contrary to the design of this
foundation, and the Church that has imposed on her sons the belief of her
Infallibility, draw all that understand it in this sense (for I see another is
now affixt to it by some Romanists) and pay this ready obedience to it, into
the same snare of heresy, or Impiety, or both.

. 4. The ill effects of it.
For of this we have too frequent experience, how hard it is to dispossess a
Romanist of any doctrine, or practice of that present Church, for which he has
no grounds either in Antiquity, or Scripture, or Rational deductions from
either (but the contrary to all these) as long as he has that one hold, or
fortress, his persuasion of the Infallibility of that Church, which teaches,
or prescribes it. And indeed it were as unreasonable for us to accuse, or
wonder at this constancy in particular superstructed errors, be they never so
many, whilst the (...), this first great comprehensive falsity is maintained,
as to disclaim the conclusion, when the premises, that duly induce it, are
embraced. And then that other errors, and guilts of the highest nature neither
are, nor shall be entertained by those, that are thus qualified for them, must
sure be a felicity (to which this doctrine has no way entitled them) and that
for which they can have no security for one hour, but by renouncing that
principle (which equally obliges to the belief of truths, and falsehoods)
embracing of commendable, and vicious practices, worshipping of Christ in
Heaven, and under the species of bread, the son, and of the mother of God, when
they are once received, and proposed to them by that Church.

. 5. But in stead of any fuller view of these, I shall mention some few of
those, which our closer, and later experience has made most familiar to us,
and given us reason to look on with a quickness of sense, and dread, but those
such, as being not entered into the Confessions of any national Church, are not
properly chargeable either on Papists, or Protestants, but on particular
dogmatizers on both parties, From whom the doctrines being infusible into all,
it will be more necessary to forewarn all of the danger of them.

. 6. Such is first the persuasion of the Solifidians, The persuasion of the
Solifidian.
that all religion consists in believing aright, that the being of Orthodox (as
that is opposed to erroneous) opinions, is all that is on our part required, to
render our condition safe, and our persons acceptable in the sight of God.

. 7. This is a persuasion frequently observable in those that are forward to
separate from all, who differ in matters of Doctrine from them, who place
sanctity in their opinions (as generally heretics do) and make the dissents
of other men, the characters of animal, carnal Gospellers: And the influence of
this on the matter in hand [the superstructing Christian life upon our Faith]
is most evident, For if we should give that persuasion of theirs the greatest
advantage, and suppose the doctrines, in the belief of which they place so much
efficacy, to be these very fundamental Doctrines, which this Discourse has
defined and specified, yet in case the believing of those aright be conceived
the one and only necessary to salvation, it is evident that the superstructing
of good life (the thing to which those doctrines relate, and in respect of
which they are styled Fundamental) is ipso facto become unnecessary.

. 8. For when it shall be once resolved that Orthodox opinions are able to
secure men of God's favor, and (that being assumed as a principle) the search
of them, being a work of the brain, shall generally be discernible (as
Aristotle observes of the study of the Mathematics) to have nothing repugnant
to passions in it, and when those articles of belief are conveyed to us with
such evidence that we have no temptation to doubt of the truth of them, what
argument is there remaining to any rational man, which can move him so
superfluously, and unnecessarily to set upon that more laborious, and
ungrateful task of mortifying lusts, of subduing of passions, of combating and
overcoming the world, of offering violence to his importunate, vigorous, carnal
appetites? If he that is to be baptized, might be admitted to that state of
justified Christians, (and therein to a right of inheriting the kingdom of
heaven) by a profession of the Articles of his Creed, and an undoubted
persuasion and belief of the truth of them, what an impertinent tyranny were
it to increase his burden, to refuse and delay his admission, till he should
undertake the whole vow, of forsaking the Devil and all his works, of keeping
God's holy will and commandments, and walking in the same all the days of his
life? What use even of Prayer, of the Sacraments, of Charity, of Faith it self,
in any other notion but that, wherein he considers it and thinks himself
assuredly possessed of it?

. 9. The issue is clear, the Solifidian looks upon his Faith or Articles of his
belief, as the entire structure, not as the Rudiments or Foundation, as the
utmost accomplishment and end, and not only as the first elements of his task;
and so this Persuasion of his most unhappily, but most regularly, obstructs and
intercepts the building any more upon it, which, if he conceived himself no
farther advanced, then the laying a few stones, a bare Foundation, he would
rationally think himself engaged and obliged to prosecute to a far greater
perfection.

. 10. Hitherto we have considered this persuasion of the Solifidian at the best
and fairest advantage, and supposed the Opinions, on which he so relies, to be
the true, Christian, Apostolical, and Fundamental Opinions; But if we should
proceed farther and consider how many other opinions there are abroad in the
world, which being neither Fundamental, nor Apostolical, nor arrived so far
as to any fair probability of truth, do yet pretend to be the only sanctified
necessary doctrines, and such, as every man that believes them is a pure
Christian professor, and whosoever questions or examines the truth of them, is
to be looked on as a carnal Gospeller (whose arguments, though never so
unanswerable, are to be resisted, as so many temptations) and many of these in
their own nature (over and above this Pharisaical opinion of the sanctity of
them) very apt to intermit our watch, to slacken our diligence, to give a
Supersedeas to industry, it would be most evident that the Solifidian's
persuasions do most directly and immediately resist God's principal design in
revealing his truths, obstruct the superstructure of Christian life on this
Foundation.

. 11. But I shall not enlarge on the mention of these, any farther then they
are likely to fall under some other head of this ensuing discourse. Mean while
it is worth remembering, what Epiphanius observes of the Primitive times, that
wickedness was the only heresy, that (...) and (...), impious and pious living
divided the whole Christian world into Erroneous and Orthodox, by which we are
advertised, how far we are from performing the engagements of our
Christianity, if we insist so passionately, or so intently on the truth of our
beliefs, as not to proceed to as vigorous a pursuit of all just, sober, and
godly living, to a strict uniform Regulation of our practice, according to the
obligations of our most holy Faith.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Fiduciarie.
. 1. THE second obstructive, which I shall mention, is that of the Fiduciarie,
The Doctrine of Faith being a full persuasion.
that having resolved Faith to be the only instrument of his justification, and
excluded good works from contributing any thing toward it, proceeds to define
his Faith to be a full persuasion, that the promises of Christ belong to him,
or an assurance of his particular election; Which he that does, and seriously
believes himself to conclude aright, that he is a true believer, or that the
only thing which he is obliged to acquire and arrive to, is this kind of full
assurance, as it excludes all fear or doubting of his estate, and yet farther
asserts (as many do) the prioritie of it (in order of time) before repentance,
and so obliges himself to be sure of his election and salvation, before he
repents or amends his life, is fortified and secured by this one deceit from
all obligation that Christian religion can lay upon him to superstruct
Christian practice, or holy living upon his Faith.

. 2. For 1. if assurance of his good estate be the one necessary, Ostructive to
good life.
then it is evident that good life, which is a thing formally distinct from
that assurance, is not necessary: 2. If his estate be already safe (and if it
be not, then his believing it, is the believing a lie, and God's command to
believe, is a command to believe a lie, and so one man is justified and saved
merely by giving credit to a falsitie, and all others rejected and damned
barely upon their not believing the like falsitie) then it needs no assistance
or supply from good life to make it a good estate, or give him grounds to
believe it such: 3. If he be justified before he repents and amends his life,
then nothing can hinder the continuance of his justified estate, in case he do
not repent at present, nor intercept his salvation, in case he do never
repent; and this, not only by force of that maxim generally received by these
Fiduciaries, that he that is once justified can never be unjustified, nothing
can separate him from the favor of God, or interscind his justified estate,
but, without that auxiliarie, by all rules of discourse and consequence, for he
that is this day in a good estate without repentance, may be so to morrow by
the same reason, and so on, to the last day and hour of his life; Repentance
will be no more necessary to the continuance, then to the inchoation of his
good estate.

The pretended use of good life to the justifying of our Faith,
. 3. Or if amendment and good life be affirmed necessary in order to the
approving of his faith or justification either to himself or others, though not
to his justification it self, 1. this cannot be reconciled with the Fiduciaries
doctrine, vain in four respects: The First.
For his Faith being a full assurance, includes that approbation of his
justification to himself, and so he that has that already, needs not good life
to help him to it, and for the approving it to others, that is perfectly
extrinsecal, and unnecessary, and impertinent to his justification, either in
the sight of God, or in his own eyes; for as God judges not as man judges, so
neither can man's disapproving of any man, be a just reason to move him, who
believes he sins and renounces the faith, if he permit himself to doubt, to
admit any the least beginning of doubt of the goodness of his estate, or truth
of his justification: And 2dly, it is God's justification, God's pardon of sin,
The second.
the promise, or hope of which has sufficient power to persuade carnal men to
forsake sin, and enter the rules of Christian life, and not the approbation of
men.

. 4. 3dly, The third.
In case the Fiduciarie were in the right (as he must be supposed to think
himself to be) the men that did not believe him justified, should be
unrighteous judges, passing a judgment contrary to God's judgment, and why
should the Fiduciarie that supposes himself to be approved of God without
Repentance, take such pains to approve himself to man's judgment, which the
Apostle disclaims being judged by, Romans 8.33.

. 5. 4thly, The fourth.
How can it reasonably be said that good life is necessary to approve our
justification or our Faith, when good life is acknowledged to have nothing to
do in the matter of justification, and when Faith is so defined as it has no
connotation of repentance or good life? If Faith be a full persuasion of my
being justified, the only humane way for me to approve this to others, i. e. to
make others believe that I am thus persuaded, is to testify it by word or
oath, which is the one means agreed on betwixt men to make faith of the truth
of any thing which no man knows but my self (and if man were supposed to know
it, it would follow that I should not need means to induce that approbation.)

. 6. The one other imaginable means of approving it to man, were the testimony
of God either by voice from heaven, or by some other like means of Revelation,
or by my doing miracles in God's name, which might impresse some image of
divine authority and veracity upon me; And so still good life is not the proper
means for that end of approving us to men, especially if others believe what
the Fiduciarie does, that Faith may be without good works, and good works, as
far as to the eye of man, without Faith, for that being granted it follows
necessarily, that one cannot prove or approve the other.

. 7. The Jew's premature persuasion of his good estate.
Thus did the Jew by saying and thinking that he had Abraham to his Father,
persuading himself of his particular irrespective election, think it safe
first, and consequently prudent to run into all foul sins, and no more to think
himself obliged or concerned by John Baptist's, or Christ's, or his Apostles
persuasions to bring forth fruits of amendment, immediately before the
judgments of God came out against that people, then he had been all the time
before; Nor could his belief of God, his expectation of another life (allowed
by the Pharisees) his obscure belief in the Messiah promised, the Law, the
Prophets, the descent of God from heaven, the raising Jesus from the dead,
prevail or gain in upon him, as long as he continued to conceive these
privileges of Abraham's sons to belong unto him.

. 8. The Christians.
And in like manner the Christian professor, who has imbibed this Fiduciarie
doctrine, and is confident of his present and unperishable right in the favor
of God, when he commits those sins against which the Gospel denounces, that
they which do those things shall not inherit the kingdom of God, he is, if he
acknowledge that part of the Gospel, and retain the belief of his personal
election, necessitated to believe those acts, when committed by him, to cease
to be those sins which they would be, when another man committed them; And then
what necessity soever lies on him that has that guilt upon him to reform the
sins that contract that guilt, he which is supposed not guilty, cannot be so
obliged, and it is hard to imagine what possible consideration, what messenger
from the dead should be able to persuade him to repent, till he has deposited
that premature persuasion of his being in Christ.

The Fiduciarie's ground, Christ's dying for none but the Elect.
. 9. One special ground of the Fiduciaries mis-perswasion is the Doctrine of
God's giving Christ for all the Elect, and for none but them, all others being
supposed to be left by God in a state of absolute destitution, and dereliction,
upon no other foreseen demerit, but only the guilt of Adam's sin imputed to
them, and not removed by Christ.

. 10. And upon that Doctrine imbibed, 1. it is not unreasonable or difficult
for him that is thus persuaded, that supposes his danger to flow from no real
sin, or guilt of his own, but only that which being committed by another is
imputed to him, to believe that there is nothing required of him (neither
repentance nor good works) but only a full assurance of his own being elected,
and rescued in Christ, i. e. a believing his own wishes (an aerial, magical
faith) to work his deliverance for him.

. 11. 2dly, What should make it necessary for him to repent and amend, who
either without respect to any degree of amendment, is supposed to be elected to
eternal bliss, or without respect to sin, to be irreversibly reprobated, i. e.
to any person thus considered, either as elect, or left, reprobate, and
non-elect in the whole mass of lapst mankind?

. 12. Nay I might add, what obligation can lie on any man so much as to
believe (whatsoever the notion of faith be, even to believe he shall be saved)
when it is supposed by him to be certainly decreed that he shall be saved,
without foresight of, or respect unto this Faith of his?

Two farther obstructions to good life.
. 13. Upon these premises it cannot be unreasonable to conclude, and useful
farther to take notice in the next place, that these two doctrines, 1. of
Christ's dying for none but the Elect; 2. of God's absolute irrespective
decrees of Election and Reprobation, are inconvenient interpositions, which are
most apt to obstruct and hinder the building of good life, even where the
Foundation thereof is received entirely, and not questioned in any part
thereof, Of which I shall therefore farther treat in the two next Chapters.

. 14. Mean while, as an appendix to this Chapter, it will be just to take
notice, that some men have thought it necessary, in the definition of Faith, to
change the [ Full Assurance] into a milder style of [ Relyance] which if it be
not joined with other changes in that doctrine, Of Faiths being defined by
Reliance.
as in that particular of the Priority of Faith before Repentance, it is
certainly 1. as erroneous, 2. as liable to the charge of obstructing good life,
as that other doctrine of Assurance has appeared to be.

The Error of it.
. 15. For the first, where there is no divine Promise, on which to rely, (as
to the unreformed sinner remaining such, the whole Bible affords none) there
what is reliance, but presumption, reliance on a broken reed, a building,
without a foundation? Whereas on the other side if any promise were producible,
whereon it were safe to rely, what scruple could the Christian there make
against entertaining the fullest assurance? for that without question will be
supported abundantly by such a promise.

. 16. For the second, it is visible, The danger of obstructing good life.
He that continues unreformed and impenitent in his course of sin, and is by
the preacher induced to Rely on Christ for his salvation, and is farther
taught, that this Reliance is that Faith by which he is justified, and the one
thing, that is required of him to his salvation, what necessity can be imagined
to lie on that man to reform or amend any vice, or to do any thing, but rely
on Christ for the pardon of it, for justification and salvation? It Is
superfluous to pursue this any farther, which so discernibly falls under the
inconveniences that have been showed to belong to Assurance, and are mentioned
in the former part of this Chapter, too largely to be here repeated.

CHAP. XIV. Of Christ's dying for none but the Elect.
. 1. NOW for that doctrine of Christ's dying for none but the Elect, i. e.
(according to the opinion of those which thus teach) for a small remnant of the
world, As it is asserted without any pretense or color of scripture proof, nay
in opposition to as plain distinct affirmations as can be produced for any
Article in the Creed, so is it of very ill consequence to the superstructing of
good life.

Universal Redemption the doctrine of Scripture.
. 2. That Christ's dying for all is the express doctrine of the scripture, is
elsewhere manifested by the phrases of the greatest latitude, used in this
matter, 1. (...) the world, which is a word of the widest extent, and although
it be sometimes used more restrainedly, yet never does, nor can in any reason
be interpreted to signify a far smaller disproportionable part of the world:
Secondly, All, which word, though it be sometimes restrained by the matter, and
does not always signify every person or thing, yet generally it must be
extended as far as the matter is capable of, and must not be restrained
without some considerable reason for doing so: Thirdly, Every man, a form of
speaking which excludes all exceptions, of which some general phrases are often
capable: Fourthly, those that perish, those that are damned, those that deny
Christ, and purchase to themselves swift damnation, which being added to the
number of those which are saved by his death, and acknowledged by all opposers
to be so, make up the whole unlimited number of all mankind: Fifthly, as many
as are fallen in Adam and dead through him, which phrase is by all, but
Pelagius and his followers, supposed to comprehend every son of Adam, every
branch of his progeny.

. 3. And accordingly, Of the Creeds. The Nicene.
though the Apostles Creed make no other mention of this, then is contained in
styling Jesus Christ, our Lord, i. e. the Lord (by title of Redemption) of us
all indefinitely, and particularly of every person, who is appointed to make
that confession of his faith, i. e. every one that is admitted to baptism, yet
the Nicene Creed has inserted some words for the farther explication of that
Article, [Who for us men and for our salvation came down -- ] which signify
all mankind to have their interest in it.

The Apostolic.
. 4. Nay if it be observed in the Apostles Creed, that the two first articles
are corresponding and proportionable one to the other, (to [ God] in the first
Article, [ Jesus Christ] in the second; to [ Father almighty] in the first,
[his only son] in the second; to [ maker of heaven and earth] in the first,
[our Lord] in the second) we shall have reason to infer that as [ heaven and
earth] in the first Article signify in the greatest latitude, all and every
creature in the world to have been created by that Father, so the [ Our] in the
second Article is set to denote all and every one of us, every man in the
world, without any exception, to be redeemed by God the Son.

. 5. Of the Church of England, in the Catechism.
And accordingly the Catechism of the Church of England established by Law,
and preserved in our Liturgy as a special part of it, expounds the Creed in
this sense, I believe in God the Father which made me and all the world; 2. In
God the Son who redeemed me and all mankind; 3. In God the Holy Ghost who
sanctifies me and all the elect people of God; Where, as Creation is common to
more creatures then redemption, and redemption then sanctification; so
Mankind, to which Redemption belongs, as it is far narrower then the world,
or the works of God's creation, so is it far wider then the catalogue of all
the Elect people of God, to whom sanctification belongs.

. 6. In the Communion services.
So in other parts of our Liturgy, in Consecrating the Eucharist, we have this
form of prayer, Almighty God -- which -- did give thine only son Jesus Christ
to suffer death upon the Cross for our redemption, and made there (by his one
oblation of himself once offered) a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice,
oblation and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world; And accordingly in
the administration of that Sacrament, the elements are delivered to every
communicant in this form, The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for
thee- -- and, The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for thee,
preserve thy body and soul into everlasting life; Which supposes it the
doctrine of our Church, avowed and professed, that Christ's death was not only
sufficient for all, if God would have so intended and designed it, but that he
was actually designed and given for all, not only as many as come to that
Sacrament (which yet is wider then the Elect) but us men, or mankind in
general, whose salvation was sought by God by this means.

In the Articles
. 7. So in our Articles also, Christ suffered for us -- that he might be a
sacrifice not only for Original sin, but also for all the actual sins of men,
Art: 2. And, by Christ who is the only mediator of God and men -- eternal life
is proposed to mankind, Art: 7. And, Christ came as a Lamb -- that by the
offering of himself once made he might take away the sins of the world, Art:
15. And, The oblation of Christ once made is a perfect redemption,
propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, Ar: 31 All
which I have thus largely set down to show the perfect consonancie of our
persecuted Church to the doctrine of Scripture and Antiquity in this point,
whereon so much depends for the stating and determining other differences, which
have also a special influence on practice.

. 8. As for the ill consequences toward the obstructing of good life, The ill
consequences of the denying it.
which are considerable to attend this one doctrine of Christ's dying for none
but the Elect, they will be most discernible by attempting the Reformation and
change of any vicious Christian that believes that doctrine, or the comfort of
any disconsolate despairing Christian, that has gotten into this hold, and
remains fortified in the belief of it.

. 9. For the former, it is evident, In the reducing a vicious Christian.
and that which he is supposed to believe, if he believe the Foundation (as I
presume him now to do, when I set the case of a vicious Christian) that there
is no salvation to be had for any sinner, but only by the sufferings of Christ,
and that redemption by him wrought for such; If therefore a vicious liver,
believing that Christ dyed for none but the Elect, shall have any attempt made
on him to reform and amend his life, it is certain that one medium to induce him
to it, must be a tender of mercy from Christ, of present pardon, and future
bliss, upon his Reformation, But if he be able to reply, that that mercy
belongs only to the Elect, and he is none of them, it necessarily follows that
he that would reduce this stray sheep, must either prove convincingly to him
that he is one of the Elect, or else has no farther to proceed in this attempt.

. 10. And if he thus attempt to persuade the vicious Christian, that he is one
of the Elect, then 1. the very attempt confesses to him that a vicious person,
remaining such, may be in the number of the Elect, and from thence he will
presently be able to infer, that then he needs not reformation of life to
constitute him such, and if so, then reformation of life is not the condition
on which only bliss is to be expected, and without which it is not to be had,
it being supposed and acknowledged by both parties, that all the Elect shall
have it, and so the medium, which was thought necessary to persuade his
reformation (the tender of mercy from Christ upon reformation) is already
vanished, and consequently it is to no purpose to persuade him, that he is one
of the Elect, which was useful only for the enforcing this medium, And so the
very making this attempt is destructive to the only end of it.

. 11. But if this were not the result of this attempt, yet 2dly, it is in the
progress agreed to be necessary that he persuade this person that he is one of
the elect, And what possible medium can he use to prove that to a vicious
person? A priori, from any secret decree of God's it is certain he cannot
demonstrate it, for he has never entered into God's secrets, and it is sure the
Scripture has revealed nothing of it, Whatsoever it says of the Book of life,
never affirming that particular man's name is written there; And then the one
possible way of attempting it is a posteriori, from the fruits of election, and
those are not supposeable in him who is supposed a vicious liver, who lives in
that estate (and is by him acknowledged to do so, for otherwise why should he
think it necessary to reduce him?) wherein he that lives shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. For his proof, whatever it is, will easily be retorted, and
the contrary proved, by interrogating, Shall the adulterer, the drunkard, the
vicious Christian, inherit the kingdom of God? If he shall, what need I that
am now exhorted to reform my life, reform it? If he shall not, then certainly I
that am such, am none of the Elect, for all that are elect shall certainly
inherit the kingdom of God.

. 12. The only reserve imaginable is, that this vicious Christian be persuaded
to believe in Christ, and if he do so, he shall by that know that he is one of
the Elect, and so that his sins shall be pardoned etc. But if this be the
method made use of, then 1. this is not the attempting to reform, to work
repentance (which was the thing proposed in this first case) but to work faith
in him, and with men of those opinions these are two distinct things, faith and
repentance, and the former must be before the other, and is resolved to do the
whole business without the other, and consequently this is not the way to bring
the sinner to repentance, but rather to assure him that he has no need of it,
his business may be done without it.

. 13. 2dly, This very attempt of persuading him to believe in Christ (as that
signifies the full persuasion that the promises of Christ belong to him) is,
supposing that Christ died for none but the Elect, as desperate an attempt as
the former, For why should he believe Christ died for him, who died only for
the Elect, when he has no means to persuade him that he is one of the Elect,
but great and strong presumptions to the contrary? For to believe that Christ
died for him, for whom he died not, is to believe a downright falsitie, and
such is the believing Christ died for him, who both believes that he died only
for the Elect, and that he himself is none of that number.

. 14. And in like manner the former inconvenience returns again, for if the
vicious Christian be advised to believe that Christ died for him, remaining
such, (and that must be the case, if this faith must precede repentance) it is
by that advise presupposed and granted to him, that Christ, which died only for
the Elect, who shall certainly inherit the kingdom of God, died for this
vicious person, of whom the Scripture says, that he shall not inherit the
kingdom; And again, if he may believe, what he is advised to believe, that
Christ died for him, as now he is, an unreformed Christian, then what needs he
reformation to make him capable of the benefits of his death? And so still it
is impossible, where this opinion is imbibed and unremoved, to found any
convincing argument, to reform a vicious Christian.

. 15. But this has no such appearance of difficulty to him that has received
the doctrine of Universal, but conditional redemption, of Christ dying for all,
that shall perform the condition required by him, and to which his grace is
ready to enable him. For then how great soever the sins of any unreformed
person are, it is evident that Christ died for him, because he died for all;
that he died for those sins of his, because he died for all sins; Only he must
reform, and forsake his sins, or else he shall never receive benefit of his
death, And then though there be that pleasure in sin, which the habitual sinner
cannot be persuaded to part with, unless he must, (unless he discern the
danger of retaining, and the advantage of parting with it) yet when he has
such arguments as these proposed to him, eternal bliss in exchange for short
temporary pleasures, assurance of this upon reformation, and an impossibility,
and absolute desperation without it, the vicious Christian, if he have advanced
no farther then so, and if his habit of sin have not corrupted his principles,
may think it reasonable to reform and amend upon such terms as these, the
Preacher may hope to superstruct good life upon such a Foundation.

. 16. In comforting a disconsolate Christian.
And the like inconveniences are found to be consequent to this opinion of
Christ's dying for none but the Elect, whenever any comfort is offered to a
disconsolate despairing Christian; For it is not possible to give him any
comfort, but by fetching it from Christ, And that he shall receive no benefit
from Christ, is the affirmation, whereon all his despair is founded, and the
one way of removing this dismal apprehension, is, to convince him that
Christ's death and the benefits thereof, either do, or, if he perform the
condition required of him, shall certainly belong to him.

. 17. This upon the belief of universal Redemption is presently so far done,
that if he set industriously and sincerely to perform the commands of Christ,
he can have no ground or pretense of doubting, but it shall prove successful to
him, and so all that he has to do, is to endeavor by prayer and use of the
means, and by good hope (of which he has such clear grounds) to qualify
himself for this blessed condition, and in the mean time has no excuse to
continue in this melancholy, mournful posture, who has so cheerful a prospect
before him.

. 18. But to him that believes Christ died for none but the Elect, and whose
comforter is of that opinion also, there is no possible reply to his
objections, or satisfaction to his sad abodings: For that no mercy does or can
belong to him, he is resolved, upon this ground, because Christ died not for
him, and the doctrine that Christ died for the Elect yields him no relief,
because he is verily persuaded that he is none of the Elect; and when the
number of the Elect is defined to be so small and disproportionable to the
number of the reprobate, and so there is really all odds against him, that he
is not of the number of the few, when his fears shall help to increase that
odds, and make him less capable of believing, what is so much less probable,
when his present despairs, being so contrary to that faith (assurance of his
salvation) which alone can justify, in his opinion, or bear witness to his
Election, shall by necessary consequence bear witness against him, and when the
scripture, that should, and in this case alone can interpose for his relief,
does certainly affirm nothing of his particular Election; and lastly, when what
it says of Christ's dying for all, is by him misunderstood to belong but to a
few, it is not imaginable what can be said to this man to persuade him that his
progress is not rational, that he does not well to despair, who has so slight
grounds to build any hope, and so much weightier to comply with, and assist his
fears in overwhelming him.

. 20. And then as necessary as hope is to labor, encouragement to quickening of
action, so necessary is the belief of Universal Redemption to the
superstructing Christian life, where the foundation of Christian belief is
already laid.

CHAP. XV. Of the irrespective decrees of Election and Reprobation.
. 1. THE same is discernible also, and need not more largely be declared in
that doctrine of God's decrees of salvation, and damnation, which has been
taken up by some both of the Romish and Reformed Churches, affixing them to
men's particular entities, absolutely considered, without any respect to all
qualifications and demeanours; Which, whatsoever else be believed of God or
Christ, is (as far as it is laid to heart, and permitted to have influence on
carnal men's practice) a most visible hindrance to the building of good life
upon it.

. 2. The Article of our Church.
The Church of England having not so much as named (but purposely avoided the
mention of any Decree of Reprobation, and for Election, or Predestination to
life, having set it down in an admirable temper, in order to gratifying all,
and not provoking any of the several persuasions, Art: 7. (as might more
largely be made to appear, if it were here seasonable) has yet providently
foreseen the dangerous downfall that from this her doctrine (the affirming no
more, nor no more particularly then she does) is to be expected to curious (as
well as carnal) men, i. e. to those that enter into farther speculations
herein, (which is the itch of curiosity) and content not themselves with the
simplicity of that doctrine, within which this Church has contained her self.
And to prevent particularly all advantage, that might be taken from hence to
the Doctrine of the irrespective decrees, to which is inseparably joined the
confining all the Promises to the Elect, The Article concludes with an earnest
expression of care, and warning to the contrary, that we must receive God's
promises in such wise, as they are generally set forth to us in the holy
scripture (as in our doing we are to follow that will of God, which we have
expressly declared to us in the word of God) which one passage excludes, and
bars out that whole doctrine.

. 3. As for the particularity of the dangers, The doctrine of irrespective
decrees.
and hindrances of good life, that are directly consequent to this doctrine,
they are presently discerned; For if that salvation, which Christ came to
purchase for a few, and in like manner that dereliction or reprobation that
irreversibly involves the far greater multitude, be not distributed according
to the qualifications or performances of men, whether works, or love, or hope,
or repentance, or the want of any, or all of these, but only by the absolute
irrespective will of God, what rational argument can be produced in any time of
temptation to any sin, (which is the special season for such arguments to be
offered to any) which may be of force to persuade a reasonable man, or
Christian professor, to renounce that present pleasure that comes in
competition with duty?

. 4. Either the promises of Christ, or the terrors of the Lord, or the
authority of the commander, must be the Topic whence that argument is drawn,
and all force, of any of these is utterly taken off by this doctrine. Takes off
the force


. 5. Promises can be of no force, 1. of Promises,
unless they be believed to be conditional promises, and unless that duty,
which is proposed to be enforced by those promises, be acknowledged to be part
of that condition, upon performance of which those promises do, and upon
neglect of which, those promises shall not belong to any, And the promises
being but a transscript of the will and decree of God, a revelation made by
Christ of that mystery, or secret, wrapped up before in God's eternal Counsels
concerning us, such as the decrees are supposed, such must the promises be
concluded to be, If the decrees be believed to be absolute, the promises must
be absolute too, and consequently not conditional, which was the one
qualification necessarily required to render them of any force to work on any,
to restrain, or invite any that were drawn, or solicited another way.

. 6. For why should a man perform an ungrateful duty, undertake a difficulty,
hazard a danger or diminution, deny himself any pleasurable enjoyment, upon a
bare intuition of promises (which by being such are represented with some
disadvantage, lie under a considerable prejudice, and are acknowledged and
experimented to be of less energie or force to allure or persuade, then
present possessions) when he is all the while convinced that all the promises,
that he can possibly have any part in, belong to him absolutely and
irrespectively, and shall no more be secured to him upon the performance, then
upon the neglect, and omission of that duty?

. 7. 2. of Terrors.
In like manner the Terrors and menaces of scripture are of as little force;
For if they fall upon men's persons, and not upon their sins (omissions or
commissions) if they are but the recitations and descriptions of God's decreed
wrath, and those decrees and that wrath have no respect to the actual sins of
men, but are terminated either in the innocent creature, or the child of
lapsed Adam, i. e. either respect not sin at all, or else none but Original
sin, (which is no part of the present deliberation, whether it shall be
committed, and I guilty of it or no) then why should terrors restrain me from
any sin, when there is any tender of present advantage to invite me to it?

. 8. All my fear and trembling will regularly be terminated in the decree, on
which all my misery depends, and not in the sin, which means me no ill, and
consequently the aversion and dislike will naturally be fastened on that severe
law, that has bound me in fatal chains of darkness, before ever I saw light,
and if it proceed any farther, may be likely to ascend blasphemously unto, and
against that Judge, that has taken pleasure to enact that law (and so that
doctrine may very probably take off from our love of God) but it is not
imaginable which way this should produce in me any aversion or hatred against
sin, which by this doctrine is cleared from being my enemy, from involving me
into any mischief, designing the least treachery against me.

3. of Commands.
. 9. And lastly, for the authority of God's Commands which forbid sin, and
command obedience, it can be no greater with any man toward the undertaking of
good life, then that man believes the weight to be, which God lays on the
performance of them; And if God heed that no more, then they that espouse the
doctrine of irrespective decrees, must consequently be supposed to believe him
to do, if in his decreeing his eternal rewards of bliss or woe, he respect
not our obedience or disobedience, but distribute both by a rule quite distant
from that which is founded in his commands, or revealed will, it will never be
thought any near concernment or interest of ours to regulate our actions
according to those commands, which have certainly much of strictness in them,
much of contrariety to flesh and blood, but nothing of influence either on our
weal or woe, as long as this doctrine is deemed to have any truth in it.

. 10. And so still the virtue and force of every of these three, which are the
common standing inducements and engagements to obedience, is shrewdly allayed,
if not wholly lost by this means.

. 11. Of Gratitude*
And it is not the motive of gratitude (which is said to be the only score, on
which the Elect perform their obedience) that can make any considerable
difference in this matter, that can be sufficient to persuade him to abstain
from any tempting sin, whom neither promises, nor terrors, nor precepts had
been able to work upon.

. 12. 1. Because Gratitude being but a return of love in him that has a quick
sense of God's loving him first, cannot have any propriety to the producing of
that effect in any, till he has arrived to that sense, nor can it continue to
do it, when that sense is lost. And consequently a great number of the
supposed elect shall be incapable of it, both they which are not yet come to
this assurance, that they are of that number, and they that under any anguish
of mind are returned to affrightments, or doubtings whether they have not been
hypocrites, and so reprobates all this while; And as these two sorts (according
to their doctrine) comprehend a great and considerable number of the very
elect, (of whom very few are arrived to that pitch of constant uninterrupted
assurance of their election) so Gratitude, by being unuseful to them that are
not thus assured, must be acknowledged unuseful to those who have the greatest
want of it, and by being confined to the few, which have this assurance quick*
and undisturbed within them, is concluded to have a very narrow and slender
province to work on, a very small number of a very small number, a remnant of a
remnant, being acknowledged to be unappliable, and so consequently ineffectual
to all others.

. 13. 2dly, Because one other doctrine there is, which constantly accompanies
the doctrine of irrespective decrees, which supersedes all farther dispute in
this matter, the doctrine of the irresistibility of grace, in working
whatsoever it works, which if it be once acknowledged, there is nothing to be
affixt to Gratitude (or to any thing else in me) which whatsoever it works at
any time works by way of persuasion, not violence, and cannot be said so much
as to contribute to the working of that, which is supposed to be irresistibly
wrought by the Spirit of God.

. 14. 3dly, If these two arguments, which are only ad homines, and consider the
Elect only in these men's notion of the word, had no kind of force in them, yet
still this of Gratitude, which is the one pretended reserve, must needs be
impertinently pretended in this matter.

. 15. First, because the good life to which the foundation was laid by the
Apostles preaching, is not that of a few persons, chosen out of the mass, but
of all that receive the Christian profession, of which number there being a
large proportion which (according to the tenure of this doctrine) must be
supposed to be non-elect, there will not be that matter of thanksgiving to any
of them, nor consequently any account, upon which they can be persuaded to make
those kind returns to God, which the Elect were more probably supposed to have
engagement to do.

. 16. And secondly, it being Christ's errand, and business into the world, to
call not the righteous, or the justified, but the unreformed, or sinners to
repentance, to change them who need a change, and who, if they are by this
doctrine supposeable to be already from all eternity elected, are not yet
before their calling or conversion affirmed to be actually justified, or
received into God's favor (any more then Saul was in the time of his journey
to Damascus, when he breathed out threatenings and slaughters against the
Church) the conclusion must be, that any such unreformed sinner will not be
capable of being wrought on by any such consideration of gratitude, and so
Christ, notwithstanding this only reserve, shall be wholly unsuccessful in his
aim toward those, who were the principal designed persons, to whom he came,
and predestined the benefits of his coming.

. 17. Thirdly, this of Gratitude being by those that maintain this doctrine
supposed to follow faith or assurance of their salvation, it is thereby
acknowledged to have no force on those who have not this faith, though they do
believe all the articles of their Creed, and so it can be no proper expedient
to remove the hindrances which the belief of the irrespective decrees has
been said to interpose in the matter in hand* or to adapt good life to be
superstructed on this (whatsoever it is imaginable to be on any other)
Foundation.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Predetermination of all things.
. 1. AND as the absolute predestination of the persons is able to evacuate all
the force of these fundamentals, The doctrine of God's predetermining all
events.
designed by God as motives of great energie to induce good life, so certainly
is the opinion of God's predetermining and preordaining the means as well as
the end, (i. e. all the acts of man's will, the evil as well as the good, and
so all the most enormous sins that are or ever shall be committed) most
abundantly sufficient to do it.

. 2. I say not the doctrine of God's predisposing or preordering, or of his
predetermining or decreeing that he will so dispose and order all things that
come to pass, whether good or bad, for that looks on the things as done, which
are so disposed, and consequently includes not any influence or causality in
the production of the^, and so God, that brings light out of darkness, can
dispose of the worst things, the foulest sins, the very crucifying of Christ,
so as to bring health and salvation out of them.

. 3. Of preordering.
But betwixt this and predetermining that which is so disposed, the difference
is wide, as much as betwixt a bloody designers suborning his instrument to take
away such a man's life, and the Confessors representing the horridness of the
fact, and by that means bringing him to repentance; And though Ordinare in
Latin, and (...) in Greek be equivocal, and capable of both these notions, yet
ordaining and decreeing in our English use, is not thus liable to be mistaken.

. 4. Secondly, Of God's predetermining his own will.
I say not the doctrine of God's predetermining his own will, but his
predetermining the acts of our will, or our volitions; Great difference there
is betwixt these two, as much as betwixt my willing a lawful thing my self,
and my inducing another man to do that which is unlawful.

. 5. For God does predetermine his own will, as often as he decrees to do this
or that, which he might not have decreed to have done, or have decreed to have
done the contrary; for when God's will is free to two things, to make or not to
make a world, or such a world, and the like, his decreeing to make it, and to
make it such, is the determining of his will, Thus when before all time God
might have created man a necessary agent, to will and to do every thing that
he wills and does, after the same manner as the fire burns, i. e. so as he
could not do otherwise, yet it is evident that God chose to create him after
the image of his own liberty, a voluntary free agent that might deliberate and
choose, and either do, or not do, or do this or the contrary to it; And so
in like manner God may determine his own will not to hinder, but permit what he
sees man inclinable to do, when he might on the other side have chosen to
hinder or not to permit; And thus he did when he decreed to permit the malice
of the Jews, the covetousness of Judas, the popularity of Pilate to join all
together in the crucifying of Christ, upon which it is said, that his hand and
his counsel (...) did predetermine this to be done, i. e. Christ to be
crucified (which was done by God's predetermining to permit them to do what
they by the free act of their own wills resolved to do, if they were not
hindered) no way intimating that God predetermined they should do it.

. 6. And this predetermination of God's own will is so far from being the
determining of ours, that it is distinctly and visibly the contrary, for
supposing God to predetermine that I I shall act freely, and that he will not
determine my will to this or that object, it is certain from thence that my will
is free in respect of God, and not predetermined by him, And therefore that
ordinary position, that the predetermination of God's will hinders not the
liberty of ours] which by being understood of God's will predetermining ours,
is most grossly false, and implies a contradiction, a predetermination and not a
predetermination, a liberty and not a liberty to the same thing, is yet most
evidently true of God's predetermining his own will, or his own will being
predetermined, for that, as it respects not our will, (meddleth not with it
at all) so it is far from hindering or taking away the liberty of it, but on
the contrary, it being one act of God's eternal will, and so a predetermination
thereof, that man shall be a free agent, and another act of the same divine
will, that this or that act of our will shall be permitted and not hindered by
God, either or both these predeterminations of God's will, necessarily inferres
the liberty of ours, which cannot but be free, when God has predetermined it
shall be free.

Of Gods Prescience.
. 7. Thirdly, I say not the doctrine of God's prescience, his eternal foresight
of all that is ever done in the world, For that again supposes or looks on
the thing as done, which is thus the object of his sight, and has no kind of
influence or causality in the production of it.

. 8. Some difficulty there is in conceiving a thing to be foreseen or foreknown
by God, and yet to continue free to be done or not to be done. And the best way
of explicating that difficulty will be, to suppose God's science to be
infinitely extended in respect of time, as his presence in respect of place,
and though speaking of infinity, we must acknowledge our understandings to be
very imperfect, all the measures we have to conceive any thing, being finite,
and so unequal and very unable to comprehend that which is infinite, Yet if we
will but conceive God's sight or science before the creation of the world to be
coextended to all and every part of the world, seeing every thing as it is,
that which is past as past, future as future, that which is by him
predetermined, as necessary, and that which is left free, as free, that which
is done, and might have been otherwise, as done freely and contingently, and
that which is not yet done, and may or may not be done, as that which is yet
free and contingent, there will remain no difficulty in affirming that his
prescience or foresight of any action of mine (or rather his science at sight)
from all eternity, lays no necessity on any thing to be, which is thus seen to
come to pass, any more then my seeing the sun move, has to do in the moving
of it, it being certain, and necessary, and antecedent in order of nature, that
that have a being, that has a capacity of being seen, and only accidental and
extrinsecal to it, to be seen, when it is, and so the seeing but an accessory,
not a cause of its being; and it is most evident that God's foreseeing does
not include or connotate predetermining, any more then I decree with my
intellect, or will with my apprehension, which is as if I should see with my
ear, or taste with my eye, i. e. confound the most distant faculties.

. 9. To this may be added, that God being acknowledged to see or foresee every
thing as it is, it is as impossible that any thing should be in any other
manner then he foresees it to be, as that it should not come to pass, when he
sees it does, or foresees it will come to pass; and consequently that God's
foreseeing those things come to pass contingently which do come to pass
contingently, is a most certain proof that there are some contingents in the
world; So likewise when God foresees and foretells that Judas will freely and
voluntarily, and against all engagements and obligations to the contrary,
betray and sell Christ, that the Jews would not be gathered by Christ when he
was most sollicitous and sedulous in gathering them, it is as certainly
conclusible from the argument of God's prescience, that they will voluntarily
and freely do this, and obstinately resist their own good, as that they will
do it at all, the manner being foreseen by God, who cannot be deceived, as
truly as the thing is foreseen by him.

. 10. And if there should yet be any doubt (as Socinus and his followers, men
very well exercised, and skilled in the (...), removing of those things, which
have continued immovable in the Church, have more then doubted) whether God
foresee any more then he determines, and consequently whether it may not safely
be affirmed, that he does not foresee all things, because he cannot be
conceived to predetermine all things, It will presently appear, that as this is
most irrational, so is it most false, irrational to grant an infiniteness of
God's other attributes and powers, his omnipresence, omnipotence, etc. and to
question the infinity of his science, and apparently false, if only God's
predictions to the Prophets be considered, For there we see many things to be
foretold, and consequently learn them to have been foreseen, which they that
make this doubt, do truly resolve cannot be predetermined by God, and, rather
then they will believe them predetermined by him, deny them to be foreseen,
viz: the infidelity and sins of men, which God cannot will or decree in their
opinion, and which they must consequently acknowledge to have been both
contingent and future, when they were foretold by him, and not to have lost
their nature by being foretold by him.

The doctrine of Predetermination noxious to Practice.
. 11. Having thus separated this doctrine of God's predetermining all events,
from these 3 other things, which the haste of Disputers have sometimes confounded
with it, It will now be presently discernible how noxious and obstructive this
doctrine is to the superstructing all good life. For 1. that which is
predetermined by God is absolutely necessary and unavoidable, no man has or
can resist any decree of his; The bounds which are placed to the sea by a
perpetual decree, Jer. 5.22. are such as it cannot pass, and though the waves
toss themselves, yet can they not prevail, though they roar, yet can they not
pass over, and such is the nature of all decrees of God; And if the actions of
men were under any such, (as 1. by the expostulation there, and 2dly, by the
mention of their rebellious heart, v. 23. and 3dly, by the opposition which is
set betwixt the sea, that cannot pass the bounds, and the sinner that can, it
is most evident they are not) this would necessarily preclude all choice, and
then, as Tertullian says, lib. 2. contr: Marcion: Nec boni nec mali merces
jure pensaretur ei, qui aut bonus aut malus necessitate fuisset inventus, non
voluntate, There would be no reward of good or evil, if men were good or evil
by necessity, and not by choice; and as Justin Martyr, Apol: 2. (...), If
mankind had no power to avoid ill or choose good by free deliberation, it
should never be guilty of any thing that was done. And as Tatianus to the same
purpose, (...) -- God therefore gave liberty of choice to men, that the wicked
might be justly punished, being wicked by his own fault, and the righteous
commended, who by the same liberty has taken care not to transgress the will
of God, So certainly this doctrine must take away all guilt of an accusing, and
all solace of a quiet conscience, and in like manner supersede and slacken all
industry and endeavor, which is the lowest degree of that which has promise
to be accepted by Christ, and by fastening all our actions as well as ends by a
fatal decree at the foot of God's chair, leave nothing to us to deliberate or
attempt, but only to obey our fate, to follow the duct of the stars, or
necessity of those irony chains which we are born under.

. 12. 2dly, There being little question made by any, but that God both can and
does whatsoever he will both in heaven and earth, when any thing is
acknowledged to be willed by God (as it is certain every thing is which is
predetermined and preordained by him) it necessarily follows, that whenever
that is done it is done by God, and consequently if that be a sin, God does, i.
e. commits the sin, and this without any so much as concurrence of any will
of mine, but what is also predetermined by him; Which is evidently the defining
God to be both the principal and accessarie in the committing every sin; which
when it is once believed, then 1. What possible way is there for any man to be
guilty of sin, which we know is no farther sin, then it was voluntary in him
that did it, and he free to have abstained, when he did commit it, or at least
to have prevented that degree of force or necessity that is fallen upon him?
And on the other side what possibility of abstaining from sin, when by God's
predetermination of it, it is acknowledged inevitable? And when these two are
taken away, the possibility of guilt, and the possibility of innocence, what
restraint can the belief of all the Articles of the Creed lay upon any man to
fly from evil, or pursue that which is good?

. 3. 3dly, The only way of defining of sin, is, by the contrariety to the will
of God (as of good by the accordance with that will) and if all things be
preordained by God, and so demonstrated to be willed by him, it remains that
there is no such thing as sin, nor any thing to be abstained from, or avoided
by us, nor difference betwixt good and evil, according to that measure of God's
will, which by this doctrine is equally competible to both of them. Revealed
and secret will.
And if the distinction of his secret and revealed will be here made use of,
and only the latter of these conceived to be it, in contrariety to which sin
consists, that so there may be a way of sinning against that, whilst the secret
will is obeyed and performed; Then, besides the great absurdity of affirming
any thing of God's secret will, till by some means or other it be revealed, and
then it cease to be (what it is pretended to be) secret, for if it be known
it is not secret; and 2dly, the ridiculousness of making that God's will, which
is supposed contrary to his will, for certainly that which is contrary to his
will, is not his will, and therefore the secret being supposed contrary to the
revealed, if the revealed will be his will, the secret is not his will, and if
the secret be his will, then that which is revealed to be his will, is not his
will; and 3dly, the impiety of opposing God's words to his thoughts, his
revealed commands to his secret decrees, (which is as ill as could be said of
any man, and will never incline any to obey God, which has such an unhandsome
opinion of him) besides these inconveniences, I say, it is evident that
intrinsic goodness consists in accordance, and sin in contrariety to the
secret will of God, as well as to his revealed, or else God could not be
defined infinitely good, or so far as his thoughts and secrets, but only
superficially good, as far as the outside or appearing part of him, i. e. as
far as he is pleased to reveal himself, which again is perfect blasphemy to
imagine, and that which equals God to the most formal and hypocritical
professor.

. 14. 4thly, This doctrine is destructive to all that is established among men,
to all that is most precious, 1. to humane nature, to the two faculties that
denominate us men, understanding and will, For what use can we have of our
understandings, if we cannot do what we know to be our duty? and if we act not
voluntarily, what exercise have we of our wills?

. 15. 2dly, To the end of our Creation, whether subordinate or ultimate; The
subordinate end of our creation is, that we should live virtuously and glorify
God in a voluntary and generous obedience, either of which other creatures,
that act naturally, are not capable of, And God's predetermining all our
actions deprives us of this honor and dignity of our nature, leaves no place
of virtue, which is founded in voluntary action, and as Origin says cont:
Cells: l. 4. (...), If you take from virtue the voluntariness, you take away the
essence of it. And so this doctrine brings us down to the level of horse and
mule, whose mouths are forcibly holden with bit and bridle, when yet it is one
of the commands of that God, that we should not be like those creatures: And so
for the ultimate end, a reward and crown in another world, which no irrational
creature is capable of, this of predetermination of all our actions, which
renders us necessary not rational agents, renders us utterly incapable of that.

. 16. 3dly, It is directly contrary to all God's ways, or manner of dealing
with us, which is all by rational ways of persuasion, by proposition of
terrors and promises, the danger that we shall incur by our disobedience, and
the infinite advantages that we shall reap by our obedience, and to these is
added the authority of the Commander, vindicated from our neglect by the
interposition of the greatest signs and wonders, in the hands of his Prophets
and of his Son, such as we cannot but wonder when we read them (as in the case
of the Israelites coming out of Egypt, and in the wilderness) that they should
not prevail upon them, when yet they did not prevail, And what can be more
contrary to rational motives, then predetermination? For as, if they had not
that persuasive efficacy in them as to be able to move a rational man, they
could not be denominated rational, so if they were backed with a violence, if
they were proposed to us in the name and power of an omnipotent immutable
decree, they could never be said motives or perswasives; And so still God's
gracious dealings with men being the aids and auxiliaries necessary to us in
the pursuit of piety, and the one doctrine and persuasion of God's
predetermination of all events, having superseded and cassated all those ways,
we have no bottom left, on which to found the least beginning or thought of
piety, as long as we continue possessed with that persuasion.

. 17. 4thly, This doctrine, if it were true, must necessarily take away all
judgment to come, all reward and punishment, which are certainly apportioned
to the voluntary actions, and choises of men (and therefore belong not to any
but rational creatures) and can no more be awarded to those actions which are
predetermined by God, then to the ascending of the flame, or descending of the
stone, which by nature the providence of God are thus predetermined, and act by
decree, and not by choice. And when all judgment to come is once vanished, all
reward to engage obedience, and all terror to restrain disobedience is once
removed, and so in effect the three last Articles of the Creed rejected also,
what hope is there that the remaining Articles should be sufficient to do it?

. 18. To these Christian and Theological considerations it will not be amiss
to add what care the Writers of Politics have had to warn us of the
noxiousness of this doctrine to all civil governments, which Christian
religion, rightly understood, is so very far from disturbing, that beyond all
other Aphorisms Political, beyond the sagest provisions of the Profoundest
Lawgivers, it is (would men but live according to the rules of it) incomparably
qualified to perpetuate public weal and peace.

. 19. But for the doctrine of those, who so mistake Christian religion as to
think it is only a chain of fatal decrees, to deny all liberty of man's choice
toward good or evil, and to affix all events to God's predetermination, This,
say they, is utterly irreconcilable with the nature of civil government, with
the foundation thereof laid in Laws, or with the punishments and rewards, which
are thought necessary to the continuance thereof, and Campanella chooses to
instance in Republica praesertim libera, in a Republic or free state.

. 20. For when the people, which think their liberty, of which they are very
tender and jealous, to be retrenched or impaired by the restraint of Laws, can
farther answer their Rulers, though but in the heart (without proceeding to
farther boldness) that they cannot observe their Laws, being led by
irresistible decrees to the transgressing of them, the consequence is easy to
foresee, the despising and contemning of Laws, and hating and detesting of
those who are obliged to punish them, when they have offended; which two are
soon inflamed, beyond the rate of popular discontents, into actual seditions
and tumults, as soon as opportunity shall favor, or opinion of their own
strength encourage them to it.

. 21. That the Turkish Empire has not yet found the noxious effects of this
poison, so commonly received among them, will, I suppose, be objected against
the truth of this; But it is visible to what Antidotes this must be imputed, 1.
to their ignorance and unimprovableness in matters of knowledge, and rational
discourse, being generally kept rude, and without all literature (which is the
grindstone to sharpen the coulters, to whet their natural faculties, and to
enable them to discourse and deduce natural consequences) 2dly, To the the
manner observed in Governing them, by force, and not by obligation on
conscience, by violence, and not by laws; Which way of managerie being somewhat
proportionable to the opinion of fatal decrees, and agreeing with it in this,
that it does really leave nothing to men's choises, is withal as a contrary
poison, a hot thrown after a cold, very proper to abate the energie of it,
forcing them as fatally to abstain, as they can deem themselves forced, or
impelled to commit any such enormitie.

. 22. However it is manifest that the force they are under is a real force, and
that of their fate but an imaginary conceived one, the one but in their
brains, the other on their shoulders, and it is not strange if the irony chains
are experimented to have more solidity, and so more efficacy in them, then the
contemplative.

. 23. Sed si Italos, say the Politic writers, But if this doctrine should ever
get among the Italians, whose wits are more acute (and sure the Italians have
not enclosed that excellency from all the rest of Europe) it would presently
put all into confusion, they would soon discern the consequences, and utmost
improvements of the opinion, and never stick to cast all on God, as the author
of all, and having resolved, with him in Homer, of the (...) --
that all is chargeable on the superior cause, Jupiter and Fate, infer
regularly with him, ((...)) the blamelesness of the inferior agent, and so
there being no place left for sin or law, immediately believe and follow their
own wishes, turn Libertines, throw off all yoke of men as well as God. In
intuition whereof I suppose it was that Plato would not permit in his
Commonwealth any that should affirm God to be the author of all the evils that
were committed. And Proclus upon the Timaeus sets them down as a third degree
of Atheists, who attribute to God the impressing on men's minds a necessity of
doing whatsoever they do.

. 24. It Is true where there is any remainder of natural piety, he that believes
the doctrine of absolute decrees, may be thereby restrained from actually
making the conclusions, inferring such impious horrid consequences (be they
never so obvious and regular) of making God the author of sin, and the like;
But we know those natural dictates are by unnatural sins effaced in many, and
when that one restraint is removed, the conclusion will be as easily believed
as the premises, and where neither boldness nor skill are wanting to deduce it,
that Conclusion will again turn Principle, and induce all vicious enormous
living, which Laws were designed to restrain, but will no longer do it, when
themselves are looked on as impertinent invaders of liberty, despised first,
and then hated.

. 25. One farther consideration has been added to this former, that this
doctrine being imbibed by Governors, is very apt to instill into them
principles of tyranny, if it be but by imitating and transcribing from God the
notions which they have received of him, by doing that themselves which they
believe of him, punishing their subjects by no other rule but of their wills,
decreeing their destruction first without intuition of any voluntary crime of
theirs, and then counting it a part of their glory to execute such decrees.
Thus when Suetonius describes Tiberius as a professed contemner of all
religion, and from thence was soon improved into the most intolerable tyrant,
he renders the original of it, that he believed all things to be wrought by a
fatalitie. But these are popular considerations, yet not unfit also to be taken
in as appendent to the former.

Sin is not nothing.
. 26. Many artifices there are invented by the necessities of those who have
embraced this doctrine, to intercept and avoid these consequences of it; The
two principal I shall name, 1. That sin is a non-entitie, a nothing, and so
that all things may be predetermined by God, and yet not sin: 2. That though
God be author of the act of sin, yet he is not of the obliquitie of it, as the
rider is cause of the horses going, but not of his lameness, or halting, when
he goes.

. 27. For the former of these, which is a perfect fantasy and school notion,
these things may be observed of it, that, besides that it would be 1. very
strange* that God should damn a multitude of Angels and men for nothing; and 2.
very ridiculous, that my swearing to a truth should be an entitie, and my
swearing to a falsitie, nothing; eating my own bread, enjoying my own wife, an
entitie, and eating another man's bread, enjoying another man's wife, nothing;
and 3dly, that which would soon fall back into the grand inconvenience of
obstructing Christian life (for why should a Christian be such a fool, as to be
afraid of nothing, to fly and avoid nothing?) besides these, I say, it is
apparent that they that thus teach, profess that sins are predetermined, by
name Adam's sin, and Judas's sin, and, if it be driven home, every sin of every
other man, as well as any other the most virtuous action. And yet farther,
unless it could be gained that every virtuous action were nothing also, there
would be little advantage in this matter, it being as contrary to judgment to
come, to rewarding according to works, that one predetermined necessary action,
which I could not but do, should be rewarded, as that another should be
punished, and as certain a prejudice to all diligence, or pursuit of Christian
life, that I cannot choose but do the good which I do, as that I cannot but
commit the ill that I commit, For although it be very agreeable to the goodness
of God to abound in giving grace and inabling to do good, to prepare, prevent,
and assist, and contribute all that can be wanting to us, either to will, or
do, (as it is not competible with it so much as to incline any man to do
evil) and so there is a difference in that respect betwixt the good and the
evil, yet to do all this irresistibly, for a fatal decree of heaven to
contrive every good action of my life, so as it is impossible for me not to
will and act, as God would have me, this is quite contrary to the nature of a
voluntary agent, a rational creature, and consequently to that will and decree
of God, whereby he predetermined man to be such, and as unreconcileable with
reward or crown, as punishment is with that which is as much, but no more
necessary.

. 28. As for the distinction betwixt the act and the obliquitie, there is some
truth in it, The distinction betwixt the act and the obliquitie.
and use to be made of it, so far as to free God, who is author of all man's
power to act, from being in any degree the author of his acting obliquely or
crookedly, i. e. sinfully.

. 29. For as it is impossible for us to move either to good or evil, except he
that gave us our first being and powers, continue them minutely unto us, so he
having used all wise and efficacious methods to incline and engage us to make
use of his gifts unto his service, and having contributed nothing to our evil
choises, but his decree of permitting or not hindering them (and if he should
violently hinder, that would make us no whit less guilty, he that would sin,
if he could, is as guilty as if he did; And without that permission of evil,
our good choises would neither be good, nor choises, and consequently never be
rewarded by him) it is most apparent that he is no author of the obliquities of
our wills, but on the contrary that he does as much to the straightning of
them, as without changing our natures (offering violence to our wills, which he
has decreed to remain free) he could prudently be imagined to do.

. 30. But this is no way appliable to this matter of freeing God from being the
author of that sin, of which he is acknowledged to predetermine the act; For 1.
though a free power of acting good or evil, be perfectly distinct and separable
from doing evil, and therefore God, that is the author of one, cannot thence be
inferred to be the author of the other, yet the act of sin is not separable
from the obliquitie of that act, the act of blasphemy from the obliquitie or
irregularitie of blasphemy, the least evil thought or word against an infinite
good God being as crooked as the rule is straight, and consequently he that
predetermines the act, must needs predetermine the obliquitie.

. 31. Nay 2dly, if there were any advantage to be made of this distinction in
this matter, it would more truly be affirmed on the contrary side, that God is
the author of the obliquitie, and man of the act, For God that gives the rule,
in transgressing of which all obliquitie consists, does contribute a great deal
though not to the production of that act, which is freely committed against
that rule, yet to the denominating it oblique, for if there were no law, there
would be no obliquitie; God that gives the law that a Jew shall be circumcised,
thereby constitutes uncircumcision an obliquitie, which, had he not given that
law, had never been such; But for the act (as that differs from the powers on
one side, and the obliquitie on the other) it is evident that the man is the
cause of that, it is man that circumciseth, or chooses to be circumcised, and
so that refuses to receive that sign in his flesh, and the act of killing
Abel was as perfectly Cain's act, as the offering of his sacrifice was, and so
in all other acts, especially of sin, to which God does not so much as incline,
and the Devil can do no more then persuade any man.

. 32. To conclude, the obliquitie of any act arising, by way of resultance,
from the transgressing of the rule (i. e. doing contrary to God's command) as
inequality arises from the adding or substracting an unity from an even
number, it necessarily follows, that he that first gives the law, and then
predetermines the act of transgressing (the disobedience, the doing contrary
to) that law, that first forbids eating of the tree of knowledge, and then
predetermins Adam's will to choose, and eat what was forbidden, is by his
decree guilty of the commission of the act, and by his law the cause of its
being an obliquitie, And indeed if the obliquitie, which renders the act a
sinful act, be it self any thing, it must necessarily follow, that either God
does not predetermine all things, or that he predetermines the obliquitie; And
regularity bearing the same proportion of relation to any act of duty, as
obliquitie does to sin, it cannot be imagined that the author of the sinful
act, should not be the author of the obliquitie, as well as the author of the
pious act is by the disputers acknowledged to be the author of the regularity
of it.

. 33. The complaint of the Gods in Homer will best shut up this, (...),
(...)
(...).
O, how unjustly mortal men accuse and charge the Gods, saying that their evils
are from them, when the truth is, that they by their own wretchless courses
bring mischiefs upon themselves, above which their fate, or decree of the Gods
can be deemed to have brought upon them. And accordingly it is one of the
excellent lessons of the Pythagoreans in their golden verses, (...),
This thou must know, that the evils that men fall under, are brought upon them
by their own choises, On which even Chrysippus, the Stoic, and great asserter
of fate, has thus commented, (...), Evils, or mischiefs come to every man from
himself, it being certain that by their own incitation they both sin, and
suffer, and that according to their own mind and purpose. This being so far
distant from the doctrine of fatality, it may well be wondered, how Chrysippus
that asserted that, under the name of (...) and (...), the chain, and the
decree, (and defined it* says Noct: At: l. 6. c. 2.
Gellius, sempiterna quaedam, and indeclinabilis series rerum and catena,
volvens semetipsa sese, and implicans per aeternos consequentiae ordines, ex
quibus apta connexaque est, an eternal and unavoidable series and chain of
things folding and involving it self within it self by eternal courses of
consequence, by which it is framed and connected, Or in his own dialect, li.
(...).
that it is (...), a natural complication of all things from all eternal, one
thing following another, (...), that complication being such as cannot be
changed) could believe himself, or reconcile this comment, or that verse, with
his great principles; And indeed de Fato.
Cicero has past a right sentence of it, Chrysippus astuans laboransque quonam
pacto explicet and fato fieri omnia, and esse aliquid in nobis, intricatur --
Chrysippus contending and laboring how to reconcile these two propositions,
that all things are done by fate, and yet that something is in our own power,
is entangled, and cannot extricate himself. This Master of the Stoics was
pressed, says Gellius, l. 6. c. 2.
with these inconvenient consequences of his doctrine of decrees, that then the
sins of men were not to be charged on their wills, but to be imputed to a
necessity and pressing, which arose from fate, that it must be unjust to make
laws for the punishing of offenders, To which he had nothing to say but this,
that though, if you look upon the first cause, all is thus fatally decreed, and
chained, yet the dispositions of each man's mind are only so far subject to
fate, as is agreeable to their own properties and qualities, as, says he, when
a man tumbles a cylindre or roller down an hill, it is certain that the man is
the violent enforcer of the first motion of it, but when it is once a tumbling,
the quality and propriety of the thing it self continues, and consummates it.
In this witty resemblance of that Stoic these three things must be considered,
First, that the Cylindre (the instance that he thought fit to pitch on) is an
inanimate, livelesse trunk, which has nothing of choice, or will in it,
Secondly, that neither the weight of the matter, of which it is made, nor the
round, voluble form of it (which two meeting with a precipice, or steep
declivity do necessarily continue the motion of it) are any more imputable to
that dead, choisless creature, then the first motion of it was supposed to be,
and therefore thirdly, that this cannot be a fit resemblance to show the
reconcileableness of fate with choice, or the reasonableness of charging on
men's wills, what was inevitably produced by their fate, or of punishing them
for those acts, which they are necessarily driven to commit* To which purpose
it may be remembered that neither is the Cylindre charged with sin, whether by
God, or men, nor any punitive law enacted by either against its rolling down
the hill, nor indeed are such charges, or such laws ever brought in or enacted
against any actions of any other creature, plant, or beast, till you ascend to
man, who is supposed to have a will, and not to be under such inevitable, fatal
laws, but to be, as that excellent man Pomponius Atticus was wont to say, the
forger of his own fate, the framer of his fortune, which yet should be as
improper to be applied to, or affirmed of a man, as of any other creature, if
all his actions were as irreversibly predetermined, as the descent of heavy
bodies, or the ascending of light, i. e. if Chrysippus's Cylindre and the
motion thereof were a commodious instance, or resemblance of this matter. But
the truth is, the man was acute, and dextrous, could say as much for the
reconciling of contradictions, as another, and though this last age has
considered this question very diligently, and had the advantages of the
writings of the former ages to assist them, yet he that shall impartially make
the comparison, will find, that the ancient Philosophers have written more
subtilely in this matter, and are more worth out reading, then any of our
modern Schools, (he that shall survey Hierocles on the (...), Ammonius on
Aristotle's (...), in showing the nature of contingent, and necessary
propositions, and the Christian Philosopher Boethius, lib. 2. de consolatione
philosophiae, will, I believe, be convinced of the truth of what I say) and
when the Master of them Chrysippus was so unable to speak intelligible sense,
or extricate himself in this business, 'twill be less matter of wonder to us,
that they which have espoused this (...), should endeavor as improsperously to
reconcile this with other notions of piety, and to extricate themselves out of
a Labyrinth not of fewer, but more difficulties (God having most clearly
revealed to Christian, that as he rewards every man according to his works,
so he requires of him according to what he has in his power to do, and not
according to what he has not) as Chrysippus is by Cicero judged to have done.

. 34. All which being duly considered, and the absurdities of that distinction
(thus applied) betwixt the act and the obliquitie, as manifest, as those of
Chrysippus's expedient, in those so many forementioned respects, and the
contrary so wide from the truth of Scripture, the attributes of God, and common
notions of piety written in men's hearts, and experimented in the government of
the world, and lastly so noxious and poisonous to good life, we may certainly
conclude with Prosper, that great asserter of God's Grace, Resp: ad 14. Object:
Vincent: Ad praevaricationem legis, ad neglectum religionis, ad corruptelam
disciplinae, ad desertionem fidei, ad perpetrationem qualiscunque peccati,
nulla omnino est Praedestinatio Dei. To the forsaking the law, to the
neglecting religion, to the corrupting discipline, to deserting the Faith, to
the perpetration of whatsoever sin, there is not at all any predestination of
God. Si ergo in sanctitate vivitur -- If we live in sanctity, grow in virtue
and persevere in good purposes, the gift of God is manifest in all this: Si
autem ab his receditur, -- But if we go back from these, if we pass over to
vices and sins, here God sends no evil temptation, forsakes not the desertor,
before he be forsaken, and very frequently keeps him that would depart from
departing, and causes him to return, though he be departed. To which may be
added that of the Arausican Council, which was very careful to assert the
necessity of Grace, and yet pronounces an anathema against those who affirm any
to be by God predetermined to sin.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Spirits acting all things within the man.
. 1. WHat has been said of the doctrine of God's decrees, fatally passed upon
our persons, or our actions, will be farther extended to the pretensions of the
Spirit, and the opinion, that of late begins to diffuse it self among some,
that all that is designed or done by them, is the dictate and motion of the
Spirit in them.

. 2. Of this it is evident, that either that man, which thus pretends, never
commits any act prohibited by the Word of God, and vulgarly called sin, after
the minute of such pretension (and then that were a rare charm indeed to render
him impeccable) or that this is the means of consecrating every sin of his, and
so the opinion being imbibed by one that lives in rebellion, murder,
adultery, pride, or schism, or any other (one or more) grossest sins, the
effect must be, that he believe every one of these to be infusions of the
Spirit of God, and so no more fit to be resisted before, nor repented for after
the Commission of them, then the most eminent acts of piety should be; And when
it is thus become impious to resist any temptation of our own flesh, which
sollicites within us, or of Satan that suggests and whispers within us too, i.
e. to omit the acting of any sin, that we are any way inclined to, what place
can be left for exhortation to Christian life, as long as I have any temptation
against it?

. 3. This is a doctrine which a man would think should not find admission with
any considerable sort of men, and therefore it will be less pertinent for this
Discourse to take any larger notice of it, yet for the preventing and
intercepting any farther growth of it, where it may unhappily have found any
reception, It will not be amiss to add, and evidence these few things:

. 4. First concerning the Spirit, Concerning the descent of the Spirit.
which is thus pretended to, That the Descent of the Spirit of God was
principally for three ends, 1. to give Testimony, that Christ was the Son of
God, sent with authority to reveal his will, and to command our faith and
obedience, and (consequently to this) to give the world assurance that the
Apostles were sent by him, and to sign the Commission of preaching to all
Nations, to propagate what he had taught, 2dly, to assure all men, that the
Rules which Christ gave us, are absolutely necessary to be observed, to render
us capable of those Promises made, those benefits purchased by him, And 3dly,
that, we being so corrupt by nature, so far from prone, or inclinable, in our
Flesh, to obey those Rules; the Graces of his holy Spirit, accompanying the
Revelation, or preaching of his will and word, should incline our corrupt
hearts to keep his laws.

. 5. Secondly, that after the mission of the Spirit, God was pleased, for
posterity, Gods method in his Church.
otherwise to express his care, and love to mankind, viz: in giving, and
consigning to them his written word for a Rule, and constant directer of life,
not leaving him to the duct of his own Inclinations.

. 6. Thirdly, that God has made (and continued, through all ages, both of
Jews and Christians) one sort of men to teach another to learn; Teachers and
learners.
Among the Jews one to preserve knowledge in his lips, and with the same to
dispense it, the other to enquire, and seek the Law at his mouth, and under the
Gospel, Pastors, and Teachers* and (...) Rulers set over men for their good;
Which is a visible prejudice to the pretended guidance of the Spirit, For if
that, by the voice within me, be the standing guide of all my actions, what use
of foreign teachers, or guides, or necessity of obeying the Apostle when he
commands me to obey those that are set over me?

. 7. Fourthly, that every thing that comes out of the heart of man, All that
comes out of the heart is not from God.
is not infused into it, or placed there by God. For besides that from thence
proceed many aerial fictions, and phasmes, and Chym^raes, created by the vanity
of our own hearts, or seduction of evil spirits, and not planted in them by God
or nature, or the duct of God's Spirit, motions and emissions of our fancy,
and not of our reason, of our sensitive, not humane nature (and to this all the
Idolatry of the ancient heathens, and the new phansiful divinity of some
present Christians, and the whole religion of the Mahomedanes is visibly
imputable) besides this, I say, it is affirmed by the Apostle, Jam. 5.15.17.
Jam. 3.15, 17. that there is a wisdom (and that must signify some Codex of
directions for practice, some law in the members, opposite to that in the
mind) that comes not from above, as well as a wisdom that comes from above,
and in plain terms, that it is earthly, sensual, and devilish, as that Law in
the members is said to lead the man into captivity to the law of sin which is
in the members.

Mat. 15.18, 19.
. 8. So again, says Christ, out of the heart proceed all the things that
defile a man, evil machinations, (...), all the most mischievous designments,
by name, murders, adulteries, fornications, (incestuous and unnatural
commissions contained under the word (...) fornication, 1 Cor. 5.1.) thefts,
false-witnesses, evil speakings, i. e. (as by those few instances is intimated
and must be supplied by parity of reason) all the contradictions to the several
branches (and degrees of those branches) of the divine or moral law.

. 9. Secondly, that to impose on our selves or others by this fallacy, The
belief of it a very noxious error.
to believe or pretend that whatever our own hearts incite us to do, what they
suggest, or dictate, is the Spirit, or word, or revelation of the will of God
within us, is the principle of all villainy (the same that has always acted
in the children of disobedience) inhaunsed and improved with circumstances of
greater boldness and impudence, then ever the most abominable heathens were
guilty of, either in their Oracles or in their mysteries.

. 10. In their Oracles, Worse then the fallacy of the heathen Oracles.
though their Idol-priests (who had the enclosure of this cheat) gave responses
out of the Caverns of the earth, and set up the devil (by the advantage of his
foreseeing some things in their causes, and conjecturing at others) above the
omniscient God of heaven, yet they affixed not the answers of their devils to
the true God. They worshipped Idols, and disclaimed any portion in the true
God, turned all knowledge or profession of him out of their hearts, according
to that reasonable proposition of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. that there is no
possible agreement to be had betwixt light and darkness. But these by their
refined pretension, do (in effect, and by way of necessary consequence, and
direct interpretation) turn the God of heaven into that accursed Spirit, affix
on him (receive and deliver as the effata and oracles of God) whatsoever the
devil* or their own lust, or revenge, or pride, or ambition, or covetousness
(so many (...), spontaneous devils) can infuse into them, and out of their
black hearts, as out of the most noisome caverns and dens of the earth (holding
intercourse with hell) breath out, and deliver to the world.

Or idolatrous Mysteries.
. 8. So again in their mysteries, and most secret recesses, and adyta of their
religion, their heathen Priests were wont to betray and lead their silly
votaries into all the most horrid unnatural sins, as into a special part of the
devotions and worships required of them by the Gods, whom they had undertaken
to serve, But yet never thought fit to let them out of the dark, out of the
retirement, but by banishing the eyes of men gave witness against themselves,
accused those facts, which were not able to bear the light, (to which the
Apostle seems to refer Ephesians: 5.13.) and so had the excuse of some
bashfulness and self-accusation, and care not to scandalize other men; whilst
these that make their own lust, their own malice and revenge the voice of the
true God, the Spirit within them, are thereby qualified to act the horrid'st
sins avowedly and shamelesly, and have no checks left, (no coldness, but where
they have no temptations) no dislikes, no shame, no objections to any thing,
but to tenderness, to scrupulosity, to fear of offending, to the doing what
they do in bondage, as they call it, i. e. to all the relics or embers of
conscience remaining in them, and if they can but utterly and finally cast out
this fear, they are hereby delivered up really to the evil spirit, while they
most pretend to the guidance of the good. The pretended Spirit of God within
them, by suggesting sins, gives a full confidence and security to commit them*
and then Scripture and conscience and temper, and a tolerable degree of good
nature, any thing lower then the utmost evil, is the thing only to be
mortified, the one piece of criminous carnality to be burnt up.

. 12. Thus by turning one pin in the machine, the whole scene is shifted, and
this voice (as if an (...)) that comes out of our own bellies, being mistaken
for the still language, in which God was once heard, a congregation of
Christians may be soon inspired into a legion of Demoniacks, and only one (but
that a teeming fruitful) error be committed all this while, the mistaking our
own motions for the incitation of the Spirit of God, which till it be reformed
or retracted, it must be a shortness of discourse to think strange, and an
injustice to charge of any new crime, the infallible consequences of it, and
such are all the barefaced villainies in the world.

. 13. For as he that is so sure and confident of his particular election, as to
resolve he can never fall, if he commit those acts, or live in those habits,
against which the words of Scripture are plain, that they that do them shall
not inherit eternal life, must necessarily resolve, that what were drunkenness
or adultery in another, is not so in him, and nothing but the removing his
Fundamental error can rescue him from the superstructive, be it never so
gross, So to this one grand mistake (the judging of God's will by the bent of
our own spirits) all vicious enormous practices (even to the taking away of all
differences between good and evil) are regularly consequent, and cannot seem
strange to attend daily, where the other has taken up the lodging.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Mistakes concerning Repentance.
. 1. ONE sort of doctrines more I cannot but annex here, though I have
elsewhere already insisted on them, and those are the mistakes in the Doctrine
of Repentance.

Of Repentance*
. 2. Repentance, whatever that word signifies, (and that is certainly a sincere
change, and renovation of mind, a conversion of the sinner to God in a new
life, repentance from dead works, Heb. 6.1.) is questionless it to which, on
purpose, Christ came to call sinners, His whole Embassy from his Fathers
bosom was projected and designed for this grand work, and so certainly all the
preachings of all the Apostles were of the same making, that the Gospel tells
us the first fruits were, Repent etc. And therefore it will concern us nearly,
not to be mislead in this matter, Dangerousness of mistakes in it*
For should we content our selves with somewhat else under the title, or
disguise of Repentance, which is either not-repentance at all, or but an
imperfect, unsufficient part of repentance, and by consequence, persuade our
selves, that by performing of this, we shall have fully answered Christ's call,
done all that he came from heaven to require of us, it is visible what an
obstacle this is to the rearing that superstructure which was designed to be
erected on this foundation.

. 3. Now to this head will be referred those that from the misunderstanding of
Romans 7. (not observing) the custom of that Apostle (...), Misunderstanding
Romans 7.
figuratively to transfer to himself, in the first person, what belongs to
others) have made it reconcilable with regeneration, or repentance (for those
two words certainly signify one and the same thing in Scripture) to be in that
state which is there described, i. e. to do what a man allows not, but hates,
v. 15. the evil which he would not v. 19. to be brought into capeivity to the
law of sin, the law in the members, warring against the law of the mind, v.
23. and, upon the same account, even to be carnal, and sold under sin, v. 14.
all which must equally belong to the person which is there represented, of whom
equally in the first person they are all affirmed.

. 4. That that chapter is really a representation of one, which has only the
knowledge, not practice of his duty, and consequently, to the sins, which he
commits, has the aggravation superadded of committing them against knowledge,
against conscience, against sight of the contrary law, is manifest from the
context, and has Annot: in Rom: 7.
elsewhere more seasonably been evidenced, And of this I need not many words to
declare, how far it is from being so much as any part of Repentance, any one
of the ingredients in it (being indeed no more then either the work of natural
conscience, or, farther, of the mind instructed by the Law of Moses, but that
not of force to work the least obedience in the man, but supposed in that text
to be joined with all customary disobedience, and captivity to sin) and
consequently that if this be mistaken for that, which it is so far removed
from being natural or legal knowledge of duty, despised and transgrest, for
sincere obedience to all the commandments of God and the former of these, by so
absurd, irrational a concession, be deemed sufficient to render his estate
safe, whosoever has arrived to this, this must needs annull, and cassate all
the force of all the Articles of the Creed (although never so firmly and
explicitly believed) toward bringing forth good life, i. e. Repentance, truly
understood, this supposititious no-repentance being once contentedly received,
and espoused in exchange for it.

. 5. For who will ever take the pains to maintain a painful, Dangers of it.
ungrateful, perhaps bloody fight against the Law of sin that is in his members
((...) and (...), which are the works of the penitentiary, on neglect of which,
the valiantest combatant may prove a reprobate, 1 Cor. 9.27.) if so much less
then a (...) or beating the air, v. 26. a bare dislike, or displeasure of the
law of the mind, without ever coming into the field, will serve the turn, to
secure him of the crown?

. 6. So again they that, like the popular Prince, Wishes of repentance.
are unwilling to dismiss any man without his request, and therefore, when
they find not a man penitent, if they can but obtain of him, to wish that he
were penitent, or to grieve, Sorrow that they do not wish.
that he cannot ascend so high as that wish, are content to accept that wish,
or that grief for that Repentance, which alone is the condition required by
Christ to rescue from perishing, What do these again, but wilfully mistake
that for Repentance, nay is by them that affirm it is, presumed and supposed
not to be; For if there had been any thing, that could have approved it self to
be Repentance, they had never descended to those low enquiries, after the wish,
and the grief, Nay the wish they had Repentance, is founded in the presumption
they have it not, and the grief that they have not the wish, is again a
concession that they have not so much as that; And if they may be capable of
comfort, who are so far from being true penitents, reformed, new livers, that
the utmost they are arrived to toward it, is but an empty, ineffectual wish
that they were such (without considering the price, that must be paid, the
pleasant, espoused sins, that must be parted with, if their wish were granted)
then what need all that Christian life, those many years of severe devotion,
and profitable service that the Apostles meant, and all Ministers endeavor to
superstruct on this foundation?

. 7. So that frequent practice, Deferring Repentance to Deathbed.
though not doctrine of the many, of secure spending in sin the youth, and
riper age, and even all the remainder (till the forerunners of death and hell
make their close approaches to them) and never doubt but the whole condition
required by Christ, the Repentance he came to preach, will in that last scene
of their last act, immediately before the exit, be as opportunely and acceptably
performed, as at any other point of their lives, What do these but evacuate
the whole force of the Christian faith, and absolutely resolve against building
of Christian life upon it.

. 8. The unreasonableness, and presumption, the danger, and desperate
insecurity of those, that thus project, and in stead of that whole age of vital
actions, which are all little enough, be they never so liberally dispensed, and
never so duly performed, ( vastly disproportionable to that eternal Crown,
which we know is adjudged, a reward to every man, according to his works) have
not so much as a thought or design all their lives long (nor till those last,
fearful summons extort it from them) to advance so far as attrition and
contrition, sorrow, and resolution of amendment, and then have no means to
secure them of the truth, and sincerity of these, The unreasonableness, I say,
and danger of these is Of Deathbed Repentance.
elsewhere largely insisted on, but never sufficiently lamented, being that
which is the debauching all parts of the world, a presumption, that ingages in
all sin, and ruin, ascertains the life to be wholly unprofitable, and has the
luck among all professions of Christians to have aides and officers diligent to
offer it some encouragements; The Romanists have many, formerly named, and
their extreme Unction, administered as the dying man's viaticum (which S. James
mentioned as the ceremony of his recovery) may be added to the Catalogue, And
others of several persuasions have made them other tenders of kindness, and
being unwilling to discourage such cunctators, always keep them up in good
hope, that if they are not yet called (for that is the style to express any
impenitent, obdurate sinner) they may yet with the thief be brought in at the
last hour, and so (to omit the desperate gulf they are by these vain hopes, if
God show not miracle, most sadly plunged in) are ascertained never to
superstruct any vital action, on that Divine foundation, so fitly prepared for
it.

. 9. If there be any, Mistake of Sorrow for Repentance.
that mistake sorrow for sin, (...), (which it is very ordinary to find in
those who carry it to hell with them, and which continues in that state of woe,
as Charity does in heaven) and confound it with repentance (...), which is
never less then a conversion, and change of mind, these by obtruding an
unsufficient part for the whole, the beginning of a change for the entire work
of new life, will fall under the former guilt of obstructing this
superstructure, and so, in a word, will all they, that either through
indulgence to others, or fondness to any sin in themselves, substitute for
Repentance any thing that is less, then a sincere, uniform Resolution of New
obedience, attended with faithful endeavor, and (...), meet, proportionable,
worthy fruits of this change forever after. The several, of such possible, or
real mistakes in the ret^il, are not here proper to be insisted on.

CHAP. XIX. Of the necessaries to the superstructing of good life on this
Foundation.
. 1. THere is still a fourth branch of Discourse behind, which by the laws of
the designed method, must now briefly be considered, What things are necessary
to the erecting of this superstructure on this Foundation, whether in a
particular Christian, or especially in a Church, or society of such.

. 2. Where by [ necessary] I mean not the supernatural necessaries, Three
kinds of necessaries.
the preventing, and assisting, and renewing grace of God, which we suppose God
ready to annex to the Revelation of his will, in the hearts of all that with
obedient humble spirits receive, and sincerely embrace it; Nor 2dly, in the
Physical notion of necessity, that without which the work cannot possibly be
done, the building be erected, for in this sense, as was said, it cannot be
affirmed of all the Articles of the Creed, that they are thus absolutely
necessary, i. e. that no man can be imagined to reform his life, so as to be
acceptable to God, but he to whom every of those Articles has been
intelligibly revealed; (For of many plain, yet pious Christians it is not
certain, that that can truly be now affirmed, and of the pious Jews before
Christ's time, it is not so much as pretended.)

Morally necessary to this end.
. 3. But by necessary] I mean that which is morally necessary to this end, i.
e. very useful and helpful to advance it, and make it most probable to be
attained, among men of those tempers, which we are commonly to look for in the
world; Meaning also by the end to which these means are ordinable, not only
the first act of change, resolution of reforming, but withal the continuance
and perseverance in such resolutions, and the bringing forth meet fruits of
repentance, and that again, not in a single person only, but in a community or
multitude of men.

. 4. And in passing our judgment on this kind of Necessaries, it will not be
modestly nor soberly done, if any of our own wisdom intrude or interpose or be
willing to make additions to what Christ and his Apostles have designed, What
the Universal Church of Christ has thought thus Necessary.
and the Universal practice of the Church has succesfully used, and
recommended to us in this kind; And therefore all that we have farther to do,
is, to recollect, what things there are which are thus brought down unto us.

. 5. And that will appear to be a methodical successive observation of these
severals, as degrees and steps, preparative the one to the other, and all
together, thus orderly used, sufficient through the blessing of God (and more
probable then any course we could likely have pitched on) to attain the
designed end successfully.

. 6. 1. Baptism,
A solemn admission of Proselytes, all that either, being of age, desire that
admission for themselves, or that, in infancy, are by others presented to that
charity of the Church, with the desires of the parents, and intercession of
sureties, that they may be thus early admitted by baptism, the Ceremony of
initiating Proselytes, of entering disciples into the school of Christ.

. 7. If the persons thus admitted be of years of understanding, then some
competent degree of instruction is reasonably to prepare for it, which, if they
be baptized in infancy, Of Infants.
is timely to attend, and security to be taken for the present, that they shall
be brought to the Church in due time, where that is presumed to be ready for
them. And because in an established Church, where that instruction is secured
on all hands, and so is reasonably presumed to attend baptism, the practice of
the Church has alwaie been (transcribed from the Apostles) to bring infant
children to baptism* we have all reason to adhere to that practice, and to
acknowledge with thankefulness the several advantages, which it contributes,
toward the end of redeeming us from all iniquity, Benefits of that;
and purifying a peculiar people unto Christ.

. 8. First, The first.
on God's part, it secures to the infant a non-imputation of Adam's
transgression, seals unto him an assurance of God's not proceeding with him
according to the strict Covenant first made with man, of a perfect unsinning
obedience, by which we could have no hope to be justified, and on the contrary
receives him into a Covenant of Grace, where there is pardon reached out to all
(truly penitent) sinners, and assistance promised and engaged (and bestowed
upon very easy conditions, humility and prayer and affiance in him) and this,
in a degree proportionable to what now is required of us, as far as is truly
sufficient, and can reasonably be desired by a rational agent, and as is
reconcilable with that liberty, which is necessary to be reserved to the will
of man, to make him capable of virtue and vice, and consequently of reward and
punishment; And this is a necessary expedient to deliver from the encumbrance
and weight of fears, and to beget a lively and a quickening hope, and so it is in
it self one excellent principle of action, (which slackneth for want of
encouragement, and cannot choose but be inlivened by such pregnant grounds of
it) and thus it must needs appear to be, whenever the Infant attains to years
and means of understanding it.

. 9. Secondly, it is the entering the Infant into the Church, The second.
where the means of knowledge of duty dwells, and where it is early
communicated to all, and so to this infant as soon as he is capable of
receiving it, And the advantage hereof is inestimable, to be thus early taken
up and prepossessed by Christ before any other Competitor has made his claim,
or gotten admission or hold or interest in him.

The third.
. 10. Thirdly, it is the imposing a band and sacramental obligation upon him,
an oath, a vow, which being the condition, upon the constant performance
whereof all the promises of endless bliss are made over to him by God, it is
not possible for one that prizeth his own good, to wish it had not been made,
or deliberately to rescind or disclaim the standing obliged by it, And by this
means it lays an absolute necessity on every one that has been baptized, to
undertake the performance of Christ's condition, i. e. of a pious and Christian
life.

The fourth.
. 11. Fourthly, it is solemnized with the prayers and benedictions of the
Church, which are always of great efficacy to bring down that which is prayed
for, but are especially so, when they are annexed to an Institution of Christ
(such as Baptism is known to be) and the effect of those benedictions being
the preventions, and illuminations, and assistances, and inspirations of God's
good Spirit, the heavenly auxiliaries, and secret hand, by which God has
promised to fight against Amalek against sin forever, this together with the
former advantages is very instrumental toward the beginning of this course, and
engaging the infant betimes to a constant perseverance in it. And accordingly
baptism in the Scripture, and the rest of the particulars which are to attend
it, as in some respect they are to be looked on, as privileges, and advantages
afforded us by Christ (for such beyond all other things are those, that
effectually induce reformation, or Christian life) so are they most frequently
considered as bands and obligations, and seals of the Christian's Covenant with
Christ, whereby he ingages his soul to a faithful performance of his part of
the Covenant, and cannot now without perjurie and Apostasy wilfully recede
from it.

. 12. Catechizing.
After Baptism (when that is in infancy received, as now in a Christian
Church we suppose it to be) succeeds in the next place Instruction and
institution in the nature and several branches of that vow which was made at
the Font, and this in such a short, perspicuous, intelligible manner, and in so
particular address and application to every single person (which, with the
narrow-mouthed bottle in Quintilian, will not probably be filled with throwing
whole buckets of water over it (to which preaching is most fit to be compared)
and therefore requires to be taken single in the hand, and to have that which
is needful, warily and with care infused into it) that it is hardly imaginable
how a more provident course should be taken, then is by the Church appointed to
be used, to convince every young person of his obligation, and to qualify him
judiciously and warily to take that oath in his own person, which was by
proxies formerly taken for him, and what greater band can lie on any to
undertake the duties of Christian life, then the thus surveying and renewing of
that oath.

. 13. And what is thus prepared for in Catechizing is in the third place
performed by Confirmation, Confirmation.
a most profitable usage of the Church transcribed from the practice of the
Apostles, which consists in two parts, The first part thereof.
the childe's undertaking in his own name every part of the baptismal vow
(having first approved himself to understand it) and to that purpose, that he
may more solemnly enter this obligation, bringing some Godfather with him, not
now (as in baptism) as his Procurator to undertake for him, but as a witness
to testify his entering this obligation, which one thing being heedfully and
piously performed, is the greatest engagement imaginable to the performance of
the matter of the vow (in which all Christian belief and practice is folded up)
considering that every act of presumptuous sin, which shall ever be committed
against that vow, brings the guilt of formal downright perjurie along with it*
together with the punishment that belongs to that great and criminous guilt,
and the forfeiture of his right and claim to all those mercies, which either in
Baptism or Confirmation are made over to him by Christ.

. 14. The second.
The second part of Confirmation is the prayer and benediction of the Bishop,
the successor of the Apostles in this office, and that made more solemn by the
Ceremony of Imposition of hands, a custom indeed of the Jewish parents in
blessing their children, but taken up by the Apostles themselves, in stead of
that Divine Insufflation, which Christ had used to them in conferring the holy
Ghost upon them, Joh. 20.22. as an outward sign of the same, as for holy
Orders, Act. 6.6 so for Confirmation of believers after baptism, Act. 8.18.
And the matter of this benediction, and petition, being the strength of Christ,
the daily increase of the manifold gifts of grace, the Spirit of wisdom,
understanding, counsel and ghostly strength, of knowledge and true godliness
and holy fear, as the bestowing of these upon the child is both the
strengthening and engaging him to all piety, to the Bishop's prayer being thus,
by virtue of his office, offered up, and having the suffrages of the whole
congregation to join with it, and being commenced to God for that boon (the
Spirit) which he has promised to grant to our importunity, it may most
reasonably be presumed to be of force and efficacy with God to bring down that
grace which may enable to will and to do, on all that come duly qualified to
receive it.

. 15. To which I may add, that this being designed by the Church to certify
those that are thus confirmed of God's favor and gracious goodness toward
them, it has all the advantages that either hope of acceptance and reward, or
a grateful sense of mercies received can add to it, to engage and oblige us to
a constant obedience to him.

. 16. Fourthly, The Lord's Supper.
those which are thus confirmed, are thereby supposed to be fit for admission
to that other sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, instituted in the
close of his last supper: And that, In five considerations.
whether it be considered, 1. as an institution of Christ for the solemn
commemorating of his death; or 2. as a sacrifice Eucharistical performed by the
Christian to God; or 3. as the (...) communication of the Body and blood of
Christ, the means of conveying all the benefits of the crucified Savior unto
all, that come fitly prepared, and qualified for them; or whether 4. as a
federal rite betwixt the soul and Christ, eating and drinking at his table, and
thereby engaging our obedience to him; or lastly, as an emblem of the most
perfect divine charity to be observed among all Christians; In all and every of
these respects, I say, it is doubtless an instrument of great virtue, that
has a peculiar propriety to engage the receiver to persevere in all piety. And
that yet farther improved by the frequent iteration, and repetition of that
sacrament.

The first.
. 17. 1. As it is the commemorating the death of Christ, so it is the
professing our selves the disciples of the crucified Savior, and that ingageth
us to take up his cross and follow him, and not to fall off from him for any
temptations, or terrors of death it self, but to resist to blood (as Christ
did) in our spiritual (...), our Olympicks or combats against sin.

The second.
. 18. 2dly, As it is the Eucharistical Christian sacrifice, so it is formally
the practicing of several acts of Christian virtue, 1. of prayer, of
thanksgiving, of all kind of piety toward God; 2. of charity to our brethren,
both that spiritual, of interceding for all men, for Kings, etc. 1 Timothy 2.1.
and corporal, in the offertorie, for the relief of those that want; and 3. the
offering up and so consecrating our selves, our souls and bodies to be a holy,
lively, acceptable service to God, the devoting our selves to his service all
our days, And this last a large comprehensive act of piety, which contains all
particular branches under it, and is again the repeating of the baptismal vow,
and the yet closer binding of this engagement on us.

. 19. 3dly, As it is by God designed, The third.
and, as an institution of his, blessed and consecrated by him into a
sacrament, a holy rite, a means of conveying and communicating to the worthy
receiver the benefits of the body and blood of Christ, that pardon of sin and
sufficience of strength and grace, which were purchased by his death, and
typified and consigned to us by the sacramental elements, so it is again the
ridding us of all our discouraging fears, and the animating and obliging of us
to make use of that grace, which will carry us (if we do not wilfully betray
our succors) victoriously through all difficulties.

The fourth.
. 20. 4thly, As it is a federal rite betwixt God and us (as eating and drinking
both among the Jews and heathens was wont to be) so it is on our part the
solemn undertaking of the condition required of us to make us capable of the
benefit of God's new Evangelical covenant, and that is sincere performance of
all duties prescribed the Christian by Christ, And he that does no longer
expect good from God then he performs that condition, is ipso facto divested of
all those fallacious flattering hopes, which pretended to make purifying
unnecessary, and must now either live purely and piously, or else disclaim ever
seeing of God.

The fifth.
. 21. Lastly, As this supper of the Lord is a token and engagement of charity
among the disciples of Christ, so it is the supplanting of all the most
Diabolical sins, the filthiness of the spirit, the hatred, variance, emulation,
strife, revenge, faction, schism, that have been the tearing and rending of the
Church of God (oft-times upon pretense of the greatest piety) but were by
Christ, of all other things, most passionately disclaimed, and cast out of his
Temple, And if by the admonitions, which this Emblem is ready to afford us, we
can think our selves obliged to return to that charity and
peaceable-mindedness, which Christ so frequently and vehemently recommends to
us, we have his own promise, that the whole body shall be full of light, Mat.
6. that all other Christian virtues will by way of concomitance or annexation,
accompany or attend them in our hearts.

. 22. And the several happy influences of all and each of these considerations,
especially when they are superadded to the three former grand instruments, and
frequently, every month at least, The frequency of Receiving it.
and every great Festivity, called in to reinforce our watch, to remand us to
our scrutinie (the examination and search of out hearts and purging out all
impurity, that has been contracted in those intervals) and to renew our vows
of temper and vigilance, may very reasonably be allowed to have some
considerable virtue and efficacy in them, to advance that work, for which
Christ came out from the bosom of his Father, to superstruct the practice of
all virtue, where the Faith of Christ is once planted.

. 23. After these four, which are thus subordinate and preparative the one to
the other, the later still bringing with it an addition of weight to the
former, Two more there are which are several from, and yet being of continual
use, are interweaved and mixed with every of these, and having their distinct
energie proper to themselves, when they are in conjunction with the former, or
added to them, they must needs accumulate and superadde a considerable weight
unto them.

The use of Liturgy.
. 24. The first is the use of Liturgy, the second the word of exhortation
among the Jews, and in the Apostles times, and proportionable to that the
sermons or homilies of the Church.

The use of Liturgy.
. 25. The Liturgy as it contains the whole daily office, consisting of
Confession, prayers, Psalms, hymns, reading of the scripture of both
Testaments, Creeds, supplications, intercessions, thanksgivings, injunctions of
Gestures and of Ceremonies, and of Holy Days, is both the exercise of many
parts of Piety, and the conservatory of the Foundation, on which all Piety
together is regularly built, and a means of hightning devotion and infusing
zeal into it; And the diligent, worthy, continual (in stead of the negligent,
formal, rarer) use of it, and the unanimous accord of whole societies and
multitudes herein, would certainly be very efficacious advancers of all
Christian virtue, of piety, of charity, of purity, over the world, of the two
former directly, and of the later by way of diversion, the frequent performance
of such offices, obstructing and sealing up the fountains of impurity, and
intercepting that leisure, which is necessary to the entertaining the
beginnings of it.

. 26. So for Preaching or exhorting the people by way of Homily, Of Preaching.
it appears to have been received from the Jewish by the Christian Church, and
by the phrase, by which it is expressed in the Acts [a word of exhortation to
the people] it appears to have been generally employed in reprehension of vices
and exhortation to virtuous living, And if we survey the Homilies of the
Ancient Church (such are those of S. Chrysostom most eminently) we shall
discern that as upon Festival days the subject of the Homily was constantly
the business of the Day, the clearing the mystery, the incarnation of Christ
etc. and the recommending the actions or sufferings of the Saint, and raising
men's hearts to acknowledge the goodness of God in setting up such exemplary
patterns and guides before us, So upon other days, after some short literal
explication of some place of scripture, the custom was, not to raise doctrinal
points, according to every preachers judgment or fancy, but presently to fall
off to exhortation to temperance, continence, patience, and the like Christian
virtues, which either the propriety of the Text, or the wants and sins of the
auditory, or the times suggested to them. And this so far from being a fault
in their method of preaching, that it was an eminent exemplary piece of
Christian prudence, observable and imitable in them, as a means of keeping
false or unnecessary definitions out of the Church, which tend to the increase
of disputes and contentions, and whilst they they do so, are not to the
edification and benefit, but to the destruction and mischief of the hearers.

. 27. Of this usage of the Church it is most visible, if it be but by the ill
uses which are made of it many times in stirring up seditions, rebellions,
murders, hatreds, animosities, calumnies, revilings of superiors, etc. in
disseminating of heresies, infusing of prejudices etc. what advantage may be
had toward the advancement of all parts of Christian life by a due performance
of it, It Is very much in the power of a popular Orator to represent vices in so
formidable, yet just appearances, and to set out each virtue in so amiable a
form, and to apply this so particularly to those that are concerned to be thus
wrought on, that the Covetous person shall fly from, and scatter (most
liberally) his beloved Idol, wealth, the rageful person shall find a calm, the
lustful a coldness insensibly infused upon his breast, and the auditor's
fancy and sensitive affections being called in to join with his reason and
the Spirit of God, it will by the blessing of that Spirit be in the power of
meditation, to radicate these seeds, to fix this transient gleam of light and
warmth, to confirm inclinations and resolutions of Good (received in at the
ear) and give them a durable consistence in the soul.

Visitation of the Sick.
. 28. Next to this is the spiritual persons being called for (and obeying the
summons) to visit the sick, Jam. 5.14. to assist him in the great work of
discussing and examining his conscience, of making his search as particular as
it can, whether it be any sin either unreformed, or unsufficiently mortified,
which may have laid him under God's present displeasure, and brought that
disease, as a piece of discipline, upon him. In this condition the rod of God
has a voice to be heard, and he whose office it is in public to explain the
oracles of God for the use of the Church, and to apply them to each man's wants,
is now to preach on this new text, and expound to the sick man (as far as by
the closest inspection he can judge) the particular meaning of the voice, the
interpretation of God's message to him, And if he be not able, like Daniel to
interpret Nebuchadnezzar's dream, or Belshazzar's handwriting on the wall,
which was the work of a Prophet extraordinarily inspired, yet he may, without
the spirit of divination, discern that affinity and dependence betwixt the
man's unreformed sins, and God's hand of punishment, which may be sufficient
ground of superstructing Daniel's exhortation of breaking off his sins by
repentance, and showing mercy to the poor, by humiliation, sincere resolution
and vow of new life, and by meet fruits of such reformation, the highest works
of charity and piety, that the patient is capable of. And besides that this
method may receive so much force (and probably prove successful) by assistance
of those impressions, that the desire of recovering the former health may have
upon the patient (when he considers the pardon of sins, which ordinarily
introduced Christ's corporal cures, and prudently judges how improbable it is,
that God, which for any sin committed has inflicted this disease, should
remove it before reformation, or if he does, must do it as an act of higher
wrath and punishment) Besides this, I say, the time of sickness, or any other
affliction, is like the cool of the day to Adam, a season of peculiar propriety
for the voice of God to be heard in the mouth of his messengers, and so may, by
the assistance of united prayers for God's blessing on his own instruments, be
improved into a very advantageous opportunity of begetting or increasing
spiritual life in the soul, and cannot without great guilt of unkindness and
treachery to that most precious part be neglected or omitted by us.

Spiritual Conference.
. 29. And the analogy holds, though not in the same degree, yet in the
proportion, to every other season or person, who is under the power of any
unreformed sin, or is doubtful of the sincerity of the kind, or sufficience of
the degree of his change, and is not so fit or competent a judge of his own
estate (if upon no other score but because his own) as any other fellow
Christian of no deeper judgment then himself, or as the spiritual person, whose
office it is to watch for his soul, and is probably furnished with more skill,
fidelity and zeal toward the doing of it, may be deemed to be. And in this case
the use of spiritual conference (which is at all times very profitable, yea and
pleasant to every diligent humble Christian) is unimaginable and unspeakable,
especially if it be free and unrestrained, having all the advantages of the
divinest friendship, and withal all the contentments and satisfactions of it
(which are exceedingly great, and agreeable to rational ingenuous natures) and
bearing an image and lively resemblance of that conversation which is among
Angels and beatified Saints, a communication and conjunction of souls, designed
to our highest interests and concernments, the countermining and eradicating of
sin, mortifying this or that passion, rage, or other sensual desire, and
contending for the highest exaltation and improvement of our natures, all
growth in grace, and the practical knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

. 30. Many inhaunsments of this spiritual useful, though more private exercise,
might be farther noted, and rules for the more advantageous practice of it,
especially that there were some eminent persons, of known abilities,
experience, judgment, gravity, fidelity, zeal to all Christian virtue and the
good of souls set apart to this one office of spiritual conference, in every
Province, and all men rationally convinced of the great benefits that might be
reaped by a frequent resort to them in all possible times of need, and of the
no kind of detriment or disadvantage, that they can suffer by it.

The power of the Keys.
. 31. But beyond all these there is another very efficacious method still
behind, of which the Apostle says, that it was not carnal or weak* but mighty
to God, or very powerful, for the bringing down of strong holds, for the
subduing of the most obstinate, contumacious sinner, and bringing him into the
obedience of the faith of Christ, and that is the power and exercise of the
Keys committed to the Apostles and their successors by Christ, the weapons of
their warfare, as Saint Paul calls them, the means of discharging their office
to the good of souls.

. 32. For when any baptized, instructed, confirmed, communicated Christian,
which has participated of the Liturgy and Sermons of the Church, shall in
despite of all these obligations (very competent and sufficient to have
restrained him) break out into any known wilful scandalous sin, this course is
then ready at hand, to be sent as an officer to arrest and reduce him, First
the admonitions, fraternal or paternal, of his fellow Christians, or of the
Governors of the Church, then more public reprehensions and increpations, and
upon the unsuccessfulness of all these milder medicaments, the use of that
stronger Physic, the Censures of the Church, either (...) for a determinate,
shorter space, or else indefinitely, usque ad reformationem, until he reform
and return, and then when he does so, the admitting him to penance, to approve
the sincerity of his change by meet fruits of repentance, and then, and not
till then, allowing him the benefit, of absolution.

. 33. The efficacy and usefulness of this last method has elsewhere been shown
at large (in a Tract on that subject) especially upon the score of shame, when
he that will live the life of a heathen, go on unreformed in any open sin,
shall not be allowed the honor of a Christian name, of an ordinary good
reputation among men, but be banished and interdicted the enjoyment of those
sacred privileges, which the meanest of Christ's flock is allowed by him. What
these losses are, is sufficiently known, and set off by the Apostles style,
expressing them by (...) and (...), destruction and excision, and the like; As
for that other of shame, the efficacy that belongs to it, may be discerned by
that ancient Apophthegm of Stobaeus, ser: 41. p. 268.
Cleobulus, the fifth of the sages of Greece, (...), that that people are
composed to the greatest sobriety, among whom the citizens stand in more fear
of dispraise, then of law; supposing that state to be best qualified, where
virtue, and every part of good living, which laws are wont to prescribe, has
acquired so great a credit, and reputation among all, that without fear of
punishment from laws, or Magistrates, the very dread of shame and disgrace
shall be able to contain all men within the bounds of exact living, and awe
them from admitting any thing which is foul, or sinful. To which purpose also
is that of li. de Republ:
Hippodamus the Pythagorean, that there be three causes of virtue ((...)) and
shame is the last of them, of which, says he, ((...), etc.) good customs are
able to infuse a dread into all men, that are (...) well cultivated, and make
them (...), to have a reverence, or pudicitious, chaste fear of doing any thing
which is ill. And according to this prudential notion of these wise men of the
world, is this piece of Christian discipline instituted by our Savior, to
deprive vice of its greatest temptation, the praise of men, to exalt and set up
virtue the only creditable thing, and brand sin as infamous, And if this of
shame superadded to the former of loss (and both being met together, as the
sinners portion here, perfectly prefiguring the two saddest ingredients in
hell, deprivation of the blissful vision, and confusion of face) cannot prove
efficacious and successful to the mortifying of unprofitable vice, the Church
does then give over the patient as desperate; pretends not to any farther
methods of working on such obdurate sinners.

This the last Ecclesiastical means.
. 34. Nor indeed is it reasonable it should, when beside the Foundation
(consisting of so many stones, each of them elect and precious, chosen by the
wisdom of heaven for this admirable work of reforming the most obdurate Jew or
heathen) this series and succession of so many powerful methods being farther
prescribed by God and administered by the Church, have found so discouraging a
reception, that nothing but the violence of storming or battery (the course
which God is forced to take for the destroying, but cannot without changing the
course of nature, for the converting of sinners) can hope or pretend to prove
successful on them.

The necessity of Governors in the Church.
. 35. What has been said of the wise disposition of God in preparing and
instituting this series of necessaries for the effecting this great work, the
reformation of men's lives (the latter annexed to the former, each to add weight
and authority, and to vindicate the contempts of the former) might more largely
be insisted on yet, on a farther design, to give us a just value of that
sacred office, which Christ fixed in the Church in his Apostles and the Bishops
their successors, and honored it and them in this especially, that he has put
these weapons into their hands, entrusted to, and invested in them the Power of
dispensing all these, and by that means rendered them necessary to the planting
and supporting a Church of vital Christians, to the maintaining of pious
practice in any community of Professors. But this would soon swell this
discourse beyond the limits designed to it.

. 36. The Conclusion.
All that is behind will be by way of Comment on that part of the Church of
England's charity, which has constantly called to God, that he will inspire
continually the Universal Church with the Spirit of truth, unity, and concord,
and grant that all they that do confess his holy name may agree in the truth
of his holy word, and live in unity and godly love.

A Prayer.
A Prayer.
O Most gracious Lord God, the Creator of all things, but of men and all
mankind a tender compassionate father in Jesus Christ, thou that have enlarged
thy designs and purposes of grace and mercy, as the bowels and bloodshedding
of thy Son with an earnest desire that every weak or sinful man should partake
of that abyss, that infinite treasure of thy bounty, Thou that have bequeathed
to us that Legacy and example of a sacred inviolate Peace, a large diffusive
charity, We meekly beseech thee to overshadow with thy heavenly grace the souls
of all men over all the world, O Lord, thou lover of souls, to bring home to
the acknowledgment and embraces of thy Son all that are yet strangers to that
profession, and in whatsoever any of us, who have already received that mercy
from thee, may be any way useful or instrumental to that so glorious end, to
direct and incline our hearts toward it, to work in us all an holy zeal to thy
name, and tender bowels to all those whose eternity is concerned in it. O give
us a true serious full comprehension and value of that one great interest of
others, as well as our selves, show us, the meanest of us, some way to
contribute toward it, if it be but our daily affectionate prayers for the
enlarging of thy kingdom, and the care of approving all our actions so, as may
most effectually attract all to this profession. And for all those that have
already that glorious name of thy Son called upon them, blessed Lord, that they
may at length, according to the many engagements of their profession, depart
from iniquity, that that holy city, that new Jerusalem may at length according
to thy promise descend from heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for the husband
Christ, that that tabernacle of God with men may be illustriously visible among
us, that we may be a peculiar people, and thou our God inhabiting in power
among us, that we which have so long professed thee, and been instructed by
thee, may no longer content our selves with that form of knowledge, which so
often engenders strife, contentions, animosities, separating, and condemning
one another, and that most unchristian detestable guilt of blood, but endeavor
and earnestly contend for the uniform effectual practice of all the precepts of
thy Son, the fruits and power of all Godliness, that all the Princes and people
of Christendom, the Pastors and sheep of thy fold may at length in some degree
walk worthy of that light and that warmth, that knowledge and those graces,
that the sun of righteousness with healing in his wings has so long poured out
upon us. Lord purge and powerfully work out of all hearts that profaneness and
Atheisticalness, those sacrilegious thirsts and enormous violations of all that
is holy, those unpeaceable, rebellious, mutinous, and withal tyrannizing
cruel spirits, those prides and haughtinesses, judging and condemning,
defaming and despising of others, those unlimited ambitions and covetings,
joined with the invasion and violation of others rights, those most reproachful
excesses and abominable impurities, which to the shame of our unreformed
obdurate hearts, do still remain unmortified unsubdued among us, but above
all, those infamous hypocrisies of suborning religion to be the engine of
advancing our secular designs, or the disguise to conceal the foulest
intentions, of bringing down that most sacred name whereby we should be saved,
to be the vilest instrument of all carnality, and by the power of thy
convincing Spirit, Lord humble and subdue all that exalts it self against the
obedience of Christ. And when thou have cast out so many evil spirits, be
pleased thy self to possess and enrich our souls, to plant and root and
confirm and secure in us all those precious fruits of piety, and faith, and
obedience, and zeal toward thee; of purity, and meekness, and simplicity, and
contentedness, and sobriety, in our selves; of justice, and charity, and
peaceableness, and bowels of mercy, and compassion toward all others; that
having seriously, and industriously, as our holy vocation ingages us, used all
diligence to add unto our faith, virtue; and to virtue, patience, and
perseverance in all Christian practice, we may adorn that profession, which we
have so long depraved, and having had our fruit unto holiness, we may obtain
our end everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. THe Notation of the word Fundamental. Page 1 CHAP. II. The Division
of the discourse into four parts, What are Fundamental in general. Page 15
CHAP. III. A particular view of Fundamentals, Jesus Christ indefinitely. Page
24 CHAP. IV. Jesus Christ Crucified. Page 35 CHAP. V. Jesus Christ raised etc.
Page 38 CHAP. VI. Other Articles of Belief in Christ. Page 42 CHAP. VII. The
Faith in Baptism. Page 56 CHAP. VIII. Of the Creeds in general, and first of
the Apostles Creed. Page 58 CHAP. IX. Of the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds
together; and severally of the Nicene. Page 82 CHAP. X. Of the Athanasian
Creed. Page 91 CHAP. XI. Of the Superstructure, and the particular branches
thereof. Page 94 CHAP. XII. Of the Doctrines that hinder the superstructing of
good life on the Christian belief, first among the Romanists, a Catalogue of
them, especially that of the Infallibility of the Church, 2. Among others, 1.
that of the Solifidian. Page 108 CHAP. XIII. Of the Fiduciarie. Page 120 CHAP.
XIV. Of Christ's dying for none but the Elect. Page 130 CHAP. XV. Of the
irrespective decrees of Election and Reprobation. Page 145 CHAP. XVI. Of the
Predetermination of all things. Page 156 CHAP. XVII. Of the Spirits acting all
things within the man. Page 192 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Mistakes concerning
Repentance. Page 202 CHAP. XIX. Of the necessaries to the superstructing of
good life on this Foundation. Page 211 A Prayer. Page 240
THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 51. line 12. re: Christ

p. 60.. 4 l. 9. re: Eutychen

p. 77. l. 1. after omitted add)

p. 90. l. 25. after practice add,

p. 95. l. 17. after the add most

p. 110. marg: the note subditos-with that next following it, Valdi -- belong
to p. 111. l. 7. and the word guilt

p. 111. the note Summorum -- belongs to lin. 19. and the word deviabilis

p. 111. the note (...) belongs to p. 112. l. 16. and the word secure

p. 114. l. 19. after principle for (put, l. 20. after falsehoods for) put, l.
21. after practices add (l. 23. after bread, add of l. 24. after God add)

p. 128. l. 4. after not re: but be reasonable

p. 172. l. 19. after nature add and

p. 178. l. 10. dele was

p. 189. l. 20. re: (...)

p. 198. l. 17. re:. 11.

p. 200. l. 5. for if re: of

p. 204. l. 27. after being add (l. 30. after God add)

p. 206. lin. 9. after Repentance add which is not repentance

p. 213. l. 17. after. 6. re: First

p. 219. l. 3. for in re: of

p. 223. l. 7. for service re: sacrifice

p. 229. l. 26. re: diffused


