THE SCRIPTVRES PLEA FOR MAGISTRATES. WHEREIN Is showed the unlawfulness of
resisting the lawful MAGISTRATE, under color of RELIGION.

ROMANS 13.2. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the Ordinance of
God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. OXFORD,
Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1643.

Of resisting the lawful Magistrate upon color of Religion.
IN this proposal of the point for debate, there are only two words will need
an account to be given of them: 1. What is meant by Resisting. 2. Why the word
Color is put in. For the first, Resisting, here signifies violent, forcible,
offensive resistance, fighting against, as Hesychius the best
Scripture-glossary explaines it, ((...) and (...) all one, and (...)) and the
Apostle in like manner, Romans 13.2. using (...) and (...) promiscuously for the
same, and so in other places, although it is true, it is used sometimes in a
wider sense. But that will not here be material, when we here set down
beforehand what we mean by it. For the second, the word [colour] is in the
Title added, only for this reason, (not to prejudge the Religion, which is
fought for, to be only a color, but) because it is possible for a man to
fight for Religion, and yet not upon color of Religion, to wit, in case the
Religion for which he fights be established by the Law of the Land, for then his
color for fighting may be the preservation of Law, which the Magistrate is
bound by oath to maintain, and though he fight for Religion, yet it is under
that other color: whereas he that fights upon color of Religion making that
his only pretense of fighting, is ipso facto supposed to fight for a Religion
distant or contrary to that which is established by Law, and so all pretense or
color of Law excluded, yea, and all supposition of failing in the Magistrate,
he standing for the Law present, not against it; which I desire may be the
setting of the case, to exclude the fallacy, plurium interrogationum, and to
distinguish the quarrel of Religion from that other of Law, and so to meddle
at this time only with that which is fully within the Divines Sphere, and
leave the other to some body else.

Those two terms being thus explained, and so the state of the question set,
the lawful Magistrate, and the established Law of the Kingdom on one side, and
some person or persons inferior to him, upon color of Religion, i. for some
Religion not yet established by Law, on the other side, that it should be lawful
to them to take up arms againsts him would seem not very reasonable, if he
were but a private man, abstracted from Regal power, (which ^ure does not make
it more lawful to resist him then any body else) having broken no established
Law (as is supposed in the case) for what legal accusation can lie against him
in a point wherein he has not broken the Law? But then this will be more
unreasonable, if moreover it be considered, that color of Religion is so wide
and unlimited a thing, that no man, that is never so much in the wrong in any
opinion, but thinks himself in the right (for otherwise he would not continue
in that error) and so that color will be plea equally good to all sorts of
errors as well as truths: and besides, he that has not so much Religion as to
be in an error, may yet have so much wit as to make use of that Apology for
his sedition, (to wit, color of Religion) and plead it as legally as the most
zealous professor* and consequently, if that will serve turn, who ever shall
but pretend to believe contrary to the Religion established in any Kingdom,
shall be ipso facto absolved from all bend of Allegiance in f^ro humano, and if
he will adventure the hazard of the judgment to come, shall have no restrain
laid on him by any earthly Tribunal; and so by this means already the grounds
of the dissolution of any government are laid by this one unpoliticke
principle, and the World given up to be ruled only by the religion (which is
in effect, the will) of every man; whereas before, there was a peace as well as
a Church, Policy as well as Religion, ^ power in the Magistrates hand, besides
that in every man's own breft or conscience; and yet more particularly, a
restraint for hypocrites as well as any else, ^ for pretenders of Religion,
who, if this ground would hold, were left unlimited. Where if it be interposed
that such an one that thus falliciously pretends Religion, though by this
disgu^se he escape here, yet shall surely pay for it hereafter; and that that
is sufficient, because there is no other Court, but of that searcher of hearts,
to which the hypocrite can be bound over: I answer, that although that be true,
yet is it not sufficient, because, although there be a judgment to come for
all crimes, yet it is no withstanding thought necessary to have present
iudicatures also, not to leave all offenders to terrors at such a distance, and
indeed for the continuance of the peace of communities to provide some violent
restraint at the present for those whom those greater but future determents
cannot sufficiently work on. This every man knows is the original of humane
Laws, yea, and of Dominion it self, a provision that all men will not do
their duties for love or fear of God, (it is apparent, the Jews would not
under their (...)) and therefore for good men's sakes, and for peace sake, and
for the maintaining of Communities, those superadditions have been thought
necessary, as some thorns in the hedge of Gods Law, that may pierce the hands
and sides of him that shall attempt to break over or thorough it. From whence
the conclusion will be evident, that the Rules for the preserving of government
must be such as shall have force to restrain the Atheist or the hypocrite as
well as the good Christian (which sure will less need those restraints) or
else they are utterly unsufficient to the attaining of their end, i. to the
preserving of government, peace, community, or protecting any that lives under
it: which being supposed, it will also follow, that nothing must be indulged
upon any color of Religion, (be his Religion never so true, and himself never
so sincere in it;) which will open this gap or outlet to others, that may make
the ^ll use of it. For this will be utterly destructive of the end of
government (which is, that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life, 1 Timothy 2.2.)
yea, and of government it self.

This argument being thus prosecuted and cleared, might be sufficient to
determine this whole business, were it not for one rejoinder which is
ordinarily made, the force of which is taken from that supreme care that every
man ought to have of his own soul, and consequently of the maintaining of his
Religion on which (to abstract from all possible disputes concerning the
particular truth of it, he being perhaps not acute or artist enough to uphold
it against all objecters) he is fully convinced, the health and salvation of
that wholly depends. For the maintaining of which against all the humane power
in the World, if he may not take up Arms or do any thing, he cannot see what
can be fit for him to fight for, (nothing sure being more precious then that;)
or consequently, why he may not take up that opinion of the Beyond
Sea-Anabaptists, That it is not lawful to fight at all, which if it should be
yielded to, although for the present it would produce peace, yet it would be
little for the advantage of Magistrates in the issue. To this I shall answer,
by concession of these four things: 1. That Religion is to be every man's
Supreme care, the prime Jewel in his Cabinet. 2. That it cannot, at least in
humane consideration, be expected that any man should be less careful of his
false Religion (if he be really persuaded of the truth of it) then any other is
of the true. Nay 3. that if he do not use any lawful means to defend that
false (whilst he is convinced it is the true) Religion; this is a sin of
lukewarmnesse in him, though indeed through prepossession not to open his eyes
to greater light and revelation of the truth offered to him, and perhaps
thorough slugglishnesse not to seek that light, be yet a far greater sin
in him. For though no man ought to defend the contrary to what he takes to be
truth, yet ought he to be most ready to deposit his error, not only when it
does, but also when it may appear to him to be so, and to seek to those
helps that may be isntrumental to that end. 4. That in some cases the use of
Arms is not unlawful. But then all this being thus granted, and so in effect
that all lawful means may be used for the maintaining of Religion, we must
yet secondly deny the inference of the Objection; upon this only ground,
because though Arms may lawfully be used in some cases, and Religion be
maintained by all lawful means, yet Arms are not a lawful means for this
end, and so may not be used in this case, that is by Subjects against the
lawful Magistrate in case of Religion, at least when some other Religion is by
Law established in that Kingdom. Which assertion I shall confirm only by
four Arguments: 1. Taken from the nature of Religion. 2. From examples of
Christ and Christians. 3. From the very making of Christianity, and
particularly of the Protestant doctrine. 4. From the Constitution of Kingdoms,
which being subordinate to the other three may deserve consideration, as far as
it agrees with them.

1. From the nature of Religion, which is an act of the soul, which cannot be
forced or constrained by outward violence, and therefore, it is apparent, needs
no outward defense for the maintaining of it, much less, invasion of others. A
man may be as truly religious under all the tyranny and slavery in the world,
as in the most triumphant prosperous estate. They that have power to kill the
body, are not able to commit the least rape upon the soul; they may rob me of
my life, they cannot of my Religion; the weakest creeple in the Hospital may
defy the whole Army of the Philistines in this matter. But you will ask, Is
not the outward profession and public exercise of Religion some part of it,
and that to be thus maintained, where any attempt to hinder it? To which I
answer, That the first of this, the outward Profession, can no more be hindered
then the former act of the soul, but rather may be most illustrious in time of
depression. I may confess Christ in the den of lions, in the furnace, on the
rack, on the gridiron, and when my tongue is cut out, by patient, constant
suffering in that cause. Religion is not so truly professed by endeavoring to
kill others, as by being killed patiently our selves rather then we will
renounce it. When I fight, it may be malice, revenge* some hope of gain, or
impunity at least by the present service, any one of a hundred worldly
interests that may help to when my sword for me, of most clearly a hope I may
kill and not be killed: and so all this while here is no act of confession of
Christ in thus venturing my life, although I do affirm I do this for my
Religion, because though I so affirm, men are not bound to believe me, there
being so much odds against me that I do it for somewhat else. But when I lay
down my life patiently, the sacrifice of my God, resign up all my possible
worldly interests for the retaining of my one spiritual trust, this is to the
eye of man a profession capable of no reasonable suspicion of insincerity, and
indeed none so, but this.

As for the second, the public exercise of the true Religion, it were by all
men heartily to be wished that it might be enjoyed at all times, for the
advancing of Gods glory, increase of charity, conversion of others, etc. But if
it may not be had by the use of lawful means, it will not be required of us by
God; without whose special providence it is not, that he permits us to be
forbidden that exercise, till the same providence be pleased to remove such
hinderance, and open to us a lawful way of obtaining it. The primitive
Christians secret meetings will first be imitable to us, and if ^hos;e be
obstructed also, their solitudes next; and however that design of obtaining
free exercise of our Religion, will never make any practice lawful to be used
in order to that, that before was utterly unlawful.

But are we not to take care of our children and posterity as well as of our
selves? If our Religion be now suppressed, our poor children and progeny to the
end of the world may in all probability be kept in blindness and ignorance,
and so left to the place of darkness irrecoverably. This objection stands
somewhat pathetically, and is apt to affect our bowels more then our reason;
moves out compassion first, and through those spectacles is then represented
with improvement to our judgment. But for answer to it, though the doctrine of
election of particular men, as well and as absolutely to the means as to the
end, might be (to him that acknowledges it) a sufficient amulet against this
fear, and so no need of that their jealous care for their posterity, any
farther then it is in their power to contribute toward them (which sure is no
more then to do what is lawful for them to do) yet the answer will be more
satisfactory to all that acknowledge Gods providence, however opinioned
concerning decrees, that whosoever considers himself as a man, much more as a
father of a posterity, must have many things to trust God with, and only God,
and among those nothing more then the future estate of those which are to come
from him. Yet if he be imfortunate and still unsatisfied, unless he himself
contribute somewhat to the securing of his posterity in this matter, let me
tell him there is nothing (after his prayers to God and paternall blessing on
them) so likely to entaile his Religion upon them at his sealing it by his
sufferings. This sure will be a more probable way to recommend his Religion to
them (when they shall hear and be assured by that testimony, that their fathers
thus hoped in God) then by that other so distant that they died in a rebellion
against the King, or that this Religion had been in their time turned out of
the land, had not they done something so unlawful to protect it. Besides, the
greatest prejudice which that posterity (of which we pretend such care) can
suffer by my non-resistance, is only to be brought up in a contrary Religion,
to hear that way first, but sure not to have their ears deafed against all
others when they shall be represented, nor to bring the guilt of
non-representation upon them if they be not. And if I bring forth reasonable
creatures, I hope they will, by the grace of God, make use of their reason and
his grace, to find out that truth that their souls are so much concerned ^in;
and if (through no default personal of theirs) they should miss of it, I hope
the invinciblenesse of their ignorance, and their sincere repentance for all
their sins and errors known and unknown, and their readiness to receive
the truth, if it were or might be represented to them* would be antidote
sufficient by Gods mercy in Christ to preserve them from that poison, so they
were careful according to their means of knowledge to escape all other
dangers. And all this upon supposition, but not concession, that the Religion
of him that would fight for it were the truth and only truth; whereas indeed
there is not a more suspicious mark of a false Religion, then that it is feign
to propagate it self by violence. The Turks and the Papists being the only
notable examples hitherto of that practice, till some others, directly upon
Popish principles a little varied in the application, have fallen upon the same
conclusion*

Now secondly for the examples of Christ and Christians, but first of Christ:
his example (as to this purpose) is evident in three passages (besides that
grand transcendent copy proposed from the aggregate of all his life and death,
Matthew. 11.29. learn of me, for I am meek and lowly.) The first is Luke 9.54.
the inhabitants of a Samaritan village would not receive Christ, verse. 53. upon
that James and John remembering what Elias had done in the like kind, 1 King.
18. and 2 King. 1. ask't his judgment of it, whether he would be pleased that
they should command fire to come down from heaven and consume them, as Elias
did, that is, in effect whether they should not do well to use whatever power
they had (and be confident that God would assist them in it) to the destroying
of those whoever they were (and yet that they were not their Magistrates it is
cle^r) which affronted them in the exercise of their Religion, or indeed which
would not receive Christ. To this Christ answers sternely, the words are
emphaticall, he turned (as to Peter when he gave him that check, Matthew 16.23.)
and rebuked them, (...).
and said, Ye know not what manner spirit you are of^ that is, Elias was a
Zel^t, 1 Mac. 2.58. (the full importance of which will belong to another
disquisition) and jure zelotarum, might do some what against B^^ls prophets,
which will not agree with that distant calling or profession of a disciple of
Christ or Christian, they are mistaken if they think they may do as Elias did.
From whence by the way is a prohibition fully legal put in against all
examples of the old Testament (^ any such there were) from being pleadable
amongst Christians, upon this ground of Josephus his observing that the Jews
were governed by a (...), God being as it were their King on earth for along
time, presiding immediately, and interposing by his Oracle, and other particular
directions as well as standing Law, as in that case of Phinees and Elias, etc.
by which those acts of theirs, though authorized by no settled or ordinary Law,
were yet as legal as whatever in any other commonwealth were done by
authority legally descending from the supreme Magistrate. Which whosoever shall
now apply to Christians, besides, that he professes himself an asserter of
Enthusiasmes, will meet with Christ's check ^ the Boanerges, You know not what
spirit you are of: I have not authorized you to pretend to the Spirit of Elias,
or to do what a Zelo^ among the Jews might do.

The second exemplary passage to this purpose in the story of Christ is, ^a^.
26.51. when Christ was apprehended by those tumultuous persons, at the (...)
but servants of the chief Priests and Elders (not again by any power of
lawful Magistrate) Peter drew the sword and smote off one of those servants
ears, upon that Christ's Answer is the thing to be observed, verse. 52. then
said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into ^is place, for all they that
take the sword shall perish with the sword: The speech particular to Peter, a
prime Disciple or Christian, that he having drawn the sword in defense of
Christ, and in him of Christianity it self (a more justifiable course then
ever any man since undertook under the color of Religion) most put it up
again; but the reason added of an unlimited universal obligingness to all
Christians* For all they that take the sword (^ Peter did, in defense of
Christ, etc. or else the citation had not been pertinent to him) shall perish
by the (...).) And the two parallel places which are noted i^ the margent of
our English Bibles are somewhat considerable, the first Genesis 9.6. where that
Law was given to the sons of Noah* (...) concerning the effusion of blood,
which sure was not any prohibition to legal, though capital punishments of
Malefactors (but rather the investing the Magistrate with that power of the
sword) and yet is by Christ urged as a prohibition to Saint Peter, signifying
that effusion of blood by him in that case to be utterly illegal, and against
the intention of that old Law not abrogated, it seems by Christ. The other
parallel place is, Revel. 13.10 where immediately upon the repeating of those
words, He that kills with the sword shall be killed with the sword, is
subjoyned, Here is the patience and faith of the Saints: 1. Christian Martyrs,
verse. 7. whose faith it seems and patience must go together, which sure is
most irreconcilable with forcible resistance.

The third exemplary passage of Christ was in his suffering, wherein many
particular circumstances might be observed, especially his answer to Pilate,
Jo^ 19.11. in acknowledgement of his legal power given him from above. Be all
that I shall observe is only in the general, That he that had so many legions
of Angels, certainly sufficient to defend him and invade his enemies
(whatsoever will be thought of the Christians strength in Tertullians time to
have done so too, of which more anon) did yet without the least resistance give
himself up to suffer death. And if it should be objected, that this was to
accomplish what God had decreed (ought not Christ to suffer these things, and
thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer) and in obedience to
that decree, not as matter of example to us, or of intimation, that it had not
been lawful for him to have done otherwise. To this I answer, That as Christ
was decreed to that death, and non-resistance, so are Christians (if Saint Paul
may be believed) predestined to be conformable to the Image of his Son,
Romans 8. that is, to that pattern of his in suffering, not fighting for Religion;
and that revelation of Gods will in that decree being supposed, it will follow,
That though Christ might have lawfully done otherwise, yet we Christians now
may not, especially being commanded to learn of him particularly his meekness;
i. especially that Lamb-like quality of the Lamb of God in his sufferings,
Isai. 53.7. So much for the examples of Christ.

Now for the like of Christians, it will be needless to mention any other then
those of whom Tertullian and Saint Cyprian speak, being so perfectly home to
the purpose, Tertul. in Apol. c. 37. and his book, ad Scapulam, wholly to this
purpose: and Saint Cyprian in his book against Demetrianus, etc. the sum of
which is this, That the Christians of that age had strength sufficient either
to have resisted or avenged themselves upon their ^eathen persecuting
Governors, but in obedience to the Laws of Christ, chose rather to die then
do so. The several testimonies (of which this is the Abstract) being so fully
produced by many and known by all, it will be more to purpose to vindicate
them from all exceptions, and intercept all evasions which the wit of this last
year (beyond all that any former age pretended to) has invented to evacuate
those testimonies, witness Goodwins Amicaval^eri^, p. 230 etc. and this I
shall take leave to do at large, because it is said, many have been satisfied
in the lawfulness of their present course by those Answers and Objections
which that book has helped them to.

1. It is objected, the father (Tertullian^ mig^^ (...) mistaken in making the
estimate of the strength of Christians in (...) strength of them that were to
oppose them. This is in civil terms, to (...) Tertullians wrote he knew not
what, or at the softest, he might be ignorant of what he affirms he knew, and
I am confident was more likely to know, living thing their the objecter now,
seeing or conjecturing at the distance of so many hundred years, who has not
the least authority (which must be the Judge in matter of fact) on his side
against so distinct and clear affirmation, not only of Tertullian in several
places (and that in an apology against the Gentiles, who could and would
certainly have tript him in so manifest a falsehood, if it had been such; and
though the negative Argument be not fully convincing, that they did not thus
trip him, because we do not hear or read they did, yet will this be of as much
force as any he has to the contrary: This certainly, the writing it to the
Gentiles, will be able to conclude, that Tertullian had been very imprudent
and treacherous to his own cause to have affirmed a thing in defense of it,
which his adversaries could so manifestly have proved a falsity, if it were not
so as he affirmed) but of Cyprian also, who lived about the same time, and no
writer of that age or since produced (I doubt not but I may say, producible) to
the contrary.

Of the proofs that are offered to make it appear possible and probable that
Tertullian should be so mistaken, the first is, Because his was no point of
faith, etc. (...) therefore a devout father might fall under ^ misprision
herein. I grant he might, but that does not prove he did, no nor that it is
probable he should be a more incompetent judge in such a matter, then he that
now undertakes to control him: Nay sure, less reason is there to deny the
authority of the ancients in matters of fact (which if they were not evident to
them, must needs be much less evident to us, who have no means to know any
thing of them but their relations, no^ cause to suspect such relations, but
either by some impossibility in the things themselves which is not here
pretended, or by some other, as authentic relation contradicting it, which is
as little pretended) then of faith, the ground of which being only the written
word of God, is common with them to us, and therefore may enable us to judge
whether that which they affirm to be matter of faith be so indeed, to be found
really in that sacred Writ from whence they pretend to fetch it.

And whereas it is farther added, That no rule of charity or reason binds us
to believe another in any thing which belongs to the art or profession of
another, and wherein himself is little versed or exercised. I answer, that this
saying thus applied will take away the authority of a very great part of those
Histories which no body yet has questioned. If it were spoken of Doctrines, it
might hold, and sure to that belongs the axiom quoted, Vnicuique in art sua
credendum est; but in narrations it is the unreasonablest thing in the world to
require the Narrator to be of that profession of which he relates the fact, for
then no man must adventure to write a Kings life but a King; and if Mr. M. Mr.
A. or Mr. S. being Ministers of the Word, shall write their ^^tters concerning
the Parliaments victory at Keinton, and relate the number of the stain on that
side so far inferior to those on the Kings, we must now upon this admonition
retract that belief we then allowed them, and begin now (though too late) to
question whether it were indeed a victory or no, which caused such solemn
thanksgiving in this City. But then secondly, why this Relation should so
wholly belong to the profession of another: i. not to Tertullians, I cannot yet
discern. For the maine of Tertullians testimony was, That the Christians chose
rather to suffer then to resist, though they were able, because Christian
Religion taught the one, and forbad the other: and this sure was not without
the sphere of the divine: but for their strength to resist, depending on the
number of Christians, not as even ballancing the heathens in the Empire, but as
very considerable and able to raise an army, if they would make head. I doubt
not but Tertullian, a Presbyter, that now labored in converting and conforming
Christians, and was not always in his study, nay, who had lately been a
Lawyer, and so not unacquainted with the public, might know and relate with
far better authority then any who has dared now to contradict him. For, for
the art of ballancing the power of parties in a Kingdom, and grounds of precise
determination of such differences (which as the Objecter denies Tertullian, so
he is unwilling to yield to the Statesman himself; you shall see anon that we
have no need to make Tertullian master of it, his relation will stand unmoved
without it.

The second proof to blast Tertullians relation, is the ordinary one in
fashion now adays, if any man differs in opinion from us, presently to examine
his whole life, and if eve^ he did or spoke any thing unjustifiable, lay that
vehemently to his charge, and by that defame him, and then we may spare the
pains of answering his reasons, disproving his assertion, he once lied or
sinned, and therefore it is ridiculous to expect any truth from him. The
Argument is this, He might mistake and miscarry in this, for not long after he
miscarried so grievously, as to turn Montanist, who called himself the holy
Ghost, etc. Just as if I should resolve to believe no relation of any Minister
(present in either of the Armies) of the strength of that Army, until I had
examined, and were assured that he were not a Chiliast, an Arian, nor guilty of
any other Heresy condemned by the Church: Yea and more, till I had some degree
of assurance that he never would be such. Or as if I should resolve this man
knew no Logic, because in this period he offends so much against Grammar in
these words [to turn Montanist, who called himself the holy Ghost] where the
relative [who] has certainly no antecedent. Tertullian cannot, for he called
not himself the holy Ghost (but only cited that style so ordinary now adays
[ nos spirituales] and all others [ animales psychici] and Montanist cannot,
unless as once Areopagi signified the Areopagites, Surect.
so now by way of compensation, Montanist must pass for Montanus, for he it
was that called himself the holy Ghost, not all or any of his followers. This
way of concluding, from a slip in Grammar, an ignorance in Logic, especially
being backed with the suffrage of so many concluding Arguments) will be as fair
Logical proceeding, as to infer, because Tertullian, an afterward turned
Montanist, therefore then he spoke he knew not what. But then Saint Cyprian was
no Montanist, and yet he affirmed the same that Tertullian does, contra
Demetrian: As for the approving of dreams and furious fancies for true
prophecies (which is added to be revenged on Tertullian for contradicting this
Objecter) I confess I excuse not him, but wish we might learn any thing of
him rather then that. But I hope the narration we have now in hand was neither
Maximilla's nor Prisca's dreams. If it was a fancy, it was quite contrary to a
furious one. And for the close of this Argument, wherein the w^^ning ^^ given
as it were from Heaven, how unsafe and dangerous it is to build on the
authority of men, as I desire the Reader may take it home with him, and from
thence resolve to believe no longer any thing upon this Objecters authority,
so denudats of all reason: so I do not yet see, why he that once erred must
never be allowed to speak truth, the making of true narrations being competible
with the greatest heresy in the world.

The third Argument against Tertullians testimony, is an observation of (...)
that there is a pronenesse of inclination in much devotion in persons devoutly
given to overvalue the works and piety of other men. To which my only answer
shall be, that yet I hope it is not observed that devout men are so strongly
inclined to tell plain lies, to this end that they may make themselves
over-valued by others. This must be Tertullians infirmity (if the objecter
guess aright) being a Christian himself, and in his apology laboring to
raise an high opinion of Christians in the Gentiles to whom he writes, to which
purpose if he should forge falsities, I must confess it were a shrewd
weakness, very ill becoming devotion, whatever the practice of later times
may say in excuse of it.

The fourth proof is from a second observation, that in the pious and orthodox
Fathers themselves there are some touches, and streines, some fibrae of the
root of bitterness which afterward grow rank in the times of popery, etc. The
Answ. All that I can collect from hence toward the conclusion designed, is that
this objecters sense is, that, for Tertullian to say there were Christians
enough in the Roman Empire to work revenge on their oppressors, was a spice of
popery; and so there is one new piece of popery more added, to the many which
this age has concluded under that title above the inventory of the Trent
catechism. And so now to debate this any further, or profess my self to
opine as Tertullian did, is to acknowledge my self popish, and that is as bad
as praelaticall: and so from henceforth all my arguments will but pass for
temptations, which none but carnal men must submit to, be they never so
demonstrative. Yet must I have leave to wonder how in the close of this Section
these words [ the sounder and more considerate knowledge of these latter times]
can have any reference to the point in hand. For certainly, for the strength of
the then Christian party, our knowledge in these latter times cannot be sounder
or more considerate then theirs that then lived amongst them; or if it be, the
words [ latter times] will be improper, for sure it will be affirmed only of
that time wherein Mr. J.G. wrote this part of this book* for I am confident he
was the first that ever revealed this act of more considerate knowledge to the
world.

The fifth and last proof is, That whatever their number was, yet it is no
ways likely they should be suffered to have any arms, etc. To which, and to
all the prudentiall state motives whereon it is grounded, (and so to all that
Section) I shall return no answer, but the very words of Tertullian, which if
all put together they do not defend their author from all their assaults,
neither will I believe the Christians strength was sufficient to buckle with
their adversaries. His words are plain: first, if we would hosts exerto^
agere, deal like professed enemies, desiisset nobis vis numerorum and copiarum?
should we have wanted force of numbers? ( i. men) or armed soldiers (for so
sure copiae signifies.) Secondly, he says as plainly, Castella vestra, castra
^p^e vimus, we have filled your Castles and Camps (there sure they were armed;
and so the Thebaean Legion, which yielded themselves to the Emperors butchery,
wanted neither number nor Arms to have resisted.) Thirdly, he says, Cui bell^
(...) idonei? what war had we not been fit for? ( etiam impares copi^, though
we had not had so many armed men as they) qui tam libenter trucidam^r. Their
despising of death, (nay, gladness to die) might have put them upon any hazard
unarmed, and he professes the only thing that kept them from resisting, was
the Doctrine which they had learnt, that it was more lawful to be killed then to
kill. Fourthly, he says, They had a way of revenge without Arms, to wit, by
departing from them, by that secession to have brought envy upon them (as for
example upon dislike of the present state, to have gone to New England, etc. to
raise an odium upon the Old) but this they would not be so malicious is to do
neither: nay, besides amissio tot civium ip^a destitutione puniisset, the loss
of so many Citizens would have been a punishment by making them less able to
resist other enemies; plures hosts quam cives usque remansi^ent, there would
have been a greater number of enemies, then there would have been Citizens
remaining. Fifthly, to put all beyond exception, he puts them in mind how one
night with a few firebrands they might have wrought their revenge, if it were
lawful for them to repay evil with evil. This one last particular being
considered, is so full a demonstration of the truth now in debate, that
supposing there were but one Christian at liberty to use that one firebrand,
there can be longer doubt but that there was sufficient strength to work their
revenge, if their Religion would have permitted them to do so. And if their
Religion (as was said out of him) were the only restraint, then certainly,
their weakness was not. Nay, though they should after all this (by a morally
impossible supposition) be supposed weak* yet if their Religion did truly
restrain them, as he professes it did, this were abundantly sufficient to
decide the controversy betwixt us and the Objecter.

Having proceeded thus far in answer to the several exceptions against the
truth of Tertullians assertion concerning the strength of those Christians, I
am invited farther by a second proffer of the Objecter to make appear, that
although Tertullians assertion should be supposed true, yet it were
unsufficient, it would not reach the question or case in hand. This certainly
is strange at first sight, the case in hand being, Whether the reason of their
non-resistance were their want of strength. Which in all reason must be
determined negatively, when once these two things are supposed; first, that
they had strength; secondly, that the command of Christ, or making of
Christianity was the cause of their non-resistance, and not want of strength.
But there is no truth so evident, but the cunning of such a crafts-master will
be able to transform, both from evidence and truth, and therefore (though in
all justice a man might vow never to have commerce with such a man more, that
should undertake thus to master his understanding, that he should believe and
not believe the same thing, yield the want of strength to be the cause, at the
very time when he acknowledges or supposes, first, no want of strength,
secondly, somewhat else, to wit, the command of Christ to be the cause) yet I
shall (to exercise that Christian meekness which I desire to assert by my
actions as well as words) wait on this great artificer to the second part of
his answer. The sum of which, as he first sets it is this, that supposing the
Father spoke truth concerning their strength* yet on some considerations he
mentions, It had been in those that were called to suffer both want of wisdom
in respect of themselves, and of charity in respect of others, if they should
have made the least resistance. To which my only answer shall be to beseech
him to consider, that this is part of Tertullians testimony, that the thing
that restrained them was (not this wisdom but) the doctrine of their Christ;
concluding it more lawful to be killed then to kill, and utterly unlawful to
repay evil for evil. And as for charity to others, I humbly wish that were,
or may yet be considered, how much burden, etc. this resistance (of which he
is the professed abetter) has brought on others who are not parties on either
side, nor, I hope, ill Christians, if their only punishable crime be, making
conscience of non-resistance.

To the next Section, in answer to a supposed reply, where he says, That it is
not probable they had any sufficiency of strength. I answer, that I cannot be
so tame as thus to be caught, or so wild as to imagine that improbable, at a
time when Tertullians testimony is supposed to be true (as now it is supposed)
the special part of which testimony is yielded to be that they had sufficient
strength. And where he adds 2. that it was not necessary they should be of one
mind and judgment touching this sufficiency, etc. I answer, that we do not
assert any such necessity, nor does our cause any way incline us to it, or want
that refuge. For sure we affirm not that they did actually resist (to which
only* that concurrence would have been necessary) but only that they would
not though they were able, and to the evidencing of that, the concurrence of
judgment you speak of, is not material, for if they that did so think of
their strength, were upon grounds of Christian patience and obedience, as far
from doing or attempting it, as any other; these men would certainly have
continued in the same obedience, though all the world had concurred with them
in the opinion of their sufficiency. For, to profess Christian meekness
first, and then upon any supervenient occurrence to be ready for resistance,
though it might be a character of the temporary (that I say not hypocritical)
subjection of our days, yet must not we be so groundlesly uncharitable as to
affix it on those Christians; and though the objecter should renounce his
present supposition, and again contend that Tertullian lied, and so divest him
of all authority as a father, of common honesty as a relater, yet sure he will
not be so severe to deny him so much of an ordinary rhetor, as to make that an
ingredient in his Apology for Christians, which were the highest piece of an
accusation. Grant but Tertullian to have any skill in any of his professions,
suppose him but Orator, if not a Divine, a tolerable pleader, if not a
tolerable man, allow him but skill at the Deske, (his first Trade, before he
was a Christian) the reputation of a little el^quence, though no sincerity, and
his very pleadings will be argumentative, though his words may not.

But it is added in the third place, that having no invitation, countenance, or
command from any authority, etc. their (...) was differing from ours. To which
I answer again, 1: That it was not still the want of such command or
invitation, that restrained them, but the contrary command of Christ as has
been clear; but then secondly, I pray let me ask a question as of one which
I will in reason suppose not to be unacquainted with the sense of Ju^ius
Brutus, and Buchanan, and it is odely this whether, if all temporal
Magistrates neglect the work of reformation, the Ministers may not and ought
not to attempt it, if they can hope to prevail. If so, then though the case be
not just the same now and then, yet the difference is not material or (...),
for then sure Ministers there would have been to invite, if that had (...) the
Christian way.

But when it is added within there line^, that we are invited, etc. by as great
and as lawful an authority as this State has any. I must confess I had
thought that the King and has Houses had been a greater authority; ^nlesse
the meaning be not simply, but ad hoc, or great and as lawful an authority as
this State has any, to do what is now do^, and then sure it shall be granted
by me, who profess my self to suppose it impossible that any command given to
this purpose should be lawful, or able to secure any from that sentence of S.
Paul's, They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Yet once more,
it is possible that the Author, by this State may mean a republique, which
though it be a word of some signification in some other Countries, yet that our
Laws acknowledge any such here* I have not yet been taught, nor sure can any
part of this Kingdom, without the King be capeable of this Title, till we have
molded a new form of government, and (...) laws, as the model of that; for
undoubtedly the old ones are not acquinted with any such. But that I will hope
is not the meaning, because it is added that inferior Magistrates, etc. which
seems to acknowledge that the Parliament without the King are but inferior
Magistrates. Of the agreeableness of that Title of Magistrates and Rulers, to
that body without the head, I purpose not to speak; only to that which is
added, that they should be obeyed as well as Kings, I answer, without canvasing
of the place in S. Peter, which others have done) that if they are to be
obeyed, but as well as Kings, then, 1. The King that commands not to do it, is
to be obeyed as well as they. 2. Not they against the King, for that the
inferiority implies. An inferior Magistrate, in that that it lawful, and
within his Commission, and not thwarted by a superior, is to be obeyed as well
as if he were superior in that, or as well as the superior in any thing else,
but sure not to the despising of the superiors lawful commands, when they do
interpose, for that were more then as well. When the King commands that which
God and the Law does not forbid, it may be said, that his commands are to be
obeyed as well as Gods, which the Apostle intimates, when he says, you must be
subject for conscience sake; and the ground of this truth is, because indeed
God the supreme, commands that subjection to the King in such matters. But
sure for all this the King is not to be obeyed against God, or where any
countermand of his has intervened, for this were in S. Peter's phrase to obey
men (not as well, but rather than God. Thus is it in that other case, the
inferior is to be obeyed as well as the superior (in things lawful and not
contradictory to the Superiors commands) upon that ground of necessity of
obedience to the Superior, from whom he has his Commission, and as Saint
Peter says, (...), is sent of him, (...) of, on by that (...) supereminent
person, the King; but sure this holds not against the superior, a^ in the
other case it did not. 3. Not they when they command to take up Arms against
him whom S. Paul bids me not resist upon of damnation, and by my oath of
Allegiance (if it were otherwise lawful) I have bound my self that I will
not. Whereupon it is observable, that the ass^ of this war, are now brought
to undertake, that damnation, or (...) shall not signify damnation (poor men,
what a weak thread does the (...), that is just over their souls? and what a
sad condition would it be, (...) that dies a confident Martyr in this war,
damnation at the day of (...) prove to signify damnation?) but some temporary
mulct; and yet withal that this war is not against the King (when yet that
other against the Earl of Essex his Army, is not doubted to be against the
Parliament) which two so (...), and yet distant hold (for if it be not against
the King, what need of (...) other evasion, from the damnation that belongs to
resisters, or if resister^ still (...) it away so easily, why may not War be
avowd against the King, by any that will adventure his wrath? do sure signify
men's consciences to be strangely grounded, and themselves very groundlesly
confident, which are satisfied upon no better principles, and whose practices
are capeable of no better security.

Upon these grounds thus laid, of obedience due to inferiors as well as
superiors (supreme it should be, for so (...) must here signify, and I hope
that our King amongst us is such) Magistrates, the objecter puts a case, that
the inferior Governor requires that which is only finest, etc. as to do our
best to defend our selves against those that contrary to law and conscience
assault us, the superior that which is contrary to both, viz. to fit still,
etc. In this case he resolves it is most clear on his side, for (whether the
lawfulness or necessity he intimates not of) resistance against the superior.
To this I answer, that it is hard to believe that the objecter did not
purposely intend to deceive his Reader by that phrase [ only honest, etc.] For
that is a very doubtful sense, it may signify, that nothing else were honest,
and then it is in that sense apparently false, for if it were honest to take up
Arms against a King, yet sure may not taking up Arms be honest too; for
(whatever that crime of neutrality signify in these days) it may be lawful
for a man to suffer injury, to suffer himself to be defrauded (and that by a
King as well as by an equal) 1 Cor. 6.7. I hope resistance, though it have
lately commenced, and taken upon it the degree of virtue, yet has not turned
Projector, got the monopoly of virtue and honesty into its hand, that it
should engrosse and enclose that title, and there be no other virtue or honesty
besides this; yet would the affirmations of some out of no meaner place then
the Pulpit, [that all (...) that are for the King at this time are Atheists or
Papists] conclude and persuade thus much. But I would feign believe that the
meaning of the phrase [ only honest, etc.] is, [no more then honest] i. not
necessary. But if that be it, then sure the superior Governor may deserve to
be obeyed in forbidding it, as well as the inferior in commanding: For it will
not follow in that case that the King commands somewhat contrary to the Law of
God and nature, but only somewhat contrary to something which was agreeable,
i. not against the Law of God and nature, i. prohibits a thing lawful not
necessary, as the other is supposed to command a thing lawful, not necessary:
which sure were as free for him to do, as for the inferior, supposing, as the
objecter supposes, that the command of God indifferently extends it for
obedience to either, in things that are lawful. Hence it appears that in the
case here put, the command of the Superior is falsely affirmed to be an
unlawful command* (for them the matter of the inferiors command must be
supposed not only honest but necessary) and if it be a lawful one, it may and
will then make void that obligation for that particular, which is supposed by
the Law of God to lie on us, to obey the inferior in that which is lawful.
The short is, if that which is here spoken of, be in it self necessary, we
must do it, as in spite of all countermands of the superior, so without all
commands or invitations of the inferior Magistrate; but if it be not necessary
in it self, neither will the commands of (...) inferior make it necessary to
any who stands prohibited by a superior.

In the fourth Section the object^ offers at a reason, why those ancient
Christians (supposing strength in them) should rather patiently suffer, because
before their conversion they had consented to the Emperors power, whereby
those Edicts were made for the murdering of Christians, etc. To which I
answer, that it is ridiculous to seek out or impose upon the Reader probable
or possible reasons for their non-resistance, when Tertullian in their name
specifies the true only reason, the Gospel doctrine of Christian patience and
obedience. But for the particular of their consent, much might be added, to
show the vanity of that plea, if that were tanti, or pertinent. I shall only
say, that if the Emperor legally murdered Christians, then their consent to
that Law or to the power of the Emperor who made it would not bind or dispense
with them to commit any thing necessary or otherwise commanded by any greater
power; for if I swear to do so I must break my oath, non-obs^an^e what is
concluded from Ps. 15* 4. And if it were not otherwise necessary or commanded
by greater power, then neither is resistance now. And then the Kings
prohibition will as much restrain me in any thing not necessary, as their
heathenish consent could be supposed to restrain them then. Nay he that makes
that consent a nullity (as this objecter in fine does) what reason can he
^ender why he that gave that consent, might not plead that nullity, for such
(though carnal) advantages as life is, if it could make good his pleading, and
no other restraint lie on him, but only that null-consent?

For the fifth Section, How that may be lawful [for an entire body to do which
may not be lawful for a part] and so for us now though not for thee? I answer,
That if the phrase [entire body] signify the head and members too, then the
period is true; if not, then the whole Section is fallacious: for it follows
not, that though the representative body without the head is more, then a party
in the Empire, without the representation of the rest, therefore the first may
resist forcibly, though the second should not: for he that from Saint PAVL
denies resistance of subjects indefinitely to Kings, will not be moved from
that hold* by discerning some other slight differences between subjects,
unless they may appear such that on one side they may authorize resistance.
But then secondly, If the Doctrine of Christian patience, etc. were the cause
of Non-resistance, then sure was not this other consideration wherein they
differ from us, the cause of it.

Well, having gone thus far, in attendance on this Objecter, and to exercise
that patience, which we so much desire to persuade: there is yet the greatest
fort behind unvanquished, erected in the sixth Section, and rescued from all
supposed assailants in six particulars following, set up like so many
fortresses about it. The sum of it is (for I would not be bound to recite
what every one may read in the printed Book) that if those Primitive Christians
had strength, and might lawfully have resisted, (by the way Tertullian only
affirms the first, and is so far from supposing, that he absolutely denies the
second) yet might God hide this liberty from them; and so his after
dispensations did require that be should hide it from them, and yet manifest it
to us: and these dispensations he specifies to be Gods counsel of Antichrists
coming into the world then, and of his being destroyed and cast out now. The
hiding of this truth of subjects power and right to resist their Superiors,
being necessary to help Antichrist up to his throne. And the commonalty of
Christians doing contrary to the will of their Superiors, being the men that
must have the principal hand in executing Gods judgments upon the Whore*
Revel. 18.4.5.6.9. that is, in the pulling him down.

To this whole Discourse (the first I am confident that ever was written on
this Subject) I must answer by degrees, (that I may not omit any thing that is
added for proof or explication by the Author) and first, I must desire the
word ^ay or might [may hide] may be changed into plain intelligible sense. Say,
did God hide the liberty of resistance from those Primitive Christians or no?
If he did not, then away with this whole Section, and particularly that
affirmation, Page ^0. that Gods dispensations did r^quire that it should be hid
from them: but if God did indeed hide it: then first, this is more then a
supposition, it is a plain concession that those Christians Tertullian speaks
of might not lawfully have re^isted, though they had had strength (which was so
long denied) for the light being hidden, they must have done it without faith,
or against conscience, yea, and against Gods determinate counsel, (who, the
Objecter says, had great causes ^o hide it, of which one sure must be, that it
should not be used. 2. Here is a ^reat secret of new Divinity, that God hides
truths (not as Christ spoke in para^les, because they seeing see not, Mat.
13.13. but) on purpose to help Antichrist ^o his throne. (of which more anon)
As for that instance of those that eat ^erbs, I pray consider, whether that be
pertinent to prove that God purposely hides truths from us, or particularly
this truth in hand. For sure that liberty God had from none in the Apostles
time; for the preaching of the Gospel manifested the lawfulness of meats as
well as herbs, only some saw not, or considered not that that was manifested,
and thinking some old legal obligation (as others did circumcision) to lie
still on them, submitted to it out of piety. Now apply this to the point in
hand. Certainly the liberty of forcible resistance against Superiors (though
it should be granted) would never be found of this kind, a liberty brought
into the world by Christ, which before had not been there. If he shall affirm
it was, (as he must if that instance of eating be pertinent) though by the
concession of the latter part, he must disclaim all his former old Testam.
pleas for resistance, from the people about Jonathan, from David, and from
E^isha, yet will he never give any probable appearance for the affirmation in
the first part, that Christ gave any such new before-unrevealed liberty: but
rather, if any such liberty before there were, it was undoubtedly taken away by
Christ, from whose example and precepts it was that those Primitive Christians,
and we also, dare not make use of that supposed liberty. The only thing I can
imagine possible to be replied, is that, though the comparison hold not
exactly, yet it may hold in this, that as that liberty of eating was hid to
some (it matters not by whom, or how) so this of resisting to others. To which
I return, that then it is confessed that this instance does only illustrate the
Objecters meaning, but not so much as probably confirm his assertion: and then
I am sorry I have considered it so long, and therefore to bring the point to an
issue, I must thirdly ask, Where this liberty, or the authority for this
liberty was, when it was thus hid. Was it in the old Testament? Though it
should be there, as it is not, yet it might be taken away in the New, (as those
things which in the old Testament, or the law of nature, are nearest to giving
of that liberty, are absolutely reformed by Christ's Doctrine and practice) and
then that were good for nothing. Was it in the new? Then deal plainly, show
the place in the new Testament which gives that liberty, and is now found out
by posterity, though hidden to them. Sure we have found out no new Scripture,
to them unknown (the Nazarites Gospel though it rehearse some speeches of
Christ no^ in our Canon, yet is not produced for any of this nature: that
famous one which it fathers on our Savior, Nunquam laeti sitis n^si cum
fratr^m in charitate vid^ritis, is of another stamp, I would to God this
Apocryphal Precept might be canonical among us) and for any place of the
known Canon misunderstood by them, and now clearly unclouded and revealed to us
in a right understanding, which inforces this, I must be so charitable to the
Objecter, as to think that if he had discerned any such, he would not have
failed to have showed it us, (as well as his interpretations of Rom 13. and
Revel 17.17.) if it were but to leave us unex^usable for not being his
Proselytes. Beyond these several ways of revelation, if posterity have had
any other (or indeed any but that of understanding of Scripture, by Scripture
light, or assistance of Gods Spirit, which was not before understood) from
whence to fetch a liberty which is not in the old Bible, or is denied in the
New, this is it which we desire so to warn men of under the name of
Enthusiasme, which is hardly ever distinguishable from a demure frenzy, and I
must call it now the dream of the dreamers, Jude 8. that despise dominion,
speak evil of dignities, but far from divine revelation. And yet that this is
the thing that this Objecter has an eye to, (and not the understanding of
Scripture more clearly then before) may appear, in that he affirms this truth
hid from their teachers, (though not from all without exception) who yet if it
were hid in the Scripture, were of all others most unlikely not to find it. As
for that offer of proof, that this truth might lie hid, because there was no
occasion of studying it: I answer, that in Tertul. days when there was
occasion to study it, (as great as ever can arise any, because the persecutions
then, were as heavy persecutions) we may by that argument think they would
have searched into it, at lest the light then would not in ordinary account have
proved more dim, as he says it did, if the Scripture were the candlestick
where this light was held out. That which he adds in the next place, of the
spirit of courage, patience and constancy which was by God powered out on the
Church in those days, and so made mar^yrdome seem a desirable thing to them,
is more like a reason indeed of their not inquiring into this liberty: and
herein, I must acknowledge the ingenuity of the Objecter, or the power of truth
which extorted this reason from him, so little to the advantage of his cause,
and so much of ours. For this is certainly the bottom of the business, the
want of Christian courage, patience, etc. (for that kind of courage is not in
fighting, but suffering) has helped us of this last age to that [dream, not]
revelation of liberty, which was never heard of among the ancients. But by the
way, it seems by the Objecter that now martyrdom is no desirable thing, nor
taking up Christ's Cross, nor following of him. We are resolved to have no more
to do with martyrdom, think that the thousand years for the Saints to reign
on earth are now at hand, and so suffering, or conformity to the image of
Christ, no longer the thing we are predestined to, we must set up a new trade
of fighting, destroying, resisting, rebelling, leave enduring to those
Christians which were furnished with extraordinary strength from heaven. Which
are the Objecters words of the Primitive Christians, which, says he, kept them
from studying cases and questions about lawfulness of escaping, (which word
mere shame had put in, ^u^^erly impertinently, in stead of resisting) I
confess, I had thought that our Q. Mary Martyes had had this strength from
heaven too; and that it was not like miracles, an extraordinary gift only for
the infancy of the Church: but now it seems we must expect to see no more
Martyrs, till we can remove mountains again: This Objecter, it is clear, is so
resolved against it at this time, and that his actions, as well as writings,
will be ready to testify. For my own part, I trust I shall be as ready to
oppose the one, as I am to con^u^e the other, and to think nothing more
Christian still, then to be crucified with my Christ, and if I might choose the
Article of Christian Doctrine which I should most desire to seal with my
blood, I think it would be that of meekness, patience, non resistance,
peaceablenesse, charity, which I conceive Christ has been so p^ssionately
earnest to recommend unto me, as most diametrically opposite to the most
unchristian damning sins of pride, ambition, malice, rebellion, unquietness,
uncontentedness^, etc.

Fourthly, For that whole discourse about Antichrist there must many things be
returned. 1. That it is not tolerable in a Christian to affirm that God
purposely hid truths, that Antichrist might come into the world; this so harsh
sense the objector first disguises in another phrase, that God by special
dispensation suffered him to make many truths his footstool, but indeed that
reaches not home to the business undertaken to be proved, for it follows not
thence, that this of resisting superiors was one of those tru^hs, if it were,
then God suffered him to make use of it, which he could not but by its being
made known, whereas he supposes it was then hid, if he mean Antichrist hid it,
and so made the holding it, his footstool. Then 1. it was not God that hid it,
as before he said, but Antichrist 2. It had then been manifest before, use then
began to be hid, when there was most occasion to use it, which before he made
improbable. If I were put upon the rack I could not give a rational account of
those words of the objector last recited, or such as may but be consonant to
his present undertakings: that which follows is more clear that God caused a
dead sleep to fall upon those truths: If he did, I wonder who first raised them
out of that dead sleep Jun. Brutus or Buchan. or M Goodwin? but still it seems
God did on purpose hide truths in favor and asistance to Antichrist to help
him into the world, and this, not like the Spirit of slumber sent on men for
their punishment, but on divine truths which sure had not deserved it, yet more
particularly that the doctrine of liberty to resist superiors should be so
opposite in a special manner to Antichrist, that it was fain to be laid asleep
to give him passage into his throne, seems very strange to me. 1. Because one
piece of Antichrists pride is to exalt himself above all that is called God
which is mostly interpreted Kings, and if rightly, then they that do so
enhaunce the power of the people; as to make the King Singulis minorem, and
loose the rains of obedience so far as to permit resistance: will I fear discern
some part of the mark of the Beast upon their own breasts. 2. Because the (...),
2 These. 2* 6. and (...), v. 7. that hindered, or let Antichrist, and was like to
do so still, till he were taken out of the way, was by the Fathers commonly
resolved to be the Roman empire or imperial Sovereignty of Rome, see Tert.
Dear see 24. Ambr. com. in 2. These. Hier. qu. 11. ad Algas* Chrysostom. in 2 These.
Cry. Hier. catech. i e. Aug. de civ. Dei, l. 20. c. 19. Lact l* 7. c. 25 Oecum.
in ^oc. and ib. S^ver. and Genesis and therefore on the sacking of Rome by
Alaricus the Goth S. Ierom presently expected that Antichrist should come, and
in his book ad Ageruchiam de mon^gam: wonders that any one would think of
marrying at that time, hence, have learned men observed, was that custom in
the most ancient times to pray in their Lyturgies for the lasting of the Roman
empire, that so Antichrist might be long a coming, Tert. Apol. c. 33. ad Scap.
c. 2. From whence though nothing else can be demonstratively inferred yet this
certainly may: that in those many Fathers opinion the power of Kings continuing
entire, was not like to help Antichrist in, nor consequently the bringing down
that power by the revelation of the doctrine of resistance, like to cause an
abortion in Antichrists birth, or now tend to the casting him out of the world.

As for the evidence of that Revelation rule that the communality in opposition
to their Kings, must have the great stroke in executing Gods judgment on
Antichrist proved Revel. 18.4.6.9. I must answer, 5. That I shall never wonder
enough at the power of Prejudice evidenced in this Objecter, by what he has
put together to this purpose page 32. To prove that the people contrary to
their Kings shall destroy Antichrist, this is thought by him sufficient
evidence, that the people are commanded to go out of her, verse. 4. when verse.
9. it follows that the Kings of the earth shall bewail her, and lament for
her: The concludingnesse of the argument I shall not insist on, but only look
forward to another place which he cites immediately Revel. 17.17. Where the ten
Kings are said to hate the whore and make her desolate. Now the word Kings in
this last place signifies, says the Objecter, not the persons of Kings but
their states and Kingdoms, and to this purpose proofs are produced, but 1. I
beseech him to deal ingenuously: does the word King ever signify the kingdom
opposed to the King, 1. Any part of the Kingdom excluding the King; but then 2.
See the mystery of prejudice which I mentioned where it is for the Objecters
turn Revel. 18. The Kings of the earth must signify their persons in
opposition to their people, but where it is not for his turn Revel. 17. There
the word Kings must signify the people or any but the King: Would not the
spirit of meekness have easily compounded this business, and have given the
word (Kings) leave in both places to signify both their persons and their
Realms, and so have reconciled the places that some Kings with their Kingdoms
should bewail her, and some again hate her, they bewail her, that continued
with her till her destruction, when they see the smoke of her burning 18.9. and
others hate her who had once tasted of her filthiness, and repented and left
her before, this were very agreeable to those texts, if we had not peremptorily
resolved to fetch some other sense out of them. 3. That first place alone by it
self concludes only thus much that good men come (or are exhorted to come) out
from Antichrist, and avenge the whore, and earthly men that have love to her,
bewail her, but not that either the first are all common people (for sure Kings
may be called Gods people, or be in that number) or the second none but Kings,
as for the proof that those people, verse. 4. are the subjects of those kings
verse 9. Because they are such as come out of Babylon, sure that is very weak,
for Babylon being the province of the whore, there may be kings as well as
subjects there, and those Kings come out too, as well as those subjects. For
suppose King and people of England all popish, why might they not all reform
together? It seems Antichrist must never be cast out of a Kingdom till the
people do it in spite of the King, and therefore it is concluded that it was
not done here in the days of King Edward nor Queen Elizabeth nor King James,
and now since the new Revelation have assured men that Antichrist must now be
cast out utterly from among us, it is become necessary that our Sovereign
should be a papist, and as much zeal and as solid arguments used to persuade
our friends that indeed he is so, (though his constant word and actions now
evidence the contrary) as are produced to maintain any other article of our
new Saints belief: one of the most suspected and hated heresies of these days,
is to doubt of the popish affections of our superiors especially the King: Well
by this doctrine, if the King should chance not to be a papist, he must turn
to be one, or else popery cannot be cast out in his time. If so he should do,
turn papist on purpose to prepare, or dispose his kingdom to turn Antichrist
out, this might be but answerable to Gods hiding of truths to that end to help
Antichrist in. But should his Majesty be so malicious as to prove Protestant
in earnest, then what would become of that sure word of prophecy that so many
have bin persuaded to depend on, that Antichrist must now be cast out of this
Kingdom, which faith the Objecter cannot be, unless the people do it while
the King bewailes. I hope I have said enough of this.

As for the connection of this observation with the conclusion in hand (though
it matter little now the observation is proved so false, yet) I shall add that
if the people were to do that great feat of casting out Antichrist, yet it
appears no^ how liberty of forcible resisting their Kings should be a necessary
requisite to the work, unless the lawful King be the Antichrist in every
country, for otherwise it is very possible that though they obey their kings
they may resist Antichrist, though they love and revere their lawful superior
they may hate and abjure their unlawful: Once more, whereas it is again
repeated that the knowledge of the supposed subjects liberty would have kept
Antichrist from his throne, I repeat again, that if it would, God sure would
have revealed it to them of all others, unless it appear that God was more
angry with the sins of Christians in Tertullians age, and so more fought
against them, then he does in ours against us, for though God may of mercy
undeserved throw down Antichrist, yet that he should so immediately and
illustriously labor to set him up, unless out of deserved indignation to a
people, is not easily resolved, yet if this may appear de facto to be so, I
shall yield, till then (...).

The last blot laid on Tertullian to obliterate all whatsoever can be fetched
from himlis, that the authority of Tertullian and the submission of the
Christians being both Apocryphal is too light to weigh against the practice of
the great Prophet Elisha etc. To which I answer, that that being supposed, yet
the grounds on which Tertullian says the Christians of his time did so
patiently suffer, viz. the doctrine of Christian patience and meekness, are
not Apocryphal, nor inferior to that of Elisha, though it were supposed to be
argumentive, or concluding for resistance. For any thing else added by the
objector in this business as the disproving of Tertullians relations on
grounds of Christian doctrine, from the contrary practice of David and Elisha
though I might answer in one word, that Christians are restrained from some
things which were practiced without fault in the old Testament, yet because
those old Testament-examples have been fully cleared by many others of our
writers, and indeed are not pertinent to the d^scourse I was upon, when this
Objecter first ^^et me in the way, and led me this wild goese ^ha^e after him,
I shall not be so impertinent as to add any thing, but conceive my self to have
vindicated the testimonies of those Fathers from all possible objections, and
so to have joined the practice of Christians, (those ancient primitive ones)
and proved them correspondent to the example of Christ, and so to have made
good my second argument proposed from the example of Christ and Christians.

My third is from the very making of Christianity, and particularly of the
Protestant Doctrine. And ^ Of Christianity, which as it differs from the Laws
both of Moses and Nature, so it constantly reformes and perfects those
(dissolves not any thing that was moral in them, nor promises impunity for
nonperformance, but upon repentance and reformation) elevates and raises them
to an higher pitch, at least th^^ Jew^ or natural men had conceived or
understood themselves obliged to, which the ancient ^athers generally resolve
to be the meaning of his (...), Mat. 5.17. to fill up all va^u^ties in those
former Laws, and add unto them that perfection which should be proportionable
to that greater measure of grace now afforded under the Gospel. Thus in that
Sermon upon the mount, that (...), that top of practical Divinity, (set down
by way of particular instance of Christ's purpose, (...)) besides the third
proaemi^ll beatitude, Blessed are the meek, which certainly though it may
contain more, yet excludes not, but principally notes the meek, obedient
subjects under government, the non^resisters, and therefore has the same
promise annexed which the Law had given in the fifth Commandment (it was there,
That thy days may be long in the Land; it is here, They shall possess the
earth, (...), which Psalm. 37.11. whence it is cited, referres clearly to the
land of Canaan, though improved into an higher sense now in the Gospel.) And
again, besides the seventh beatitude of the peacemakers, or peaceable ((...)
and (...), being equivalent in the Scripture style, vid. Iam. 3.18.) and the
eighth, of those that are persecuted for righteousness sake, (whence sure is
not excluded the cause of Religion and Christianity it self) which sure are
opposi^e enough to forcible resisting of lawful Magistrates, especially for
Religion: besides all these, I say, in the introduction to that Sermon, there
is in the body of the Sermon it self, an (...), which sure prohibits all
forcible resisting or violence even to the (...), the injurious or (...) from
(...) troublesome person which if it should chance to be our King, would not
certainly be more lawfully or Christianly resisted then any body else;
especially, when it is our religion which is invaded, which of all other things
a whole army of plunderers cannot rob us of, (as they may of the cloak verse.
40.) and therefore needs not our violence to retain it; nor is ever injured,
but more illustrated by our suffering. To this may be added the consideration
of the depositum left by Christ with his disciples, pacem peace John 14.27.
(which it seems only the beloved disciple had recorded) Peace I leave with
you, external peace for the pacem meam, my peace follows after as a gift
perhaps peculi^r to them that prised and kept this legacy, and if it be
objected that Christ came not to send peace, but a sword, Matthew. 10.34. that
sure refers not to Christ's prime counsel or purpose, but to the event; what he
foresaw it would be, not what he had determined it ought (which manner of
speech is very ordinary in all authors) for the precept is punctual to Peter
against the use of the swor^ and to all the disciples for preserving of peace
Mar. 9.50. and to that it is thought the mention of salt belongs in that place,
which among other qualities is (...) unitive, have salt in your selves, and
have peace one with another. On these texts many effectual emphaticall
descants are added by the Apostles, Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much as
in you lies, live peaceably with all men: and Heb. 1^.14* follow peace with
all men (...) an agonisticall word to run for it as for a prize or (...), and 1
Thessal. 4.11. (...), we render it study (it is, be emulous, contend, strive,
make it your ambition) to be quiet, to which I shall only add two places
more, James 3.17.18. The w^sdome which comes from above is first pure, then
peaceable etc. which before ver. 13. he had called meekness of wisdom, then 1
Pet. 3.3. where after direction for the (...) obedience of wives (...) husbands
(and we know the kingdoms relat^on to the King is besides others, that of a
wife to an husband who is therefore espoused to it with the ring at his
Coronation) it is added, (...), that her bravery consists in the sincerity (I
think it should be rendered) of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight
of God of great price. If it be objected, that these many places of peace are
but general wide illations against resistance, or however, no more pertinent
to the case about resisting of Magistrates, then of any other private man: I
answer, that though I might thus argue, a minori, (and also assume that no
other resistance is near so destructive of peace as that resisting of the
Supreme power, that being indeed the sh^king of government it self, which is
the band of peace, and the dissolving of which, returns (...) to the state of
common hostility, leaves us a wilderness of Bears or Tigers, not a society of
men) yet I shall confess, that I intended not to lay any more weight on this
part of the Argument, then any man will acknowledge it able to bear, and that
therefore before I infer my conclusion of non-resistance from the making of
Christianity, I must add to these places so passionate for peace, another sort
of places concerning obedience, of which (without naming the places being so
known already) I shall venture this observation, that in the new Testament
especially the Epistles of the Apostles (which were all written in time of the
re^gn of wicked heathen bloody adversaries of Christianity, and can refer to
none but those) there is no one Christian virtue, or article of faith more
clearly delivered more effectually enforced upon our understandings and
affections to be acknowledged by the one (against all pretense of Christian
liberty to the contrary) and submitted to by the other, then that of obedience
to Kings, etc. It were most easy to vindicate those places from all the
glosses and scholia's that the writers of this year Master Goodwin in ^ntican.
Master Bur. Master Bridges, etc. have invented to free themselves and others
from the obedience most strictly required there, but would not again trouble
any ingenious man with such extravagant discourses as even now I learnt by
experience would be necessary to answer such exceptions, which men's wit or
somewhat worse has produced, besides, those places have been by others
vindicated already. I shall only say whosoever can without colored spectacles
find ground for the present resistance in those places of Scripture Romans 13. 1
Pet. 2.13.18. etc. So far as to settle and quiet a conscience, I shall not
conceive my understanding fit to duel with his, any more then I would wrestle
with a friend, or combat with the fire, which Pythagoras tells me would avail
little: he that can be sure that damnation Rom 13.2. signifies not damnation,
but some temporary mulct only (if the King should prove able to inflict it)
when, v. 5. It is added we must needs be subject not only for wrath (i. Fear
of temporary punishment) but also for conscience sake, (which when it accuses,
binds over to eternal wrath, or damnation) I profess I know not what camel
he may not swallow* I shall only in the bowels of Christ desire him to
consider, what a sad condition it would prove, if being on this confidence
engaged, and by Gods h^nd taken away in this war he should at Gods tribunal
hear Saint Paul avouch that by (...) or damnation in that place, he did mean
no l^sse then eternal damnation without repentance: O how would his
countenance change, his thoughts trouble him, the joints of his loins be
loosed, and his knees smite one against another, one general (...) possess
all his faculties, and Master Bridg^ etc. be unable to settle him or give him
confidence any longer, when the Tekel shall come out of the wall over against
that interpretation of his, that it is weighed in the balances (of truth and
judgment) and found wanting, of this word (...) I design another
disquisition: only I could not defer to forewarn the Reader of his danger in
this place, and now I shall not doubt from the making of Christianity to
infer my conclusion of non-resistance, not doubting but the premises will
bear it.

For the other part of this third argument from the making of the Protestant
Doctrine, I would fain be very brief by way of compensation for my former
importunity, and therefore shall engage myself not to trouble the Reader with
citations or names, which yet might be brought by hundreds of reformed Writers
for every Iunius Br^ius, Butherius, and Buthanan that has appeared for the
contrary since the reformation. Though the truth is, such as these if they must
be called Protestants, are yet in this somewhat more then that title ever
imported, I may say perfect Jesuits in their principles, and resolutions
concerning Kings (no Papist of any other order has gone so far) although they
differ some what in the seat of that power of making such resistance. That
which I designed to say on this point is only, This that the doctrine of
Allegiance to Kings, and of their supremacy in all causes, has always been
counted a principal head of difference between the Protestants and the worst
of Papists, and a special evidence which most men have used, to conclude the
Papacy to be (...) the antichrist, is this that the Pope exalts himself above
all that is called God: 1. The Kings of the earth, that he in case the King be
not a Catholic, absolves subjects from their Allegiance to him, that he
pretends power over them in spiritual things, and in temporal in ordine ad
spiritualis. It is not unknown to any that the Oath of Supremacy if not of
Allegience among us is principally designed to discern and and discover
Papists, of whom, one of the prayers appointed for the fifth of November
affirms, that their religion is rebellion, that sure is, that one main
difference betwixt Romish and English, Popish and Protestant doctrine is that
of liberty to Rebel in some cases, particularly in that of Religion: In
opposition to all which doctrines or insinuations of theirs, there is no Church
that ever expressed their sense in any article more fully and largely, then ours
has in this particular, witness the several parts of the homily of
disobedience and rebellion, printed in Queen Elizabeth's time. And if herein all
other parts of the reformed Church have not gone as far as we, yet shall I not
retract my asserting this doctrine purely Protestant, 1. because this Kingdom
has always been esteemed a prime part of the Reformation, wherein the Papacy
was legally cast out, not by violence or tumults of the people, and so nothing
rejected but what in sobriety was necessary to be rejected, and therefore our
Church has generally been the Norma or rule by which others have desired to
compose themselves, and never yet any other so preferred before us, as that our
ancestors could think fit to conform to them, 2. because in many other
countries the government is not regal or Monarchical as here it is, Bodin. l.
2. c. 5. de rep. can find none of this nature in Europe, but France and
Spain, and England and Scotland (I conceive Ireland he contained under the
word Auglia^) in which, says he, Regis sine controversia jur^ ^^nia majestatis
habeant per se: Singulis civi^us nec universit ^as est (it seems Master Dale
our Ambassador from whom he had received his advertisements of the state of
this kingdom had not then heard that our King though Singulis major is
^^^versis minor, which certainly had divested him of all Sovereignty it being
impossible that the Sovereign or supreme of all should be Minor then any (
Sumni prinsipis vitam fama^ ^ut fortunas in discrimen vocare, seu visen judicio
constituto id fiat, etc. As for the Emperor of Germany Charles the fifth by
name, he says plainly, Tyrannide cives ad rempublicam oppressit cum iura
maiestatis non haboret, which if it be true will be some excuse to the Germane
Princes in what they did at that time in taking up arms for Religion, though
it is most certain what he affirms, that when those princes consulted Martin
Luther about it number id ^ure divino liceret, whether it were lawful in the
sight of God, Ille negavit he resolved it utterly unlawful: this answer says
Bodin, Luther gave Perinde atqua si Carolus summam imperit solus haberes, and
therefore much more must it be given when the case is of a Monarch indeed, as
he concludes, and though he acknowledge that distinction which it seems Luther
did not betwixt that Emperor and true Monarchs, yet is he feign to pass a sad
observation upon the fact of those Princes in taking up arms for Religion,
against Luthers advice Ita funestum bellum reique publica calami tosum
suscepi^s est, cum in gentiprincipurs ac civi^ strage, quia iusta causa
^^llowideri potest adversus patriam arma sumendi. I would to God those words
were Englisht in every of our hearts: a direful and calamitous war with the
slaughter of all sorts, because (though it were for Religion) yet no cause can
be counted just, of taking up arms against ones country. The truth is, what
was done there though, 1. very unhappily and 2. against no Monarch, has been
thought imitable by Knox and Buchanan in Scotland, and from thence infused into
some few into England a^ Penry, etc. But by Gods providence has formerly been
timously restrained, and not broken out to the defaming of our Protestant
profession. It seems now our sins are ripe for such a judgment, the land
divided into two extreme sinful parts; one by their sins fitted to suffer
under this doctrine, others si^full enough to be permitted to broach and
prosecute it. I meekly thank God, that though my sins are strangely great, yet
he has not given me up to that latter judgment. I conceive I have also given
some hints at least of proving my position from the making of the Protestant
Doctrine.

Now for the last Topic, taken from the constitution of this kingdom. Though
that be the Lawyers task, very prosperously undertaken by others, yet one
general notion there is of our Laws, which from my childhood I have imbibed,
and therefore conceive common to all others with me; and it is this, That the
Laws of this kingdom put no man (no Papists I am sure) to death for religion.
When Jesuits, and Seminary Priests have suffered, every man is so perfect in
the Law, as to know that it is for treason, by a Statute that makes it such for
them to come into this kingdom. The truth of this, and the constant pleading
of it against all Objecters, has made me swallow it as a principle of our Law,
that even Popery strictly taken (and not only as now this last year it has
learnt to enlarge its importance) is no capital crime. From whence, I
profess, I know no impediment to forbid me to conclude, that in the
constitution of our state no war for Religion is accounted a lawful war; for
that it should be lawful to kill whole multitudes without any enditement, yo^,
and by attempting it, to endanger, at least, our own. 1. Many good Protestants
lives, for that, which if it were proved against any single man, would not
touch his life in the least degree, is, I must acknowledge, one of the Artaria
belli which I cannot see into. And therefore Sleidan tells us of M. Luther, that
he would not allow a war, though but defensive, with the Turk himself, com. li.
14. page 403. and though after he had mitigated his opinion upon a new state of
the question, and persuaded the Emperor to it, yet it was with this
limitation, M^do nec vindictae, nec gloria, nec emolumenti caur^ sub^^^^^,
(three things that are very rarely kept out of war) sed tantum ut spur^issimum
l^tronem, non ex religionis, sed ^urti and injuriarum action aggradiantur. It
seems the cause of Religion, although it were of Christianity against
Mahometisme, was not to him a sufficient warrant for a defensive w^^ But then
2. For this war to be waged against the Prince, (or by any one but the Prince,
in a Monarchy, as this is) who whatsoever he has not, has certainly the
power of the sword immediately from God (or else must be acknowledged not to
have it at all, for this power cannot be in any people originally, or any where
but in God, and therefore it may be most truly said, that though the regal
power were confessed to be first given by the people, yet the power of the sword,
where with regality is endowed, would be a superaddition of Gods, never
belonging to regal or whatever other power, till God annexed it in Genesis 9.6.
which also (...) to be out of all dispute in this kingdom, even at this time,
where the universal body of the co^monalty, even by those that would have the
regal power originally in them, is not yet affirmed to have any aggregate
power, any farther then every man single out of government was presumed to have
over himself, which sure was not power of his own life: for even in nature
there is Felonia des^, and therefore the representative body of the Commons, is
so far from being a judicature in capital matters, that it cannot administer
an oath) and therefore is not justly invasible by any subject or community of
subjects, who certainly have not that power, nor pretend to have it, and when
they take it, think it necessary to excuse that fact by pretense of necessity,
which every body knows, is the color for those things which have no ordinary
means of justifying them: like that which Divines say of saving of children and
idiots, etc. by some extraordinary way.) Nay, 3. For this war to be waged, not
against Popery, truly so called, but against the only true Protestant
Religion, as it stands (and by attempting to make new laws is acknowledged as
yet to stand) established by the old Laws of the land, and therefore is fain to
be called Popish (and our Martyr reformers notable, by those fiery chariots of
theirs, to get out of the confines of Babylon) that it may be fit to be
destroyed; just as the Primitive Christians were by the persecuters put in
wild beasts skins that in those shapes they might be devoured: this I confess
is to me a complication of riddles (and therefore put by some Artists under
that deep, dark phrase, and title of fundamental Laws of the kingdom) to
which certainly no liberty or right of the subject in Magna charta, no nor
legislative power, will enable any man to give any intelligible, much less
legal name: At which I profess I am not ill pleased, because this I hope will
keep it from being recorded to posterity.

I have done with my fourth Argument, and am heartily sorry I have kept my
Reader so long from his prayers, which must set an end to this controversy,
for sure Arguments are too blunt to do it; I beseech God to direct all our
hearts to a constant use of those means (together with fasting and abstinence,
at least from father provoking sins) and exerci^e that evil spirit that has
divided his titles (of (...), and now at length, (...) and (...)) among us, and
by those means infused his mortiferous poison into the very veins of this
whole kingdom. [I create the fruit of the lips peace, peace to him that is far
off, etc. and I will heal him. Thou have moved the land, and divided it, heal
the fores thereof, for it shakes.]

The word (...), according to its origination signifies Censure, Judgment, and
in its making has no intimation, either of the quality of the offense to which
that judgment belongs, or of the Judge who inflicts it: that it belongs to
humane judgments, or sentences of temporal punishments sometimes, is apparent
by Luke 23.40. where one thief says to the other, (...), making, it seems, the
same sentence of death, or capital punishment, called (...), c. 24.20.
judgment of death temporal; and that at other times it signifies also divine
judgment, is as apparent Act. 24.26. (...), judgment to come, that is,
certainly at the end of this world, at that day of doom, So Romans 2.^. (...),
the judgment of God, and so again verse. 3. which v. 5. is explained to be
^rath or punishment against the day of wrath, etc. so Heb. 6.2. resurrection of
the dead, and eternal judgment. The truth is in this sense, it is most what
(...) this Book, see Mat. 23.^4. Mat. 12.40. Luke 20.47. Romans 3.8. and
therefore He^, the best Glossary for the new Testament, renders it (...)* Gods
retribution or payment, or rendering according to works. It will not be ^^^th
while to survey and consider every place where the word is used, he that shall
do so, will perhaps resolve with me to accept of that glossary, and understand
it constantly of Gods judgment; unless, when the circumstances of the (...)
shall enforce the contrary, as they do in the places first mentioned, and 1
Cor. 6.7. But then when the context rather leads to the second sense, there
will be great danger for any man to apply it to humane judgments, for by so
doing, he may flatter himself or others in some sin, and run into that (...),
as it signifies eternal judgment, when by that misunderstanding he does not
conceive himself in any danger of it. Of places which without all controversy
thus interpret themselves, I will mention two, 2 Pet. 2.3. (...), to render it,
whose judgment of a long time lingereth not: which that it belongs to eternal
vengeance, appears by the next words, (...), we render it, Their damnation, it
is literally, Their destruction sleeps not. The second place is, 1 Timothy 3.6.
(...), fall into the condemnation of the devil; that is, sure into that
sentence that fell upon Lucifer for his pride (being cast out of heaven, and
reserved to chains of eternal darkness) for the person spoken of here, is the
Novice, or new Convert, lifted up with pride, just parallel to the Angels newly
created, lifted up with pride also, the crimes and the persons parallel, and so
sure the punishment also. Now three places more there are which appear to me by
the same means of evidence, or rule of interpreting, to belong to the same
sense, though I cannot say of them as I did before, [without controversy.] For
I see it is not only doubted by some, whether they do belong to this sense or
no, but that it is resolved they do not: which resolution sure must be
obnoxious to some danger, that I say no worse of it. The first of these places
it, Romans 13.2. (...): we render it, They that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation: But say others, it must be rendered judgment, as that
signifies some temporary punishment which the higher powers may inflict, and
nothing else: and this they labor to make appear by the words following: For
rulers are a terror to evil works, and he bears not the sword in vain, etc.
To which I answer, That there is no doubt made by me or any, but that rulers
are to punish men for evil works, particularly that of resistance against
them, and not only that, but also crimes against our brethren, and God; and in
that respect it is added, v. 4. (...), the minister or officer of God he is,
and executioner for wrath, that is, punishment temporal to him (indefinitely)
that does evil. But does it follow from hence, that either he that makes
forcible resistance against the superior or supreme power, or that commits any
other sin (which the supreme power is set to avenge or punish temporally) shall
incur no eternal punishment? If this new Divinity should be entertained, it
must be privilege and protection to other sins as well as resistance and
rebellion, even to all that any judicial laws have power to punish, for in
these also he is the Minister of God: (...), an avenger, or executioner for
punishment, and there is no avoiding it; but this must be extended
indefinitely, or universally, (...), to any malefactor punishable by that
power, or that comes under this cognizance; and so by this Logic, he that is
hanged, may not be damned, what ever his crime be, an execution on earth shall
be as good as a Purgatory to excuse him from any other punishment. But then
secondly, suppose a rebel escape the hand of justice here below, by flight,
etc. nay, that he prosper in his rebellion, and get the better of it, that the
King be not able to punish him, nay, yet farther, that he proceed higher,
depose the King, and get into his place; What (...) is he like to receive, if
that signify only the Kings wrath, or temporal punishment? Sure this
prosperousnesse of the crime must make it cease to be a crime, make it commence
virtue, as the Turks on their principles are wont to resolve it, says
Busbequius, Ep 4. -- Ex opinione quae Turcis insedit ut res quocunque consilio
institutas, si been cadunt, ad Deum Authorem referant, etc. Or else give it,
(though it be a sin never so great, and unrepented of) perfect impunity both in
this world, and in another; and certainly this is no jest. For he that observes
the behaviors of many men, (the no manner of regrets or reluctancies in their
course of forcible resistance, save only when they conceive it goes not on so
prosperously as it was wont, and the great weekly industry that is used to
persuade all men of the continued prosperity of the side, as being conceived
far more useful and isntrumental to their ends, then the demonstration of the
justice of it, men's consciences being resolved more by the Diurnall then the
Bible, by the Intelligencer then the Divine, unless he turn Intelligencer also
(I would we had not so many of those pluralists.) Will have reason to resolve
that this Divinity is the principle by which they move; which if it be not yet
brought to absurdities enough, then look a little forward to the conclusion,
deduced and inferred, v. 5. Wherefore ye must be subject, not only for wrath,
but also for conscience sake. Words by Prophetic Spirit added by the Apostle,
as it were on purpose to contradict in terminis that new interpretation. Wrath
signifies that temporal punishment, v. 4. which if it were the all that is
meant by (...), then how can it be true, that we must be subject not only for
wrath? Certainly he that resists is not subject ((...), is all one with (...),
and both directly contrary to (...), the word used both in the third and fifth
verse) and therefore if we must be subject not only for wrath, as that signifies
temporal punishment, then he that resists, shall receive more then wrath, as
that signifies temporal punishment. viz. (...), in our rendering,
condemnation, if he do not prevent it timously by repentance: which sure is the
importance of the (...), but also for conscience sake; that if he do it not, it
will be sin to him, wound his conscience, bind him over to that punishment
which belongs to an accusing conscience, (which sure is more then a temporal
mulct) which is farther clear from the first verse of that chapter, the command
of subjection. For sure every Divine or Apostolical command entered into the
Canon of Scripture, does bind conscience, and the breach of it known and
deliberate, is no less then a damning sin, even under the Gospel, mortiferous
and destructive without repentance, which is just equivalent to the (...), he
shall receive damnation in our way of interpreting it. So much for that first
place.

The second is 1 Cor. 11.29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation (or as our margent judgment) to himself, etc. This place I
find avouched for the confirming of the former interpretation Romans 13. That
(...) signifies only Temporal punishment and thus, it is known the Socinians
commonly interpret this place, per (...) non sempiternam damnationem nominatim,
sed suppliciu^ in genere intelligendum esse. Volk^lius l. 9. de ver. rel. l. 4.
c. 22. That which is used to persuade this to be probable is that which
follows ver. 30. for this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many
sleep, which belonging only to Temporal punishments, is conceived to be a
periphrasis of the (...) judgment, which should seem consequently to be so
also: and indeed, Volkelius has added other proofs: 1. Because the Apostle
speaks of any one single act of this sin of unworthy receiving (not of any
habit or custom) which he conceives not actually damning now under the second
covenant, 2. Because it is said ver. 32. and when we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord that we should not be condemned etc. To these three (and
I know not that there are produced any more) probabilities, I conceive clear
satisfaction maybe given by those who affirm (...) to contain in it eternal
punishment; Though if it were only Temporal punishment, yet being sickness,
etc. Which are not inflicted by the magistrate, but by the hand of God it will
not come home to that which was by Master Br. affirmed of the word in Romans 13.
For this must be promised that we do not conceive it to signify eternal
punishments exclusive or so as to exclude temporal, but eternal and sometimes
Temporal too (for so sure he that for his Rebellion receives damnation,
hereafter, is not secured from being hanged drawn and quarterd here) or else
eternal if be repent not, and perhaps Temporal though he do by (...), as I
said, I understand with Hesychius (...) Gods vengeance whether here, or in
another world, but I say in this place both of them, (and so ordinarily in the
former also. This being premised, the word (...) may still contain in it
eternal punishments, ver. 29. though many for this cause of unworthy receiving
did fall sick and die, ver. 30. for 1. they might both die and be damned too,
or if, as Volkelius says the word (...), o^do^miscunt, sleep, be never used in
the N. T. of those that are destined to eternal destruction, then still may
this be very reconcilable without interpretation that many for this cause are
weak and sickly, and many others sleep, God chastising some by diseases to
reform them, and punishing others, who as Volkelius acknowledges, were guilty
only of some single act of the sin only with death temporal or shortning
their days: which certainly hinders not but that God might punish others that
did customarily commit this sin (and perhaps with greater aggravations) with no
less then eternal death, how ever that it were just for him to do so, what
ever he did it is plain by ver. 27. which is parallel to the 29. whosoever
shall eat and drink unworthily shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord, that is in Volkelius his own words Ipsum Christi corpus ac sanguin^m
contemnere and ignominia afficere ac quantam in ipsis est profanare
proculcareque censendi sunt, shall be thought to contemn and disgrace, and as
much as in them lies to profane, and tread under feet the body and blood of
Christ, which what is it but to count the blood of the Covenant an unholy
thing, Heb. 10.29. Which yet there is used as a main aggravation of that sin,
for which, says the Apostle there remains no more sacrifice, ver. 26. It is
apparent that the phrase (...) guilty of the body, etc. Is paralled to the
Latin Reus Maiestatis used for a Traitor, and sure signifies no less then a
guilt of a great injury to Christ, which how any man can affirm to be a sin to
which no damnation belongs (supposing no antidote of invincible ignorance or
weakness, nor recovery by repentance nor gracious pardon of God in not
imputing some single act of it) I profess my self not to discern, though I
think I have weighed impartially all that is said of it. This sure will keep
the first proof from being any longer probable, and for the second, (or first
of Volkelius) it is already in effect answered too, for though he that is
guilty only of some one act of this sin found mercy, yet sure they that are
guilty of the customary sin, may speed worse, and indeed of all indefinitly the
Apostle speaks according to the merit of the sin, as when he says the drunkard
and adulterer shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Where yet perhaps he that
is guilty only of one such act may find mercy. For the last proof, I
conceive it so far from being a probable one against me, that I shall resolve
it a convincing one on my side, for if those that were sick, etc. Were
chastened of the Lord, that they should not be condemned, then sure if they had
not been so chastened, nor reformed by that chastening, they should have been
condemned with the world* and so their temporal judgments may be a means
through the mercy of God in Christ to free them from their eternal, but not an
argument that eternal was not due to them, but a perfect intimation, that it
was.

The third place (which is not indeed of much importance in it self, but only
is used to give countenance to the interpretation in the two former places) is
1 Pet. 4.17. the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God.
Here, say they (...) judgment is that that befalls the house of God, the godly
therefore but temporal judgments.

To which I answer in a word, that here is a mistake in opposing judgment in
its latitude to the house of God, when only it is affirmed by S. Peter of the
(...), or (...), the beginning or first part of judgment: for of the (...) or
judgment in this verse, there are specified two parts, (...), the first part,
and (...) the end (or else the word (...) seems to sound in our English, the
tail) of it, as Psalm. 75.8. the cup of Gods displeasure, or punitive justice,
is supposed to consist of two parts, 1. red wine (or (...)) and 2. mixture of
Myrrh and other poisonous bitter spices, called (...), Apocal. 4.10. and
(...), Matthew. 24.17. and both together, (...) myrrhato, wine, Mark 15.25. Now
this cup is powered out, and tasted of indefinite by the godly some part of it,
but the dregs thereof, i. the myrrh bitter part, that goes to the bottom, is
left for the wicked to wring out and drink: so that only the tolerable,
supportable, easy part of the judgment belongs unto the godly, but the end,
the dregs, the unsupportable part, to those that obey not the Gospel of God. Or
yet a little further, the beginning or first part, (...) of the judgment, is
(...), from the godly (and so it was (...)) intimating that the judgment does
not stay upon them, but only take rise from them; but the (...), the second
sadder part of it, is (...) of them, (or belongs to them) that obey not, etc.
So that still in this place also (...) signifies Gods judgment of this life
and another both; not of this life only, to the excluding of the other, but
one part in this life, another in that other; and though the godly had their
part in it, yet there was some what in the (...) that the godly never ^asted
of, but only the (...), they that disobeyed the Gospel of God, and this is
apparent by the 18. verse. 18. For if the righteous (...), we read it scarcely
be saved. It signifies (by comparing that place with Prove. 11.31. where in
stead of recompensed on the earth, the Greek translation reads, (...)) be
rendered unto, or recompensed, i. punished in the earth, then where shall the
ungodly and sinners appear? There are again the two parts of (...), one (...),
Gods retribution to sin here, wherein the godly have their part, and the other
his rendering to the wicked hereafter, and so neither of them the punishment of
the Magistrate in this life, as Mr. Bridge. out of Piscator, contends to have
it. Romans 13. and as it must be here also, if others speak pertinently, who use
it to avoid that interpretation, which I confess Mr. Br. does not.

They that are unlearned and unstable wrest the Scriptures to their own
destruction, ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know those things before, beware
lest you also being led away with the error of the wicked fall from your own
steadfastness, 2 Pet. 3.16.17.
FINIS.

