OF SINS

Of Weakness, VVilfulnesse:

And appendant to it, A Paraphrasticall explication of two difficult Texts,
Heb. 6. and Heb. 10.

(...), Thucid. l. 3.

By HENRY HAMMOND D. D.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1646.

OF SINS OF Weakness. Wilfulness.
THe second Covenant being that by which we are Sect. 1.
now all either justified or condemned, and the condition of that, in respect
of the facienda, being sincere not exact obedience, not the not sinning at all,
but the not sinning wilfully after our receiving the knowledge of the truth,
Heb. 10. 26. (which though it seem to damn all irreversibly that sin wilfully
after conversion, yet sure is to be understood according to the (...) of the
Gospel, unless he do repent and return sincerely unto God again, for
whosoever does so, there is certain mercy by other places made over to him in
Christ, and what is the full importance of that place will anon be explicated)
It will be an enquiry though of some difficulty, yet of as great use and
necessity as any one other in all Divinity, to search what sins there are,
for which mercy is to be had under the Gospel, and for what not. For that some
men are damned, and not all finally saved, there is no doubt, and yet as little
there ought to be, that this is for sin that one man is guilty of, and the other
not; from whence it follows that seeing no man is guiltless of sin, some
degrees or sorts there must be of that guilt in one, which are not in another,
and according to those different degrees, (though every of them be of it self
or without Christ, or by the tenor of the first Covenant damning, yet) under
the Gospel or second Covenant, the adjudging of men to heaven or hell is
proportioned.

From all which this results, that some kinds, or sorts, or degrees Sect. 2.
of sinning, or more plainly, some states of sinners, are under the Gospel
damning, some are not; some reconcilable with a good estate, some not; some
for which there is sure mercy in Christ, some for which there is as certainly
no mercy; for though the mercy of God be infinite, and so unfathomable by our
finite wits, yet when he has in the Gospel defined how far his mercy shall
extend, and beyond what terms it shall not, 'twill be no insolence to affirm,
that God will not have mercy on any who are not qualified according to that
second Covenant of his, who are not such persons to whom only he has promised
mercy, at least if they be such as of whom he has affirmed [they shall not
have mercy.]

Thus far to justify the fitness, and use, and necessity of this search.
Now for progress in it. It will be eafie to define in the general. Sect. 3.
1. That all sins in the world, be they never so great, of what sort or kind
soever, if they be retracted with true repentance, shall certainly be forgiven;
(for that any act of sin should be irremissible, they that affirm do it on
this ground that they that commit that act shall never truly repent, implying
that if they did repent, it would be remissible) and in this the only
difficulty will be, 1 What true repentance is: And 2. Whether that be
necessary to the obtaining pardon for every sin.

To the first, I answer, that true repentance is a change, a through change of
mind, (called in the Scripture, and the ordinary style of Sect. 4.
Divines, the new creature, being regenerate, conversion, spiritual
resurrection, forsaking of sin, mortification, habitual sanctification,
sincere, faithful resolution of new life, reformation, amendment, (...), as it
superaddes to (...)) and what ever does not amount to thus much is not true
saving repentance, to which the promises or mercies of Christ do appertain.
And so consequently many specious pretenders to that Title are excluded. Such
are bare sorrow for sin, such the votum poenitentiae, the wishing they were
penitent, such a bare warring of the law of the mind against the law of the
members, whilst we are carried captive to the law of sin; and many the like.

To the second, I must answer by distinguishing the equivocalnesse of the
question. For the meaning of it may be, 1. Whether amendment, Sect. 5.
or forsaking, or overcoming every particular sin be necessary to the
obtaining of pardon for that sin, whether it be of infirmity or otherwise:
and if that be meant, I answer, No. For that some sins are of that nature,
that as long as we have this mortal infirm flesh about us, we can never hope
to be rid of them to get victory over them: such as for which the sacrifices
were appointed to be offered under the law, and for which Christ's sacrifice
once offered is a perfect expiation; and these by the tenor of the second
Covenant, or through the mercy of God in Christ shall never be imputed to the
penitent sinner; I mean to him who has amended all others, and humbled
himself before God, and besought his mercy in Christ, and by faith laid hold
of it for these, which though he labor against them sincerely, he cannot
thoroughly amend or overcome.

But if the meaning be, secondly, Whether the actual amending Sect. 6.
of all his known sins which consequently may by the Christian be amended,
be required necessarily to make a man capable of the pardon even of his sins
which cannot be amended; I answer, that it is very probable to be so. Because
Christ's sufferings seem not be advantageous (at all, not so much as to the
washing away of humane frailties) to any but those who are in Christ, i. e. to
new creatures, who alone are so; however that will not be a material scruple,
though it should be left disputable, as long as this other proposition be taken
for infallible (which is so) that except we repent we shall all perish, i. e.
that he that has not forsaken all wilful sins, shall (whether for his
wilful sins only, or his wilful and frailties both together, it matters
not) be certainly condemned.

By the answering of these two questions so much has been Sect. 7.
gained, as that we may make another general resolution, and define secondly,
that some sins are reconcilable with a true penitent, convert, regenerate
estate, others are not. And consequently some not destructive under the second
Covenant, though others are. What these are in general will also in the third
place be easily defined. Sins of infirmity are reconcilable, wilful sins
are not.

Under infirmities I contain all sorts that are usually reduced Sect. 8.
to that head, and which have been briefly mentioned in another discourse;
Whether those that proceed from any not culpable defect Of Conscience.
of my understanding, as sins of ignorance, or from some present prevailing
temptation, which though I use all means in my power against it, I cannot
overcome; or from some advantage taken by Satan, etc. in the assaulting me
either on the sudden, when I have not time, to use those means which I might
otherwise use which we call sudden surreption; or from the frequency or
repetition or almost continuednesse of the temptation, which when I have
repelled it never so often, returns again, so that if ever my watch be
intermitted (which considering our humane frailty it is though not logically,
yet morally impossible, but it should some time or other) I shall infallibly
fall, (which we use to call sins of daily incursion) or from the levity and
undiscerniblenesse of the matter, or from any other principle, which by that
measure of grace that God affords me, (or if I be not culpably wanting to my
self in neglecting the use of the means prescribed he is ready to afford me) I
am not able to resist. Supposing all this while that it is not upon some former
wilful sin of mine that God by way of punishment withdrawes this grace
necessary to the resisting of it; for if it be so, then though it may truly be
said, I cannot now resist that sin for want of that grace so withdrawn by
God, yet will not this pass for a sin of infirmity.

On the other side under the name of wilful sins I mean not all willingly
committed, or voluntary sins, (for all sin as far as Sect. 9.
it is sin is voluntary, and therefore sins of infirmity are voluntary) but
all that are not excusable by any of those former titles of infirmity, or all
that are not included under some of those heads.

Thus far in the way of general defining there is no great difficulty. Sect.
10.
That begins to show it self when we come to the (...) or particular, to
mention what sins in specie, or individuo, what sorts of sin or acts of those
sorts, are sins of infirmity, what not; And this is indeed an insuperable
difficulty, 1. Because one man has more knowledge, more quickness of
understanding, and also more grace then another, and so that sin in specic,
or individuo, that sort or particular act of sin, which he has power to
resist and overcome, that other man that has less power, has not power to
overcome; and if so, twill be an infirmity in him, though in the other it is not. 2.
Because any specificall sin comes backed with more temptations (and so makes
a more forcible impression upon the will) at one time then another; and
consequently though it were not above his strength at one time, yet at another
time it may. Yea and thirdly, because the same man is at one time more able to
resist and overcome, then he himself at some other time, as of a man in state
of desertion it is clear, as also when either by drunkenness or any other
culpable extravagancy (through rage or lust not resisted in the first motion)
the man is utterly debauched from his natural and spiritual strength, and no
way able to resist those temptations, which at another time he would scorn to
be captivated with.

But these two causes will not be very pertinent to the business Sect. 11.
in hand: because, as is supposed in them, that which brought this weakness
upon the man, was some culpable, nay wilful act, (or yielding of his)
committed then against strength, (though now that strength be not sufficient
against the consequent assault) and so no way apt to excuse the sin, that it
primarily betrayed him to. But if the case be set of some innocent accident
which causes this alteration, then it will be pertinent to the thing which I
now affirm, (to wit the evidencing the difficulty of such particular defining
(...)) as we know a man in time of sadness will be able to reject some jolly
proposalls, which yet in time of mirth (supposing that moderate and harmless,
and as perfectly sinlesse in it self, as that contrary sadness) he will not
perhaps be able, nay, as Hippocrates affirms in his tract (...), one air or
place may strongly incline a man to one whether virtue or sin, which another
does not, and where the inclinations are stronger or weaker, there we know the
strength being in degree supposed the same must prove unproportionable to the
one though not the other, able and sufficient to resist the weaker, though
unsufficient to subdue the stronger inclination.

To come yet more clearly to that which is of every days experience. Sect. 12.
Suppose a man a little drowzy at one hour (which drowzinesse at that time
particularly, is not a sin, but a natural desire of sleep, which is natures
due debt) and suppose him thoroughly awaked, and out of that fit of drowzinesse
at another time; and then suppose that the same proposal be made to him at
both those times, it may very probably be received at one time, and rejected at
another; nay if the proposal be an undertaking destructive of his present
desire of sleep, it may easily be affirmed that in that drowzy fit he has no
strength to resist it, though at another time he has. The reason is, because
sleep being a ligation of the faculties, drowzinesse likewise is so in some
degree, and the want of that degree may disable the understanding or upper
soul from representing strongly enough at that time, that which at another
time it shall be able to represent so strongly, that the contrary proposalls of
the sense shall not dare to appear before it. From whence I conceive it
follows, that if the proposal, supposed in this cause, be a sinful
proposal, that sin committed by that drowzy man will be a sin of
infirmity, which if it were committed by the same man broad awake, would be a
sin against strength, and so a wilful sin. From whence yet the man so
deceived once or twice ought to receive admonition that hereafter, if any
weighty matter, wherein his duty be concerned, be represented to him in the
like posture, he will before he consents or refuses, discutere somnum, shake
off sleep, that he may not be so unfit a judge, or if he find his own
weakness such that he cannot, he will appoint some body else to awake him
thoroughly, that he be not thus constantly impotent; For if he do not use these
means to recover his strength, when he is aware of them, it may cease to be an
infirmity.

From all which as we have evidenced the difficulty of the problem applied to
particular individual sins or persons, so we Sect. 13.
conceive our discourse to have given some hints which will be useful toward
this discovery. Especially this, that any sin committed by him that has at
that time strength or grace to resist it, or whose wilful fault it has been,
that he has not that sufficient strength (as if either some former wasting
sin of his, whether act or habit, have grieved the holy Spirit of God, and
provoked God to withdraw it from him, which he would not otherwise have done,
or if by the use of some means beforehand he might have prevented the strength
of that impression, or better fortified himself, or by use of some other
means, as of prayer, etc. at the present he might yet get strength, or remove
the tempter, and he make use of none of these means through sensuality or
sluggishnesse) is a wilful sin, (not a sin of infirmity) to that man at
that time.

And so though we have no other particular way of defining, Sect. 14.
yet this we have, that will stand any man in as good steed for the examining
himself, and his own guilts, or any confessor (that has received of his
confitent an exact account not only of the action, but the circumstances of the
action, his qualifications at that time, and the particular vigor of the
assault) as particular definitions concerning this, or that sin universim
would.

As for example, if I would know whether any act of mine own, Sect. 15.
(or being a confessor) of my poenitent, be a wilful sin or no, I must first
inquire, whether in that point of time, when being tempted I committed it, my
understanding or upper soul, and the spirit of God in me did move me more, or
as strongly not to do it, as the flesh did to the commission, allowing farther
somewhat of grace to incline the will, or of the understanding to move it as
much in proportion as the will since the fall is naturally inclined to the
carnal appetite, (as you know when one Scale is heavier of it self then the
other, or by some default in the beam one is more apt to turn then the other,
you must, if you would even the balances and make an aequilibrium, put more
weight in the Scale that is apt to fly up) Or if this be an obscure operation,
why then I must desire thee to examine whether at that time thy Spirit or
Conscience told thee, this was not to be done, and that on pain not only of
Gods displeasure but also of thy eternal damnation, (which must certainly be
far greater motives of determent even to flesh and blood, then any pleasure
the flesh can represent, can be allective to the contrary) and if thou find
it did, and yet for all this thy will consented to the flesh in its proposal,
then this is a sin against strength, a wilful sin, and not of infirmity.

But if thy conscience, or spirit or upper soul, at that time did Sect. 16.
not this, then it is to be resolved on, that it failed to do the duty of a
watchman, and if it did so, then my second inquiry will be, From whence that
failing of thy spirit arose? (for if it be awake and disposed as it should be,
(and as even yet by grace it is prepared to be, if we make use of that grace)
it will speak and admonish us, and that not in words which are subject to
misunderstanding, but in sense which therefore we cannot conceive) Whether,
first, from Gods just desertion the punishment of some former sin, or secondly,
from some present actual sin of mine upon me at that time, as drunkenness,
crapula, etc. or thirdly, from some habit which I have, by former acts of the
sin which I am now tempted to, contracted, to the blinding of my
understanding, or grieving of the spirit, or glibbing that sin, that it shall
be able to pass down insensibly and escape the search of my understanding; In
all these cases, the original of that failing being sinful, the failing it
self will not yield any excuse or complete apology, but the sin will still
remain a wilful sin.

If none of all these be found chargeable upon thee, as the original Sect. 17.
of that failing and negttive productive of that sin, then I can as yet
think of but one inquiry more, whether thirdly, thy understanding and the
grace of God in it, being thus laid asleep as it were, by some natural,
sinlesse, or at least invicible and so excusable frailty, or else (as in a
drowzy fit) not perfectly awake, there be not some means prescribed and
presented to thee by God, which if thou had used, thou might have wakened
thy understanding, or fortified thy will, or weakened the temptation: and if
so, and thou have, through negligence, or confidence, spiritual security or
pride, omitted to make use of them, then will this still amount to a wilful
sin or a sin against strength; as when the Lunatique Son was brought to the
Disciples of Christ, and the Text faith Mat. 17. 21. they could not cast the
evil spirit out, and Christ gives the reason why they could not, because,
says he, this kind goes not out, but by prayer and fasting, Christ yet
charge them with infidelity almost unsufferable, (O faithless generation,
how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you?) because there being
such means to enable them to do the work, they neglected those means, and
so only by that neglect became unable. The style of faithless in that place
gives us yet a more perfect notion of a wilful sin, then hitherto we have
arrived to, that it is not only that which is against natural conscience, or
spiritual infusions, but also that which is particularly against faith, i. e.
comes to be committed by neglecting the use of some means, which the word of
Christ, or the Scripture offers and prescribes to us, especially if by our
former faylings we have discerned the want we have of such helps or
auxiliaries. For in this respect of directing to such means of victory Faith
is said to be the overcoming the world, 1 John 5. 4. as well as in presenting
us with the promises and terrors of the Gospel.

Farther yet in the fourth place, if at the time of commission of the sin
thou caust truly say, 'twas not in thy power to resist it, Sect. 18.
because of the strength of the temptation so hurrying thee, as not to give
thee leisure to judge or deliberate, (which may seem to entitle that action to
the title of infirmity) thou must then enquire, whether thy yielding
(voluntarily from conte^plation of the pleasure etc.) to some entrances and
beginnings of that sin, whether marose thoughts, or somewhat father, be not
that, that has made the temptation so strong, or thee so weak; which thou will discern by this enquiry, whether before those morose thoughts etc. were
entertained, thou were not able to make resistance to the actual sin, and
then, if so thou were able, nay actually did, and only the intervenience of
those preparatory yeeldings did betray thee to this impotence, and it was in
thy power (by natural or supernatural strength already had, or prayer either
as it has a promise of more strength, or as it is an excellent means of
diversion) to have resisted those beginnings, when thou did yield, then still
is this a wilful sin, or sin against strength.

As for other sins more clearly and immediately against natural Sect. 19.
conscience, against Faith, (or directions of the Scripture for the overcoming
the world) against supernatural strength or grace, as contumacious stubborn
presumptuous sins, there will be little scruple to any man, or cause to keep
him from pronouncing of, and charging on them the crime of wilfulness, and
concluding (without real change) the certain damningnesse of them even under
Christ. I say particularly, presumptuous sins, when (presuming that Gods
mercy in Christ is either unlimited, and may belong to any the most unreformed,
or that it is decreed absolutely to some persons, without any respect to
qualifications or demeanures, to Saul the persecutor, as well as Paul the
Apostle) the sinner runs comfortably and alacriously on, without any regret
of conscience: the doing so is certainly no sin of infirmity, because though
some error may be pretended for his so doing, and that error seem apt to
lend him excuse;

Yet first, errors, that are not simple errors, but bring vicious Sect. 20.
life after them, are not excusable (because not invincible) errors, the rule
of the agenda or duties of life being so clear in the Scripture and in the
heart, that no man can be invincibly ignorant of that, Romans 10. 8, 9. and Deuteronomy.
30. 14. The word that is now commanded is not hid or impossible, or like
fetching Christ from heaven, or the grave, a thing quite out of our power, but
it is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it. And
secondly, it will be apparent, that even those errors on which that
presumption is built, being simply considered, are demonstrable to be errors
(supposita fide) or to one that acknowledges the Scripture, because there be so
many places in the Scripture point-blanke against them, particularly those of
the conditional promises every where scattered. Neither circumcision, etc. but
the new creature, but faith consummate by love, but keeping the Commandments
of God; Without holiness no man shall see the Lord; He that confesses and
forsakes shall have mercy; He that has this hope purifies, etc. And having
therefore these promises let us cleanse, etc.

From what has been said, it will be more then probable, that all acts of
fornication, adultery, etc. (which I shall suppose never to Sect. 21.
be actually committed without some space of deliberation, or if they be, then
I mean those other wherein that deliberation inteposes) are wilful sins,
and so also all acts of drunkenness, unless when through ignorance of the
strength of the liquor, or the weakness of the brain, the man suddenly fall
into it by desiring to quench his thirst, or do somewhat which is lawful;
wherein yet, if after one or more trials he miscarry the second or a third
time, it will still be a wilful sin; So also lying or speaking that which we
know to be false, to the defrauding and wronging of another, or for any
vainglorious design; So again, any sin of oppression, injustice, etc. or
generally all those where there is any time of advice and deliberation; For
where ever that liberty is, there is supposed an ability and readiness in the
upper soul of a Christian to present arguments for obedience to God, stronger
then any the devil, or the world, or flesh, can offer for the contrary. As for
killing a man, though the Law of the Land is wont to distinguish of wilful and
not wilful murder, yet to any man in his wits, the stabbing his neighbor (or
using any other such means as may probably take away his life) would seem so
strange, that I cannot conceive but his spirit should be able to deter him
from it in that space, which is required that any such weapon may be prepared;
For if it be said, his rage does gag or silence his spirit; I shall answer,
that the raising of his rage to that pitch was not in a minute, but grew upon
him by degrees, and then there was time and means to prevent that growth,
which he that did not make use of will hardly be able thereby to excuse or
extenuate the subsequent sin.

For swearing also I know not how in ordinary discourse or in Sect. 22.
any case (extra causas juramenti legitimas, where it is supposed perfectly
lawful) it can be made a sin of infirmity; for in communication Christ's
words are so plain [But I say unto you, Swear not at all, and particularly,
Let your communication be yea, yea, etc. for whatsoever is more, is (...) from
the evil one] that it would amaze any man to see that it should become an
ornament or tolerable part of a Christians dialect. And if it be in rage, then
I dare say, that either that man has formerly in some measure enured his
tongue to swearing, or not so strictly made conscience of an oath, as Christ's
precept obliges him; for he that never swore, will not in impatience probably
fall out into those forms of speech that he never used, (but always vowed and
resolved against) but into some other which he has been more used to, or which
he could hear in others with less horror and detestation, or which were a
more natural remedy for that passion. And if you mark it, that which rage
does is only to blind the understanding, (and so to steal out any proper
effects of rage, as presuming of their impunity, or not considering the
contrary danger) but not to hurry us to the commission of any or every other
sin indifferently, and at a venture. And why a rage should cast one upon
using Gods name in oaths, (which before he had never phansied for any use but
in his prayers) any more then on many other unheard of sins, I am so far
from conceiving any reason, that I must conclude it impossible, unless it
proceed from the being used in some measure to that sin, or having a more
favorable easy opinion of it. And yet after all this, that rage it self being
so Unchristian a thing, which we are so obliged to prevent, (and if in time it
be not prevented, will not always pass for an infirmity in a Christian) will
be unable to patronize or excuse any such one oath, which that puts into our
mouths; but on the other side, the observing that my rage has made me swear,
must in any reason give me so strict a watch over my self in time of
provocation, as never to let loose into a rage, which proves so inconvenient
and so complicated a sin unto me; as he that finds himself quarrelsome in
his drink, has the greatest obligation to temperance of any. As for any other
means that bring on swearing, custom, pride, ostentation, (...), filling up
the discourse, none of these will excuse it from a wilful sin; especially
considering the natural intrinsecall untemptingnesse of that sin, that were
it not for some accidental or extrinsecall advantage, evil example, (which if
it had been a good one, we could easily enough have rejected and not imitated)
or custom local or personal, or that other of the company we are used to,
scarce any man that hears swearing forbidden by Christ, will discern himself
to have any carnal invitation to swear, no not in time of rage.

The same I think may be defined of all the gross outward acts of sin, or
sins in the members; because for the acting of them, Sect. 23.
over and above the consent of the will, some space is necessarily required,
wherein the spirit or upper soul, if it be about us, will be able and ready to
interpose, if it may be hearkened to, (which me thinks is intimated by the
Turks in a custom of theirs, who when they mean to give themselves liberty
to be drunk, use to make a great noise, which they say is a warning to their
soul to retire into some extreme part of the body, that it may not be
spectator or Censor of this their beastiality.) And if it be thus driven away,
gagged, or not hearkened to, then that is a sin against strength, a wilful
sin. Which perhaps was Saint James his observation, when he said, Sin being
perfected brings forth death. For the conception of lust precedent signifies
certainly the consent or conjunction of the will with the carnal appetite,
when in the wooing (or canvasse for that consent) of the upper soul on one
side, and of the lower soul or carnal part on the other, the will which is thus
courted by both, yields to the second, and so they join in mutual embraces,
from whence, says the Apostle, sin is brought forth, that very consent of
the will to the sensual faculty, being formally sin without, or before the
acting of it; but this perhaps a sin of iufirmity, as the case may be (for
universim or always it is not; but very often wilful and damning, though it
never come to act) whereas if this sin (of infirmity while it was only in
the conception, i. e. consent of the will) come to birth (i. e. actual
commission) or perfection, and fitness for birth, (which requires some space,
and time) it may justly be said a sin against strength, and so in the very
Covenant of grace a fatal mortiferous sin.

And therefore though before we said that the same sin in Sect. 24.
specie, might be but an infirmity in one, and yet a wilful sin in another,
yet this affirmation will need this caution to interpret it, that the meaning
of it be only this, that a sin that is only an infirmity in one, may by
some means of aggravation become wilful in another, but not e contra, that
that which, upon some grounds or supposition of strength common to all men, may
be in universum defined a wilful sin, can by any means be extenuated into
an infirmity. That which I now say, I mean of any gross outward act, or habit
of sin, because in these I conceive there is some mora or stay, wherein the
spirit may be advised with; and then that being supposed in good health or
regenerate state will not fail to suggest sufficient arguments against that
sin, and so be a means to retract that sudden stolen consent, before it come
to act, at least to habit; Or if it be not it self without auxiliaries able to
combat with the temptation, yet it will out of the word of God be able to
direct us to some aid, which being called in, will either improve us to a
competent strength, or help to disarme and weaken the temptation, which we
shall find by trying, and making use of those means; be they our prayers
either for grace in time of need, or as I said prayer as a means of
divertisement, or be they fasting, vigilance, etc. or be it but a tempting to
do our best, for this is very ordinary to observe in our selves, that (when we
put our selves to it, and do our best) we prove able to do far more, then
ever we dreamt, we had been able. And this is very remarkable, whether you
consider it, as a truth in morality, wherein it has been observed that
necessity or extreme danger enables men to do miracles, which when they are
past they are amazed to see them done by them, (as Hierocles excellently shows
on that golden Pythagorean (...)) or as a truth of Scripture, wherein there be
many promises that God will aid when we fight, cooperate when we work, assist
when we endeavor, and not be wanting to them which are not first culpably
wanting to themselves.

Having said thus much of wilful sins (for the disabusing of Sect. 25.
those who are over apt to flatter themselves that their sins are infirmities
and no more, and therefore sure of their pardon in Christ, though continued in,
or not retracted by particular repentance) I shall not think this discourse
chargeable or accusable of any dangerous or hurtful severity, by being apt to
drive men to despair. 1. Because it is known in Scripture and acknowledged by
all, and now confessed by this paper, that there is a tabula post naufragium, a
planke after shipwreck, repentance, as it implies forsaking, and change of
mind, and the working of that in every such sinner, is the thing that all this
while I intend, and there is no way possible for the working it, but this, by
representing the danger, if it be not wrought, which he, that takes all his
sins for infirmities, will never be convinced of, while he so thinks. And 2.
because the despair that is dangerous is that which is contrary to the
purifying hope, to that hope that sets upon amendment, by assuring that there
is mercy to be had on such terms; And as any other hope is but groundless
confidence, so any other despair but that which makes us give over amending,
is in some respects a very useful, at least not very noxious, despair:
useful, if it set us on mending, when without it we would not; as in case of
despair or distrust only of our present condition, in respect of our present
sins, but not of the future, because there is yet place for repentance: or not
noxious, I mean not so far, as to damn, or do any thing but deprive us of
some comfortable assurance here, (the want of which, if we want nothing else,
will never prejudice any man's salvation, whatever they think, that take this
assurance to be Faith) as in case of dying without all hope of Heaven, when
that no hope proceeds only from an amazing sight of former sins, which
though we have sincerely forsaken, yet none but God infallibly sees that we
have, and our selves out of an humble lowly conceit of all our own actions,
(our repentance particularly undervalued by us) think and resolve we have not.
For sure if God see we have changed sincerely, and so there be assurance
respectu objecti, in respect of the object, it is an error in us to think we
have not; (from whence proceeds the non-assurance of the Subject) and this
error if it be only in the understanding, and produce no evil life, will
sure damn none that should not otherwise be damned.

For whereas it may be objected, that he may seem to want Sect. 26.
that affiance in Christ for salvation, which is a saving necessary grace, I
answer, that that affiance (that is so) is the rolling my self on Christ for
salvation, and if I perish, I perish, the denying and renouncing all trust in
my self in my own righteousness, faith, repentance, my own any thing, but
only Christ, and God's mercy in him; not the believing my personal election,
or that I shall be saved what ever my sins be, and how unreformed soever. For
besides that this is in an unreformed sinner (speaking of wilful sins) were
the believing of a Lie, because there is really no mercy or Salvation for such;
besides this I say there is no obligation or command in Scripture, which can be
thought to make it duty or necessary for any to believe himself a true
poenitentiary even when he is so. It Is true we are commanded to prove our work
etc. Gal. 6. 4. i. e. to ponder and balance every action we take in hand
whether it will bear the (...) trial of the test or no, and this we are
encouraged by that which follows, that we shall have (...) boasting only in our
selves. But then, first, this precept of trying is not a precept of knowing or
believing. Secondly, this trying his own work, signifies the direct act of
conscience, the doing each action with a good conscience, but belongs not to
the reflexive act of Conscience upon the whole life past, or if it do,
requires not, that every man should at every minute of his life believe or know
infallibly that this state is good, and shall be so to the end. Thirdly, the
boasting there is set only in opposition to boasting over another (as appears
by that which follows v. 5. for every man shall bear his own burden, i. e.
another man's being worse then you will do you no good) to judging well of our
selves by that deceitful way of comparing our selves with those that are worse
then we: and therefore, fourthly, it is observable that it is not said by way of
promise (...), he shall have matter of boasting in himself, (for sure the best
man living has little of that) but (...), only in himself, all the boasting
or comfort that he has shall be in himself and in the uprightness of his
own conscience, as that is opposed to comparing or comforting himself (as the
Pharisee with the Publican) because others are worse then he. And so still the
want of this assurance being the utmost inconvenience that this doctrine can
possibly at the worst view of it bring upon him, this will amount no higher
then some present discomfort, which will be recompensed abundantly by the
gains it brings with it of being disdeceived and brought timely and happily to
repentance.

The short is, let these sins which thou see improved, perhaps beyond thine
expectation into wilful sins, be sincerely resolved Sect. 27.
and labored against, and all means used for the performing that resolution,
and then if by any unsuperable weakness of thine thou failest in performing
it or overcomming them, perhaps I shall retract my doctrine in some part as it
is appliable to thee; or if I do not, be confident I have done thee no
considerable injury, though I should have deceived thee in some particular; I
am sure I am not guilty to my self of any design to do so, and therefore I
hope my error shall not be a culpable one, because error amoris, an error of
kindness, or care, or love, in that I desired to make heaven as sure to thee
as I could, though not to make thee over sure of heaven.

Somewhat being thus set down by way of character to know Sect. 28.
wilful sins by, we shall suppose that that will also be helpefull to the
defining what sins of infirmity are. For of that no scruple will be made to
affirm, that what ever sin is not wilful in any of the former descriptions
of it, must be resolved to be of infirmity; there be no middle or third betwixt
those two in the second covenant-account of sins. By the rule therefore of
contraries we shall best proceed. 1. In general, to define a sin of
infirmity, that which is not against strength or grace, or that which (though
we labor and endeavor sincerely against all sin, and use what means we are
convinced will tend to the overcoming of sin) we yet fall into, either
through humane frailty alone, or through Satan's cunning, taking advantage of
that our frailty.

As first, when (as at first we gave hints of resolution) any invincible Sect.
29.
and so excusable ignorance of Gods will in some particulars betray me to some
sin, (for then my understanding or spirit is not of strength sufficient to
advise me) then the sin is of weakness, and therefore Romans 14. they that are
called the weak, v. 1. are explained to be they that lack knowledge v. 10.
which all they that have are called the strong through that Chapter. Or
secondly, when the suddenness of the assault gives not my spirit leisure to
represent those perswasives and determents which it would do if it were not so
surprised; and so for want of those representations on that side, the present
promises of the temptation do preponderate and prevail against all that is
offered to the contrary; for as a man that has time to set himself upon his
guard will be able to resist and vanquish that enemy which by surprisall takes,
and binds and conquers him with ease, so is the will of a man in case of
sudden surprisal; It has no leisure to make use of those succors that
reason could afford, if it had time to muster them up. And so being more weak
at such times then at other, the sins that at such time it yields to, but
would not at another, are sins of Infirmity.

For it is to be observed that the upper soul moves the will not Sect. 30.
as a natural but rational agent, uses syllogismes and arguments to persuade,
has not that despoticall power to have it at its beck or nod, it is not by a
Go and it goes, and come and it comes, (as Aristotle's Philosophy seems to
set it) that what the understanding prescribes to be done, the will must do;
but the course is of some more length. The understanding must dispute and
canvasse it against the carnal appetite, answer the motives brought by that,
and then give more persuasive ones for the contrary; and then perhaps the
understanding is otherwise busy at that minute when the temptation comes, and
the popular carnal argument that it has used, has prevailed and gotten
consent before the understanding was aware of it, either through present
business and inability to attend more things at once, or for want of an (...)
suddenness of mind to represent presently the arguments it has on its side,
or to find out the Sophismes ont other. Or however, To dispute it thoroughly and
clear all difficulties, and indeed (if it be but) to make this one Syllogism,
[the terrors of the Lord belongs to him that commits such a sin as thou art
now tempted to but that man is mad that will upon any carnal motives venture
upon the terrors of the Lord, therefore that man is mad that will adventure on
that sin,] and then to prove and make good against the contrary fallacious
suggestions of the flesh, etc. every part of that Syllogism, and moreover to
bring it home particularly to thee at that time, will require some space, and
that (by the suddenness and no warning of the temptation) being not afforded,
the spirit in this case is not able to do its duty, and so the sin will be
committed for want of strength. For the want of strength that especially
denominates the sin of infirmity, is not any want of bodily strength (for
whatever is committed for want only of that is a kind of rape, no voluntary
action, nor consequently any sin so much as of infirmity, an act or defect of
the body, not of the will, and so not chargeable upon the man which is
primarily his soul, (...), thy soul is thou) but of spiritual or inward
strength, i. e. of grace, and of motives and suasories to obedience, more
effectual, or operative, or powerful, then any the world, or flesh, or devil
has to the contrary. And seeing these arguments are perpetually to be had from
every regenerate Christian's spirit, and the only want is the non-representing
or non-producing of them in time of need, if the case stands so, that by
reason of the sudden surprizall, (or which is somewhat different) clancular
surreption, when from some indifferent acts a sin steals on us, as by
drinking one glass of wine I am prepared to a readiness to drink a second,
and perhaps by that sending up some cloud to the understanding, or warming, and
so emboldning me, I may be much induced to a third, and so every step make me
more unable not to proceed) they cannot be thus produced, this sin thus
consented to must needs be a sin of infirmity in him that merely through
ignorance of the power of wine is so betrayed, though to him that had one such
warning, and yet thus falls again as before I said, I cannot be so favorable.

Or thirdly, when the vigilance and importunate diligence and Sect. 32.
indefatigable siege of the temptation is such, as that if the man do not
watch with as continued a diligence, the will will be taken unfortified, and so
by that disadvantage won to consent, (as in case of daily incursion of any one
temptation, or of all sins, some at one time, some at another, every minute
almost some) then the sin that is committed merely thus, may pass for a
sin of Infirmity; because though every assault particularly considered be
such as that the spirit might have been vigilant enough to prevent it, yet to
be so perpetually upon the guard is morally impossible; and so sometime to nod,
and slip, or fall may pass uncensured for an infirmity. And therefore when to
that which is said truly of the second Covenant [that the condition of it is
feisable because there is now under the Gospel no more required sub periculo
animae, but to do what we are enabled to do, and no man can be unable to do
that] it is wont to be objected that no man ever did all that he is able to do,
and therefore though it be Logically possible to do so, and so to perform the
condition of the second (though not of the first) Covenant, yet it is moraly
impossible, i. e. it is not to be imagined that ever any man will do it, (and
then that will be all one in effect with the condition of the first Covenant,
which is acknowledged utterly impossible.) To this we answer, that therefore
the Gospel has made provision even for these moral impossibilities, and not
required the regenerate Christian, sub periculo animae, to perform always what
ever he is able to perform, but indulged so much to humane frailty, that what
ever is morally consequent to that, shall be matter of excuse to us, and so
particularly to fall sometimes through daily incursion of temptation, only
because I do not (which it cannot be expected I should) watch always, will be
matter of excuse also.

Besides these 3 heads of sins of infirmity, some others there Sect. 33.
are, which will not so clearly be put under one or several heads, such as
are those that the levity of the matter and that inadvertence betrays us to,
(supposing that that be not gross, or affected, or caused by some wilful
sin) for some degree of this there will be in the most knowing and most
vigilant man, and some sins will drop from us by this means, which wholly to
avoid may be truly said to be above Humane Power.

One head of these sins of infirmity there is yet behind, containing Sect. 34.
many branches under it, of which 'twould be too long to treat particularly,
and yet without a particular descending to particulars, hard to define whether
they be infirmities, or no. Namely, sins which passion betrays us to,
meaning thereby such passions which it is not in the Christian's power so to
quell, but that they will be apt thus to betray him. These sins are either 1.
the inordinacy of these passions themselves, which I think neither nature nor
grace can so wholly conquer in this life, but that in some kind or other there
will at some time appear some inordinacy, some act of either immoderate anger,
or fear, or love, or joy, or sorrow, at some time or other, and of these we
may define in general, that he that first studies himself so carefully as to
discern which of these he is most inclinable to by his temper, and then
labors sincerely against all, but with most industry against that, to which he
is most inclinable, (of which sincerity he will be able to pass some judgment
by the daily impairing of the violence of those passions, for sure if he labor
sincerely, especially by the use of proper means, he will be able to advance
somewhat toward victory, though not absolutely arrive to it) shall have the
excuse of infirmities for his some few acts of immoderate passion.

Or 2. These sins are some other specificall acts of sin which these
passions betray men to, which though much different in guilt Sect. 35.
as well as nature from the mother sins, and many times very far from
infirmities, (for sure he that for fear would sacrifice to Idols, through
anger kill etc. will hardly be thus excused) yet is it very possible that such
sins that some passions may betray us to, may deserve that title of
infirmities. As when any natural trembling or other passion incident to the
flesh, being (without any improvement into an inordinate passion) an incitation
of mind, makes me not discern or not weigh the sinfulness of some small light
sin, which offers it self to rid me from my fear etc. as if the venturing
of some lesser sin should promise me rescue from death, which being otherwise
represented to me as unavoidable, were withal very formidable to me.

For although in this case the least sin be not in strictness to Sect. 36.
be admitted, though it be for the saving of my life, and though the deliberate
resolution that in such a case I will venture on such a sin, because it is
but a sin of Weakness and so excusable, do make it in that case to be
wilful and unexcusable; yet abstracting it from this, and considering it not
beforehand, but only at the time of sudden surprizall, it may be said, that
the temptation of the fear being so great above the proportion and size that
the sin is at that time represented in, this may pass for a sin of
infirmity.

To come now to specificall or particular sins, and define universim that
they are sins of infirmity (as of some I did that they Sect. 37.
were wilful) I shall not adventure, because as I said, some circumstances
might improve some acts under those species into wilful sins, in some men at
some time. All that I shall say is, that 1. Evil thoughts being suddenly (or
as soon as they are deprehended) rejected with indignation, 2. Wandering
thoughts in time of prayer, following us only out of custom of thinking on
some honest or lawful things (which yet I desire and in some ejaculation pray
for strength to cast away from me, when I set about that work) and never
distinctly consented to, but crouding in upon a confused imperfect consent, or
non-rejection, 3. Wicked motions unconsented to, or if on the sudden
consented to, yet presently retracted again, (and not only strangled or
frustrated for want of opportunity of acting them) are most capable of that
title of infirmities.

For any more particular knowledge of them, every man will Sect. 38.
best be able to advise himself, when he has tried his actions by this
touchstone, that [Those only are sins of infirmity, when our sincere
endeavor and industry and the use of grace given us, and prayer for more
grace, and other means prescribed us, are not able to free us from some acts
of those sins, or when all our failings in endeavor etc. are but consequents
of humane frailty, not of wilful sin.

Of these that which I shall say for close, will, I conceive, be matter of as
much comfort, as the former part was of discomfort to any. To wit, that through
the mercy of Christ under the Second Covenant, Infirmities unconquered,
unforsaken, sticking to us till our very deaths, may be and shall be most
certainly pardoned to them, that have nothing else to be charged on them. i. e.
by whom all wilful sins be sincerely forsaken, and for infirmities 1. their
souls humbled in confession, and contrition, 2. pardon humbly begged in
Christ's name, and 3. sincere endeavor used against them; they shall I say be
pardoned, if not so far as not to be punished in this life, yet so far as
not to separate from the love of God here, or vision of God hereafter, though
they be here never wholly overcome, or put off.

This I would make the interpretation of that distinction of a general and
particular repentance, so ordinary among Divines, that the particular
repentance should not only descend to particular wilful sins, especially
those that are committed after the receiving knowledge of the truth, but also
extend to the actual forsaking of them; but the general repentance belong
only to sins of infirmity; and that 1 without descending to all particulars
of that kind, 2 without extending our sorrow etc. for them to actual
forsaking. For the sacrifices of the law being appointed to be offered for
these sins, but not for wilful, argue that Christ typified by those
sacrifices, when we were weak, dyed for us, and by his death has obtained
pardon (for all that walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit) for all
their sins of weakness, on terms only of humiliation, particular, or,
where that cannot be, general confession, prayer for pardon, and affiance in
Christ for that pardon, without any actual overcomming or casting off, or
getting rid of them, (which in wilful sins must be superadded to the
former), so, that he that at the time or minute of his death should be guilty
of one of them, it would not hinder his salvation, any more then the same would
be inconsistent with a regenerate justified estate in time of life.

So that the conclusion may be safe and clear. A true Christian may safely
live and dye with sins of infirmity about him, but live or continue in any
wilful sin, much less dye he cannot, or if he do, he cease to be such.
He that is borne of God sins not, and he that does sin is the servant of
sin. Some spots there are which are not the spots of sons, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. and
they that are guilty of them, may be resolved, either never to have right unto,
or if they had, to have forfeited all their privileges of Saintship here,
(such are justification, etc.) and hopes and benefits of it hereafter.

A PARAPHRASTICALL EXPLICATION OF Heb. 6.
FOR this cause (or because it is an evidence of v. 1. (...).
children and babes to be always fed with milk, still taught nothing but the
elements of the beginning of the Oracles of God, ^. 5. 12. and to know nothing
of that higher doctrine of righteousness, i. e. of our justification and
sanctification, v. 13. (...),
which depends extremely on the doctrine of Christ's Melchizedekian
Priesthood, v. 10. to which being consecrated, v. 9. he [became the author of
eternal salvation to all those that obey him,] which words are the compendium
of the Doctrine of our Justification annd sanctification.) Let us proceed to
this higher and more perfect doctrine, or such as is (...).
proportionable to an upper form of Christians, leaving or passing over these
doctrines that Christ began with, (such was that of repentance and faith, Mark.
1. 15. the first words of his preaching) and not beginning at the very elements
of Christianity, again, those fundamental docttrines that the rawest
Christians are taught; as by name those, First, of repentance and turning from
our unregenerate works. Secondly, of Faith or belief on God. Thirdly, (...)
of baptizing, as that contains both the baptism of Repentance and of Faith
precedent, both John's baptism, the baptism of repentance, and Christ's
baptism administered by the Apostles, the baptism of Faith in the (...)
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Fourthly, of laying on of hands, whether that
which is answerable to our Confirmation, often mentioned of those that had been
baptized, or that in Absolution, or a third, that on the diseased, the ceremony
of curing them, (of which there is so frequent mention in the Gospells, Matthew.
9. 18. and 19. 13. Mark. 5. 23. and 6. 5. and 7. 32. and 8. 23, 25. and 16. 18.
Luk 4. 40. and 13. 13. and many times in the Acts in the description of
miraculous cures.) Fifthly, of the resurrection of the dead. Sixthly, of
eternal judgment or (...), (...) 3. (...).
adjudging of men to eternal life and eternal death. And by the help of God,
this we purpose to do, i. e. to proceed to those sublimer doctrines of
Christ's Melchisedekian Priesthood, forementioned, c. 5. and resumed v. 20. of
this Chapter. Only for those that are such non-proficients in Christianity,
that after so long profession of that doctrine need still to be taught the
principles again, even that of repentance from dead works, being themselves
turned back or in danger so to turn to their former Unchristian unregenerate
courses, let them know this important truth, for which I cannot but go out of
my way a little, and tell them in a parenthesis; That it is impossible, that
those who have bin once regenerated (for this is the result of that which is 4.
(...),
expressed by many phrases) that have once been baptized or enlightened, the
word signifies both, because adulti were not baptized, till they had been
catechized, and sufficiently instructed in the faith. 2. That have had a gust
or taste of the celestial gift, whether (...),
of Christ, that Tit. 2. is called (...), salvificall saving grace, or whether
the grace of Christ. 3. That have been partakers of the Holy Ghost, of (...),
those gifts and graces which that works in the heart by the preaching of the
word, or invisible overshadowing. 4. That have had a gust of the good word, or
Gospel ((...), being all one) of 5. (...),
Christ, and of the powers whether of the Kingdom of grace, the state of
Christianity, (for that is called (...), the age to come, by the LXXII. Is. 9.
6. where it is set, as the title of Christ, that he is (...), (...).
the father of the age to come, as opposite to that Judaicall State) or whether
of the Kingdom of heaven,) and fall from that state of regeneration, and those
6. (...)
privileges of Gods Spirit that attend it, (for the (...) is of equal
latitude with all the former particulars, and is the falling from, or
forfeiting of them all) should renew, or recover in an intransitive (...)
sense, or in an active reciprocal, renew or recover themselves to repentance,
(or once more being applied to Saint Paul's discourse of repentance, that Saint
Paul's (...)
preaching (taken by it self without superordinary measure of grace, should
renew such in a plain active sense) being by such sins of theirs guilty of a
kind of recrucifying of Christ, and putting him to a shameful (...).
death; for Christ who was once crucified and slain, is as it were revived in
the regenerate Christian's heart, lives and rules and reigns in him by faith,
and when that man falls to his old unregenerate course again, he crucifyes
Christ anew, and puts him to a contumelious death.

The clear understanding of these 3 verses 4, 5, 6. depends upon these 6
Gospell-truths put together. First, that without God's Spirit or special grace
no man can convert, repent, renew himself, much less recover after a
defection. Secondly, that by this grace and strength of God, man may convert
and repent, and being a regenerate convert, do all things through Christ that
strengthens him, work out his own salvation, and when he falls, if God do not
withdraw that grace, according to the words of our article, he may by the
grace of God rise again. Thirdly, that if in case of fall God does so
withdraw his grace, then the man cannot so renew himself, or recover to
repentance, nor can the ordinary power of the ministry work upon him.
Fourthly, that God has in the Gospel threatened upon our not making use of
this grace, to withdraw it or take it away from us, as appears by the parable
of the talents, where it is said, [To him that has, shall be given, and from
him that has not, shall be taken away even that which he hath] i. e. To him
that makes use of the grace given him, to the end for which 'twas given, the
resisting of sins, denying of lusts, and living soberly, and justly, and
godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 12. to him shall more grace be given; but
from him that makes not this use of it, (is an unprofitable steward of grace,
has grace, but does not thus resist sins by the help of it, from him) shall
be taken away even that which he has. Fifthly, that God does not upon every
sin committed by a regenerate (...), no not upon every sin committed
against knowledge, against grace (if it be but some single act) presently
withdraw his grace, for this sin may be presently retracted by repentance,
not indulged or staid in, and then to such humble sinners God gives grace does
not take it away from them. The case that such acts of sin bring regenerate
men to, has from the Scripture been explained in another discourse, which I
desire may be there considered, Of Conscien p. 34.
and not repeated here. And though it be a sad one, even God's delivering up to
Satan, yet does not that infer the withdrawing of his Grace, or forsaking,
but rather the giving or continuing sufficient grace, 2 Cor. 12. 9. passage
out, and power of bearing it, 1 Cor. 10. 13. But then sixthly, that upon the
regenerate man's walking after the flesh, relapsing into the sins of his
former unregenerate life, like a dog to the vomit, etc. or into a new set of
other sins, spiritual pride, faction (able to denominate a man carnal, 1
Cor. 3. 3.) and the like filthiness of the spirit, then does God withdraw his
spirit from that man, and therefore such sins as these are called peccata
vastantia conscientiam, and tristantia spiritum, grieving and quenching of the
spirit of God; which though it strives with sinners, yet shall it not always
strive, Genesis 6. 3. when unrighteousness comes in, i. c. any old or new
vicious habit, then the holy spirit of discipline will not abide, Wisd. 1. 5.
And therefore it is said, 2 Pet. ^* 21. That they that after they have known,
turn from the holy Commandment, or the way of righteousness, and are again
entangled in the pollutions of the world, which they had once escaped, v. 20.
fall into a worse estate then they were in before their regeneration; which
must needs be by the total withdrawing of grace from them. To which purpose
is that of Saint James out of Solomon, that God resists the proud, where
resisting is opposed to giving of grace, and so notes taking it away, and the
proud opposed to the humble, are the proud impenitent obdurate sinners, or they
that go on in any impenitent course against knowledge or conscience. All which
being premised, it is clear that they that are thus fallen from a regenerate
state to their old (...)
unregenerate course of sin, etc. and so by Gods just punishment deprived of
his grace, without which they were able to do nothing, are not now possibly
able to recover or renew themselves to repentance. As they that are only slipped
or fallen, but not layne down in their mire of sin, might by the grace which
they yet have, and by the preaching of the word, be able to do.

That this is the meaning of the place, may yet farther appear by the
similitude following, v. 7, 8. brought on purpose to explain it. For the
ground that has the benefit of the rain to 7. (...)
moisten its natural dryness, and so to make it able to bear fruit, and that
has sucked in that rain, and been actually moistened by it, (which is the
lively expression of the premised regenerate man) if it do bring forth fruit
to the husbandman, perform that which it is enabled (...).
(and is expected from it) to perform, (which is an expression of him that
makes good use of grace, lives like a regenerate man, this [he that hath] in
the parable of the talent) it shall receive blessing from God (the more grace
in the parable.) But that same moistened and manured ground (the same regenerate
man) which brings forth nothing but thorns and briars, (the servant that
proves evil and faithless, that makes not 8. (...),
use of grace to its due end of resisting lusts, and overcomming the world, but
falls into his unregenerate sins, lives as if no culture had been bestowed
upon him) is rejected, (deprived of that reward which the other (...).
had) for so (...), an agonisticall word, signifies generally in this book, as
1 Cor. 9. 27. one that misses the prize, the reward) the blessing of more (...).
grace: And contrariwise is nigh to cursing, that punishment of withdrawing of
grace due to it, and the end of it is to be burnt, or to burning, which whether
it be set to note eternal perdition, or else an extraordinary kind of
husbandry, which we call Devonshireing, cutting off the turfe and burning it
upon the ground, to make that bear which ordinary culture would do no good
on, I shall not define. Only from that latter interpretation, which I suppose
will be rejected, I shall take the hint to say that which though the
interpretation be not admitted, will yet be without contradiction true, that
how impossible so ever it be for such an one to recover himself, or for the
ordinary means to work upon him, yet it is still possible, that God may by
some extraordinary means of spiritual husbandry recover and reduce that man.
All that is here affirmed is only this, that there is no promise that he will,
and the thing is only in the hands, the free hands of God, not so much as
constrained by a promise, and so no ground either of depending upon it for my
self that God will do it for me, or prejudging others that for them he will
not do it.

I can foresee but one objection now producible against the probability of this
interpretation, and it is this, that this impossibility of doing any good by
our own natural strength without Grace is so universal a truth, that it
cannot be here appropriated to this one case of apostasy or recidivation of
the regenerate. For the regenerate, remaining so, can do no good thing without
it, and those that are not yet regenerate are as unable to convert themselves,
as these are to recover or renew. To which though I might answer, that the
instancing in this particular, is most (and only) proper to the Apostles
present purpose, who speaks to converts, who were either thus fallen or in
danger thus to fall, (and therefore though the Aphorism might be extended to
those others, yet we have no reason to expect, that the Apostle should so far
recede from his business in hand as to do it, and so the objection will be of
no force) yet will the answer be more clear and satisfactory, if I add, that
indeed that which is here said, is proper only to this kind of sinners, the
relapst regenerate. For of the regenerate not so fallen, it is most certain and
agreeable to Scripture-doctrine to affirm, that by the spirit of Christ he can
do all things, that he has sufficient grace, and by that sufficient strength
to do what God in the Gospel requires of him, and therefore it is affirmed of
him, i. e. his person thus enabled, that he is thus able; and consequently he
is every where exhorted to do accordingly, to work out his salvation, to
stand, to quit himself like a man, to purify himself, and a hundred the
like, which (every one) suppose him to have grace by which to do it.

And for the unregenerate, though indeed he having no grace, can as yet do
nothing, yet some promises there are in the new Covenant of giving of grace to
him, (mention of giving Christ for every man, (that Christ being the (...), the
salvificall grace that appears to all, teaching them, etc.) and in Christ
striking a Covenant with those to whom he is given, and part of the effect of
that Covenant, (...), to give strength to serve him, and again mention of the
talents dispensed among the servants, to all some, and upon the good use of the
least more bestowed. From whence sure it may be concluded, that it is by some
default of our own, whosoever have not sufficient grace given us, especially
the promise being so punctual, that God will give the Holy Spirit to them that
ask him of God by importunate unwearied prayer.) Whereas in case of the
forementioned relapse, there is no such promise of Grace, to give us such a
claim to it, nor consequently the same degree of possibility to renew, that
the other has to convert, God's promise of giving grace to them, which do not
resist it, adding much to that possibility; and his no promise to the other,
being sufficient proof of the impossibility of the other, according to the
importance of Aquinas his note out of Aristotle, l. 3. Eth. that those things
are said to be possible to us which we can do by the help of our friends,
(which we can do by a derived power, though of our selves originally we
cannot) and God being a friend (I mean no enemy, but lover and helper beyond
all friends) to unregenerate men, so far as to give Christ to dye for them,
and his holy Spirit to descend to them, being such enemies, to love them and
give them the effects of love, whereas to them that have rebelled and vexed his
Spirit, he is not such a friend, but an enemy to fight against them, Is. 63.
10. And so no such secundary derived way of possibility competible to them,
because no such assurance of any friend to aid them in it, there being none
other imaginable but God, and he being to such an one an enemy rather.

Parallel to this place thus interpreted is that in the same Ep. c. 10.

For those that after the accepting of the knowledge of the truth, after the
embracing the Gospel, or Christianity, 26. (...),
being regenerate and born a new of water and the Holy Ghost, do fall
willingly into their old (or other new) courses of sin (for so (...)
signifies, not the single act, but the habit of sin, 1 John 3. 6. and 5. 18.
Romans 2. 12. Heb. 3. 17. and (...) added thereto notes it to be a voluntary
wilful trade of sin, which is supposed by having received knowledge of the
truth; whereas it is possible to continue ignorantly, and so by infirmity in
such habit, and then that will not be capable of such aggravations as there do
follow, nor withal pertinent to this case) by this means fall into a
condition, for which the Gospel has not provided any ordinary remedy. Which
(...).
is the meaning of [there remains not now a sacrifice for sinnes] And that
sense arises thus. For them that had sinned ignorantly under the law, there
was place for sacrifice, the Priest was to offer a sinne-offering for them
(called ordinarily in the 72. (...)) and they were not to be farther punished
or proceeded against in foro, but he that did wilfully or despightfully break
the law, was upon sufficient proof of it by witnesses, put to death in
capital, or otherwise punished in other crimes, without mercy or pity to him,
(which is the sum of the 28 verse) and so in like manner proportionably 28.
(...).
to those types, he that has sinned through ignorance or ignorantly, lived,
and gone on in sin, (and such the sins of the unregenerate life are counted
to be, done ignorantly in unbelief, as Saint Paul says of himself, and the
same will hold of the sins of those that are Christians in profession,
baptized, etc. and yet have not amended their lives or forsaken their sins,
for they are still in an unregenerate state, not capable of that description,
c. 6. 4, 5.) there is mercy to be had for him (as Saint Paul says of himself,
1 Timothy 1. 13.) Christ has dyed, offered himself a sacrifice for sin, and so
delivered men from the danger of such sins, upon condition that they do
repent of them, and amend, nay by this sacrifice of his he has purchased grace
for such, sufficient to bring them out of that darkness to light, from that
state of unregeneration to repentance, so that for that man considered in that
state, though he be a sinner, yet (as Saint John says, 1 Epist. 2. 1.) Christ
is an advocate and a propitiation, and here there remains a sacrifice, a
means of pardon and a means of converting, Christ giving himself, both that
he might redeem and purify, Tit. 2. 14. justify and sanctify. Yea farther,
when this man being regenerate falls into any single act of sin, (if it be
through ignorance or weakness (as still there remain some relics of them in
the regenerate, the state in this nonage of ours, being but an imperfect state)
then (...) yet of still this sacrifice remains, and pardon is had by it to the
regenerate disciple upon acknowledgement and petition; nay if it be not capable
of the excuse of ignorance or weakness, yet if it be not continued in, but
retracted presently by repentance, this sarrifice (...) still remains in force
for him, as in the Law when the leprosy does not spread, Lev. 13. 23. or is
healed in the leper, 14. 3. then though the Priest shut him up again seven
days, etc. answerable to excommunication or delivering up to Satan, yet still
v. 4. the Priest shall offer sacrifice for his cleansing, and so here though
the sin be leprosy, an unclean spot in the soul, yet being not spreading
but presently retracted by repentance, it may bring some inconveniences upon
him, such as have been mentioned elsewhere in the case of delivering up to
Satan; but yet it may pass for a spot of sons, at least such as shall now
not hinder from being a son; and this sacrifice here, or 1 John 1. 7. the
blood of Christ parallel to it, cleanses from such sins as these, continues
pardon and grace as yet to such, obtaines of God that he withdraw neither. But
if any man, after the embracing of Christ, receiving the truth and grace, i. e.
being thus regenerate, shall return to his old pollutions again, (or some new
in exchange for them, the filthiness of the spirit in stead of that of the
flesh) to a course and trade of sin, having not now the excuses or
alleviations, of which before he was capable, showing himself to contemn both
the mercy and grace of God, to despise that pardon, and (to make no use of, but
contrariwise) to resist that grace; there is no direction for any offering for
such; this very sacrifice of Christ belongs not to him so far as by Covenant
to obtain continuance of pardon for him, or continuance of grace; God may
justly withdraw both, and Christ's blood say nothing to the contrary; nay, God
has told us that in this case he will withdraw both in the places
forementioned, and the same may be 20 (...),
collected from this place from the aggravations here set upon the sin, that
it is the treading upon the Son of God, profaning the blood of the Covenant,
i. e. making the blood of Christ uneffectuall to his pardon, and contumeliously
using the spirit of grace, and so grieving and quenching that spirit. And so v.
27. all that remains behind in justice, or by tenor of the second Covenant
expectable from God, is that he should proceed to judge such a sinner, and his
zeal 30 (...) etc.
or wrath burn like fire, to consume all such gainesayers or adversaries that
walk thus contrary to all his methods of mercy, of grace, and from hence all
that can toward comfort of such be concluded, is, that it is not here said, that
God cannot or never will give grace again to such, or use means for the
recalling them, because of God this is not here affirmed. From which negative
argument, though the possibility of such recovery may be concluded, yet there
are little grounds to conclude it probable, or reasonable for any man (that
should by that be encouraged to spiritual security) to depend or hope in it,
for if the weight of one passage be observed (how much worse punishment shall
he be thought worthy of or adjudged to? i. e. 31. (...);
worse then that under Moses law, when the offender, 28. was put to death
without mercy) we shall rather have reason to fear God will punish such with
excision or cutting off, without giving any new stock of grace to recall them
again: For the word (...) in this book does not so often import being thought
worthy, (which might consist with contrary mercy) as meeting with that reward,
actual receiving of it. So (...), Heb. 3. 3. is to have honor bestowed upon
him, (and (...), 1 Timothy 5. 17.) and not only to be thought worthy of it. In
proportion to which if the words should be interpreted and taken without
exception or dispensation, [(...), etc. he shall be punished in a worse manner]
there will be little place of comfort for such to depend on, and from thence to
fall into such dangerous snares; and yet because after all this it is possible
that though (...) in the good sense signify actual giving, yet it may not in
the ill, actual punishing, because to think worthy and to reward, still go
together in God, in retribution of good, but not so in evil, his pardoning
mercy often interceding; and again, because those words may well pass not for
any law set to God, (but only as a means to keep us from so falling, when we
stand, by setting such a direful character upon it, showing us how
promiselesse and dangerous such our state is) it will therefore be no
temptation to anywho is in this sad estate to be hopeless or give over
laboring to get out again, but rather a Summons or Proclamation of terror,
straight to awaken him out of that estate to humiliation and prayers to God,
lest it be too late. And in this the example of David will be encouragement to
him, who after a years sleep or lethargy in those sins of adultery and
murder, etc. (which were such falls of a regenerate man, and by God's ordinary
means never retracted all that while) was yet by God's grace, and mission of a
Prophet extraordinary recalled and reduced again, though it cost him afterward
many floods of tears and penitential expressions to wash out those spots
which he had thus contracted (and though even still he lies under the reproach
of that sin, when he does not of any other, because that only was indulged in
so long) 1 King. 15. 5. And the same may be said of Solomon also, who after
such heavy falls, which beyond all the children of God are sadly recorded of
him in Scripture, was by God brought back to repentance; God's mercy being
beyond all promise (I shall add beyond all other example) to him in this
behalf.

And therefore the close must be, that if we have followed them in their
sins, we must be sure to imitate them also, not only in the repentance, and
sincerity of that, but in all the degrees and demonstrations of their
repentance, if we hope for the mercy which they met with. To which I shall add
no more save only this, that the product of that which from these places has
been concluded, seems to be very agreeable with that famous case set by Saint
Augustine, l. de persever: of two men supposed to be converted together, to
live the life of converts in the same manner, to fall together, and so to
continue some time, and then one of them before death to recover and rise
again, and the other to dye in his state of relapse; where he makes this an
argument and example of God's making a discrimination betwixt men, supposing
this last act of recovery in the one, to be an act of spiritual extraordinary
grace to him, which was not given, nor by any obligation due unto the other;
which is the most that from these two places thus paraphrased has been
collected.

He that thinks he stands let him take heed lest he fall.

1 Cor. 10. 12. If any man be overtaken in a fault, you that are spiritual
restore such a man, considering thy self lest thou also be tempted,

Gal. 6. 1. Then says the Devil, I will return to my house from whence I
came out; and coming he finds it empty, swept, and garnished; then goes he
and takes with him seven other spirits worse then himself, and they go in
and dwell there, and the end of that man is worse then the beginning. So shall
it be to this evil generation,

Mat. 12. 42. Behold thou art made clean, go, sin no more, lest a worse
thing happen unto thee.

Joh. 5. 14.
OF A LATE, OR, A DEATHBED REPENTANCE.

Brutus in Epist. ad Pergamen.

(...).

By HENRY HAMMOND D. D.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1646.

OF A LATE OR A Deathbed Repentance.
CONCERNING a late or Deathbed repentance, Sect. 1.
(which I conceive much fitter for a sad secret consideration in the presence
only of God, and the Scripture, and ones own soul; then for a dispute or
debate, wherein either each party may be unwilling to yield, or willing to
retain their own prepossessions, or else that person that has long depended
on the benefit of a late repentance, may think it great rashness to resign
up that hold upon slight grounds, and such will any seem to be at a sudden
transient representation;) It must first be acknowledged, that one of those two
things is ordinarily understood by it, either the perfecting our accounts with
God at that time, reinforcing all our former good resolutions, and shutting up
that business of our souls, which in time of health had been sincerely begun,
but not perfected; or else the Beginning of that work of Repentance at that
time.

For the first of these it is acknowledged, that the Close of our Sect. 2.
lives, whether it be old age, or sick bed, is very proper and useful to that
purpose. For the person that has before that, sincerely converted to God with
unfeigned sorrow and confession of all former sins, and firm resolution of
amendment, (which is the least that true repentance can consist of) may then,
when he sees himself drawing toward a period of a life, mixed with infirmities,
and sins, lay his full load on his own shoulders, and so with true sorrow
and compunction, come heavy laden to his Savior, lay down that burden before
God by particular confession, and beseech his pardon through the sufferings and
satisfaction of Christ for every of these; which pardon the true sincere
penitent has on those terms promise to receive from Heaven. Nay, he that had
before made many good resolutions, and yet through custom / of the place,
through strength of natural constitution, and such like temptations, has
hitherto not been so faithful to his resolutions, as he ought, may now at
last upon God's visitation, and by help of this discipline of Heaven, radicate
and settle such resolutions so deep, that they would be constant, and
persevering, if he should again recover; and so this discipline may in that
case be thought to have been designed by God to this wholesome end, and the
working of such an effect will no doubt be acceptable in his sight.

But for the second, the beginning, I say the beginning the work of repentance
at that time, I desire these particulars may seriously Sect. 3.
be laid to heart. 1. In a general view of it, whether it be not reproachful
and contumelious thus to offer God the refuse and vilest of our age and parts,
like that offering to Ceres Phygaliensis (...).
in Pausanias; none of the honey of their bees, but only the wax, or juicelesse
part of their labor; and of their wool; those fleeces which were not fit for
use, but full of the daglockes, the coursest and (...).
foulest part of it. That kind of wool, if a late Critickes bold conjecture
might be heeded, was it in which the sponge of vinegar was put, when 'twas
given Christ on the Cross. The Criticisme I shall confess very insolent, but
the observation on that supposition, true (...). Heins: in Arist. 21.
and obvious enough, that it was the greatest contumely that could have been
offered unto Christ.

2. Whether a person that now in time of youth or health, depends in any
measure upon that repentance of old age, or disease, that deferres the
forsaking of wilful sins, or laboring to overcome passions or vanities for
the present, in contemplation of the possibility of doing all this at the last,
and of the conceived benefits or usefulness of such repentance, do not, for
the present, grieve, and resist, and refuse the holy spirit of God, which at
that time importunes to be heard and obeyed.

3. Whether he do not promise himself, that though Gods spirit Sect. 4.
be thus grieved and resisted, yet he will never be wearied out, but will be as
bountiful and constant in giving of grace, after such resistance, as before.

4. Whether to hope this be not contrary, as to that of the Prophet, Is. 63.
10. They rebelled and vexed his holy spirit, therefore he was turned to be
their enemy, and he fought against them; so also to the method of God in
dispensing his Grace described in the Gospel, especially in the parable of the
Talents, which goes upon this rule, that he that makes use of, and improves
that measure of Grace which God affords, shall have more, but he that does not,
that which he has shall be taken away from him; As Genesis 5. 3. where we read my
spirit shall not always strive with flesh; the Greek has (...), shall not
abide or dwell with him; and the Hebrew is thought to have a peculiar notion
((...) from (...) a sheath) my spirit or the spirit which I have given to man,
shall not be thus unprofitably laid up, and sheathed in him, the talent that
lies so long idle shall at length be taken away, and the flood be sent to awake
or drown such unprofitable-spirited-men. It is the phansy of a very learned
man, that these were the (...), 1 Pet. 3. 19. the spirits (in prison say we) of
whom God so complains that they were sheathed, lay idly and unprofitable in
mankind, in Noah's days who went and preached to them. Which if it be rightly
conjectured by him, will conclude them, and all such others in the number of
the (...), v. 20. disobedient, whose repentance and amendment Gods patience
((...)) once expected, but at length gave over expecting; the very same
provoking condition (expressed by the same word, (...)) that Heb. 3. 18. is put
under that direful oath of God, that they should not enter into his rest. Thus
the preaching of the Gospel, the means of working grace being allowed in an
eminent manner to God's people the Jews, and after the death of Christ, yet
farther continued to them for some time, upon their resisting of those means,
is taken away from them, Mat. 21. 43. To which purpose that terrible passage so
often repeated and so little understood (Matthew. 13. 13. Mar. 4. 12. Luke 8. 10.
Joh. 12. 40. Act. 28. 26. Romans 11. 8. all taken out of Isa. 6. 9.) is very
observable, being in the place of the Acts peculiarly applied to this matter,
the removing of the means of grace from the Jews to the Gentiles, v. 28. of
all which several repetitions of the same words, this is the plain constant
sense, that because they had first resisted that powerful means of grace, so
long vouchsafed unto them, therefore they were by God's just punishment
deprived of those means (that spoken to them obscurely in parables, which was
to others plainly, as the places in the Gospel specify) and so delivered up
to hardness of heart. For this reason or cause (so (...) denotes) because
their heart was (in the preter tense, was before, not is, in the present) waxen
gross, and their ears were dull of hearing, (...) in the aorist, they had for
some indefinite time been so slow and dull in hearing, (...), their eyes had
they closed, lest they should at any time see, or hear, or understand, or
convert, and so God should heal them. That this is the meaning of that hard
place (a proclaiming of consequent desertion from God upon their precedent
obdurating their hearts against God's means, and not any absolute, antecedent,
unprovoked act of God's hardening of them) the manner of setting down the place
both in Saint Matthew, and in the Acts, and the rendering it as a reason of
Christ's speaking to them in parables, in three other places, will enforce; as
might be more largely here manifested, if it were seasonable. And indeed (to
return from this short digression) the promises of the Gospel go generally
on this ground, assurance of grace to the humble, that is, to those that being
sensible of their danger through sin, do obey God's call, and resign
themselves up as Subjects to Christ, but withal that threat adjoined of
resisting the proud or disobedient, Ja. 4. 6.

And though it may be said that God does not always withdraw Sect. 6.
his Grace, and his calls the means of grace upon every such resistance of
ours, and therefore I may still hope that he will continue them to me to the
hour of my death, and then I may make use of them; yet the answer will be
pregnant enough,

1. That although God upon every act of our resistance does Sect. 7.
not wholly withdraw all grace, yet we have reason to think that the oftener we
refuse, and resist, the more apt God is to forsake and desert us, and perhaps
the weaker are his after-cals; As the Angel of God which he promised to send as
a guardian before Israel, Exodus 23. 20. endued with the power of God, v. 21.
was, say the learned Jews, upon their worshipping the calfe, taken away from
them, and an inferior weaker Angel given in his stead, with no more then mere
Angelical power; and this they ground on Exodus 33. 3. where God, that v. 2.
says he had promised to send his Angel before them, now tells them, he will
not go up in the midst of them, for they are a stiff-necked people. And then
sure this will be able to enforce that warning of God's concerning that Angel,
Exodus 23. 21. Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; as being sure
that any such provocation will bring some revenge or punishment after it. A
gleame of which truth it was, that the Heathens conceived that their (...), the
Gods, or Angels of Cities or Nations, did upon the provocations and sins of
the inhabiters solemnly forsake their Altars and Temples, resign up their care
and tuition of them. 2dly. That every act of our present resistance adds to our
future obduration, as the beating of an hammer on an anvill (such is the (...)
in Theod. the soul that reverberates every stroke or call) makes the anvill
the smoother, and in effect the harder, I mean less capable of impression;
and then in the ordinary dispensation of the spirit, though God should continue
the same degree of grace, after our frequent resistances which he gave before;
yet we should then be less likely to receive it, then we were before, when yet
it appears we did not receive it. Whether by one or both of these means it
comes to pass, I know not; but sure every such sin that is thus added to the
tale, makes the reduction of any sinner more difficult and improbable then
before it was; and I shall appeal to the conscience of every such man that
has for any time flattered himself with the hopes of what a Deathbed
repentance may do for him, whether he do not find that ever since he
entertained those hopes, he has grown more wretchlesse, profane,
Atheistical, and so much farther from the end he hopes for, or depends on, and
every day in an estate more deplorable, and desperate, then other.

3dly. That we have no reason of believing, or hoping, farther Sect. 8.
then we have grounds from the word of God, (the foundation of all belief and
hope) and that either from some promise, or example there.

And therefore the next thing I desire should be considered, is,

1 How far those promises and examples may be extended, and from thence that
it be resolved unreasonable and unsafe to extend our hopes or persuasions of
our selves any farther, then those will make it prudent for us to extend them.

For the promises, that which is most familiar with us, and on Sect. 9.
which it is most likely most men take up this hope, is that, wherewith our
Common prayer-booke begins, At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his
sins etc. of which (that we mistake it not) these two things are observable.

1. That that place contains no promise of Gods giving the grace of repentance
at all times, which is the only thing which all this time we consider; but
only that at all times God is ready to forgive on supposition that we do
repent.

3 That that place cannot so fitly or probably be applied to a deathbed
repentance, because if we look into the margent of our books we shall see the
place cited from Ezech. 18. 21, 22. and therefore is in justice no farther to
be extended, as an infallible promise of Scripture, then that in Ezech. will
bear; and that upon examination will yield no more then this, that at what
time soever a wicked man shall convert to God, turning from all his sins,
that he has committed, and on the contrary live, and perform the actions of a
new life, keep all Gods Statutes, that is, perform (though not perfect, yet)
sincere, universal, impartial obedience, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live, he shall not dye, his transgressions shall be
forgiven; and in his righteousness, his renewed sincere obedience, he shall
live. Which doing, and keeping, and righteousness, how it can be applied to
him which begins his work not till he sees that he is just ready to dye, will
hardly be imaginable.

But having said thus much of this one Place, I remember the Sect. 10.
saying of an ancient (uncontradicted by any that I have heard of) that though
God promise pardon to all penitents at all times, Qui promisit ^oenitenti
ve^iam, non pronisit peccanti ^oenitentiam.
yet he has no where promised repentance to those all at all times, and that
is all we now speak of, and therefore shall now suppose there are no such
places, and therefore seek no farther for them; and though without such
promise it is possible God may still give that grace of repentance, yet that he
should do so;

1. It is extraordinary, and therefore he that despises his present offers,
has little reason to hope that those extraordinaries shall be reserved for
him, and if still he will hope, Job has told him, The hypocrites hope shall
perish, and I shall be bold to add, that there is no greater degree of
Hypocrisy, then this want of sincerity, which appears now in him by his not
accepting of grace for the present, by refusing or deferring to do that which
he is enabled and solicited to do.

In stead of seeking after more such promises I shall add one Sect. 11.
terrible threatening, Psalm. 95. which is repeated by Saint Paul in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, and by our Church thought fit to begin our daily morning
service. Where after these words To day if you will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts, which signifies the time present, or at farthest the time of Gods
calling to them in his word to hear his voice, it is straight added to all
others, I have sworn (and Gods oaths are irreversible) in my wrath, that they
shall not enter into my rest. To which these two other places may fitly be
subjoyned, Prove. 1. 26. where as the punishment of those that have refused
God's calls, it is added in God's name, I will laugh at their Calamity, and
mock when their fear comes. A terrible place to him that has neglected Gods
seasons and opportunities, and at last comes to be surpised with Death, and
the fears that accompany it, and then begins to fly to God for succor, and
grace, and pardon, and God in stead of compassionating, scoffs, and laughs,
and mocks, at him; The least that this can import, will be that that time is a
very improbable time for that most necessary work to be wrought by Christ in
us. The other place is that admonition of the author to the Hebrews 12. 16,
17. that no man be profane as Esau was, in selling his birthright for a
morsel of meat. i. e. (at least by way of accommodation) that precious
privilege and birthright of grace here, and (consequent to the Christian use
of that) his eternal inheritance in Heaven, for some transitory pleasure of
this earth, lest it befall him eternally, what befell Esau here in respect of
his father's blessing, he found no place of repentance, could not get his
father Isaac to repent, or reverse the donation from Jacob to him, though he
cried bitterly for it, Have thou but one blessing, O my father? bless me, even
me also, O my father; and so, as it follows there, sought it carefully with
tears. The full importance of the place is, that they that are guilty of
Esau's despite and contempt, which is there called profaneness, may have
reason to apprehend that they may fall into the same hazard for their spiritual
estate, that Esau did for his temporal, be irreversibly lost, and find no
place for repentance in God, though they seek it with sorrow, and grief, and
bitter compunction, carefully with tears. To which purpose Christ's dealing
with the people of the Jews, is matter of example, and admonition to every of
us, Luke 19. 42. when weeping over Jerusalem he said, If thou had known, or
O that thou, even thou did know, at least in this thy day, the things which
belong unto thy peace; and as if that time were past, just as he was a
speaking, he adds, But now they are hid from thine eyes. For the days shall
come, etc. It seems before the point of the coming of those days of their
surprizall, the things belonging to their peace were hid from their eyes, to
wit, upon that critical fatal act of their crucifying Christ, adding that
bloody transcendent impiety to their former killing, and stoning of the
Prophets, on which certain irreversible destruction went out against them; In
which case though Noah, Daniel, and Job should intercede, they should not be
able to reverse it.

To which purpose it is observed generally by Divines from these, and the like
grounds, that there is to every wicked man a Sect. 12.
time when the measure of his iniquities are filled up, and Gods patience in
waiting for him so wearied out, that he gives over calling, or expecting, or
waiting his repentance. This was wont to to be called by the Jews the measure
of judgment, i. e. a pitch of sin, upon which judgment infallibly followed,
destruction of whole Kingdoms, and the like. This time is not to be known by
any man of himself, (nor to be discerned by any observation, and comparing of
himself with others) either by the number of sins, or calls of God, or
years spent in sin contrary to those calls, there being so much variety in
these, and in God's dealing with men, that nothing but Gods revelation can give
us any certain knowledge in this point; Only this may be said of it, 1. That
the death of an impenitent sinner, i. e. God's plucking him away in that state,
is, when it comes, a certain indication of it. 2. That it is possible, I say
possible, that it may be before the time of death, i. e. that the man which is
come to that fullness of sin and ripeness for excision, may be kept alive by
God beyond that time, and if that, which I say is possible, ever actually be,
then is that man concluded under a final sentence, an irreversible estate in
evil, even in this life, and consequently it is possible some impenitent sinner
may in this life arrive to that estate. For as Numb. 16. 38. the censers and
the lives of Corah and his company were forfeited to God together, (as that
place should be read, the censers of these sinners with their souls, or lives,
v. 38. are hallowed, v. 37. i. e. consecrated, forfeited (...)
to God, their goods and their lives together) so is it with grace, the
special suppllex or furniture of the soul, that, and life are betrayed
together, the same degree of sin, the same pitch of provocation makes
forfeiture of both, and then God may use his power and dominion, as he please,
take both together, or take one and reprieve the other for some time, withdraw
grace, and leave life, for some ends in his wisdom seeming good to him; and
as there the censers were not destroyed, but made into broad plates for the
Altar, used to the service of God, when the owners were swallowed up quick, so
no doubt on the other side, might the owners have been kept alive, and used by
God some way to set out his glory, and yet the censers have been destroyed. It
being free to God to take the forfeiture, when, and how far he please, and in
case of such filling up their measure, either to withdraw grace only, (which if
it be total and final makes up the irreversible estate) or else if he so
please, to call for both the deposita at once, take away grace and life
together.

That I thus take confidence to conclude, is upon the authority Sect. 13.
of Scripture, which has made it clear to me that it was thus actually with
Pharaoh at one time of his life, after the sixth judgment peculiarly (but not
before, through all, or any part of the space of the former calls, much less
at, or before his birth, or before Gods messages to him) when God is said to
harden his heart, and to make him stand, or keep him alive, (when otherwise he
had cut him off from the earth, but that he intended thus to reprieve him) that
he might show in him his power. Exodus 9. 14, 15. Which because it is a notable
(and as far as I have observed in Scripture a singular) example, and because
by some mistakes in our translation and by other prejudices it is become
somewhat obscure, I will here set down as it lies in the story.

Moses and Aaron are sent to Pharaoh with that message from God Sect. 14.
concerning the dismission of the Israelites, and with miracles and signs to
give authority to their message, and Pharaoh refused to harken or obey, but
hardened his heart, Exodus 7. 13. In which place our ordinary Translation has
mistaken, for it is not to be understood, as we read it, that he, i, e. God (as
yet) hardened Pharaoh's heart, for the words do not bear that in the Hebrew,
nor had any such thing by way of story at that time been intimated (only by
way of prediction, and evidence of Gods praescience, Ex. 3. 19. and by way of
Decree what God would do upon it, c. 4. 21. and 7. 3. which was after
fulfilled, and not yet, and might therefore be referred to that after-time)
(but (...) Pharaohs heart waxed strong, or hard, was hardened: and so it
follows v. 14. the Lord said to Moses, Pharaohs heart is hardened, he refuses,
etc. and so the very same words are rendered by our English c. 7. 22. and c. 8.
19. was hardened, in the passive, not actively he hardened. And so this denotes
only an act of stubbornness in Pharaoh, an obstinate resistance or refusal
against God's calls and miracles, and not any act of Gods either positive or
privative (by way of desertion) in hardening him, only the Lord had said that it
would be so, (in the end of that verse) which referres to Gods prediction of
his stubbornness, c. 3. 19. I am sure that the King of Egypt will not let you
go; and that, I say, grounded only in Gods praescience, which has no more to
do with (no more influence on) the effect, nor degree of causality in the
producing it, then my seeing of any object, has on the object, being perfectly
as extrinsecall and accidental to the effect, as my sight or my knowledge is
to another man's action, and the thing foreseen no more necessitated to be by
that means, then it would if God did not foresee it, it being common to God
with us to work by his will, and not by his praescience, and the absurdity
being as great, to affirm that he wills by his knowledge, as that he knows
by his will, or that I see with my ear, or hear with my eye, and such like:
the truth of which Calvin it Vid. Instit. l. 3. 9. 23. number. 6. praescientia
so^a nullam necessitatem creaturis imponi libenter concessero, tametsi non
omnes assentiantur; sunt e^im qui ipsam causam rerum esse volunt. Vecum
acutius, and prudentius Valla, etc.
seems discerned by some hint in Valla's writings, and from him Beza learned,
and acknowledged it also. After this obduration of his against a call and a
wonder, God proceeds to a judgment of turning the water into blood, v. 16, 17.
and that it seems was a very sufficient means of conviction unto this
obdurate Pharaoh, for so says God, Hitherto thou would not hear, but in
this thou shall know that I am the Lord, behold I will smite, etc. this visible
judgment was able it seems to extort from him the acknowledgement of the hand
that sent it, in this thou shall know, and yet after this, it follows, that
Pharaoh's heart was hardened, v. 22. neither did he set his heart to this also
v. 23. and the reason is given, because the Magicians did (in these two signs)
the same thing also by their enchantments.

After this comes the plague of frogs, and that it seems came so Sect. 15.
near him (on him c. 8. 4. and into the Kings Chamber, says the Psalmist)
that, though the Magicians were able to do the like, yet being not able to
deliver him from them again, he calls for Moses, and intreates his prayers for
deliverance from this plague, and promises that he will let the people go, v.
8. and Moses, to improve this mercy to him, that it may be a softning
deliverance, that the frogs and the obdurate heart may depart together, bids
him choose his time when, v. 9. and it shall be done for him, v. 10. that thou
may know that there is none like the Lord our God. But it seems this had no
effect on him neither, for when he saw there was respite, when the judgment
was removed, (now God's mercy (...).
was his temptation as before the Magicians enchantments) he hardened his heart,
and harkened not, v. 15. and this was a third wilful act of his own
obduration, agreeable to what God had foretold of him, as the Lord had said.
Then comes the plague of lice, v. 17. and in this the Magicians are posed, v.
18. the Devil that before could hurt but not deliver, that could do
destructive, but not saving miracles, is not now able to destroy, to do
mischief, confesses and proclaims the finger of God, as he does the Messiah
in the Gospel, when the Pharisees denied him, and yet for all this, this
testimony and sermon of the very Devil against him, it follows, his heart was
hardened, v. 19. and he harkened not as the Lord had said.

After this comes the swarm of flies, and that not only as a plague Sect. 16.
miraculously produced, but with a sign, v. 23. a division betwixt God's
people and his, no flies swarming in Goshen, but in all Egypt besides, on
purpose to make him sensible of his sin by the particularity of the punishment,
to the end that he might know, v. 22. on purpose to teach him piety. By this it
seems Pharaoh is wrought on a little, first to give leave that they shall
sacrifice to God without going out of the land; then when that would not serve
(because by so doing they should sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to
the Lord before their eyes, v. 26. i. e. those things which the Egyptians would
detest to see so used, Genesis 43. 32. to wit in Manetho's phrase, (...), cattle
which were sacred among the Egyptians, first by law forbidden to be killed, and
after, though not then, received into the number of their Gods, for so was Apis
says Caeso ariete in contumeliam Ammonis. Bos quoque immolatur quem Aegyptii
Apim cotunt.
Tatitus, a bull and the special God of the Egyptians) he proceeds farther and
gives way that they may go into the wilderness, only you shall not go very
far away, v. 28. and upon this promise, Moses promises to entreat for him,
v. 29. But now Pharaoh had already hardened his heart four times, and at one of
those times he had over and above dealt falsely, promised fair, c. 8. 8. but
brake his promise, and therefore now Moses after this fifth judgment, though he
promise to pray upon his promise to mend, yet does it with a particular warning
more then at any time before; but let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more, v.
29. as ominating that, if he bid, now the danger would be greater then ever
before, and yet v. 32. as soon as the judgment was removed, Pharaoh hardened
his heart, (...) hac vice, this turn, this time also.

Upon this God sends that plague of murrain upon all the cattle Sect. 17.
of Egypt, c. 9. 6. and the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, 7. and so still all
this while though Pharaoh was obdurate, yet this by no act of God's, but
Pharaoh hardens his own heart, and will not let Israel go, as the Lord
commanded. Upon this God sends another judgment, that of boiles and blaines,
v. 10. and then it is said in a new style (...) the Lord hardened the heart of
Pharaoh, v. 12. (which sure was the time at first referred to by God by way of
prediction to Moses c. 4. 21. as our margent directs, and was the judgment
before threatened implicitly in that special caution or warning, c. 8. 29.)
and this God never did till then; and therefore as after that warning it is said
that Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also, so it is here said, v. 14. that
(...) this turn, this time, now, though not before, God would power all his
plagues upon his heart, and those plagues on his heart are sure effects of Gods
obdurating.

Upon which immediately follows the passage wherein the greatest Sect. 18.
difficulty lies, c. 9. 14, 15. not as we read it [for now I will stretch out
my hand, that I may smite thee and thy people with pestilence, for the event
proves there was no such matter, Pharaoh was not smitten by the pestilence, nor
cut off from the earth by that means, but drowned in the red sea some time
after. But thus should the words be rendered, And (or For) now I had sent or
stretched out my hand, and I had smitten thee and thy people by thee pestilence,
and thou had been cut off from the earth. It is (...) in the preter tence,
sent, says Ainsworth, or rather had sent, (as it is ordinary in Hebrew for the
preter tence to bear the sense of the pluperfect tence) and Paulus Fagius from
the Chaldee Paraphrase, nunc prope erat coram me ut dimisissem, I was near
stretching out my hand, referring as it is probable to the plague of the
murrain, in the beginning of the Chapter, (called (...) both in this verse, and
that v. 3.) which might have seized upon him and his people, as it did on his
cattle, or else to those boiles, v. 11. which might be plague-swellings, and
so proper enough to have cut him off; and so that which follows will be more
clear, But (not And) in very deed for this cause, (...) I have (not [raised
thee up] but) made thee stand, kept thee alive, sustentavi te says the ancient
Latin, sustained thee, (for otherwise had it not been for this, I had smitten
thee with the murrain or plague before, and thou had some time since been
cut off utterly, but that I intended) to show, or make known, or make to be
seen (for so (...) literally signifies) my power in thee, as in cutting up or
anatomizing a man alive, which is condemned to death, (says Chrysostom) that
others may be instructed and benefited by that dissection.

In this matter it is true Saint Paul reads (...), Tom. 5. p. 781.
for this very thing I raised thee up, say we; but that must be understood and
interpreted by what we have already found to be Sect. 19. Romans 9.
the meaning of the story, and not on the other side this rendering of the
passage in the story (which the context inforceth, and P. Fagius, and out of
him Ainsworth acknowledge to be the importance of the Hebrew) brought to the
sound of our English phrase in Saint Paul, for (...) must not needs refer to
the time of Pharaoh's birth, or to any absolute destination of his person, (it
would be hard to bring any example of such a sense of it in Scripture, or other
Author) but may belong to some particular passage or part of his life, and so
directly to this point of time, when God says he might have slain him with
plague or murrain; and so be rendered raising, as that signifies a raising one
out of a danger or sickness, a rescuing or recovering him, and so keeping
alive, as it is ordinarily used in Scripture of raising from sickness or
death. The sense certainly is, that God continued him alive, when he had filled
up his measure of obduration, and so in ordinary course was to be cut off by
death; in the same manner as the author of the book of Wisdom says of God's
dealing with the Canaanites, c. 12. 20. Those who are due to death thou
punishedst with so much long animity, and so it is intimated by that which
follows, Romans 9, 22. God willing to show his wrath, etc. endured with much long
suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.

And then when Pharaoh's heart was thus hardened by God in this extraordinary
manner, God expostulates with him, v. 17. (in triumph Sect. 20.
as it were over this sinner that now is the illustrious object of his
judgments of obduration, plague of heart, and a kind of hell on earth, for
which he was reserved, beyond the ordinary period of life, kept alive for this
remarkable judgment) as yet exaltest thou thy self, etc. and in referrence
peculiarly to that expostulation is that objection to be understood, Romans 9.
19. (...); why does he yet find fault? i. e. God might indeed, says the
objector, with good reason find fault all the while of the former six
judgments, when Pharaoh hardened his own heart; but now when God has hardened
him, and by a total deprivation of grace (without which he cannot choose but
sin) ingulfed him in an irreversible state, as much as if he were in hell,
(...), why yet or still does he find fault, or expostulate? for who has
resisted his will? then God might be said to will his obduration, which he had
inflicted by way of punishment, (though before it is confessed he could not) and
what possible resisting of his will is there, that he should still find fault?
The answer to this objection (first by way of (...), not for any exact (...),
Chrysostom: t. 5. q. 778. and again, (...) (a figure of depelling the intention, or
avoiding the hate of the objection) (...). Sect. 21.
determining or stating any point of controversy or question, particularly of
that immediately precedent, [who has resisted his will?] but for the puzling
and silencing of the objecter, v. 20. 21. and then by speaking directly to the
matter in hand about Pharaoh, v. 22.) might out of Saint Chrysostom be fully
cleared, if this were not already too large an overgrowne (...), and this part
of it impertinent wholly to the matter in hand.

The result of all that I have labored to lay down concerning Pharaoh is
this, that although his state were a long time but reversibly ill, as long as
he hardened his own heart, yet when his own obdurations were come to the
fullness of measure, and he ripe and dropping into hell, as after the sixth
judgment he was, then God exchanged the first part of that due punishment of
his in another world, that was instantly to have commenced, for a temporary
cooler hell here, hardened his heart, and obstructed all possibility of
repentance from him, and so concluded him in this life in an irreversible
estate.

Having gone thus far, I shall now demand, whether an impenitent Sect. 22.
Christian, that in the midst of many means of grace, many calls of Christ for
many years together afforded, does repeat and reiterate his resistances, and
hardens so often his own heart against God, be not as great a provoker as
Pharaoh was? I am sure, that that which Josephus makes the character of
Pharaoh, (...), Folly with wickedness and malignity, is the just inscription
of such for the most part. And if it be objected, that such an one is not
allowed those signs and prodigies that he was, I answer, 1. that it is but the
greater mercy to him, that he is not, those being all destructive miracles; and
if he complain for want of them he may within a while (if he have not already)
meet with some rouzing judgment, some sharp disease of the stone, or
strangury, or fever, a thunder and lightning about his ears, which will be
able to supply that place, and aggravate his guilt, perfectly as high as
Pharaoh's, if he be not reformed; 2. Father Abraham's answer to Dives may be
conviction to him, that he that has the Moses and Prophets in the Christian
sense, the many methods of the Holy Ghost, the many calls of Christ in the
Church, and is not wrought on by them, neither would that man repent, though al
Pharaoh's miracles were showed before him; some magician-inchanting-deceit,
(flattery of his own corrupt heart) or comfortable hope, which the removal of
a punishment would be apt to infuse into him, would be as sure divertisements
to avoid the force of the most powerful work of Gods upon him, as the like
were then unto Pharaoh.

It Is true there may be some disparity (in regard of some circumstances) Sect.
23.
betwixt that Pharaoh and the Christian impenitent, and therefore there will be
no certainty deducible from Pharaoh's example, that any man now a days does
come in this life to that irreversible estate; This I am most willing to
grant, and from thence to conclude, that 'twill be a great madness for any
melancholy hypocondriack from this discourse to take occasion to pahnsy
himself actually in that estate, and from thence to give over all hope, and
labor to get out again. 1. Because the doing so is the sure way to ingulfe
him in it for the future, though he be not yet in it, which is one piece of
fury, thus to run into that, which I fear, when the fear ought in any reason
to drive me from it. 2. Because this paper has only labored to prove that a
man may fall into it, if he do not take heed, which if it be believed and made
use of, he never shall fall into it; and to give over all heed is a use quite
contrary to this doctrine. 3. Because the only reasonable, and the far more
proper use of this doctrine will be, 1. To hasten our repentance. 2. If it
have been deferred too long, then to help to repair that defect by more
zeal and intention, and vehement desire, by more humiliation to root it deep,
and by fruits (all that are possible) to evidence the sincerity of it, and in
all these respects to lose no time in impious or melancholy thoughts, but by a
speedy change to confute our fears, and show that we are not lost
irreversibly. 4. Because whosoever is supposed to be subject to these
discouraging thoughts, and so in danger to be hurt by this doctrine, is
supposed for the present to be desirous to repent and amend, and then by a
principle laid in another discourse, we must Of Conscience,
suppose his present estate, though it be ill, yet not to be irreversible, this
care and desire to get out being a character and indicium of that state of
sin, which is styled sin not unto death, for which the prayers of others,
viz. of the Church have that promise, 1 John 5. that God will in answer to them
give him life, i. e. not present pardon or salvation, continuing as he is, but
sufficient means of grace to bring him to repentance first, and then to life.
But if he have cast of all desire of being better, then as I have no such
grounds of comfort for him, so will not the principles of discomfort, that this
discourse has offered, prove matter of despair to him, but rather of rouzing
and wakening him out of his presumption. This one answer is alone abundantly
sufficient in this matter, and then for any man thus to give over the former
only hope (not upon any appearance, or probable argument, but upon a fancy or
jealousy of his own, raised only on some occasion or pretense, I am sure not
ground, or cause taken from this Discourse) will be so unreasonable (and
withal so impossible to clear or rescue any the truest and wholesomest
discourse from such accidental mistakes, and scandals, and inconsequent
conclusions) that I shall not add any more words to prevent, or cure it.

The truth is, there is another kind of desperation, that of going on still in
our wickedness (as Jer. 2, 25. [thou say there is no hope] is set to
signify, says Grotius, abstinere nequeo, I cannot abstain, and that
impotence an effect of a passionate will, or a custom in sinning, as follows
in that verse, I have loved strangers, and after them will I go) the running
headlong upon all the sin, and danger, and misery in the world, which we are
wont to call a desperate state, because it is the neglecting of the condition,
upon which all the Gospel promises (the only ground of hope) are made over to
us; and to fprtifie us against that, is the only design, and project of this
paper. I wish it may prove successful to it.

All which being not only granted, but proposed as necessary considerations to
be taken along with this doctrine, it remains still clear and uncontrolled,
that God may, if he will, thus punish a hard heart with total and final
substraction of grace, and so with hardening irreversibly, either here, (which I
only say he may, but know not that he will) or at the hour of death, at which
time there is no doubt but he will thus proceed with every impenitent. And
though it be hard, if not impossible, to judge, when the former of these times
is come, or beforehand to divine when the latter or former will come, either
to another or to my self, and so still there Sect. 24.
is hope, to him that will make use of hope to present amendment, not to secure
procrastination, yet these three things may be resolved on.

1. That there is or may be such a time, as to nations and people, so to
particular sinners also. In the 10th generation the deluge came upon the old
world, and in the 10th generation after that, the fire and brimstone came upon
Sodom, and nothing but repentance could then have reprived them, or put off
their ruin; To that end 120 years warning was given to the former, and Noah
designed a preacher of that repentance; and to the latter, the Chaldee reads,
that God came down to see, whether they had made to cease, or made an end (so
paraphrasing (...)) i. e. repented, Genesis 18. 21. and if not, I know, says he,
what I will do; Irreversible destruction in that case. And our Saviors
parable of the Tree that for so many years received the owners expectation, is
to the same purpose, and the issue of it, Cut it down, why cumbreth it the
ground? Secondly, that every day spent in an unreformed state, brings a man
nearer to one of these periods of obduration, or excision irreversible, as
every of those generations contnuing unreformed, came nearer to that 10th and
last generation. Thirdly, that every call of Gods being rejected, brings him
yet nearer to it, as every step in the way brings nearer to the journeies end.
Fourthly, that an unreformed sinner, if he do (on confidence of longer space,
and resolution not to begin that so necessary a work of repentance till the
last, but in the mean to enjoy the pleasures of sin, till the days come,
that he shall say, I have no pleasure in them) continue so one minute longer,
does by such presumption terribly provoke God to bring that fatal punishment
on him, and so, if he will go on, may that next minute (for ought he knows or
any can ensure him) engulfe himself in that irreversible estate, out of which,
when he is once in it, no escape or issue is to expected.

And though after all this, one of Christ's parables seems to allow Sect. 25.
as free a reception, and as fair an hire to the labourer, that comes latest
into the vineyard, as to any other, yet this is in case he be not sooner
called, but come as soon as he is, not when the earlyer call has been often
rejected, on purpose to avoid the heat and burden of the day; much less when
it is therefore rejected, because it is too early, and because the going in
later will serve turn as well; for sure God is not likely to be circumvented,
and cheated, and mocked, by such crafty merchants as these, nor to call such at
the eleaventh hour that would not come, at the 3d, nor 6t, nor 9th, nor to
admit, or reward them that come in that manner, as they are likly to comewith,
(i. e. only a desire of heaven) when the doors are shut, when they are not
called. To which purpose his dealing with the Israelites is remarkable, God
commanded them at his bringing them out of Egypt to invade the Canaanites, and
promised them strength to overcome them, and possess the land, but they
refused to go up; afterward when he bid them not, they would needs go up, and
then they miscarried in the attempt; the application is easy and terrible to
the delayer, or refuser, and the parable of the foolish Virgins seems to bring
it home to our pupose, they come knocking when the door is shut, and find no
admission. Mat. 25. 11.

And beside the deterrements that may thus be offered us on Sect. 26.
Gods part in ths business, many other are ready at hand from consideration of
our selves, as 1. that though God do continue to call, yet we may be as likely
to defer still, as before we were, and to think that other one act of
procrastination may be as safe, as the many former have been. 2. That leisure,
will, or strength may then be wanting, and then far more probably then
before, by how much a more chronicall habit does harden the heart, weaken, and
stop the ear, and many the like; and so still nothing is safe, but present
instant returning. The Prophets speech is remarkable to the confirmation and
enforcing of this, Esa. 55. 6. Seek the Lord while he may be found (it seems
there is a period of that time, and so a time when he may not be found, (...),
when the storehouses are sealed up, says Epiphan:) call ye upon him while he
is near. Let the wicked forsake and return, etc. an actual forsaking and
returning (sorrow for loss of heaven, or apprehension of instant hell, will
not serve the turn) and then comes the promise that God will have mercy, etc.
and so Prove. 8. 17. Those that seek me early shall find me, the promise is to
the early seekers, and to no others, and so far of the promises.

Then for any example in the word of God, on which to ground Sect. 27.
this hope, or make it prudent that a future deathbed repentance should be
depended on, I think there is but one that will be pretended, that of the
thief upon the Cross; concerning which it is observable,

1. That it appears not of him, (nor have we any reason to charge it on him)
that he ever procrastinated or purposely posted off his conversion, till this
so late a date, and so he will not be matter of comfort to them that do.

2. That as far as we have any knowledge, he seems not ever to have heard of
Christ, at least to have been called or instructed by him, till he met him
upon the Cross, and consequently he can be no precedent to any that has lived
an age or a great part of it under the preaching of the Gospel.

3. That for the thief to be converted then, and believe in Christ in that
state of greatest humility, upon the Cross, (which so scandalized the Jews,
when by all other motives they were inclined to have believed on him) was a
most notable illustrious eminent act of faith, and ought in any reason to be
preferred before that which is ordinarily found among men.

4. That it was accompanied with as many effects of sincere conversion, as that
condition was capable of, confession of Christ, and devout prayer to him for
his mercy, or remembrance when he came to his Kingdom.

5. That it was not extorted by the fear of death, but proceeded from a sight,
and acknowledgement of the innocence, and power of Christ, even upon the
Cross, and this was an argument to himself and others, (and was it seems so
acknowledged by Christ) of the sincerity of his faith, and conversion to God,
and that being supposed sincere, will undoubtedly be accepted, be it never so
late.

6. This was done by the thief in the midst of all temptations to the
contrary, the Cross one great temptation, and such as almost all the Disciples
were shaken with, and besides the other thief was his tempter to the contrary,
railing on Christ, etc. Luke 23. 29, and also the chief Priests, and Scribes,
and Elders, mocked him, and they that passed by reviled him wagging their
heads, Mat. 27. and so that new-convert-Thiefe was a singular person, almost
the only confessor in the company. These particulars being observed will give
us reason to acknowledge the difference great betwixt the example of the
thief, and any that make use of that example to defer their repentance till
the last, and will consequently advertise us, that though it succeeded very
well to him, it may succeed very ill to us.

For other examples it will, I believe, be very hard to produce Sect. 28.
any out of Scripture (and for allegations out of humane story, or observation,
it will not be pertinent to produce them, because they bring not with them any
evidence how they were accepted by God, as that of the thief did, This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise) and yet to be sure to omit nothing, that may
to any seem pertinent, we will suppose the conversion of Saint Paul to have
somewhat in it, something like that of the thief, for he was stricken to the
earth, in the midst of his threatenings and slaughters against the Church, and
before he was recovered again, undoubtedly converted, and after lived to be a
most gracious Apostle. To which example as far as can concern our case in
hand, I answer, by proposing these three considerations.

1. Whether, supposing that Saul had died when he was thus stricken, (yea
though it had been after the delivery of those words, Sect. 29.
v. 6. [he trembling and astonished, said, Lord what will thou have me to do?]
conceiving no more to be meant by them then was by Saint Peter's auditors,
when they said, Men and brethren what shall we do? to which he there answers,
Repent, etc. whether I say any man would affirm, that he had been saved (and
yet sure that trembling and saying amounted as far as sorrow for sin,
without actual amendment) or at least bring any evidence o^ Scripture to
confirm any such affirmation. If God's absolute decree, that of Electing of
his person be produced for such argument, that will as much hold for the saving
him, though he has died in the midst of his blasphemies, without any such
trembling* and then he might have been saved, without ever having been
converted; which I have not yet heard to be asserted by any, unless the
Antinomian doctrine may amount so far.

2. Whether the case of Saint Paul be not quite distant from Sect. 30.
that of a Christian, delaying and deferring repentance to the last. For that
is sin against light, and so a wilful, deliberate crime, and by that God is
provoked to withdraw, rather then invited to give more grace. But Saint Paul
affirms of himself that he obtained mercy because he did it ignorantly, in
unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. 13. and therefore though ignorant Christians, zealous in
their erroneous way may be allowed some of our charity, upon this precedent of
Saint Paul's conversion, and it may be agreeable to analogy of faith, to hope
that God will by an extraordinary way bring them to a sight of their errors in
time of life, or accept their repentance for all sins known and unknown,
(so there were in them a preparation of mind to have deposited their errors
upon sufficient light, and to have reformed the sins consequent to those
errors) yet that a bare sorrow shall be accepted for wilful sins, when it
is on purpose deferred so long, till it cannot bring forth fruits worthy of
repentance, and so in effect can prove nothing but sorrow, (no amendment being
added to it actually; and whether the resolution of amendment be sincere, it is
both to the party himself, and to others by ordinary means utterly
un-evident, because he is supposed to dye before any sufficient trial of it) I
conceive will not be thought concluded convincingly from that example.

3. Whether the enlarging of Saul's life and abundant laboring Sect. 31.
and suffering of his, after conversion, be not an intimation (very observable)
that great sinners, when they are converted, must do much more in
Christianity, (I mean exercise more acts of sorrow and repentance, whether by
way of restitution to those that are wronged, or of satisfaction to those that
were scandalized, or to express the sincerity of the change by way of (...), 2
Cor. 7. 11. of revenge on himself) then would be necessary to the salvation of
another: and if 'were so of Saint Paul, whose former sins were committed
ignorantly, then how much more of wilful continuers in sin, as he, that thus
deferres his repentance, is supposed to be?

The promises and examples from Scripture being considered, and Sect. 32.
found unconcluding: the fifth thing to be considered, is, whether he that thus
depends on a deathbed repentance, do it not because that time will be more
probable for him to repent in, then any other, and that though he repent not
before that time, yet then it will be probable, which if he do, then must he
think it either, 1. in his own power to repent without grace, and that is
Pelagianisme, or 2. that God's terrors, and the imminency of approaching
dangers have that or a greater force in them, then Ordinary Grace; which is
quite contrary to the doctrine of Father Abraham, Luke 16. 31. (If they hear
not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from
the dead) and indeed to all Divinity, which asserts the principal or sole
cause of true saving repentance, to be no outward impellent (for such were an
extorted, not voluntary, nor consequently true repentance) but the gift of
sanctifying grace, meeting with an humble malleable heart (supposing that
humility to be first wrought by God's preventing Grace) in that sense that it is
said, God gives grace to the humble. Or 3. that there is some assurance or
probability that that special grace shall not then be wanting; For which yet
we have showed there is no Assurance; and for the probabilities which may
induce persuasion, though not assurance, let us now consider,

1. Is it probable, that in this case God shoul'd give more grace then ever he
gave before? Or Sect. 33.
2. That the same or a less measure of grace then, should work that which
before it wrought not? Or 3. That that performance which would not have been
accepted before, should then be accepted?
For the first, the rule of Scripture is, From him that has not, that is, has
not made use of grace given, God will withdraw that which Sect. 34.
he had given, and Rev. 22. 11. He that is unjust let him be unjust still, and
he that is filthy let him be filthy still; and this not only God permitting,
but God deserting, and sometimes God delivering up, and possibly obdurating
also.

For the second, it is certain that the longer a habit of impenitence Sect. 35.
in any sin has continued, the more obdurate the person is, especially if it
have been sin against light, (as our case supposes) and though it be not
simply impossible to God to melt such, yet extremely improbable it is, that
they shall be melted without a far greater degree then that, by which before
they were not melted. And though sickness it self may be a means of some
force to work good, and being added to that grace, which without it prevailed
not, may now possibly prevail, yet is this a great uncertainty. For, 1. Some
men are worst under the rod. Exodus 6. 9. They hearkened not for anguish of
spirit and for cruel bondage, their anguish kept them from harkening. This
Hippocrates observes, de aqua, aere and locis, and from thence has a pretty
heathenish argument, that a disease among the Scythians which he speaks of,
was not (...), of God's sending, because it fell not on poor men, on whom he
conceived the Gods would inflict all their evil things because of their
murmuring and blaspheming. 2. They that are affected by the rod, do not all
repent sincerely, Hos. 7. 14. They have not cried unto me with their hearts,
when they howled on their beds; thus Ahab's humiliation, which the judgment
produced, was we know no thorough reformation, only a putting on sackcloth,
and going softly, (not much of an higher pitch then what has been related of
an horse that by the help of a hot floor and some traces was taught to dance
to a tune) and to that perhaps belongs that of the Psalmist, God's enemies
shall be found liars unto him, submit themselves, as our other translation
reads, but submit feignedly, their love of God is but little improved, though
there be an outward form of submission, extorted it seems even from haters;
and so to this may belong that censure of Saint Chrysostom, (l. 2. (...):)
which he brings as an argument why men should be only persuaded, not forced to
reformation of any fault or error, (...), because God rewards not those that
upon necessity abstain from evil, but only those that voluntarily do it. And
it is observable in the ancient canons, that they that deferred their baptism
til they thought they should die, the Clinici or bed-baptists, had an ill
character set upon them, and if they recovered, though they were acknowledged
Christians, yet were excluded from any farther dignity in the Church, could
never be admitted to orders, a mark of the Churches judgment of such men.
Nay, 3. that which is then done by any man, there is no certain judgment to be
made, whether it be his will and intention, or no, whether it come from the
man, or the disease. It Is a rule in Justinian that surdus and mutus testamenta
non facit, there is small heed due to a testament made by one that is brought
so low: and sure repentance is a very easy task, if he that is disabled for
all things else is strong enough for that. 4. The great diversions which the
sick bed presents would be considered; 1. disquieting, if not enraging, or
stupifying pains; 2. decay of spirits, and a consequent numnesse and dullness;
3. the hurry of worldly business then to be composed and set in order; all
which being put together will add extremely to the improbability of any man's
being wrought on, or melted at that time, and rather define that it is
undoubtedly the unfittest and unlikeliest season to begin or perfect a work so
great, so weighty, that before he could find no leisure, even when time lay on
his hands, to set about it; and yet farther, many diseases there are, a
Consumption by name, wherein the more desperately we are sick, and the nearer
our end, the less are we apt to believe we are so, and other sharper diseases,
when they come to an height, deprive us of our wits, and hopes together, and by
their indications to others, that they are mortal, disable us utterly from
preparing for that mortality.

For the third there is little hope of that, the condition which Sect. 36.
is now required under the Gospel, being as indispensably required of all that
come to years and powers and means of knowledge, as ever the condition of the
first Covenant was under that; And that condition is, Repent and believe the
Gospel; and, Except you repent you shall all likewise perish; now I hope
'twill be no news to say, that repentance is more then sorrow; if it be, then
observe 2 Cor. 7. 10. and it will be convincing. Besides, the example of Judas,
that had this sorrow before he hanged himself, and the example of Esau's
birthright lost, and the insufficiency of sorrow at last to get Isaac to
repent, or reverse the blessing, which God had decreed from him to Jacob, will
argue that bare sorrow will not serve the turn to regaine the spiritual
inheritance. Besides this sorrow, the most that that state is capable of, is a
resolution of amendment, (as for actual amendment, or the evidencing of that
resolution by actions, this state is supposed incapable of that.)

Now concerning a deathbed resolution of amendment these 8 Sect. 37.
things may be observed, 1. That it is at that time most improper and out of
season, very unreasonable that the end of the life should be the first minute
of living well; It is an old rule in Hesiod, that it is too late to sow (...),
for then the corn should be growing up; the deathbed is a special season for
the exercise and evidence of many Christian virtues, and consequently very
improper for a seedes-time, or plantation.

2. That it is a ridiculous thing, for a man to resolve to live well upon no
other consideration, but because the time is come when he thinks he shall dye.
The very foundation of the resolution being contrary to the performance of it,
the condition of all his good life, a presumption that he shall not live. And
not only ridiculous, but null; 'twill be but an act of reason and justice to
himself, to change the resolution when the motives are changed, and a contrary
imprudence and unkindnesse to adhere to the conclusion, when the praemises are
confuted, and to do that which he resolved, when that upon which the
resolution was made, (self-love and carnal advantages, and interests) shall
as much oblige him to make contrary resolutions; the invitations of the flesh
being as persuasive in health, as the terrors of hell affrighting in
sickness, the present pleasure now as strong an argument as was then the
approaching pain, especially when the pleasure has the advantage of being
represented alone, without the rival; which was the only means by which the
other came ever to prevail. From such grounds of discourse as this, what can
be expected of this sick resolver, but that he resume his sins with his
health, leave his new vows in that bed, where first he took them up,
discharge his fears, and his good motions, his Physician and Confessor
together.

3. That a desire of dying well, of having heaven in another world, may then
easily be mistaken for that resolution.

4. That as a weariness of pains may be taken for a weariness of this world,
so that weariness may be taken for mortification, and that mortification for
resolution of amendment.

5. That the no strength then to sin, may easily pass for this resolved
amendment; or however resolution to amend at a time when I have no strength to
sin, may last no longer then that impotence lasts.

6. That although this resolution, if it be sincere, (and such as God sees
would bring forth fruits of repentance, of time were given) shall certainly be
accepted by God, (according to that of Wisd. 4. 7. although the righteous be
prevented with death, yet shall he be at rest) yet this resolution while it is
no more 'then so, first may be mistaken and thought sincere, when it is not,
(there was little difference to any man's sight, betwixt the seed that sprung up
without root, and that which was sowed in good ground, till the shining of the
Sun made the discrimination) and that error not only others, but our selves
may be subject to; we commit many things in time of temptation which in absence
of the temptation we resolved against, and really believed that resolution had
been sincere; and so we omit in like manner: and the reason is, because we
resolved it only absolutely, but foresaw not the price to be laid down for it,
either did not discern, or else did not resolve on the pains or difficulties
that it would cost us to perform it. He that is sick, and is assured that
such a potion will cure him, resolves firmly he will take it, and is perhaps
at that time persuaded that this resolution is sincere, and yet when the potion
comes, and proves extreme offensive to the taste, he will rather dye then
swallow it; This argues the resolution either not largely enough extended, or
not deeply enough radicated; he had only digested the potion, as physic, but
not as loathsome, as prescribed for his good, but foresaw not then (or after is
not courageous enough to overcome) the bitterness of it.

And though I shall not affirm or conceive that every resolution is unsincere
which ever actually fails, or possibly might fail Sect. 38.
in time of temptation (because those failings may be but infirmities, and
those are reconcilable with sincerity, or but single acts of sin, and those if
presently retracted again by repentance, and not continued, or persevered in
impenitently, are reconcilable also) yet still sure there is such a thing as
unsincere resolution, and of the many kinds of that I shall name a few (...).
1. The resolution that does not (or would not on supposition of trial) hold
out against the (...), the ordinary humane temptations, such as are
proportioned to the strength which we have, or which, if we use the means
prescribed, we shall be sure to receive. 2. The resolution that is not deeply
rooted in an honest heart (as that is expressed first by the good, then by the
moist hospitable soil, contrary both to the thorny and stony ground, the one
when the cares of the world are unweeded, unmortified, the other when the hard
heart is unsoftned, unhumbled) 3. The resolution that does not forecast the
means, as well as the end, the difficulties and temptations, as well as the
easier and more amiable part of the task: the man in the parable that sets on
building without considering the charge, without laying or disigning the means
whereby to go through with it, the Herod that rejoiced in John Baptists light,
i. e. says Saint Augustine, beheld with joy the luster of his doctrine, heard
him gladly, and in obedience to him, did many things, but fell off, when he
looked upon himself, and the pleasant sins, the brothers wife, that in
obedience to him he was to part with; the resolution that does not extend to
the undertaking the condition, the unpleasanter part of the work, but only
lays hold on the prize, or the duty abstracted from the condition, which is
the pleasanter, the Balaams wish for the righteous man's death, without any
real change, productive of a righteous life, or the young Augustines wish,
that would be chaste, but would not yet part with the pleasures of incontinence,
or the general humor of the world, to like heaven as the place of bliss, and
piety as the way to Heaven, but not to mortify one lust for the compassing of
either. 4. The resolution that proves weak, and failing, not for want of
strength, but of courage, not for want of the gift of grace on Gods part, but
of our making use of this grace when it is given, or of those means to which
it is promised, (such are that spiritual (...) of prayer, humility, ardent
importunate humble requests to heaven.) 5. The resolution that is not
universal against all both sins, and temptations to those sins, and those
not only such as now he finds inclinations to in time of disease, but also
all other that in time of health may be most likely to assault and to win
him; And in a word, the resolution which God, that sees unerringly, sees to be
but temporary, or partial, or hypocritical, in any, or all these or any other
respects; And then such a resolution as these (whatever it appear to us who
are not such infallible judges of our selves, but whose hearts are deceitful
above all things) cannot have any rational, or Christian ground of hope
(merely by the good hap of being taken away before trial, i. e. in effect,
before this hypocrisy was discovered) to be accepted and rewarded by God; or
if it have, it must not be by the second Covenant, under which nothing but
sincerity has that promise.

Secondly, supposing this resolution to be sincere, and so sure to Sect. 39.
be accepted by God, yet there is no evidence to us that it is sincere, or will
be thus accepted, but by worthy fruits of repentance, by enemies and
temptations wrestled with, and overcome; from whence though it follow not, that
God will not accept of that resolution, (because he may see it sincere without
those trials, which I conceive is the ground upon which the Schools affirm
that a strong contrition may on the deathbed be accepted without restitution,
etc. i. e. that in him, who has no time and ability for any thing but
contrition, God may see that sincerity of change, which he will accept, because
he sees it would bring forth fruit if it were allowed time) yet we our selves
in this case cannot know it, and consequently the deathbed repentance, if in
any particular it prove to be such as shall avail in another world, yet cannot
afford the dying man any comfort or rational assurance in this, nor
consequently his friends any thing but the judgment of charity, which hops
all things, for which there is no evidence to the contrary.

7. Let it be considered whether any example can be brought Sect. 40.
in Scripture or story, of any that wilfully and advisedly deferred present
repentance and relied and depended on late deathbed repentance, to whom it
succeeded well. I profess my self to have heard terrible ones to the
contrary, but as yet none in favor of such deferrers. Methinks the mention of
Felix in the Acts 24. 25. has some efficacy in it. He when (after some
preaching of Christ, v. 22. and knowledge of that way) he heard Saint Paul
reasoning of righteousness and continence (things in which it appears by the
text and by story, by Tacitus and Josephus, that Felix was much failing) did,
as it is added, tremble and answer, Go thy way for this time, when I have a
convenient season I will call for thee. This man upon advise and deliberation
through the prevalency of his sins which he loved dearly, deferres his
repentance till a convenienter season; And all that I observe is, that we never
read of any such season that he made use of to this purpose.

8. Let it be considered, whether when the last hand of God Sect. 41.
comes on any man, (I mean that disease that cuts him off speedily) if that
man have remained impenitent till then, it be not a very ominous and
inauspicious sign, that that man has filled up the measure of his iniquities,
and now the voice be peculiarly gone out against him, as against the tree (even
now mentioned) that had frustrated God's continual expectation, [Cut it down,
why cumbreth it the ground?] If on the coming of a disease, (which like the
laying the axe to the root of the tree is often times an hazning call to
repentance) this use be suddenly made of it, and God's long suffering do
interpose in the counter-voice, Nay but spare it one year longer, and if it
bear fruit, well, but if not, then cut it down, and that voice be hearkened
to, that is, if that disease do not prove the last, but upon resolutions of
new living, the life be enlarged and the resolutions performed; then it is very
well; But if not, if it be (without more time of repentance) cut down; if
God's long-suffering, and patience, which was on purpose to bring to
repentance, have been made use of (as it was said of God's long-suffering to
Pharaoh) as a means to harden his heart, have we not reason to fear, that
God's coming to strike is an argument of a severe purpose against that man? or
have we any reason to hope that when his patience is at an end, his mercy and
gift of effectual grace is not at an end also? that which the Apostle says
Heb. 10. 26, 27. 29. 31. is much to this purpose. And I know not what will be
called falling into the hands of the living God, if this be not, viz. to
continue in sin impenitently til we fall into God's attaching apprehending
hands, of which the doom is there most sad; It is a fearful thing so to fall.

Having proceeded thus far in defining (as warily and as safely Sect. 42.
as I could; by the conduct of God's word and Spirit) one thing may perhaps be
necessary to be added, though not by way of answer to the possible exceptions
and objections of disputers, because the doing of that, I find, would lead into
some more nice and less profitable speculations, and contribute little to the
direction of practice, the only aim of this paper, (and therefore what was
thus prepared shall not here be inserted) yet by way of necessary satisfaction
to a practical question. And the question is this, In case I be a minister,
called to give comfort to such an one, viz. an habitual customary sinner,
which were thus surprised by the hand of God, any mortal disease or wound, and
were thus cast down with extreme horror of mind, and from thence professes
himself resolved that if God shall spare him, he will certainly lead a new
life, whether I would not give that man comfort in that case, but suffer him to
be swallowed up with desperation.

To this I answer, 1. by setting before our eyes an example of Sect. 43.
God himself in a case not very distant from this proposed, which may be
matter of direction to any who shall be called to for comfort in this kind,
Judge. 10. 6. The children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord,
and served Baalim and Ashtaroth, etc. and forsook the Lord and served not him,
v. 6. upon this Gods anger was hot against Israel, and he brought a double
distress upon them, v. 7, 8, 9. and Israel was sore distressed. And then v.
10. the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, saying, We have sinned against
thee, both because we have forsaken God and also worshiped Baalim. Here is
that confession and sense of the provocations, which our case supposes, and
that in time of the sore distress, and so in that parallel also. And then
God's return to them is remarkable, 1. An expostulation continued for three
verses, to aggravate their crime and ingratitude, and the close an absolute
refusal, a denying present pardon to these confitents, Wherefore I will
deliver you no more. And then farther yet a bitter reproach and sarcasme, v.
14. Go and cry unto the Gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in
the time of your Tribulation. And then the story proceeds to tell us the good
use and effects that this severity wrought upon them. And the children of
Israel said unto the Lord, We have sinned, do thou unto us whatsoever seems
good unto thee, deliver us only we pray thee this day, v. 15. And they put away
the strange Gods from among them and served the Lord, v. 16. their penitence is
approved to God by their patience, and submission, and importunity, by present
reformation, and contrary acts of piety; and then it follows, his soul was
grieved for the misery of Israel, i. e. God ceased to afflict them, and on the
other side prospered them to victory in the next Chapter. And then this dealing
of Gods being examplary to us, as far as the cases shall appear parallel, may
pass for a general or first answer. But then 2ly. and more distinctly to the
question, I answer, that in this case the course I would prescribe to others,
or observe my self, is this, according to this copy premised, not presently to
make haste to apply comfort to that man (meaning by comfort words of pardon, or
promise, or assurance, that his sins, in this state, shall certainly be
forgiven) but to dispense my comfort discreetly, and so that I may lay a
foundation on which he may more safely build, and I more in fallibly ascertaine
comfort to him; I mean by preparing him to a right capacity of it, by
increasing yet farther in his heart, and rooting as deep as I can the mourning
(which if sincere has the promise of comfort, Mat. 5.) the sorrow for sin,
the humiliation and indignation at himself, the vehement desire, the zeal,
the revenge, the all manner of effects of Godly sorrow, and indeed by doing my
utmost in perfecting this so necessary work in him; which if by the help of
God it be done, and those graces deeply rooted, (through a consideration not
only of the instant danger, but detestable uglynesse of sin, the provocation
offered to a most gracious Father, and most merciful Redeemer, and sanctifying
Spirit, together with all the other humbling matter from the particular sins,
and aggravating circumstances of them) it will then be that Godly sorrow which
the Apostle speaks of, and that will (if God afford space) bring forth that
repentance, which consists in a sincere change and reformation, (called by the
same Apostle, 2 Cor. 7. An ancient ^n^ in Magdalen College in Oxford.
10. (...), or as some manuscripts read, (...), i. e. as I conceive a
repentance, a change, or amendment, which will not be retracted again, a
lasting or durable reformation) and then there is no doubt, but to him which is
in this estate, mercy infallibly belongs; And to him I shall then hasten to
ascertaine it. And yet of this mercy if I through some error or neglect of
mine, should not give him (nor he himself through the greatness of his
sorrow, the flood of tears in his eyes, otherwise find) any comfortable
assurance, yet is he by God's immovable promise sure (certitudine objecti,
though not subjecti) to be partaker, [and all that he loses, by not being
assured of it here by me, or by his own spirit, is the present comfort, and
joy of some few minutes, which will soon be repaired, and made up to him at
death, by God's wiping off all tears from his eyes, the gracious revelation of
his Saviour-judge unto him, with a Come thou blessed of my Father, thou have
cordially mourned and converted, and thou shall be comforted. Whereas if I
should go about too hastily and preposterously to grant him any such
comfortable assurance that he were already accepted, (I mean not now that he
should be accepted, if his change be sincere, or his sorrow such as would bring
forth that change, for that conditional comfort I have all this while allowed
him, but positive assurance for the present upon a view of such his sorrow) I
might then possibly raise him up too soon, before the work were done, the
plant rooted deep enough, (and that were utterly to ruin him; by giving him
his good things, his comfort here, to deprive him of it eternally) or at the
best refresh him a little here beforehand, but not at all advantage him toward
another life; which loss being so unmercifully great, and acquisition so
unconsiderably small, it were great uncharitableness to run that hazard, and
so still the best way must be by proposal of conditional, but not of absolute
comfort, to humble him unto the dust, if so be there may be hope, to set him
this only task of working out his salvation with fear and trembling, laying
hold on God's mercy in Christ* his general but conditional mercy for all
penitent purifying sinners, (for confessors, and forsakers, and none else) and
so laboring for that sorrow, that purity, that confession, contrition, and
forsaking, and then if he perish, he perishes, no way is imaginable to do
good upon him, if this do not.

And if it be farther demanded, whether in this case supposed, Sect. 44.
I would upn his demand deny him Absolution? I answer, that Absolution may
signify two things. 1. The absolution of the Church, as it is the Churches
pardoning him all offenses done against her, quantum in ipsa est, to wit, the
scandal of his sins, etc. and this absolution the Church (and I, if she have
entrusted to me that power) ought to grant him in articulo mortis, when the
binding him, or retaining his sins is not probable to do him any further
good, by way of (...), or discipline; In like manner, as every single person
offended, or injured by him, is by charity obliged upon his demand (though he
be not confident that he is sincerely contrite) to grant him his free
forgiveness, and the denying of this being thus demanded, were hurtful not to
the dying man, but to him that were so uncharitable as to deny it; and the
giving it an obligation of charity both to him and to my self: But for the
second thing signified by absolution, viz. the pronouncing him absolved in
heaven, all that I am obliged to, by duty or in prudence, is then to do it,
when by examination of his sorrow and resolutions, I am inwardly persuaded that
his repentance is a well- grounded and radicated repentance; and in that as I
would not persuade any man to be over easy, or popular, (that humor of the
Emperor now a days stolen into the Confessor, neminem tristem dimittere)
because of the possible hurt, and unproportionable gain of it; so if any man
should be over austere, and difficult, only out of desire to make the penitent
yet more penitent, (and not to bruise the broken reed, to tyrannize over his
wounded soul) to make heaven more surely his, by his being not yet sure of
heaven; this will be at the worst but an error of charity, which will never be
imputed to the confessor, much less to the penitent, it being acknowledged
that the Ministers absolution does not avail, nisiclave non errante, and
consequently that his denying absolution (clave errante still) will never do
any hurt; the error of his key in shutting or retaining being in reason no
more mortiferous, then the like error in remitting is salvificall.

Agreeable to this decision you shall find the practice of the Sect. 45.
Church anciently, when ecclesiastical discipline was in its vigor, In such
or such cases they would not afford the dying man absolution, because they had
no grounds of assurance, that the state of the person was capable of it, and
yet would they make no scruple to allow him place of comfort and hope, that God
might possibly absolve him, God having other ways of discerning the sincerity
of repentance, (viz. by seeing of the heart, or by conditionate prescience)
which they had not; and so much for the satisfying of the question.

All that I have now to add to this theme is only this, (which will Sect. 46.
bring the whole discourse home to the particularity of the present estate of
this Kingdom, and so give you the full end of the writing of this discourse)
that by this long debate, and the evidence of the truth asserted, concerning
the soutes of particular men, the condition of this poor calamitous Kingdom
is now dissected also. We have enjoyed a long day of God's merciful and
gracious calls to repentance, and many solemn admonitions at the door as it
were of every Church, at the beginning of our daily service, [To day if you
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts] and it is most sadly evident by
our present punishments, that we have not heard the voice in that day of peace
and prosperity, but hardened the heart; The judgments being now fallen most
formidably on the Land, and no part of it now remaining which has not had its
sympathy in this shaking, falling fit, some sorrow, and humiliation, and
withal some acts perhaps of confession have been extorted from us; Were there
to these an addition of that other part of repentance, that of a sincere change
and thorough-reformation, no doubt there would be mercy; God would return upon
our returning; Nay were the resolutions of amendment, (which perhaps may be
observed in many) sincere resolutions, such as that all-seeing eye does
discern, would hold out against all the temptations of peace again, there
were yet hope that for that sincere change of those many, the judgment (of the
(...) at least, that final total excision, that seems to be threatened) might
be reverst, (according to the purport of the treaty that was about Sodom,
betwixt God and Abraham) But by the continuance and no kind of relaxation of
God's heavy hand, it is as clear, as if Euclid had demonstrated it, that yet
that work is not done, that the repentance of the Land is but hypocritical,
such as the present weight of the judgments has extorted from us, not such as
would continue upon their removal, like the strange quick sent that is
reported of the wild boy of Liege, to have been acquired by a thin
Forest-diet, and to have been lost again as soon as he came to full feeding,
(perhaps only a sarrow for the smart we are under) and this is such a
repentance as would not be for the honor of God to reward with such a
donative; The only course that a whole Synod and assembly of Angels could upon
consultation advise us to, and promise it Prosperous for the averting of ruin
from the Land, is so to improve our sorrow above the occasion of it (the
afflictions that are upon us) as that it may be a sorrow for sin, purely for
sin, (for though judgments may be the monitor to put us in mind of those
sins, and so the occasion of that sorrow, yet nothing but sin may be allowed
the cause of that sorrow, or if it be, as soon as ever that be removed, the
sorrow will be superseded also) and then that sorrow bring forth such a change
of mind as would prove immutable upon God's allowing us a time of respite,
bring forth fruits of repentance worthy of such reprievall. When the whole
heart of this Kingdom, or of that part of it that still cleaves to the house
of David is thus smitten, and really affected by God's rod, so that he to whose
eyes all things are naked, (...), as when the skin is pulled off, and (...),
Heb. 4. 13. (as the entrails of a satrifice cut down the back, which the
Priest does (...), view it censoriously, and (...), examine strictly, whether
it be perfect, whether there be any blemish in it or no) may pronounce it
(...), Lucian de sa^rif:
a blemisblesse repentance, a sincere hearty change, then will there be a place
for hope, assured hope, then may the Priest intercede with confidence, Spare
thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach; and the hearer of
prayers will be obliged by that his title to answer that importunity. But till
this Rod of the Lord be thus Heard, all hope in God for mercy to the Land, or
for victory, (though to the justest cause that ever man espoused) will be
little better then Presumption.

If ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the
lame and sick, is it not evil? Offer it now to the Governor, will he be
pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of Hosts? Mal. 1. 8.
Si tu sis securus, at ego non sum securus. Aug.
FINIS.

