A VINDICATION OF THE DISSERTATIONS CONCERNING EPISCOPACIE: From the ANSWERS,
or EXCEPTIONS offered against them by the London Ministers, in their Jus
Divinum Ministerii Evangelici.

By H. HAMMOND, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-lane, 1654.

TO THE READER.
IN Erasmus's distribution of his own writings into Tomes, the 8th. we find
thus inscribed by him, Octavum occupent Apologiae. Me miserum. Et hae justum
volumen efficient. It was his great infelicity, that the Apologies and Answers
to exceptions and calumnies, which he was constreined to write, made up an
entire large Volume in folio. Now though I have that pleasure in the temper of
that person, which gives me security, by the Romanists Proverb, never to be
deemed one of their good Catholics, and so may probably partake of some part
of his fate, yet't were great insolence in me, who have not troubled the World
with a tenth proportion to that were with he has favored it, to expect the
Tithe of that consideration, which is required to make one capable of that
degree of infelicity, which lay a full load on him; Nevertheless these few
last months have given me a taste and (...) what I am to expect. For besides
the reproaches of one learned Gentleman (to which, being barely such, I have no
one word to retribute, but that of the (...) which Christ directs me to) I have
farther met with some variety; Many exceptions, though little of contumely from
these Assemblies; More, and in a very distant Character from a large Preface of
Animadversions on the D^ssertations sent me lately from Oxford; others also
there are which I have not yet had leisure to weigh, but soon purpose and hope
to do it; and if either I discern my self, or find it the opinion of others,
that what is already said in the Tracts, which they oppose, be not sufficient
to prevent, or remove the scruples proposed by them, I shall willingly dedicate
some time of vacancy to that employment. At the present, the Exceptions of the
London Ministers have challenged the precedence, and here are offered to
consideration. And because the Praeface from Oxford falls on the same sort of
matter, Episcopacy and Ignatius's Epistles, as they are defended in the
Dissertations, I purpose, God-willing, that an Answer to that shall now follow,
as soon as the Printer can dispatch it. And that is all that I had to say to
the Reader by way of Praeface.

THE TABLE.
CHAP. I.
COncerning the Angels of the Churches of Asia, Page 9. Section 1. The grounds
of affirming them to be Bishops. Ibid. Sect. 2. Of Timothy, of Onesimus, of
Policarpe, p. 15. Sect. 3. Of the negative argument from S. John's not using
the word Bishop. Of (...) in the Revelation, p. 19 Sect. 4. Of S. John's
writings. Again of Diotrephes, p. 25 Sect. 5. Of S. John's being Bishop of
Asia. Of the Apostles being Bishops, p. 29 Sect. 6. Of the word Angel, and
Star, pretended to be common to all Ministers. Of Messenger, and Ambassador.
The singularity of the word Angel, p. 35 Sect. 7. Of their exception to our
arguing from Symbols: Of Bishop and Elder being the same, p. 38 Sect. 8. Of the
singularity of each Angel. The objections from the use of the plural number,
p. 41 Sect. 9. Of the Elders at Ephesus Act. 20. p. 45 Sect. 10. Of expressing
a number by singulars. A Church by a Candlestick. Of the seven Angels Rev. 8.
p. 47 Sect. 11. Of the Epistles being sent to the whole Church, not to the
Bishop only. Of Timothy, Onesimus and Polycarp, being Bishops of some of the
Asian Churches, without any charge of Apostasy falling on them by this means,
p. 50 Sect. 12. Of Timothies being an Evangelist, that it hinders not his being
a Bishop. p. 55 Sect. 13. Of the Bishops at Ephesus. Of the plural number in
the Epistle to the Angel of Smyrna, p. 56 Sect. 14. Of Beza's interpretation,
of the Praesident* p. 57. Sect. 15. Of Dr. Reynolds interpretation, of the
Bishop in Cyprian. Of Ordination by Bishops not without Presbyters, from the
Testimones of Cyprian, and Fermilian, p. 51 Sect. 16. Of the Churches of Asia
being Metropoliticall. Of the paucity of believers, p. 54 Sect. 16. Of
modelling Churches according to the Government of the Roman state. Of exemplars
of Metropolitans among the Jews. Testimonies of the Apostles instituting
Metropolitans, p. 67 Sect. 17. Of the objection against Metropoles from the
seven Stars in seven Churches, p. 71 Sect. 18. Of the use of the word Bishop
for Archbishop in Tertullian: Of Angel in Christ's Epistle. p. 64 Sect. 19. Of
division into Parishes, and Union into Diocesses. Of Diocesan Bishops in the
Apostles days. Elders in every Church, Act. 14. Elders of the Church, Act. 20.
That place vindicated from exception. p. 75
CHAP. II.
OF the equivalence of the words Bishop and Elder in the New Testament. p. 92
Sect. 1. Four sorts of equivalence of these words proposed, Ibid. Sect. 2 Of
the word (...), p. 95 Sect. 3. Of the word (...) Elder, p. 100 Sect. 4. Of
reverence to Antiquity, and the interpretations of the Ancients. Of Praelatists
disagreement among themselves; 102. Sect. 5. Inconveniences objected, and
answered. Of more Bishops in one City. No Presbyters in the Apostles days. The
no Divine right of the order of Presbyters, p. 105 Sect 6. A first confession
objected and vindicated. Of the Ephesine Presbyters being all the Praelates of
Asia, Elders, Aldermanni, p. 108 Sect. 7. A second confession of the Bishops,
Phil. 1. 1. being Bishops of that whole Province, Philippi a Metropolis, and a
Colony, p. 110 Sect. 8. A third confession, of Timothies being an Archbishop.
Of the qualifications, 1 Timothy 3. 2 belonging to Bishops. Of the Bishops being
worthy of double-honour, though he never preach. Of the word, and Doctrine. Of
the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4, Of Rebuking and receiving accusation against an
Elder. p. 112 Sect. 9. A fourth confession of Titus being Archbishop of Creet,
p. 116 Sect. 10. A fifth charge of contrariety to Scripture answered. Of
visitation of the sick belonging to Elders, James 5. p. 118 Sect. 11. A last
objection from Act. 21. 18. and. 14. 3. and 11. 30. answered. Elders for Rulers
or Bishops. p. 122
CHAP. III.
COncerning the Opinion of Antiquity in this Question. Page 129. Sect. 1. The
Testimonies of Clemens Romanus, Bishops and Deacons the only offices at the
first. Corinth Metropolis of Achaia. What (...) signifies. The Apostles care to
prevent contentions about Episcopacy. Hegesippus's testimony of the contentions
at Corinth. Clement a Bishop, p. 129. Sect. 2. The Testimony of Policarpe. That
he was himself a Bishop. His mention of Ignatius's Epistles, fit to give
authority to them, being so confirmed as it is by a series of the Ancients, p.
139 Sect. 3. A vindication of Ignatius's Epistles, Vossius's edition of them,
and the Archbishops of Armagh. Some Testimonies out of them, The cause of his
so inculcating obedience to Bishops. Mr. Causabones Testimony considered, and
the Allegations from the Archbishop of Armagh. Three reasons against these
Epistles answered (No Marriage without the Bishop.) Of the Reformed Churches.
Of the Church of Scotland after the first conversion, p. 143 Sect. 4. Of
Salmasius's conceit that these Epistles were written at the time of Episcopacy
first entering the Church, p.163 Sect. 5. Testimonies of Iraeneus, The use of
Presbyteri for Bishops, p. 165 Sect. 5. Testimonies of Tertullian. Seniores and
Majores nat^ for Bishops, so in Firmilian. p. 169 Sect. 6. S. Jerome's Testimony
of Bishops, etc. by Apostolical Tradition. Consuetudo opposed to Dominica
dispositio. S. Jerome's meaning evidenced by many other Testimonies to be, that
Bishops were instituted by the Apostles. So by Panorm^tan also. The Testimonies
of Isidore, etc. the Council of Aquen, and of Leo vindicated. Of Ischyras's
Ordination. The testimony of the Synod ad Zurrium, and of the 4th Council of
Carthage. p. 171 Sect. 7. The Testimonies of Ambrose and Austin. Consignare
used for consecrating the Eucharist, and that belonged to the Bishop when
present. p. 187 Sect. 8. Of the Ch^repiscopi, p. 189
A VINDICATION OF THE Dissertations concerning Episcopacy, From the Answers or
Exceptions offered against them by the London-Ministers in their Jus Divinum
Ministerii Evangelici.
The INTRODUCTION.
Of the occasion of this Work, The state of the Controversy, The Heads of the
Prelatists Plea, from Scripture and Antiquity, with some Observations assistant
to them. The considerable concernements of the question.
BEing advertised from many hands, Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici, which is
lately published by some, who entitle themselves the Provincial Assembly of
London, has undertaken to consider and confute many passages of the
Dissertations, three years since published in Latin, in defense of Episcopacy,
against D. Blondell and others, I have thought my self obliged to examine
whether there be any thing objected by them in relation to those Dissertations,
which may reasonably move me to retract what was there either with diffidence
proposed, or more confidently asserted by me.

2. And having diligently surveyed the whole Book, that I might omit no
passage, wherein my interests might be in the least concerned and being truly
able to affirm from that view, that it has yielded me no one syllable of
useful Exhortation, no motive to retract any period, or alter any expression
in those Dissertations (but as far, as I do persuade my self that this
Provincial Synod contains in it Men of judgment and abilities to maintain
the truth and convince gaine-sayers, so far I am forced to assume, that what
I have written is testified to be Truth, and by that privilege competently
secured against all opposers) I might herein reasonably acquiesce, without
farther importuning the Reader or my self with impertinent vindications, only
trusting and adventuring the whole matter to the judgment of each intelligent
Reader, who is obliged by all Rules of Justice to compare either by his Memory,
or by his Eye those passages in this Book, and the Chapters in the
Dissertations to which they are confronted.

3. But I am again told that many, who have read and are moved by the
Arguments and Answers of this Book, and the Authority of a Provincial Synod,
are yet disabled to be so just as to examine them by comparing them with the
latin Dissertations, and that we are fallen upon those times wherein
whatsoever is not answered, is cried up as unanswerable (an humor, of which,
if I might be permitted to receive the fruits. I should have no temptation to
complain, there being so much a greater part of those Dissertations, which was
never attempted to be answered.) I continue still under some seeming obligation
to give an exact account of the whole matter as it lies in contest between
this Provincial Synod and those Dissertations, and I shall hasten to do it,
when I have first by way of* necessary Introduction premised these two things.

4. First, the state of the Controversy, as it generally lies between us, which
is this; whether the Apostles of Christ, when they planted Churches in each
City, left them in the hands of many to be governed by the Common Council of
those many, erecting an equality or parity of several Rulers in every City, to
whom all others were subjected, and they to none: or whether they placed the
Superior power and Authority in some one, and subjected all others to him.
Other consequent differences there are arising from hence, (and those of such
weight and concernment to those with whom I now dispute, in case the Truth be
not on their sides, as will make this return to their Objections, no less
than a duty of Charity, as to Brethren, if by the Grace of God they shall judge
it reasonable to make that use of it) but this is the one Basis of all, whether
the Apostles planted parity or imparity in the Church, many equal Governors
in one City, or but one in each; The former is the Presbyterians interest to
defend, the latter the Prelatists; And so the controversy stands between them
to be debated and evinced by such evidences as a matter of Fact is capable of,
(the Right being by both sides acknowledged to follow that Fact) i. e. by the
Testimonies of those who are fit to be credited in this matter.

Secondly, the brief heads of the Plea, by which I have undertaken to
maintain the Prelatists assertion, 1. By Scripture, 2. By the Records of the
first times, the Writings of those who were nearest the Apostles, and either
affirm what was done by the Apostles, or how it stood practiced in the
Churches, all the World over, which were planted by them. As for the third way
of arguing from the universal consent and practice of all Churches for about
1400. years together, i. e. from about the year 140. till the Reformation,
this I do not insist on, as I might with all evidence, because it is known
and confessed by the Adversaries, and all that is by them pretended, is, that
parity and equality being prescribed and practiced by the Apostles soon after
their death, and quite contrary to their plat-forme, Prelacy was introduced
into all Churches; It being their desire and demand now (a little different
from what M. Calvin at first proposed to the Churches of Helvetia) that all may
be reformed and reduced to the state wherein the Apostles left it.

6. In the managing the proofs proposed by me, I have used this method, which
seemed to me most convincing. 1. To insist on some few Testimonies under each
head, which are sufficient to conclude the matter on the Prelatists side; and
then to propose some observations, which may accord all other places both of
Scripture and ancient writers, with those Testimonies and that conclusion.

7. The special proofs of Scripture are taken, First, from the power derived
(as from God the Father, to Christ, so) from Christ to the Apostles; not as to
a Common council of sociall Rulers, but as so many several planters and
Governors of the Church, each having all power committed to him, and depending
on no conjunction of any one or more Apostles for the exercise of it; And this
is largely and clearly deduced Dissert. 3. c. 1. 2. 3. 4. And this power being
by them derived to Bishops in each City, in the same manner as they used it
themselves (which is also farther evidenced and vindicated, c. 5. etc.) this
was deemed a first competent proof of this matter, and as a confirmation of
it, it was observable, that the first Bishops made by them, were in the very
Scripture called Apostles, James the Bishop of Jerusalem, etc. Diss. 4. c. 3.

8. A second principal proof of Scripture is taken from the several mentions
of the so many Churches of Asia, and the so many Angels assigned to them, one
to each, as a singular Governor or Bishop in the Revelation. And in discourse
of these we have found great evidence of the fact to authorize us to improve
the conclusion a little higher, than was necessary to the defense of the maine
cause; viz. to affirm of these Angels, that each of them was an Archbishop or
Metropolitan, and having done so to discern upon undeniable grounds that there
were many other such, mentioned in the Scripture (though not under that title)
as James the brother of the Lord, Metropolitan of all Judea, Titus of all
Crete, with an hundred Cities in it, etc.

9. And the ways of according all other Scriptures with these have been
briefly these. 1. By observing this difference betwixt Cities and Metropoles,
as the true cause and occasion of the mentions of many Bishops in (not of) one
City, meaning thereby the Bishops of all the Cities under that Metropolis as
Phil. 1. 1. Act. 20. 17. Secondly, by examining the Nature of all the words,
which I conceived to be used in Scripture for Bishops, as (beside Apostle and
Angel forementioned) (...), Bishop, (...), Ruler, (...), Doctor, (...), Pastor,
(...), President, (...), Elder (and in the Fathers, (...), Chief Priest, and
Sacerdos, Priest^) each denoting Dignity and Authority, and all cleared to be
in their own nature applicable, and by the circumstances of the Context to be
actually applied to the singular Governors in each City; most of them
constantly so, and that one of (...), if not constantly so, yet very rarely
otherwise. And this is done Dissert. 4. c. 7. and so to the end of that Diss.
Thirdly, by observing the paucity of believers in many Cities in the first
Plantations, which made it unnecessary that there should by the Apostles be
ordained any more than a Bishop and Deacon (one or more) in each City, and that
this was accordingly done by them at the first, is approved by the most
undeniable ancient Records. Such as those (...), the profoundest Histories, out
of which L. 1 l. 3.
Epiphanius makes this Observation; (...), Where there wanted Bishops, and
there were found persons worthy of the Office, Bishops were constituted; but
where there was no multitude, there none were found among them to be
constituted Presbyters, and they satisfied themselves with a Bishop alone in a
place; Only the Bishop could not possibly be without a Deacon, and accordingly
the Apostle took care that the Bishop should have his Deacons to minister to
him. That which is thus cited by Epiphanius out of those Ancient Records, is
found clearly affirmed by Ep ad Cor.
Clemens Romanus, an Apostolical person, and witness of the Apostles
practice; that they being sent out by Christ; as he by his Father, went out
Preaching the Gospel, and proclaiming it through Regions and Cities, (...),
they constituted their first fruits into Bishops and Deacons, of those which
should afterward believe. To both which we shall again add what Ephiphanius
prefaceth in that place; (...), that when the preaching was new, the Apostle
St. Paul wrote agreeably to the present state of affairs. We have here so
clear an account of the reason of the Apostles immediate subjoyning of Deacons
to Bishops, Phil. 1. 1. and 1 Timothy 3. ( viz. because those were the only two
Orders then constituted in every Church) that these two places (which are made
use of by the adversaries against us) are most punctual evidences of the Truth
of ours, and of the unseasonablenesse of their pretentions.

10. As for the Testimonies out of the first Antiquity; The groundwork I have
chosen to lay in Ignatius his Epistles, because the Testimonies thence are so
many and so evident, and the Writer so near the Apostles time (that holy men
being Martyred in the 10. of Trajan, to whose Reign S. John lived) and most of
his Epistles written to the very Churches of Asia planted by St. John, and the
Bishops of many of them named by him, and of one Bishop the Presbyters under
him, that if that one Authors Testimonies be attended to, there is an absolute
decision of the whole matter on the Prelatists side; To which purpose I have
also vindicated these Epistles from all that has been objected to them in
these late years, and asserted their Authority by as ancient and authentic
evidences, as can be vouched for any ancient piece, next the Holy Scriptures
themselves, and contented my self with the most pure and uncorrupted Copies
and Editions of it.

11. In accord with these Testimonies I have also produced many others out of
Clemens Romanus, Hegesippus, Polycarpe, Papias, Polycrates, Justin, Jrenaeus,
Clemens Alexandrinus, T^rtullian, and as many of the first times as have said
any thing to this matter, and found a full consent in all, and in most
irrefragable suffrages, which conclude this whole controversy on the
Prelatists side. To which I have also added some few observations of
unquestionable truth, as 1. That of the continuance of the use of (...), Elder,
to signify Bishop (in our Modern sense) among some of these most ancient
Church writers (whereas the word (...) is never used by any, but for a singular
Governor.) Secondly, that of the distinct Congregations of Jewish and Gentile
Christians in the same City (the grounds of which are evident in Scripture) and
consequently of the several Governors or Bishops over them (which was useful
for the removing some seeming difficulties in the Catalogues of the first
Bishops of Rome, Anti^ch, etc.) and some other the like, not for the serving
the Necessities of our Cause, but as supernumerary, and ex abundanti. And upon
these and such like heads of probation we have built our plea, descending also
to a particular survey of Saint Hierom's testimonies, which are by the
adversaries principally made use of against us.

And if what is thus copiously deduced in the Dissertations, together with
Answers, and refutations of the principal Objections of Doctor Blondel, and
Walo Messalinus, do really stand in force, and appear not to be refuted now
in whole, or in part, by these men, who have often attempted to refute them, I
shall then leave them seriously, and Christianly to consider but this one
thing, and to return their anger not to me, but to themselves, what security
of grounds they can build upon in their present practices, particularly in
their assuming to themselves that power or authority which does not belong to
them; For 1. if the Praefecture in each Church were (as by Christ to the
Apostles, so) by the Apostles given to the singular Governor or Bishop (by
them (...), constituted over all) and from that time to this, regularly
continued in a succession of Bishops in every Church; and secondly, if those
which are now called Presbyters, were by those, who first instituted them,
placed in a second rank as of dignity, so of power, and never had all that
power committed to them, which to the Bishop was committed, particularly not
that of Ordeining the meanest Deacon, much less Presbyters with power of
Ordeining other Presbyters; and thirdly if they, on whose authority they most
depend (S. Excepta Ordinatione, Hier. ep. 85. ad Evagr. (...). Chrysostom. Hom.
in 1 Tom.
Hierome the Presbyter, etc.) do expressly assure them, that the Presbyters in
their times had not power of Ordination, but acknowledge the Bishop superior to
the Presbyter in that (and it is not imaginable how that power should be
conveyed to any Presbyter now, which was not vested in any at that time, nor
pretended to be so in above a thousand years after them.) And lastly, if no
man may take that which is not given him from Heaven (or give that which he
has not) which the Scripture yields to, as a rule by which both John Baptist,
John 3. 27. and Christ himself, Luk, 12. 14. was to be judged, and the
Apostle, Heb. 5. 4. has applied that general rule to this particularity, of
Priesthood in the Church, viz. that no man may (...) assume an honor to
himself, but who is (...), called by God, In Ep. ad Heb. p 913.
((...), advanced by God, says Theophylact) either immediately or mediately,
either by the Apostles, or by those which received it successively from them
(all others being truly affirmed by the Theophylact Ibid.
Ancients (...), to leap into the honor, (...) ( and to corrupt the rule or
law by which they should be guided) then I say, upon what solid grounds can
they satisfy Conscience, who without all pretense of necessity (which by some
is here made use of as an excuse) the regular way being open and plain before
them, have run before they were sent, assumed that power to themselves, which
belongs not to them, nor was ever by any, which had it, bestowed upon them?

I do not foresee any more here necessary to be premised to our future
debates, and shall therefore hasten to them, as to an unpleasant progress,
that I would willingly be at the end of, and commit all to the grace and
unerring judgment of him, whom we all profess to serve and obey in this, as
in all other things.

CHAP. I.
Concerning the Angels of the Churches of Asia.
Section I.
The grounds of affirming them to be Bishops.
FOr the vindicating of the Dissertations from all the exceptions which are
offered against them in the Book, Reader any the most cursory view of the
whole Book; I shall therefore fall in, though abruptly, on the sixth Chapter of
the second part of it. For although in some of the former Chapters of that
part, some endeavors are used to assert Presbytery against Episcopacy by
Arguments so frequently produced by that party, that they were every one
foreseen; and in the Dissertations largely evidenced to have no validity in
them, yet it falls out somewhat to mine own and the Readers ease, that I am
not personally called into the lists, till the beginning of the sixth Chapter;
which by the signal of some Latin words in the Margin out of Dissert. 4. c.
4. Sect. 4. have marked me out as the person against whom that Chapter was
entirely designed, and I shall readily answer the call, and not refuse the
pains to examine every Section of that Chapter.

2. The subject of this Chapter is the pretended ( as they please to style it)
Episcopacy of the seven Asian Angels, And thus they begin their assault; The
second Scripture ground brought to prove the Divine Right of Praelacy, is from
the Angels of the seven Churches of Asia; These Angels, say they ( the
Assertors of Prelacy) were seven single persons, In (...) lu^e adhuc ca^c^ire
aliquos inter (...) in^uspicatissimi saeculi prodigi^ numerandum est*
and (as one has lately written) not only Bishops, but Metropolitans and
Archbishops. This is said with so much confidence that all men are condemned as
blind or wilful that endeavor to oppose it: And it is reckoned as one of the
great prodigies of this unhappy Age, that Men should still continue blind, and
not see light enough in this Scripture to build the great Fabric of Episcopacy
by Divine Right upon.

3. This is, it seems, the first crime chargeable on me as Author of the
Dissertations, that I am confident of my Assertion, and condemn all others as
blind or wilful that endeavor to oppose it. And although this be no competent
way of disproving what is asserted, for it is no universal maxim or Datum
among the Objecters that confident asserting should be looked on as a character
of falsity, yet I, that would much more be ashamed to have been presumptuous
than mistaken, and deem it not a sin to have erred modestly, am concerned to
avert the envy of this their Prooeme, and to give this essay, how far any the
most moderate speeches may be disguised and deformed by a disadvantageous
interpretation.

4. These words [in tanta luce -- ] lie thus in the Dissertations; [ Ad tertium
accedo -- I proceed to the third thing, that which concerns the Angels in the
Apocalypse, that by them are noted so many prefects of the chief Cities or
Churches in Asia, whom you may call not only Bishops, but Primates, Enarchs,
or Metropolitans. Each of these things must be briefly taken notice of. First,
that each of these were single and properly called Bishops. So Andreas
Caesariensis pronounces of them, (...), The seven Ephori (inspectors or
Bishops, so called from the Greek (...) Inspectors, directly equivalent to
(...)) parallel to the number of the seven Churches are in that place of the
Ap^calypse called Angels. This title of Angel is sufficiently known from
Malach. 2. 7. to belong to the chief Priest of the Jews, for he is called
the Angel of the Lord of Hosts, as the person from whom the Law was to be
derived to the people. Further more these Angels in that vision of John's are
likened to so many Stars, which, seeing Christ is said to bear or carry in
his Right Hand Apoc. 1. 16. 20. and 1, 2. an argument of competent validity may
be drawn from thence, that this dignity and power of them in the Church is, if
not immediately instituted, yet approved and confirmed by Christ; especially
when in these so many parts of this Epistle, Christ himself has written to
every of them under this title of honor and dignity. In the presence of so
much light that some Men should still continue blind is to be numbered among the
prodigies of this worst and most unhappy age. For as to that which from the one
word [yo^] in the plural. c. 4. 24. I find objected by some against so many
single mentions of the Angels (one in every Church) that will immediately
vanish, etc.

5. These words thus entirely set down have a face very distant from that so
much confidence and censoriousnesse that I am here charged with by the
Provincial Synod. For 1. For the conclusion deduced from the mention of these
Angels, it is not the Divine Right of Prelacy (which phrase might yet have been
reconciled with rules of Sobriety and Modesty, as well as the Jus Divinum of
Presbytery) but Christ's approbation and confirmation of this dignity and power
of Bishops, which conclusion has evident grounds in those Texts which mention
Christ's holding them in his Hand, and his addressing an Epistle to them,
supposing only, what is undertaken to be evidenced by other mediums, that
these Angels were single persons in each Church.

6. Secondly, that which is by me so confidently affirmed, is not, as this
learned Assembly is pleased to suggest, that these Angels were Metropolitans or
Archbisops. That they were such, is afterward as a distinct matter in the next
Chapter proposed in a much more moderate style, statim credibile fiet, it will
straitwayes become credible, and with no more show of confidence then the
premises which are there at large set down, will Authorize.

7. These be two competent essays to begin with, by which we may proportion
our expectations; But there is yet a third which has somewhat more of
injustice in it, to mention my so much confidence in asserting, but never to
take notice of the grounds produced, whereon this confidence (as far as it
extends) is built, the want of which is so constantly the one thing, which
renders confidence unseasonable or blameable, that it is not in the power of
any man to have apprehended grounds as proper to induce a conclusion, and to
suspend the belief and confidence of the truth of that conclusion, which is so
inferred. The injustice, I say, is there not taking notice of the mediums,
whereon the confidence is founded, very competent to infer a conclusion in
that style, wherein it was there inferred, if they had been pleased to
advertise their Readers of it.

8. The inference lies thus; The Angel of each Church of Asia was a single
person, therefore not a College or Consistory of Presbyters, and the
singularity of the person is there supposed to be evidenced sufficiently by
that which is so many times repeated in the Text, the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, and the like, by the testimony of
Andreas Caesariensis, the Principal Annotator or Interpreter of the
Revelation, transcribed by Aretas in express words, (...), the number of the
Bishops equal to the number of the Churches; and by the answer rendered to that
one Objection which is brought by the Presbyterians against the singularity of
the person of each Angel.

9. Secondly, this singular person was a Bishop in that notion of the word
which signifies a precedence of power and dignity over all others in that
Church. This again was made evident, both by the forementioned singularity of
his power and person in each Church, and farther by the propriety of the title
bestowed on him, an Angel, such as among the Jews the chief Priest was
styled; Malac. 2. to which matter I shall now superadde one Testimony which
Photius has out of Diodorus Siculus concerning the Jews; (...), Him they call
the High Priest, and deem him to be to them an Angel or Messenger of the
commands of God* (a Commissioner of Heaven, empowered from thence for the
execution of his Office among them.)

10. This by the way, gives us the reason of the denomination, because as
Angels do not only carry up our Prayers to God but also bring down Gods
Commands to us, so did the High priest under the Law. This dialect is also said
to be derived from the Hebrews to the Egyptians, who call their chief Priest
Angel also. And then how fitly the parallel runs betwixt the High Priest among
the Jews, and the Bishop, in the Christian Church, taken in the Prelatists
notion of him; was a theme which seemed not to need any length of harangue to
perform or illustrate it. And yet after a Section spent to clear that one
difficulty of the [(...), you, in the plural c. 2. 24.] there are two Sections
added more for the farther fortifying of this evidence. 1. From the Council of
Chalcedon; Act. 2. which (...).
from Timothy till the time of their Session numbers 27. Bishops in one of
these Sees, that of Ephesus, all ordained there (and Timothy we know being
ordained by the laying on of St. Paul's hands 2 Timothy 1. 6. will divolve it to
that Orginall, Apostoliacll institution) and 2. from Polycrates, De M^^tyr.
Timoth.
who was borne soon after St. John's days, and is a witness of a competent
antiquity, and affirms himself to be the Ep ad. victor. ap ^u^eb. Eccl Hist.
l. 5. c. 25.
eight Bishop of that See; From both which testimonies of the Catologue, and
number of Bishops, ascending to St. Timothy, as the first of that rank (who
certainly was constituted there before the Epistle of Christ to the Angel of
that Church) the conclusion is obvious and irrefragable, that either Timothy or
some successor of his was personally the Angel to which the Epistle was
addressed, and I profess not to wish for a greater evidence to justify a
Prelatist in his desire to live in obedience to that order so signally
confirmed by Christ.

11. The like is in the next Section produced out of Irenaeus l. 3. c. 3.
concerning the Angel of the Church of Smyrna. Irenaeus lived in the time of
Polycarp that ancient Primitive Martyr, and being a youth had the honor to see
that venerable old Man, and of him he affirms, that he was (...).
not only a Disciple of the Apostles, and converst with many that saw Christ,
but that also he was sent to Asia, and constituted Bishop in the Church of
Smyrna; And if there needed any more light after so clear and authentic a
testimony (which again concludes either Polycarpe, or some successor of his to
be the Angel of the Church of Smyrna to whom Christ addresseth his Epistle)
there is another added out of Tertullian, a Writer of great Antiquity and
reputation for knowledge in the Records of the Church in these words. Sicut
Smyrnaeortem Ecclesi^ Poly^^rpum a Johanne collocatum refert, sicut Romano^um
Clementem a Petro ordi^atum edit, perinde utique and ^aeterae exhibent, quc^ ab
Apostolis in Episcopatu^ constitutos, Apostolici i^ semins traduces habent. De
Praescrip c: 32.
As the Church of Smyrna relates Polycarpe to have been constituted there by
John, as the Church of Rome affirms Clement to have been ordained by Peter, so
in like manner the rest of the Churches exhibit the Records of those whom they
have had their Bishops constituted by the Apostles and conveyers of the
Apostolical seed to them. And more particularly of the Churches of Asia, the
subject of our present discourse. Habemus Johannis alumuas Ec^lesias -- Oedo
Episcoporum ad originem rec^^sus in Johanu^m fltabi^ authorem. Adv. Ma^c. l. 4.
c. 5.
We have the Churches fed by John, and the course of Bishops being driven to
the Original, acknowledge John (the Apostle) to be the Author of them. Here
certainly is light enough to make some confidence excusable in a Prelatist, and
to make his wonder seasonable, that any that have eyes, should in so clear a
Sunshine want the use of them, and to think it no very auspicious omen that
they do. Yet because I had much rather assist, then upbraid other men's
infirmities, I have here given them an instance how easy it had been for them
to have informed themselves and their respective charges of the grounds of the
Prelatists confidence, that the Epistle of Christ to the Angels of the seven
Asian Churches was an evidence of his approbation of the Order of Bishops in
our modern notion of that word for a single overseer in every Church.

12. And if there be any obscurity still remaining in the premises, because the
Council of Chalcedon (and Policrates) makes Timothy, who was ordained by Paul
the first Bishop or Angel of the Church of Ephesus, but Tertullian divolves the
Original of the course or Catalogue to St John, the answer is easy, that there
were two sorts of Christians in Ephesus, and throughout all Asia, the first of
Gentile converts, brought into the faith by St. Paul the Apostle of the
Gentiles, and over them it was that Timothy was by him placed in Ephesu^ their
Bishop; the second of Jewish Proselites converted by St. John (by compact
designed to go to the Jews, as his Province Gal. 2. 9. and those peculiarly
the Asian Jews, as appears every where in (...) l. 3. 23.
Eusebius story, and by the relation of his death in that place, given us by
Ibid. c. 31.
Polycrates, an early Bishop there) and the Author of the constiuations out of
an ancient tradition tells us that another of the same name, (...)) was by that
Apostle ordained Bishop of the Jewish Christians there, as Timothy by S. Paul
of the other Congregation of Gentile Christians. An observation which is
largely educed and exemplified in the Dissert 4. c. l, and 7. etc.
Dissertations, and of which there is no small use for the dilucidating of
obscurities in ancient story, and the clearing of this controversy betwixt us
and the Presbyterians; but I must not here take liberty to enlarge on it
unnecessarily, having been thus far forced to expatiate somewhat above
proportion to the length of their own period, wherein my confidence and
censoriousnesse were shortly accused, how deservedly, I hope has now been made
manifest.

Section II.
Of Timothy, of Onesimus, of Polycarpe.
The next period in their charge against me runs thus. Nun. 1.
It is farther added, that some of the Ancient Fathers mention the very men
that were the Angels of those Churches. Some say Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus,
when John wrote his Epistle to it; Others say Onesimus, others say that
Policarpe was Bishop of Smyrna; And from hence they conclude with a great deal
of plansibility, that the Angel of the Churches were seven individual Bishops.

2. Here is as yet no great charge offered, but a confession rather, that I had
some temptation for the confidence, of which I was formerly accused, my
conclusion being acknowledged by the adversaries to be inferred with a great
deal of plausibility. But I have not so much reason to depend on their
civilities, as to omit the inserting here, what may be useful to prevent
mistakes, and shall therefore think it necessary to set down entirely, what
it is which I have affirmed in this matter.

3. And 1. I have yet no where said that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus when
John writ this Epistle to that Church; My words are expressly otherwise, Ex
quibus patet vel Timotheum ipsum vel aliquem ei succedaneum hunc ipsum Angelum
fuisse, quem c. 2. 1. Christus alloquitur. By which it appears (having
formerly set down my grounds to induce this conclusion, that either Timothy
himself, or some body that succeeded him, was that very Angel to whom Christ
addressed his speech, c. 2. 1. But that is not to affirm it of Timothy, but
purposely to abstain from affirming any thing that could be denied or doubted,
and only to affirm it either to Timothy or some successor of his, which
evidently and infallibly it must be, if there be truth in the premise from
which it was inferred, the words of the Council, and the Father, that after
Timothy, the first, succeeded of continual series of Bishops there.

4. What my opinion is in this matter, I shall now freely tell them, though
before I had not occasion to do it, together professing it to be only my
opinion, and so still affirming nothing in a matter of some uncertainty, or
farther than the grounds, on which my opinon is founded, shall appear able to
support it. My opinion briefly is, that Timothy was then Bishop of Ephesus at
the time of addressing that Epistle to the Angel of that Church; And the
grounds are these. 1. That St. He^. (...).
John's banishment and prophesying are by Epiphanius twice expressly affirmed to
have been (...), in the times of Claudius Caesar; Then secondly, that as it is
by Chronologers set down to be in the 13. of Claudius, that Timothy was left
by Paul at Ephesus, when he went into Macedonia; 1 Timothy 1. 3. Act. 20. so it
is generally resolved that Timothy suffered at Ephesus under Nerva, and that
agreeable enough with his age, who appears to be young when Paul first placed
him Bishop of Ephesus. If these grounds have truth in them, then Timothy cannot
be doubted to be Bishop of Ephesus, when St John's vision was received; And
though it is true, that Ireneus seems to assign another date of these visions,
at least of some of them, (...), at the end of Domitians Reign (which what it
is to be deemed to signify, is Annot. p. 906.
elsewhere explained) yet still that is within the compass of Timothies life,
if he suffered not till Nerva's Reign. And so much for that of Timothies.

5. Secondly, that Onesimus was Bishop of Ephesus at the date of that Epistle,
is no where so much as intimated to be my opinion, much less affirmed by me.
And therefore I need reply no more to that. Yet because Ignatius in his Epistle
to the Ephesians mentions Onesimus their Bishop (and that Testimony is produced
by me Dissert. 2. c. 25. Sect. 9) I shall here freely give them my opinion also
of that matter.

6. First, that there is little ground of question, but that one of that name,
Onesimus, was Bishop of Ephesus in the tenth year of Trajan, wherein Ignatius
wrote that Epistle.

7. Secondly, that by one indication there is some small reason to guess, that
this Onesimus was then lately come to that dignity; I mean Ignatius his words
of gratulation to that Church, that God had given them the favor to obtain or
have such a Bishop; (...).

8. Thirdly, that according to Epiphanius his setting down the time of John's
banishment and visions, in the days of Claudius, there must be above 50 years
distance between the date of this Epistle of Christ, and that of Ignatius, and
consequently that it is not so likely that Onesimus, that was their Bishop in
the later, should be that very Angel in the former.

9. Fourthly, that as I can have no cause to consent with Ado (in lib. de Fest.
Apost. ad 14. Call. Mart.) that this Onesimus in Ignatius was he that is
mentioned by St. Paul to Philemon, so nor to adhere to the Roman Martyrologie,
that he whom Paul mentions, was constituted Bishop of Ephesus after Timothy.

10. And therefore fifthly, it must be remembered, that both the Greek
Menologies, and Simeon Metaphrastes (who celebrate his memory on March 13.)
acknowledge not that Onesimus to have been at all Bishop of Ephesus, and that
others also of the ancients make him to have been Bishop of Beraea, and
martyred in Domitian's Reign: and Dorotheas in Synopsi expressly affirms that
Gaius succeeded Timothy in Ephesus.

11. From all which it follows, that Onesimus mentioned by Ignatius, was some
later Bishop of that City, who bare that very Ordinary Greek name, and so that
his being Bishop of Ephesus no way belongs to that time of the Angel in the
Revelation, not interferes with their opinion, who think Timothy to have been
that Angel; The appearing incompetibility whereof was it, I spppose, that
brought in here the mention of Onesimus.

12. This was here seasonable enough to be confronted to their words in this
place, and will be of use to be remembered in the process of their Discourse.

13. Thirdly, for Polycarp's being Bishop of Smyrna, as there is left no place
for the doubting of that (if either Irenaeus, that lived in his time and saw
him, or if Tertullian, who lived not long after, and was a curious Antiquary,
may be believed in their joint affirmations of a known matter of Fact) so it
is again no where affirmed by me, that he was the very man, to whom that
Epistle to the Angel of Smyrna was sent, and if that were their meaning, they
have again misreported my words.

14. All that I had said, I think was proved irrefragably; that in two of
those Churches mentioned in the Apocalypse; Timothy and Poylcarpe are by
Anthentick testimonies affirmed to be constituted Bishops, the one by St. Paul,
the other by St. John, and that is a competent argument added to others, to
infer that the Angel of each of those Churches was a single person, and so a
Bishop in the Prelatists, not in the Presbyterians notion of the word, an
assertion which I need not fear will yield any advantage to the adversaries,
and so I as briefly commit it to them.

Section 3.
Of the negative Argument from St. John's not using the word Bishop. Of (...)
in the Revelation.
IN the next place by way of answer to this plea of the Prelatists,
Smectymnuus, the Vindication of Smectymnuus, the Humble Addresses of the
Divines at the Isle of Wight, wherein, say they, these things are fully,
clearly, and satisfactorily handled.

2. But it being certain that every one of these three was published some
years before the Dissertations, I should think it strange that the
particulars there insisted on by me, should by divination be thus answered
before their conception, being able truly to profess, that though I am not
unwilling to make use of any man's aid for defending truth, yet none of those
writings, to which any of those three were given in answer, were by me made use
of in those compositions.

3. But we are superseded the trouble of examining any of these three, by the
leave that is craved to borrow from them what may be useful for the turn, and
then in like manner I shall more willingly receive from these, what shall
appear to answer, or prejudge our plea, than undertake new troubles in farther
unnecessary search of it.

4. First, then they desire it may be considered, that S. John, the Penman of
the Revelation does neither in it, nor in any of his other writings so much as
upon the (by; I suppose, for the Printer fails me) name Bishop. He names the
name Presbyter frequently in the Revelation, yea, when he would set out the
office of those who are nearest the throne of Christ in his Church, Rev. 4. he
calls himself a Presbyter, Ep. 2. And whereas in S. John's days some new
expressions were used in the Christian Church, which were not in Scripture, as
the Christian Sabbath began to be called the Lords day, and Christ himself the
Word, now both these are found in the writings of St John; And it is strange to
us that the Apostle should mention a new phrase, and not mention a new Office
erected by this time (as our Brethren say) in the Church, especially if we
consider that Polycarpe (as it related) was made Bishop by him; And no doubt if
he had been made Bishop in a prelaticall sense, we should have found the name
Bishop in some of his writings, who lived so long as to see Episcopacy settled
in the Church, as our Adversaries would make us believe.

5. We are now to consider what degree of conviction, or Argument, to the
prejudice of our pretensions, can be fetched from this large consideration. And
first it is most evident and notorious among all Artists, that an argument from
Authority cannot conclude negatively that there were no Bishops in St John's
time, because St. John does not mention Bishops. It is the same way of arguing,
as if they should conclude that there was no God in the time of writing the
Canonical Chapters of Hester, because God is not found once mentioned in those
Chapters. And yet of this inartificiall kind is the whole discourse of this
Paragraph, the premises barely negative throughout all the consideration; And
so nothing is conclusible from it to the prejudice of us, or benefit of our
adversaries.

6. Secondly, all that this consideration pretends to, is terminated in the
bare name of Bishop, that is it which they pretend is not to be found in St.
John. But 1. They knew that the word Angel is often in St John, and by us
contested, by the singularity of the person one Angel in each Church (and other
Characters) to conclude the Office of Bishop as irrefragably, as if the word
Bishop were there specified. Nay of this we have a competent experience, that
if the word Bishop had been found there, it would by Presbyterians be as
readily expounded to signify a Presbyter, or college of such (for so
certainly they have done in other places) and truly with as much reason and
satisfaction to any impartial judge, as they have affirmed the word Angel in
each Church to denote such. And therefore

7. Thirdly, I shall demand, would the Apostle St. John's using the name
Bishop, be at all useful to the Prelatists interests, to conclude that there
was such an Office in the Church in his time, or would it not? If not, then
sure it is not to our prejudice, that he has not mentioned that name, and
then this whole consideration is perfectly to no purpose. If it would, then
sure St. Paul's and St. Lukes frequent mentions of them (I may add St. Peter
also) will supply St. John's omissions, and conclude there were Bishops in
their time, and that was long before St. John's death, if it had been considered.

8. Fourthly, when it is said that St. John frequently names the name Presbyter
in the Apocalypse, it is not imaginable that they should think the Author of the
Dissertations could receive any prejudice from thence, when he has avowed to
believe that those (...) Elders, mentioned in those so many places of the
Revelation, were the 24. Bishops of Judaea sitting in Council at Jerusalem
their Metropolis, encompassing James the Bishop there together with the four
living creatures, denoting the four Apostles that were joined with them in the
council, and the 7. Lamps, the emblemes of the 7. Deacons attending; Of which
matter till they have disproved what is commodiously deduced Dissert. 4. c. 20.
Sect. 10. I shall have no need farther to enlarge, it being perfectly useless
to our present inquiry, that either the word Bishop or Elder should be used by
S. John, for a single Prefect in the Christian Church, supposing (as now we do
in the Objection, and it is but a begging of the question in the respondent to
suppose the contrary) that the word Angel is a notation of it.

9. By this it appears fifthly, how little we incommodated by the position of
these Elders in the Revelation placed nearest to the throne of Christ in his
Church, for supposing, as I do, that Christ is by way of vision represented
there under the person of the Bishop of Jerusalem sitting in council, and
encompassed (on each side) with a Semicircle of Thrones, on which sat the 24
Bishops of Judea, I can well allow these 24. (call them Elders, or what you
please) to be nearest to that middle throne, whereon Christ is seated. And
truly if it should be otherwise interpreted of Presbyters in the modern
notion of the word, it would be hard to make the other parts of the vision to
bear proportion with that phansy; For I must suppose, according to St. John's
words, that in the vision these thrones were set up in Heaven; And then I shall
demand, was that a representation of any council or Judicature on Earth* or
not? If it were not, then nothing can be inferred thence in favor of
Presbyters, more than of Bishops, for of both these we speak, as of Officers
on Earth; But if it were, then applying it to Presbyters, it must follow, that
in the midst of them there is some other (environed on each side by them)
(...), sitting upon that throne of principal dignity, before whom also they on
the other thrones must fall down v.10. (or else the parallel will not hold
throughout) and the least that can be signified hereby, will be superiority of
dignity in him that sits on that middle throne above all the 24. Elders, which
will be deemed to exceed the case of a Prolocutor or Moderator of an Assembly,
which is the ut most that the Presbyterian (...) or equality can admit of, but
much more commodiously agrees to the Metropolitan of all Judea, sitting in a
National Council with the Bishops about him, for of these we doubt not to
affirm that they were as much inferior to him, as this representation does
pretend them to be.

10. As for the sense affixt to it by the Assemblers, that the (...) are
Presbyters in the modern notion, and that he that sits in the midst of them is
Christ, this is against all analogy, and rules of interpreting, a mining and
confounding the Original with the Copy, the type with the Antitype,
interpreting one part of the visi^n, as if it were in Heaven (for it was there
where Christ did sit as Judge) and the other as if it were on Earth, for sure
the Presbyters in this notion are to be considered as there; And this is a very
sufficient prejudice against their interpretation (if there were not enough
besides) and such as no way presses our way of setting it, as has been
already manifested.

11. Sixthly, for his calling himself a Presbyter Ep. 2. I answer, that as
far as this allegation has truth, it has no force in it at all against our
pretentions. He does indeed call himself (...) (the Elder, we fitly render it)
noting thereby (according to analogy with the solemn notion of the word both
among sacred and profane Writers, set down at large Dissert. 4. c. 19.) a
person of authority in the Church of Christ; an Apostle first, and then the
supreme Governor of the whole Jewish Church in Asia, which is but
proportionable to Saint Paul's beginning his Epistles with Paul an Apostle (or
Commissioner) of Jesus Christ (placed in that power in the Church by Christ
himself) and with the same style in the front of Saint Peter's Epistles, only
with this Characteristick note peculiar to Saint John in his Gospel and
Epistles, of omitting the expression of his own name; And then all that this
text is of force to do, is to prove that the word (...) does not import a
Presbyter (in our modern use of the word) governing in common with other
Presbyters, but rather a singular Governor of the Church, such as Bishops are
by us contested to be; And so the Greek Scholiasts have expressed it, (...), By
the word Elder he calls himself Bishop. And this, it is certain, is for the
interest of the Author of the Dissertations, and no way to his prejudice, if it
had been adverted by them that produce it.

12. Seventhly, when it is said that in Saint John's days some New expressions
were used in the Christian Church, which were not in Scripture, as the Lords
day, and the Word, I profess not to comprehend what advantage to their
praetensions could be designed or aimed at in this part of the consideration:
For 1. how can it truly be said, that the word (...), Lord's day, which is in
the Revelation, and (...), the Word, which is in Saint John's Gospel, were not
in Scripture? I must suppose the meaning is, that they were not in any other
writings of Scripture, except Saint John's: But then 2. that does not infer
them to be new expressions in Saint John's days, as these days are
distinguished from the days of the other Apostles, whom John survived, but only
that they were idiomes or characters of speech that Saint John delighted to
make use of.

13. Thus indeed it is ordinarily observed of his expressing of Christ by (...)
the word, which yet is taken from the Ancients of the Jewish Church (the
Chaldes paraphrase being known frequently to use (...) the word of the Lord,
and Plato seems to have been acquainted with the expression, which caused
Amelius to swear at the reading the beginning of S. John's Gospel, that that
Barbarian was of their Plato's mind, that the word of God was in order of a
Principle) and perhaps not peculiarly to him appropriate, for In Pandect. page
31.
Budaeus a very learned Critic in Greek affirms Saint Luke to have used it in
this notion, cap. 1. 2. and if he does not, yet still 'twill be but a peculiar
part of Saint John's style, which if he had written his Gospel in the same
year that Saint Matthew did his, he would doubtless have made use of, the
phrase being certainly in the world before that time (and so not new, as they
would have it) and the usage of it in the Church being in all reason to be
derived from Saint John's use of it (who was from thence called (...) the
Divine) not Saint John's use of it from the new admission of it into the
Christian Church.

14. And for the word (...), Lord's day, as it is not certain that it is the
Christian Sabbath (I mean the weekly Lord's day,) which is meant by that title
once used in the Revelation, but as probably the feast of Easter, the annual
commemoration of Christ's rising from the dead (and accordingly Andreas
Caesariensis sets it indifferently, yet so as it seems rather to incline to the
later, (...), the Lord's day bearing the memorial of the resurrection of
Christ) so in what notion soever it be taken, it was against Saint John's use
of the word that gave it authority in the following dialect of the Church, not
the Churches usage (that we any where can discern) from whence Saint John
derived it; And so this will be an instance as ineffectual as the former, to
infer the conclusion to which it is designed: For indeed bating the
unskilfulnesse of the argument, ab authoritate negative, already mentioned,
what a strange way of concluding would this be? S. John uses the words [(...),
the word] and [(...), Lord's day] (supposing also, that it is true which is
added) and no other writer of the Scripture uses them but in stead of them, [
the Son of God] ( Messiah, Christ) and the [ first day of the week] therefore
if there had been any office of Bishops erected in the Church in Saint John's
time, it is strange that Saint John should not mention the name (...) Bishop:
It Is at the first hearing clear enough, that there is no strangeness in this,
both because Saint John undertook not to set down a Dictionary of all words
or customs which were in his time in the Church, and because there is no
proportion held betwixt the members of the comparison, as has been showed. And
it will yet be less strange, because 1. it is easily supposeable and not
strange, that he should have no occasion at all to mention that office, or that
mentioning it, he should do it in his own chosen expression, (...) Angel, or
(...), Elder (as in other greater matters he is acknowledged and allowed to
do) by either of those signifying the same thing as expressly as the using of
(...) Bishop would have done: And 2. it is otherwise as manifest by Saint Paul
and Saint Luke, that the word (...) Bishop, and the office belonging to it were
before the time of Saint John's writings used in the Church, as it could be, if
Saint John had made express mention of it.

15. And lastly, for the highest round in the (...), the special part of the
consideration, our affirmation that Polycarp was made Bishop by Saint John,
that does not (any more than all the rest) infer it necessary that Saint John
should mention the name Bishop: Saint Jude, I hope, is supposed by the
Assemblers to have constituted some Presbyters in the Church, and yet he in his
Epistle has made no mention of any such name or office. And so much for that
first consideration.

Section IV.
Of Saint John's writings. Again of Diotrephes.
A Second consideration now follows to be added to this, John's writings, of
the superiority of one Presbyter over another, save only where he names and
chides Diotrephes, as one ambitiously affecting such a Primacy.

2. A consideration of the same unhappy constitution with the former, 1. a
testimonio negative again, Saint John had no occasion to mention it, therefore
there was in his time no such thing, and 2. in respect of the matter just the
same again, put only in other words, there 'twas, [No mention of Bishop in all
Saint John's writings,] here, [No superiority of one Presbyter over another in
all Saint John's writings.] And so it can add no accumulation of weight to the
former.

3. But then 2. (bating again those two infirmities in discourse) what if it
were granted that at the time of Saint John's writing, there were not in the
whole Church of Christ any one Presbyter, superior to another Presbyter, what
has the Author of the Dissert: lost, or they gained by this? He makes no doubt
willingly to yield to any enforcing reason that is or shall be produced to
conclude that at that time, there was above De^cons but one degree in the
Church, and yet to be never the less qualified to maintain his praetensions,
Nay he is known to have expressed it as his opinion probably inferred, and not
easily confuted (and that by which, if it be true, or because there is no
evidence to the contrary, all the Presbyterian praetensions, founded in the
doubtfulnesse of words in Scripture, are utterly excluded) that there were not
in the space within compass of which, all the Books of the New Testament were
written, any Presbyters in our Modern notion of them, created in the Church,
though soon after, certainly in Ignatius's time, there were; and then if the
consideration now before us were of any force at all, this would be the one
direct and proper use of it, to add more confidence to this opinion, and so to
confirm, not to invalidate our praetensions.

4. Thirdly for Diotrephes and Saint John's chiding of him for ambitiously
affecting a Primacy over other Presbyters, there will appear to be more than
one misadventure in it. For 1. it is apparent in the Text that this Di^trephes
(whom (...) Page 24.
Walo Messalinus a good friend to the praetensions of the Assemblers, describes
so, as will conclude him a me^re Presbyterian, Noluit, says he, agnoscore
superiorem aliqu^m in Presbyteros habentem potestatem, he would not acknowledge
any superior having power over Presbyters) contended for superiority, not only
over his equals, but over Saint John himself, (...), faith that Apostle, he
(...) not us, yields no obedience, gives no heed to our letter of directions;
This certainly belongs not to the superiority or dignity of Bishops, which
reserves the Primacy to the Apostles entire, and no way clasheth with it, and
only pretends to that power and office of duty, which for the preserving of
unity, and the good of the flock, the Apostles thought fit to entrust and
commit to them.

5. Secondly, Diotrophes was not (as far as appears, or we have reason to
conjecture) ordained to any office of power in the Asian Church, committed to
that Apostles care, but of himself without any mission, nay expressly against
the Apostles consent, was willing to assume and exercise this power, and is but
an example of Corah's sedition and presumptuous humor (and that is inevitably
the case of the Presbyterian, unless he can show his commission for the power
he pretends to) all one with that of the Gnostics censured by Saint Jude under
the style of (...) the gainesaying of Cora^^, and this no way belongs, or is
appliable to the practice of the Bishop, who by Commission from the Apostle,
not by any ambition or presumption of his own, regularly ascends to this
degree of office and dignity in the Church, and uses it as regularly also, in
subordination to all his superiors.

6. On this Occasion the Dissertations have offered a Dilemma to these
Disputants, which I should be willing to hear answered by them, in this form,
Either Diotrephes exercised in the Church the power of the Bishop, in the
notion of a singular Prefect, assuming power over the Presbyters, or he did
not; If he did not, then is this consideration presently at an end, Diotrephes
is falsely accused, and the innocent Bishop unjustly wounded through his sides,
who it seems was no Bishop: But if it be said he did, then I demand, Why is not
Diotrophes checked by S. John for that presumption of affecting a power over his
equals? And why does the whole charge lie another way, that he received not S.
John's Letters, nor paid due obedience to them? Or why is that very thing
charged so heavily on the Bishops in our age, and punished so severely in them,
which the Apostle living and seeing, and upon occasion taking notice of
Diotrephes his insolence, does not so much as reprehend or accuse in him?

7. For as to the Epithet which he bestows upon him, that he was (...), one
that loved the praeeminence, supposing that were the title of his fault, yet
that extends not the Apostles speech to censuring or blaming the use of that
power, but only the ambition and affectation of it, which were otherwise
lawful to be enjoyed; as when it is noted in the Pharisees, that they did (...),
love or affect the uppermost seats in the Synagogues, which otherwise simply to
have sat in, had employed no crime of theirs, for to this very end, that some
body should sit in them, they were certainly erected, and it is known that there
was among them a (...) head of the Consistory, and (...) Governor of the
Synagogue, to whom that seat belonged by God's appointment.

8. Nay for the very desire, as far as is expressed by (...) or (...) 1 Timothy 3.
1. desiring and coveting, it is allowed by the Apostle to be terminated in
(...) the office of a Bishop, (...), as a good, and consequently a desirable
work, and if Diotrephes be supposed guilty of any other, it may safely be
yielded to have been a fault in him, without praejudice to the good office
which he so vitiously and criminously affected, according to that of In 1 Timothy
3. 1
Theodoret, that the Apostle, (...), accuses not the desire simply, but the
desire of rule, (...), and teaches to desire, not the honor, but the virtue,
not to covet the dignity, but to seek the work of the dignity, the task to
which it belongs. By all which, and much more added in the Disser^ 1. cap. 13.
Dissertations, it is evident, how little advantage has accrued to the
Assemblers from their mention of Diotrephes out of Saint John, and by
consequence from their second consideration.

Section V.
Of St. John's being Bishop of Asia. Of the Apostles being Bishops.
NOw succeeds a third consideration. viz. That the same Authors that say that
S. John made Polycarpe Bish. of Smyrna, and that S. Peter made Ignatius Bishop
of Antioch, do also say that St. John himself sat many years Bishop of
Ephesus, and was the Metropolitan of all Asia, which (say they) is an evident
demonstration to us, that these Authors did not use the word Bishop in a
Prelaticall sense. For it is certain that the Apostles cannot be properly
called Bishops; For though they do eminently contain the Episcopal Office,
yet they were not formally Bishops. For this were to degrade the Apostle, and
to make their Office Ordinary and perpetual, this were to exalt the Bishop
above his degree, and make him an Apostles, and to make the Apostle a Bishop.
It does not much differ from madness, to say that Peter or any one of the
Apostles were properly Bishops, as learned Whitaker says, whom we shall have
occasion to cite to this purpose hereafter.

2. Whether this consideration be likely to contribute any thing to their
advantage, save only by amusing the Reader, and keeping him longer in
expectation, that somewhat may possibly be produced to the disparagement of our
plea, I desire may distinctly be considered by these degrees.

3. First, I acknowledge that style [ the same Authors -- ] to belong truly to
ancient Writers produced by me in the Dissertations, who, as they do affirm
St. John to have constituted Policarpe Bishop of Smyrna, Diss. 4. c. 5. Sect.
5. and St. Peter to have placed Ignatius Bishop of Antioch. Diss. 5. c. 1.
Sect. 18. so they consent also that St. John sat Bishop of Ephesus and
Metropolitan of all Asia: so L. 3. c. 23.
Eusebius frequently, that after his return from his banishment (...), he
administered or governed the Churches there, i.e. in Asia; and (as he cites it
lib. 3. cap. 31. out of Policrates his Epistle) died there. So the ancient
Writer of the Martyrdom of Timothy, Biblioth: Number. 25^.
in Photius (...), Being recalled by Nerva's decree, he sat down at Ephesus,
and himself personally, with seven Bishops his adsessors (those in all
probability the Bishops of the seven Churches in the Revelation) he governed
the Metropolitan City of Ephesus that prime Metropolis of all Asia, to the
Bishop whereof, says Hom. 15. in 1 Timothy 5. 19.
Chrysostom, was entrusted (...), the whole Nation of Asia; These testimonies
may suffice for the substance of the affirmation that St. John governed the
Church of Ephesus, and under it all Asia, which is the notion we now have of a
Bishop Metropolitan and Primate.

4. As for the word Bishop, how can it be inconvenient to bestow that upon him,
when he discharged the Office, nay when Christ himself that great exemplar
and original of this power, is expressly called the Bishop of our Souls, as
well as the Apostle; when the Office from which Judas fell, and to which
Matthias is assumed, is by St. Luke out of the Septuagint called (...)
Bishopric, Act. 1. 20. When accordingly from the Scripture usage the Fathers
of the Church have continued the style, Apostolos i. e. Episcopos and
Praepositos Dominus elegit, the Lord chose Apostles, i. e. Bishops and
Governors of the Church, says Ep. 65.
Cyprian, and (...), Peter and Paul were the first or chief in Rome, the same
persons, Apostles and Bishops, says L. 1. Con^. Carpocr.
Epiphanius, and Apostoli Episcopi sunt, firmante illud Petro Apostol^ -- the
Apostles were Bishops, as is confirmed by Peter in these words. His Bishopric
let another take, says In Ephesians. 4. and 1 Cor. 12. 29.
Hilarious Sardus, and again, Areall Apostles? ^Tis true, says he, quia in
Ecelesia unus Episcopus, because in each Church there is one Bishop. And, Nemo
ignorant Episcopos servatorem Ecclesi^s instituisse, Ipse enim priusquam
ascenderet, imponens manum Apostolis ordinavit eos Episcopos. No man is
ignorant that our Savior instituted Bishops in the Church, for before he
ascended to Heaven he laid his hands on the Disciples and ordained them
Bishops; says the Quaest. 97.
Writer of the questions on the Old and New Testament, and, Sanctus Matth^us
Episcopatum sortitus est, St. Matthew was Bishop, says Gildas. And to shut up
all, (...) -- It is manifest that the Apostles were Bishops, St John in Asia,
St. Andrew in Achaia, St. Thomas in India; says (...).
Gabriel Philadelph: And agreeably when St. John of whom we now speak, calls
himself in the front of two Epistles (...), the Elder, the Greek scholiast,
resolves (...), by the word Elder he calls himself Bishop. And so there is no
news in thus affirming.

5. But then secondly, when they take this for an evident demonstration, that
these Authors did not use the word Bishop in a Prelaticall sense, this is very
far distant from a demonstration, having not arrived to the lowest degree of
probability or credibility. For what is a Bishop in the Prelaticall sense, but
a single person governing in chief in a City or wider circuit? And such
certainly was St. Peter at Rome, S. John at Ephesus, etc. As long as they
continued to execute that power of the Keys (the donation of which instituted
them (...) Stewards in Gods House, Governors of the Church) in this or that
City or Region, and ordained other Bishops there.

Thirdly, therefore when it is added, that it is certain that the Apostles
cannot be properly called Bishops, I reply that it is most certain they may,
not only because these so many ancient Writers, through several ages have
called them so, and may not, with any justice from us, be accused of
impropriety, but because the donation of the Keys did as properly make them
Bishops, as the Commission to go preach to all Nations, being added to it,
made them Apostles. To which purpose let these few things be considered, 1.
That it is here by the Assemblies acknowledged, that the Apostles did eminently
contain the Episcopal Office, which though it be a little hastily expressed,
and should be, I suppose, that the Apostolical Office did eminently contain
the Episcopal, yet there is no doubt, but this is the meaning of it, that the
Apostles had all the Episcopal power in their hands, and over and above,
something more, and if they had Episcopal power, then sure in respect of that,
they may as properly be called Bishops, as in respect of their Apostolical
Commission, which they had also, they may be properly called Apostles. Thus we
know that they that have first the power of Deacons bestowed on them, and after
of Presbyters, are questionless Deacons still, though they be also Presbyters,
and they which from the Office of Presbyters are advanced to Bishops, are
certainly Presbyters still, though they be also Bishops, and do not lose the
former power by being advanced to the latter, are not lessened by this increase
of their dignity.

7. Secondly, that when an Apostle is differenced from a Bishop, it is either
by his extraordinary power granted him for the planting of the Church, or by
the Universality of his Diocese, the [ all the World] to which his Commission
extended, whereas the ordinary Bishop's power and Diocese are more limited. But
then these differences are of no force in this matter, they only conclude that
the Apostle is more than a Bishop in those two respects, not that in other
sufficient respects he is not a Bishop.

8. Thirdly, when the Apostles had each of them (not only all together in a
consistory) that unlimited power, in respect of the extent to all the World,
given to them by Christ, we know that after his ascent they parted and
distributed this Province among them, assigned every one (...), or (...) his
proper place or lot, to which he should betake himself for the planting of the
faith of Christ; And then there will be no doubt but that he, who according to
his line (in St. Paul's phrase) had planted the faith in such a City or
Province, and sat down, and confirmed, and farther instituted (which is the
meaning of laboring in the Doctrine, as well as in the word) and governed
them, and exercised all Episcopal acts among them, might in so doing be styled
a Bishop in that City or province, and that as truly and as properl^ as he
that could do all the latter and not the former (building on another man's
foundation* go^erning and instructing, where another had planted the faith
might be said to be.

9. Nay fourthly, we know, that although by Canons of the Church there is
provision made, upon prudentiall considerations, that no man shall be made a
Bishop sine titulo, without a title or particular See, to which he is
assigned, yet before those Canons forbad it, such Bishops there were, and those
never doubted to be properly Bishops, though they were not affixt to any
Diocese; And then nothing can hinder but that the Apostle, who had each the
whole World for his Title, though he were never affixed to any particular
Diocese or Province, might be most properly styled a Bishop for all that. But
this is ex abundanti, more than is needful to our present praetentions of St.
John, who, we know, was after his return from banishment affixt to Asia, and
seated at Ephesus the chief Metropolis there, to superintend in the Jewish
part of the Asian Church over all the Bishops and Metropolitans there.

10. To this I might add fifthly, that the Bishops in every City were
successors of the Apostles, as is largely deduced Diss. 3. c. 3. Sect. 14. etc.
which they could not truly be, if the Apostles, whom they succeeded, were not
in vested with that power, wherein they succeeded them, i. e. were not first
Bishops before them. But I shall not enlarge of this, having no need of more
evidences in this matter.

11. Fourthly therefore, when it is added, that if the Apostles be affirmed to
be properly Bishops, this were to degrade the Apostles, and to make their
office ordinary and perpetual. This is but a shortness of discourse, of which
a very few words will suffice to admonish any, for there is no more strength in
that consequence, than there would be in affirming that such an one is a Man,
therefore he is not a living Creature, or that he that says he is a living
Creature, degrades him from being a man; For as to that of [ ordinary and
perpetuall] it is no way inconvenient, that the Apostles, who had somewhat
temporary and extraordinary for the first planting of Churches (in respect of
which especially they were called Apostles) might also have somewhat, which was
of ordinary perpetual use in the Church, wherein others might and should
succeed them, and that is it unquestionably which we mean by the word
Bishops, when we ascribe it to them or any of them, or to Christ himself, the
source and original Copy of that power in the Church.

12. Fifthly, when another inconvenience is accumulated on this, (much to the
former purpose, but in more words) this were to exalt the Bishop above his
degree, and make him an Apostle, end to make the Apostle a Bishop. 1. It is
evident, that if the forementioned exception were true, viz. That it were the
degrading the Apostle, it could not farther be truly said, that it were the
exalting the Bishop above his degree, for supposing one to be above the other,
the degrading one would make the other e^uall to him without any new act of
exalting him* if the Apostle have already descended to the Bishop, sure the
Bishop need not, cannot ascend to the Apostle; I cannot go up stairs to him
who has prevented me by his dignation or misfortune, and is already come or
fallen downe^ to me. Secondly therefore this makes not the Bishop an Apostle,
which is a degree higher than he, (though in respect of the Episcopal power
common to them with the Aposles it is nothing strange in the Ancient Writers
for the first Bishops of the Churches; James the Bishop of Jerusalem,
Thaddaeus, Luke, Barnabas, Mark Timothy, Titus, Clemens, Ignatius, to be
called Apostles, as is evidenced at large in the Diss. 4. c. 3.
Dissertations) but only supposes the Apostle to be a Bishop, which he may
well be (as the greater contains the less) though the Bishop be no Apostle,
as it is confessed that the less contains not the greater.

13. And lastly for the citation out of Dr. Whitaker, I have no directions to
the place, which may enable me to examine it; And I know circumstances of the
context, or the design of the speech may much alter it, from what it signifies
to me at my reading it thus cited; But if it be distinctly thus, and incapable
of a more commodious interpretation, I cannot consent to the truth of it, or
comprehend upon what grounds of reason he should so severely censure those
Scriptures and Fathers, which have been produced to affirm that the Apostles
were Bishops, and particularly St. John and St. Peter. And indeed when it falls
out, that each of those two Apostles peculiarly calls himself (...) an Elder,
or as they render it Presbyter, I shall demand; Did either of those speak
properly or no? If they did, were either of those little distant from, madmen?
If so I shall be content to be under any censure in their company. And
therefore if they spoke not so properly, I shall be content with them to have
spoken improperly also: But if Apostles may be called Presbyters without any of
these inconveniences of degradation in them, any ins^lence in the Presbyter, or
madness in the Speaker, my only remaining Quaere is, why they might not,
without all this ado, be called Bishops also, meaning by Bishops, as I now
mean? For I am sure that is the same thing that I understand by (...), Elder
in those three places, and they, who differ from me herein, do yet understand
it of Presbyters (and so had said in the second consideration expressly, that
St. John calls himself a Presbyter) and then all the spice of madness
consists in this, thinking a Bishop capable of that exaltation, that a
Presbyter in perfect sobriety is capable of. And so much for the third
consideration.

Section VI.
Of the word Angel, and Star, pretended to be common to all Ministers. Of
Messenger, and Ambassador. The singularity of the word Angel.
THe fourth consideration is, Bishops) does not import any peculiar
jurisdiction, or praeeminence, but is a common name to all Ministers, and so is
used in Scripture. For all Ministers are Gods Messengers and Ambassadors sent
for the good of the elect, and therefore the name being common to all
Ministers, why should we think that there should be any thing spoken to one
Minister, that does not belong to all? The same may be said of the word Star
(which is also a title given to those supposed Metropolitans) It is evident
that all faithful Ministers are called Stars in Scripture, whose duty is to
shine as lights unto the Churches in all purity of Doctrine, and holiness of
conversation; There is nothing in these titles that argue these Ministers to be
Bishops in our brethrens sense: Insomuch as had they not been called Bishops by
some authors that succeeded them, (who spoke of former times in the language of
their own times) this way of arguing would have been counted ridiculous.

2. ^o this consideration I might, if it were needful, reply, 1. That the word
Angel is no where used for any other Officer or Minister in the Church, save
only the Prophets (such as Haggai. c. 1. 13. and John Baptist, Mat. 11. 10.)
and the chief Priest, Mal. 2. 7.

3. Secondly, that, as to the words Messenger, and Ambassador, there is in
ordinary speech some considerable difference between them, the latter having
in it a connotation of dignity, sustaining the person of the King, from whom he
is sent immediately, which is not applicable to the former; And agreeably when
it is used of St. Paul and Timothy, in whose name that Epistle is written
[(...), we are Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20.] there is added (...), for, or, in
the name, and authority of Christ, and again we pray you (...), which we well
render, in Christ's stead, as his proxies, for to Ambassadors are; which being
there applied to S. Paul an Apostle, and to Timothy, one employed by him
immediately to preach and plant the faith, and after to govern in the Church,
may be proportion belong to the Bishops their successors peculiarly.

4. Thirdly, that as the word (...) signifies a Messenger, or Nuntio, so the
word (...), Apostle (according to the origination of it from (...) to be sent)
signifies also without any considerable difference, but yet is never thought
fit, either in Scripture, or in the style of the Church to be applied to
ordinary Ministers, but only to those sent immediately by Christ, as he by his
Father to plant and rule Churches, and to those who first succeeded them, or
were employed by them in that great office.

5. But that which wholly frustrates the design of the consideration, is this,
that the singularity of the person, (one Angel in each of the seven Churches)
is all that we argue from, in this matter; For as to the power and authority
in each Church, That is certainly pretended to (and not declined) by the
Presbyterian as well as the Prelatist, the only Question is, whether it be
placed in one over the rest, or in more than one, ruling together in common,
and from the style of Christ's Epistle to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus,
and the like in each of the seven, we think we conclude regularly, that it
was one, it being certain that the singular number is not the duall or
plural, and that [ Angel] is a person, not an aggregate body or multitude.

7. And to the same purpose again we conclude not from the mention of the
Stars, not from their light or shining, but from their number, but seven in
all, no more than there are Churches, i. e. one only in each Church; And we
know there is difference between a Star and an Asterisme or constellation, one
single light, and a conjunction of many; And accordingly Mr. Brightman, that is
resolved not to find this truth in that Text, is forced to deal plainly, and
to tell us, that the Epistles are not each of them sent to any one Angel, but
to the College of Pastors, nec uni alicui Angelo mittuntur, sed toti, ut ita
dicam, collegio Pastorum, in Apoc. c. 2. 1. which being sufficiently contrary
to the evidence of the Text, which reads (...) to the Angel, in the singular,
he thinks fit to add his reason for it; Non enim unus erat Angelus Ephesi sed
plures, nec inter istos aliquis Princeps, for there was not (...) Angel of
Ephesus, but many: nor any one among those principal or chief, which is the
begging of the Question, or proveing his assertion only by asserting it;
whereas Beza finding himself more pressed by the force of the place, is forced
to render it (...) i. e. (...), to the Angel, i. e. to the president, quem
nimirum oportuit inprimis de his rebus admoneri, who was in the first place to
be admonished of these things.

8. What the (...) in the use of the Ancient Church properly signifies, is
shown at large out of Justin Martyr, Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, Marcellus
Ancyranus and the Council of Ephesus, Dissert. 4. c. 17. directly the same
that we mean now by Bishop; But that I pretend not to think Beza meant by it
(his Prolepses and espoused Principles leading him another way) All that I
observe from the citation, is, that by the singularity of [(...) the Angel] not
Angels, he was forced to confess a single person to be understood, which is
contrary to Mr. Brightman, and those that comprehend a College of Presbyters
under the title, which being yielded, I doubt not but our other evidences
already produced (which must not be at every turn repeated) from the Catalogue
of Bishops in the Church of Ephesus, etc. and the judgment of the Universal
Church concerning those single persons, will conclude them indeed (...), not in
Beza's notion, but in Justin Martyrs (who was much a more competent judge) i.
e. the very Bishops which we pretend them to be: And truly I cannot discern
any weak part (which may hazard being counted ridiculous) in this way of
arguing.

Section VII.
Of their exception to our arguing from Symbols: Of Rishop and Elder being the
same.
THe last Consideration now remains in these words, Rev. 1. 20. The Mystery of
the seven Stars -- And certainly it cannot be safe or solid to build the
structure of Episcopacie by Divine Right upon mysterious and metaphorical
denominations, Theologia Symbolica non est argumentativa, Especially if we
consider that there are abundance of clear texts that make Bishops and
Presbyters to be one and the same; and it cannot be praiseworthy for any men
(though never so learned in the esteem of the world) to oppose certain
allegorical and mysterious titles to so many express testimonies of Scripture.

2. To this the Answer will be satisfactory, though it should be but brief,
that we do not found our argument in an allegory. For 1. though the word
Stars applied to the Governors of Churches be only figuratively so applied,
yet the word (...) (if the Authors of this consideration may be believed in
that which immediately preceded) signifies (not an Angel from Heaven, or
incorporeal substance, but) a Messenger or Ambassador, such as, say they, all
Ministers are, And agreeably in that which is here annexed to prove the
allegorical or mystical phrases (from Rev. 1. 20. the Mystery of the seven
Stars) it is evident, that only the word [ Starres] is Symbolical or
Mystical, and as evident that the Angels are not, for it is in the explicating
and not in the forming of the figure, that the Angels of the Churches are
mentioned, as the things which are signified by the mystery of the Stars, as
the Churches themselves by the Lamps; and therefore as it would be absurd to
say that a symbol is explicated by a symbol, one mystery by another, or
proportionably that the Churches, by which the Lamps are expressed, are a
mystical allegorical phrase, so it will be as unreasonable to affirm of the
Angels, that they are a mystery or allegory, because of the Stars it is
affirmed that they are such, when indeed the word Angel is the interpretation
and unfolding of the mystery, which is as far from being the mystery, as the
light is from being darkness, which it expells out of the horizon, and is
purposely sent by God to do so.

3. But then secondly, it is yet more manifest, that if the word Angel were here
used figuratively (as it is evident it was not, and was so confessed, when it
appeared useful to the Objectors that it should not) yet it being the
singularity of the person, wherein our argument is founded, our argument is not
founded on that which is mystical, For certainly this number is a plain
Grammatical notation of a singular person, and that is proof enough that it
was not a collective body, a Presbytery or Consistory, that is meant by it. And
in this all the controversy betwixt us and the adversary consists, whether it
was in many or in one in each Church, that the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction was
vested, and that is sufficiently decided by that which is clear and
un^igurative in this Text, and cannot be imagined otherwise, but by forcing
some figure on it, by which one Angel may be set for more Ministers, which if
it be done, would not by their rule be argumentative.

4. Thirdly, Whereas it is suggested, that this which we conclude from hence,
is opposite to many express testimonies of Scripture, I have no more to say in
this place, where this is only affirmed, but not attempted to be proved, but
to profess my persuasion and assurance (the truth of which must be in the
process of this discourse contested) that there is no such thing, but on the
contrary, that the whole Scripture, and practice, and writings of the first
ages of the Church, and the succeeding through all the world, agree directly
with what I conclude from the singularity of the Angel; And when in the
following words the testimonies are expressed to be those which make Bishops
and Presbyters to be one and the same, This also will immediately vanish, when
it is remembered, what is largely deduced in the Dissertations, that the word
Bishop in the Scripture is never used for a Presbyter in our Modern notion of
the word, but constantly for the one single Governor in a Church or City, and
that if there be any truth in that which is here affirmed, Presbyters must be
taken in a notion distant from that in which now we use it, and signify, as
(...) has already been said to do, the singular Bishop in each Church, and
it is certain such an identity of the names, will never be deemed contrary to
what we have concluded from the Angel, but directly confirm it for us.

5. And although here is no occasion in this place to prove and make good this
assertion in each part of it, (the first positive, that (...) or Bishop in
Scripture always signifies the singular Bishop; the second suppositive, that
if (...), Bishop, and (...) Elder, be one and the same in Scripture, it must be
by interpreting (...) Elder, so as to signify a Bishop in all place*) yet it is
certain, that this is already done at large in Dissert. 4. cap. 6. Sect. 19,
20, 21, 22. and shall here again be repeated and vindicated, when the proper
place requires it, which I foresee it will speedily do.

6. In the mean, I must take leave to express my present sense, and hope that
others will not think it too hasty, that no one of these five Considerations,
nor consequently all of them together, have at all praejudged our Conclusion
(now in hand) inferred from that of the Epistle of Christ to the 7. Angels of
the 7. Churches.

Section VIII.
Of the singularity of each Angel. The objections from the use of the plural
number.
THese considerations being thus laid as their foundation (and I suppose being
already removed from superseding or hindering our superstructure) The next part
of their method is, singularity of each Angel's person, to whom Christ's
message or Epistle is sent, and the conclusion of an high Prelatist from hence,
that these Angels are not only Bishops but Archbishops, to apply solid and
every way sufficient answers to this Objection.

2. In this proposal of our Objection, I shall not need to inquire who this
high Prelatist is; The former intimations and directions have persuaded me that
I am looked on as this Objector, though it be sufficiently known that the most
Reverend Archbishop of Armagh, Lord Primate of Ireland, has many years since
deduced this conclusion in every part from this Text, and might, if they had
pleased, have secured me from the opinion either of novelty, or singularity in
the Assertion.

3. But I shall most willingly assume the burden, and proceed to the view of
the solid and every way sufficient answers, which are said to be given to this
Objection, which though they be, it seems to be fetched out of Smectymnuus,
etc. yet it happens well, that we shall (without need of consulting those
larger volumes) find them here with more ease, reduced to two heads, One, that
the word Angel signifies not a singular person, the second, that if it did, it
will not at all advantage the Episcopal cause.

4. These two, I confess, if either of them be solidly proved, will utterly
drive us from our hold: The only question at present is, whether in either
part the proofs be solid, and of this we must now inquire, and first of the
former of them.

5. This they thus propose, That the word Angel is not to be taken (...) but
(...), not individually, but collectively, for all the Pastors and Ministers of
the respective Churches.

6. But before their proofs for such an assertion (that the Angel of such a
Church, which is certainly an individual, as much as the Bishop of such a
Diocese, is not yet to be taken individually) they first add their confession
that this answer is called a poor shift, a vain conceit, etc. but promise
such reasons for the justification of it, which cannot be answered.

7. To the view of these unanswerable Reasons therefore we shall now hasten;
And the first reason is, because our Savior speaks to the Angel often in the
plural number, Rev. 2. 21. But unto you I say, and the rest of Thyatira, and so
Rev. 2. 10. and 13. By which, say they, it is evident, that by the word Angel
is not meant one singular person, but the collective body of Rulers.

8. To this first reason I shall answer, by separating that one text of
Thyatira from the other two, and all that are of the same nature with them, and
speak first of these two, and remind them 1. that in an Epistl^ unquestionably
addressed to a particular person, others under his care and charge may be, and
are occasionally mentioned, so in that to Titus, Paul^s own Son, i. e. under
the particular character of the beloved person converted by him; in the
conclusion we find these words, Grace be with you all, i. e. not with him as
he must signify a whole Presbytery, but all the sincere lovers of Christ, and
Saint Paul, they that love us in the faith, in the former part of the verse.

9. Secondly, that though the one Angel of the Church be the person to whom
each part of the Epistle is addressed, yet in it are set down the sins and fate
of the whole Church,, i. e. of all the believers in it; Thus when the people of
Israel or Judah were fallen into foul sins and provocations against God, it
was ordinary for God to send a Prophet to the King of either of them, and
admonish him what reformations were to be wrought, and what judgments were a
coming in case of neglect. In which kind of messages of the Prophet delivered
to the King, it is certain that the whole people were concerned, and so without
question was it here, Rev. 2. 10. the Devil shall cast some of you, i. e. some
Members of that Church, into prison, etc. and so ver. 13. among you, i. e.
among you of that Church or City.

10. And indeed if each of those Churches had been governed by a Consistory of
coequal Presbyters, and those (as is pretended by our adversaries) signified
by the Angel, yet there would be as little reason to doubt, but the sins of the
people, as well as the Clergy were here reprehended by Christ, and the
judgment threatened to one as well as to the other, And to this can be no
reason to infer the Angel to be no singular person, the Church ruled by one,
making up a multitude, as well as if it were ruled by a Presbytery.

11. As for the place, cap. 2. 24. concerning Thyatira, that has a different
appearance, For the Greek copy ordinarily reading it [(...), But I say unto
you (in the plural and to the rest which are in Thyatira] the [ you] in the
plural, is by the Objectors thought necessarily to belong to the Angel of that
City, as [ the rest] to the community of the people. To this place therefore we
have formerly answered, that the reading in the Ancient Manuscripts,
particularly in that belonging to the Kings Library at Saint James's, leaves
out the [(...), and] and reads thus, (...), But to you I say the rest which are
in Thyatira] And this takes away all force from the objection, for the former
part of the Epistle belonging to the Angel, who permitted Jezabel, and to them
that committed fornication with her, the [ But] in the front separates the
[(...), you the rest] from the Angel, and those other formerly spoken to, and
therefore the (...), you, cannot possibly be the Angel, wherein all the
strength of the Objection consists.

12. But this Answer, though taken notice of, is disliked: For, say they, he
that shall view the Antecedent and Consequent, and consider that ver. 23. it is
said, I will give to every one of you, etc. and then follows, but I say unto
you, and then in the conclusion of the verse, I will put upon you no other
burden, will confess that the old copies are better than that which is said
to be Tecla's Manuscript.

13. And here I shall desire the Reader to bear me company in obeying their
directions, and observe what the Antecedents and Consequents can afford to the
prejudice of that Ancient copy. It Is most true, that v. 23. we read, I will
give to every one of you, and that then it follows v. 24. But I say unto you,
and in the conclusion of the verse, I will put upon you -- But I demand, what
will they conclude from hence? That by the word [ you] in all these places the
same persons are to be understood, and that those persons are the
interpretation of the Angel v. 18? These two things they must conclude, or else
they will fail in their design, which is to show that by the word Angel the
collective body of Rulers is meant. But the first of these is evidently false,
whatsoever reading be retained, for besides that the [(...), But] does clearly
separate the second [ you] from the first, and makes them distinct persons, The
very matter of the speeches will convince it: For in the 23. v. the [ you] are
those that were corrupted by Iezabel v. 20. 22. who are now to be exemplarily
punished and destroyed, I will kill her (i. e. Iezebels) children with death (as
also those that had committed Fornication with her v. 22.) and all the Churches
shall know that I am the searcher of hearts, and I will give to every of you
according to your works; But the second [ you] and so also the third, are the
quite contrary to these, As many as have not this Doctrine, and who have not
known these depths of Satan, and consequently, who are not to be punished, nor
so much as admonished, but only confirmed in their present practice, to hold
fast what they have already.

14. So contrary is it to all appearance of truth, that the Antecedent and
Consequent should favor their pretension.

15. This matter is so evident (the contrary conditions and fates of the [ you]
in v. 23 and the [ you] in v. 14.) that if the ordinary reading were to be
retained [(...)] and that rendered [ to you and the rest in Thyat^ra] so as to
difference [ you] and [ the rest] another Antecedent to the Relative [ you]
must necessarily be sought out, and then that can be no other but the Churches
incidentally mentioned v. 23. who had not been charged for this crime. For as
for the Angel v. 18. if he were not so remote (6. verses off) and if the
singular number could be the Antecedent to the plural [(...), you] (as it
cannot) yet still he is charged for suffering the Woman Jezabel, and so is
numbered among the gulity persons, that are to repent or be punished, and not to
have no other burden laid on them, save only to hold fast what they have, as
is said of the second [(...) you] v. 24.

16. But the truth is, that of making the Churches the Relative is so
inconvenient (and yet no other way imaginable to reconcile the ordinary
reading) and the whole sense is so much more clear and current in the reading
of the King's M S. [ But to you the rest in Thyatira (those that had not been
guilty of the misbehaviours censured, and threatened in the former Verses) that
I profess I cannot discern any appearance of reason to quesion the truth of
it, much less to conceive that the ordinary copies are better, which yet
however they read it, must oppose the [(...) you] to those before mentioned,
and so cannot apply it with any appearance of probability to the Angel, or
consequently pre-judge ours, or confirm their pretensions.

Section IX.
Of the Elders at Ephesus Act. 20.
A Second reason to prove the Angel to be a collective body, is this, because
it is certain that the Church of Ephesus was a collective body* and that there
were many Presbyters to whom St. Paul, at his final departure from them,
committed the charge of that Church. And these Presbyters are called Bishops,
and were all of them Stars of the same magnitude, and Angels of the same order
without a difference or distinction.

2. But this is a way of proving a thing which is denied, by another which they
know is equally denied by him, against whom they dispute, and therefore that
argument can be of no force with us.

3. It Is most true indeed, what they begin with, that the Church of Ephesus was
a collective body, for so it is certain every Church is, whether governed by
one or more Rulers; But the Church is not the Angel, any more than the
candlestickes are the Stars, but punctually distinguished from them Rev. 1. 20.
But this I suppose was a mistake hastily fallen from them, and I shall not
pursue it any farther.

4. Their argument, I conceive, depends upon the plurality of Elders [(...)]
which were at Ephesus Act. 20. when Paul takes his leave of them, and calls
them Bishops. But to this they know I have answered clearly, that as in other
places of Scripture, so in that, the word (...) Elders, being all one with
(...), Bishops, denote (not the many Presbyters of the one City of Ephesus,
but) the many Bishops of that and other Cities of Asia, which at that time by
S. Paul's summons sent to Ephesus, the chief Metropolis of Asia, were called
and met together at Miletus.

5. To this purpose L. 3. c. 14.
Irenaeus is a witness beyond exception, who speaking of these Elders or
Bishops, adds, ab Epheso and proximis civitatibus convocatos esse, that they
were assembled from Ephesus and the next Cities, in which as the faith was
planted, as well as in Ephesus (even in all Asia) so there is no reason to
doubt but there were Bishops in them, as well as in Ephesus (seven such
Churches we know are here mentioned in the Revelation) and that Paul was as
careful to take his leave of them (as many as could conveniently come to
Miletus in his hasty progress) as of the Bishop of Ephesus he is justly
deemed to have been.

6. Other arguments and authorities I need not here accumulate for this notion
of Elders Act. 20. because here is no appearance of reason offered to prove
their, or impugn our Assertion. This perhaps will be afterward attempted, and
then I shall, as occasion requires, farther enlarge: In the mean it suffices
that it yet no way appears, that Ephesus was governed by many Presbyters, and
not by one Bishop, and therefore this second offer of reason is as deficient as
the first, to prove the Angel of that Church to have been a collective body.

Section X.
Of expressing a number by singulars. A Church by a Candlestick. Of the seven
Angels Rev. 8.
THeir third reason is, because It is usual with the Holy Ghost, not only in
other Books of Scripture, but in this very Book of the Revelation, in
mysterious and prophetic writings, and visionall representations (such as this
of the Stars and Golden ^Candlestick is) to express a number of things or
persons in singulars. And this in visions is the usual way of Representation
of things, a thousand persons making up one Church is represented by one
Candlestick, many Ministers making up one Presbytery by one Angel. Thus Rev. 8.
2. It is said that John saw seven Angels which stood before God. By these seven
Candlesticks ( I suppose it should be seven Angels) Dr. Reynolds does not
understand seven individual Angels but all the Angels; For there are no seven
individual Angels, but all the Angels; For there are no seven individual
Angels that stand before God, but all do, Dan 7. there are many more instances
brought in the Books forementioned.

2. To this third Reason I have no obligation or notice to give credit, any
farther than the evidences persuade, for many of which, though we are referred
to Smectymnuus, etc. yet having received promise from these, that they would
borrow a few things from those others; I shall with reason hope that what they
have upon choice borrowed, leaving, as they say, much more behind, is the most
satisfactory and solid of any thing by them produced; and consequently if there
be no force in these instances to oppugn our conclusion, we shall not expect
to find more convincing ones by travailing farther, and gathering up out of
those dispersions, what they have refused to take up and offer to us.

3. The thing they would prove is, that it is usual with the Holy Ghost in this
(as in other mysterious prophetic Books) to express a number of things or
persons by singulars. Their proofs are but three, and the first is of no
force, because the word Church denotes a singular thing, as well as Candlestick
that represents it; for though a thousand men make up one Church, yet one
Church is but one thing, considered as a Church, and proportionably as one
Candlestick in the singular is set to denote each Church, so there are seven
Candlesticks to represent the seven Churches.

4. As for the second, that of the Angels, that that signifies many Ministers,
that cannot be offered as a proof, being it self the matter of the question.
And indeed though Church be a collective body, and so one Church is known to
consist of many men, yet Angel is not of that nature, one Angel neither
signifies many men, nor many Angels.

5. And whereas the parallel is set betwixt the word Candlestick, and the word
Angel, that they (each) are singular words, by which multitudes are
represented, that is a mistake, for the parallel lies betwixt Church and Angel
(and on the other side betwixt Candlestick and Star, as appears Rev. 1. 20.)
and both these are individual things, the Church an individual Church, and
there be seven such individual Churches, and the Angel an individual Angel, and
there be seven such individual Angels, and there can be no more pretense that
one Angel should signify many Ministers, than that one Church should signify
many Congregations.

6. Lastly, for the third proof, that of seven Angels, Rev. 8. 2. if that were
granted to Doctor Reynold's authority, that the [ seven Angels] there signifies
all the Angels, yet would it not at all contribute to the proof of the point
in hand, which is, that many shall be signified by a singular, for we know that
seven are not a singular, but the custom indeed being ordinary to use a
certain definite number, for an uncertain or indefinite, and the septenary
being a perfect number, and so fittest for the turn, it is more tolerable that
the number of seven may represent some greater number, one plural a larger
plural, than that a singular one should do so.

7. And yet secondly, there is no great reason to doubt, but that the seven
Angels are indeed very seven Angels, and no more; This I collect, 1. from the
seven Trumpets that were given them, ver. 2. and the specifying them by that
Character, the seven Angels, which had the seven Trumpets, ver. 6. Secondly, by
the several employments assigned them in the subsequent parts of the vision
which brings them upon the scene one after another, the first Angel, ver. 7.
the second Angel, ver. 8. and so to the seventh. Thirdly, by the distinction
that is evidently made between those seven Angels and another Angel, ver. 3.
And another came and stood at the Altar: which makes it certain that the
former seven did not signify all the Angels, unless after all, there could
yet be one more. Fourthly, from the mention of the seven Spirits, cap. 1. 4.
which are said to be before Gods throne, that sure is all one with standing
before him here, and it being certain that Angels are Spirits, I have no
reason to doubt but that these seven Angels are those seven spirits, and so
still a definite number of seven, and no more. Fifthly, from the mention of the
seven Eyes, Zach. 4. 10. which seem to be interpreted to this sense, Rev. 5.
6. seven eyes which are the seven Spirits of God sent into all the Land.

8. And though in some of these places other men have had other notions, yet
(...), it is more to be appr^ved that we understood Angels by that phrase, cap.
1. says Andreas C^sariensis, And of the whole matter, (...), there are seven
which have the greatest power, the first borne Princes of the Angels, says
Clemens Alexandrinus. In which words of his, Strom* 6*
the first borne Princes are evidently taken from Dan. 10. 13. where the Hebrew
reads (...) the Principal or first rulers or Princes, of which Michael is the
first, and thence called Archangel.

9. And so in Tobit, cap. 12. 15. we find seven holy Angels which present the
prayers of the Saints, which description of them and their office, to present
the prayers of the Saints, if it be thought unagreeable to their standing here
before God or being before his throne, it will soon be reconciled by that
speech of Christ, that the Angels of the infant tender Christians always
behold the face of God, and by that means are qualified to make their wants
known unto him, which is all one with presenting of prayers.

10. Sixthly, from the mention of the seven Lamps, Rev. 4. 5. (styled Lamps, in
reference to the like number of Lamps on the Candlestick in the Sanctuary)
which burn before the throne, as cap. 1. they are before the throne, For of
these it is added (...), which are the seven (by way of eminency, or the seven
Principal) spirits of God.

11. Seventhly, from the no appearance of the least reason produced to the
contrary; For as to that which is introduced with a [ For] and supplies the
place of a reason, it is evidently a bare assertion of the contrary, [ there
are no seven individual Angels that stand before God] without any offer of
proof, that testimony out of Dan. 7. that all do, being far from concluding
that there are not such seven principal Angels which these so many evidences
assure us there are.

12. In that of Dan. 7. 10. upon that solemn occas^on of God's judgments
expressed by a fiery stream, thousand thousands are said to Minister to him, and
ten thousand times ten thousand to stand before him. But how does that hinder
but at another time, seven principal Angels may be employed by him, and in
order to that stand before him too, and when we so often read of such seven,
what question but they were individual Angels? And so much for the third reason.

Section XI.
Of the Epistles being sent to the whole Church, not to the Bishop only. Of
Timothy, Onesimus and Polycarp, being Bishops of some of the Asian Churches,
without any charge of Apostasy falling on them by this means.
THere is a fourth behinds still, R^v. 1. 10. Rev. 2. 7. 11. 17. And therefore
when it is said in the singular number, I know thy works, This thou have,
Repent and do thy first works, etc. All these and the like places are not to
be understood as meant of one individual person, but of the whole company of
Ministers, and also of the whole Church, because the punishment threatened is to
the whole Church, Rev. 2. 5. 16. 2. Now we have no warrant in the word to
think that Christ would remove his Gospel from a Church for the sin of one
Bishop, when all the other ministers and Churches are far from those sins.

2. To this I shall need make no reply, having done it sufficiently already, by
concession that the Angel being the Ruler of a Church, the whole Epistle
belongs to him and the Church promiscuously, and agreeably those expressions,
which are used in the singular number, do not all belong to the Bishop, but to
the Church wherein he praesides: But certainly this is far from inferring
that the Bishop and Church are all one, or that the word Angel signifies the
collective body of the Church, for, besides that the Text is express in making
a signal difference between the Stars and the Candlesticks, the Angels and
the Churches (and the Assemblers are here forced to confess that the Angels
and Candlesticks are not the same) the confounding them will be as
disadvantageous to them as to us, and I shall as regularly be able to conclude
that the word Angel signifies not the Presbytery, but the whole diffusive body
of the Church, as they can pretend to do upon their own postulatum, that the
Angel denotes not the Bishop but the whole Church, it being as certain that
they make a difference between the Church or multitude of believers, and the
Presbytery that is set over them to rule, as we do between the same Church and
the Bishop.

3. Thus have we viewed all the reasons produced by them to assert or confirm
their first answer, and showed diverse ways how no manner of validity there is
in any one or all of them, to evidence it to be a solid and every way
sufficient answer. And therefore there was some use of the next part of the
Method, to call in the authority of other men to countenance this
interpretation, Master Brightman, Master Perkins, Master Fox, (who cites
Primasius Haymo, Beda, Richardus, Thomas, etc.) Doctor Fulke, Master Meade,
Gregory and Saint Austin; But although they have thought fit to set down these
names, yet having omitted to add their Testimonies, and indeed having resolved
to forbear, because Smectymnuus has done it already, I shall confess my self
willing to leave this chase, and in stead of leading the Reader so wearisome a
walk, to examine the several comments here named (and but named) give him
more shortly my conjecture what truth may be in them.

4. Master Brightman, I know (and some others it is possible) may have
interpreted the Angel to signify the whole College of Pastors, and truly I
should much sooner take up an Interpretation upon the bare word of these
Assemblers, than I would upon no better evidence from M. Brightman; He was one
learned man, long known to be unkind to our Pralates, and here are many, for
ought I know, as learned, though under the same praejudices.

5. Some others here cited, I cannot believe are brought to testify this, but
only that what is said to the Angel in each part of the Epistle, was said to
the whole Church, and not only to the Bishop; and if that be all they say, it
is that which we cannot doubt to affirm with them, and have often confessed to
understand Christ's Epistle so, without any incommodity to our praetensions.

6. If I mistake in these conjectures, I desire pardon, and shall hope to give
a better account, when I read the testimonies in the Authors from whence they
are cited. For in these derivations of testimonies, the Assemblers citing them
from Smectymnuus, Smectymnuus from Master Fox, Master Fox from Primasius,
etc. there is great possibility of mistake, and therefore I shall follow the
example before me, forbear adding any more of this matter.

7. In the next place they are pleased to take notice as of an objection
against their interpretation, that some Authors say, Timothy was Bishop of
Ephesus when our Savior wrote this Epistle, others that Onesimus was Bishop,
others that Polycarp was Bishop of Smyrna at that time, and therefore these
Angels must needs be taken individually for so many single persons.

8. Of this Objection, which they have thus formed for us, there is only thus
much of truth, that out of authentic Records we bring undeniable evidences
for Timothies being constituted by St. Paul Bishop of Ephesus, for Onesimus
being placed in that See at the time of Ignatius's writing to the Ephesians,
that Polycarpe was constituted Bishop of Smyrna by S. John, of all which we
have spoken enough already.

9. But of all or any of these being Bishops in those Cities at the very time
of Christ's addressing this Epistle to the Angels of each, this had no where
been our affirmation, nor would it have been useful to us in any considerable
degree, if we had grounds positively to affirm it. All that is needful to us
is this, that by the Ancient Records, which evidence them to have been so early
Bishops in two of those Churches, to which Christ's Epistle was sent, and
Bishops in the notion wherein we now use the word, we are secured of the truth
of ou^ collections, when from the mention of the seven Angels of the 7.
Churches, we assert the Ecclesiastical power in the hands of a single Bishop
in each Church to be owned and confirmed by Christ; And supposing some other
persons, and none of these three to have been those very numericall Angels to
whom those Epistles were written, this conclusion of ours stands yet as firm,
as if we could demonstrate it of those very numericall persons, there being no
reason to doubt but the same manner of Government continued all the Scripture
times; and to Timothies successor and Onesimus's predecessor, being as
certainly Bishops, as either Onesimus or Timothy himself; when withal we have
already produced mentions from the Ancients of the Catalogues of those Bishops
which succe deed Timothy in that See.

10. Having thus set right the Objection for them, so as it is owned by us to
be an Objection against them, it will now soon appear what force there is in
their answers to it, and those are three.

11. First, that they that say that Timothy was then Bishop, offer no little
injury to him, for they thereby charge him to be guilty of Apostasy, and of
losing his first love, and so out of a blind zeal to Episcopacy they make that
glorious Saint to stand charged as an Apostate. The like injury is offered by
Objections to Onesim^s.

12. But first you see whatever our opinion is expressed to be we have not
affirmed either of these, as to the person either of Timothy or Onesimus, but
left it uncertain who the Angel of the Church of Ephesus was, whether either
or neither of these, but some successor of the one, and predecessor of the
other, and so what charge soever falls on that Angel, it falls not necessarily
on either of these.

13. Secondly it is already agreed betwixt the parties, affirmed by them, and
acknowledged by me, that the Epistle being addressed to the Angel of Ephesus, the
Church or diffusive body, the Christians in it, were concerned in the contents
of it; And then whatsoever charge be found in the Epistle, of how heavy a
nature soever, even of Apostasy it self, yet there is no necessity the Angel
or Bishop should be personally guilty of it, and so whosoever the Bishop was,
though Timothy himself, our zeal to Episcopacy has not been so blind or
transporting, as to put us on any uncharitable censure, to affix any unhandsome
character upon so glorious a Saint.

14. Lastly, to remove this answer yet one degree farther from being
satisfactory, it no where appears that apostasy is in that Epistle laid to the
charge, whether of the Church or Angel; The first part is all in commendati^n
of their former zeal, and the later, wherein their charge consists, v. 4. is
only this [(...)] which is not (as is suggested) losing their first love, but
remitting it; Their love to Christ had formerly been strong as death, pure and
vehement, such as had cast out all fear of dangers, and evidenced it self in
courageous confession, but now, though it were not quite lost, yet it was
remitted, lessened in the degree, not so intense as formerly, and therefore
when they are bid remember from whence they are fallen, that fall does not
necessarily signify Apostasy or renouncing of Christianity, for then it had
been an impertinent threatening to remove their Chandlestick v. 5.) but a
falling from the former degree, a cooling of the intense heat, which had been
so laudable in them. And so still there is more invalidity in this first answer.

Section XII.
Of Timothies being an Evangelist, that it hinders not his being a Bishop.
THe second is, that they have already proved that Timothy was an Evangelist in
a proper sense, and therefore cannot be called Bishop of Ephesus in their sense.

2. To this I reply, 1. That Timothies being an Evangelist no way prejudgeth
his being a Bishop in our ^ense, An Evangelist is one commissionated by any of
the Apostles' (...) to preach the Gospel to any City or People; And a Bishop
is one commissionated by the like Apostle to praeside in, and govern a Church
already planted. And what hinders but that he that has been employed in the
former capacity to plant, may elsewhere or in the same place be appointed to
Govern, and so the Evangelist be a Bishop?

3. Whatsoever Objections can be brought against this, I shall not doubt will
be easily answered, but there is no offer of any here, and therefore it will
not be pertinent farther to treat it in this place.

4. Secondly, it must again be remembered, that what is here said of Timothy is
proper to his person, both from Onesimus and Polycarpe, and all other Angels,
whether succeeding Timothy in Ephesus, or praesiding in the other 7. Asian
Churches, and therefore though Timothy by being an Evangelist were rendered
incapable (which yet he was not) of being the Bishop of Ephesus in our sense,
yet those other seven Angels at the very time of the writing this Epistle of
which none have been proved to be Evangelists, may still be Bishops in our
sense.

5. Thirdly, I shall demand upon the Assemblers principles, who allow a Primus
Presbyter, a Prolocutor in their consistory or Council of Presbyters, might
Timothy be that first Presbyter in the Church of Ephesus, or did his being an
Evangelist hinder him from being so, when he was by St. Paul exhorted or
appointed (...) to abide in that City? I cannot imagine they will say he could
not, who give both St. Peter and St. John leave to call themselves Presbyters;
But if he could in their opinion, then why might he not be a Bishop in our
sense (notwithstanding that he was an Evangelist) as well as a Presbyter in
theirs? I foresee not what answer can be adapted to this Dilemma.

Section XIII.
Of the Bishops at Ephesus. Of the plural number in the Epistle to the Angel
of Smyrna.
THere remains a third branch of the Answer, that it will not follow because
Onesimus was Bishop of Ephesus in St. John's days, that therefore he was the
only person to whom Christ wrote his Epistle; For St. Paul tells us there were
many Bishops at Ephesus (besides the supposed Onesimus) and Christ may very
well write to him, and to all the rest as well as him. The like may be said
concerning Polycarpe, for our Savior speaks to the Angel of the Church of
Smyrna in the plural number, Rev. 2. 10. And therefore he may truly be said
to write to all the other Angels that were at Smyrna, as well as to one.

2. Here is nothing in this branch but what has been distinctly forestalled,
and spoken to largely already, it will suffice that we repeat the heads, and
leave the Reader to view the places, where they are more explicitly handled.
And 1. though St. Paul should tell us that there were many Bishops at Ephesus,
as there might be from other Cities occasionally met there, yet it would not
follow that there were more than one Bishop of that City, or consequently that
Christ in a peculiar address to the Angel of that City could write to more
Bishops there.

3. But then secondly, the whole truth is this, that S. Luke (and not St Paul)
tells, that upon St. Paul's summons sent to Ephesus, many Bishops met him at
Miletus; Ephesus being the chief Metropolis was the fittest means to convey
the summons to the Cities near it, and from them and not only from them, and
not only from Ephesus came the Bishops to him, as has been declared out of
Irenaeus.

4. Thirdly, for our Savior's speaking to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna in
the plural number, that is not punctually true, for though the letter be
written and inscribed to the Angel, yet, as has often been said, the whole
Church is concerned in the contents of it, and so speaking to the Angel in the
singular, he may yet speak to the Church or any members thereof, in the
plural number. And so much again to demonstrate the ineffectualnesse of the
first Head of Answers.

Section XIV.
Of Beza's Interpretation, of the Praesident.
THe second follows upon a supposition ( but not grant) that these Angels were
personae singulares, Angel is to be taken individually, yet they conceive this
will not at all advantage the Episcopal cause. For 1. Mr. Beza (no great
friend to Episcopacy) acknowledges that by these words to the Angel is meant
(...) to the Praesident, as whom it behooved specially to be admonished
touching those matters, and by him both the rest of his Colleagues, and the
whole Church likewise; but then he adds, But that Episcopal degree which was
afterward by humane invention brought into the Church of God, certainly neither
can nor ought to be from hence concluded. Nay, not so much as the Office of a
perpetual President should be of necessity as the thence arising Oligarchical
tyranny (whose head is the Antichristian beast) now at length with the most
certain ruin, not of the Church only, but of the word also, makes manifest;
By which quotation it is evident, that though Beza held the Angel to be a
singular person, yet he held him to be Angelus Praeses, not Angelus Princeps;
and that he was Praeses pro tempore, just as a Moderator in an Assembly, or as
a Speaker in Parliament.

2. To this I reply, 1. that Mr. Beza's interpretation, as it was foreknown and
formerly mentioned by us, so was it not in reason to be of any force or
authority with us, if it be but upon the score intimated here, that he was not
only no great friend, but a known professed enemy of Episcopacy, and so was
obliged to be, by the course wherein he was engaged at Geneva. All that his
authority concludes, is, that to avoid a plain testimony, which is not for his
turn, a man may be induced to affirm that confidently, for which he has no
ground of proof, nay, wherein all ways of evidence, that the matter is
capable of, are absolutely against him.

3. Thus it is certainly in this matter, for when Beza has here acknowledged
that the Angel was the (...) President, who will be the most competent Judge or
Witness, to determine what was meant by the (...) Praesident] in the Primitive
Church, what kind of Praesidency he had, whether only of place or order, and
that only for a time, or of superiority of power and office, and that
perpetual? In all reason this is to be fetched from those first Writers which
speak of it, and either use the very word (...) President, for such a Bishop,
as we now assert (a singular person in every Church, having a power for life
over all the Officers and Members of the Church, and succeeding some Apostle,
or Apostolical person in that power) or else in other words affirm the same
thing.

4. Of this, store of evidences are Dissert. 4.
elsewhere produced, in the explication of the several titles, by which this
singular prefect was anciently known, whether of Apostle, in a secondary use
of that word, of Angel, of Bishop, of Elder, of Ruler, of Pastor, of Doctor, of
Steward, of President, of Priest; Against which the bare authority of Mr.
Beza's name, who has fancied a temporary President or Prolecutor, and brought
no manner of reason to confirm it, will have very little validity in it.

5. What is proved by the bare testimony of Beza, is farther confirmed by a
like citation out of the Reverend Divines at the Isle of Wight, who by the
example of the King sending a message to both Houses, and directing it To the
Speaker of the House of Peers, which inferres not that (...) the Speaker is
always the same person, or the Governor, or Ruler of the two Houses in the
least, conclude, that notwithstanding this direction of Christ's Epistle to the
Angels, yet they might be neither Bishops, nor yet perpetual Moderators.

6. But the authority of those Divines, which had this answer from Beza, adds
nothing of weight, because nothing of proof to it; As for their similitude, it
concludes nothing but this, that these Divines thought fit to make use of this
instance of a Speaker in Parliament, to show the thing possible to have been,
not to prove that so it was, And the matter of our present inquiry, is not,
what a kind of president Christ and his Apostles might, if they would, have
left in each Church, but what really they did; And that must be contested by
the best Records of those times, not by a similitude of a Speaker in our
Parliaments. And that is all I need to say to that Section.

Section XV.
Of Dr. Reynolds interpretation, of the Bishop in Cyprian. Of Ordination by
Bishops not without Presbyters, from the Testimonies of Cyprian, and Fermilian.
AFter the authority of Mr. Beza, backed with that of the Divines at the Isle of
Wight, is added, in the second place, the authority of Dr. Reynolds, who as he
has a Letter in print against the Divine Right of Episcopacy, so he
acknowledges also in his conference with Heart, Dial. 3. That this Angel was
persona singularis: For he says,

2. The whole place of Dr. Reynolds is set down at large by the Archbishop of
Armagh in the front of his learned Dissertation of the Original of Bishops and
Metropolitanes, and I shall not need here to recite it, being of some length,
and indeed nothing in it defined or expressed of his opinion, that the President,
when he was made such, either continued to be equal with the rest of the
Presbyters, or lasted but for a time, so as the Prolocutor of an Assembly does;
I am sure he affirms him to have had the Presidentship (not among, but) over
Elders (which I suppose must imply some power) and that this was he that in the
Primitive Church the Fathers called Bishop, and applies to him the mentions of
Bishops made by St. Cyprian (and Cornelius) of whose notion of Bishops, that it
(...) not to a bare Prolocutor of an Assembly, nay, that in nothing it
differs from ours, I am sufficiently assured, and so will the Reader by what
is cited from him Dissert. 3. c. 3.. 13. And because from some other
intimations in this Book I see there is need of it, I shall here (...) out of
many, mention this one evidence more.

3. In the 60 Epistle to Rogation a Bishop, who had been wronged and
contumeliously used by a Deacon of his Church, Ego and Collegae mei qui praesen
^es ad^rant.
and had written an account of it to Cyprian and the Append. p. 219
annual Council of Bishops with him, Cyprian returns this Answer, that it
was his humility to make this complaint to the council, Cum pro Episcopatus
vigore, and Cathedrae authoritate haberes potestatem, qua possis de illo statim
vindicari, when by force of his Episcopal power, and by authority of his
chair, he had power himself to inflict punishment on him immediately, and
that punishment afterward specified, ut eum deponas vel abstineas, either to
depose him or suspend him.

4. Here it was a part of Rogatian's Episcopal power, without any joining with
him, to judge and censure the inferior Officers of the Church, and they were
bound honorem sacerdotis agnoscere and Episcopo praeposito suo -- as it
follows in that Epistle, to acknowledge the honor of their Priest, and with
full humility make satisfaction to the Bishop which is set over them. All power
in the hands of one set over all, called promiscuous^ly Priest and Bishop in
Cyprian's style.

5. And therefore when in the Appendix to this Book, these men to prove that
Ordination by Bishops without the assistance of Presbyters was always
forbidden and opposed, tell us of Aureliu's being ordained by Cyprian, and his
Colleagues* Ep. 33. and then assure us from 8p. 58. that by his colleagues he
means his Presbyters (where yet there is no other proof of it* but the using
of these words in the Inscription of the Epistle, Cyprianus* cum Collegis, and
Ego and collegae, Cyprian with his colleagues, and I and my colleagues) This is a
great, but discernible fallacy put upon the Reader, as will soon appear 1. If
we but observe that the 33 Epistle, where he tells of Aurelius, was written by
Cyprian to his Presbyters, and so they are the persons whom he advertiseth,
what he and his Colleagues had done, and so sure were not those Colleagues that
did it with him. Or secondly, if for the understanding Cyprian's notion of
Colleagues, Ep. 58. we shall but look forward to the next Epistle 59. for that
will fully discover it, being this, Cyprianus and caeteri Collegae qui in
Concilio affuerunt numero LXVI. where Cyprians Colleagues are evidently the 66.
Bishops that were in Council with him.

6. The like might be also observed of the Testimony out of Firmilian, which
they there subjoyne, of the Seniores and Praepositi that have power of
ordeining, by whom, say they, the Presbyters as well as the Bishops are
understood; But again it is clear by the express words of the Epistle, that
by them are meant the Bishops in their annual Council, Necessari^ apud nos fit
ut per singulos annos Seniores and Praepositi in unu^ conveniamus -- It Is
necessary that every year we the Elders and Governors should meet together to
dispose and order those things which are committed to our care, adding
concerning the Church ( in opposition to Heretics) that all power and grace is
placed in it, ubi praesident majores natu, qui and Baptizandi and manum
imponendi and ordinandi possident potestatem, wherein the Elders praeside, and
have power of Baptizing, absolving and ordeining, an evident description of the
Bishops. But this by the way, as an essay, what their testimonies out of the
Fathers, scattered sometimes in this Book, would be found to be, if this were a
place to examine them.

7. Lastly Dr. Reinolds acknowledges another Praesident even among Bishops, the
Bishop of the chiefest City in the Province, and so a Metropolitan. All which
are contrary enough to the praetensions of the Presbyterians (what amends he
has made them in his Printed letter I know not*)

8. Yet after all this, there lies no obligation upon us to regulate our
Doctrine by Doctor Reinolds's scheme in this matter, being sufficiently
instructed by the Primitive records and practice, what kind of power and
dignity belonged to the (...) or Praesident among them, the very same that we
now pretend to be the Bishops due, And if Christ's letter were addressed to the
Angel, as to such a (...) or Praesident, it is all that we desire, to erect our
fabric of Spiscopacy on this one place, if there were not (as there are)
others able to support the weight of it.

9. And so we see what reasons have been brought to make good their second head
of Answers, of which we had promise that they were solid and every way
sufficient answers, and yet in the issue there is nothing so much as offered
toward it, save only the testimony of Master Beza, the Divines at the Isle of
Wight (which is by interpretation themselves) and Doctor Reynolds, who yet is
not perfectly of their party neither.

Section XVI.
Of the Churches of Asia being Metropolitical. Of the paueity of believers.
HAving thus done, they say It is objected by some men that the seven Cities,
in which these seven Asian Churches had their seat were all of them
Metropolitical, and so had relation to the rest of the Towns and Cities of
Asia, as unto daughters rising under them, and that therefore these Churches
were Metropolitical Churches, and their Angels Metropolitical Bishops.

2. How this comes to be styled an objection I cannot well guess, or what it
is, against which it is thought to be objected. The truth of it, as far as
any Episcopal person I know, is interessed in it, is this, It is not only
evident of the Angels of the seven Asian Churches, that they were Bishops,
which is sufficient for us against the Assemblers, but there is over and above
that, all reason to deem them Stars of a first magnitude, i. e. Bishops of
Mother-Cities, Metropolitanes and that very pertinent to be urged in this
matter of the Asian Angels, not to secure the proofs of Episcopacy taken from
thence, but to render a reason why in all Asia but seven Churches and their
Bishops are named there. To this purpose the discourse is enlarged (above what
it needed to have been) Dissert. 4. 5. to set down the nature of
Metropolitanes, the exemplars of them among the Jews, the expresses of the
Institution in the Apostles writings, and the signal evidences of it in the
Primitive Church, and the Ancient Canons in the Council of Nice and Antioch,
and Ephesus, all owning them as Primitive and Apostolical Institutions, and all
this exemplified in Jerusalem, in Antioch, in Rome, in Alexandria, in Gortyna
of Creet, and at length in all the seven Churches of Asia.

3. What is there thus set down, if it have not perfect truth in it, I shall be
very glad to see the weak parts of that discourse discovered, and therefore
though I never proposed or meant it as an Objection of ours against the
Presbyterians, having no need of such auxiliaries, and the whole matter being
sufficiently proved without, and this only added ex abundanti, yet I shall
most willingly attend their motions, and see what answers they will adapt to
this Objection, as they call it.

4. And 1. they answer, that it will hardly be proved that these seven. Cities
were all of them Metropolitical Cities in S. John's days, And the situation
of most them lying nearer together on the Sea side makes it very improbable.

5. To this I reply, that for five of them, Ephesus, Smyrna, Sardis, Pergamus,
and Laodicaea, Pliny, that lived and wrote in the beginning of Vespatian's
reign, Lib. 5. ^. 29. 30.
is a competent witness, that they were Cities wherein the Roman Proconsuls
sixth their Courts or Seats of Judicature, and administered justice there to all
the Cities about them, and that is the interpretation of a chief City or
Metropolis, in the secular account, and agreeably Vlpian mentions Ephesus as
the chief of these Metropoles. And for the other two, Philadelphia and
Thyatira, the latter of these by Greg. l. 5 c. 2.
Ptolomee, the former by the Council of Constantinople sub Mena is punctually
affirmed to be a Metropolis. To these are added other evidences and reasons,
and the Lord Archbishop of Armagh has written (besides his Original of
Metropolitanes) a very learned Dissertation of the Lydian Asia, on purpose to
clear this matter.

6. And when a thing is so largely proved already, and when a satisfactory
proof of it in any one of the seven Cities is abundantly sufficient to the
asserting of Metropolitanes, (for then the Angel of that one was a
Metropolitan) it is then certainly a very incompetent confutation barely to say,
that it will hardly be proved, that these seven Cities were all of them
Metropolitical Cities in Saint John's days, for if it be proved, it matters
now how hardly, and if any one were so in S. John's days, it matters not, if
possibly some other were not, that one was a Metropolitical Angel, which is all
we need insist on.

7. And for the Argument to make it improbable, drawn from the situation of the
Cities, that is as infirm; for this, as all other controversies of matters of
fact, must be waged by authorities of those which were likely to know the
truth, and to testify aright, and to those we have all reason to adhere, and
not to be moved by arguments that seem probable to those that live 1600.
years after, and are not perhaps so perfect Masters of the Geographie of the
place as duly to be able to judge even what is in that respect most probable.

8. Nay for the distances of these Cities, though I have not now Mr. Brightman
by me, yet my notes out of him tell me, that in his scale of furlongs, Pergamus
was distant from Smyrna 540. furlongs, i. e. about 68. English miles, and
Ephesus from Smyrna 320. i. e. about 40. miles, and Thyatira from Pergamus 80.
English miles, which is a distance very reconcilable with their being
Metropoles.

9. But they are content to suppose this was true, and then have answers ready
another way, 1. That it is no good argument from the greatness of the Cities
to infer the greatness of the Churches, for though the Cities were great,
yet the Churches were but small, and the number of believers very few in
comparison of the rest of the people.

10. To this I reply, 1. by concession, that in all places and times the
greatness of the Church cannot absolutely be concluded from the greatness of
the City, because it is possible that a great City may have utterly resisted
the faith, and a lesser City received it; or again a greater City, that has
received the Faith in some of the Members, may yet have fewer believers in it,
than another City, which is not so great. This therefore is not our way of
concluding, from the bare greatness of the Cities, to infer the great number
of believers in them.

11. Our way of concluding is this; Paul had spent three years, Act. 20. 31.
in this Lydian or Proconsular Asia, ver. 18. In this time he had pursued his
work very diligently and zealously, not ceasing to warn every one night and
day with tears, and herein his harvest was proportionable to his labor; After
two years space and upwards spent at Ephesus, it is said, ver. 19. that by the
continuance of his preaching and gathering Disciples, all they that dwelt in
Asia, heard the word of the Lord both Jews and Greeks, and though many were
hardened and believed not, and spoke evil of that way, ver. 9. yet ver. 17. by
some extraordinary works of his, which were made known to all the Jews and
Greeks dwelling at Ephesus, fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord
Jesus was magnified, a conversion in a manner general, and therefore it
follows, and many that believed -- ver. 18. and so mightily grew the word of
God and prevailed, ver. 20. Whereupon Saint Paul himself speaking of these
successes, calls it a great door and an effectual, 1 Cor. 16. 9. which at
Ephesus, v. 8. was opened unto him.

12. From hence we conclude, and sure safely may, 1. that in Asia generally,
and especially in Ephesus there was a great number of Christians, before this
time of Christ's Epistle, (which is not a concluding it barely from the
greatness of that or any other Cities of Asia) Secondly from hence, together
with Ephesus's being in the secular account (the Notitiae Imperiales) a
Metropolis, where the Assizes were kept, we conclude that Ephesus was in the
Christian account also a Metropolis, and the chief of all Asia; and this I
hope is not so improbable infirm a way of concluding, as the other imposed on
us seemed to be.

13. Thirdly, from hence, and from other exemplifications of it (as that
Trallis and Magnesia, which appear to be under the Metropolis of Ephesus, are
by Ignatius written to as all Episcopal Sees, in our present notion of the word
Bishop) we conclude that other Cities of Asia beside these seven, had received
the Christian faith, and were certainly taken care for by Paul, which had
planted it among them, and agreeably had Rulers settled in them, i. e. Bishops
subordinate to the Metropolitans. And all these inferences I doubt not will
appear regular enough, and I should farther enlarge on them, if there were any
thing in the answer, which could render it needful or seasonable.

14. As for the paucity of Christians in those times in comparison of the rest
of the people, that cannot be pertinently opposed to our pretensions, because
still the number of Christians in a great City might bear the same proportion
to the number of the Christians in the smaller Cities, that the people in the
one did to the people in the other, one thousand bearing the same proportion to
one hundred, that an hundred thousand does to ten thousand.

15. And it being the affirmation of Clemens, that the Apostles in each City,
where they received any proselytes, though never so few, before their parting
constituted a Bishop (with his Deacon) who was to be governor (...), of those
that should after believe, it follows unquestionably from thence, that in the
Cities which had but few Christians, Bishops might be and were constituted, and
those very regularly depending on the greater (their Metropolitical) Cities,
from whence the faith was derived to them, (as from Ephesus, where Paul chiefly
resided, to the Cities about it) and all this without any need of ballancing
the parties, or considering what comparison the number of the Christians in
one, or the other, bore to the number of the unbelievers in either City. And
let this serve by way of Reply to the first branch of the second answer.

Section XVI.
Of modelling Churches according to the Government of the Roman state. Of
exemplars of Metropolitans among the Jews. Testimonies of the Apostles
instituting Metropolitans.
THeir second answer is, Roman state. This was the after policy of Christian
Emperors and Bishops, but no part of Apostolical policy; And therefore it
does not follow, that because there were diverse Cities under the jurisdiction
of those 7. Cities, that therefore there should be diverse Churches subordinate
to the 7. Asian Churches.

2. That the Apostles, which designed to plant a Church in the Heathen World,
should do it in that manner as would be most advantageous to their end, will
not I hope be accounted strange. This generally was by betaking themselves to
the Cities, rather than the villages, and first to the greater Cities, unto
which was the most frequent resort, that by that means the faith might be most
compendiously and successefully propagated. If a greater City resisted their
preaching, or fewer Saints were gathered there, I do not then pretend to prove,
or to believe that that was constituted a Metropolitan Church with superiority
over others of greater antiquity, or larger growth in the faith whatsoever the
dignity of it were in the secular account; But when a whole Nation is
converted, and the greatest and most populous Cities first, and from thence the
sound gone out into all the Region, and lesser Cities in it, that then the
Apostles, which certainly constituted Bishops in every believing City (and
therefore what is reported to have been done (...) in every Church, Acts 14.
23. is appointed to be done (...) in every City, Tit. 1. 5) should set up the
principal Sees in those most Christian Cities, which had formerly the priority
in the Roman state, as it is the wisest method, and fittest for the wisest
planters to take, so we have all reason to believe it was done particularly in
the Lydian or Proconsular Asia, in which there being many more Christian
Cities, than those seven, to whom Christ's Epistle is addressed, those are in all
reason to be accounted the chief of that Region, and those which are not
named, less princi^all than they: which concurring with what we find recorded
in Pliny and Ptolomy of the account of them in the imperial noticiae, if it
demonstrate not, is yet matter of exceeding great probability, and may persuade
with any reasonable man, as long as there is nothing in any degree such, which
is offered to be confronted against it.

3. If that which scandalizeth the Assemblers (for we are left to Divine what
it is) be the unfitness that the Apostles should model the Church according
to the Roman state. I shall first demand how it is possible to imagine a
plantation of a Church in any, whether Jewish or Heathen state, without doing
somewhat equivalent to this? For suppose Joseph of Arimathea to have (as De
excid. and Conqu. Brit.
Gildas says) converted the Britannick church in Tiberius's time, is it to be
imagined that he should meddle with the civil power of this Nation, as it
stood in respect of it is separation from other Nations, toto divisa Orb, or
with the divisions or distributions of this Nation within it self, into
Cities, and Provinces, etc. or go about to innovate any thing in that matter?
Is it not certain that it was no part of the Christian faith to be such a
judge or divider; but on the other side that all should remain as it did (in
that respect) before the coming of Christianity? And therefore supposing 1.
That this Nation were governed by a King of its own; is it not certain that
this national Church should follow the boundaries of the Nation, and so be
modeld according to the government of the (formerly Heathen) Britannick state?
And supposing again (what has already been proved by the testimony of
Clemens, and by comparing Act. 14. 23. with Tit. 1. 5.) that a Bishop were
constituted in every Church, in each City, will there be any reason of doubting
but that those Cities being subordinate one to another, according to the
customs of the Nation, the Churches in those Cities, and the Bishops in those
Churches shall be so also? This I hope will not be deemed an impious compliance
with heathenisme, or conformity with the World, nay, though the Emperor of
Rome (by his conquests here) were the author of these distributions.

4. But then secondly, it is already cleared in the Dissertations, that this
Ecclesiastic division of Cities into Mothers and Daughters, Metropoles and
inferior Cities, was by the Apostle copied out from the Jews, as when God
commands by Moses, that Judges and Officers should be ordained in every City,
Deuteronomy. 16. 18. and that in matters of weight and doubt they should resort to
Jerusalem; to the Judge and Sanhedrim there, according to which it appears
that Jerusalem was the Metropolis of those other Cities, and so is evident,
Act. 9. by the story of Saul carrying Letters of Commission from the Sanhedrim
there to the consistories in Damascus, and by many other evidences. So likewise
Numb. 3. when three Families of the Levits, the sons of Aaron, were separated
for the service of the Tabernacle, and an head or Prince or President of every
of these, called (...) v. 24. 30. 35. Eleazar Aaron's Son is constituted over
all these, and styled (...) the head of the heads of the Levites, This is
clearly a pattern of the Metropolitanes in the Christian Church, which may
therefore own it is derivation from thence, and not from the Heathen models of
Government, which yet it was not reasonably to disturb, being found so
concordant to, and commodious for it.

5. And that what was done in this kind, was done by the Apostles themselves
and Apostolical persons, the first founders of Churches, and not only by the
after policy (as is suggested) of Christian Emperors and Bishops, might have
appeared abundantly by these few testimonies, of they had been worthy to be
taken notice of. First, of the council of Nice An. Domini 325. not many years
after the conversion of Constantine, the first Christian Emperor, Can. 6.
which takes care for the preserving the privileges of the Metropolitanes (by
name that the Bishop of Alexandria should have power over the Churches in
Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis, that in Antioch and the rest of the
Provinces(...), the priveleges should be preserved to the Churches) begins with
this rule (...) Let the ancient customs continue in force, which certainly
referres to that which was long before the Christian Emperors, and (without
any reason of doubting) to the first constitutions of those Churches by St.
Mark, and St. Peter, and then the Canon goes on to exact this by way of
conformity with other places, with Rome it self, (...), for this is the
custom of force with the Bishop of Rome, and upon these grounds the Canon
requires (...) universally, that if any man be made a Bishop (...), without the
judgment of the Metropolitan, he ought not to be Bishop --

6. So in the 9. Canon of the Council of Antioch, in the year 341. which
begins thus, that the Bishop, which presides in the Metropolis, ought to know
the Bishops in every Province, and to take care of the whole Province, (...),
because all that have business, resort from all sides to the Metropolis (which
is the very thing we now contend, to be the reason of conforming the
Ecclesiastic to the civil models) and then proceeds to forbid other Bishops
acting any thing of such a nature without him, this is backed with these words,
(...), according to the ancient Canon of our Fathers, which has been in force,
referring again to the immemoriall custom of all Churches since the first
plantation, and not the after-policie of Christian Emperors and Bishops, as is
here suggested.

7. Lastly, in the last canon of the Great council of Ephesus, in the year
431. (which is the defining a special matter of Metropoliticall right) where
the occasion of the controversy is rehearsed, how the Bishop of Antioch
invaded the privileges of the Cypriots, contrary to the (...) the ancient
custom, and the decree is made that the Bishops of Cyprus shall retain them
inviolate, (...), (...), according to the Canons of the Holy Fathers, and the
ancient custom; The Canon extends it self to all other Dioceses and
Provinces, that no Bishop shall meddle with another Province (...), which was
not upward and from the beginning under his, i. e. his praedecessors power,
where it is most evident that the Metropolitical power, and primacy
Ecclesiastical is derived from the beginning of the plantation of each Church,
and consequently that this was a part of Apostolical policy, and not only an
after policy of Christian Emperors, etc.

8. And upon these grounds of probation, I shall be competently secured that
this is proved, which they do not believe ever can be, and have no other
argument to prove their negative, but their not believing the affirmative.

Section XVII.
Of the objection against Metropoles from the seven Stars in seven Churches.
OF the same temper is their third answer, that they are fully assured that it
can never be made out, that any of these Asian Angels were Archbishops or
Bishops over other Bishops, or Bishops over diverse settled Churches. The seven
Stars are said in Scripture to be fixed in their seven Candle-stickes or
Churches, not one Star over diverse Candle-stickes or Churches.

2. What they are already fully assured of, that it can never be made out, I
shall have little confidence to persuade them was formerly done to their hands;
Otherwise I should hope that by what had long since been said, and has now
been more largely deduced in Reply to their last answer, they might find cause
to alter their judgments, and retract their so definitive sentence of full
assurance.

3. As for the only appearance of reason, which is here superadded, viz. that
the seven Stars are found fixed in seven, not one over diverse Churches, this I
conceive not to be of any force. For it being by us granted and presumed that
each of the seven Asian Angels was Bishop of his particular Church, one of
Ephesus, another of Smyrna, etc. It is perfectly reconcilable herewith, that
in case these seven were not the only Cities and Churches in Asia (as it is
certain they were not, all Asia, consisting of many more Cities, being before
this converted to the Faith) all the other might have dependence on these seven.

4. For this we know, that two Bishops in England, that were each of them,
first in one City, for example in Canterbury or York, had yet each of them a
superiority or Metropoliticall power over diverse other Cities, and when any
Record styles one of them Bishop of Canterbury, as the Scripture does Angel of
Ephesus, we should sure acknowledge it a very infirm inference from the words
of that Record, to conclude that being Bishop of Canterbury he could not be
Metropolitan of London, Rochester, etc.

5. And this is the very parallel to the present instance, and if it were not
invalid enough, by being a bare negative argument [they are not said in
Scripture to be one Star over diverse Churches] (all things that are, are not
said in Scripture, those Angels have not therefore no names, because they are
not there recorded) this parallel instance, which supposes the contrary to
their pretensions, would be sufficient to invalidate it.

Section XVIII.
Of the use of the word Bishop for Archbishop in Tertullian: Of Angel in
Christ's Epistle.
A Fourth answer, or rather confutation, is added, That if this opinion were
true, then Tertullian did not do well in saying that St. John made Polycarpe
Bishop of Smyrna, but he should rather have said that he made him Archbishop.
And our Savior Christ had not given to these seven Angels their due Titles,
for he must have written to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, together with
all those Churches in the Cities subordinate to Ephesus. And so likewise of the
other six.

2. To this I reply, that the affirming the seven Angels to have been
Metropolitanes, no way obliges us to find fault either with Tertullians or our
Savior's style. Not with Tertullian's, for 1. an Archbishop is a Bishop,
though dignified above some others of that order. Secondly, supposing Smyrna to
be a Metropolis (as no doubt, if it were, Tertullian knew and supposed it to
be) then his styling Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, is aequivalent to his calling
him a Metropolita^ or Archbishop, As acknowledging Canterbury to be a
Metropolitical See in England, the affirming William Laud to be constituted
Bishop of Canterbury, is all one, as to affirm him Archbishop.

3. Thus when In Tit. 1. Hom. 1.
Chrysostom says of Titus, that (...), an entire Island and the judgment of
so many. Bishops was committed to him, what is this but to affirm Titus
Archbishop of Crete? And yet Lib. 3. cap 4.
Eusebius, who believed this, and adverted to it, as much as Chrysostom, uses
this phrase, (...), that he was Bishop of the Churches of Creet, calling him
Bishop distinctly, though by the mention of the Churches in the plural, it is
evident he meant the same that we do by Archbishop.

4. So again Lib 5. cap. 23.
Eusebius of Irenaeus, that he (...), was Bishop of the Provinces of France,
which must needs signify Archbishop of Lions, for so he was. And it is certain
that other of the Ancients use the word (...) Archbishop, of those which were
no otherwise qualified for that title, as when Saint Cyprian the Bishop of
Carthage, under which the whole Province of Africa is comprehended, is by the
In Trallo. can. 2.
Council of Constantinople called (...), Archbishop of the region of Africa.

5. The same answer will competently suffice, for the reconciling Christ's
style and ours, for supposing Ephesus to have been a Metropolis, the writing to
the Angel of that Church, implies writing to those other Churches in the Cities
subordinate to Ephesus, and need not be more fully expressed, as when the Apostle
wrote to the Church of Corinth, and not only so, but to all the Saints (and so
all the Churches) in all Achaia. 2 Cor. 1. 1. it is certain that the former
Epistle was written to those very same Churches (viz. all under the Metropolis
of Corinth) and yet it is inscribed to the Church of God which is at Corinth, 1
Cor. 1. 1. without mentioning of Achaia, save only in a general indefinite
phrase, with all that in every place call on the name of Jesus.

6. Secondly, the word in Christ's Epistle being not Bishop but Angel, is not
at all liable to this exception, For why may not an Archbishop be as fitly
called an Angel, as a Bishop would be? nay if it be remembered what was formerly
cited out of Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. 6. that there are seven Angels which
have the greatest power, by him styled (...), the firstborn rulers of the
Angels; parallel to the phrase in Dan. 7. 10. 13. (...) the head, Lords or
chief Princes, or, as we ordinarily style them, the Archangels, of which
number Michael is there named to be one, There will then be more than a
tolerable propriety of speech in Christ's style, a most exact critical notation
of their being Archbishops, and withal a farther account of Tertullian's
calling Polycarp a Bishop of Smyrna, though he were Archbishop, just as the
Archangels in Daniel are more than once called Angels in the Revelation.

7. For a close of this matter they are pleased to add their Character, not
over-benigne of those by whom this device, as they style it, was found out for
the honor of Archpiscopacy, [that they did aspire unto that dignity.]

8. If hereby be meant the Lord Primate of Ireland in his discourse of the
Original of Bishops, this character can have no propriety in it, he having
quietly enjoyed that dignity many years before the writing hereof. If it be
designed for a reproach to me, I shall elude the blow by not thinking it such.
For as at a time when Episcopacy it self was by the Parliament abolisht, (and
that Act of severity actually put in execution) it had been a great folly in
any to hope that he should ever attain to that Office of Dignity in the
Church, (and what ever other follies I have been guilty of, truly that was none
of them) so I think there could not a point of time more commodiously have
been chosen in the space of above 1600 year^s, wherein a man might have better
secured a Discourse for Bishops and Metropolitanes, from the Censure of
aspiring to either of those Dignities, that was that, wherein that Book was
published.

9. To this if I add by way of retortion, that it is evident that they which
write this Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangeliei, do aspire every one of them to
their part of a Ruling Presbytery, which their brethren that have not those
Ambitions are far from thinking to have any Divine Stamp upon it, I shall
have given an account of the unskilfulnesse of their Reproaches, as well as of
the invalidity of their Answers.

10. As for the fear which their Discourse on this matter suggests to their
more moderate brethren, that if a Jus Divinum be stamped on Archbishops and
Primates, and Patriarchs, they may be forced by the same proportion to put a
Divine stamp upon the Pope himself, I persuade my self that I have given the
ingenious reader a satisfactory account of the inconsequence hereof, in a
Discourse of Schism, to which I shall refer him, if he need, or desire farther
trouble or direction in this business.

Section XIX.
Of Division into Parishes, and Union into Diocesses. Of Diocesan Bishops in
the Apostles days. Elders in every Church, Act. 14. Elders of the Church, Act.
20. That place vindicated from exception.
AFter all this, fourth (whether Answer or suppletory Consideration) for the
conclusion of this Discourse concerning the Asian Angels, and I shall follow
them to that more cheerfully, because it looks like a conclusion.

2. It is this, That it can never be provid that these Asian Angels were
Bishops in a Praelaticall sense, much less Archbishops and Metropolitanes.
For it is believed upon all parts, that believers in great Cities, were not
divided into set and fixed Congregations and parishes, till long after the
Apostles days, and that Parishes were not united into Dioceses till 260. years
after Christ. And therefore sure we are that there could not be Diocesane
Churches and Diocesane Bishops formerly so called in the Apostles days; These
Angels were Congregationall, not Diocesan. In the beginning of Christianity the
number of Believers, even in the greatest Cities were so few, that they might
well meet (...) in the same place. And these were called the Church of the
City, and therefore to ordain Elders (...), are all one in Scripture.

3. To the praeface of this conclusion, that it cannot be proved] it is again
very sufficient to answer, that when a proposition has already been proved so
far, that no answer has been rendered, which at all satisfies, or invalidates
the force of the proofs, it is very unlike Artists to say, that it cannot be
proved. Nay, although some inconvenience were producible, which would press
our assertion yet the old rule would require it is place, incommodum non solvit
argumentum, the mention of an inconvenience ensuing, does not take off the
force of an argument.

4. But we need not that wariness here; the reason which is here annexed to
prove that it cannot be proved, is of no force against us, For 1. as
Congregations and Parishes are synonimous in their style, so I yield that
Believers in great Cities were not at first divided into Parishes, while the
number of the Christians in a City was so small, that they might well assemble
in the same place, and so needed no partitions or divisions.

5. But what disadvantage is this to us, who affirm that one Bishop, not a
College of Presbyters, presided in this one Congregation, and that the
Believers in the Region and Villages about, did belong to the care of that
single-Bishop of the City-church? May not these be ruled by a Bishop as well
before, as after the division into Parishes? Or is this division more necessary
to the Government by one Bishop in each City, than to the Government of more
Presbyters in every City? In all reason the division of this one into several
Parishes should make Presbyters more necessary after than before such division,
that each Parish might have one Presbyter, to officiate among them in things of
daily use; and upon that account I suppose it was, that when the number of
Believers was so far increased, that all the Christians of a City could not
meet commodiously in one place, and when the Regions and Villages so abounded
with Proselytes that in respect of them also it was necessary, then the Bishop
of each City thought fit to constable tute Presbyters, in our modern notion of
them, many in every City, and many in every Region, one in every Village,
though as yet the word Parish, in our modern sense, was not come into the
World.

6. And so this is far from being Argumentative against us, it is rather
useful to confirm what is asserted by us, that it is against the whole Scheme
which the Scriptures or first writers give us of Churches, to imagine that in
every City there was by the Apostles a College of Presbyters constituted, when
as they agree to assure us a Bishop and his Deacon were sufficient at the first
(so thin) Plantations.

7. So again when they take it for granted that Parishes were not united into
Dioceses till 260. years after Christ; I shall ask 1. whether they were
sooner divided into Classes, etc. and if not, what they have gained to their
Jus Divinum by this observation?

8. But then secondly, it is clear that there might be Dioceses before this
division into Parishes, in our modern notion; For what is a Dioces^ but a
Church in a City with the Suburbs and Territory or Region belonging to it? And
this certainly might be, and ^emaine under the Government of a single Bishop,
as well before, as after any more minute distributions into such, as we now
call Parishes.

9. For it is one thing for the Church of this City to be divided from the
Church of every other City, another thing for the same Church to be divided
into many Assembles; The first is it which is required for the setting up of
Government; and of any such Church so bounded there may be a Bishop, and that
whole Church shall be his Diocese, and so he a Diocesa^ Bishop, though as yet
this Church be not subdivided into more several Assemblies.

10. And therefore when they add, that there could not be Diocesan Churches
and Bishops formerly so called in the Apostles days, unless they have some
little aequivocation in the word Diocesan, It is most certain they have no
reason on which to found their confidence, For that there was a Church in each
City, and it is territory (howsoever governed by one or more) is most certain,
and equally affirmed by them and us, and equally their interest and ours, that
it be affirmed. As for the use of the word (...), that has often varied, and
has sometimes been of a larger, sometimes of a narrower signification, and so
has (...), the original of our Parish also, but I hope our contentions must
not be always about words, when the matter is sufficiently agreed on among us,
and the words sufficiently explained to express that matter.

11. And therefore when they add these Angels were congregationall, not
Diocesan, the reply is obvious, they were every of them Angels of a Church in a
City, having authority over the Region adjacent, and pertaining to that City,
and so as Church and Congregation are all one (as in ordinary use in all
languages they are) they were Congregationall and Diocesan also.

12. What follows of the paucity of believers in the greatest Cities, and
their meeting in one place, as also of a Church and City being all one, is
willingly granted by us, and has not the least appearance of being useful to
their pretentions, or hurtful to ours, and therefore I have no temptation to
make any the lest Reply to it.

13. That which next follows, though it concern us not to examine it, our
interest being equally secured, be it true or false, yet I cannot but take some
notice of it in passing, because it is a little extraordinary.

14. Afterward, say they, we conceive that believers became so numerous in
these great Cities, as that they could not conveniently meet in one place; Thus
it was in the Church of Jerusalem, Act. 2. 41. and 4. 4. and 5. 14. and thus
possibly it might be in most of these Asian Churches in St. John's time.

15. Here certainly the word [Afterwards] is relative, and referrs to the
Antecedent in the former Paragraph, and that is, [In the beginning of
Christianity] Hereupon I demand, what time is that which they call [the
beginning of Christianity?] Is it that wherein Christ continued on the Earth?
If so, they will easily believe us, that we do not think, that Diocesan
Bishops were placed in the Church, within that period If it be the time
immediately following the Resurrection of Christ, when the Apostles began to
preach and propagate the Faith, then how come they to divide that time, which
is spoken of Act. 2. 41. from that time of the beginning of Christianity, by
this word [Afterward] for it is certain what is there storied of the 3000.
Converts, is the effect of the first Sermon preached by any of the Apostles
immediately upon the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them, and the gift of
Tongues, the wonderment whereof brought those so many Auditors together.

16. So secondly when they say of this point of time, Act. 2. 41. The believers
were so numerous that they could not conveniently me^t in one place, This is
contrary to the evidence of the Text, which says expressly v 44. That all the
believers were (...), which in the last paragraph, they interpreted, meeting in
^ne and the same place. The like might be said of the other places. Act: 4. ^4.
and 5 14. for certainly, as yet though the number of Believers increased, yet
they were not distributed into several Congregations. But this by the way,
being assured that this disquisition is perfectly extrinsecall to the matter in
debate between us, because as at Jerusalem the ancients are clear in
affirming, that soon after Christ's Ascension, (...). Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 2
c. 1. Ex. Clem. (...).
Peter and James and John chose James the just, the Brother of the Lord, and
constituted him Bishop or Jerusalem, which is all that we need pretend to from
the story of that Church, so it matters not much at what point of time that was
done, whether at the very beginning or afterward, much less how soon it was
that that Church was distributed into several divided Assemblies, the Creation
of the Bishop not at all depending on that, as has formerly been showed.

17. Hence will it appear to how very little purpose are those cautions added,
and observations made in the remaining part of this sixth Chapter.

18. Thus, say they, possibly it might be ( i.e. the believers be so numerous
in great Cities, that they could not conveniently meet in one place) in most of
these Asian Churches in St. John's time. But yet notwithstanding all this,
there are three things diligently to be observed; First, that these meeting
places were frequented promiscuously and indistinctly, and that believers were
not divided into set and fixed Churches or Congregations in the Apostles days.

19. But first I demand, Is there any truth in this observation? was not the
Church of Jerusalem in the Apostles days a set and fixed Church, so as to be
perfectly severed from the Church of Alexandria and Ephesus? Was not James the
Brother of the Lord Bishop of the one, and not of the other?

20. Secondly, why was this for the Presbyterians interest to be so diligently
observed? If one of these Churches were not thus divided and severed from
others, how could it be governed by a Presbytery, as they pretend it was? Must
it not be a determinate fixed body that is governed by any, whether Bishop or
Presbyters? I profess not to be able to discern by my most diligent
observation, why this was so necessary to be so diligently observed.

21. Secondly, (say they, it must be as diligently observed) that
notwithstanding these different meeting places, yet the Believers of one City
made but one Church in the Apostles days, as is evident in the Church of
Jerusalem, which is called a Church not Churches, Act. 8. 1. and 15. 6. and 22.
16. And so likewise it is called the Church of Ephesus, and the Church of
Thyatira, etc. not Churches, etc.

22. This Observation I acknowledge to have perfect truth in it, and not to be
confutable in any part (save only that the two latter Texts are certainly
misquoted, and not rectified in the Errata) and therefore instead of rejecting,
I shall embrace it, and from thence conclude, that there is no manner of
incongruity in assigning of one Bishop to one Church, and so one Bishop in the
Church of Jerusalem, because it is a Church not Churches, being forced to
acknowledge that where there were more Churches there were more Bishops, and so
likewise one Angel of Ephesus, and of Thyatira, etc. This I suppose was not the
thing they meant to infer from hence, nor indeed do I conceive it
necessarily inferred from (only very agreeable to) the oneness of each
Church, without other arguments to join with it. But I am still to seek, and
emand what advantage accrues to their cause, or disadvantage to ours by this
observation?

23. But then thirdly they add, that this Church in the City was governed in
the Apostles days by the common council of Presbyters or Bishops.

24. This indeed were worth their diligent observing, if it could be descried,
and would abundantly recompense them for the no-profit their two former
observations brought them in, if it could be obtained by all their diligence.
But this being the (...), the only thing in question betwixt us, whether the
Church in each City was in the Apostles days governed by the common council
of Presbyters or Bishops, or by one single Bishop, called sometimes (...) Elder
(as that signifies simply a Governor, not with restriction, a member of a
College of Governors) this I say being the only question in debate between
us, it must not be any farther yielded to them, than their proofs and
evidences will enforce it; And these of what virtue they are, must now appear
by the view of them. And the first they produce is this.

25. The Apostles went about ordeining Presbyters in every Church, Act. 14. 23.

26. But surely this is an infirm argument. Every Church signifies without
question more Churches than one, viz. Derbe, Lystra, Iconium, Antioch, v. 20.
21. And if in each of those one (...) be supposed to be ordained, that
certainly will satisfy the importunity of that Text, and the mention of (...)
Elders in the plural, viz. four Elders in those so many Churches. And if
because (...) is in the singular number, they therefore think that those
plural Elders must be ordained in each of those Churches. This is too gross a
mistake for Scholars to be guilty of, it being certain that that is not the
importance of the phrase (...), any more than of the English [ Church by
Church] or [ in every Church] i.e. more Elders in more Churches, one in every
one.

27. Their next proof is from Act. 20. 17. Paul called for the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus (one of these seven Churches) and calls them Bishops, and
commits the whole government of the Church to them; The like may be said of the
other six Churches.

28. What may be said of Ephesus, I grant may be said of the other six
Churches, but the Text no where affirms it of Ephesus, and so the analogy will
no way prove it of the rest. All that the Text says, is this, And from Miletus
he sent to Ephesus and called the Elders of the Church. This is not to say the
Elders (as that signifies Presbyters in our modern notion) of the one City,
and so Church of Ephesus, but the Elders, i.e. Bishops either of the Asian
Church of that whole Region, or at least of the Ephesine Province, the
neighboring* Bishops of the Churches or Cities that were under that Metropolis
of Ephesus, who by St. Paul's sending his summons to Ephesus, the chief City
of the one, and chief Metropolis of the other (which consequently had daily
means of communicating intelligence to those other Cities) might thus most
commodiously be advertised of St. Paul's coming, and provide to meet him at
Miletus.

29. That this is no strained interpretation or answer, is elsewhere evidenced,
and may summarily appear by these two testimonies, one of Irenaeus here
formerly mentioned, l. 3. c. 14. ab Epheso and reliquis proximis civitatibus
convocatos esse, that they were called from Ephesus and the rest of the nearest
Cities adjoining to it, This is an express evidence, which being allowed puts
the whole matter out of question. And although in a matter of fact, a testimony
of so credible a person that lived so near the times, being an auditour of
Polycarpe the first Bishop of Smyrna, and is not contradicted by any
contemporary, is of a competent authority, and need not any other Topickes to
assist it, yet for the removing all possible prejudices from it, and rendering
it yet more indubitable, I shall a little farther enlarge for the confirming of
it.

30. And 1. the Apostle at his meeting with them, v. 18. begins in this style,
ye know from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have
been with you at all seasons; An address to them, either as to the Elders of
Asia indefinitely, as many as could conveniently come to Miletus at that time,
or at least as to more than to the Elder (or Elders, if that could be truly
pretended) of one City of Asia, peculiarly, or exclusively to all others.

31. So again v. 25. And now behold I know that ye all, among whom I have
gone preaching the Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more; This evidently
addresses the speech not only to the inhabitants of one City, but to all those
(as many as were then present) among whom he had gone preaching the Faith of
Christ, and that we know was done by him to the other Cities, and not only to
that of Ephesus, (...), in passage (though not so solemnly as at Ephesus) going
through all the Region and preaching the Gospel to all, says Oecumenius on 2 John And so it is expressly said Act. 19. 21. that after the two years and three
months spent at Ephesus, (...), he staid and spent some time in Asia, And
accordingly v. 26. Demetrius truly says, that not only at Ephesus but almost
throughout all Asia, Paul had persuaded and turned away the people.

32. Secondly, then the Faith being before this time successefully propagated
through all Asia, and not only in this one City of Ephesus, there were without
question Churches accordingly gathered and compacted in many other Cities, as
well as in Ephesus, before this time of Paul's parting never to see them
again. And not only in the other Metropolis, ( six more of which are owned by
the Objectors, Smyrna and the rest Rev. 1.) but also in the lesser Cities,
which were not Metropoliticall, and yet more especially in those Cities which
were nearest Ephesus, and which as belonging to that Metropolis, had frequent
resort thither to the Assizes which were there kept Act. 19. 38. and so must be
supposed to have received special influences from the Apostle's residing there
for the space of two years and three months, Act. 19. 8. 10.

33. To which purpose it must again be remembered, that as Tim^thy is by
Eusebius styled (...), Bishop of the Province that belongs to Ephesus, l. 3. c.
4. which is all one as to make that a Metropolis over other Cities, and
accordingly in the order of Metropoliticall Sees at the end of Codinus, the
Bishop of Ephesus is called (...), Primate of all Asia, so Ignatius in Tra^an's
time is by joint consent of the ancients affirmed to have written Epistles to
two Churches, Magnesia and Trallis, which are known to be Cities under this
Metropolis of Ephesus, and to have named the Bishops of each, Damas of the one,
and ^olybius of the other.

34. And as there is no question among any but that Ignatius wrote such
Epistles to those Churches (Salmasius cites that to the Ana^letum and
Cle^^entem Petri M^^istics facit Ignatius in Epistola ad Trollenses. Wall. Me p.
222.
Trallians expressly as the Epistle of Ignatius, which certainly he would never
have done, if he had doubted whether ever Ignatius wrote to them; and indeed
all that is questioned by him and D. Blondell is but this, whether the Epistles
now extant under his name be genuine or no, not whether Ignatius, as all
writers accord, wrote seven Epistles, of which these which we now speak of,
are two) so there is no ground of imagining that they were of a later
plantation, than that which is here recorded to be wrought by St. Paul, Act.
19. All Asia having then heard the Faith, v. 10. and received it in a
remarkable manner v. 20. and a great door, says St. Paul being opened to him
at Ephesus peculiarly, which must needs have influence on the Cities next
adjoining to it in a special manner.

35. To this I shall add thirdly, that as Or. ad Asiat. Civ. de concord.
Aristides says of Ephesus, that it was (...), the common magazine or
storehouse of Asia, (...), their refuge for all wants, so it must needs be the
fittest way of conveying intelligence speedily to all the Cities of Asia,
especially the proximae civitates, as Irenaeus said, the Cities next adjoining,
and so most commodious to assemble those other Bishops to Paul at Miletus and
not only him, or those that are supposed to have resided at Ephesus.

36. And accordingly we find in Eusebius, Eccl. Hist l. 4. c. 23.
that the Epistle of Antonius ^ius concerning the Christians, which was to be
communicated to all Asia, (...), was proclaimed or divulged at Ephesus, in the
common meeting of Asia, as the readiest way to make it universally known.

37. All which being premised, and withal that there is no reason to imagine,
that St. Paul at the time of his fimall parting, (taking his solemn last
leave) of them v. 38. should not so much consider, as to call for, or desire to
see any of the rest of his Sons, the Governors of the Inferior Churches, to
whom he had committed that numerous flock (which was now so universally in such
danger of Wolves) save only those of the one Church, of that one City of
Ephesus (supposing there had been more than one there.) This will be a very
competent confirmation of Irenaeus his testimony, that indeed thus it was, as
he has delivered, that the Bishops of the Cities nearest adjoining to Ephesus
(as many as by summons from thence could speedily be called together, in all
reason the Bishops of the Cities which were under that Metropolis) were sent to
meet the Apostle at Miletus, and accordingly met him there.

38. The second testimony is that maxim of the Greek Scholiast on 1 Pet. 1.
5. (...). The Book of the Acts calls the Bishops Elders, which being avowed by
me in the Dissertations, and cleared through all the places in the Acts, they
ought, by all Laws of disputing, either to have endeavored the refuting of
what is there said, or the proving that (...) Elders must needs there signify
Presbyters in the modern notion, which having not here attempted to do, there
is no kind of force in what is here dictated, nothing said but what had been
long since largely and clearly answered*

39. Yet because in the next Chapter, where this place of the Acts is viewed
again, one argument I see produced in favor of their pretensions, which they
found in an observation of mine, I shall think my self concerned to give an
account of it.

40. It is this, Page 85. If the Apostle by the Elders of the Church had meant
the Bishops of the Church of all Asia, he would have said, not the Elders of
the Church, but of the Churches. It is an observation made use of by one of
those that makes use of this answer we are now confuting, That when the
Scripture speaks of Churches in Cities it always uses the singular number,
as the Church of Jerusalem, the Church of Corinth, etc. but when it speaks of
provinces where there are many Cities, then it uses the plural number, as the
Churches of Judaea, and the Churches of Asia, Rev. 1. 11. According to this
observation, if the Apostle had meant of the Bishops of all Asia, he would have
said the Elders of the Churches, whereas he calls them Elders of the Church, v.
17. and so must mean the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, and so mere
Presbyters, not Bishops.

41. But herein is a manifest mistake; For the observation is not made as is
here suggested, of Churches in Cities and Provinces, that the former of them
are constantly to be understood where there is mention of a Church in the
singular number (without any name of particular City added to it) and that when
a Province is mentioned, it is always done by Churches in the plural number;
This is the sense on which their argument is founded. But if the Reader consult
the Dissertations p. 190. He shall find there is no such thing, it is only
this, That in the New Testament there is mention made of Churches in the
plural number, the Churches of Judaea, of Samaria, of Galilee, of Syria, of
Cilicia, of Galatia, of Asia, of Macedonia, whereas in other places there was
as frequent mention of a Church in the singular, the Church in Jerusalem, in
Antioch, in Cenchrea, in Corinth, of the Thessalonians, of Ephesus, of Smyrna,
of Pergamus, of Thyatira, of Sardis, of Laodicaea^.

42. The cause of that difference is there said to be this, that Judaea, etc,
was the name of a Province, in which there being many Cities, there were
consequently many Churches and Bishops in them, whereas one City with the
territory adjoining to it being ruled by one single Bishop, was to be called a
singular Church, and therefore that which is said to be done in every Church,
Acts 14. 13. is said to be done in every City. Tit. 1. 5. The sum of which
observation is only this, that one City, with the territory adjoining to it
never makes above one Church in the Scripture style, whereas a Province or
Country, or Nation consists of many Cities, and so of many Episcopal Sees or
Churches.

43. This was all that was said in that place, or that was useful to be said
in order to the end (to show the Original of Metropolitanes) there. And what a
wresting of a plain obvious observation is it, to conclude it from hence to be
my assertion, that when (that must be, whenever, or else the conclusion
cannot be deducible from it) the Scripture speaks of a Province, it is in the
plural number? It does sometimes do so, and that was all that was useful to
me. If it had done so but once, though twenty times it had done the contrary,
it had been sufficient (for some reasonable account there must be for the doing
it once, and what could that be, but the number of the Cities and so of
Churches in each Province or Nation) much more when there were so many examples
of it.

44. But this is not to affirm that it always does so, especially when being
left at large without any restraint, not the Church of Ephesus, or the like,
but indofini^ely the Church, it is very capable of another interpretation. For
sure when I wrote that, I had not forgotten my Creed, or in it the name Church
in the singular number, which by the adjunct of Catholic must needs be more
than the Church of one City. And having read Mat. 16. where the whole Church of
Christ is called my Church in the singular, a like phrase to that of the Church
of God, which the Bishops here are commanded to feed, and in the one Epistle to
the Ephesia^s having six examples of the word Church in the singular, each
signifying evidently the universal Church, I might very well be allowed to
discern the word Church in the singular, without any addition of Ephesus or
the like, which restraines it in all the examples there produced, to be
appliable to a far larger body, than the Church of one City, and consequently
be quit from all obligation of making the Elders of the Church, Act. 20. 17.
the Elders of the one City of Ephesus.

45. There is little doubt I suppose but the Church of the whole World,
consisting of many Churches, as the parts thereof, may be, and is in Scripture
called the Church in the singular, and so certainly may the Church of a Nation
or a Province, especially if it be united together under one Primate or
Metropolitan, as it is certain the Churches and Cities near Ephesus, nay over
all Asia were, according to the plain words of St. Chrysostom, who when
(...). Anon. ap. Phot. number. 254.
others affirm of Timothy that he was by Paul ordained Bishop of the
Metropolis of Ephe^us, expresses the same thing thus, (...), It is manifest
that Timothy had a Church committed to him, or indeed an entire Nation, that of
Asia. The like is ordinarily observable of Crete, a whole Island with an
hundred Cities in it (in each of which Titus was appointed to ordeine a Bishop
or Elder) which yet is styled in the subscription of the Epistle to Titus,
(...), the Church of Crete, and the subscription never questioned upon that
score by any, that it spoke improperly herein.

46. And consequently there can be no harshnesse in this interpretation, Paul
sent to Ephesus and called the Elders of the Church to come to him to Miletus,
and in his Oration addressed to them called them Bishop of the flock and of the
Church of God, meaning them singular praefects of several Cities of the Church
of Asia, especially of those which were nearest Ephesus, the chief Metropolis
of the whole Nation.

47. And so much in answer to that Objection, in defense of their argument from
the Elders of Ephesus, as they call them.

48. Another proof of the same is there added Page 85. Thus, The Syriack
translation reads it, he sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church
of Ephesus, so Hierome, Presbyteros Ecclesiae Ephesinae, so concilium
Aquisgranense.

49. What authority St Hierome's testimony is to carry with us in this matter,
has been elsewhere largely showed, and we may hereafter have farther occasion
to declare it, and our reasons of it. At the present it is willingly confessed
that St. Hierome on Tit. 1. does endeavor to prove that in Scripture, Bishop
and Presbyter is the same, and from him Isidore Hispalensis de officiis Eccl.
l. 2. has the same, and both have according to that prolepsis changed the
words of the Text in the Acts, and instead of what there we read, sent to
Ephesus and called the Elders of the Church, they read, sent to Ephesus and
called the Elders of the same Church, expressing themselves to mean of the
Church of Ephesus. And the council of Aken (Aquisgranense) having transcribed
nine Chapters from Isidore verbatim, consequently do the like. So that the
authority of Isidore and that council being as great as St. Hierome can make
it, from whom evidently it proceeds, may yet be allowed to yield to the far
greater authority of Polycarp's auditor Irenaeus, who has sufficiently cleared
it to the contrary.

50. As for the Syriack tanslation, it is not here recited exactly accordingly
to the truth, For in that, thus the words lie: (...) And from Miletus he sent
and called for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, where is but one mention of
Ephesus, not two, as is here suggested from the translation, that it reads, he
sent to Ephesus and called the Elders of the Church of Ephesus. The short of it
is, Ephesus being but once named in that verse, the Greek places it in the
beginning (...), from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and this being the Original
must certainly overruled all translations, and accordingly all translations but
one to read it, only the Syriack has mis-placed the word Ephesus, put it in
the later part of the period, quite against all Syntaxis, and for doing so, are
here cited, and their testimony made use of to assist Presbytery, when the
manifest truth in the Original, and by all other translations acknowledged,
would not allow them any the least advantage.

51. After they had produced these two arguments, to prove that the Church in
the City was governed in the Apostles days by a Common Council of Presbyters,
the Reader would hardly expect that which now next follows in these words.

From all this we gather, that the Asian Angels were not Di^cesan Bishops, but
congregationall Presbyters, seated each of them in one Church, not any of them
in more than one.

52. This conclusion, as the words lie, consists of two parts, 1. That each of
these Asian Angels, under the title of Congregationall Presbyters, was seated
in one Church* This, if it were meant, as the words sound, were the granting to
us all that we contend, and would hardly be reconciled with the third
observation, that the Church in the City was governed by the common council of
Presbyters; For sure each of those Presbyters is not a common council; But I
rather believe they have not so soon disclaimed their praemisses, and
therefore that it is more reasonable to interpret their words by their
principles, than their meaning by their words, and so that by congregationall
Presbyters they meant so many Colleges of such Presbyters, seated each of them,
i. e. each of those Colleges in one Church; And if that be their conclusion, I
must acknowledge it to accord perfectly with their praemisses, which being
already answered, there remains no force in the conclusion.

53. And for the second part, that not any of them was seated in more than one,
understanding it again as the words sound, it is no way contrary to our
pretensions, for we do not think that the Angel of Ephesus was seated in
Smyrna, or in any Church but that of Ephesios, and the territory thereof; and
although as that was a Metropolis, other Cities were under it, and so other
Bishops subordinate to the Bishop of Ephesus, yet was not any other City the
Seat of that Metropolitan, but only Ephesus, whereof he takes his
denomination, as although Rochester be under the Metropolis of Canterbury, yet
the Archbishop of Canterbury is not seated at Rochester, but some other Bishop
affixt to that City and Diocese. As for any other meaning of it, proportionable
to that which we were feign to affixe to the former, I confess my self
ignorant what it can tend to, For it is as if they should say, not any council
of Presbyters was seated in more Churches than one. Which is as if they should
say, no one body is in several places. And I know no Prelatist that either
directly or by consequence has affirmed it is.

54. What remains in the last Paragraph of this Chapter, is only to state the
Question betwixt us, which is all the while no more but this, whether
Tertullian and Irenaeus that call Polycarpe and Onesymus Bishop of Smyrna and
Ephesus, mean Bishops, (...) in a peculiar sense, or in a general phrase, as
all Presbyters are called Bishops. And this I acknowledge to be the only
question between us, and if Bishops do signify Bishops, I cannot doubt but
the cause is by them adjudged on our side; And why it should not, they have, to
conclude, only this offer of argument, that Bishops and Presbyters had all one
name in the Apostles days, and long after in Irenaeus's time.

55. I am truly weary of the length of this Chapter, and cannot but by consent
have some compassion on the Reader, and therefore I shall bring the matter to
this short issue. This reason of theirs is no reason, unless the word Bishop,
both in the Apostles days and long after Irenaeus's time, signified a
Presbyter in our modern notion; For if both (...) and (...) Bishop and Elder
signified Bishop in our notion, this again gives the cause to us from them.
And upon these terms I am content to leave it, if ever they find in Irenaeus
that Episcopus signifies a Presbyter in our modern notion, I will confess
them Conquerours, but this they have not offered here to do, and I have some
moderate assurance they never will.

And so much for that Chapter.
CHAP. II.
Of the equivalence of the words Bishop and Elder in the New Testament.
Section I.
Four sorts of equivalence of these words proposed.
THe next place where I find my self called forth, seventh Chapter, toward the
bottom of page 92. Only for the conclusion of this Discourse, etc. For
although in the former part of that Chapter they undertake to vindicate their
chief proofs of Scripture, Act. 20. 17, 28. Phil. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 3. 1 Pet. 5.
and to make replies to the Answers given to them, and although it is most
certain that in the Dissertations every of those places are answered, and
showed to be fully reconcilable with our praetensions for Praelacy, yet they
have not pleased to take any notice of what is there said, which if they had
done, I might, without insolence, undertake to show, that it had prevented all
appearance of force in any of their Replies; And therefore being by this means
perfectly freed from all obligation to view any Paragraph of that former part
of the Chapter, and having already said somewhat to the chief of their places,
Act. 20. and foreseeing a fit opportunity for the rest, I shall for mine own,
and the Readers ease, punctually expect and obey the summons, appear when I am
called before them, but no sooner, avert their charge, and not multiply debates
above what is necessary.

Thus then they begin, that there is a Doctor, a high Praelatist, etc. That in
a late Book of his has undertaken to make out these two great Paradoxes, 1.
That wheresoever the word Bishop is used in the New Testament, it is to be
taken in a praelaticall sense. 2. That wheresoever the word Presbyter is used
in the New Testament, it is to be understood, not of a mere Presbyter, but of a
Bishop properly so called. And whereas we say that the Scripture-Bishop is
nothing else but a Presbyter, and that there was no Bishops distinct from
Presbyters in the Apostles days, this Author on the contrary says, that the
Scripture-Presbyter is a true Bishop, and that there were no single and mere
Presbyters in the Apostles days. For our parts we do not think it necessary
to take a particular survey of all that is said in justification of these
Paradoxes, only we desire it may be considered.

There is so much of the sense of some passages in the Dissertations set down
in these words, Author here charged for these two Paradoxes. That they are so
styled by those who are contrary minded, and who have assumed a power, which,
if either of these propositions be true, they must be obliged to part with, I
cannot think strange; And if I should style their assertions as perfectly
Paradox (i.e. as contrary to all the ancients sense or Doctrine in this matter)
when they say that the Scripture-Bishop is nothing else but a Presbyter, etc.
this were certainly an introduction fit to be confronted to theirs, as being
equally argumentative. But because this verbal eloquence has little of
efficacy in it, and will never be a means of evincing the truth of our
pretensions, by affirming the contrary to be errors or Paradoxes, and because
what is affixt to me, is not entirely my sense, though it recite it in some
part, and approach near to it, I shall here begin with a brief relation of
what is affirmed by the Dissertations in this matter, and then inquire what is
here produced to invalidate it.

Dissert. Bishop] and [ Elder] in the Scripture, the first thing taken notice
of was the (...) or equivalence of these words in the opinion of many. To which
purpose Theodoret, Chrysostom, Oecumenius, and St Hierome are cited, as
favorers of this opinion, but this with some difference of the one from the
other. And for the distinct stating of the Question, four senses were set
down, wherein it was possible that this equivalence of the words might be
understood. 1. That both Bishop and Elder should signify one and the same,
viz. a Bishop in our modern notion. 2. That both should signify the same
thing, viz. a Presbyter. 3. That both of them should signify promiscuously,
sometimes a Bishop, sometimes a Presbyter, i. e. that the word (...) should
sometime signify a Bishop, sometime a Presbyter, and in like manner (...)
signify sometime a Bishop, sometime a Presbyter. 4. That the word Bishop
should always signify a singular Bishop, and the word Elder sometimes a
Bishop, and sometimes a Presbyter.

Of these four senses of the equivalence of these words, exclusive of the
other three; and although some of the ancients might be brought in favor to
one, more than to the other, yet this was eminently observable, that those that
favored that species, which is most for the Presbyterians interest to be
accepted, do yet assert the cause of the Prelatists as confidently as any. So
Theodoret, who seems most to assert the second species, does yet propugne the
(...), the superior dignity of Bishops above Presbyters, and affirms (...),
etc. Theo. in 1 Timothy 3. 1.
Those who were in his time called Bishops (the Singular praefects of Cities)
to have been styled Apostles in the Scripture-times, and that Epaphroditus was
called so by St. Paul, as being Bishop of the Philippians, and so says he,
Titus was Apostle of the Cretanes, and Timothy of the Asiaticks.

So when Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Oecumenius approve of the third species,
In Phil. 1. and Act. 20. and 1 Pet. 5. 1.
and affirms Bishops to be called Presbyters (and Deacons also) and on the
contrary Presbyters to be called Bishops, yet of each of them it is notorious,
that they asserted the superiority of Bishops over Presbyters, not only in
their own, but in the Apostles time. And to that purpose the concession and
testimony of Peter Moulin was produced, Epist. 1. ad Epise. Winton
that the most famous Bishops of the ancient Church, Chrysostom, etc. did not
think it any diminution to their dignity that the words Bishop and Elder were
at first conceived to be used in the same sense, which observation being
premised, and thereby the Prelatists pretensions competently secured, which
soever of those senses should be accepted, so long as they that were authors of
the assertions be permitted to give their own interpretation of them; It was
then, I thought, perfectly seasonable and safe to discuss the question freely,
and to set down what to me appeared most probable, without prejudice to any
other dissenter, and upon those terms, and not otherwise, these two
propositions were offered to farther consideration of learned men.

1. That the word (...) in Scripture constantly signify a singular Bishop.

2. That the word (...) either constantly signifies a Bishop also, or else
commonly a Bishop, and sometime, but rarely, a Presbyter.

These are somewhat different from the two paradoxes affixt to me, paradoxes.
And begin first with the former of them, concerning the word (...) Bishop. And
this is already done, 1. By considering the original notation, and use in the
Old Testament, of the word (...), then by going over every place in the New
Testament, where the word Bishop is used.

Section II.
Of the word (...).
THe word (...) naturally signifying an overseer, and used by Aristides for
(...) the Governor, Justinian calls (...), the Ruler of Provinces and
Metropoles, and by Cicero ad Articum rendered speculator and custos, one that
looks to, and guards a Province (and so fitly styled Angel, who is generally
deemed to have those two Offices, and is in the Scripture called an eye, and
vulgarly a guardian) does in the Greek of the Old Testament sometime render
the Hebrew (...), which is common to God, Lord, Angel, and generally denotes
Dominion; sometimes (...) a Prefect or Commissary, entrusted with the
administration of some affair, whether in army, as a Commander, Numb. 31. 14.
in Mechanical working, as a Master-workeman, 2 Chronicles. 34. 12. 17. in a City, a
Ruler or Prince, Nehem. 11. 9. peculiarly the chief of the Priests v. 10 in
the Ministry of the Temple as Eleazar (the Ruler of the Levites) Number. 4. 16.
and lastly in the House of the Lord, the Ruler set over that, 2 Kin. 11. 18.
And the result of all this is, that it generally signifies an office of charge
and dignity and power and superiority over others, all one with (...), which
are all used to render the same word that (...) does, and so is most fitly
qualified to signify the like, viz. a praefecture in the Christian Church
under the New Testament.

Accordingly there we find it applied, Christ himself, the Bishop of our
souls, who though he ministered to his Disciples, yet owned the title of Lord
and Master, as that which from them belonged to him, Joh. 13. 13. Secondly, to
the Apostles Act. 1. 20. And for all other places where it is used, it is
evidently capable of a sense very agreeable to these premises, being never
once used in the New Testament, but where it will be very commodious to render
it Bishop in our modern notion of the word for a singular prefect in each
Church, not a colleague in a Presbytery.

This is at large showed by a survey of every of those places; Act. 20. 28.
where the Apostle takes leave, and exhorts the Bishops set over the flock by
the Holy Ghost: They are there bid to feed the Church of God, i.e. the
Christians of the several Cities of Asia, or near about Ephesus, as was in the
last Chapter evidenced out of Irenaeus, auditor to Polycarpe made Bishop of
Smyrna by St. John, and therefore may well be resolved to be the singular
Bishops of those Cities, and not only of the one City of Ephesus, as was
largely showed in the last Chapter.

The second place is that of Phil. Saints in Christ Jesus which are at
Philippi, is added, with the Bishops and Deacons; where although some of the
Greek Commentators, which at the same time assert Episcopacy, do for that very
reason, because there could not be many Bishops in one City, understand that
place of Presbyters in our modern notion, and add that the words (...),
Theophyl. in Phil. 1. 1.
Bishop and Presbyter, yea and Deacon too, were not as yet distinct, but
promiscuously used, the one for the other; here the word Bishops for
Presbyters, as elsewhere the Presbytery is used for Bishops, 1 Timothy 4. 4.
adding this reason (...).
, because Presbyters ordained not a Bishop; And although many expedients were
ready at hand to keep the Text from being useful to the Presbyterians, in
case it were granted that by Bishops the Presbyters were meant, as that
Epaphroditus their present Bishop (as is acknowledged by Theodoret, Chrysostom
and Theophylact, who are most favorable to that interpretation) was with St.
Paul at the writing that Epistle, c. 4. 18. yet I have the authority of
Epiphanius to affirm, that (...) there signifies peculiarly Bishops, and I
doubt not but it may do so, referring it to all the Bishops of the several
Cities belonging to that Metropolis.

For such was Philippi, first fruits of all Macedonia, first converted to the
Faith, 2 Act. 16. 9. and (...), a prime City of that Province of Macedon, v.
12. of it self, before it is conversion, and so says Epist. 247.
Photius distinctly, (...), and accordingly Polycarps Epistle to them is
inscribed (...) to the whole province that belongs to Philippi; In which there
being diverse Cities, and Bishops in them, the Epistle to St. Paul is to be
conceived written to them all, (as the Epistle to the Corinthians appears to
have been written to the Saints of all Achaia) and being inscribed to Philippi,
was to be communicated to those others, as the Epistle to the Colossians was to
be communicated to the Laodicaeans, Col. 4. 16. and that which the Laodicaeans
had received (whether, as Tertullian seems to believe, that to the Ephesians,
or any other) in like manner to be communicated to the Colossians, and the
Epistle of the Church of Jerusalem to the Church of Antioch did belong and was
communicated to all the Churches of Syria and Cilicia. Act. 16. 4.

And then all that the immediate subjoyning of the Deacons in that place,
Presbyterians any profit) that as (...). l. 1. Contr. Aer.
Epiphanius says, (...), the Churches being but newly planted, there were not
Presbyters as yet constituted among them, only a Bishop with one Deacon or
more in each City, in like manner as it was at Jerusalem Act. 6. where after
James's assumption to the Bishopric, which the Ecclesiastical writers tell us
of, the seven Deacons are soon instituted, no Presbyters being created in the
middle, betwixt the Bishop and them, that either Scripture or ancient Record
inform us of.

And Clem. Romans Ep. ad Corinth.
Clemens, Paul's fellow Labourer, mentions it as the general practice, that the
Apostles preaching through Regions and Cities constituted their first fruits
into Bishops and Deacons of those which should come in to the faith.

Thus far is this from being a forced interpretation being perfectly regular,
best and antientest Records of them; And if in any circumstance we should be
liable to mistake, yet for the maine, the Reader will hardly think it
possible, when he remembers this very Church of the Philippians to be one of
those expressly named by Tertullian, among whom in his time, Apostolorum
Cathedrae suis adhuc locis praesidebantur, The Chaires of the Apostles were yet
extant praesiding in their due places, which concludes some Bishop or singular
prefect to have succeeded the Apostles in this Church (as in those other,
Thessalonica, etc.) and by Theodoret, whose authority is most used against us
in this matter, to prove that the Bishops were Presbyters here, Epaphroditus is
expressly affirmed to be that Bishop.

The next place is that of 1 Timothy If any man desire the Office of a Bishop he
coveteth a good work: A Bishop therefore must be blameless -- where there is
no reason of doubting, but the Bishop is the singular prefect or Governor of
the Church; For the only appearance of the contrary being again (as in that
to the Philippians) the immediate subjoyning of Deacons and their
qualifications, v. 8. that presently vanishes, if again we remember the
observation of Epiphanius, which he had out of the most ancient Records, and
was found exactly conformable to the express words of Clemens Romanus, the
contemporary of the Apostles, that at the beginning of the Church (...), before
the government was complete in all the Offices, the Apostles and Apostolical
persons placed in the Church by them, such as Timothy to whom here he gives the
directions, created no more but a Bishop and Deacon (one or more) in each
Church, the present state of things neither requiring nor being well capable of
any more, in respect of the paucity of the Christians to be governed or
instructed, and of those which were fit to be made Presbyters.

And although Theodoret again (with some few others) interpret the place of
Presbyters, Bishops, adding in the same place, that the Bishops especially
should observe these Laws (...), as those which had atteined to a greater
honor.

Meanewhile S. Chrysostom (...).
Bishops, as I have done, and in that notion of Bishops which severs them from
Presbyters, such as govern in each City, and adds the qualifications to be
such, as being spoken of Bishops, (...), do agree to Presbyters also. And
accordingly Theophylact interprets it of the (...) and (...), the President and
Ruler, without any mention of Presbyters.

There remains but one place, Tit. 1. 7. For a Bishop must be blameless, as
the steward of God (answerable to that notion of the word Bishop in the Old
Testament for the Ruler set over the House of the Lord, 2 Kin. 11. 18. i. e.
the Steward, to whom the Keys of the House were committed, Isa. 22. 22.) That
this is the singular Bishop in every City, signified before v. 5. by the
Elders, which Titus was left in Crete to constitute, is the joint affirmation
of St. Chrysostom, Theophylact and Oecumenius on those words of v. 5. Elders
in every City, (...), etc. By Elders he there means Bishops, as in the Epistle
to Timothy, appointing them to be constituted in every ^ity, for he would not
have the whole Island administered by one, but that every ^ity should have it is
proper Pastor (or Bishop) that so the labor might be the lighter, and the care
more exact. In Crete there were certainly many Cities, Eusebius mentions an
hundred, of all which, L. 3. c. 4.
says he, Titus was made Bishop by St. Paul, that under him, says Arg. Ep. ad
Tit. In tit. 1 Hom 1.
Theodoret, he might ordeine Bishops: to which (...), Arg. Ep.
Chrysostom and Theophylact add (...), that he might have power to judge or
censure those Bishops, as a Metropolitan and Prima^e over them.

There is now no other place wherein the word Bishop is used, proposition is
competently rescued from meriting the censure of Paradox, whether that signify
novell or strange; this being so conformable both to the nature and use of the
word, to the tradition of the ancient Church, and the importance of each
Scripture, where it is used, that Bishop should signify (...), the singular
Pastor or Governor in each City or Church.

Section III.
Of the word (...) Elder.
NOw to the second proposition, positivenesse, but is set down in a greater
latitude of defining, that the word (...) either constantly signifies a Bishop
also, or else commonly a Bishop, though sometimes, but most rarely a Presbyter.
Of this I shall now need to praemise but these few things.

First, Elder in the Old Testament, does denote most properly, and signify
most constantly (as in all Languages the word is found vulgarly to do) a Ruler
or Governor. This is so largely deduced and demonstrated in the Annotation on
Act. 11. 30. that I shall not endeavor farther to manifest it.

Secondly, New Testament the word is necessarily to be understood of Bishops,
so in every other place it is very fitly capable of that interpretation; This
is again so particularly evidenced to the Latin Reader, Diss. 4. c. 19, 20,
21, 22. and to the English Reader Annot. on Act. 11. b. and 14. a. that I
cannot deem it reasonable to tire my self farther with transcribing it.

Thirdly, Presbyters in our modern sense, as that of Jam 5. 14. or the like, I
shall only desire, that he will bring any convincing proof or authentic
Testimony, that in that or those places it so signifies, and I shall most
willingly grant it to him, and be so far from thinking it, in the least
degree, disadvantagious to our pretensions, that I shall not doubt to evidence
it a demonstrative argument to confirm them, but shall not need to insist on
that, till such proof be offered.

Fourthly, assertion was not truly cited p. 92. in these words, that
wheresoever the word Presbyter is used in the New Testament, it is to be
understood not of a mere Presbyter, but of a Bishop properly so called;
Certainly neither my words nor sense extended to the wheresoever -- and, it is
to be -- being only in a disjunctive form, either constantly so, or sometimes
but rarely otherwise.

Fifthly, Paradox were as high and as positive, as it is represented, yet I
conceive not the reason why they that have with great confidence affirmed that
both Bishops and Elders do always signify in Scripture their Presbyters and no
more, (for if either of those words do but once signify a Bishop, their Jus
Divinum, and whole cause falls to the ground irrecoverably) should be so much
at leisure from excusing themselves, to accuse that for a Paradox in others,
which is not imaginable to be more an extreme on one side, then theirs is on
the other*

Lastly, do not think it necessary to take a particular survey of all that is
said in justification of these (which they thus please to style) Paradoxes,
which is in effect, as if they should profess to deny and declaime against the
conclusion, without attempting to satisfy any reason, by which it is inferred;
It might be as just in me to tender them answers of the same making, and so to
supersede any farther dispute in this matter.

But I shall not imitate their method, due to them, in giving the Reader a
brief view of the grounds of my Assertions, which were too long for them to
take notice of, I shall now trace their steps, and follow them which way soever
they lead.

Section IV.
Of Reverence to Antiquity, and the Interpretations of the Ancients. Of
Praelatists disagreement among themselves.
FIrst then, say they, we desire it may be considered, that these assertions
are contrary to antiquity, which yet notwithstanding our Brethren do so highly
magnify and boast of it in this controversy, and for receding from which, as
they say we do, they do most deeply charge us.

That these Assertions, Assertions, are so distant from being contrary to
antiquity, that they are founded in the Records of the most ancient reverend
authority, has appeared most plainly by what has now been said, and had
before been laid, as the ground of the interpretations, in the fourth Dissert.
if they, which gathered the conclusion from thence, would have vouchsafed to
take notice of the praemisses.

The utmost that can be with truth pretended, Texts, which we have insisted on
here, and so likewise some of those where (...) Elders are mentioned, are not
by all the ancients interpreted just in that manner, as I think they may
safely and most probably be interpreted, and so as they will best accord with
the opinions which those very ancients appeared to have concerning the
Original of Episcopacy.

In this I hope I have not offended against the ancient Church, accusers, than
those I have, so should I wait for no other judge but my self, and
immediately submit to any penance for it.

But they which truly reverence antiquity, Reverence is terminated, not in
adhering to every interpretation of each Text of Scripture given by any ancient
Commentator or Interpreter, for truly that is absolutely impossible, several
of them being known in interpreting of Texts very frequently to differ one from
the other; This can be no news to any man, who has but lightly viewed them,
or but occasionally consulted Tirinus, or such like later Commentators, who
have collected the Interpretations of the Ancients, and marshalled their names,
and told us how many have been for one, how many for another sense of such a
Text.

And in affairs of this nature, Doctrines, nor testified Traditions, but only
expressed their single opinions, or conjectures of an Apostles meaning in words
capable of more senses than one, I know no Praelatist that ever denied later
Writers liberty to recede from one, and adhere to some other of the ancients,
or if more convincing reasons appeared for any fresh interpretation, never
given before, the like liberty has been allowed; And indeed if it were not so,
our studying of the Originalls, inquiry into the nature of words and phrases,
observation of customs among the ancients, and all wherein learned men differ
from unlearned, consideration of the context and argument, (...) as well as
(...) of each difficult place, and all the other skills and advantages of a
good Interpreter would all be unusefull first, and then dangerous, would tempt
one oit to recede from some former Writers, to forsake the road and method (so
ordinary) of transcribing other men's labors, and by inciting him to say any
thing which had not often been said before, (which if it have, why does he again
trouble himself and others to repeat it) would infallibly involve him under the
burden and guilt that is here laid on me, of being contrary to Antiquity.

But I am unwilling to discourage them from any sort or degree of reverence to
antiquity, Reverence, or the word Antiquity, I will forgo all my novell
interpretations, and say no one word which the Ancients have not distinctly
said before me, and refer the whole fate of the cause to this judicature.

Their second consideration is, that they are contrary to all that have ever
written in defense of Episcopacy, from whence they conclude that till their
brethren ( i. e. we Praelatists) agree among themselves, they need not spend
time to answer the private Opinions of one Doctor.

To this I answer, defense of a Christian cause, asserted constantly by the
Church, to choose his arguments (as combatants do their weapons) such as he
thinks are fittest for his managery, and will most probably (in his opinion)
convince the gainsayers; No obligation lying upon him by the Laws of these
agones, to use those arguments (and no other, nor otherwise improved) which all
other writers of that side have done before him; For if this were the manner of
the (...) the legail combat, to what end should any second writing on the same
subject ever appear to the World? That which had been formerly said, needed
not to be transcribed and said again, but either the book might be Reprinted
or translated into a language more intelligible (as I have here been fame often
to do) And though I might truly say, that for those more minute considerations
or conjectures, wherein this Doctor differs from some others, who have written
before him (as to the manner of interpreting some few Texts) he has the
suffrages of many the learned men of this Church at this day (and as far as
he knows, of all that embrace the same cause with him) yet I do not think it
necessary to prove my agreement with others of my brethren by this only
medium; It being certain that they who believe the same conclusion upon
several mediums or ways of inferring it, are in that, and may be in all other
conclusions at perfect accord and unity among themselves.

All that I can conclude from this and the former consideration (the double
charge laid on me of contrariety to antiquity, asserters of Episcopacy) is
only this, that the authors of them are ill pleased, that I use any other
arguments, or answers but what they were willing to assign me: otherwise if
there had been less, not more truth, or evidence in my way of defending the
cause, they would have had the greater advantage against me, and I doubt not,
have been, in the space of three years, at leisure to have observed it.

Section V.
Inconveniences objected, and answered. Of more Bishops in one City, No
Presbyters in the Apostles days. The no Divine right of the Order of
Presbyters.
BUt they are, third place, pleased to object some inconveniences which the
defending of these paradoxes must necessarily bring upon me; And to these I
shall more diligently attend.

First, say they, he that will defend these Paradoxes must of necessity be
forced to grant that there were more Bishops than one in a City in the Apostles
days, which is to betray the cause of Episcopacy, and to bring down a Bishop
to the rank of a Presbyter.

To this I reply by absolute denying of this consequence (for supposing the
Scripture-Bishop to be always a Bishop, Scripture Elder also, how can it
follow from thence that there are more such Bishops in any one City?) It Is most
evident that this is no way inferred upon either, or both of my assertions, nor
is here one word added to prove it is, to which I might accommodate any answer.
It Is on the contrary most manifest, that whenever I find mention of Bishops or
Elders in the plural, as Act. 20. Phil. 1. etc. I interpret them of the
Bishops of Asia, and the Bishops of Macedonia, Bishops of Judaea, etc. (and
render my reasons of doing so) and consequently affirm them to be the Bishops
of diverse (sure that is not of one) Cities.

The second inconvenience is, Bishops over Presbyters in the Apostles days, for
if there were no Presbyters, there could be no Bishops over Presbyters.

Here is an evident mistake, Presbyters in the Apostles days, but only that
in the Apostles writings the word [ Bishops] always signifies Bishops, and the
word [ Elders] either never, or but rarely, Presbyters; Now besides that it is
possible for those to be in the time of the Apostles writing, which yet for
want of occasion are not mentioned in those writings (and I that love not
negative arguments a testimonio, should never have thought fit to conclude
there were no Presbyters within the time wherein the several Books of
Scripture were written, upon that one argument, because I could not find them
mentioned there) besides this, I say, It Is certain that the Apostles times are
somewhat a larger period than the time of the Apostles writings, and therefore
that what is spoken only of the later, was not meant to be extended to the
former.

For 1. Apostles continued alive some time after writing their Epistles, and
secondly, some of the Apostles survived others; John, of whom Christ's will was
intimated, that he should tarry, and not die till after the coming of Christ,
and that Kingdom of his, commenced in the destruction of the Jews, did
accordingly live till Trajanes time, and by that time I think it probable that
the number of believers daily increasing, there were, as the wants of the
Church required, Presbyters ordained in many Churches: And accordingly in the
Dissert. p. 229. when I speak of this matter, I expressly except S. John, and p.
211. I make use of a testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus, on purpose to conclude
that this Apostle ordein'd Presbyters in Asia, after his return from the
Island, to which he was banished, (...), etc. and to the same matter I D'ssert
4. c. 4. Sect. 4, 5.
elsewhere apply that of Ephiphanius, out of the profoundest, i.e. antientest
Records, that as Moses and Aaron took to them first the Princes of the people,
and at length the Sanhedrim of the seventy Elders, so the Apostles first
constituted Bishops, and in process of time Presbyters also, when occasion
required, as the Bishops assistants, and Council, and that upon account of
this Analogy with the Sanhedrim, they were styled (...) Elders

And Ignatius making mention of Presbyters, middle degree in the Church betwixt
Bishops and Deacons in his, i. e. in Trajan's time, and that in his Epistles to
several of those Asian Churches, Smyrna, Ephesus, Magnesia, Philadelphia,
Trallis, I think the argument of great validity to conclude, that in that
Province that Apostle had in his life time instituted this middle order. And
therefore I that had so carefully prevented, was not to be charged with this
crime of affirming there were no Presbyters, or Bishops over Presbyters (which
certainly there were, if there were Presbyters under them) in the Apostles
days.

And third inconvenience they add, by consequence I must affirm that Ordo
Presbyteratus is not Jure Divino.

But that is no more consequent to my assertion, assertion, that there were no
Presbyters in the Apostles days, and therefore I that am guiltless of the
assertion, cannot be charged with the consequents of it; John I know was an
Apostle, and John, I believe, ordained Presbyters, and thence I doubt not to
conclude the Apostolical institution, i.e. in effect, the Divine right of the
order of Presbyters, though not of the government of the Church by Presbytery;
and so I am still clear from the guilt of that crime which the worst of
Papists would abhominate, which they are resolved I must have layen under, if I
had questioned the Divine Right of Presbyters, though they can more than
question the Divine Right of Bishops, remorse or compunction, or dread any
charge or ^entence for it.

Sect. VI.
A first confession objected and vindicated. Of the Ephesine Presbyters being
all the Praelates of Asia, Elders, Aldermanni.
AFter these inconveniences briefly touched (and almost as briefly by me
averted) they proceed to take notice in the fourth place, confessions of mine,
which the justification of my opinion have forced from me. By this method
thinking (as at length they say) to render Episcopacy, that is thus maintained,
or else my way of maintaining it, odious and contemptible to all sober, and
godly, and moderate Christians, i.e. to all those, who for the attaining of
those titles, good opinion, and good words from them, shall be invited to
contemn, or hate those, whom they are yet pleased to call their brethren. And
this I confess is the most compendious way of confuting that which would not
otherwise be confuted.

What those confessions of mine are, assertions so odious, I must next take a
view, and consider with what justice this is said by them.

The first is, that the Ephesine. Presbyters, whom Paul sent for to Miletus,
were all the Praelates of Asia.

To say that the Ephesine Presbyters, Praelates of Asia, were, I confess, a
ridiculous, and so, if they please, a contemptible confession, but I have yet
been under no such torture from their arguments, as should constrain such
confession from me. What I say is sufficiently known to be my free opinion,
(and no forced confession, such as the necessity of a desperate enterprise
might extort from me) that the (...), Elders of the Church, who by summons sent
to Ephesus, the chief Metropolis of all Asia (and by that convenient way
communicated to other Cities) were assembled to Paul at Miletus, Act. 20. 17.
were, as Irenaeus assures me, the Bishops of the other Cities in those parts,
and not only of the one City of Ephesus.

What harshnesse there can be in this assertion, odious at the first hearing, I
confess I divine not, That those Cities had Bishops, as well as Ephesus,
cannot be strange, or that Paul desired to speak with them before his final
parting. And that the Bishops may be called Elders, will be as little strange,
if it be but remembered, what is at large showed in the Dissertations, that the
word Elder had in the Old Testament denoted dignity and Praefecture in single
persons, as when Eleezer Abraham's Oeconomus, who was set over his servants, is
styled (...), the Elder of his house, and Ruler of all that was his (by Elder
and Ruler signifying the same thing) and so the Elders (...), of the Moabites,
Number. 22. 7. are the Princes of Moab, v. 8. and the Elders of Israel are the
heads, or Praefects of the principal Families of Israel, Exodus 6. 14. the
Rulers of the people c. 16. 22. the Elders of the Tribes, Deuteronomy. 31. 28. and all
this, and much more, before they were called into a Council, or Senate, to
assist Moses, as appears Number 11. 16.

And proportionable to this has been the use of the word among all Nations,
the Elder always has the Rule, and all obey him, says L. 2.
Diodorus Siculus, and so Seniors] in all languages is a title of honor and
dignity.

And peculiarly among us, Aethelstane the half King (as he was called) of the
East Angles, was saluted by the title of Vid. Autho^ lit. Rames. Sect. 4. and
33. and S. H^n. Spelma^s Glessary. p. 28. 29.
Aldermannus, i.e. (...), Elder of all England, and so Aethelwod and Aelwin, so
in King Aelfred's Laws c. 34. there is mention Regis Aldermanni and Presbyteri
Regis; And accordingly Mat. 20. 25. those words of the Princes of the Nations
exercising dominion over them, are by the Saxons interpreted Ealdo^men
wealdaqthat; hisa theodo, Elders have dominion over their Nations, and Luke 9.
22. the Elders and chief of the Priosts are by them rendered Ealdrum and
Ealdormaannum. All taking the word Elder for a title of Dignity and praefecture
(and from that notion of it the Pre^bytorians are not observed to decline.)

And then finally that the addition of (...) the Church, though in the
singular, cannot make it unfit for these Elders to denote the Bish^ps of Asia,
or near Ephesus under that Metroplis, has been already accounted for at
large. And so still I hope they, and all godly and moderate brethren need
neither hate, nor contemn Episcopacy, nor the defenders of it, upon pretense
of this (so far from incommodious or inconvenient) confession.

Section VII.
A second confession of the Bishops, Phil. 1. 1. being Bishops of that whole
Province, Philippi a Metropolis, and a Colony.
LIke unto this first, That the Bishops of Philippi, whom S. Paul salutes Chapter
1. were not the Bishops of that City only, but of the whole Province, whereas
Theophylact says that Philippi was (...), a little City subject to the
Metropolis of Thessalonica.

That the word (...) Bishops, Bishops of the Cities of Macedonia, which were
under this (...), chief City, or Metropolis, as S. Luke calls it, Acts 16. 12.
is already evidenced to be no strange or violent (I hope as little odious)
confession. I need not farther repeat, or enlarge on that, but bear in good
part, whatsoever fate is decreed by them to attend that Confession.

As for the Objection which is here subjoyned, Dissert. 4. c. 10. Sect. 12.
they might, if they had been so pleased, have taken the antidote with the
poison, observed, and tendered to the Reader the answer, which in the five
following Sections is solemnly rendered to it, and confuted that answer, if
they had discernd any infirm part in it.

First then, answer is, that that description of Philippi in the argument
prefixed to Theophylact's notes on that Epistle, was taken out of an ancient
Geographer, and belonged to that City, as it was built by Philip, having been
formerly called (...), then (...): not to the later times, under the Roman
Empire, and that it is no new, or strange thing, that under the Romans those
Cities should become Metropoles, which formerly had not been such, to which
agrees that of the Council of Chalcedon, Can. 12. which mentions, (...) Cities
honored by the imperial Letters with the name and dignity of Metropoles.

And indeed the saying of Geogr. l. 13.
Strabo is of evident truth, Provinces were often confounded (...), by cause of
the Romans distributing them not according to the distributions of Regions or
Nations (such as the Geographers anciently had made use of) but after another
manner, according to the Cities, in which they kept their Courts or Assizes, as
before was said of the Cities of Asia.

Accordingly when S. Paul first comes to Philippi, Luke mentions it under the
title of the prime City of the Province of Macedonia, and is not that more to
be heeded, speaking so expressly of that City at that time, then that
Geographers description, which no way discovers to what time it belongs, and
cannot belong to this time of the planting the faith at Philippi, if S. Luke
may be believed?

Secondly, Luke says of it at that time, that it was (...) a colony of, i.e. a
City replenished by the Inhabitation of the Romans; And of those Colonies in
chief Cities, there is no question but they were especially chosen to be
places of their Assizes, whither the Neighboring Cities resorted for Justice,
and so were Metropoles in the civil accounts.

Thirdly, Philippi it is as evident, that it was the first converted of all
Macedonia, and that from thence he went after to Thessalonica; And so the right
of Primogeniture, which ordinarily gave claim to the Metropoliticall dignity
in the Ecclesiastical account (as in the case of Antioch and Jerusalem
appears) belonging to Philippi, over and above the forementioned praecedence
thereof in civil account, there is no reason to doubt, but this was a
Metropoliticall Church, an Elder Sister to Thessalonica, and each a Mother to
the Churches of lesser Cities of Macedonia that belonged to them.

According to which it is, Polycarpe in his Epistle, mentions St. Paul's
Epistles in the plural, written to these Philippians, which learned men
interpret of the Epistles to the Thessalonians, and it cannot commodiously be
understood any other way.

Sect. VIII.
A third Confession, of Timothies being an Archbishop. Of the qualifications, 1 Timothy 3 2. belonging to Bishops. Of the Bishops being worthy of double honor,
though he never preach. Of the word, and Doctrine. Of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.
Of Rebuking and receiving accusation against an Elder.
THe third Confession is, that Timothy was Archbishop of Ephesus, that when
Paul sets down the qualifications of Bishops, though he mention none but such
as are common to a Presbyter with a Bishop, yet he is to be understood to
speak of Bishops in a Praelaticall sense, and not at all of Presbyters; And
when he says the Elders that Rule well are worthy of double honor --, this
is, says this Author, the Bishops that Rule well -- thereby holding out this
great error, that a Bishop that Rules well is worthy of double honor, though
he never preaches; And when St. Paul bids Timothy not neglect the gift that
was given him by the laying on the hands of the Presbytery, that is, says he,
of Episcopacy; And when the Apostle charge him not to rebuke an Elder, -- and
not to receive an accusation against an Elder, -- this is to be understood of
Bishops, says he, and not of mere Presbyters.

To this accumulative crime affirmed to be confessed by me in so many
particulars, answer by avowing my Confession thus far, 1. that I take Timothy
to have been Bishop of Ephesus, and conclude it from 1 Timothy 1. 3. then that
Ephesus was a prime Metropolis of Asia, from the testimonies of Pliny and
Vlpian, and generally the Ancient Church-writers: And from those two put
together, I hope I may gain liberty to confess, that Timothy was Archbishop
of Ephesus.

Secondly, Paul 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2. speaking of Episcopacy, as of a good work or
office, and the qualifications required in the person to be promoted to it
speaks of a Bishop in the Praelaticall sense; so I am sure Chrysostom does
understand him, and the testimony was lately cited out of him, and Theodoret
that understands it otherwise, yet applies it first to Bishops, and says on
that occasion, that their degree in the Church is superior to that of
Presbyters. And if no higher qualifications be required of a Bishop, than are
fit to be required of a Presbyter (which yet I no where say, and the argument
taken from the no-other qualifications here specified, than only for the
Bishop and the Deacon, are of no force to induce it, both because it is a
negative argument, and there is another reason for the omitting Presbyters,
because in this infancy of the Church there was not any such need of them, the
Bishop with his Deacon, one or more, were sufficient in every City, and besides
the qualifications assigned the Deacon, may be common to him with the
Presbyter, as well as those assigned the Bishop) yet that is no prejudice to
the superiority of the office, or to my interpreting that Text of the Bishop;
For sure I may as conveniently say, that the Bishop is named without the
Presbyter, at a time when there were Bishops, but as yet no Presbyters in the
Church, and that when there were Presbyters instituted, their qualifications
were to be regulated by the rules given of Bishops, as it can be imagined to be
fitly said by them, that the place is meant of Presbyters (when the Apostle
names Bishops expressly, and when by many other evidences we know, that then
there were Bishops, but by no footsteps can discern that then there were
Presbyters) upon no other reason, but that the qualifications are common to
Presbyters.

Thirdly, For the mention of the Elders that rule well, 1 Timothy 5. commedicuoly
be interpreted of the Bishops through all his Province, for as there the style
is (...), praeside or rule, so it is certain, that in the use of the Church
this was the title of the Bishops, as has formerly been showed out of Justin
Martyr and others, and the (...) double honor (...) the privilege of
Primogeniture, being assigned as his portion, is an evidence thereof.

And the inconvenience that is here urged against that interpretation, Bishop
is worthy of double honor, though he never preaches, then from their
interpreting it of the Presbyter, it will as much follow to be their o^inion,
that the Presbyter is worthy of double honor though he never preach.

But then secondly the truth is, conclusions follow either the one or the other
interpration, for the first phrase of laboring in the word, and the other of
laboring in the doctrine (which by these are confounded, and so expressed
undistinctly by preaching) denote two several things; the former the planting
of the faith where it is not yet received, which is constantly expressed by
(...), and (...), preaching the Gospel, and the word; the latter signifies
taking pains in a Church already gathered, for the confirming and farther
instructing of believers. And then as he that does one of these, may yet
possibly not do both, occasion not requiring, and so not be so eminently
worthy of the double honor, as he that actually does both; so certainly, he
that rules well in any Church, and beside the care belonging to rule, undergoes
that other double hard travel (so (...) signifies) of preaching the faith to
Infidels, and confirming, and instructing believers, does very highly deserve
the double honor and alimonie; And this as it is the exact meaning of that
Text, so it utterly supersedes all force of this objection or exception against
our understanding it of the Presidents or Bishops in the Praelaticall sense.

Fourthly, Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. by which they say, I understand
Episcopacy, I answer, that I interpret it of some combination either of
Apostles or Apostolical persons and Bishops, (...) in Theodoret's phrase, such
as were vouchsafed the Apostolical grace, i. e. of Paul assuredly, 1 Timothy 2.
6. and perhaps of Barnabas, perhaps of some other Apostolical person with him,
in like manner as both Peter and John style themselves (...) Elders, and Ep. ed
Philad.
Ignatius styles the Apostles (...) the Presbytery or Eldership of the Church,
and as of Ignatius himself S. Chrysostom affirms, (...), that the hands of
more Apostles than one were laid on him, in his ordination to the Bishopric of
Antioch.

To which matter the Scholion of Chrysostom is express, he speaks not here
of Presbyters but Bishops, adding the reason, because Presbyters did not
ordain Bishops, and so Theophylact and Oecumenius.

not-rebuking and receiving an accusation against an Elder, though in those
places it were clearly for my interest to interpret (...) a Presbyter in our
modern sense, for then as Cont. Ha. l. 3. t. 1.
Epiphanius says, there is an evidence of proof that the Bishop has power
over the Presbyter ((...)) Timothy over the Elder, says he, but never the
Elder over Timothy: Yet I confess my self inclined by other considerations to
foregoe that advantageous sense of the place.

Because Timothy being placed in the prime Metropolis had power over the
Bishops of lesser Cities, ^udging as well as of ordeining Bishops, which is
Dissert. 4. ^. 19. Sect. 11, 12.
elsewhere evidenced to be the opinion of S. Chrysostom, in order to the
understanding of this place. And so still the crime is not very great or
reproachful, which I am said to have confessed, it amounts no higher than the
former confession had done, that Timothy was Archbishop of Ephesus; and yet
this you see without any necessity to extort it from thee, save that of
speaking freely what I conceived most probable; For otherwise nothing could be
more for the advantage of the maine cause I defen^, than that (...) Elders
should signify Presbyters in these two places.

Sect. IX.
A fourth confession of Titus being Archbishop of Creet.
THeir fourth charge is, that I am forced to confess that Titus was Archbishop
of Creet, and that he received no commission from S. Paul to ordain single
Elders, but only for ordeining Bishops in every City. It seems, say they, this
Author slights the Postscript, where Titus is called the first Bishop of Creet,
and slights all those ancient Fathers that are cited by his own party, to
prove that he was Bishop of Creet: But he must be an Archbishop, and so must
Timothy also, or else these assertions of his will fall to the ground. Now that
they were neither Bishops nor Archbishops has been sufficiently proved (as
we conceive) in the former discourse.

That Titus was Archbishop of Creet, i. e. how he that was fastened in (and, as
Lib. 3. c. 4.
Eusebius says, had (...) the Episcopacy of) a whole Island, which had an
hundred Cities in it, and was there placed, that he might ordeine Bishops under
him in each of those Cities, Tit. 1. 5. 7. and, as the ancients add, exercise
jurisdiction over them, should be other than an Archbishop.

That this was his condition, inconveniences that it is pressed with, they will
prove very supportable. For I shall not at all be obliged thereby to slight
either Postscript or Fathers, but give the disputers example to pay them all
reverence, being very well able to discern the Bishop through the Archbishop,
and having never imagined that the styling Michael an Archangel was denying him
to be an Angel. He certainly was an Angel, and that of an higher degree, or
else could never have been justly called an Archangell; and it is just so with
Titus, if I had not thought him a Bishop, I could never have affirmed him an
Archbishop, and they that in common speech give him the title of Bishop, do no
way intimate their thoughts to be contrary to mine, for every Archbishop is
certainly a Bishop, though every Bishop be not an Archbishop.

And therefore if all the danger of my assertions falling to the ground be
consequent to this of Titus or Timothies proving to be no Archbishop, I shall
deem them competently safe, for each of them were unavoidably such, Timothy
Archbishop of Ephesus, the prime Metropolis of all Asia, and Titus of the whole
Island of Creet, and accordingly to those two, peculiarly as such, directions
are given for the ordeining Bishops and Deacons in every City.

And the proofs which were offered to the contrary, replies shall not be so
impertinent, as to appear without their antagonists. Only because it is here
inserted as part of my inconvenient confession, that Titus received no
Commission from Saint Paul to ordain single Elders (which I believe I no where
say, any otherwise than that the Commission, cap. 1. 5. was to create Bishops
in every City) I shall freely tell them my opinion of that, viz. that a greater
power may very fitly be said to comprehend under it the lesser of the same
kind, and consequently that both Timothy and he which had Commissions to
ordain Bishops in every City, had also by the same commission power to ordain
single Presbyters, where those were useful to be ordained, as is evident by
the qualification of Deacons and Widows after-mentioned in one certainly, and,
as I conceive, in both Epistles, for that supposes their Commission to extend
to the ordeining of those, who yet had not been named in them, if we may guess
by that of Titus, cap. 1. 5. And so much also of that part of my confession,
which is as free and unforced, as the former had been, and I believe as fafe to
the affirmer.

Sect. X.
A fifth charge of contrariety to Scripture answered. Of visitation of the sick,
belonging to Elders, James 5.
BUt the fifth and last charge is more severe than any of the former, that these
paradoxes, as they style them, are contrary to the very letter of the
Scripture, as we have made it evident in our arguments against the Jus Divinum
of Episcopacy, and would farther manifest it, if we thought it necessary.

This I confess of contrariety to the very letter of the Scripture (rightly
understood) I, charge, that I verily expected somewhat extraordinary to bind
it on me, and I suddenly resolved (as I read the first words of that Section)
to examine those Scriptures that should now be produced, ponderingly and
exactly, and either confess my own conviction, or give competent reasons why
I was not convinced by them.

But I soon found my expectations frustrated, Scripture mentioned, so for their
arguments against the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy, I know not where to seek them,
and never heard (and verily believe there is no such thing) that they had
formerly written any such Book against Bishops, wherein the Dissertations or
any assertions of mine therein, were so much as arraigned by them, much less
evidenced to be contrary to the very letter of Scripture: If I had, I assure
them I should then have been as ready to have made my reply, as now I have been
to attend them thus far.

And for their evidencing this in any tract published by them before the
Dissertations were written, Dissertations were to be concluded, I have no
reason to think that to be their meaning, because these assertions of mine are
by them affirmed to be Paradoxes, contrary to all that have ever written in
defense of Episcopacy, and therefore could not, unless it were by divination,
be taken notice of, and prevented by them.

After they had expressed their opinion that it was not necessary for them
farther to manifest the contrariety of my Paradoxes to the very letter of the
Scripture, they yet farther proceed in these words,

For when the Apostle says, James 5. 14. Is any man sick among you? let him
call for the Elders of the Church -- who is there that can be persuaded to
believe that all these Elders were Bishops (in the sense that Bishops are taken
in in our days) Is this the p^oper Work of Bishops to visit the sick? And
besides, if the Apostle by Elders had meant Bishops in that sense, he would
have said, let him call for the Elders of the Churches, not of the Church,
unless our brethren will say that there were diverse Bishops in every Church in
the Apostles days, in which there were many sick persons.

What the [For] in the front here signifies, antecedents would incline me to
believe that it pretends to introduce a reason, which might make it evident
that my assertions are contrary to the very letter of Scripture: But that sure
it does not any way attempt or appear to do, unless the (...) Elders of the
Church be supposed here to signify Presbyters in our modern notion of the
word: But then that is so far from being granted, that it is known to be the
only (...), the matter of question betwixt us all this while, and so was to be
proved not supposed or presumed in this matter.

But bating them this begging of the Question, wonderment, that I should go
about to persuade any, that (...) Elders, in this place of Saint James, were
Bishops in that sense that we now understand and use the word.

And 1. Church there were no other officers ordained, but only the Bishop and
Deacon, it must of necessity be resolved the proper work of Bishops to visit
the sick. That there was at the first, when the Faith was but thin planted,
such a time has already been evidenced out of Clemens Romanus, and the
profoundest antequities that Epiphanius could meet with, And that then this
office must either be neglected, or performed by either Bishop or Deacon, will
not need any farther proof.

As for the the Deacons in their institution, office, and indeed the
suitableness of absolution to that state of dangerous sickness, and the
mention of (...) his having committed sins, and the command of giving it (in
case he be qualified for it) (...), absolvetur ei, absolution shall be given
him, does render the Deacon incompetent for that work, and so, where there are
no Presbyters, must needs divolve it on the Bishop.

And this account has more than probability, Ancients to be matter of fact,
that where the number of believers was small, and none qualified for the office
of Presbyters, there the Apostles constituted no more but a Bishop and a Deacon
in each City. For whilst this was the state of that City, I shall suppose a man
sick, and by the force of S. James's exhortation, desirous of absolution, etc.
Who is there supposeable in that City to give it him but the Bishop? And whom
else can he call to him for this purpose? And then who can doubt but this is
the work, in it self very agreeable, and in this supposed case peculiar and
proper to the Bishop? so that unless this supposition be false, nay impossible
to be true, I may safely say, this was or might be the Bishops work, to visit
the sick, etc.

And indeed, Bishop, when other parts of his office became his fuller
employment, committed to the Presbyter? For 1. he could not commit this to
others, if he first had it not in himself; and Secondly, this was the only
reason of ordaining inferior officers in the Church, that part of the Bishop's
task might be performed by them (as when the whole burden, which was too
heavy for Moses, was distributed among other men) which in this particular
could not be, if before this assignation of assistents, it were not originally
the (...) work or proper task of the Bishop.

To this may be farther added the real dignity, charity of this performance of
visiting the sick, etc. and this arising both from the intimation of Gods own
finger, pointing out this a most agreeable season for all spiritual admonition
and comfort, a molle tempus fandi, wherein a word seasonably spoken, may most
probably find the due reception, and wherein the prayers and blessing of the
most Apostolical person, or the most highly and justly dignified in the Church,
and in the favor of God, may come in most opportunely, and in this respect we
see in that place, that the prayers of the great Prophet Elias are made use of
by S. James, to exemplify the practice, which in this particular he
recommended to the Church.

And I must needs tell the Objectors, visiting the sick, I cannot but affirm
on the contrary, that if it were duly and advantagiously managed, it were
extremely useful and beneficial to the good of Souls, and as proper for a
Bishop personally to perform, when his other public necessary taskes
(wherein many more are concerned, and wherein he has no proxies to supply his
place) permit, as any one part of his divine office, differing from the rest
only in this, (and in that respect yiedling the precedence to them) that other
parts of his office are, or may be at the same time extensive to many, whilst
each act of this is terminated in some one, whose soul yet ought to be more
precious in his eyes, than all other acquisitions in the world.

Accordingly it is in the Dissert. 4. 21, 22.
Dissertations evidenced out of Polycarp's Epistle (who was somewhat after the
time of James the author of this Epistle) that part of the Bishop's office it
was then esteemed to be, to visit all the sick, in like manner as in Justin
Martyr he is made the Curator of all that are in want, the grand distributer of
all the liberalities of the Church.

As for the only objection that is here tendered against this interpretation
of the place, singalar [(...) of the Church] not of the Churches, the answer is
obvious, that this Epistle of James being written to all the Jews in
dispersion, Jam. 1. 1. these could not make up any one particular Church of any
single denomination, but yet all conjoyne very fitly in that one Universal
style of (...), the Church. In this respect we know it is called the Catholic
Epistle of James, because written to the whole Church of the Jews, all the
believers of that nation, wheresoever dispersed out of their Country.

Now these inhabiting in diverse Cities, Bishops in this circuit, and so the
(...), the Elders of the Church, are most commodiously set to express these
several Bishops, belonging to this complexe body, the Church of the dispersion.

Not that there were more of these in one City, plural expression, because were
there never so many, the sick person needed not have called more at once (and
upon that score (...) shall demand of them that argue from the number, was
every sick man in their opinion, to call for the whole Presbytery?) ^or again
because there were not as many Churches as Elders, but only because these many
particular Churches, of which there was an equal number of Elders, were very
fitly comprehended under the one general (...), the Church in the singular
number.

Sect. XI.
A last objection from Act. 21. 18. and 14. 3. and 11. 30. answered. Elders for
Rulers or Bishops.
THere yet remains one sort of Objections more against these Paradoxes,

Besides, when it to said, Act 21. 18. Paul went in with us unto James, and all
the Elders were present, It is supposed by our Episcopal men, that James was
at this time Bishop of Jerusalem. Now we demand, who were these Elders? were
these also Bishops of Jerusalem? will this answer consist with our brethrens
judgment? so likewise when it is said, Act. 15 4. And when they were com^ to
Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, and of the Apostles and Elders, we
demand, what is meant by the Church? Is it not meant the Church of Jerusalem,
to which place they are said to come? And if so, then we ask^ farther, what is
mean^ by the Elders? Must it not be answered, that by Elders are meant the
Elders of Jerusalem? And then let any man (...) us, how these Elders can be
said to be Bishops in a Prelatical sense, especially according to the sense of
our brethren, who make James to be at this time the only Bishop of Jerusalem.
Add farther, It is said, Act. 14. 3. When Paul and Barnabas had ordained them
Elders in every Church, Act. 11. 30. They sent relief to the Elders, etc. Can
any imagine that this relief was sent only to Bishops, and that Paul and
Barnabas ordained no Presbyters in any Church, but only Bishops? Is not this to
offer manifest violence to the Scriptures? and instead of upholding of
Episcopacie, is not this sufficient to render it odious and contemptible to all
sober, and godly, and moderate Christians? But we forbear.

It seems we have still remaining another heap of inconvenient Confessions
that we labor under; more socratico, they make their demands; And although I
might justly wonder why they which have read the Dissertations, and know what
answer I give to every of their demands, should be at the trouble to ask them
again, yet because I am resolved not to be weary of attending them, I shall
answer them as punctually as they could wish, and patiently support all the
odium that will result from thence, among all sober, and godly, and moderate
Christians.

Here only I desire two things may be remembered, Elder^ in the style of the
Old Testament, in the continued use of all languages, being an expression of
power and dignity, is in the New Testament upon all reasonable accounts as
properly applicable to the Rulers and Governors Ecclesiastical, as the word
Apostles, or Bishops, or Presidents, or Rulers, or any the like would be
thought to be, and withal very fit to express single Rulers in each
particular Church (in case any such may otherwise appear to be mentioned in
Scripture) there being no propriety in the word, or peculiarity in the usage of
it, to incline it to joint power of Colleagues ruling in common.

Accordingly evidences have been produced in the Dissertations to show the
continuance of this usage among Authors after the Scripture-time, language of
the Ancients, Policarpe, Papias, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and
Tertullian, many of which are known and by the adversaries acknowledged to
assert Episcopacy in our modern sense, and yet use the word (...) Elders, to
denote sometimes the Apostles, sometimes the singular Bishops in each Church.

And therefore the affirming this one thing, viz. that the word (...) may very
conveniently be interpreted Bishops, as often as the circumstances of the Text
will bear it, will not, I hope, still be so unfo^tu^ate as to fall under the
censure of Paradoxe and odious, being indeed a plain obvious observation,
which has nothing of difficulty or harshnesse in it.

Having praemised this, Apostles being by all Praelatists (I hope convincingly)
affirmed and proved to have ordained Bishops in every City of Converts and
proselites to the Faith, and there being many such Cities in Judaea, besides
Jerusalem, and consequently many Bishops in those Cities, one in each, it can
be no new thing to conclude, that when we read of Bishops in the plural within
that pale of Iudaea, these are the Bishops of Iudaea, and so in like manner
when we find the Bishop of Jerusalem mentioned separately, and then those
others with him, (expressed by any title which signifies Bishops, be it (...) or
(...) it matters not) and with all, these never expressed to be (...) Elders of
the Church of Jerusalem, but either Elders simply, or else (...) or (...) in or
at Jerusalem, denoting only the place, where, at that time, they were present,
it will be as little harsh to infer, that at such time there were assembled
or met together at Jerusalem, James the Bishop of that Metropolis, and the
other Bishops of the whole region, the Bishops of Iudaea with him.

From hence there will now be no difficulty to make a brief answer to each of
their demands, Act. 21. 18. the Elders which were present with James the Bishop
of Jerusalem, were the Bishops of Iudaea which were then, upon the emergent
affairs of the Church, present at Jerusalem, whether all of them assembled in
Council, to receive an account of Saint Paul's transactions and successes among
the Gentiles v. 19. or many of them on any other Ecclisiasticall concernment.

But that which puts it out of question, all of them in Council, is, what
follows v. 25. where they refer to the decrees which had been conciliarly
delivered v. 15. by them, who are now there present, we have written and
concluded. And what Paradox can there be in this, that all the Bishops of
Judaea should be in Council at Jerusalem, and St Peter and St. John with
them, and that St. Paul should come and give an account of his travailes and
actions in their presence.

The same answer certainly belongs to the place next mentioned c. Reception by
the Church follows [ and of the Apostles and Elders] by the Church is meant
the Believers that were at Jerusalem, whether inhabiting there continually, or
now occasionally present there. By the Apostles, James the Brother of the Lord,
the then Bish^p of the Metro^olis, together with Peter and John the known
Apostles of Christ, this James by them set over that Church, says (...), l. 6.
Clemens and (...).
Hegesippus, and by S. Paul himself reckoned among the Apostles, Gal. 1. 19.
and so in the title of his Epistle, and named before Peter and John the two
prime Apostles, as being in this his See, Gal. 2. 9. and expressed to pronounce
the decree in the Council, (...), I judge, Act. 15. 19. and this confirmed by
the testimonies of those Ancients that the Presbyterians make the most frequent
use of, Theodoret and Commen. in Isa.
St. Hierome; the former expressly affirming of those times, that they which
were after styled Bishops, were then called Apostles, and the latter styling
this James particularly, Apostolum decimum tertium, the thirteenth Apostle.

And then what can be more agreeable to the Context (to make the Council
complete, Council for the Churches of Syria, etc, to appeal to) then to
render the Elders the Bishops of all Judaea, which were certainly fitter for
the turn to join in the Council, and give Law to other Cities, then the bare
Presbyters of the one City of Jerusalem could have been esteemed, if any such
there had been in the Church so early.

For though of the Apostles, universal jurisdiction, and of the Bishop of
Jerusalem (as that was the prime Metropolis not only of Judaea, but Syria also)
with the Bishops of the whole Province in Council with him, some reasonable
account may be given, why they should be consulted by the Church, of Antioch,
and give binding decrees in that matter, to all that were subject to that
Metropolis, yet supposing the Church of Jerusalem to be governed by Presbyters,
and that (as these say) the Elders mentioned in the Council were none but the
Presbyters of that particular Church, there could no reasonable account be
given, why they should join with the Apostles in this work, wherein not
Jerusalem, of which alone they were Presbyters, but Antioch and other Cities of
Syria and Cilicia were immediately concerned, and concluded by the sentence of
James, that must be, (according to their opinion) of one of the Presbyters of
Jerusalem.

In the next place what is said of Act. Act. 11. 30. is somewhat unhappily put
together, and yet not rectified in the Errata. For 1. the ordeining Elders in
every Church to which Act. 11. 30. is affixt, is not mentioned there, but Act.
14. 23. and the sending relief, which in the Syntaxes must be affixt to Act.
14. 23. is not to be met with there, but ^^ct. 11. 30. But this were imputable
to some haste either of Scribe or Compositor, were there not a second
incongruity interweaved in it, viz. that when Paul and Barnabas had ordained
them Elders, etc. (which was not done till Act. 14. 23.) They sent relief to
the Elders, (which was done Act. 11. 30.) which is an evident (...) which I
cannot discern how it was useful for them to be guilty of.

As for their Quaeres raised on these two Texts, Answers are obvious, and here
to be translated out of the Dissertations as formerly, that the (...) Elders
Act 11. 30. are the Bishops of the several Cities of Judaea, not the
Pre^byters of that one City Jerusalem.

For 1 the famine that occasioned this charity of the Antiochians, Jerusalem
alone, but all the World, i.e. in the Scripture-stile, Lu. 21. 26. Romans 10. 18.
over the whole Land of Judea, according to the manner of the septuagint, who
often render (...) the earth or the Land, when it signifies the Land of Judaea,
by (...) the World, As Isa. 10. 23. and 13. 5. 9. and 24. 1. and accordingly
Josephus says of this time of Claudius's Reign (...), that there was a great
famine over Judaea.

Secondly, Donors, (...), to the brethren that dwelt in Judaea, in no wise
confined to Jerusalem, nor consequently can the Elders to whom it was sent, and
in whose hands it was put, be any others than the Elders, i.e. say we, Bishops
of all Judaea.

Thirdly, office of Bishops, as we find the practice in the Primitive Church,
to be the receivers and stewards and dispensers of the wealth of any sect,
which was brought in to the Church, whether by the offertory of the faithful
in the Sacrament, or by the liberality of other Churches, enlarged to those
that were in want. It being Justin Martyr's affirmation of the first times,
that all the offerings were brought to the (...) or President, and that he was
thereby made (...) the Curator of all that were in want.

And when what is sent to the Bishop is supposed to be sent to him, Oeconomus
or steward of the Church, not for the enriching himself, but to provide for
those that wanted, I cannot imagine why this may not be as conveniently
supposed, as that it should be sent to the Pre^byters only.

So in like manner the (...) Act. Bishops again, and such and only such (as
far as we have any footsteps of it) were at that time ordained in the
Churches, one in every City where the Gospel was received with one or more
Deacons to attend him.

And to this as the words so often mentioned out of Clemens Romanus are most
evident, the Apostles of Christ preaching through Cities and Regions,
constituted their first fruits (...) for Bishops and Deacons, so the context in
this place of the Acts is very agreeable: For here when Paul and Barnabas had
preached and converted a competent number at Derbe, v. 12. and returned to the
Cities of Lystra, Iconium and Antioch v. 22. co^firming the souls of the
brethren i.e. the faithful, there it follows, before their parting, that they
ordained Elders (...) in every Church, that sure is in every of the Churches
here named, not many in each, but Elders in all, one Bishop in every Church,
which again is no news for me or any Praelatist to affirm, when in the Epistle
to Titus, St. Paul's direction is conformable to his practice, appointing him
to ordain Elders (...), City by City, or in every City, c. 1. 5. and presently
calling the Elder so to be ordained Bishop, as in the Epistle to Timothy he is
also called.

Thus much pains I shall not grudge to have taken, book, very innocently
meant, from the charge of two such Paradoxes, as they are called by those, who
have not thought fit to believe them, and are as unwiling that others should,
and therefore conclude their discourse against them with tragical expressions
of offering manifest violence to the Scriptures, of being sufficient, instead
of upholding Episcopacy, to render it odious and contemptible, etc. And when
they have said so much with so little weight of reason to justify it, they
will then part with all meekness and perfect temper [but we forbeare] i.e.
abstain to add more, when they had said as much ill as could be. I am sorry
there was still any more bitterness within, to be suppressed, when there was so
much vented. However it is, we are now at end of a second post, and to have
time to breath a while after some lassitude.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the Opinion of Antiquity in this Question.
Sect. 1.
The Testimonies of Clemens Romanus, Bishops and Deacons the only offices at
the first. Corinth Metropolis of Achaia. What (...), signify. The Apostles
care to prevent contentions about Episcopacy. Hegesippus's testimony of the
contentions at Corinth. Clement a Bishop.
SOme things there are yet behind in their Appendix, directly and immediately,
in others by remoter obligation, as when some of those testimonies of
Antiquity, which are in the Dissertations manifested to be perfectly
reconcilable with our pretensions, and some of them evident confirmations of
them, are yet by these Writers crudely taken up, and made use of, as
Testimonies on their side, without ever taking notice of that which is said in
the Dissertations to clear the contrary.

Of the former sort, immediately pointed at, there are four things. First,
Concerning one testimony of St. Hierome. Secondly, concerning Ignatius his
Epistles in general, and the appeals that I make to h^s authori^^, which they
will not allow to have force with them. Thirdly, concerning one testimony cited
by them out of St. Ambrose on Ephesians. 4. and answered by me* but that answer
disliked and rejected by them. Fourthly* concerning the Chorepiscopi. Of the
second sort, are the testimonies out of Clemens Romanus, Polycarpe, Irenaeus,
and Tertullian, especially the two former of them.

I shall therefore briefly survey every one of these, clearest view both of the
judgment of Antiquity concerning Episcopacy in general (to which their
Appendix professes wholly to be designed) and more particularly of the truth
of those two propositions which have been accused as Paradoxes in me, but will
now appear not to be such) by taking these testimonies, as they lie in the
order of time, wherein the Authors lived, and then that of St. Hierome, which
happens to be first mentioned by them, p. 102. will fall to be one of the last
to which we shall make reply.

First then for Clemens, P. 104.
they thus begin, sure we are that Clemens, who lived in the first century, in
his famous Epistle to the Corinthians (an undoubted piece of antiquity) makes
but two Orders of Ministry, Bishops and Deacons. And having set down the
place which testifies this, Clem, ad Corin. p. 54,
* (...), and rendered it thus, Christ Jesus sent his Apostles through
Countries and Cities, in which they preached and constituted the first fruits
(approving them by the spirit) for Bishops and Deacons to those who should
afterward believe. From hence they observe, p. 105. That Bishops and Deacons
were the only orders of Minist^ry in the first Primitive Church. And that the
Apostles appointed but two Officers (that is Bishops and Deacons) to bring men
to believe, because when he had reckoned up three Orders appointed by God
amongst, the Jews, High Priest, Priests, and Levites: coming to recite Orders
appointed by the Apostles under the Gospel, ^e does mention only Bishops and
Deacons.

And here one would think were little for the Presbyterians advantage,
Paradoxes would have afforded them, which, from this very testimony and some
other, concluded that which was then so strange for them to hear (yet now can
be confessed by them) that the Apostles at their first plantations contented
themselves with Bishops and Deacons, one of each, or perhaps more of the latter
in every City.

But when these men thus grant the conclusion from this place, liberality,
because I suppose it their meaning, that by Bishops Clemen^^ meant Pre^byters,
though this they do not so much as say in twice repeating of their conclusion.

And yet certainly it needed more than saying, proving by some evidence or
argument, that (...) Bishops in that place signifies any thing else but
Bishops. All that they offer toward a reason for this, must be contained in
these words of theirs that follow in the former place.

The occasion of that Epistle seems to be a new sedition raised by the
Corinthians against their Presbyters, Clemens to remove their present sedition
tells them how God has always appointed several orders in his Church, which
must not be confounded; in the Jewish Church he appointed High Priest, Priests
and Levites, And then tells them for the time of the Gospel that Christ Jesus
sent his Apostles as before, citing the words of Clement already set down.

But certainly this does not prove Bishops in that Epistle to be no more than
Presbyters, Elders in that Epistle signify Bishops. The only imaginable
medium of proof, which can be useful for their turn, I shall suppose to be
this, that Corinth was but one City, and therefore (...) Elders at, and of
Corinth, must needs be Presb^ters, because according to our opinion there were
not more Bishops in one City.

But to this I answer, Clemens says in the testimony now produced, he speaks
not of Corinth peculiarly, but of the Cities, and Regions in general, which
the Apostles converted, and of them in the plural number, (...), through
Regions and Cities, and then in those many Cities, there may well be many
Bishops, and yet certainly no more than one in one City.

Secondly, Epistle of Clemens to the Corinthians was not to the Christians of
that one City, but to the whole Province of Achaia, of which Corinth was the
Metropolis, and wherein the Proconsull of Achaia resided, and kept his Courts,
Act. 18. 12. 15. So the Title of the Epistle inclines, being inscribed to the
Church (...), which denotes the whole Province, then called (...), as when in
Polycarps Epistle, the Church (...)] is not only that of the City Philippi,
but of the Province belonging to it, and in the other part of the title of this
Epistle, (...), the Church of God dwelling about Rome,] in the Church of Rome,
and all that belonged to that Metropolis, called by Ignatius (...), the place
of the Region of the Romans, i. e. the City, and the whole Region about it; l.
4. c. 23.
And so when Eusebius mentions Dionysius the famous Bishop of Corinth, he calls
him Bishop (...), of the Province of, or about Corinth.

And that this is the truth of it, no conjecture of mine may appear by one
character in the Epistle; He tells them that they had formerly received
Epistles from St. Paul. This directs to resolve that these to whom this Epistle
was addressed, were the same to whom St. Paul's were formerly sent, And it is
evident that those were the Saints or Christians in all Achaia, 2 Cor. 1. 1.
And the same is doubtless implied by the phrase in every place, 1 Cor. 1. 2.
not in every place simply of the World (for it was no Catholic Epistle, but a
particular admonition for particular faults, incest, etc.) but in that whole
Porvince or Region of Achaia. So that which Apollos is said to have done among
them ( Apollos has watered) 1 Cor. 3. 6. appears by the story Act. 18. 27. to
have belonged to all Achaia. And so what the Apostle writes to them of sending
their offertory to Judaea, 1 Cor. 6. 1. 2 Cor. 8. and 9. does appear by Romans
15. 26. to appertain to all Achaia, Macedonia, says he, and Achaia have
pleased to make a contribution, and 2 Cor. 9. 2. I know your forwardness, that
Achaia has been ready above a year ago. Where the [(...) you] and [ Achaia]
must needs be of the same latitude, and so again it is c. 11. 9. compared with
v. 18. And so those of St. Paul, and consequently this of Clement was not to
the City of Corinth alone, but to all the Churches of Achaia, and if among them
there were more Bishops than one, there will certainly be no news in that, and
if those Bishops (according both to the nature of the word, and the use of it
in those days before and after Clement) were styled sometimes (...), sometimes
(...) also, then all is very agreeable to all that we contend for, that there
was one Bishop, not a College of Presbyters in Clements days in every City.

And this is directly the importance of Clements words, Epistle, (...), says
he, (...), Christ was sent out from God, and the Apostles from Christ ( As my
Father sent me, so send I you] And then to show that the Bishops were in the
same manner sent, i. e. commissionated by them, he adds, that they, i. e. the
Apostles (...) (...) went out Preaching, (...), etc. Therefore Preaching
through Regions and Cities, they constituted their first fruits -- for Bishops
and Deacons, Cities and Regions in the Plural, and Bishops and Deacons
proportionable thereto.

And when he adds that they were thus made of their first fruits, officers of
those which should after believe (supposing that there were not many now that
did so) this is directly a description of those times, of which Epiphanius
speaks, saying, that when the Gospel began to be Preached, there was yet no
need of Presbyters, but Bishops and Deacons served the turn.

And accordingly Deacons in those days were immediately made Bishops, Clement
the Writer of this Epistle, who was St. Peter's Deacon and Bishop after him, as
is cleared in Dissert 5. c. 1. Sect. 11. And so much for that first testimony.

One thing only more from hence they are desirous to conclude, in the first
and purest times the custom was to choose Bishops in Villages, as well as in
great Cities, grounded upon this, that here the Apostles are said to have
appointed Bishops (...), as well as (...).

But there is no ground of this conclusion in this testimony, villages, (...)
is not Greek for them, but (...), and it is the former, not the latter which
here we find. It is evident what is meant by (...), when it is joined with
(...) Cities, viz. Provinces, which have each of them many Cities in them, and
when it is joined with (...) Villages, it sitly denotes Regions, in which there
are many Villages.

So says Geo. lib. 13.
Strabo of Asia, the Romans made that Region a Province, and so in the
Ecclesiastical writings (...) is a Province made up of many Cities, each of
which had a Bishop over them, as when in the Can. 2.
Council in Trullo. (...), Cyprian is said to be Archbishop of the Region of
the Africanes, Region there signifying the whole Province under that
Metropolitan, and so Ep. 52.
Cyprian himself makes it his observation, Jampridem per omnes provincias and
singulas urbes instituti sunt Episcopi. Anciently through all the Provinces and
each of the Cities, Bishops were instituted. Where the Bishops in the several
Provinces, as those differ from the Bishops in each City, are undoubtedly
Archbishops.

And if that place so very agreeable to this of Clemens may be allowed,
conclusion that the Apostles instituted Bishops in every City, and in each
Region or Province, and in the Metropolis or chief City of it, a Metropolitan
or Archbishop.

But then 2. if (...) should signify, company of villages or little towns
lying near together, so as to be here used in opposition to the Cities, yet
could it not be from hence concluded, that the Apostles constituted Bishops in
those villages. The words are, they preached through regions and Cities, and
constituted their first fruits (earlyest converts) into Bishops and Deacons,
which will be perfectly true, though all the Bishops and Deacons constituted by
them, had their fixed seats of residence in the Cities; For that they
constituted Bishops in the Regions, is not here affirmed.

Much more might be said in this matter, concessions that the adversaries could
demand from hence, would no way hinder or disadvantage our pretensions, but
only give the Chorepiscopi a greater Antiquity in the Church, than either
they or we have reason to think they had, of which whole matter the reader may
see a full discourse, Dissert. 3. c. 8. Sect. 25. etc. and of it somewhat we
shall anon have occasion to repete from thence.

The second Testimony of Clemens is set down by them in these words, Page 57.
that there would a contention arise, (...) about the name of Bishop, and being
endued with perfect foreknowledg they appointed the aforesaid (that is, the
aforesaid orders of Bishops and Deacons) etc. Here they require two things to
be noted 1. that by name is not meant the bare name of Bishop, but the honor
and dignity, as it is taken, Phil. 2. 9. Ephesians. 1. 21. Heb. 1. 4. Rev. 11. so
that (...), The controversy among the Corinthians was not about the name, but
dignity of Episcopacy; for it was about the deposition of their godly
Presbyters, page 57. 58. 2. That the only remedy appointed by the Apostles for
the cure of all contentions arising about Episcopacy, is, by committing the
care of the Church to Bishops and Deacons: Afterward the Church found out
another way, by setting up one Bishop over another; But Clemens tells us, that
the Apostles endued with perfect foreknowledge of things ordained only Bishops
and Deacons for a remedy of Schisms.

To this they add (to supersede farther citations our of this page 57. 62. 69.
72. and take notice that those which are called Bishops in one place are called
Presbyters in another, and that they are (...) throughout the whole Epistle.

What this whole Epistle will yield toward the proof of their proposition, That
after Christ's Ascension the Church of God for a certain space of time, was
governed by a Common Council of Presbyters without Bishops] I think it
reasonable for any that has not read it, to conjecture by these two
testimonies, which these, who assert the proposition, and here undertake to
prove it, have thought fit to cull out of it, having withal nothing more to
collect for their turn from the rest of the Epistle, particularly from the
comparing those four pages, 57. 62. 72. but only this, that they which are
called Bishops in one place, are called (...) Elders in another.

Now this last they know is the very thing that I contend (as from the
Scripture, ancient writings, that (...) and (...), [ Bishop and Elder] are
words of the same importance, all the question is, whether at the first both
imported Bishops or both Presbyters in our modern notion. That there is no one
circumstance so much as offered by them to consideration, which may incline it
their way, is evident by their own words, neither of their two notes
pretending to it, only their conclusion affirming, that they are (...), words
of the same importance. The whole matter therefore will still divolve to this
one Quaere, whether, when Clement says of the Apostles that they constituted
none but Bishops and Deacons, by Bishops a College of Presbyters in every City
be to be understood, or rather one Bishop, with his Deacon or Deacons in every
City.

For the clearing of this one difficulty (for this being evinced, two notes
affirm, is directly on our side against them) I shall here entirely set down
the whole place last produced, of which they have left out one half. It is
thus, (...). Our Apostles knew by our Lord Jesus Christ (that must be by
revelation from him) that there would contention arise upon the name or dignity
of Episcopacie (i. e. about the authority of Bishops in the Church, some
opposing it, and casting them out of their Offices, as here in the Church of
the Corinthians, and through all Achaia was actually come to pass at this
time, and occasioned this Epistle to them) For which cause therefore the
Apostles having received perfect foreknwoledge (that there would be such
contentions on this occasion) did (for the preventing of them) constitute the
forementioned (Bishops and Deacons of those which should come in to the Faith
in their new plantations) and after them (so (...) signifies in Barnabas's
Epistle, Sect. 10. (...) the people that should be after, and (...), Act. 13.
42. that which should follow the next after) gave a Series or Catalogue, or
manner of succession (i. e. set down a note of them which in each Church
should succeed the present Incumbent) that when they dyed, other approved men
might succeed to their office or ministry.

What can be more manifest, dignity, which the Apostles conferred on the
Bishops in each City and Province, which in the former Testimony has been
cleared to belong to single Bishops, not to any College of Presbyters, was by
them foreseen, that it would be matter of Contention, occasion of Sedition in
the Church: for the prevention of which, they used the probablest means
imaginable, named successors to the present Bishops in every Church, who should
supply the vacant places, as soon as they fell, and so prevent suing and
contending for them, and were by the special spirit of God directed, who those
successors should be; so that the opposing their succession, or casting them
out afterward, must be a great sin, even of resisting the spirit of God, who
had designed them to this inheritance. Which, next to Christ's bearing them in
his right hand, Rev. 1. 20. is the greatest character of dignity, and evidence
of Christ's approving of the Order, and care of continuing it, as the original
of union (not division) in the Church.

There is not by these men one word of objection offered against this
conclusion, Dissertations, and therefore I need add no more for the
vindicating this testimony, yet will it not be amiss here to interpose the
words of Hegesippus, one that was present at the time of that sedition, and
gives an account of it in L. 4. c. 2^.
Eusebius, (...), says he, (...), The Church of the Corinthians continued in
the right, until Primus was Bishop of Corinth. Which is a testimony as
ancient as that of Clement, and tells us what Bishops they were which Clement
speaks of, such as Primus was at Corinth, i. e. one singular Governor in a
City.

The same will be yet more manifest, all Authors is affirmed of Clemens
himself, the writer, at the time of writing this Epistle, that having been
Saint Paul's fellow laborer, Phil. 4. 3. Saint Peter's Deacon (Ignat. in Ep.
ad Trall.) he was no Bishop of Rome, by the joint suffrage of Irenaeus and all
the Ancients, even of Saint Jerome himself in his Catalogue, and by him styled
an Apostolical person on Isa. 52. a companion of the Apostles (in Interp. Com.
Orig. in Rom.) and by Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. lib. 4. an Apostle in the
sense that Theodoret says, those whom in his time they called Bishops, had
been at first called Apostles.

Accordingly of him, Irenaeus in his Catalogue of the successive Governors of
the Church, (...), in the third place from the Apostles Clemens came to the
Bishopric, Which how it is easily to be accorded with those who truly make him
Peter's immediate successor, see Dissert. 5. c. 1. Sect. 6. etc.

Other testimonies there are producible from this Epistle of Clement, image of
the Ecclesiastical state under Bishops and Deacons, in the prophecy of
Isaiah, cap. 60. 17. where in the Greek translation, then in use, he had read
(...), I will constitute their Bishops in righteousness, and their Deacons in
faithfulness, speaking of the Judges and their Ministers and officers in every
City.

And so again when he exhorts them to give due honor to the Elders among
them, sedition against their Elders, and casting them out of their Episcopacy,
in one place ((...)) and removing them from that honored office ((...)) in
another, and the like; All of the same importance, and to be interpreted by the
former.

Sect. II.
The Testimony of Polycarpe. That he was himself a Bishop. His mention of
Ignatius's Epistles, fit to give authority to them, being so confirmed as it is
by a series of the Ancients.
IN the next place follows their testimony out of Polycarpe,

The like Record we have of Polycarpe that famous Disciple of John the Apostle,
who lived also within the first century, and wrote an Epistle to the
Philippians, in which he makes also but two Orders of Ministry, Bishops and
Deacons, and persuades the Philippians to be subject to their Presbyters and
Deacons, as to God and Christ.

To this Testimony from Polycarp there is no reason I should deny any part of
my assent, two orders of Ministry, Bishops and Deacons, and he persuades the
Philippians (i.e. that whole Province, the same to which Saint Paul had
written, consisting of many Churches, all under that Metropolis of Philippi) to
be subject to their (...) and (...), Elders and Deacons, and sets the former of
them, in the comparison, to answer God the Father the supreme Monarch of
Heaven; and the latter to be the parallel to Christ who came out from Heaven
upon his Fathers messages, then what reason have I to doubt, but that these
Elders and Deacons are the very same which Saint Paul had called Bishops and
Deacons, Phil. 1. 1. which that it belonged to the several Bishops of that
Province of Macedonia, has before been sufficiently vindicated.

And therefore without farther debating this Testimony, Polycarp, which will
help conveniently to clear the whole matter.

First, famous Disciple of John the Apostle, so this is added to his titles by
the authonti^k Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, (...). This was the most
wonderful person in our times, being an Apostolical and Prophetical Doctor,
and that he was a most glorious Martyr, is the designed matter of that whole
Epistle.

Secondly, famous, most admirable Apostolical Doctor and Martyr, was the Bishop
of Smyrna, and so constituted by the Apostles, as will appear by three
Testimonies, each of them irrefragable. 1. By the Epistle of that Church of
Smyrna, written on purpose concerning his Martyrdom, a reverend piece of
Antiquity, fit to compare with any that remains in the Church. And there we
find in the close of his titles, (...), that he was Bishop of the Catholic
Church, which is in Smyrna, i. e. both of Jewish and Gentile Christians there.

So Polycrates (the eight Bishop of Ephesus, John's death) in his Epistle to
Victor, (...), Polycarp the Bishop of Smyrna and Martyr.

So Irenaeus, constituted by the Apostles Bishop of the Church of Smyrna in
Asia.

And then what possibility can there be, Bishop, nay Metropolitan himself,
(as has formerly been showed) writing to another Metropolis, and commanding to
obey the (...) and Deacons, should mean any thing else but Bishops by (...).

Thirdly, Polycarp, as in this Epistle he acknowledges to have received an
Epistle from Ignatius ((...), You wrote to me, and to Ignatius also) so he
tells them that he had sent them a collection of the same Ignatius's Epistles.
(...) -- The Epistles of Ignatius sent to us by him, and as many others as we
had by us, we have sent to you, as you required, which are subjoyned to this
Epistle, by which you may receive great benefit.

By this passage it is clear, Ignatius wrote one Epistle to Polycarpe, another
to the Church of Smyrna, whereof Polycarpe was Bishop, both contained under the
phrase (...), sent to us, (as it is explained by Eusebius in these words,
(...), Ignatius wrote to the Church of Smyrna, and severally to Polycarpe the
Ruler thereof) so he wrote diverse others also, which at that time, before
Ignatius's death were by the Philippians desired from Polycarpe, and by
Polycarpe transmitted to them, and so cannot with any sense be affirmed to be
forged, and affixt to his name after his death.

How these Epistles were from Polycarpe brought down to the hands of Irenaeus,
Polycarp's time, and saw him an old man, and so testifies in his Epistle to
Florinus; and cites a notable passage out of Ignatius, which we now have in his
Epistle to the Romans: How, soon after Irenaeus, In Luc. Hom. 6.
Origin cites them again, calling him Martyr and Bishop of Antioch, the second
after Peter, and setting down the very words which we now have in the Epistle
to the Ephesians; How, after Origin, L. 3. c. 35. 36.
Eusebius sets down the whole story of writing them, together with a distinct
Catalogue of seven, to Ephesus, to Magnesia, to the Trallians, to the Romans,
to the Philadelphians, to the Smyranaeans, and to Polycarpe: Catal. Script. and
ad H^lvid c. 9.
And in like manner Athanasius, citing from Ignatius words which we now find
in his Epistle to the Ephesians, and Theodoret in many passages out of that to
the Ephesians, Dissert. 2. c. 24.
to the Trallians, to the Smyrnaeans; And at last St. Hierome (on whose
authority the Presbyterians so much depend) according exactly with Eusebius, to
give these seven Ep^stles of Ignatius a full authority with all; All this I say
has been at large deduced and evidenced in the Dissertations; And this, one
would think, might have been sufficient to have given Ignatius some place
among their Testimonies for the opinion of antiquity in this matter, especially
when that very Epistle of Polycarpe, which for the bare name of (...) Elders
used by him, they cite, and give him his just honor, does give testimony to
the Epistles of Ignatius, as clear, and as universally, and fully confirmed by
others, as any, by which that Epistle of ^olycarpe or Clemens, or any other
ancient writing stands in the Church.

But all this, Clemens, and one of Polycarpe, backed with the like number of
three more, a saying of Bishop Bilson (very unlikely to be to the praejudice of
Bishop^, if it were here seasonable to examine it) and the like of Gratian, and
the third of the Lord Digby, They are then at leisure to remember what out of
Ignatius is objected against them; Had he by any possible color of any passage
in him, been capable of doing them any service, he might then, as his Epistles
were written before Polycarps, have also been called out and cited before him;
But all those Epistles being so diametrally contrary to their pretensions, as
every man knows they are, he is now to be looked on and answered, as
temptations are wont to be, to be mentioned only, that he may be rejected by
them.

Section III.
A vindication of Ignatius's Epistles, Vossius's edition of them, and the
Archbishops of Armagh. Some Testimonies out of them. The cause of his so
inculcating obedience to Bishops. Mr. Causabones Testimony considered, and the
Allegations from the Archbishop of Armagh. Three Reasons against these Epistles
answered. (No Marriage without the Bishop.) Of the Reformed Churches. Of the
Church of Scotland after the first conversion.
THus therefore they proceed, Ignatius, who lived in the first century, has
in his Epistles clearly and fully asserted Episcopal Government, as it is
distinct from Presbyteriall, and that therefore there was no space of time,
wherein the Church of Christ was governed by the common council of Presbyters
without Bishops properly so called.

I do not conceive that they have said any thing of any avail, for the
proving their Proposition, and presume that neither from Clement nor Polycarpe
it has appeared that they have gained any thing; And therefore against all
that they have said there is no need that I should make any Objection. But in a
far larger style I think it were no insolence to say, that against all that
was ever imagined by any to be producible out of Antiquity in behalf of
Presbytery, the bare testimonies of this one Apostolical Martyr, Ignatius,
will be abundantly sufficient, being put in the other Scale, to weigh them all
down and decide the controversy on the Prelatists side.

It were here unreasonable at large to recite all these testimonies, Dissert.
2. c. 25. and the notoriety of the fact being such that a special Objection
against the Epistles is, that he every where asserts Episcopacy. And therefore
the only way that could be invented for the supporting the Presbyterians
interest against such direct Testimonies, so (every where) inculcated, and so
impossible to be reconciled with their assertions, is this which they give us,
p. 108. in these words.

In answer to this we must entreat the Reader to take notice that in the
Primitive Times there were abundance of spacious and supposititious works put
forth under the Names of the Apostles and blessed Martyrs, etc. The like fraud
has been used in Ignatius's works, etc.

Here first it is a little strange that the spurious and supposititious works
of the Apostles and Martyrs should be said to be put forth in the Primitive
Times, Primitive, be taken in a very great Latitude, I had thought that it had
been in after times, when errors were gotten in, and sought patronage and
covert from the Primitive Fathers, that these spurious brats were borne, and
affixt to great Names; And by this means indeed they are generally descryed,
by their impudent mentioning of some matters of fact, which fell out in those
latter times, and so discovered the imposture.

But this mistake imports not much to our present controversy; affirmed, [The
like fraud was used in Ignatius's workes] can be any way proved to have truth
in it, either in respect of the Primitive or aftertimes, I shall not quarrel
upon such niceties. I shall therefore examine their proofs which follow.

And first, say they, it is certain the Epistle of the blessed Virgin Mary to
Ignatius, and of Ignatius to the blessed Virgin, and two other Epistles of
Ignatius to John the Apostle are spurious and counterfeit.

To this I most willingly yield, Ignatius's name to the blessed Virgin and St.
John may very probably be deemed none of his, and so they are generally
rejected by those who maintain ours, as well as their interests. I shall only
add that there is no one word in them concerning Bishops, nor were they ever
produced by any Prelatist in defense of them.

Next then, say they, As for his other twelve Epistles, five of them are by
invincible arguments, as we conceive, proved by Vedelius to be written by a
Pseudo-Ignatius. Eusebius and Hierome make mention but of seven.

Here also will easily be granted by us whatsoever is demanded; Vedelius a
Divine of Geneva since the casting out of their Bishop and setting up of the
new Government, might well be looked on as a partial arguer or Judge concerning
Ignatius's writings, yet it being true, and by me formerly acknowleged that
Eusebius and St. Hierome mention but seven Epistles of his, I shall also be
ready to yield to the utmost that Vedelius contended, that there be no more
then seven Genuine Epistles of Ignatius, not that every of the other five can
be proved to be suppositious, but because the ancient testifications of the
Church do not make it so evident, that those other five are all his, as of the
other seven they do.

According to this concession it is, Dissertations all the Testimonies which
are produced in defense of Episcopacy, are taken out of those seven Epistles
which St. Hierome, the Presbyter, and only trusted friend of the
Presbyterians, does acknowledge to be his.

But of these seven also they have somewhat to say, in these words: And for
those seven, though with Scultetus, Vedelius and Rivetus we do not renounce
them as none of his, yet sure we are, they are so much adulterated and
corrupted, that no man can ground any solid Assertion about Episcopacy from
Ignatius's works.

I hope I shall not now be looked on, intemperate asserter of Episcopacy, if in
this third step also I go so far with the Presbyterians as to yield that I
shall rest contented even, with those parcells of those seven Epistles, which
these most rigid censors, even Vedelius himself, which published him at
Geneva, is content to acknowledge for his. If this be allowed me I shall need
demand no more; The matter is evident, any man may consult Vedelius's edition,
and find testimonies as clear for our turn, as could be wished, in those
parts of those Epistles which he allows of.

But for the purging of Ignatius, Ancients, I suppose the Method, which
Vedelius used, proceeding for the most part, by his own conjecture and
fancy, is not likely to be the best; The one course which any Judicious Man
would require or depend on, has been used in this matter, since Vedelius had
done his best; I mean the most ancient copies in Europe have been consulted,
and God's Providence has been eminently discernable in the result of that
inquiry.

Isaac Vossius, learned Man of that part of the Reforme^ Church, which is
governed by Presbyters, has met with an Ancient Manuscript in the Medicaean
library, which has none of the suspected Epistles, and is perfectly free from
those passages, which were formerly among sober Men made matter of suspicion
against the Epistles; And as in them we find those very passages entire, which
the Ancients have cited out of them, so from them again all the Testimonies
are fetched, which we desire to make use of in this matter.

So that if ever Ignatius wrote those Epistles which from Polycarpe downward
the Ancients generally agree that he wrote, authority, and the Testimonies I
have brought from him, will be of full value and force in this matter.

When this Copy out of the Medicaean Library was first transcribed by Vossius,
Episcopacy were much taken with it; D. Blondel confesses that he presently got
a Transcript of it, compared it with the Testimonies, which the Fathers
(Polycarpe, Irenaeus, Origin, Eusebius, Athanasius, Jerome, Chrysostom, etc.)
had cited out of Ignatius, and finding them all to agree with this copy,
confesses of himself that he was glad for this age of ours, that we had now
gotten that very copy that 1300. years ago, Eusebius had used, and expected
great light from thence. But at length this proved not for his turn, the
Author spoke so much of Bishops (...), in season and out of season, that he set
himself to form arguments against it, which are answered at large in the
Dissertations.

But beside this Greek copy of Vossius's Edition, Reverend Archbishop of
Armagh about the same time met with some ancient Latin copies in England,
which he thought fit to publish, although the Translation were rude and
barbarous, and that Latin Edition of his was found every where agreeable to
that Greek of Vossius, freed, as that, from all interpolations, and by this
concurrence of these Providence, there is all reason to think that we have at
last the Epistles of Ignatius, as purely set out as either that of Clemens, or
Polycarpe, or any other ancient writing.

And in this purity it is that we now appeal to it, three orders in the
Church, Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, and the Obedience and respects due to
them, as evidently and irrefragably asserted in very many places, as any truth
of Scripture can be expected to be.

After all this, most distinctly deduced in the Dissertations, they yet
proceed, we will not, say they, for our parts trouble the Reader with a large
discourse about this subject. If he please he may read what the Archbishop of
Armagh, what Rivet, Vedelius, and Cook in his Censura Patrum, and what
Salmasius and D. Blondel say about it, who all of them bring diverse arguments
to evince the invalidity of these Epistles. There is a -- Doctor that has
undertaken to answer the Objections of the two last, But this Doctor should do
well to answer also what the Archbishop of Armagh, has written about these
Epistles, who proves at large that six of them are nothae, the other six
mixtae, and none of them to be accounted omni ex part sincerae and genuinae,
who also tells us out of Casaubone, that among all the Ecclesiastical
Monuments there are none in which the Papists put more confidence, than in
Ignatius's Epistles.

This being the sum of their charge on me in this place, answered all the
Arguments of Blondell and Salmasius (I hope satisfactorily, or else they were
very unkind not to express their dislikes of some one answer) I have not yet
answered the Arguments of the Archbishop of Armagh against these Epistles, I
shall hope, that when either I have done that, or given competent reason, why I
need not do it, I shall not need to travail any farther in this Argument; yet
to omit no pains which they can but think of prescribing me, I shall take the
whole matter of this their last Section before me, and consider every part of
it.

And 1. For Rivet, Vedelius and Cook in Censura Patrum it is evident, that
their exceptions and censures belong to the former Printed Copies of Ignatius,
that especially which had been set out by Mastraeus a Papist, against whom
Vedelius his Edition and Exercitations were chiefly designed.

But then Vedelius having called this volume to a very strict examination,
Copy, which he had thus purged, cannot be still liable to his and the like
exceptions, which before were made against the former Copies.

As for Salmasius and Blondell, answers be some way attempted to be
invalidated, which here they are not, but instead of it, I am called to answer
the Archbishop of Armagh his Arguments. Lastly, therefore for the Archbishop of
Armagh; It is first somewhat unexpected, that what he had said, as the ground
and occasion of making a new Edition, setting out this very ancient Copy, and
by it purging Ignatius, who had before been so corrupted in his opinion, should
now be proposed to me to be answered, who use that very Copy, which that
Archbishop set out, and acknowledge it was formerly as corruptly set forth, as
he conceived it to be.

Is it not visible that the Archbishop's whole design in two impressions of
those Epistles, Prolegomena, were to prove the former editions to have been
corrupt, and so that the^e was great need of seeking out better Copies, and
that he verily thought he had now found such? And then what can be required of
me to answer in his writings, who am directly of his opinion in all the
substantial parts of the whole matter?

As for lesser doubts, Polycarpe be among the genuine or no, though with
Eusebius and St. Hierome I believe it is, and have given the reasons of my
opinion, yet I need not controvert this with any, because the other six will
still serve my turn abundantly, and the Testimonies out of the most purged
Geneva, or Amstelodam-editions of those six, will sufficiently vindicate
Episcopacy in our present notion of it to be then received, and of the Apostles
erecting in the Church.

A few of these Testimonies I shall here set down (...), Reader may know the
unquestionable opinion of Ignatius, and how far I am from necessity of using
any corrupted copy of those Epistles. First, then in his Epistle to the
Smyrnaans, we have the three Orders set down distinctly, (...), and again
(...), the like in 3. places to the Ephesians, in 3. to the Magnesians, in 4.
to the Philadelphians, in 4. to the Trallians. So secondly we have their
particular Bishops mentioned, as such, Polycarpe of Smyrna, in the Epistle to
the Magnesians, Onesimus of Ephesus in his congratulation to the Ephesians,
(...), that they had such a Bishop, adding* Burrhus his Deacon: Damas of the
Magnesians, together with the names of two of their Presbyters, Bassus and
Apollonius, and Sotion the Deacon, all in the Epistle to the Magnesians.
Polybius of the Trallians, in the Epistle to them. Thirdly we have his
affirmation concerning Bishops through the whole World, that they are
constituted as, or by the mind of Christ, i. e. sent by him, as he by his
Father, (...) Perhaps (...) in both places.
(...). Jesus Christ is the mind or by, or according to the mind of the Father
(sent and Commissionated by him to reveal his will to us) and so the Bishops
constituted through the World are the mind, or by the mind of Christ.
Fourthly, he tells us that all in the church, particularly Presbyters, must
yield obedience to the Bishop, (...), all follow the Bishop, in the Epistle to
the Smyrnaeans, (...), that being subject to the Bishop ye may be sanctified
in all things, in Ep. ad. Ephesians. (...), ye ought to pay all reverence to the
Bishop, adding, (...), as he had observed their pious Presbyters to do, though
their Bishop were young in Ep. ad Magnes: and again, (...), be subject to the
Bishop, so (...) give heed to the Bishop, in Ep. ad Philad. (...), and (...),
be subject, and it is necessary to be subject to the Bishop, and (...).
Farewell ye that obey the Bishop, in Ep. ad Trall. Fifthly, he often adds, that
nothing ought to be done in the Church without license of the Bishop, (...),
Let none without the Bishop do any of the things that belong to the Church,
instancing in Baptism and the other Sacrament, in Ep. ad Smyr. and so in the
Epistles to the Philadel^hians and Trallians. Sixthly, that a convenient
reverence and respect is also due to the Presbyters, and to the Deacons, as is
every where taken notice of by him, almost in every Epistle.

And all this and much more we have in the Copies, incorrupt, unto us, And
there is no imaginable way to avoid the force of these Testimonies, and the
authority of that holy Martyr for Episcopacie, but the una litura, expunging or
casting away the whole volume of Epistles.

For the truth is, divine Charity, to fortify the several stocks, to which he
wrote, against the poison of Heretics, the Gnostics, so early creeping in,
and despising the Governors of the Church, (as they had done the Apostles
themselves) and the Doctrine of the Apostles being by him known to be
deposited with the Bishops in each Church, and having particular assurance of
the sanctity, and foun^ faith of the present Governors of these Churches, to
which he writes, He thinks fit to make use of this one most compendious
course, most immediately tending to his end, to keep them all in obedience to
their Bishops and officers under them, and to make the contrary (as it was
indeed) the sure mark of Haereticks, whom they were to avoid.

And so this is it which has so filled all the Epistles (except that one to
the Romans) with continual discourse of the Bishops, conjuncture of affairs,
nothing could with more reason and ^tnesse have been insisted on.

Mean while that I may return to the place from which I have a while
diverted, learned Archbishop of Armagh, that he never disputed against the
validity and authority of these Epistles thus purged, that it cannot be
unknown to them that thus dispute, what arguments he has urged for the
authority of them, and in like manner what and how satisfactory answers he has
given to the special exceptions of others, which very thing occasioned a
particular letter of reply to him from D. Blondell, which by that Archbishops
favor I received, and made my rejoinder to it in the Diss. 2. c. 9. Sect 6 etc.
Dissertations.

This I hope may be sufficient to have said in this matter, instead of
undertaking so unreasonable a task of answering any thing asserted by that
Archbishop.

As for that which follows out of him and M. Casaubone of Baronius and the
Papists making such use, confidence in these Epistles above all other
Ecclesiastical Monuments, it is speedily answered also out of what is already
said, that they were the former corrupt editions, which were abroad in
Baronius's time, with all those supposititious additions and interpolations,
which the Papists are either by Mr. Casaubone, or that Archbishop said to have
made use of; there being no one word or period in this volume, to which my
appeal is made, which yeildeth any advantage to the Papists in any point, nor
is it, nor can it be pretended by any that it does, unless by those in whose
opinion the mainteining of Bishops is reputed for such. And therefore that very
learned man, M. Casaubone, is so far from rejecting all these Epistles, that he
distinctly promises nonnullaru^n ex illis antiquitatem se novis rationibus
tuiturum, that he will, if God permit, defend the antiquity of some of them, by
reasons which others had not taken notice of: Exerc. 16. Cont. Baron. Sect. 10.
And this promise of his is cited by the Archbishop, Dissert. de Epist Ign. page
136. so far is it from all appearance of truth, which is cited as the opinion
of these two learned men.

After all this* they will briefly off^r, why they cannot build their judg^ment
concerning the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, about Episcopacy upon
Ignatius's Epistles.

1. Because there are diverse things quoted out of his Epistles by Athanasius,
Gelasiu^, and Theodoret, which are either not to be found in these Epistles or
to be found altered and changed, and not acco^ding as they are quoted* This is
R^vets argument, and pursued at large by the Archbishop, to whom we refer the
Reader.

Being among their other Readers referred to the Archbishop of Armagh for the
validity and pursuit of this first reason, appeal, what force there is in it,
against the volume of Epistles now twice in several forms published by him.
And in the ^rolegomena to the former of them, page 15, 16 etc. this is most
evident that the passages cited by Athanasius, Gelasius, and Theodoret, which
were not indeed to be found in the former printed Greek copies, are exactly
discerned and evidenced by him to be in the old latin Interpreter, which he
therefore thought fit to publish both out of Caius College and Bishop
Montacutes Library. The same has he farther shown, cap 4. page 19. etc. out of
the same and other of the Ancients, Eusebius, Hierome, etc. and set down the
places in columns, by way of parallel, to demonstrate the agreement of this
Copy with the genuine Ignatius.

And is it not a little strange, Archbishop for the pursuit of this argument,
which he has so distinctly proved to be of no force against the Copy which now
I use, but to concur in demonstrating the purity of it?

Their second Reason they draw from his overmuch extolling himself in his
Epistle to the Trallians, Cherubims and Seraphims, the Kingdom of the Lord,
and the incomparable Divinity of the Lord God almighty. All these things I
know, and yet am not perfect, etc. Now who is there that can believe that such
arrogant boasting can proceed from such an holy man, and humble Saint, as
Ignatius was?

And who would believe that the writer of this Appendix, Archbishop of Armagh
in his Prologomena to his first Edition of Ignatius, and so could not but be
able to have consulted that Edition, should thus think to defame, and blast
the whole volume of Epistles, for one such periods sake, which is not to be
discerned in this, or that Archbishops latter, or in Vossius's edition of them,
to which only he must know we make our appeal for Episcopacy?

In these Copies the words are quite distant from what is here cited, contrary
to them, evidences of the greatest humility, now when he was so near the honor
of Martyrdom, (...), For I am not, because (or in that) I am in bonds able
also to understand heavenly things, the Positions of Angels, their assemblies
of Principalities (or of the Rulers of them) both things visible and invisible.
Besides this, I am yet also a Disciple, etc. What arrogance, I pray, or
boasting is there in this? and yet he adds no more in that place but only,
(...), (...), For many things are wanting to us that we may not be left behind
by God, thinking himself utterly unworthy of the honor (and fearing he may
yet miss of it) to suffer Martyrdom for him. And so much for the second
Reason.

The third (which, say they, is most for our purpose) is from his over eager
and over-anxious defense of the Episcopal Hierarchy, which he does with such
strange and Hyperbolical expressions (as if all Christianity were lost, if
Prelacie were not upheld) and with such multiplied repetitions, ad naus^am
usque, that we may confidently say as one does, Ceci censur^.
Certo certius est has Epistolas vel supp^sitias esse, vell ^oede corruptas,
and that they do neither agree with those times wherein he wrote, nor with
such an holy and humble Martyr as he was. We will instance in some few of them.

What reasons and design Ignatius had to exhort the Christians, o^edience to
their Governors, in the Church, has already been said at large, this being the
only expedient, that, at that time, could be thought on, to keep out most
dangerous heresies out of the Church. And therefore what that holy Mart^r did
in that kind, when he was carried from his own Church, never to return to it
again, cannot be looked on, as the seeking any great things for himself, and
so contrary to either his piety or humility, but as a desire full of both
those, that the Church of God might enjoy truth and peace, after the beasts had
devoured him.

As for the strange and hyperbolicall expressions, objection, and exemplified
in the two following pages, the Reader must again be told, that what they had
done most unreasonably before, is here practiced again at large, several
places brought out of the former corrupt editions of Ignatius, of which no one
word is to be found in the new editions out of the most ancient Copies Greek
and Latin, from which alone it is evident that we produce all our testimonies
for Episcopacy, and so have produced very few of those, which they are thus
pleased to find fault with.

The places which they urge, eight, I shall not need to set them down, but give
the leader a much shorter, and yet as satisfactory an account of them. Two are
cited from the Epistle to the Trallians, and neither of them are in any part to
be found in our Editions. Two are cited from the Epistle to the Magnesians, and
the first is not at all in our Editions, nor the second any farther than thus,
(...). As Christ being one with his Father did nothing without him, either by
himself or by his Apostles, so neither do ye act any thing without the Bishop
and the Presbyters, nor endeavor that any thing should appear reasonable to
you which is private, or of your own devising A speech in every syllable of
it, very well becoming that Holy Martyr, written by him at a time, when the
truth being by the Apostles deposited with the Bishops, all private devises of
their own were most justly to be suspected.

The fifth is in the Epistle to Polycarpe, Copies thus, (...). It becomes the
men that marry, and the women that are married, to consummate their union with
the consent of the Bishop. And I wonder what age of the Church there has been
from that time to this, which has not been of the same opinion. For what is by
Bishops committed to Presbyters, that is not done (...), without the mind of
the Bishop (as elsewhere in those Epistles appears of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, neither of which, says he, are to be meddled with without the consent
of the Bishop, and many testimonies out of Antiquity are See N^m. 55.
elsewhere produced in perfect conformity therewith.) And consequently, if in
the Christian Church, marriage has always been consummated by the Priest or
Presbyter, then cannot this speech of Ignatius have any blame in it.

And that thus it has been through all ages, there is little matter of
question ( and no word here produced by the Objectors to the contrary) *
Tertullian will be a good competent tostimonie for the next Centurie, Ad Uxor.
l. 2. c. ult.
speaking of the felicity of the Christian Marriage, quod Ecclesia conciliat,
and confirmat oblatio, and obsignat benedictio, Angeli renuntiant, etc. Which
the Church makes, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper confirms, the benediction
of the Priest Seals, and the Angels pronounce valid. And in * another place,
De Pudic. c. 4.
Penes nos occultae co^junctiones, i. e. non prius apud Ecclesiam professa,
juxta moechiam and fornicationem judicari periclitantur, Marriages that are not
done publicly before the Church, are in danger with us, to go for adultery
and fornication.

The same is every where to be found in the Decretal Epistles of Euaristus,
Ignatius's time (which makes it a tradition from the Apostles and their
successors) of Soter not above 50. years after, of Callistus near fifty years
after him, of Silvester an 100 years after him, of Siricius 70. years after
Silvester, of Hormisdas 130. years after Siricius: And though some of these be
by D. Blondel thought to be of later dates than the titles of them would
pretend, yet the authority of most of them is unquestioned, as to this matter.

And the ancient piece lately published by Sirmund concerning the Heresy of the
Predestinati, written, says he, 1200. years since, speaks of it, as a known
custom and Canon of the Church, over all the world, For, says that ancient
author, If marriage be unlawful, Emendate ergo Ecclesia regul^m, damnate qui
in toto orb sunt, sacerdotes, Nuptiarum initia benedicentes, consecrantes, and
in Dei mysteriis sociantes, Amend then the rule the of Church, and condemn the
Priests which are in all the world, who bless the beginnings of Marriage,
consecrate, and join the parties together with the Holy Sacrament.

And the fourth Council of Carthage, before the year 400. has these words,
Sponsus and sponsa cum benedicendi sunt a sacerdote -- When the Bridegroom and
the Bride are to be blessed by the Priest, Can. 13. And for latter ages the
matter is out of Question.

And so it will be much more reasonable, Ignatius, being found so perfectly
concordant with other passages of the times so near him, to resolve the rule of
the Church concerning sacerdotal benediction in marriage to be received from
the Apostles and their successors, than from finding this speech in one of
Ignatius's Epistles, to cast away the whole volume.

As for that which is added at the end of this testimony from the Epistle to
Polycarpe, My soul for theirs, that obey the Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons,
there can be no fault in that, supposing as has been said, that the Bishops at
that time, and the Presbyters and Deacons living regularly and in union with
them, had the true safe way among them, wherein any man might walk
confidently, all danger being from the Heresies that crept in, and brake men
off from that unity of the faith.

The sixth place from the Epistle to the Philadelphians, Princes and Emperors
obeying the Bishop, is certainly inserted by forgery in the former, for not one
word of it, or like it, is to be found in our editions.

So likewise for both parts of the seventh place out of the Epist^e to the
Smyrnaeans, Editions.

The last only is to be met with there, moderate strain, than the former, in
words and sense very agreeable to wholesome doctrine, and the exigencies of
those times, wherein there was no visible way to keep out the tares of false
teachers, but by requiring all to be kept to the managery of the true
husbandman. And accordingly I have cited this very speech out of Ignatius for
the asserting of Prelacie (and if there were no such, the Epistles might pass
well enough with these, as with all other men, they would have needed no
vindication, having no adversary) The words are these, (...) -- All of you
follow the Bishop as Christ Jesus did his Father (i. e. as elsewhere appears by
the like expression, with [(...)] added to it, be at perfect unity of doctrine,
etc. with the Bishop, as Christ was with God the Father) and the Presbytery as
the Apostles, and reverence the Deacons as those that are appointed by God,
(viz. mediately by the Apostles.

Where it may be observable, obiectors which find such fault with this speech
of Ignatius in their quarrelling with it, leave out this latter part of
Presbytery and Deacons; they cannot find in their hearts to quarrel, or
accuse him for bidding them follow the Presbytery as the Apostle, the only
crime was to bid them follow the Bishop (not, as Christ in the dative, i. e. as
they follow Christ, but) as Christ follows his Father, the only p^acular
offense, to recommend unity with, and obedience to the Bishop. But that by the
way.

It follows in the place, Bishop do ought which belongs to the Church, Let
that be accounted a firm Eucharist, which is done by the Bishop, or him whom
the Bishop shall permit. Where the Bishop appears there let the multitude be,
as where Christ is, there is the Catholic Church, It is not lawful without
the Bishop ( i. e. as before, without commission from him) either to Baptize or
Administer the Eucharist, but what he approves of ( thus in these public
Ministrations) that is well pleasing to God, that it may be sa^e and firm
whatsoever is done; It does well that men know God and the Bishop. ( as their
Ruler under God, with whom his truth is by the Apostles deposited) he that
honors the Bishop, is honored by God, he that does any thing clancularly
without him, serves the Devil ( performs a very acceptable service to him;
For so in a very eminent manner the Heretics of that age, the Gnostics did,
which secretly infused their devilish Leaven, and deadly poison into men's
hearts, by which they took them quite from Christ, but could not have done so
successefully, if this Holy Martyr's counsel here had been taken.)

What inconvenience can be imagined consequent to our affirming that Ignatius
was the author of these words, question, but that it is the ordinary Language
of the ancient Church, and accounted necessary in an eminent degree, to
preserve unity and truth in the Church, and to hold up the authority of
Governors among all, (...), The Presbyters and Deacons must do nothing
without the mind of the Bishop, Can. Apost. 40. and the reason is added (...),
for he is entrusted with the people of the Lord, So in the 56. Canon of
Laodicaea, (...), The Presbyters must do nothing without the mind of the
Bishop, and so in the Council of Arles, Can. 19. The Presbyters must do
nothing in any Diocese sine Episcopi sententia, without the Bishops mind, and
sine authoritate literarum ejus, without authority of his Letter^.

All that is here offered by them to make the like words in Ignatius a
competent charge, volume of Epistles, is only this, If this be true Doctrine,
what shall become of all the Reformed Churches, especially the Church of
Scotland, which (as John Major says lib. 2. Histor. de Gestis Scotorum, c 2.)
was after it is first conversion to the Christian faith above 230 years without
Episcopal Government.

To this double question I might well be allowed to render no answer,
extrinsecall to the Question in hand, (which is only this, whether Ignatius
wrote or wrote not those Epistles) to examine what shall become of the Reformed
Churches, etc. It were much more reasonable for me to demand of the Objectors,
who suppose their Presbyteriall platform, as that is opposed to Episcopal, to
be settled in the Church by Divine Right, If this Doctrine be true, what did
become of all those Primitive Churches all the World over, which they confess
departed from this model, and set up the contrary, and so of all the
succeeding ages of the Church for so many 100 years, till the Reformation, and
since that also, of all the other Churches, which do not thus far imitate
Mr. Calvin, casting out the Government by Bishops?

Is it not as reasonable that they should be required to give a fair and
justifiable account of their dealing with (and judging, post factum, of) all
these, as I should be obliged to reconcile Ignatius his speech concerning his
present age, with the conveniences of the Reformed Churches, which he could
neither see, nor be deemed to speak of, nor consequently to pass judgment on
them by divination.

What they were guilty of which secretly infused their poison into Men and
Women in his age, Bishop the Governor of the Church, be the Judge of their
Doctrines and ^ractices, he here tells us, viz. That they performed service to
the Devil, in stealing Men's hearts from Christ; But what crime it was in those
of Corinth, and through all Achaia, to turn their Bishops out of their places,
(...) and (...), to cast them out of their Episcopacy their Office and
Ministration, this he tells them not in that place, Clemens Romanus had done it
competently in his Epistle.

As for the particular case of those Reformed Churches, present Governors, but
over and above utterly cast off the Government it self, there had been I
confess, a great deal said, both in this and other places of Ignatius, and
many other Ancient Writers, who yet never foretold these days, abundantly
sufficient to have restreined them from so disorderly proceedings, if they
would have pleased to have hearkened to such moderate counsels. But having not
done so, Ignatius has gone no farther, he is only a witness against them, he
undertook not the Office of a judge so far beyond his Province, has
pronounced no sentence upon them.

And to proceed one degree farther, successors of those in the Reformed
Churches (as many as are justly blameable for treading in their Leaders steps)
though I may truly say, they have as little taken that Hol^ Martyrs advise,
and more than so, that they have retaind a considerable corruption in their
Churches, and that they should do well, if now they know how, to restore
themselves to that medell, which they find every where exemplified in Ignatius,
yet till they shall have done so, I know that they are exactly capable of being
concer^d in any part of these words, last cited from Ignatius.

For they that have no Bishop at all, do nothing without consulting with the
Bishop; They are justly to be blamed, as far as they are guilty, that they
have no Bishop; but then that is their crime (and they are to reform it as
soon as they please) but that being supposed, this of not consulting the
Bishop, while they have none, is no new crime, nor liable of it self to the
censure of (...) here, which was affixt to those that had Bishops, and would
not have their Doctrines examined by that standard, of which they were the
Depositaries. And this is as much as is needful to be said in this place for
that first inconvenience affixt to Ignatius's words.

As for the other, Church of Scotland in it is first conversion, the matter
again is so remote from the task we have now in hand, for the vindicating the
Authority of Ignatius's volumne of Epistles, and withal so uncertainly set
down by Authors, that it would be unseasonable to engage far in so dark a
part of History so impertinently. In brief therefore, though I have not John
Major by me to consult, yet I conceive I shall not guess amiss at the
grounds, and consequently at the truth and weight of his assertion.

Joannes Jordanus was of opinion that Demster. Appar ad Hist. Scot. l. 1. c. 6.
Paschasius a Sicilian prima Christianae pietatis rudimenta mandante P. Victore
in Scotia nuntiavit, Scotland by the command of Pope Victor. And this was about
the year 203. And Eccle. Hist. l. 1. c. 13.
Bid says that in the eight year of Theodosius Junior, that is about the
year 431, Palladius ad Scotos in Christum credentes a Pontifice Romanae
Ecclesiae Coelestino primus mittitur Episcopus, Palladius was by Celestine
Bishop of Rome sent first Bishop to the Scots that believed. And the distance
betwixt these two terms being 228. years, this I conceive the ground- work of
John Major's affirmation here cited, of the 230. years, wherein that Church
after it^s first conversion remained without Episcopal Government.

But first it is to be noted here, Jordanus of Paschasius in Victor's days, is
no more than this, that he preached the Gospel there, prima rudimenta
nuntiavit, declared the first rudiments there, and, as it follows in Demster,
tyrocinia fidei fecit, laid the grounds of Christianity among them; And that
might be done, and soon moulder away again, and never come to so much
maturity, as either to have Bishops or Presbyters constituted among them. And
secondly, though Bid say that Palladius was sent to them Episcopus primus,
their first Bishop, yet neither he, nor any other affirms that they were
formerly ruled by a Presbytery, or so much as that they had any Presbyter among
them. Nay thirdly, Demster reports it from Jordanus but slightly, Joh. Jordanus
putavit, it was the conceit or opinion of that author. And that which Lib. 8.
de signis Eccl. c. 1.
Bozius tells us will take off much from the creditablenesse of that Opinion,
Traditur in Scotia, quae tunc erat Hibernia, Christi cultum disseminatum eodem
tempore quo in Britannia, sub annum Christi 203. Victore sedente. They say that
the faith of Christ was disseminated in Scotland, which was then Ireland, at
the same time that it was in Britanny, about the year 203. in the time of
Victors Papacy.

By this it appears that the conceit of Jordanus belonged to Ireland,
Scotland, Ireland being anciently called Scotia (as in Li. 2. c. 4.
Bid we find, Scotorum qui Hiberniam insulam Britanniae proximam incolunt,
the Scots which inhabit Ireland, and L. 3. c. c.
Gentes Scotorum quae Australibus Hiberniae partibus morabantur, the Scots
which inhabited the Southern parts of Ireland) and that which is now Scotland,
was then styled Nova Scotia, to distinguish it from the other. And it is worth
remembering that Marianus the Scotch Antiquary had no knowledge of this
conversion of Scotland under Victor, See Baron. Annal. Tom. 5. Anno. 429. Sect.
2.
nor is there any show of it in Bid, who tells us of the latter.

Nay it is yet more evident Adv. Coll^s. in fine.
by Prosper, conversion from barbarous to Christian, which is spokon of in
Coelestines time, and that the Faith was planted, and the Bishop constituted
there together, Venerabilis memoriae Pontifex ab hoc codem morbo Britannias
liberavit, and ordinato Scotis Episcopo, dum Romanam insulam studet servare,
Catholicam fecit etiam barbaram Christianam, Pop^ Coelestine freed Britain
from Pelagianisme, and ordained a Bishop for the Scots, and so while he
endeavored to keep a Roman Island within the bounds of the Catholic Faith,
he also made a barbarous Island Christian. Which as it differs somewhat from
Bedes expression of Palladius's being sent ad credentes, to believers, so it
gives us occasion to propose that which may reconcile these seeming
differences, viz. 1. That Christanity was planted in Scotland before
Caelestine's time, derived to them most probably from their Neighbors the
Britains here, with whom they are See Bid l. 2. c. 4. Scotos nihil discripar^
a Britonibus in eorum conversatione didicimus, and c. 19. and l. 3. c. 3. Hoc
enim ordine septentrionalis Scotorum Provincia and ^^nis n^tio Pictoru^ Pascha
Dominicum ^^lebrabat.
known to have agreed in the keeping of Easter, contrary to the custom of the
Roman Church, and so cannot be deemed to have received the first Rudiments of
their conversion from Rome: Then secondly, that this Plantation was very
imperfect, differing little from Barbarism, and so reputed by Prosper, till
the coming of Bishop Palladius among them. Thirdly, that even after that, they
retained the usage of Easter, contrary to the Roman custom, which still
referres to some rude conversion of theirs before Palladius.

By all this it is cleared to us, John Major's affirmation, which has now very
little appearance of truth in it, and if it had, would be little for the
Presbyterian interest to insist on it, when after all that time of the supposed
government of that Church by Presbyters, it was found directly barbarous, and
to be planted with Christianity anew, at Palladius'^ coming.

Some uncertainty we see there is of the time and means of planting
Christianity in Scotland, 69*
but as to this matter of the 230. years under Presbytery, there can be no
ground to affirm it; For if the conversion of it be dated from Victor's time,
as that opinion would have it, yet even by that account 'twas after the space,
wherein the Presbyterians themselves acknowledge Episcopacy to have prevailed
over all the World; and then, upon that account, it must be granted, that
whenever their first conversion was, 'twas certainly derived to them by those
who had Episcopal Government among them, and then they having sent them
Presbyters to instruct and officiate (as Presbyters not as Bishops) among them,
those Presbyters must be supposed to have continued under those Bishops by whom
they were sent, whether from Rome, or nearer home from the British, so far at
least, as that when they failed, their number was supplied from the same
Fountain from which they first sprang, (in the same manner as our own
experience tells us of Virginia, which since the first Plantation continued to
receive Presbyters from hence) and so continued to be, until they had Bishops
ordained and planted among them. And so much for that second supposed
inconvenience also.

Sect. IV.
Of Salmasius's conceit that these Epistles were written at the time of
Episcopacy first entering the Church.
THat which follows of the Justice of the Reverend Presbyterian Divines
censure of these Epistles, Salmasius's his belief, that they were written by a
Pseudo-Ignatius, will not require any answer from me, who cannot be moved by
the conclusion made by those Divines, any farther than the Premises here
produced and answered, have appeared to have force in them, and who have more
largely examined Salmasius his exceptions heretofore, and was even now by them
acknowledged so to have done, and nothing yet replied to my answers, and
therefore must not for ever turn the same stone, begin the same task again.

But for the conceit which is here cited from Salmasius, which I confess I
considered not so much before, as to make any reply to it, viz. That these
Epistles were written when Episcopacy, properly so called, came into the
church, and that proved from hence, because in all his Epistles he speaks
highly in honor of Presbytery as well as of Episcopacy, that so the people,
that had been accustomed to the Presbyterian Government, might the more
willingly and easily receive this now Government by Episcopacy, and not be
offended at the novelty of it. It is evident how easily this may be retorted,
and the argument as firmly formed to conclude, that Presbyters were then newly
come into the Church, and therefore to make the people inclinable to give them
a willing Reception, without being offended at the novelty of them, he still
speaks highly in honor of Episcopacy.

Such Arguments as these you will guess from hence, incompetent they are to
conclude matters of fact, done so many hundred years ago, (such is the
question, whether Ignatius wrote these Epistles or no) It is much more probable
that they wanted Arguments of any real validity, who are feign to fly to such
Succors as these.

Yet one farther misadventure there is, conceit, For what is said in those
Epistles concerning the honor due to Presbyters or the Presbytery, is far
from looking favorably on the Presbyterian Government, for certainly as long
as there is a Bishop, properly so called, set over the Presbyters, as they know
there is in all those Epistles, and as long as the Presbyters are to do nothing
without commission from him (as they knew also (and even now quarreled at it)
that by him they are required to do) there is little show of the Presbyterian
model discernible, no whit more, than there was in England long before they
covenanted to cast the Bishops out of the Church, It being certain that no
community or equality of Presbyters taken into council with the Bishop, does
constitute the Government Presbyterian, as long as there be any Bishops to have
power over Presbyters; Else had the Convocation of Deanes, Archdoacons and
Clerks, fourteen years ago, been the platform of Presbyterian Government in
England.

This is, answer to every the most minute part or appearance of Argument here
produced against these Epistles, and is all that was proper here to be said
concerning Ignatius, whose Epistles as long as they have any authority with us,
let it be in the most Reformed, purified Edition, that ever was, or can be
hoped for, there is evidence enough for the Apostolical Institution of Bishops
in the modern notion of the word, And if after all this they must have no
authority, for no other crime, but because they are such punctual Asserters of
this Doctrine; It Is to little purpose farther to examine or inquire, what
Antiquity has affirmed or practiced in this matter.

Sect. V.
Testimonies of Irenaeus, The use of Presbyteri for Bishops.
YEt because their Method leads us forward to consider some other of the
Ancient Writers, Irenaeus and Tertullian, p. 114. 115. where having
acknowledged of them that they say that Apostles made Bishops in Churches,
Polycarpe in Smyrna, Clemens at Rome, etc. all that they require of us to
prove, is, that by the word Bishop is meant a Bishop as distinct from
Presbyters, and the reason why they think this needs proving, is, because both
those Authors use the words (...) Bishops, and (...), Presbyteri, Seniores, for
the same thing, the one calling Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, Telesphorus, Xystus,
Presbyters of the Church of Rome in his Epistle to Victor; the other calling
the Presidents of the Churches Seniores in his Apology, and some other places
are produced to the same purpose.

To this therefore I shall now briefly give answer, i. e, by concession that
the same persons, Bishops, are promiscuously called Presbyteri and Seniores
also; And therefore secondly, that this question being thus far (as to the
Names) equally balanced between us, they saying that Bishops] signifies
Presbyters in the modern notion, we that Presbyters] signifies Bishops in the
modern notion, some other Indications, beside this of the Names, must be made
use of on either side, toward the decision of it.

Of this sort there is no one offered to us by them, as they have nothing to
incline the balance their way, so we have nothing to make answer to in that
particular. I shall therefore (as the only thing left for me to do) render
some few Reasons, why the words Bishop and Elders in these Authors must needs
signify Bishops in our Modern sense.

And the first proof, Ironaeus, is, because Irenaeus, who uses these words
promiscuously, was himself a Bishop in our modern notion, and yet is by
others in his own days called Elder of the Church of Lions, at that very time,
when he is acknowledged to be Bishop of it, in our modern sense of the word;
This I thus manifest in each part.

And first, Irenaeus was Bishop of Lions, in such a sense, as we now use
Bishop, appears by what L. 5. c. 23.
Eusebius says of him, importing that he was Primate of all France, (...),
(...), says he* he was Bishop of the Provinces through France: Now this, we
know, cannot be affirmed of a modern Presbyter, who pretends not to any such
wide and singular jurisdiction; And this needs no farther proof, it being by
D. Blondell in his Apology for St. Hierome confessed, that 140. years after
Christ, i.e. nigh 40. years before this time, the Government of the Church was
in the hands of Bishops over all the World, one in every Church set over all
the rest of the Church.

For the second part then, Bishop and Archbishop, he is yet called (...), Elder
of the Church, I appeal to the Testimony of the Gallicane Church, at that
time, as it lies recorded in L. 5. c. 4.
Eusebius, where in an Embassy performed by him in the name of the Martyrs of
Lions to Elentherius the Bishop of Rome, we have these words concerning him,
(...) (...), (...) (...), (...), (...) (...) (...), (...). We have entreated
our Brother and partaker Irenaeus to bear these Letters to you, O Father
Eleutherius, and we beseech you to prize him at one very zealous of Christ's
Covenant; If we thought that Justice would purchase a place to any, we had
commended him in a principal manner, as Elder of the Church, for so he is.

Here nine years after he had been Bishop and Archbishop of Lions, year of
Christ 177. he is styled by those Letters, Elder of the Church; by which it
appears that in his time Elder was the title of Bishop, in our Modern sense,
and consequently so it may fitly signify in his own writings, and so must
needs do there, when it is applied to those, who were acknowleged Bishops at
that time, when by the Presbyterians acknowledgement Episcopacy was come in, in
that notion, wherein we now understand it.

A second proof of this, Papias he says of all the Seniores or Elders, which
in Asia converst with St. John, that Clemens Alexandrinus, who lived in the
same time, affirms of the Bishops or Elders of Asia; meaning by both of them
the Bishops in our notion of the word.

Clemens Alexandrinus wrote his Stromata about the year 192. five years
before Irenaeus Martyrdom, in the 5. of Severus. Now of this Clemens, it is
certain, 1. That he acknowleged the three Orders in the Church, which he calls
(...), Strom. 6.
(...), (...), (...), the three degrees or promotions in the Church, of
Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and consequently must by the word (...)
understand Bishops in our modern sense.

Secondly, that when he makes the Relation of John's meeting with the Bishops
of Asia (which is the same matter which Irenaeus produces out of Papias) he
calls them in the same period both Elders and Bishops indifferently, John he
has this passage, (...) (...), (...) (...) -- Coming to a City not far off
-- and looking on the Bishop, which was constituted over all, seeing a young
man, he said, This person I commit to thee -- And the Elder took him home,
brought him up baptized, and at last gave him confirmation.

Here it is evident this Elder of Asia, Irenaeus, conversed with Saint John, is
(...) (...), a Bishop constituted over all in that City; and agreeably when
Saint John comes back that way again, he calls to him by that title, (...),
(...) (...) (...), O Bishop, render us the depositum, which both I and Christ
delivered to thee in the presence of the Church, over which thou art set. Where
again he that is called Elder both by him and Irenaeus, is also by him called
(...) (...), the Bishop set over the Church. And so that is a second evidence
of it.

Thirdly, Epistle to Victor Bishop of Rome, he speaks of his Predecessors
thus, (...) -- The Elders which were set over the Church which thou rulest,
Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, and Telesphorus, and lib. 3. cap. 3 (...) -- The
blessed Apostles having founded and built the Church of Rome, put the Episcopal
office into the hands of Linus, Anacletus succeeded him, Clemens Anacletus,
Evarestus Clemens, Alexander Evarestus, then Xystus the sixth from the Apostles,
after him Telesphorus, then Hyginus, then Pius, after him Anicetus, after
Anicetus, Soter; (...), (...) (...), Now in the twelfth place Eleutherus
possesses the Bishopric from the Apostles.

Here 1. it is evident that every one first named as Elders, single persons,
one succeding another, (...) set over, or ruling the Church of Rome: Secondly,
That for twelve successions together they are by Irenaeus looked upon all, as of
the same rank, succeeding one another, and the first as well as the last,
called Bishop, which must conclude it to be understood by him in such a notion,
as is equally competible to all, and so must be in our modern notion, if the
great Asserters of the Presbyterian cause say true, that about the year 140.
i. e. certainly before Elutherius was Bishop of Rome, there were Bishops over
Presbyters all the world over.

Lastly, L. 4. c. 44.
Irenaeus, speaking of some unworthy voluptuous Elders, expresses their faults
in such a manner, as cannot fitly belong to any but Bishops, Principalis
concessionis tumore elati sunt, they are puffed up with the ^ride of the
principal place, the (...) the principal chair, which as Bishops belonged to
them. ^or though it is as possible that Presbyters should be guilty of the
pride, the tumor and elation, as that Bishops should be guilty of the same,
yet the occasion of it there mentioned, the principalis consessio, the chief
place of dignity, is peculiar to the one, and not reconcilable with the (...)
or equality of the other.

These evidences have readily offered themselves to show what Irenaeus means
by Presbyteri, Bishops promiscuously, viz. by both, Bishops in our modern
notion, and he that shall read over that author diligently, and compare his
dialect with Polycarpe and Papias, with whom he accords, the former using (...)
for Bishops (as has largely been insisted on) and the latter for Apostles and
Bishops, single Governors of each Church, ( Eusebius. l. 3. c. 39.
(...), (...), (...), (...), and elsewhere (...). Andrew, Peter, Aristion,
John, Mark, all Elders) will doubtless find many more proofs that thus he
used the word, and (I shall adventure to undertake) meet with no one indication
to the contrary.

Sect. V.
Testimonies of Tertullian. Seniores, and Majores natu for Bishops, so in
Firmilian.
AS for Tertullian I shall need say no more, but that it is the confession of
the great Patron of Presbyterians, D Blondel Apol. page 38.
that he does aperte tueri communiusu receptam ordinis in Episcopos,
Presbyteros and Diaconos, distinctionem. Openly defend the received common
distinction of the Ecclesiastic order into Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons,
and he that can yet doubt of it, let him examine his citations, de Praescript.
cap. 41. de Baptism cap 17. de Monogam. cap. 11. de Fuga c. 11. And that de
Baptismo as high and clear, as that which was most quarreled with in
Ignatius. Dandi Baptismum jus habit summus sacerdos, qui est Episcopus, dein
Presbyteri and Diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi authoritate, propter honorem
Ecclesiae, quo salvo salva pax est. The Bishop has the right of giving
Baptism, after him the Presbyters and Deacons, yet not without the authority
of the Bishop, for the honor of the Church, which being preserved, peace is
preserved.

So that of him it is as clear, Irenaeus or Clemens, that he must understand
Bishop in our Modern notion: And yet even by him, these of this uppermost
degree are called Seniores, and Majores natu, Elders, Praesident probati quique
Seniores, the Elders praeside, Apol. c. 39. and of the Bishops of Rome, the
series of whom he had brought down to Anicetus, lib. 3. contr. Marcion. cap.
9. he expresses them by Majores natu, successors of the Apostles, in his Book,
written in verse, against Marcion.

And there will be less wonder in this, Cyprian's times (who has been
sufficiently evidenced to speak of Bishops in our modern notion of them)
Firmilian Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, in vulgar style calls them
Seniores, and Praepositi, Elders, and Provosts, in his Epistle to Cyprian, and
again Praesident Majores natu, etc. the Elders praeside, evidently meaning the
Bishops by those titles.

And so much be spoken in return to what they have objected from these two
Ancients, Irenaeus and Tertullian, supposing that I have competently performed
the task by them imposed on the Praelatists, showed that the Bishops spoken of
by them, were Bishops over Presbyters, and by them understood to be so*

Sect. VI.
Saint Jerome's Testimony of Bishops, etc. by Apostolical Tradition. Consuetudo
opposed to Dominica dispositio. Saint Jerome's meaning evidenced by many other
Testimonies to be, that Bishops were instituted by the Apostles. So by
Panormitan also. The Testimonies of Isidore, etc. the Council of Aquen, and of
Leo vindicated. Of Ischyras's Ordination. The testimony of the Synod ad
Zurrium, and of the 4th Council of Carthage.
IN the next place I am to proceed to that of Saint Hierome in his 85. the
unanswerablenesse of which I am affirmed to make matter of Triumph over D.
Blondel and Walo Massalinus, seeming to say, that it never can be answered,
whereas say they, if I had been pleased to cast an eye upon the vindication --
written by Smectymnuus, I should have found this answer --

What this answer is, triumphing over these two learned men.

And first it is sufficiently known, defenders of Presbyter^ conceive
themselves to have from that one Ancient writer, the Presbyter Saint Hierome:
From him they have the interpretation of those Scriptures, which they think to
be for their use, as that the word Bishop and Presbyter are all one in several
texts of Scripture, and both signify Presbyters, and that the Apostles at
first designed, ut communi Presbyteroru^ concilio Ecclesiae gubernarentur, that
the Churches should be governed by the common Council of Presbyters, and that
it so continued till upon the dissentions, which by this means arose in the
Church, it was judged more prudent and useful to the preserving of unity, ut
unus superponeretur reliquis, that one should be set over the rest, and all the
care of the Church belong to him, And this, says Hierome, in toto Orb
decretum, decreed and executed over the whole world.

By whom this was conceived, decreed, he gives us not to understand in that
place, nor in what point of time he thought it was done, but leaves us to
collect both from some few circumstances; as 1. that it was after Schisms
entered into the Church, and one said I am Paul, I of Apollos, etc. And if it
were immediately after that, then the Presbyterians will gain but little by
this Patron: For his whole meaning will be, that the Apostles first put the
Government of each Church into the hands of many, but soon saw the
inconvenience of doing so, and the Schism and ruptures consequent to it, and
changed it themselves, and settled one singular Bishop in the whole power of
Government in every Church, to which very fitly coheres what Clement had said,
that lest new contentions should arise about this singular dignity and
authority who should succeed to it, they made a roll or Catalogue of those,
which in vacancies should succeed in each Church.

That this was not, Hierome's opinion, done thus early in the Apostles time,
the Presbyterians think they may conclude from what he says on Tit. 1.
Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine quam dispositionis Dominicae veritate
Presbyteris esse Majores, Let Bishops know that their greatness and
superiority over Presbyters is held rather by custom, than by Christ's having
disposed it so. But it is very possible that this may not prove the conclusion,
which is thought to be inferred by it, For here Consuetudo, Custom, as opposed
to Christ's disposition, may well signify the Practice of the Church in the
later part of the Apostles times, and ever since to S. Hierome's days, and that
may well be severed from all command, or institution of Christ's, and so Jerome's
opinion may well be this, that Christ did not ordain this superiority of one
above another, but left all in common in the Apostles hands, who within awhile,
to avoid Schism, put the power in each Church in the hands of some one singular
person.

And that this was Hierome's meaning, charity to him, obliged to think, both
because in this sense his words would better agree with the universal
affirmation of all Orthodoxe Christians, that before him (and after him too,
unless those few that took it on his credit) speak of this matter, and also,
because if this be not his sense, he must needs be found to contradict
himself, having elsewhere affirmed that the three degrees of Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons in the Church were of Apostolical tradition, i. e. by
the Apostles themselves delivered to the Church.

And now before I proceed, ingenuous Reader, who is contrary minded, to
consider, what he can object to this conclusion of mine thus inferred
concerning S. Hierome's opinion, and consequently what probability there is,
that the Presbyterians cause should be superstructed on any Testimony of S.
Hierome, supposing what I am next to demonstrate, that the three orders are by
him acknowledged to be delivered from the Apostles.

And this is evident in his Epistle to Euagrius, substance of what has been
now cited from his notes on Tit. 1. he yet concludes, Et ut sciamus-traditiones
Apostolicas sumptas de veteritestamento, Quod Aaron and filii ejus atque
Levitae in templ^ fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi and Presbyteri and Diaconi in
Ecclesia vendicent. That we may know that the Apostles traditions are taken out
of the Old Testament, we have this instance, that what Aaron and his Sons and
the Levites were in the Temple, the same the Bishops and Presbyters and Deacons
challenge to themselves in the Church. Where these three degrees (and so the
superiority of Bishops over Presbyters) are by him affirmed to be traditions of
the Apostles.

On occasion therefore of inquiring into Hierome's meaning (and because this
place so readily offered it self to expedite it) it was sure very reasonable
to examine, Hierome's authority, should be found to say to this testimony of
his, for the Apostolical tradition of three orders. And among these, three
principal persons offered themselves to our consideration, D. Blondell, Walo
Messalinus, or Salmasius, and Lud. Capellus, every of them having newly written
on this subject, and collected especially what Jerome had said of it.

Of these three the last was soon discerned to have dealt most prudently,
testimonies out of him, but wholly omitting this; The other two having not been
so wary, made use of another dexterity, set down the words, but deferred their
observations on them, till some fitter season; D. Blondell put it off to his
sixth Section, whereas upon examination he has but three in his whole book,
and so is certainly never likely to speak of it, nor can be justly believed to
have, in earnest designed any such thing: The other says, he expects more and
better notes on it from Salmasius (i.e. from himself) in another book, viz.
De Ecclesiastico Ordine, and after a great volume come out of that subject 8.
or 9. years after, he yet never takes this place, or his own promise into
consideration.

This was all that my search produced, plain matters of fact, the behaviors
of these men in that, which so much concerned the whole cause to be taken
notice of, and laid to heart, is all that was done by me, and which is styled
by these a triumphing over those learned Men. And I hope there was little of
hard measure, and as little of insolence in this.

Now because what these learned Men thus averted the doing, Smectymnuus, and
that if I had cast an eye on the vindication -- I should there have found that
place of Hierome's answered, I am now in the last place to obey their
directions, and consider the answer, which from Smectymnuus they have set down
for me.

And it is twofold, civil denial that there is any truth in the words, For,
say they, It is hard to conceive how this imparity can be properly called an
Apostolical Tradition, when Jerome, having mentioned John the last of the
Apostles, says it was postea, that one was set over the rest.

But is this the way of answering the place, difficulty? Hierome says,
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons in the Church (that sure is this imparity) are
an Apostolical Tradition; and they answer, It is hard to conceive how it can
be properly so called. What is this but to make Hierom's words (as soon as
ever he says any thing which accords not with their interest) as
unreconcileable with truth, as with his own former words, which they had cited
from him? And then how much kinder to Hierome was I than they, who thought it
necessary to affix a commodious meaning to his former words, and interpret
confuetudo] the custom of the Church begun in the Apostles days, that so in
thus saying, he might be reconcilable with himself, when he called Episcopacy
a tradition Apostolical?

As for the reason, hard for them to conceive from Hierome's words, I believe
it has no force in it; For though after the mention of S. John's words in his
second and third Epistle, he says that [ postea, afterwards] this imparity was
introduced, yet this proves not his opnion to be, that it was not Apostolical
tradition; It might be done after the writing of those Epistles, and yet in St.
John's time, i. e. before his death. And though I believe St. Hierome was
mistaken, in thinking there were no Bishops till then (it would have had more
truth in it, if he had said there were no Presbyters till then) yet for all
that, I cannot doubt but this was his opnion, because as he no where says any
thing which is contrary to this, so here be says expressly that it was
Apostolical tradition, which in his opinion it could not be, if it were not in
the Church, in his opinion, before St. John's death. And so there is but little
appearance of validity in their first Answer.

And for their second, that is somewhat like the former, viz. that with Hierome
Apostolical tradition and Ecclesiastical custom are the same.

If this be true, Hierome used consuetudo custom in opposition to Dominica
dispositio, Christ's appointment or institution, I ought to interpret custom
in that place, by Apostolical Tradition in the other. For how Ecclesiastical
custom with him, and Apostolical Tradition should be the same, and yet
Ecclesiastical custom may not be interpreted by Apostolical tradition,
especially when the same man affirms them both of the same thing, I confess I
cannot apprehend.

But then secondly, same, they must mean to bring down Apostolical tradition
to signify Ecclesiastical custom, not to advance custom to signify
Apostolical tradition (in the same manner as when they make Bishop and Elder
the ^ame, they bring down Bishop to signify Presbyter, but will not allow
Elder to signify Bishop) that also will be worth examining a while.

And 1. Can there be any reason to imagine, Hierome or any man should set down
that for an instance of Apostolical tradition, which the same person does not
believe to be delivered by the Apostles, but to be of a latter date? That which
is delivered by the Apostles, and received, and practiced by the Church, may
fitly be called a custom of the Church, without adding or specifying, that we
mean the Apostolical Church, because the Apostles, while they lived, were a
part of the Church, and the following age was a part of the Church also. But
can it be truly said, that that was delivered by the Apostles, which was only
accustomed in the subsequent Church, and not so much as introduced under the
Apostles?

This certainly is another strange way of interpreting words or phrases quite
contrary to all Lexicons, use of such words or phrases, which unless they be
changed, it is as much as to say, he that said Tradition Apostolical, did not
mean Tradition Apostolical; And this sure will bring little credit to St.
Hierome, on whose authority they so much depend in this matter.

As for their proof of what they say, the observation of Lent, which he says,
ad Marcellum, is Apostolica traditio, is contra Luciferianos, said by him to be
Ecclesiae consuetudo,] that sure is not of force to conclude what they would
have it, for it may be (or by him be deemed to be) both, an Apostolical
tradition and a custom of the hurch too, it being very ordinary and
reasonable, that what the Apostles delivered, the Church should also accustom,
and practice. But could both these be said by him of that which he thought were
but one of these? That is again to make him testify against his conscience,
to say Lent was an Apostolical tradition, and to believe it was not an
Apostolical tradition.

Here I shall not need debate whether the observation of Lent were Apostolical,
Hierome, that said it was such, believed it to be such, And if he be mistaken
in his belief, then he may be as well mistaken in the meaning of those
passages, which he interprets so, as is useful to, and in favor of the
Presbyterians, as that (...) Elders, Act. 20. were the Presbyters of the Church
of Ephesus; that the (...) Bishops, Phil. 1. are Presbyters of that one Church
or City, and the like. For either of those is but his belief or persuasion
too, and the more fallible they find him in other things, the less weight
they ought to lay on his opinion in this, and the less blame on us, for
departing from his opinion.

But having said this (...), repelling all force of their objection, I shall
now add some other testimonies out of Saint Hierome, and after them, one
argument, ad homines undeniable, to demonstrate, that it was indeed and without
question S. Hierome's opinion, that Bishops in our modern notion were
instituted by the Apostles themselves.

1. In his 54. Epistle he sets down this difference among others, Catholics
and the Montanist heretics, Apud nos Apostolorum locum tenent Episcopi, apud
eos Episcopus tertius est, Among the Catholics the Bishops (such as were in S.
Hierome's time, i. e. certainly such as in ours not mere Presbyters) hold the
place of the Apostles ( i. e. the uppermost place in the Church of Christ, and
succeed the Apostles in it) and among those Heretics the Bishop is the third,
which it seems was one character of their being Heretics, and so a deviation
from an Apostolical truth.)

2. In this Book, he says of James the brother of the Lord* Jacobus ab
Apostolis statim post ascensionem Domini Hierosylimorum Episcopus ordinatus,
suscepit ecclesiam Hierosolyma. Timotheus a Paulo Ephesiorum Episcopus
ordinatus, Titus Cretae, Polycarpus a Johanne Smyrnae Episcopus Ordinatus,
James presently after Christ's Ascension, was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem, and
undertook ( i. e. ruled, as to receive the Congregation, Psalm. 75. is to rule
it) the Church of Jerusalem, Timothy was ordained Bishop of the Ephesians by
Paul* Titus of Crete, Polycarpe was by John ordained Bishop of Smyrna. Where,
as it is evident, and by the Presbyterians acknowledged, that Timothy and Titus
were singular rulers ( which therefore they are wont to excuse by saying they
are extraordinary officers or Evangelists) and yet by him said to be Bishops of
Ephesus and Crete, and so constituted by the Apostles, so it is consequent that
James and Polycarpe were by him deemed singular rulers also (and not Colleagues
in a Presbytery) and those so constituted by the Apostles also, and accordingly
of this James he says, ad Gal. 2. Jacobus primus ei Ecclesiae praefuit --
Eciscopus Hierosolymorum primus fuit, James was the first that was set over
that Church -- was the first Bishop of Jerusalem. And in consequence thereto
in his comments on Isae. lib. 5. cap. 17. he calls this James Decimum tertium
Apostolum the thirteenth Apostle

3. In like manner Page 85.
Epist. ad Euagrium, speaking of Mark (who dying in the 8th. of Nero* what was
done by him, must be resolved to have been in the Apostles times, and agreeable
to then practice] he says, Alexand^iae a Ma^co Evang^^^sta ad Heraclam and
Dionysium Episcopos Presbyteri semper unum ex se electum in excelsiori super
Presbyteros gradu^ collocatum, Episcopum nominabant, quomodo si exercitus
Imperatorem faceret. At Alexandria from the time of Mark the Evangelist, to
the time of Heraclas and Dionysius Bishops, the Presbyters always named one
chosen from among themselves, and placed in an higher degree above Presbyters,
their Bishop, as if an army should choose their General. That what is said of
the Presbyters choosing their Bishop, belongs not to Presbyters imposing hands
on him, is Dissert. 3. cap 10.
elsewhere largely evidenced. And so, by the way, appears the falsenesse of
the citation out of Jerome, Appen. p. 142. that in Alexandria for a long time
the Presbyters ordained (it should have been said elected) their Bishop. That
which I here infer from the testimony is manifest, viz. that in Saint Marks
time, and from the first planting of the Church at Alexandria, one Bishop or
singular Ruler was constituted among them, as that signifies an higher degree
than that of Presbyters.

4. More places there are in him, Bishops, as they differ from Presbyters, are
successors of the Apostles: In his Comment on Psalm. 45. Nunc quia Apostoli a
mundo recesserunt, habes pro his Episcopos filios, sunt and hi patres tui, quia
ab ipsis regeris. Now (in^. Hierome's time) because the Apostles are parted
from the world, you have in their steads Bishops their Sons; They also are
thy Fathers, because thou art governed by them. Where the Bishops that then
ruled (those are confessed to be single persons, not Presbyteries) are the
successors of the Apostles in his opinion. And Ep. 1. ad Heliodorum, of not
undertaking the office of Bishop. Non est facile stare loco Pauli, tenere
gradum Petri; it is not easy to stand in Paul's place, to hold the degree of
Peter. Where Episcopacy is the place and degree of those Apostles. And so Ep.
13. ad Paulinum, Episcopi and Presbyteri habeant in exemplum Apostolos and
Apostolicos vires, quorum honorem possidentes habere nitantur and meritum,
Bishops and Presbyters must have for their Examples the Apostles and
Apostolical men, whose honor they possess, and therefore ought to endeavor
to imitate their merit.

5. I shall add a Cumulus of other passages much to the same purpose with the
former, Hierome's opinion in this matter. Ad Nepotian. Ep. 2. Esto subjectus
Pontificituo, and quasi anima parentem suscipe, quod Aaron and filios ejus, hoc
Episcopum and Presbyteros esse noverimus. Be subject to the Bishop, and receive
him as the parent of thy Soul, what Aaron and his Sons were, that we must
know the Bishop and Presbyters to be. And on Tit. 1. speaking of S. Paul's
directions for the making a Bishop, Apostolus, says he, Ecclesiae Principem
formans, the Apostle forming the Prince or ruler of the Church, and so again
in the same words on Psalm. 45. deciphering a single ruler by that Bishop, which
the Apostle there meant to form. So on that 45. Psalm. Constituit Christus in
omnibus finibus mundi Principes Ecclesiae Episcopos, Christ in all parts of the
world constituted Princes of the Church, the Bishops, just the same as has
been cited from Ignatius, that all the world over, the Bishops were ordained
by the Apostles according to the mind of Christ. In his Dial. adv. Luciferian.
Ecclesiae salus in summi sacerdotis dignitate pendit, cui si non exors quaedam
and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur Schismata
quot sacerdotes; and, Si quaeris quare in Ecclesia baptizatus, nisi per manus
Episcopi non accipiat spiritum sanctum -- disce hanc observationem ex ^a
authoritate descendere, quod spiritus sanctus ad Apostolos descendit. The
safety of the Church depends on the dignity of the chief Priest (or Bishop) to
whom* if a peculiar power be not given above all that others have there will be
as many Schisms as Priests in the Churches -- If you demand why he that has
been baptized in the Church, may not receive the Holy Ghost but by the hands of
the Bishop, learn that this observance d^scends from that Authority in that
the holy sp^it descended on the Apostles (...) Testimo^y, as it shows the
necessity of a singular Bishop to avoid Schisms in the Church, and so must
affixe the institution of them on the Apostles, who made provision against that
danger (and that I suppose is his meaning in In t^to o^ be (...) ut unus de
Pre^byteris (...) ad quem omnis Ecclisiae cura (...), ut schisatum semi^^
toilcrentur, and Paulatim ut diss^^ sionum semina t^llercutur, ad unum omnis
^oll^itudo d^ela^ a est. Com ad Tit.
that place which the Presbyterians make most use of) so it directly derives
the authority, by which Bishops stand in the Church, distinct from Presbyters,
and above them from the descent of the Holy Ghost on the Apostles. Lastly, adv.
Jovinian. (...). Episcop^ and Presbyter and Diaconus non sunt meritorum nomina
sed offi^ior^m Nec dicitur, si quis Episcopatum desilerat -- The Bishop and
Presbyt^r and Deacon, are names of offices, neither is it said* If any man
d^si^e a Bishopric -- applying those Texts of Saint Paul, concerning the
qualifications of Bishops to the Bishop, as in his time he stood, distinct from
Presbyters.

All this I supose may suffice to give authority to my collection and
conclusion from plain words of Saint Hierome, plain and undubitable, that
Episcopacy was delivered down and instituted in the Church by the Apostles
themselves. And I cannot conceive what can be invented to avoid the evidence of
these testimonies; yet because I promised it, I shall now add that one
argument (ex abundanti, and much more than is necessary) to the same purpose, (
viz. to prove that this was Hierome's meaning, which I pretend it to be.) And
that such, as by these objectors cannot with justice be denied, to have a full
irrefragable force in it, having themselves made use of it against us, which
they ought not to have done, if by themselves it shall now be denied when it is
produced by us.

In the close of their Appendix, they have set down several propositions
declaring the judgment and practice of the Ancient Church about ordination of
Ministers, and their first proposition, being this, that in the first and
purest times -- there was ordination of Presbyters without Bishops over
Presbyters, their proof is this. For these Bishops came in postea and
p^ul^tim, afterward, and by little and little as Jerome says. And Panormitan,
lib. 1. Decretal. de Consuetud. cap. 4. says Olim Presbyteri in communi
regebant Ecclesian^ and (...) sacerdotes, and pariter conferebant omnia
sacramenta. Of old the Elders ruled the Church in common, and ordained Priests,
and jointly conferred all the Sacraments.

These two testimonies of Hierome and Panormitan, proposition concerning
ordination by Presbyters, and the time of Bishops coming in to the Church, It
must sure be reasonable to resolve that what Panormitan has defined in this
matter, that was Saint Hieromes sense also; Now what that is, will be discerned
by setting down Panormitane's words at large, as they lie in the place cited
by them.

The business he has there in hand is to prove that custom is not of force
so far, as to prescribe that an Ordinary Clerk as Presbyter should perform
an Episcopal act, Ea quae sum ordinis Episcopalis non possunt acquiri per
ordinem inferiorem ex consuitudine quantamcunque ve^ustissima. Those things
that are of Episcopal order cannot be any custom* how ancient soever, be
acquired by any Inferior order: The reason is, quia consuetudo non facit quem
capacem, because custom does make no man capable -- Then he makes this
observation, that Ritus Apostol orum circa sacramenta habent impedire
characterus impressionem; The rites, or practice, or Institutions of the
Apostles about the Sacraments, have power to h^nd ^the impression of the
Character, nam immediate post mortem Christi^om^es Presbyteri in communi
regebant ecclesiam, non fuerant inter ipsos Epi^scopi, sed idem Presbyter quod
Epi^copus, and pariter conferebant omnia sacramenta, sed postinodum ad
Schismata sed^nda fecerunt seu ordinaverunt Apostoli, ut crearentur Episcop^
and certa sacramenta iis reservarunt, illa interdicendo simplicibus Presbyteris
-- For immediately after the death of Christ, all the Elders in common ruled
the Church, and so there were no Bishops among them, but a Presbyter was the
same that a Bishop, and they jointly conferred all the Sacraments. But after a
while for the appeasing of Schisms the Apostles caused or ordained that
Bishops should be created, and reserved to them some Sacraments (or holy Rites)
forbidding single Presbyters to meddle with them: and he concludes, Et vides
hic quod talis ordinatio habet impedire etiam impressionem Characteris, quia si
Presbyteri illa de facto conferunt, nihil conferunt, and here you see, that
such an Ordination is able to hinder the impression of the Character, because
if Presbyters do de facto confer them, they confer nothing.

Where, Panormitan cited by them to prove Ordination without Bishops (and
specious words picked out of him to that purpose) does yet distinctly affirm
that Presbyters, which confer Orders without a Bishop confer nothing, all
their Ordinations are mere nullities (and what could have been said more
severely against their practice, and their design in citing him, than this?)
so he plainly interprets St. Jeromes assertion of the occasion and time of
Bishops being set over the Presbyters, that it was done by the appointment of
the Apostles themselves, and so that consuetudo, custom in Jerome, opposed to
Dominica dispositio Christ's disposal, is no more than [ postmodum
ordinaverunt Apostoli, after a while the Apostles ordeined] opposed to [
immediate post mortem Christi, immediately after the death of Christ.]

And then by the way, Reader may hence discern what force there is, in this
Testimony of Panormitan to support their first proposition concerning the
Ordination of Presbyters without Bishops over Presbyters (for which besides St.
Jeromes postea and paulatim, and part of this testimony of Panormitan, they
produce no other) and as by what was formerly said of the Testimonies of
Cyprian and Firmilian, their chief supports for their Append. p 129
second proposition, have already been utterly demolished, so also the
Testimonies of Isidore Hispalensis and the Council of Aquen produced for the
proof of their Append. p. 131.
third Proposition, concerning the Presbyters having an intrinsic power to
ordain Ministers, will immediately vanish in like manner. For as it is evident
that that place in that council of Aquen is for nine Chapters together
transcribed out of Isidore, and consequently the Testimonies out of him and
that council are but one and the same thing, twice repeated, to increase the
number, so it is as evident that what is by them said, is taken from St.
Hierome, and can no farther be extended either in respect of the authority or
the matter of the Testimony, than in St. Hierome it has appeared to extend.
Append p. 13^.
And therefore as the * words cited by these men out of them are no more than
these, that solum propter authoritatem Clericorum ordinatio and consecratio
reservata est summo sacerdoti, That Presbyters have many things common with
Bishops, only in respect of authority (or for the preserving it entire, and
the unity of each Church; which depended on that, in St. Hierom's opinion) the
Ordination and consecration of Clerks ( i. e. of all Presbyters and Deacons)
was reserved to the chief Priest, i. e. the Bishop; which how far it is from
concluding what it was brought to prove, the intrinsic power of Presbyters to
ordain Ministers, I leave to any Reader to pass judgment. And yet truly this
does it as well as their one other ancient Testimony, that of Leo, set out in
their front, out of his 88. Epistle* concerning the Consecration of Presbyters
and Deacons, and some other things, Quae omnia solis deberi Pontificibus
authoritate canonum praecipitur, All which that they should be due to the
Bishops and to none else, it is commanded by the authority of the ^anons. Who
would ever have thought fit from such words as these, which affirm this
privilege to be reserved peculiarly to the Bishops, and that the authority of
the Canons so requires, to conclude that the Presbyters had this intrinsic
power; As if all that the Canons deny Presbyters, were infallibly their due to
enjoy, and the Argument demonstrative, that it was their Original and
intrinsic due, because the Canons deny it.

What they add of Ischyras Prop. 6. being deposed from being a Presbyter, P.
143.
because made by Colluthus who was but a Presbyter himself, and not a Bishop,
this was done, not because the act of Colluthus was against the Canon of
Scripture, but only because it was against the Canons of some councels.] is
somewhat of the same nature with the former, and will be best judged of by the
relation of the Fact, which in the story of those times is thus made by
Socrates, (...), L. ^. c. 10.
He adventured on a thing worthy of many Deaths, for being never admitted to
the Priesthood, and assuming to himself the name of an Elder, he dared to do
the things belonging to a Priest. A censure which certainly sets the fault
somewhat higher than the transgressing of the Canons of some Councels.

Two Testimonies more I shall touch on, Excursion.

For the confirmation of their second Proposition concerning Ordination,
Testimony they produce from the Synod ad Quercum Ann. 403. where it was brought
as an accusation against Chrysostom, (...), That he made Ordinations without
the company and sentence of the Clergy. Another from the council of Carthage
Can. 20. Vt Episcopus sine Concilio Clericorum s^orum non ordinet, That a
Bishop ordeine not Clerks without the Council of his own Clerks, and Can.
2. Cum Ordinatur Presbyter Episcopo eum benedicente, and manum super caput ejus
tenente, etiam omnes Presbyteri qui prasentes sunt manus suas juxta manum
Episcopi super caput illius teneant. When a Presbyter is Ordrined, as the
Bishop blesses him and lays his hand on his head, let all the Presbyters also
that are present lay their hands on his Head by the Hand of the Bishop. And the
conclusion deduced from these Testimones (and the forementioned of Cyprian and
Fermilian) is this, that Ordination by Bishops without the assistance of his
Presbyters was always forbidden and opposed. How truly this is inferred from
the Praem^sses will soon be judged by a view of the Testimonies.

For the first, Theophilus a guilty person, and as such, cited to answer, what
was objected against him, making use of the envy, under which Chrysostom then
labored, shifted the Scene, and becamse his judge, nay, as Photius tells us,
he and the rest of that Conventicle, (...), that were Chrysostome' s greatest
enemies, (...), were at once Judges, and Accusers, and Witnesses of all that
was charged against him. And therefore we already see, what heed is to be given
to the accusati^n of those Fathers ad quercum, and how valid an argument can be
deduced from it; And we shall the better guess at it, if we consider also,
what other particulars were, in the same manner that this was, charged against
him, set down by Photius in his Bibliotheca. The 23. charge was, (...) -- that
the Bath was heated for him alone, and that after he had bathed, Serapion shuts
the passage into the Bath, that no body else might bath: The 25. (...), -- that
he ate alone, living like one of the Cyclopes, and betwixt these two new found
crimes, comes in this, in the midst, being the 24. (...), that he ordained many
that had no Testimonialls; which being set down by Photius, as the sum of
that charge, referres us indeed to the ground, on which their charge was built,
of his ordaining without a Council, and against the mind of his Clergy,
(those testimonialls, and so the approbation of the person by the Clergy being
generally a good preparation to the receiving Orders) but does not at all prove
that a Bishop might not ordain without assistance of his Presbyters, or that
it was always forbidden, any more than it proves that eating or bathing alone
was always forbidden also.

As for that of the 4. Council of Carthage Can. 20. They have set down but
half the Canon; the whole runs thus, Vt Episcopus sine concilio Clericorum
non ordinet^, ita ut civium conniventiam and Testimonium quaerat, That the
Bishop ordain not without his council of Clergy, so that he seek the liking
and testimonial of the Inhabitants. Which again only serves to show, the use
of the assistent Presbyters, to help the Bishop to a due knowledge of the
person to be ordained (and this they know we Praelatists assent to and approve
of) but is no argument of the unlawfulness of sole ordination, or of any power
that the Presbyters have in the conferring of Orders.

So likewise that from Can. 2. Testimony for the fitness and usefulness of
that custom (still retained and used in our Church in all Ordinations of
Presbyters and Deacons) that the Presbyters there present should lay on their
hands by the hand of the Bishop, and so join in the Prayer or benediction, but
no proof that a Presbyter might not be ordained by a Bishop without the
presence of such Presbyters.

I have for a while gone aside from the consideration of S. Hierome's testimony
(the designed matter of this Section) and allowed my self scope to take in all
the testimonies of Antiquity, Assemblers, for the justifying their Ordination
of Ministers; And I have done it on purpose (though a little contrary to my
designed Method and brevity) because after the publishing of the Dissertations
against Blondel. I remember I was once told, that though it was not necessary,
yet I might do well to add some Appendix, by way of Answer to that one head of
discourse concerning Presbyteriall Ordination, and the Instances which were
objected by him. For which reason I have now, as near as I can, taken in all,
in this place, which are in their Appendix produced on that head, and do not
elsewhere in this brief reply, fall in my way to be answered by me. For some
others, mentioned by D. Blondel, I refer the Reader to the learned pains of
the Bishop of D^rry, in his vindication of the Church of England from the
aspersion of Schism, p. 270. etc.

And so being at last returned into my rode again, Dissertations concerning
St. Hierome, both to clear his sense, and for the setting the balance aright
betwixt his authority on the one side, and the authority of Ignatius on the
other, betwixt some doubtful sayings of the former, which seemed to prejudice
the Doctrine of the Apostles instituting imparity, which yet elsewhere he
affirms to be Apostolical tradition, and the many clear and uncontradicted,
constant sayings of the latter, which are acknowleged to assert it. Which one
thing, if it be not in the Dissertations so done, as may satisfy any
impartial Judge, that Ignatius, in full concord with all, is to be heeded on
our side, more than St. Hierome, in some few of his many Testimones, can be
justly produced against us, I shall then confess my self guilty of overmuch
confidence; but if therein I have not erred, it is most evident that I need not
undertake any farther travail in this whole matter.

Sect. VII.
The Testimonies of Ambrose and Austin. Consignare used for consecrating the
Eucharist, and that belonged to the Bishop when present.
THere now follows in the next place the passage cited by them p. 133. out of
Ambrose on Ephesians. 4. where to prove that even during the prevalency of Episcopacy
'twas not held unlawful for a Presbyter to ordeine without a Bishop, they urge
out of St. Ambrose these words, Apud Aegyptum Presbyteri consignant, si
praesens non sit Episcopus, In Egypt the Presbyters consigne, if the Bishop be
not present. And the like out of Austine ( or whosoever was the Author) in
Quaest. ex utroque Testam. Qu. 101. In Alexandria and per totam Aegyptum, si
desit Episcopus, consecrat Presbyter, In Alexandria and through all Egypt, if
the Bishop be wanting, the Presbyter consecrates. And having done so, they
add, which words cannot be understood (as a -- defender of Prelacy would have
them) of the Consecration of the Eucharist; For this might be done by the
Presbyter praesente Episcopo, the Bishop being present, but it must be
understood either of confirmation, or (which is more likely) of ordination,
because Ambrose in that place is speaking of Ordination.

To this I shall briefly reply, eminent Presbyterians, that these two Books,
whence these Testimonies are cited, were not written either by Ambrose or
Austine, but by some other (Hilarious Sardus, says Blondel) and unjustly
inserted among their works, and then the authority of such supposititious
pieces will not be great to overruled any practice otherwise acknowledged in
the Church of God.

Secondly, Blondel and Salmasius, concerning the meaning of the former of these
places, were so evidently discovered by the second of them (the consignant in
the one, interpreted by consecrat in the other) that I conceived it sufficient,
but to name them, For can there be any thing more unquestionable than this,
that consecrare in ancient writers signifies the Consecration of the Eucharist?
And then if consignare be a more obscure phrase is there any doubt, but it must
be interpreted by that which is so much more vulgar and plain? and all the
circumstances besides being exactly the same in both places, what doubt can
there be, but in both, the words are to be understood of the Eucharist?

Yet because some advantage was by this their misunderstanding sought to the
Presbyterians cause, rectified, though they know not which to apply it to,
Confirmation or Ordination, and pretend not to produce any Testimony, where
consecrare is ever used for the latter, or consignare for either of them. And
indeed Apol. p. 57.
Blondel and Appar. ad. lib. de Prim.
Salmasius were yet more uncertain, for they thought it might also belong to
the benediction of Penitents, and that as probable as either of the two former;
And when the truth is rejected, thus it is wont to be.

As for the only reason which inclines them to confine it to Ordination;
because Ambrose in that place is speaking of Ordination, if the place be
reviewed, it will not be found to have truth in it; He speaks immediately
before of the several Ministerial Acts, Preaching and Baptizing, adding
indeed that Scripta Apostoli non per omnia convenient Ordinationi, quae nunc in
Ecclesia est, The writings of the Apostle do not in all things agree to the
Order, which is now in the Church. There is mention of Ordinatio indeed, but
that signifies not Ordination, as we now use it for ordaining of Ministers, but
manifestly the (...), the rule, or order used in the Church, in several
respects, says he, different from what it was in the writings of the Apostle.

And for their objection against my interpretation, consecrating the Eucharist,
[because this the Presbyter might do when the Bishop was present] If they
would have taken notice of the many evidences brought by me in that place out
of the Ancients, the Canons of the Apostles, Ignatius ad Magnes. the 56 Canon
of the council of Laodicaea, and Tertullian, that the Presbyter might not
administer either Sacrament without the Bishop's appointment, and distinctly of
this Sacrament: Non de aliorum quam de Praesidentium manu Eucharistiam sumimus,
we receive it not from the hands of any but the Praesidents, i. e. (in his
style) the Bishops, Tertull: de Cor. Mil. they could never have thought this a
reasonable Objection, It being evidently the sense of the Ancient Canons, (to
which the description of the practice in Justin Martyr does perfectly agree,
Apol. 2.) that only the Bishop had power to consecrate the Eucharist, and in
his absence only, the Presbyter, to whom he gave that power.

Had they been pleased to have taken notice of these Canons and ancient
Records, Testimonies to that Proposition. And as to that of the Alexandrian
Bishops out of Hierome, that is also largely answered by me, Dissert. 3 c. 10.
but that again they were resolved not to take notice of.

Sect. VIII.
Of the Chorepiscopi.
THere still remains one mention of me, Chorepiscopi or Regionary Bishops,
Append. p. 138. Of that subject they are somewhat large, and so D. Blondel had
been before them, and in answering him, all their pretensions from thence, and
that whole argument (by them pursued. P. 135. 136, 137. 138.) is punctually
answered, before it was produced, Dissert. 3. c. 8.

And yet they go on roundly, as if there were no such thing, only in the close
they add, There is another whom we forbear to name, that says that the
Chorepiscopi were Bishops. But he adds, though they were Bishops, yet they
were made but by one Bishop, and Bishops merely titular and sine Cathedra,
which is all one as if he should say, they were not properly Bishops.

That which is said of the Chorepiscopi in the Dissertations is too long to be
here so impertinently repeted, Reader please to consult the place, I have no
fear that he will return unsatisfied in any thing that is by these men
objected against Praelacy from that head. A Dilemma is there used, which,
whether they were Bishops or no, will certainly secure us.

As to their present argument against me, answer, that what I say of those
Chorepiscopi, is, not that they were Bishops merely titular, but that they were
Proxies or vicarii of the Bishop of the City, acting by Commission from him in
the Region or Country, and were under the Bishop of the City and Ordained by
him, and so were true Bishops, but not of the Cities, had Ordination as other
Bishops had, though three Bishops were not by the Canon required to the
ordaining of such, but only that one Bishop of the City, whose Proxy or
Vicarius the Chorepiscopus was: Bishops in cases of necessity, ordained sine
titulo, without a title or City to which they were affixt, and for some time
allowed to ordeine Presbyters and Deacons in the Country, and to do some
other things in the Bishop's stead.

All which is so largely set down in the Dissertations, Presbyterians
interest, that I must not for ever do the same thing again, transcribe what
is there said abundantly, and nothing here objected against it, but that what I
affirm of them, makes them to be not poperly Bishops. Where if by properly
Bishiops they mean Bishops of Cities, they say very true, for I affirm them
to be, as their title assures me they were, Regionary Bishops, Vicarii and
Proxies to the City Bishop.

But that they were mere Presbyters, Presbyters had the Power to Ordeine other
Presbyters (which alone is the Presbyterians task to make good, if they will
have it useful to the proof of their conclusion, their Append p. 133
4. Proposition, That Presbyters, during the Prevalency of Episcopacy, had not
only an inherent power of Ordination, but in some cases did actually ordeine)
this they do not undertake to make good against the discourse in the
Dissertations; And therefore I have no excuse to make any larger reply to them.

The Conclusion.
I Have now gone through every part of my designed Method, and not omitted one
intimation of theirs, wherein I could think my self concerned; And that it
may appear that I should not have chosen this, as a season, to begin any
debate concerning a subject so forgotten in men's minds as Episcopacy is, I
shall thus conclude the Readers trouble, without examining what else they say
on this subject; having, I hope, competently secured my self from the Opinion
of having formerly attempted to seduce any, so little either to his or my own
advantage.

THE END.
The Printer to the Reader.
THe absence of the Author, and his inconvenient distance from London, has
occasioned some lesser escapes in the impression of this Vindication, and^. The
Printer thinks it the best instance of pardon if his E^capes be (...) laid upon
the Author, and he hopes they are no greater than an o^dinary understanding may
amend, thus.

PAge 5. l. 25. r. (...). p. 6. l. 5. r. which when we. l. 6. r. place, l. 7.
r. (...). l. 9. r. affairs, we have then so. l. 19. r. holy man. p. 7. l. 20.
r. of David. l. 24. r. their answer. p. 8. marg. l. 4. r. (...). l. 6. r.
(...). p. 10. l. 21. r. exarchs. p. 12. l. 1. r. their not. p. 13. l. 4 r to
confirm. l. penult. r. some praedecessor. p. 16. l. 14. r. of Timothy. l. 18.
r. a continual. p. 18. l. 4. r. D^rotheus. p. 21. l. 24. r. we are. p. 22. l.
22. r. mixing. l. 33. r. praetensions. p. 23. l. 35. r. Chaldee. p. 24. l. 24.
r. was again. p. 25. l. 27. r. And in them of Diotrephes. p. 31. l 31. r.
Assemblers. p. 36. l. 18. r. for so. p. 43. l. 11. r. so this. p. 49. l. 19. r.
understand p 53. l. 25. r. and so p. 63. l. 21. r. most of them lying near. p.
66. l. 2. del. all, p. 67. l. r. r. Sect XVII. p. 69. l. 33. r. the sixth Canon,
which. p. 72. l. 7. r. fixed in. p. 73. l. 22. r. (...). l 29. r. (...). p. 74.
l. 14. r. head-Lords. p. 76. l. 3. r. formally. p. 78. l. 1. r. formally. p.
79. marg. l. 10. r. (...). p. 83 l. 33. r. Metropoles. p. 85. l. 5. r.
Antoninus Pius. l. 24. r. sent for to p. 89. l. 25. r. (...) l. 32. r. (...) l.
34. r. so read p. 94. mar. l. 4. r. (...). l. 25. r. affirm. p. 97. marg. l.
4. r. (...). p. 99. l. 18. r. (...). l. 25. r. (...). p. 100. l. 20. r. (...).
l. 30. r. (...) p. 107. l. 25. r. A third. p. 111. l. 6 r (...). l. 12. r.
(...). p. 127. l. 16. r. any sort. p. 128. l. penul. r. and so. p. 132. l. 1.
r. (...). l. 4. r. (...). l. 22. r. Province. p. 136. l. 22. r. (...). p. 139.
l. ult. r. (...). p. 140. l. 1. r. (...). l. 34. r. (...). l. 35. r. (...). p.
142. l. 22. r. of spurious. p. 249. marg. l. 2. r. (...). l. 13. r. (...) p.
155. l. 23. r. Ecclesiae. l. 29 r. of the. p. 160. l. 1. r. know not that. p.
162 l. 2. r servare Catholica^. p: 165. l. 25. r. answer 1. by p. 166. l. 17.
r: (...) p. 167. l. 3. r: that place would purchase justice. p 169. l. 22. r:
(...). l. 23. r: (...). p 171 l. 8. r: Synod. ad Quercum. p 174. l. 8. r:
years since, p. 183. l. 14. r: so how far this is. p. 184. l. 15. r: (...). l.
16. r. (...).


