A VINDICATION OF Dr. HAMMONDS Address, etc. From the Exceptions of EVTACTVS
PHILODEMIVS, IN TWO PARTICULARS. Concerning The Power supposed in the Jew, over
his own Freedom. The No-power over a man's own life.


TOGETHER WITH A BRIEF REPLY TO Mr JOHN GOODWINS (...), as far as concerns
Dr. HAMMOND.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1649.

A VINDICATION OF Dr. HAMMONDS Address, etc.
. 1. THe late Author of the Original, and end of Civil Power, under the name
of Eutactus Philodemius, has thought fit to question two things set down by
Doctor Hammond in his Address to the General, and Counsel of War. page 5.
The first is this Affirmation, That the Jew under Gods own Government might
wholly give up himself, and his Freedom to his Masters will (the power of
life being only exempted) and by having his ear bored, might of a freeman,
become a slave for ever.

. 2. The second is this Question, Whether ever any man was by God or Nature
invested with power over his own Life, i. e. page 18.
to take away his own life, or to kill himself?

. 3. This Affirmation, and this Question, he willingly acknowledges, and is
content that the Question shall be interpreted a downright Negation, That
never any man was by God, or Nature invested with power over his own life, or
power to kill himself. And having thus confessed the citation, as far as
concerns him, it remains, that I proceed to justify, both parts of it. And
to that end, I shall think my self sufficiently fortified by two advantages,
which that Author has been pleased to allow me in this matter.

. 4. First, that it is not any opinion of Doctor Hammond, but the plain words
of Scripture, which are under his name, thus opposed by this Author in both
places. The former is in terminis, Exodus 21. at the beginning, If the servant
shall plainly say, I love my Master, etc. I will not go out free, Then his
Master shall bring him to the Judges, etc. And his Master shall bore his ear
through with an awle, and he shall serve him for ever. And again, Deuteronomy. 15.16.
And it shall be, if he (i. e. the servant set free at the Sabbatick year) say
unto thee, I will not go away from thee, etc. Then thou shall take an awle,
and thrust it through his ear unto the door, and he shall be thy servant for
ever, and also to thy hand-maide thou shall do likewise.

. 5. That a plain place of Scripture should be thus mistaken for an Assertion
of Doctor Hammond, I am not permitted to suspect, because that Author has to
his mention of the Doctors Name added the testimony of Genesis 21. which, though
it be a mistake, I suppose, of the Printer, for Ex. 21. will yet be a competent
testimony of that Authors opinion, that Doctor Hammond had Moses on his side,
and consequently, that both were to be involved by him in the same condemnation.

. 6. The same, I suppose, I may assume of the other Negation questioned by him,
that it is in Doctor Hammond, but the repeating of the 6. Commandment [ thou
shall not kill] according to the latitude, wherein all Jewish, and Christian
Writers have interpreted it to the prohibition of self-murder, as has been
showed by him at large in another place. Pract. Cat. l. 2. sect. 5.


. 7. Having mentioned this first advantage against this Author, sufficient
certainly to secure Doctor Hammond from his blame, and to make any Apology for
him unnecessary, and well-nigh scandalous (the Word of God being able to plead
its own cause, without the assistance of any humane Advocate) I have yet the
benefit of a second kindness allowed me by this unknown adversary; which,
though Scripture were not of Authority with him, would encourage the Doctor not
to fear the falling under his displeasure. That is, the unreconcileablenesse of
those two opinions (the one with the other) which he is pleased to confront to
Doctor Hammond, viz. that it should be unlawful for a Jew to give up his
Freedom, (and that servitude should be, as he calls it, an unnatural
servitude) and yet that it should be put in his power by God and Nature (for
that is to affirm it lawful, and agreeable to Nature) to take away his own
Life, or to kill himself. For it being by Job mentioned as an Aphorism of
common Nature, that a man will for his life give all he has; and in the
accounts and practices of all men, that of Liberty being part of that all; It
will consequently be unreasonable, and impossible for him that has once
affirmed the parting with ones freedom to be an unnatural servitude, to deny
the killing of himself to be an unnatural murder; And therefore, having so
fair advantages before me, not only the Scripture in terminis on my side, but
this Adversary, by so easy a consequence, become my Second also, I am (not
unwillingly) persuaded to tender a brief reply to those reasons, which seem to
have drawn this Author into this casual dispute, and to endeavor the
preventing of those Errors; to which, a Philodemius, or popular disputer may
in such an Age of Licentiousness betray others.

. 8. To the case of the Jewish Servant, giving up his freedom to his Master,
(which was by the Doctor mentioned out of Moses) the Author has framed three
Answers.

. 9. The first, That it cannot be affirmed upon good and pregnant grounds, that
from nature the Jew had any such power, but that God only permitted it to be
so; and the Jew, by this unnatural servitude to his master, was a fit type of
that slavery that man should be in unto Sin, to obey it in the lusts thereof;
for his servants we are whom we obey.

. 10. To this I Answer, That the affirmation of Moses in the Scripture, [That
this was permitted by God to the Jewes] is to me a good and pregnant ground
that the Jew had this power under Gods own Government, which is all that he
affirms to be affirmed by Doctor Hammond in that place; and therefore, the
putting in those other words [ Of the Jews not having it from Nature] seems
to be on purpose designed to take off from the clearness, and the pregnancy of
the probation, and so only to darken, but not to invalidate the argument.

. 11. But then secondly, I add, that Gods permitting any thing to any man, is
a pregnant argument, that from Nature that man has that power: If by Power we
mean a moral power, or power of doing it without Sin; And if by Gods
permission we understand his Approbation, as of a lawful fact. For, thus it is
certain, that God never so permits, as to approve (or not prohibit) any
thing, which by the Law of Nature may not be done without sin. For the Law of
Nature being the Law of God, as truly as any positive Law of his promulgating;
and God in all his Laws being constant to himself, so far as never to
prohibit, and permit the same thing at the same time to the same men; It is
most certain, that what God thus permits, Nature permits also, i. e. Leaves it
lawful to be done, or possible without Sin.

. 12. But if by Permission this Author means no more then dispensation, or
grant of present Impunity, such as in the Jewish Commonwealth was (for the
hardness of their hearts) allowed in the business of divorce, or (for the
multiplying of them) in polygamy, then it will sure rest upon him to prove, and
not only, as he says, to suppose, that God thus (and thus only) permitted it
to be so: But this I shall suppose impossible to be proved, though it cannot
lie upon me to demonstrate the Negative, nor shall I so much fear the
probablenesse of his unprov'd groundless supposition, as to endeavor it. For
indeed, what degree of likeness is there betwixt those divorces and
polygamies, (which were such inordinate Liberties) and this other of divesting
himself of Liberty? Only the same that is betwixt two Contraries.

. 13. I shall not need further to insist on this, both for the plain words of
Scripture, and because it is the acknowledgment of this very Author, page 18.
That this may lawfully be done for the obtaining of a greater good, which being
compared with Romans 3. ver. 8. makes up a demonstration, that a man has this
power, i. e. that he may lawfully do it. For it is not the intuition of the
greatest moral good, much less of the greatest advantage to my self, or any
other, that may make that lawful which in it self is unlawful, or which by
nature man has not power to do.

. 14. And therefore, when he adds, [ That in this the Jew was a fit type of
man's slavery to sinne] as it will be easily granted, that he was (as type
signifies Image or Emblem) so sure it will not prove that this servitude of
the Jew, was an unnatural servitude, any more then any other parts of the
Judaicall Law, (which either in the intention of the Lawgiver, or by the wit
of Man can be made an Image of any present state, or condition of men) can by
that one Argument be proved to be unnatural. For, sure all types are not by
that one evidence of their being types demonstrated to be sinful, especially
when they are instituted, or permitted by God, and by that appear to be
agreeable to his will, in Opposition to, or Variation from which all sin, or
Obliquity consists: Or if this charge must fall singly on this Type, but not on
all others (as sure the Passover, which was a Type, was not yet unnatural,
and so of the rest) then must this charge be proved by some other medium, then
by this only, that it is a Type; and till that be produced, I must think this
way of discourse (which first supposes this giving up of the Jews Liberty to
be a Type, and then concludes it unnatural for being such) to be the proving
of quidlibet ex quolibet, the same with his, which first supposes a live man to
be a Picture, and then sends him a challenge for being such: Certainly such
reasoning is too very loose, and light, to set any good Character on that cause
that wants such supporters.

. 15. His second answer is yet a little more strange, and such as could not yet
easily have been foreseen, or expected, That his having his ear bored was a
punishment for his contempt of that Liberty, etc. It Is sufficiently known that
this boring of the ear was the ceremony of receiving a Servant among the Jews;
and therefore, when David says of Christ, But mine ear have thou opened, it is
acknowledged, that thereby was denoted his taking on him the form of a
servant. This boring of the ear with an awle was no very painful thing, sure
not so much as Circumcision; and yet 'twould be a little strange, that when a
Proselite was received among the Jews with Circumcision, that should be deemed
a punishment on him for his not continuing a Gentile, or that his Conversion to
Judaisme, of which this was the Ceremony, should be thereupon counted an
unnatural Sin: The answering such Arguments as these, would require a more
cheerful, and pleasant humor, then the times, or occasion of these debates
will well permit.

. 16. The last Answer looks a little more demurely, That his giving himself
up to be a slave for ever, did refer to, and terminate in the year of
Jubilee, etc. and that he did not make himself irrecoverably a slave, etc.
[That this was to terminate in the year of Jubilee] is said without farther
proof, then only of this untestified affirmation in a Parenthesis, that that
was the year of his freedom from that servitude which the corruption of his
own will had brought upon him, which is the proving a thing by a bare repeating
of it in other words, and only throwing a little dirt upon it. For how does it
appear that it is a piece of Corruption (for a man that loves his Master, as
the Text says, and is better pleased with his service, then with his former
liberty) thus to choose that which he likes best? Or how comes the casting off
Liberty to be a corruption of the will, when casting off yokes, and servitude
is made capable of so good a Character? Had the words of Saint Paul, speaking
of servants, [ If thou can be free, use it rather] been brought to back this
bare Assertion, there had been some tolerable excuse for such a begging of the
question as this: But those words extend not to a command, that every man
should be obliged to be free, that can, but only to a permission, that, if he
will rather use it ( i. e. prefer this Liberty) he most lawfully, and
commendably may. But this Author has not thought fit to make this
Interpretation, or account of that place necessary to be given him. As for the
truth of his Affirmation, that this Bondsman with his ear bored, was released at
the year of Jubilee, it is that, which, as it does not well consist with the
words of Moses, [He shall serve him for ever] Exodus 21.6. and Deuteronomy. 15.17. so
it is not proved by any other place, or made probable that [ for ever] is not
an absolute [for ever.] One place in Leviticus, there is Chap. 25.41. which
says, that the poor Brother that is sold to be a bond servant, shall be free
at the year of Jubilee, and proportionably the servant (spoken of by me in
Exodus and Deuteronomy) is to be set free from that servitude, to which he was
sold (i. e. the forced and constrein'd, not purely voluntarily servitude) in
the seventh, or sabbatick year, and so by the same reason in the Jubilee, which
is the great Sabbatick (made up of seven times seven) in the place of Leviticus.

. 17. But this Author must mark, that this person thus set free, is not the Jew
of whom Doctor Hammond spoke, but the other that has made the voluntary
surrender of his Liberty, he that, when the Sabbatick year comes (or
consequently the year of Jubilee, which offers him the same release) resolves,
that he will not go out free, refuses to make use of the advantage of a
Jubilee, and so has no more releases behind; and consequently by this act of
his is in an irreversible estate, remains a servant for ever. And so this more
specious answer appears to have as little of truth, or substance in it, as the
two former.

. 18. To which, yet I might further add, That in case it were granted, that
the next year of Jubilee gave this man release also, yet would not this avoid
the concludency of this place for the lawfulness of giving up our Liberty
(which is the only point in hand) because he that can do it for seven, or for
fifty years, can surely do it: and although having done it, he shall have
Liberty, after that number of years, to retract, if he please, yet is this no
obligation that he shall retract, but only a privilege that he may, which
privilege he may again as lawfully deny himself to make use of, as before he
did of his first Liberty.

. 19. Mean while the conclusion, or close of this Authors reasoning is a little
more extraordinary yet. For having from (the (...) of) the Jubilee, inferred
that he did not make himself irrecoverably a slave, he proceeds. [And if so (
i. e. sure, if he made not himself a slave irrecoverably) where is the warrant
from God, or Nature, from passiing away his freedom, or Liberty at all? and if
so, how without recall, and irreversibly?] Is it possible this Author could
think these conclusions demonstrated so logically, as that he should set them
down by way of question, which supposes them irrefragable at the first asking?

. 20. For the first of them, is not the contrary most demonstrable? that if he
were a slave till the year of Jubilee, (as it is confessed he was, and withal that
he was so by Gods permission) then there is warrant from God for passing away
his Liberty in some degree, and for some space, though not irrevocably. Does
not he serve at all, that serves not eternally? or is that no warrant at all,
which is such for a limited time only? Then sure are we not at all permitted to
be men, or warranted by God* or Nature, to live in this world, because we have
our Jubilee too, our time of manumission from hence.

. 21. And for the second, what is that but a plain Circle, first to infer the
[ not at all] from the [ not irrevocably] and then in same breath, the [ not
irrovocably] from the [ not at all.] How reconcilable this is with the
Authors popular title of Philodemius I dispute not, but resolve, it is not the
particular merit which bestowed on him that other more regular of Eutactus.

. 22. And for the dexterity that is expressed in the conclusion of the whole
section, [ That therefore, that absolute, and unreserved resignation of a man's
native Liberty, etc. without any just condition, or adaequate exchange, (which
says he, is hereby pleaded for by the Doctor) can have no rise, or origination
from God, or reasonable nature] (imposing on the Doctor directly against his
sense, those words of so irrational importance, [ without any just condition,
or adaequate exchange] I shall suppose that this was an effect of the necessary
wants of his cause, and a discreet praevision that his conclusion could not
subsist without such supplies, which made him venture on such indirect means.

. 23. For Doctor Hammond is not such an enemy to mankind, as to plead for such
irrational actings, or to become his advocate that makes imprudent, or
unthrifty bargains, (though by the strength of his free will to evil, he may
possibly do so sometimes, and be obliged by his own act, and justly suffer the
inconveniences, and smarts of it) but resolves, that both the Campanians in
their dedition, and the Barbarians in their request to the Romans, that they
might have leave to become their servants; and the Jew in Moses's supposition,
that loved his Master, and preferred his service before his manumission, (I
shall add my self also, who profess to prefer (in my choice for my self)
subjection before absolute Liberty, nay, before Sovereignty it self, and
believe it a far more sober, and consequently rational speech in Saul, 1 Samuel 9.21. which expressed some aversation to Samuels proposal about anointing
him, then that other of Absolons, O that I were a Judge, or King, etc.) did all
part with their Liberty upon adequate exchanges, such, as they (which were the
fittest judges what themselves thought) did conceive to be the full worth of
the commodity they parted with: And such a rational power of parting with
absolute Liberty for somewhat that I like better, ( i. e. for subjection to
Government, which is, 1. in it self, far removed from slavery; and 2. is the
only way to secure men from the danger of it) is all that that Address had
occasion to assert, or plead for at that time.

. 24. One thing more there is, which I may be allowed to add, (having thus
far replied to all his answers) that the conclusion which was in the Address
inferred from that practice of the Jews, was farther confirmed by the practice
of diverse Heathens, who can neither be excused by the pretense of a
permission, or special dispensation from God to do unnatural things (as he
thinks may be affirmed of the Jew) nor yet were observed by the most rational
Historians to have done any thing contrary to Reason or Nature, in changing
absolute Liberty for somewhat which seemed better, and more advantageous to
them, to wit, for security, and protestion, i. e. in changing a state of common
hostility, (the unhappiest lot in nature) for that other (set down by the
Apostle as the object of their Christian (...).
pursuit, and emulation, and (...).
contention) a quiet settled peace. The advantage of which change, he that is
not inclined to acknowledge, must be of a temper of mind, or body so distant
from that, which God has given me, that I shall not wonder, that that which
seems to me most demonstractively asserted, is to him so far from being
acknowledged such. I shall add no more to the vindicating of the first
proposition, till I meet with the temptation of better, or more dangerous
arguments against it.

. 25. I proceed as briefly to the second, which is proposed in the Address by
way of question, Whether ever any man was by God, or Nature, invested with
power of his own Life, i. e. with power to take away his own Life, to kill
himself? The vindicating of which, I must acknowledge a task, to which I did
not expect, that the Doctor should be called; having not, till now, been so
fully convinced of the danger, and ill consequences of favoring the excesses
of those men's wits, who have maintained paradoxes, or of the improvidence of
those that have tempted others by the publishing of them.

. 26. For certainly about two years since, before the time, that the
postthumous (...): was set out, a man might in this Nation have adventured to
have asked so calm a question [whether a man might Lawfully kill himself?] and
not have feared a challenge in Print for this injury, or encroachment upon the
liberty of our Nature. And I conceive those Laws of our Land, which have
looked on this selfe-slaughter, as an inhumane crime, and punished it after
Death, with the denial of Christian burial, and a mark of reproach upon the
grave, might, when time was, have been able to have come in to the assistance
of so known a truth; had not the sacred rites of Christian buryall been now so
despised, and profaned, that the wanting them has ceased to be esteemed a
punishment among us; had not the Custom of killing other men so harassed our
Consciences, and obliterated all the remainders of written, and unwritten
Laws, that we need not be wondered at, if the swords, which have been so flesht
abroad, mistake their way sometimes, and return on the owners breasts. And
lastly, had not the deduction been so prone, and easy from the General, to
the particulars, from the Lawfulness of a Nations destroying it self, to a
single persons going and doing likewise, from the justifying of civil intestine
slaughters of the public, to that other more tolerable crime of a single
violence.

. 26. As it is, I shall not endeavor to persuade my self (as the Pyrrhonian
in Sextus Empiricus, would teach me to do) that I was in a dream, when I read
D. Hammond cited, and confuted for thus affirming; I must rather provide for
the encounter, and hasten to answer the arguments, which this Author has
offered against this branch of the sixth commandment (as he met with it in the
Doctors hands) or else twill be possible this opinion may gather Proselytes
also in this age, wherein nothing can be said so incredible, which some men do
not make a shift to take up, and believe very contentedly.

. 27. His first argument is drawn from the Doctors Concession, that man has
power from God and Nature over his own body to cut, and lance it, and over his
own freedom to pass it away, from whence, if he do any thing, he must
undertake to conclude, that therefore he has power over his life also; And to
do that, he must make good these three things:

. 28. 1. That since the confutation of the former proposition, he has now
changed his mind, and agrees with Doctor Hammond, that a man has from God or
Nature power over his freedom to pass it away, (for otherwise, though it will
be an advantage against Doctor Hammond, who confessed it, yet will it not be of
use to himself who professes the contrary) and again that he has forgotten,
what in his very last period he had affirmed [ that God does not entrust and
allow any man to have power to destroy his own image, i. e. to take away man's
life, but him, or them whom he makes Gods, i. e. Magistrates to whom he deputes
his own place] for sure it cannot be thought, that every private man in the
community of Nature, is such a Vicegerent of God, or Magistrate.

. 29. 2. That the argument, a minori ad majus affirmative, is valid, against
all Logic, viz: That he that has power over the body, or over freedom, is
supposed to have power over Life also, and so that the Surgeon, that may
scarify the flesh, or cut off an Arm, may therefore as Lawfully slash the
throat, and cut off the head also, and in like manner that the Master by being
such, is become the Judge of his Servant, and has among Christians that power
of his Life, which he has seldom been allowed among the worst of Heathens.

. 30. And 3. That God, which has put something in our power, is thereby
obliged to reserve nothing to himself; Or that by giving us the usus fructus,
or benefits of Life, he has giving us the absolute dominion, and propriety of
it also.

. 31. But without either of these 3 more difficult undertakings, the Author
has attempted an easier way, by supposing that neither cutting of flesh, nor
Parting with freedom may be endured by God or Nature, unless they refer to
such an end, whereby a far greater good is to be enjoyed, and obtained: that
cutting or lancing (without this necessary circumstance of a greater good) is a
step or degree toward self murder, etc. From whence the Conclusion, I
suppose, must be, that by the same reason the Killing of ones self, may then
also be conceived allowable by God, when it is referred by me to such an end,
whereby a far greater good is to be enjoyed, and obtained, but never else.

. 32. To which I shall make these clear Replies, 1. That a thing directly
forbidden by God, cannot be thought approveable by him, upon the referring of
it to a moral (much less if it be but an advantageous or profitable) good
end. Their damnation is just, that say, they may do evil that good may come:
And that this is not a begging of the question; but that, indeed, self-homicide
is evil, and forbidden by God, will be clear by remembering these three things,
1. That the command of not killing, is indefinite; and that he that kills
himself, does certainly kill, that he that sheds his own blood, sheds the
blood of a Man: and 2. That the Image of God residing on him (which is the
ground of this prohibition in Moses, Genesis 9.6.) is as truly so, when it is
beheld in the reflection, as when in the direct line, in my self, as in any
other man. 3. That the power of Life is Reserved a peculiar to God, and not
communicated to the Creature, (save only to his Vicegerent) which may thus
appear. God as the Creator of the World, and sole doner of life must be
acknowledged to have the dominion over it: This dominion consequently is
communicated to none but to those to whom by God it is communicated; To the
Magistrate this power is given by that Law of God, whereby he prescribes the
putting certain Malefactors to Death; and whereby he constitutues the
Magistrate his Vicegerent on Earth, and so the executioner of that Law, an
avenger for wrath, Romans 13. And whosoever will challenge the like power, must
show the like charter, and evidence; and if he cannot do that, that is
sufficient to prove that he has it not; As it is sufficient to convict any man
of the injustice of any his claim to my estate, that he cannot show any deed
whereby it was conveyed to him from me; And there need no other Affirmative
proof against such an one, then that it was once in me, and it appears not how
it parted from me to any other. And therefore, till some evidence be produced,
(which I suppose will never be) that this power of life is made over from God
to every private man, the demonstration is abundantly clear, that that power is
not in any private man any more over himself then others. And it is observable
to this very purpose, that though the Stoics, to teach their Disciples apathy,
or courage against whatsoever events did talk of that sure remedy against all
temporal pressures, the going out, or killing themselves, (looking on it
favorably as a refuge, or sanctuary from all those things which might
otherwise be phansied unsupportable) yet when they considered it this other
way, (as every thing, they said, had two handles) i. e. in respect of God, who
placed them here; it was generally resolved by them, viz. by Seneca, and the
wisest of them (and the more foolish of that Sect, are seldom found to
practice the contrary) that we must not on our own heads desert our station,
but maintain that ground on which our General has set us, and wait with
courage and patience, till he think fit to command us off again. As for the
other two, power over the flesh, and the freedom, the cutting of one, and
parting with the other, they are no degrees toward the taking away life, but on
the contrary are used on purpose for the preserving of it, in its being, or
well being, the one by the rules of physic, the other of policy; and therefore
is the power of those allowed us by God, and Nature, because they are thus
isntrumental to that end, and submitted to our discretion, because they may be
so. Thus are some things referred to the Stewards judgment, and put into his
power, to dispose for the good of the Family, and yet others reserved peculiar,
and sacred in the Masters own hands. Thus are my Writings put into my Lawyers
hand, for him to use to the preserving of my Estate; yet is not my Estate put
into his power to dispose of it at his pleasure for some greater end. And the
argument would be very infirm, because that power which the Steward, or Lawyer
has entrusted to him, ought not to be used by him, but in order to some good
end; that therefore, that which is not so entrusted to him, may be thus assumed
also. Some rays there have always been communicated from Heaven to this Earth
of ours; and yet some Flowers of of that celestial Crown, which have been
reserved as sacred, and incommunicable. And so there will be no kind of weight
or concludency in this present way of arguing, this ballancing of flesh or
liberty with Life, till it appear also from the same, or equal evidence, that
those are reserved by God, as Life appears to be. This certainly without any
more help, is a full satisfaction to this argument.

. 33. But then secondly, and ex abundanti, the Killing my self is no way
ordinable to good, 1. It Is not ordinable to mine own present worldly
advant^ge, as lancing, and subjection may be, that is clear; and that is a
reason why God should not give us this Liberty, (though if we were not able to
render reasons, the wisdom of the Lawgiver were reason enough) and for future
advantages to my self, the being with Christ, which is far better, 1. that
cannot be taken notice of by bare Nature, till that be Christianized: and then
2. according to the Christians rules, we have all reason to resolve that 'twill
not be purchased by any other way, but by that which God has prescribed toward
it, i. e. by lawful unprohibited courses. It being evident, that the Crown
which is held in Gods hand shall not be dispensed to any, but those which do
(...), strive lawfully, and that patience of waiting till God calls, is one of
the Laws that are thus prescribed in our (...).

. 34. As for advantages to others, the Publick-weal, or peace, it is not
imaginable, how the killing my self can be directly, or otherwise then by
accident, ordinable to that; whatsoever can be conceived of it, will be as
sufficiently provided for by the Magistrates having power of life; and that he
may have from God immediately, as well as he can be supposed to have it from
any act of collation from me, if 'twere in my power.

. 35. Lastly, For any moral, or Christian virtue, or yet farther, the
illustrating of the Glory of our Creator, (which alone deserve the title of
good ends) it is not the having an unlimited power, that immediately, or
directly contributes to these, but the making use of the limited powers we
have, the employing the lives which he has given us, according to his will,
and not the destroying them contrary to it, I shall not need to prosecute this.
All that is in this place pretended by the Author to this purpose, is only
this, that a man may freely consent, and willingly expose his life to death for
a greater, or publiker good.

. 36. Where by consenting I shall suppose him to mean a consent of the will to
that action which immediately follows, i. e. to the exposing his life to
death, (and if by consent he should mean any thing else, as the consenting,
that the other shall kill him, or the making it free and lawful to that other,
to take away his Life, then has he put two very distant things together, and
so it is but the ordinary fallacy plurium interrogationum, and in that Notion of
Consenting I shall anon show that man may not, i. e. has not power so to
Consent.) And to the proving of this, it is, that his remaining endeavors (as
far as concerns Doctor Hommond) are directed. And accordingly he says, He
will be so bold as to state the Question as it ought, i. e. to remove it from
the words and sense wherein Doctor Hammond proposed it (and in which it is that
his whole discourse is grounded) to those other words of his own, most
extremely distant in sound and sense; and in which I am as confident, that the
truth is on his side, (if Consent signify no more then I take it to signify)
as I am, that that truth does not contradict those other truths, which by
Doctor Hammond are superstructed on his foundation; or that the Proposition, as
it is stated by the Doctor, is all that is necessary to be affirmed for the
founding of the rest of his discourse.

. 37. For I desire to know, whether there be no difference betwixt killing my
self, and exposing my life to death? If so, then it must be not only lawful
so to kill my self (which is all the Author demands) but sometimes an act of
duty, and necessity also: For so certainly (in the assisting my Sovereign, or
Country to hazard, and expose my life, when I am thereto lawfully called; and
so again, to suffer Martyrdom in the confession of Christ, or discharge of
any Christian duty, is not only lawful for me to do, but I sin if I do it
not. And yet I do not perceive that this Author has laid this obligation, or
necessity on himself, or any man else in any case to kill (or lay violent
hands upon) himself, and so I suppose he is still of the Doctors mind, (though
he be willing to conceal it) that there is a difference between these.

. 38. And if there yet want any farther light to the clearing of this
difference between this [ having power of my own life so as to kill my self,
and that [ having power of my life, so as to expose it, or venture it in a good
Cause] I shall (for the concluding of this Paper) propose the plain difference
between them.

. 39. And that may be taken from the nature of the word [ exposing] for that we
know signifies no more, then to submit it to an hazard, and so to expose my
life, is to hazard my life: In doing so, all that can be affirmed of me, is no
more then this, that I am willing, or content (and by my actions express that
willingness) to lose my life, if God please to permit it to be taken from me.

. 40. When my life is thus lost, three things must necessarily concur to it,
1. The Violence of the invader; 2. The Providence of God permitting him to
invade; and 3. My not resisting, or my not using the means (which were
naturally possible for me to use) to prevent, or avoid the violence of this
invasion, as when Christ might have used Angels (and another slight, and a
third compliance, and caution) but chooses not to do so. Of these three the
only efficient cause of the action (of killing) is the malicious violent
invader; sure neither the providence of God in permitting, nor my own
meekness, or obedience to Christ in following him, though it be to the very
Cross.

. 41. In this case, supposing that it be for a good End that I now expose my
life; it is also supposed, that the pursuance of that end is either duty in me,
a thing that I am absolutely bound to, as the Confession of Christ, etc. or
else that it is excess of Charity, to which, though it be not under particular
precept, yet the Intuition of some great, and glorious end does so invite, and
incline me, that it is heroical Virtue in me to do it, and that which (though
God does not so require it of me, as that I sin, if I do it not, yet) he
has promised to reward abundantly, whenever it is done for his sake.

. 42. In the former of these cases, when the pursuance of that good end is
strict duty, as in case I am commanded to confess Christ, or to assist my
Prince in protecting my Country, There as my endeavor is required of me by
that precept, so is my utmost endeavor, such as I must not remit, whatsoever
the danger be; And if that danger prove to be the utmost danger, even of my
l^fe it self, yet the command of Constancy, of not fearing, or fainting, and
the character of perfect love given by Saint John, that it casts out fear, and
the denunciations against the fearful, or cowardly, do all join to extend my
obligation, to pursue this so necessary End without any receding, and if the
Cross it self lie in my way toward this end, to take it up, i. e. willingly to
submit to Gods Providence, which has thought fit to call me to this Trial, if
it be even of resisting unto blood. And so still all that I do, is the
constant, patient, cheerful submission to Gods Will (in his providentiall
disposing of my life, and in permitting the injurious to take it from me) and
nothing else; an absolute choice of Obedience, but not of Death; a sacrificing
to duty all desire of Life, but not otherwise undertaking to dispose of it.

. 43. Hence is it that my venturing of my Life does not clear, or free the
Invader, from any degree of sin, or guilt in thus taking it away from me.
'Twas but a Sarcasme or Trope in Julians Soldiers, to say, they did not wrong
the Christians by killing them, but only hasten them to their desired home:
And the Fathers were able to answer the Paralogisme by the rule in Ethickes,
distinguishing betwixt a mixed, and absolute will; and so concluding their
slaughters to be Injuries, though they were willingly embraced, the Persecutors
to be Persecutors still, though the other were Martyrs.

. 44. Which is a demonstrative proof, that it is the Invader, not Sufferer,
whose act the killing is supposed to be, and so that I am not in this case of
exposing my Life, supposed to give any Consent that he shall kill me, or
consequently to divest my self of the power of my life, or indeed to have any
such power over it. For whatsoever is absolutely in my power to dispose of,
that I may lawfully consent to part with; That if I do part with it, ipso
facto, and jure Data ^o ipso quo dantur, siunt accipientis. Iurist.
becomes his, to whom I part with it (and if there be any error in it, it is
chargeable on the giver, who was thus profusely Liberal above the proportion:)
And consequently for him to take and use it, is in him no sin; As that part
of my Estate which is in my power, may by me be past over to another by gift,
and being so, is lawfully possessed, and enjoyed by the receiver.

. 45. And therefore, I say, if the lawfullnesse of the exposing my Life would
conclude me to have a power over it, it must be as perfectly lawful for the
Tyrant, into whose hands my Life (in the confessing of Christ) is by me
exposed, to take that Life from me, as it is for the poor man into whose hands
my goods are by me put (in obedience to Christ's command of mercifulness) to
receive, and carry away those goods; which being an absurdity too gross to be
defended by any, will, I suppose, incline this Author to discern the distance
betwixt the questions, as the one is by him, and as the other was by Doctor
Hammond proposed.

. 46. And in like manner also, when the End pursued by me, is (though not
absolutely necessary, yet) better and more excellent; there the Precept of
being faithful unto death, and the promise of reward made to him tht lays
down, or loses his life for Christ's sake, do as much oblige to constancy, at
least, as much assure that such constancy shall be acceptable to God, (and that
the more by how much greater the hazards, and terrors, and temptations are to
the contrary) as when the particular matter of the action was under precept.
And so that other accidental difference will make no variation in the main,
nor make it at all probable, that exposing my life heroically was not warranted
by God, when exposing it necessarily, was supposed to be so: it being as
certain that God does warrant me to do that which he commends, as what he
strictly commands to me: And therefore what was said in the case of duty, does
as truly hold (and so needs not to be repeated again) in this case of [ more
excellent] also.

. 47. Having thus far proceeded, it will now be unnecessary for me to answer
the Arguments which this Author adds in this matter, because the Question
being by him changed from that, which was proposed by Doctor Hammond (and
stated Negatively) to another, which no man can be more ready to affirm, and
assert then that Doctor; It would be an impertinent niceness in him to refuse
to have his Opinion confirmed by another man's reasons; I shall rather wish that
all his proofs were demonstrative, and effectual to conclude, what Doctor
Hammond affirms with him; and only briefly show, that they are ineffectuall to
prove what that Doctor denies, and that will soon be done by the most cursory
mention of them.

. 48. For first, I grant with him that God permitted his own Son to be put
to death by the hands of violent, and unjust men, but see no consequence from
thence, that Christ, as a Man might lawfully have taken away his own Life; as
for the phrase of laying down the life for the sheep, that sure signifies not
the killing himself, for the goodness of the Shepherd consists not in that)
the cutting his own throat, when the Wolf invades the Flock; but the making
use of his Life to the utmost, wherein it may be advantageous to the Sheep, and
venturing, and hazarding it in their defense, or quarrel; yea, and contentedly
suffering (not acting in) his own death, that he may be able to avert theirs.
For this is the meaning of (...), to lay down the life, ((...), to venture
himself voluntarily into danger, (...), in the notion in which the Greek
Glossaries explain the phrase, from (...), i. e. (...) in Hesychius, and the
Latin, Parabelanum animae suae esse, i. e. all one with (...)) to expose it,
not to be so solicitous for the defense of it, as to forgo da^y, or charity,
or care of the poor sheep entrusted to him, for the preserving of it.

. 49. A second Argument is by this Author touched on (though not formally urged
by him) that the preserving whole societies from perishing is a good, and a
public end, and that the impunity of offenders being the readiest way to the
dissolution, and destruction of societies, Nature is supposed to dictate that
one man should rather justly die, than whole societies unjustly perish. This
Conclusion, and Premises, the Doctor does, as the Author foresaw, most
willingly acknowledge, but withal discernes not, how it proves that a man has
power over his own life: It will be sufficient if God by any other means (as
by instating it in the Prince etc.) do place that power of life in others. The
utmost which this way of arguing can pretend to conclude, is, 1. That
whatsoever any man has in his own power, that it is reasonable for him to
deliver up into the Governors hand, (thus to make it easy, or possible to
discharge his trust, and by these advantages to contribute to the public quiet
and weal.) Nay 2. that God that has the power of life, and sees how useful
it is to have that vested in Governors, should consequently be supposed so to
vest it (And that he does so, is the clear acknowledgment of the Address.)

. 50. But sure it cannot extend so far, as to make a man give (or have) that
which he has not, nor to restrain God from having the sole Original power of
that, which otherwise might be acknowledged to be vested in him.

. 51. As for the supposition, which the Author here adds on the back of this,
[In case 10 men in the community of Nature chose one to rule over them, and one
of them thus spontaneously subjected shall murder one of his fellow Subjects]
(whereupon he demands whether the ruler so set up may not by his own consent by
virtue of that power he received from him among the rest, put such a Murderer
to death) To this I answer, that the Governor may in this case put the
Murderer to death, but this not by virtue of any power, or consent of the
Murderer, but by authority from God, who alone has the power of life; In
relation to which it is that the Governor is styled (...), a Minister of God,
in this very notion, as he is (...), an avenger for wrath or punisher of
offenders.

. 52. That which is in the Subjects power the Governor may have by the
Subjects consent, and by virtue of the power which he received from him; And
therefore it is that the power of violent resisting invaders, the right of
repelling force by force, which God and Nature has given the single man in
community of Nature, is now, in case of submission to the Governor, parted
with, and deposited by him, so far as refers to the Governor, and though it be
founded in selfe-defence, yet he that thus violently resists the powers, shall
receive to himself damnation.

. 53. But still that which is not in the Subjects power, is not, nay cannot be
vested by the subject in the Governor, but flows from an higher principle
(from him that really has the power) and comes from the Subjects consent,
only, as from the causa sine qua non, or by way of resultance; That as God
communicates not this power of life to any but the Governor; so that man's
Consent, that he should be his Governor, does remotely (and by way of
condition, or qualifying of the subject to a capacity of receiving that power
from God) concur to the vesting of that power in that person. Thus does the
temper of the air contribute to the qualifying the slime, or putrid matter to
receive influences from the Sun, and then those influences beget life in it,
and endow it with that higher principle, which the temper of the air, that
contributed all it could, (having not thus much in its power) could not be
affirmed to contribute to it.

. 54. And so you see the Doctors way of stating this question does as fully
provide for the punishing of Malefactors, and preserving of communities, as the
supposing the power of life to proceed originally from the People, would be
able to do; As he that affirms the Soul in every birth to be infused by God,
makes as sure a provision for Generation, and consequently for the preservation
of the humane species, as they that suppose the Soul to be traduced from the
Parents, as well as the Body.

. 55. His last Argument is from Romans 5.7. For a good man one would dare to die,
i. e. says he, would with the presence of a resolved Spirit die; the word [
daring] says he, noting a presence of mind terrified with no dangers. To this
Argument again, as far as by the Author it can be extended, i. e. to the
acknowledgement, or concluding of the lawfullnesse of a valiant courageous
suffering of death, either for a public good, or for some act of eminent
private charity, I am fully of the Authors mind.

. 56. But the word [ dying] in that place, signifying no more then submission
of the Will, contentedness, or willingness to suffer death, not by his own,
but by some other man's hands, an (...), a taking those blows (though never so
sharp and mortal) on his own shoulders, and breast, which were meant by the
Enemy to another (to the merciful, or good man in that Text) there is no
Logic can conclude from hence, that a man has any power over his own life,
to take it away from himself by any act of force, (as (...) among the Attick
Writers, is, says Phrynicus, used (...), He that kills himself, takes upon him
an Independent Authority over himself) or to give it into another man's hands,
so that he may without any farther Authority (without any investiture of the
power of the Sword from God) lawfully take it from him. Nam ne in animalibus
quidem manendi amor ex animae voluntatibus verum ex naturae principiis venit,
Nam saepe mortem cogentibus causis, quam natura reformidat, voluntas
amplectitur, etc. de consol. Phil. l. 3. Pros. 11.
I shall conclude this with an observation of Boethius, that the love of life
is not seated in the will of the Creature, but in the principles of Nature.
That so our lives may not be ventured on the uncertainties and hazards of our
own passions, or satieties, which may incl^ne the will to prefer death
sometimes, but in the instincts of that more constant immutable Rule, which
always prescribes the preserving of those treasures, by God and Nature
entrusted to us.

. 57. Having made this short, and sudden return to this Authors reasonings,
Doctor Hammond will leave the matter most willingly, where this Author has
placed it, at the feet of all ingenuous, and unprejudiced Readers, and will
endeavor (as unpassionately as any man) to approve himself a Servant of
Reason, and embracer, or friend of Truth, wheresoever he meets with it; upon
which score, he is content to acknowledge some Obligations to this Author, who
has occasioned this farther survey of his former affirmations, and given all
other men some cause to be more confirmed in the persuasion and assurance of
the truth of them. And thus much I conceive is sufficient to have said upon
this occasion.

. 58. BUt it seems the Readers quiet is not to be obtained so easily; for
while that which has been thus said was under the Printers hand, Mr. John
Goodwin's (...) came forth, and by the mention of Doctor Hammonds name twice in
his Title page, gave reason to delay this Vindication so long, till it might
appear whether 'twould be useful to add any thing to it (upon this new
occasion) by way of Postscript. And herein it has proved a little unluckily,
that this second Advocate of the same cause falling upon this passage in the
Address (the Subject of our present discourse) has yet in his judgment upon
it so varied from the former Author, that as he has yielded the question
hitherto debated, page 22.
and confessed that no man has by nature the power over his own life; so he
has provided a new task for me, by denying the Doctors consequence from hence,
[ that then this power cannot be derived to Kings by Men, or from the People.]
This I confess is somewhat strange that that should be imagined derivable by
men, or from the people, which at the same time it is confessed no man has. I
have lately learned a That cannot be brought But, that is not the Ben.
Scotch Proverb from Master Henderson, and find by search the meaning of it to
be this plain English, that nothing is derivable from any place, which was
never there: and Mr. Goodwin acknowledges the strength of that consequence to
stand in the authority of this Maxim, Nihil dat quod non habet, Nothing gives
that to another which it has not it self. And truly, I shall never desire a
firmer basis for any conclusion of mine then such an acknowledged Principle as
this. Should I find any part of my possessions in M. Goodwins hands, and he
justify his Title to it, by pretending the donation, or sale from Philodemius
to him, and I produce evidence that this was never in the possession of
Philodemius, would there be any more required of me, to conclude consequently,
that 'twas not derivable from Philodemius to him? would it not be a strange
reply, to say, That this consequence depended on the Authority of a Topic
Maxim? The word [ Topicke] I suppose to be here prefixed by him upon a design
of diminution, as Topicall is equivalent with probable, and opposed to
demonstrative. But I hope this is not thus a Topic Maxim. Can any
demonstration be more convincing, then that which is built upon a Principle, as
acknowledged as any in the Mathematics, and the contrary of which implies a
contradiction [to have, and not to have?]

. 59. As for the reason of denying this consequence, which Master Goodwin
renders, because [ though no particular man has by nature this power over his
own Life, yet as a member of community he has, not simply a power, but a
necessity lying upon him by way of duty, etc. to consent with others, that his
life shall be taken from him] 1. It Is not to me imaginable, that he should have
a necessity of duty lying upon him* who has not simply a power, meaning, as
here he must, a power of doing it lawfully. And 2. For this power, or necessity
of consenting only (as that differs from the power of giving) this will be of
no kind of force, unless it also appear that the Magistrate derives the power
of life (which is supposed to be in him) from this consent of theirs, or that
it is this consent of theirs, and nothing else which gives him that power. But
this is so far from being proved, that it is not so much as affirmed by Master
Goodwin: And on the other side it is clear, that the bare consenting that a
thing shall be taken out of my hands, is very distant from the taking upon me
to give it; the latter pretends and supposes a possession, or investiture in
the giver, the former does not in the Consenter; and so, though the latter
would be of some use (if granted) to infer Mr. Goodwins conclusion, that the
power is originally from the people, yet the former will be no way able to
infer it.

. 60. The matter will be very visible by example in any Trust, or Stewardship.
The Lord intrusts to his Steward the keeping of a sum of money, after that he
assigns it over to some other man by Bill of Attorney, and legally vests his
right in that other. In this case the Steward formerly entrusted consents, that
that other shall take what is thus by the Lord assigned to him, and indeed a
necessity lies upon him by way of duty so to do. In this case I shall ask M.
G. from whom this money is derived to this other? from the Lord, or from the
Steward? I hope he will acknowledge from the Lord: The same again, when the
King delivers a Castle by way of Trust, to be kept by one of his Subjects, and
after assigns it over to his Son, and the Subject that kept it, consents
that the Son should have it, and so the Son enters upon the possession; the
case is clear, that it is not from the Subject that the Son derives this
possession (though it is as true that the Subject consents to deliver it up) but
from the King only: and that Act of the Subject is no expression of any right
in him, from him conveyable to the Son, but only of his Trust, and
subordination to the King. And this is generally the difference betwixt
Investitures and Trusts: what is vested in me, I may give, or derive to
another, what is entrusted only, I cannot: the Servant cannot dispose of his
Masters goods, yet that his Masters disposal may stand good, he may, and ought
to give his consent. This is so grossly true, that it is pity any longer to
insist on it; and yet it is the very thing that the whole point in hand depends
on, and was therefore, I conceive, so industriously involved, and obscured by
Mr. Goodwin.

. 61. After this, Master Goodwin insensibly glides into another piece of
artifice; The power of life, says he, is eminently and virtually in the people
collectively taken, though not formally. And again, A man, and a body of men,
have power over their own lives Radically, and Virtually, though not formally.
This period of Master Goodwin seems to be a new way of Answer, by applying
distinction to the Antecedent, as the former was by denying the consequence.
The Antecedent was [ That no man has by nature the power over his own life,
etc.] from whence the Address concludes that therefore [ This power cannot be
diriv'd from the people] To this Master Goodwin first returns his
acknowledgement, That if the consequence be right, it is a clear case, that
Regal power is not originally in the people, but conferred on the Ruler
immediately from God. This is an acknowledgement in him of the truth of the
Antecedent, and a doubt only of the consequence, which accordingly he
immediately proceeds to invalidate: And therefore it is a little strange (and
an argument that his first attempt was not very successful to him) that he
should now so soon return to deny the Antecedent* at least to distinguish of
it, having before so absolutely garnted it. But to pass over this, and allow
him this liberty of recalling his bounty, let us examine the force of his
distinction.

. 62. The force of this distinction does not, I conceive, respect the Subject
[the people] (as if that might be taken in two notions, either singly, or
collectively) because presently, without that distinction, he speaks
indifferently of [ A man] and [ A body of men] but it belongs to the Copula, or
word [ Is] and then it must be thus dissolved. The power of life may be said to
be in a man two ways, 1. Formally, 2. Eminently and Virtually, and Radically.
This distinction of Formaliter, and eminenter has been applied by Philosophers
to the Sun, and Heavenly Bodies: of which it being by them resolved, that they
are simple and free from those mixtures to which our sublunary bodies are
subject, and yet it being apparent, that they warm and heat other things, it
is thereupon defined, that they have not heat, or other qualities in them
Formally, (i. e. in that manner, or kind, that fire is hot, or we are hot) but
Virtually, and eminently, i. e. that they have some other Virtue, or faculty in
them, higher, or more eminent then that heat which is in inferior bodies: and
that that does enable them to warm other things, though they are themselves
such pure creatures, as not to have those gross qualities in them. Whether
this be rightly affirmed, or only nicely conjectured by Philosophers (for I
suppose there is little known of those distant bodies beyond conjecture) I
shall not now enquire, but only desire to be taught by Mr. Goodwin, how this
can be made appliable to the matter in hand, i. e. to the power of life and
death. This power, we know, is in God first, and if in any Eminently, and
Radically, and Virtually, certainly in him: And in the Supreme Magistrate
formally, being actually inherent in him, though not Originally, nor in so
eminent a degree as in God it is. But can it thus be said also to be eminently,
etc in the People, i. e. that the People have in them some higher, and more
eminent Virtue, or faculty then the power of every man over his own life; and
that that supplies the place of that formal power, and that by it the People
beget, or produce the power of life in the Supreme Magistrate, as truly, as, if
they had it formally, they could do? This is the meaning of the distinction in
the ordinary, and only notion of it, and must be it, if it be rightly
appliable; but Mr. Goodwin interprets his meaning of it, so far from this, so
far from importing, or concluding the People to have such an higher power or
faculty (to which [ Eminently] and [ Virtually] in opposition to [ Formally]
belongs) that it is indeed by him set down as much inferior to that power
formally inherent. For thus he interprets it, A Man, and a body of Men, have
power over their own lives Radically, and Virtually, in respect whereof, they
may render themselves to a Magistrate, and to Laws, which, if they violate,
they must be in hazard of their lives, etc. By this I discern two things, 1.
That by this eminent, Virtuall, Radical power, Mr. Goodwin understands that
(which is far enough from the meaning of those words, and) which Logicians
call a remote, or indirect power, (as that is opposed to an immediate, or
direct) or rather a power, to which this effect is merely accidental, as if
the patient were said to have power to cure himself, meaning thereby that he
has power to submit himself to the Physician, who is able to cure him. And for
Mr. Goodwin to assume the liberty of speaking thus largely, was not, I suppose,
his want of knowledge in propriety, but his willingness to receive advantage
from this abuse of words: And then 2. If this be the only meaning of the four
hard words, (Eminently, Virtually, Radically, and Formally) viz. that it is in
the power of men (or the People in community of nature) to render themselves to
a Magistrate, and to Laws, to which rendering 'twill be consequent, that they
shall hazard their lives upon violating those Laws, then, I say, are Mr.
Goodwin, and Doctor Hammond very well agreed; for this his explication of that
distinction is very reconcilable with those words of the Address. This giving
up their (i. e. the peoples) Liberties to one, or more, makes that man, or men,
a Ruler over them, and being a Ruler, to him belongs (derived from God, not
from them) the power of life which Gods decree has instated in the Supreme
Power, or Ruler, who is therefore in that relation of avenger for wrath or
punishment, a Minister of God, Romans 13. etc. For whence is it that their
rendering themselves to a Magistrate, in Mr. Goodwins style, brings upon them
that hazard of lives, in case of violation of Laws, unless it be that he that
has power of their lives, places that power in that Magistrate to whom they
have rendered, or subjected themselves? That this is God, and not the People, I
will not conclude to be Mr. Goodwins opinion, because it is his maine design to
prove the contrary, but that those words of his, and his distinction so
explained will bear that sense, I mean, that they will be true, and
acknowledged by him, that acknowledges the power of Life to be only in the
Supreme Governor, derived from God, I conceive sufficiently manifest; and
consequently, that though this power be said to be in the People remotely,
improperly, and indirectly, and so in Mr. Goodwins notion of eminently, etc.
yet it is not from the People, but from God only, that the Governor has it.

. 63. The reply will be as ready, and easy also to all force, or concludency
of his next Argument, that which is taken from the Peoples power, to make, or
consent to the making of Capital Laws. For 1. Mr. Goodwin cannot be ignorant
that it has been sometimes in the power of Kings to make Laws, without the
addition of any consent of the people: such were the Principum placitae among
the Romans: and after it was thought fit by Princes to lay some restraint on
themselves, both that they might be better advised, and more readily obeyed,
then, though the peoples consent has been deemed necessary, yet does this
belong only to the regulating, and modifying the exercise of this power: the
Fundamental power it self of life, being in the Supreme Governor, before the
making these Laws; Now it is very easy to distinguish betwixt these two, the
power, and the Regulating of the exercise of that power; the power in the
gross, and the determination of that power to this, or that particular action.
The interposition of man in the latter of these, does no way prejudge the sole
privilege of God, in the donation of the former of them: As the Grace of God
is his peculiar, and proper gift; and yet man may give Directions, and Rules,
how we are to act by that Principle, what use it will best become us to make of
that precious talent entrusted to us. And therefore, for the great
Noon-day-Truth which Mr. Goodwin induces from these, and the like
considerations, viz. [That men by nature have such a power over their lives, as
voluntarily, etc. to expose them to the stroke of public justice, in case
they shall offend, etc.] This being granted, is of no force against Doctor
Hammond, but does with him rather suppose a Public Justice able to strike, i.
e. a power of life already vested in the Magistrate, before this consent of the
People, or abstractedly, without respect unto it. And so still it is not from
this consent of the People, that this power is derived to the hand of Public
Justice, but from some other higher principle, viz. that of God, to whom (...)
the avenging, or punishing of offenders, peculiarly belongs, and no other, but
in subordination to, and substitution from him.

. 64. And what if the King, as M. Goodwin next alleges, have no power to take
away the life of his Subjects without cause, or for every cause, but only such
as by Law are punishable with death; what if he cannot command them to be their
own Executioners? Does it follow from hence, that therefore, he has the power
of life from the People, not from God? Does the power of God so consist in
doing causeless, or irrational things, that nothing which is exercised
moderately, or ordinately, can be imagined to come from him? I shall suppose
that God himself has perfect dominion over the world; and yet that he
observes rules of all-justice, and goodness in the exercise, and dispensing of
that power, and has not power of doing any thing contrary to those rules of
eternal Justice; which he has prescribed to himself; which to do by all wise
men has been counted an act of imbecility, not of power. And consequently, how
natural is it that he should thus determine, and limit his deputies also? give
them power of life over their Subjects, and yet command them to exercise that
power with that just temperament, which either natural, or civil, or
municipall Laws shall dictate, and prescribe them? And therefore Master
Goodwins arguing is very loose, and unconcluding; [ That if the power which the
King has over the lives of the poeple, were immediately from God, then he
might lawfully execute the same, and take away the lives of men, without any
mediating direction, or warranty from any Law.] For sure the same God that
gives the Magistrate the power of life, does command him also not to throw away
that precious trust causelessly, makes him his Minister for wrath to them that
do evil, and contrary wise a rewarder to them that do well, and though he
subject him not to any earthly superior, but reserve him to his own severe
tribunal, yet he subjects him to reason, and rules of Justice, and (when he
has undertaken to govern by that Standard) to the positive municipall Laws
of that particular Kingdom also, and has been as particular in prescribing
Laws to the Prince, to avoid Oppression, or acts of Height, as to Subjects to
abstain from resistance.

. 65. As for that proof which Mr. Goodwin produces to enforce his arguing,
viz. [That the execution of no commission immediately issued by God, ought to
be suspended upon, or determined, or regulated by any commission, or
constitution of men.] It is as far from truth, as it could well have been
contrived to be: As will appear if it be considered; that the word [Commission]
1. signifies not an absolute, or positive Command, but only a power, or
investiture of Authority; or if a Command, yet that 2. only an Affirmative
precept, the nature of which is, that it binds not ad semper, and so
consequently, may be suspended at some time, by the free will of him that has
the Commission, much more if any weighty reason interpose to determine his
will. 3. That this Commission is only General, and indefinite, without
application to particular cases, referring that application to the conjuncture
and concurrence of circumstances, (which ordinarily are humane, and
Political;) and consequently to the discretion of Rulers judging by those
circumstances: The intervenience of which circumstances makes the particular
exercise of that Commission convenient, and seasonable in one place, and at one
time; and consequently, where they do not intervene, there the exercise of it
may be at that time, and place suspended as unseasonable. As when the shedder
of blood is by God commanded to be put to death, and yet some men accidentally,
and invountarily fall under that Title, it must be in the power of the
Magistrate, to suspend the execution of that sentence, or else the Innocent
must loose the benefit of the City of refuge, and run the same fortune with
the most murtherous designer.

. 66. After this manner it is clear, that Christ had a Commission from heaven to
work Miracles, to cure Diseases; yet it is particularly affirmed of the
infidelity of his Countrymen, that that suspended the exercise of his power
for some time; He could not do many mighty works there because of their
unbelief, yet, I hope, this will no way be thought to argue, that Christ's
commission issued from his Countrymen, or from the belief of men, (though that
were necessary, to the exercise of it) or that Christ did ill in suspendi^g the
exercise of his Commission. In like manner the people of Israel had from God
not only a commission, but command to put the nations to death, Deuteronomy. 20.10.
And yet on those of them that were left, 1 Kings. 9.20. Solomon suspended the
act of that commission, and only levied a tribute of bond-service ver. 21.
Once more; I shall suppose a General to receive power of Martial Law from the
Sovereign in any Kingdom, this power he is not willing to exercise, but by a
cognizance of each malefactors cause before a Council of War. Here it is
plain that that Council of War suspends that exercise of the Generals power
upon a particular man; but sure it will no way follow from thence, that that
Commission, which was supposed to issue to the General from the Sovereign,
does now issue not from the Sovereign, but that Council of War; and then no
more will the possibility of suspending the exercise of the Kings Commission by
Law, etc. conclude that Commission to issue from the People, and not from God.
And therefore in the case which Mr. Goodwin has been confident to refer to
Doctor Hammond to Arbitrate [ Whether the King has any Regular or just power
over the lives of men, other then that which is proportioned, etc. by the Laws
of the State] I suppose the Doctor may agree with Mr. Goodwin, and yet never be
enforced, or concluded by that concession, to question the Original of the
power from God, the difference being discernible between the Power it self, and
every particular exercise of that power; and the suspension of the latter,
far from including the evacuation, or cancelling of the former.

. 67. The same answer will clear Mr. Goodwins succeeding Plea, page 26. That if
the power of Kings over the lives of men, were by immediate derivation from
God, then must this power be uniforme, etc. in all Kingdoms whatsoever.] This
consequence is far from all appearance of truth; Because the power may be from
God, and yet that God that gives the power, may leave it in the particular
exercises of it, to be determined either by the arbitration, and free will, and
prudence of the Governor, where there are no Laws, or by the Regulation of
Laws, where there are such; The Dimensum, or proportion of power over the
lives of the Subjects, which a Governor claims, consists not in indivisibili,
in any certain, or definite point, but is that which may enable him to
discharge his office of Ruler, i. e. to protect his people, and restrain their
inordinacies. And as far as Reason, and (which are supposed to be a branch of
that) paticular Laws, (subordinate to Gods Word) see it fit to extend the
exercise of that power, so far may that Ruler regularly extend it; And
whatsoever proportion it be, that he is entrusted with by God, it is not
reasonable that he should irrationally extend the exercise of it. And this
regulation of indefinite power by such prudent limits as these ( i. e. by the
Universal law of Reason and Justice, or by the particular conclusions, which
the wisdom of Lawgivers has thought fit to deduce from thence) cannot justly
be quarreled, as a retrenchment of power, any more, then the infinite
goodness of God which permits him not to be able to do any thing which is
contrary to that attribute, is a manicling, or restraining his Omnipotence, but
is only a cultivating and dressing of it, a paring off the excesses, and
exorbitances of it, and leaving it a formed channel, instead of a vast or
unbridled Ocean.

. 68. And thus I suppose the nature of Angels or men, which have bounds of
Virtue and Conscience, and Laws prescribed them, within which they are to
move, and not to range unlimited in the desert of their own uncertain
proposals, cannot thereby be said to have lost the liberty of their species, or
to have received no powers from God in their creation, though some regulations
(it must be acknowledged) they are under, and consequently, determinations and
suspensions for the exercise of their powers. And what inconvenience the
affirming of this will bring upon the Doctor, what hazard of blaspheming of
God, etc. I must profess my self so tame, as not to foresee, or imagine,
howsoever M. Goodwins (...) has helped him to fancy such invisible Mormos,
and Anakims in our passage.

. 69. Next, it is but affirmed, and not at all made probable by Mr. Goodwin,
that the Affirming the Kings power over the lives of the people to be by
immediate derivation from God, is to smite them with blindness, etc. and not
to discover to them the Dan and Bersheba (I suppose he means by this trope,
the due bounds and limits) of such their power] I am sorry Mr. Goodwin should
think it fit that such popular harangues should be admitted to supply the place
of reason, and shall briefly reply, That they that affirm the power of the
Sword to be from God derived to Magistates, do at the same time define, and
affirm, that those Magistrates are to remain rational creatures, and to
continue under the Sovereignty of Reason, and all the branches of that, as
far as their particulars are concerned in it, i. e. to be ruled by the
Universal Laws of Justice and Equity, by the Civil Sanctions which tend to
the preserving of Societies, and consequently by the particular Local, or
municipall Laws of any Country, which are supposed to have a peculiar
propriety toward the preserving, and regulating of that People.

. 70. 'Twill now be to little purpose to prove that these two affirmations are
reconcilable, the one deriving the power of life to the Ruler from God, the
other acknowledging the regulation of this power by these bounds; For there is
no kind of repugnance, or contradiction, nothing but accord and amity between
them: The very Hand of God that conferres this power, gives this very
direction, and Law for the exercise of it, that they that rule other men should
themselves be guided by Reason in all their actions: And what that Reason is in
each particular emergent, they are not always, or only, the Judicialls of
Moses, which are fit to direct us, but the wisdom sometimes of Particular Laws,
and Lawmakers. And so there is small danger either of ensnaring Kings, or
disturbing States, (as he seems willing to fear) by this doctrine; which
though it define the Original of this power to be from Heaven, can yet allow
the regulation of this power for the Exercise of it to be of an inferior,
Humane, Political Orgination.

. 71. One Argument more Mr. Goodwin is pleased to take in to disprove the
immediate derivation of this power of life from God. Because, says he, that
derivation which is immediate from God, can by no ways be assisted, furthered,
or promoted by any creature, or second means, but this derivation of that
power of life is at least furthered by the act of the people in electing, etc.
Ergo, I shall not examine the force of his ensuing probations, which have
frailties enough in them, but shall be content to suppose the most he can wish,
or imagine, viz. That the people do elect, or choose their King; In this case,
says the Doctor, The people give not the power of their lives to that King,
but by giving up their Liberties, etc. to him, nominate him to that office of
supreme power, which, wheresover it is, God superinvests with the power of
life. This is the Doctors stating of the question in his Andresse, and thereby
the separation is evident between the Act of the People in Electing the person
of the Ruler, and the Act of God in conferring this power of life. All that can
be said of the former of these is that that act of the people is the means of
determining the General decree of God (that Rulers shall (as his Deputies)
have the power of life) to this particular person, not that it is an assistent,
or sociall cause in conveying this power to the Ruler, much less that it shall
undertake to wrest this power out of Gods hands, and assume it into their own;
but, I say, as a causa sine qua non, or a previous preparation of the subject,
by their choice qualifying the person to be thus invested, and empowered by
God. And so, though the people in this case are supposed to do somewhat, i. e.
to Elect, and that election to determine this power of Gods to this person, yet
is this power derived solely from God, as the Address has sufficiently
explained, and not from any act of the People: And therefore the word [
Furthering] in Mr. Goodwins Argument, may be taken (as an equivocall word) in a
double sense, either to denote actual assistance, or contribution of force, or
efficacy, toward the production of the effect, viz. of the power of life in the
Ruler: And in that sense it is not true, that the Act of the People in
Electing, does further this power, it being the sole act of Gods decree to give
that power, and nothing else. Or else the word [ Furthering] may be taken to
signify no more then preparing, or qualifying the Subject to a capacity of
receiving this power from God, (as John Baptist prepared men's hearts for the
receiving of Christ, when he came, but had nothing to do in the mission of him,
which was the sole work of God) and thus indeed, the Election of the People may
further the derivation of this power from God to such a particular Ruler; And
there is nothing more ordinary then for Gods works to be thus furthered by
second causes, or means, even his work of Grace, which he ownes most
peculiarly. The resemblance made use of in the Address, is very commodious to
clear this whole matter. In the Generation of a child, the parents are
acknowledged to contribute much, to be not only furtherers, but even
efficients in the production, Yet is it commonly agreed, that God creates,
infuses, and inspires the Soul immediately. I need not examine, or attest the
truth of the ordinary opinion, that the soul comes from heaven, not from the
Parents; because I now use it as a resemblance only, and that it may be
allowed to be, though it should not be true, and thus far at least it will be
argumentative, that the electing of the person of the Ruler by the people, does
no more conclude that the power of life is not superinfused and derived to the
Ruler (so chosen) from heaven, then the parents begetting of the child is an
argument, that the soul is not superinfused from God. Our Phoenomena may be
all very happily solved by this way of setting it; and M. G. exceptions
superseded, and the conclusion cleared, which was the only one, which the
Address desired to infer by this consideration, viz. That whatsoever were
supposed of the peoples electing their Ruler, yet the Supreme power neither is
nor can be in the community of the people by force, merely of their Original,
or natural Liberty, upon this firm ground (not yet shaken by M. G. or
Philodemius) that the power of life, which is part of the Supreme Power, is not
part of the natural Liberty, nor consequently either inherent in the Community
of men, nor by them communicable to any Representative. (...)* The only thing,
which this rejoinder (as the former discourse) was designed to demonstrate most
irrefragably.

. 72. And having proceeded thus far to make return to M. Goodwins offers of
reason, I shall not endeavor to make payment to his Scoffs, page 28. or
vindicate Doctor Hammond from his charge of overweeningnesse, etc. Though it is
not at all intelligible to me, how those words in the Address (For it is
possible that I may put you in mind of an evident truth, which perhaps you
have not taken notice of] should be chargeable with this (...), or
interpretable to any farther sense, then only this, That this truth so evident
in Doctor Hammonds opinion, was not by him ^onceived to be sufficiently taken
notice of, or laid to heart by them, to whom he then made his Address. And if
that Doctor were therein mistaken, or if he be justly charged in his next page
(together with the rest of his persuasion, under the title of the whole Legion
of the Royal Faction) as the firstborn of that evil Generation of
Flatterers, for producing plain Arguments of Reason, and Scripture to avert,
that which appeared to him a heavy Sin, and Judgment, from a Nation; I must
then betake my self to my Prayers, that God will forgive me my more
discernible sins, (when innocencies, and good offices to mankind are become
so culpable) and get out of his company as soon as I can, who can so readily
shift the discourse from reasoning to defaming, and supply with reproaches what
was wanting in Arguments.

. 73. I am now come to an end of this debate concerning the Power of life, but
cannot be so prudent, or thrifty of my pains, as to dissemble the other
exceptions, which (in this book) Master Goodwin has made to some other parts
of the Address; I shall give you as brief an account of them as is possible.

. 74. The fitst, is his dislike of that Critic annotation, as he styles it, of
the Royal Doctor, taking notice that the Supreme Power, or Ruler is styled by
the Apostle, Romans 13. the Minister of God, and not of the people] How this
comes to be styled a Critic annotation, (which supposes it a Grammatical one,
Vi. Moschopul. Gram. Gr.
(as (...), are the parts divisive of (...)) where there is no use made of
Grammar to deduce it, nor indeed of any thing but of the plain words, as they
lie in the Text) I have not the skill, or sagacity to divine. All that Doctor
Hammond affirms is this, that the Supreme power, Romans 13. is styled by the
Apostle, the Minister of God, and not of the people. And is not this manifest
to any that looks on Romans 13.4. where he is twice styled (...), the Minister of
God, and is neither there, nor any where else styled the Minister of the People.

. 75. But, says M. Goodwin, This no way infringes the credit of his
conclusion, that Kings are the Servants and Ministers of the People. The
Apostles were the Ministers of God, and yet they preach themselves also the
servants of Men, 2 Cor. 4.5. and Ministers of the Saints, Romans 15.25. etc. To
this I answer, that the phrase (...), Minister of God, signifies a Minister of
Gods Ordination, and Institution, and though it may signify somewhat else, yet
this is the only notion wherein Doctor Hammond takes it in his Address,
according to Romans 13. of which he speaks, where the powers are said to be
ordained by God, and to be his Ordinance. Now he that is thus a Minister of
God, cannot be so also of the People, because these two Ordinations being
incompatible, he that holds by one, must needs disclaim holding by the other.
Another notion there may be of the phrase, as it signifies performing of
service to God; and so indeed the same Apostle that serves God, may be a
servant of Men also, and to that, all M. Goodwins probations are directed, and
though S. Paul's (...), his carrying of alms, and contributions to the poor
Saints, be no very proper instance to this purpose; yet thus it is acknowledged,
that S. Paul may be a servant of Men, and perform offices of Humility to them,
(though by the way this Servant of theirs behaves himself sometimes very like a
Master, and comes with a Rod when he sees it convenient.)

. 76. But this is nothing to the purpose to infer the King to be (...), a
Minister of the People in the former notion, i. e. a Minister of the peoples
Institution; and therefore all that M. Goodwin adds of the Reasons why the
Ruler, Romans 13. is not called the Minister of the people, is very extrinsecall
to that purpose. The utmost that he can enforce from that place is, that the
King attends on the public good. But sure that will avail as little to prove
that he is not a minister of Gods instituting, or one that has the power from
him, as the Shepherds waiting over the Flock, is a proof that he is ordained,
or instituted by his Sheep.

. 77. The next undertaking of M. Goodwin against Doctor Hammond, is to prove
that the Civil Magistrate is by S. Peter called (...); which he renders the
Ordinance, or creature of Man because they receive their very being from the
people as Kings, and as Magistrates. Doctor Hammond has, I conceive,
sufficiently vindicated that Text of S. Peter from this interpretation, and
'twere easy to show, that the phrase (...) must by all analogy be rendered
Humane creature; not Ordinance, or creature of Man; by humane creature, meaning
any part of mankind; by creature of man, a thing of man's creating. The phrase
to express the latter of these would be, (...), taking Creature for
production, or work, and Man for the artificer, or workman of it; what is said
in the Address, is sufficient to direct any sober man to a right understanding
of that place. And M. Goodwins exceptions are very far from persuading the
contrary. As 1. [ That the King is there called Supreme, not in respect of the
community of the people, as, says he, the Doctor supposes, but as compared
with subordinate Rulers.] But this is of no force against the Doctor in that
place, where all that he inferres from their title of Supreme, is, that they
are the very persons that are enstiled the Ordinance of God, To. 13. and that
is the signal character which he mentions in that Text, without taking notice
of any other aspect of the word Supreme, or drawing any nice conclusion from it.

. 78. His second exception is against the concludence of a Negative Argument.
Which I acknowledge an exception so far as to keep that Argument from being
demonstrative, in case all the force of it were fetched from the Negative; But
that Argument from the Negative (or from the Governors not being said to be
sent by the people) is but praelusory and preparative to another more forcible
branch of the Argument, viz. that (on the contrary) Supremacy is affixt to the
King, and Subjection for the Lords sake, commanded to be paid him, (as mission
from him is affirmed of all other Magistrates) And both those put together, the
Kings being Supreme, (i. e. inferior to none but God) and Subjection being
affirmed to be due to him for the Lords sake, (i. e. because of the relation
which he stands in to God, by whom he is said to be ordained Romans 13.) may well
enough pass for a character of some remarke upon the King, and keeep the
pretended rendering of (...), from being the necessary importance of that text,
or the Supreme power from being concluded to be originally in the people.

. 79. As for the groaning of the creation, or creature] Romans 8. which Doctor
Hammond renders [ the hope of the heathen world] it is not all M. Goodwins (...)
that will render it an improbable interpretation. That the Heathen world
(though without hope, i. e. in a desperate condition in respect of salvation,
as long as they remained in their idolatries) were yet so capable of receiving
benefit of Christ's coming into the world, that Christ is called Desiderium
omnium Gentium, the desire of all Nations, in Haggai, and (...), the
expectation of the Gentiles, in the Septuagints rendering of Jacobs Prophecy;
that they seeing their own impure condition, desired the means of restoring
their lost treasure, and consequently are said to desire Christ, without
explicit foreknowing any thing of him, (because that which they desired was no
otherwise compassable, but by him) is no nicety of the Doctors invention, but
largely insisted on by S. Augustine in his Books De Civ: Dei; and this one
Consideration is Reply sufficient to all the inconveniences which M. Goodwin
has sprung in this interpretation.

. 80. As for the other difficulties which to him seem to press and resist the
interpreting of the following words to this sense, they are not so solemnly
mentioned by M. Goodwin as to own my impertinence, if I should enlarge on
them; though I can assure him, that D. Hammond has long since considered the
whole Context, and is ready to give an account of the agreeableness of it to
his present notion, whenever it shall be seasonable. Only in favor to the
Reader, he does not unnecessarily obtrude it on him at this time, meaning to
expect a fairer opportunity for that, and other the like dissertations.

. 81. But M. Goodwin upon the granting of this notion of (...), for the heathen
world, has fallen upon a special (...), that however, It signifies the world
under the consideration of being the creature or creation of God. And then he
wonders why (...) should not signify the Magistrate to be the creation of man,
and how by this interpretation that conclusion of the Kings being the creature
of the people, is avoided. To this I answer punctually, that M. Goodwin being
the affirmer of this doctrine, [ That the King is the creature of the people]
and his proof of it being those words of Saint Peter, where obedience is
commanded to be paid (...), as it is by him rendered, to every creation, or
ordinance, or creature of man, It is certainly sufficient for D. Hammond (to
disprove this conclusion so inferred from that place of Saint Peter) if he
shall be able to mention another probable interpretation of those words, from
whence that Conclusion will not be inferred; especially if by other places of
Scripture he make it manifest, that that interpretation is most agreeable to
the analogy of that and other Scriptures. Now this has D. Hammond done, by
showing that (...) is a phrase which needs not signify any more then every
man, or humane creature, not only Christian, but Gentile, or Heathen also.
Which if it be the entire notation of the phrase (as at this time M. Goodwin is
content to grant) then sure is there no ground for him from thence to conclude,
that the King is (...) in that other so distant sense, an ordinance or creature
of the people. As long as M. G. conclusion depends upon that one only notion
of the phrase, so long, unless that be acknowledged the genuine sense of it,
(as certainly it is not, when another so distant from that, is supposed possible
to be it) there is no stability to be expected to that conclusion, whose
premises are thus forfeited by his own concession.

. 82. As for the Doctors Answer to the supposed Objection, (where by the
parallel command of honoring all, ver. 17. he infers the limitation of the
subject, All to whom honor belongs there, ( i. e. superiors, not inferiors)
and so here, every humane creature, (i. e. every such, that is in place of
Magistracy) certainly M. G. has failed much in his attempt to invalidate it,
by affirming that that Apostle, in his command to honor all, supposes a debt
of honor due from every man to every man, according to that of the Romans 12.10.
In honor preferring one another. For to this I answer, that the meaning of 1
Pet. 2.17. cannot sure so properly be fetched from Romans 12.10. as it may from
the circumstances of the Text and verses on each side of it in the place of S.
Peter. In the former verses, 13. and 14. the words clearly refer to the
doctrine of obedience to Superiors, and so ver. 15. the mention of Gods will
[that by well-doing we should put to silence the ignorance of foolish men] (i.
e. that by obeying of our Superiors we should take off the Scandal that lay
on Christianity, as if it made men ill Subjects, ver. 16.) does plenarily
belong also to the same matter. So again, honoring the King in the end of the
17. ver. and servants obeying their Masters, ver. 18. are very forward to
concur with this notion; And the precept of loving the brotherhood, i. e.
their Fellow Christians, and of fearing God* (from which fear the honor
divolves upon his Vicegerent) will no way prejudice this notion of the honor
there spoken of, that it belongs only to the debt of inferiors to superiors;
and so that the [ All] are only those all that are thus capable of it.

. 83. As for the honoring of Widows (by Master Goodwin mentioned from Saint
Paul to Timothy) that sure is not appliable to this matter, since the honor
there, is the relieving, or feeding of them, giving them that honor of supply,
which is acknowledged to be another notion of the Word, not that which in the
fifth Commandment, and those other places, is the principal importance of it.

. 84. As little reason has Mr. Goodwyn to conclude that the precept of being
Subject one to another, 1. Pet. 5.5. should not be a precept of obedience to
Superiors, when the words immediately precedent are, Likewise ye younger submit
your selves to the Elders, and those Elders, ver. 2. the (...) and (...), the
Pastors and Bishops of the Church. It Is possible indeed, that the [ one
another] may be, Others beside Superiors, but sure it is not so probably so, when
that which immediately precedes, is Submission to Elders, to which the
subjection here added, is not a phrase of diminution, but of addition rather,
and when Gods resisting the proud, that immediately follows, is, says Saint
Augustine, (as in the Poet, debellare superbos) the direct contrary to
Subjectis parcere, the giving pardon, or grace to the obedient Subjects. And
thus I conceive the parallel words of Saint Paul, Ephesians. ^.21. Submitting your
selves one to another] are most probably to be interpreted, to those among you
who are in any relation of superiority, for so it* follows immediately, ver.
22. Wives submit your selves to your own husbands, etc. Whereas, when he
rerurnes to the husbands duty toward the wife, it is not submission but love
only, v. 25. Other places I might easily mention, where the word ((...)) may
very well signify no more then others. So the (...), confess your faults one
to another, Jam. 5.16. cannot farther be extended then to a direction to the
sick to make confession of his sins, whether to others simply, or to those
others whom he has injured, but obliges not them that are in health to
tonfesse their sins reciprocally or back again to the sick, and so in the next
words [ and pray (...), for one another] that is, that the brethren in health
should pray for them that are sick, and not reciprocally that the sick should
pray for them in health, the end of the prayer there mentioned being (...),
that ye may be healed; which end, and close does, I conceive, confine the
discourse to the sick first to confess, and to the healthy, after to pray for
the sick and no more. And so (...), 1 Pet. 4.9. notes hospitality to the
strangers that wanted, and not mutual, reciprocal entertainments one of the
other: For though it is possible that it might note the inhabitants civility to
the travailer first, and then that travailers repayment of the like, when he
comes to be a sixth inhabitant, yet the word (...), strangers, being ordinarily
taken as a species of men in want (as besides some places of Scripture, I
remember in Just: Mar: second Apolog: speaking of the offertory, he says that
by that means the Prefect became the guardian of strangers, etc. and of all
that were in want) I conceive (...) is no more then kind to that sort of poor
strangers, and that without any expectation of being entertained by them
again, for that the Almes-giver should expect that return from the poor, or
stranger, is both unreasonable and unchristian also. So Luke. 12.1. (...)
cannot be taken reciprocally, that they which trod on others were also trod
upon by them, but that one trod upon another agreeable to our present sense: so
Act. 7.^6. (...); not that the person injured was injurious also, but only
that one injured the other. And yet more plainly, Romans 2.15. their thoughts
excusing or accusing, (...), where it cannot be imagined that the thoughts
mutually or reciprocally accuse or excuse, the accusation belonging to the
conscience, which accuses the erroneous will, but not in like manner to the
will, that that should accuse the Conscience. These places are added ex
abundanti; That of Ephesians. 5. will be able alone to serve the turn, if these
others should not be thought to be demonstrative. I have thus briefly replied
to these other exceptions of Mr. Goodwin as far as concerns that Place in
Saint Peter, and I suppose have vindicated it from being the foundation of Mr.
Goodwins beloved dogma (which I shall desire him to show to be the affirmation
of any one ancient Father or Commentator on that place, or of any one place of
Scripture besides, which might help to countenance it) that Kings are the
creatures of the people.

. 85. There are yet some old reckonings which Mr. Goodwin is willing to make
even with the Doctor, and I must b^g a very Little patience from the reader to
observe what account he has given of them.

. 86. He begins with fair words of D. H. and acknowledgments, that having
frequently heard of him, he never heard any thing but well and worthy of a man,
his judgment in the grand state-question of the times only excepted. That the
discharge of his Conscience in obedience to the fifth Commandment should be
thus made an exception against the Doctor, he has sure learnt (...) neither to
think strange, nor take ill at M. G. hands, remembering that some of the
Christians which were anciently in the world, in the absence of other visible
crimes, were thought worthy of all reproaches for their common profession, or
being Christians. One thing only I shall suppose, I have the Doctors leave to
assure M. G. that it was no special desire to engage M. G. which caused the
particular mentions, and refutations of some passages in his books, but only
the opinion which he had, that they might probably prove matter of seduction to
the reader (and that seduction of a dangerous consequence) if such necessary
antidotes were not provided to avert, or prevent the danger. D. H. I suppose,
is not over-fond of such disputes, or debates as these, and is never more in
constraint, then when he lies under such engagements.

. 87. Some passages in M. G. Butchers blessing were a first great temptation to
him, which, though resisted by the love of quiet, prepared him to receive more
violent impressions from some remarkable sections in the Anticavaleirisme, And
at last the fire kindled, and his pen gave testimony of it.

. 88. The particulars he then took notice of in M. G. were 1. His dexterities
in evacuating the force of Tertullians testimonies concerning the patience, and
non-resistance of the Primitive Christians, and these are at large refuted in
the tract of Resisting etc. page 10. to page 20. Secondly, his strange
affirmation of Gods hiding from the first Christians this liberty of resisting
Superiors, as part of his counsel to bring Antichrist into the world, and his
manifesting it to us now, as a means of casting Antichrist out. The latter of
these two, D. H. conceived as strange, and as dangerous a Doctrine, as he ever
met with, and therefore examined it to the bottom, Resist. page 21. to 28.
These two maine matters of difference D. H. acknowledges to have managed
against M. G. but conceive without any thing of asperity, or excess in any
kind, which should look like a particular desire of engaging M. G. And M. G.
has thought fit for many years to let these reckonings sleep without ever
giving the least reply to either of them. And now that [ of Gods hiding of
truths from the Ancient Christians, and the helping Antichrist to his throne]
has not the fortune to be taken notice of at all. And for the other of
Tertullian, though that be now mentioned, yet is it a little strange that no
other return should be made to all the Doctors answers, save only the
transcribing of two or three pages from M. Rutterford, and M. Pryn, as from a
pair of Royalists, in their two tracts of Lex Rex, and Soveragine power of
Parliaments, which sure he could not believe will be of any Authority with the
Doctor, though he is so pleasant as to mention the friendlinesse of their
judgments, and the Doctors in case of the late King: Beside this
transcription, there is but one passage in those dissertations of the Doctors,
to which he thinks fit to make reply, and that is a Grammatical (...), taken
notice of (...) by the Doctor, viz. M. G. attributing to Montanist, that he
called himself the holy Ghost. This D. H. did conceive to be hastily written by
M. G. and not agreeably to the rules of the Grammar, unless as in Smectymnus,
Areopagi, are set for the Areopagites, so e contra, Montanist were set by M. G.
for Montanus. In this casual incidentall charge M. G. thinks himself very
nearly concerned, more it seems, then in giving account either of his Censure
of Tertullians testimony of the Christians patience, or of Gods hiding of
Truths, and assisting Antichrist. For to justify the Grammaticalnesse of these
words, [ Montanist who called himself the holy Ghost] a great deal of pains
is taken, and three whole pages spent on that affair. It Is not possible I
should think fit to exercise my Reader by continuing such a Debate as this any
longer, but shall think it abundantly sufficient to assure M. G. that the
English remains still unjustified, upon this ground, that the word Montanist
is no possessive, and if he still have inclinations to dispute it, I shall
propose him this parallel: M. Goodwin is a Christian, who dyed for the sons of
the world, and ask him, Whether it be Grammatical sense to have said this. As
for the deep recriminatior against D. H. for using the word [ Resolve] for
concluding, or being satisfied within himself, etc. if this be any matter of
ease on refreshment to M. G. 'twere pity he should be denied the liberty to
make use of it.

. 89. There now remains but one particular, the Doctors accusing M. G. of
flattery in the Elogies bestowed upon that action of the Army, (collected in
the Address, p. 6.) Whether they were thus guilty, I shall no farther dispute,
but leave it to the Reader to determine, having no other design in this whole
Reply, then that M. G. may resume the consideration of his actions, and of his
arguments, and remember that the matters of these debates, are of such an
importance toward the public peace, that men of our profession owe an account
to God for them. And for other passages of this Author, wherein the
London-Ministers are concerned; I leave them to answer for themselves, and so
conclude this Paper.

THE END.

