THE Pastors last Legacy AND COUNSEL.

Delivered in a Farewell SERMON, Preached at St. PHILIPS in Bristol, August,
24th. 1662.

By Mr. Edward Hancock, late Minister there.

London, Printed in the Year, 1663.

Mr. Edward Hancock's Farewell: being his last Sermon, Preached at St. Philips
in Bristol, August, 24. 1662.
SEt your hearts to hear the words of the Lord, for it is not a vain thing,
because it is your Life: as it is continued in the 13th. Chapter of the second
Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, and the 11th. Verse.

Finally, my Brethren, farewell: be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one
mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

YOu know at this time I am called to do a work which possibly may be
unpleasing unto many of you, even as to my self; which work is indeed a strange
work: that is, to dye a civil death whilst I am naturally alive. When the Sun
for this day is set, I shall then cease from having any charge over you, and
you will then cease from having me to be your Minister. I may say as one did
that was going to dye a violent death; I am this day to do a work that I never
yet did, I desire of God to give me strength that I never yet had.

And having been long upon this Text, showing to every one of you your several
duties, and my time allotted draws nigh to an end: The Lord grant that it may
be spent for your eternal good, that so I may dye well in this respect amongst
you.

Those that dye well do usually these five things.

1. First, They must endeavor to make their peace with God. 2. Secondly, To be
in perfect charity with all men. 3. Thirdly, To set their House in order. 4.
Fourthly, To give good counsel to their surviving Friends. 5. Lastly, To
commend them all to God by Prayer.
Paul in the 20th. of the Acts, and the 27. verse, I can give up my account
with joy, in reference to the discharge of my duty, I having kept back nothing
from you of the Council of God, having taught you publicly both in season and
out of season the Oracles of God.





The God of love and peace be with you all.

I shall begin with counsel unto you all in general, and what I say to one I
say to all; therefore attend to the last words of a dying man.



reckoned for in the day of the Lord Jesus. There have been many of late have
staved off Spiritual opportunities, and turned their backs upon Ordinances: the
Lord be merciful to them; if they obtain not a pardon, woe be to their poor
souls. I am as sure and as certain to hear these opportunities mentioned in
eternity with joy and sorrow, as that ever the Sun did shine in the Firmament:
acknowledge them thankfully; and especially remember these last three years,
about which time I have been with you, and have labored in the public service
of the Church of God amongst you.

Paul does in the first of the Galatians, and ver. 9. If any preach any other
doctrine let him be accursed. You must excuse me for want of abilities as
others may have, yet has it been my work (by the help of the holy Spirit)
according to my power, to teach you out of holy Scripture those things that
concerns your everlasting peace. Take heed of Antinomianisme and Arminianisme,
never cease a total dependence on the Grace of Christ, and a strict reliance on
him alone for life and salvation. This has been my Doctrine from my first
beginning even until now, 1 John 2.24.

Phillippians 4. I have walked amongst you with a sense upon my spirit. The
Professors in this City have much dishonored God. Oh! let there be zeal,
sincerity, love, humility and peace shining in the Professors of this City.
This is my counsel, now I am ready to depart from you, that your conversations
may be such as becomes the Gospel.

in your Families to be lodged in Hell: if no Family Prayer, expect no Family
Blessing: live as those that knows there is a God, and would have God to be
theirs; let not thy family be under a curse, which it will be if thou call
not on the name of God. Have thou no care of Childrens and Servants souls, it
is a sign God has no care of thine.

Isaiah, and the two last verses. If the Sabbath be the day of thy pleasure,
thy pain will be Gods pleasure. If any come amongst you and preach otherwise, I
charge you receive not his doctrine; let God have the day called by his own
name, Rev. 1.8.

Acts 9.5. Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me.



and the God of love and peace will be with you. There is no question but the
Non-conformists will be used rigorously, but be contented; I know that will be
and is reported of them, that they are movers of Sedition, no friends to
Caesar, etc. but they are mistaken, for we are resolved to live in peace with
all men, and to sit down contented under the hand of God. And it is my last
counsel unto you, and the counsel of God in Scripture, that come what will come
upon you, you stir not in thought, word, nor deed, against that lawful Power
that God has set over us.

For my part the sanctified experience that God has given me of the
unconstancy of the world, causes me not to be moved in the least at this
temptation. I bless my God for it, I have sat down and counted my cost
already; and I assure you nothing but the wrath of the Almighty could have
caused me to leave you; such is my love to your souls and zeal to my duty. But
whatsoever may be the censure of Authority upon us, I repeat it again, that
there may be no mistake; for it is like many may come this day to catch words,
words out of my mouth to entrap me. I say, whatever Authority does censure of
us, I beg and beseech you all, that you think of nothing, nor use any help to
deliver your selves out of sufferings, but Faith, Patience, and Prayer. And I
profess before you all, I have not spoken with, nor heard of any of this
persuasion, but they are all against ever having any hand in any War, even
those who had a hand in the last; and therefore it is a horrible slander that
is cast upon the most peaceable Subjects that God and earthly Princes can have;
pray Christians let it appear so by your peaceable suffering. Consider if thou
suffer for Conscience, thou must not revenge thy self; if thou do, thou
losest thy reward: Show a spirit of Obedience in the exercise of Love and
Patience. I do verily hope, and I am really persuaded that I shall never hear
of any Nonconformist that has a hand in any Rising or Sedition whatsoever.
This is my ninth counsel, Study peace.



I confess it is a great reproach and a great affliction; it made David cry
out, Lord, let me not be confounded. When the enemy said, Where is now your
God. Many in like manner now cry out, where is now your God! Heretofore you
said there was a stream of Providence did follow Holiness, but now where is it?
does God like this preciseness and extempore Praying, and long Preaching? no,
God likes a formal kind of serving him best, such as is according to the
Church, and as it was in our forefathers days; he owns it, favors it, and
smiles upon it. Come, come, Providence is various, David staggers at it, till
he comes to weigh the case in the balance of the Sanctuary; be not cast down
at these reproaches, either thou have got good by the Ordinances or not; if
not, thou art in a sad condition: if thou have, what need thou care for the
reproach of man, what need a man care to be upbraided of having his Cup-board
plundered when his Treasure was safe in a surer place. Christian thy treasure
is in heaven, thieves cannot there break through and steal. Consider, this is
not a place where things goes right, it will go right in another day; now thou
live amongst Drunkards and profane persons, there is no room for such in
heaven; look upon things now as it will go then, and let those words of the
Judge stick close to thy heart; He that is ashamed of me, and of my word, in
this adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed
when he comes in the glory of his Father.

Jacobs troubles; though we are all now in peace, blessed be God for it, yet we
know not what may befall us ere we come to dye, when I shall not be here to
advise you: and supposing this may be your cafe, and wishing you well, even as
my own soul, I am bold to advise you how you shall behave your selves when it
comes. Out of love to your souls I advise you what to do in the day of Jacobs
troubles.

Jacobs troubles, without doubt the Devils black mark will be found on you at
the last day. In Ezekiel 9. v. 4.5. all that had not this mark on them were the
persons destinated to destruction. When the overflowing scourge comes, when the
destroying Angel goes upon his circuit, he is not to spare man, woman, nor
child; but those that had this mark upon them, even those that cried out for
the abominations done in the land. Read that text. Now mark the difference that
God and the world puts upon such mourners in Sion; God puts a mark of
preservation upon such as the world puts a mark of destruction; seditious,
humorsome, keeping a whining, fasting, and mourning: behave your selves well in
the day of Jacobs troubles, get the mark of mourners on your foreheads, let not
God see that you are a careless people; let not God that sees this
Congregation, this great number of people have cause to say that you are a
careless company; care not for your own sins, nor for the sins of others; care
not for the wrath of God, though gray hairs be here and there upon us, you know
it not; care not for the Churches misery, though Jacob be under the hatches,
and the Church like to be grownd to powder, thou can trudge about the world
and endeavor to preserve thy Estate, but carest not for the wrath of God, nor
the miseries of the Church: Thou art not one of those persons that behavest thy
self well in the day of Jacobs troubles. I tell thee, if the sins of a Nation
be nothing to thee, the judgments of a Nation shall be something to thee.
Remember that a messenger of Jesus Christ, a poor dying worm, who is just now
leaving you, told you thus much; that if the ungodliness, profaneness,
sensuality, blasphemy, and atheism of a Nation be nothing to thee, then the
judgments of a Nation shall be something to thee. Either mourn for sin, or
mourn for woe and sorrow. Oh! do you mourn for the wickedness that is done in
this Land, though sinners make sport of it, and please themselves in it, and
look upon it as part of their glory that they can go to Hell quietly; let me
beg it of you all, and leave it as my counsel with you, to get the mark of
mourners on your foreheads; let it appear that the Angel may take notice of
thee, and mark thee when the overflowing scourge shall pass through the land.
Really there is hypocrisy in Professors on both hands, in times of the
Churches prosperity, and in times of the Churches adversity: the Devil may tell
thee that thou art sincere, though thou take no notice of the Churches
troubles, nor mournest for it; be not deceived, thy heart is not right in the
sight of God if thou carest not what becomes of his Church; thou have had a
hand in their sins, have a hand in their sufferings. Thou have helped to bring
sorrow to the Church by reason of thy sin, Oh bring tears of godly sorrow to
help to quench the flame that sin has kindled!

Jacobs troubles, keep your selves pure from the reigning sins of the times
wherein you live. I speak not of any particular time, but when God is angry
with his Church, let it be now, be it when it will, it then becomes Christians
to keep themselves pure from the sins of those times.

In Revel. 18. v. 4. hearken to that text of Scripture, thou carnal, complying,
temporizing, and time-serving Professor I heard a voice from heaven saying,
Come out of her my people, and be not partakers of her sin, lest you are
partakers of her plagues. When men's sins are filling apace, when the Ephah is
near full, keep thy self pure from the sins of the times, lest thou be made
partaker of the plagues of the times. Consider what are the sins of such times,
if there be profaneness, superstition, impiety, malice against Religion,
sensuality, impenitency, and see little else but wickedness of this dye and
nature, touch you not one of them, keep your selves pure. I am giving you
counsel as for my own life, if I were dying on my sick bed, as God knows how
soon I may, according to the measure that God has given me of his free Grace,
I could not give you better counsel. Oh that I could deliver it with that
authority that I ought. Purity is a condition of the Covenant, 2 Cor. 6.18. He
will be to you a Father, and you shall be to him Sons and Daughters, if you
will come out from such uncleanness. A word to the wise is enough, and
according as God furnishes you with his Spirit, learn to behave your selves
well in the day of Jacobs troubles, keep your selves pure from the sins of the
times.

takes not a common interest with the Church of God, thou art but a false
friend to Christ: if thou do not feel the Churches pain, thou have none of
the Churches Spirit: if a finger or a toe suffer, the whole body is sensible.
Thou have none of the Spirit of Christ, if thou do not feel the sorrows of
the Church. Woe be to those that dwell at ease in Sion; very few great men are
like good Nehemiah, who was of the Kings Court, and in great favor with him,
and ailed nothing, yet his heart was full of sorrow for the Church of God;
insomuch that the King saw by his countenance that he was troubled; and
Nehemiah made use of the opportunity, and rested not till he had accomplished
his design for the House of God. Men that have a great estate, and in great
places, many times are the greatest enemies to the Church of God; and they are
ready to forsake Christ, like the rich young man in the Gospel, which you may
read at your leisure.

In Amos 6. ver. 6. read your doom there, (if the Devil do possess some of you
with prejudice, I profess seriously Brethren, it is in love to your souls I
speak) read that 6. verse of the 6. of Amos, poor Joseph lay by the heels, the
Irons entered into his soul: But those that took their pleasure and was not
sorry for the affliction of Joseph, should go into captivity with the first
that went into captivity. The Church has a flood of persecution, and mouths
full of the venom of the old Serpent is spit out after them; yet the Church is
kept safe. In the 25. of Matthew you have three famous parables; of the ten
Virgins, of the Talents, of the Sheep and Goats; there you may see that the
trial of the last day is according to the simpathizing with the Church. Do but
consider it seriously, it is according as thou have sympathized with the Church
that thy trial will then be. You saw me in my Members, in my poor afflicted
Members, you never looked after them; and inasmuch as you did it not to one of
the least of these, you did it not to me. Then shall they go into everlasting
pains, but the righteous into life eternal. Pray remember this, there will be a
day of judgment, and the Scripture is the rule by which all must be tried that
lives under it. The love of the Brethren is the mark by which we shall be
judged at the last day, 1 John 3.14. We know that we are passed from death to
life, because we love the Brethren. Those that are spiritual Brethren, that
have God for their Father, Jesus Christ for their elder Brother, new Jerusalem
that is above for their Mother, ought so to love one another, as the Apostle
says in that 1 John 3.16. That they ought to lay down their lives for each
other. If God does call for thy Estate, thy Life, thy Hearts Blood to be
sacrificed for him, thou ought to do it. Brethren, amongst other Arguments,
to sway with a true Son of the Church, this should be one; what, shall I turn
upon the Church of God now in affliction? what a stumblingblock and cause of
offense will it be to my weak Brother. Brethren, when God seems to call upon
you, saying, Who is on the Lords side, and who is not? you are to love the
Church so, as if your lives did lie at stake to part with it; every member
should endeavor the preservation of the whole.

Jacobs troubles, give God no rest day nor night till he have mercy on his
people; until he take his rod from the back of the righteous; until he make his
Church a triumph and rejoicing over the whole earth.

Prayers and tears are the Churches weapons, use no other, for those are the
weapons that will fell tall and stately Cedars; those be the weapons that will
scatter Kingdoms. It is said of a Queen of the Scots, that she was more afraid
of John Knox, then of an Army of twenty thousand men; such was his prevalency
in Prayer. Are you living men or not, do you breath or not? if you are
spiritually alive, and living Members of the Church of Christ, you cannot but
lay close siege at the Throne of Grace in its behalf. Do thou pray to God,
and can thou pray and forget the Israel of God? Have thou a mercenary care
that thy own soul shall be saved, and forgets the Church of God in misery,
never putting up a serious petition for Gods Israel, nor mindest the
afflictions of Joseph. Oh! give God no rest day nor night until he has mercy
on Sion. This is a successful war that you are commanded and encouraged unto in
Isa. 62. ver. 6, 7. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, that
shall never hold their peace day nor night, until he establish Jerusalem, and
make it the praise of the whole earth: Ye that make mention of the Lord keep
not silence.

Oh the Lord increase the number of such persons! Oh! that you that are real
Members of the Church would stand upon the walls and give God no rest day nor
night until he has established Sion, and made Jerusalem the praise of the
earth, Oh! bless God for the success of Prayer, when poor weak impotent crasie
prayers engages All Sufficiency and Omnipotency to do this. Read Psalm 137.
and the 6. first verses, By the Rivers of Babylon we sat down, yea, we wept
when we remembered thee, O Zion, we hanged our harps upon the willows in the
midst thereof; it was no time to hear the sound of them, we were not so merry.
They that wasted us required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the Songs of
Zion. Come, let us have some of your zealous mirth. Come let us hear you now
pray in the Spirit, and preach ex tempore; then it becomes us to hang our harps
on the willows, and say, How shall we sing the Lords Song in a strange Land.
Now we have lost our Ordinances, and are given up to the hands of Heathens that
reigns over us. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning: If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. Oh pathetical expression,
he did not shrink from the Church of God; but see with what affection he
speaks, If I forget thee, etc. I must forget that which I am used to do, If I
prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. Oh Brethren, get this spirit of
affection toward the Church. Really, Brethren, I am afraid few of you are real
Members of the Church? were you, you would be more importunate at the Throne of
Grace for the Churches establishment: see what you may do by importunity in
that 18. Chapter of Luke. from the first verse to the 8. Brethren, you must
pardon me because it is my last, and although I am so long a taking leave of
you, yet will it be no obstruction unto you in your journey, but a furtherance.
See what an encouragement there is in that 18. of Luke, And he spoke a parable
unto them, to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint. Oh!
faint not in your prayers, for if the unjust judge that feared not God, nor
regarded man, yet was wrought upon to avenge the poor widow because of her
importunity; and shall not God avenge his own Elect that cries day and night to
him; although he bear long? I tell you, he will avenge them speedily. The cloud
over the Church may be so thick, and the estate of the Church so desperate,
that when the Son of Man comes, he shall hardly find faith on the earth. Do
you think that God will not hear his own Elect, but suffer their enemies to
make such deep furrows over them; although he do seem long to thy carnal sense,
yet when his time is come, he will come and not tarry: therefore bear a sense
upon thy spirit of the Churches misery, for he that can be quiet in the
Churches misery, has removed himself from the Churches light and society; he
has cashiered himself out of the mystical Body, however he may seem to be in
outward society. Oh! therefore feel and simpathize with the Church in her
misery. I only ask thee one question, Art thou content to have no part in the
happiness of the Church hereafter? if thou separatest thy self from the Church
Militant, I tell thee, in the name of my Lord and Master, thou shall be
separated from the Church Triumphant hereafter. Would thou stand at the right
hand of the Head of the Church, and be owned as a Member, and be glorified for
ever with the Church? why, then here feel the Churches sorrow, and cry mightily
to God that he will arise and have mercy on Sion.

But if thou do not here feel the Churches misery, nor cry to God for
deliverance, thou must be separated from the Church hereafter. And thus have I
done with this general counsel, learn to behave your selves well in the day of
Jacobs troubles, in four particulars; Get the mark of mourners on your
foreheads. Keep your selves pure from the reigning sins of the times. Feel the
sorrows of the Church. And cry mightily unto God that he would have mercy.

you to, but it is a spiritual wisdom, a true wisdom: Oh learn it, it will do
you good to all eternity. Once more hearken to a few counsels from your
departing friend, which contains the substance of the greatest wisdom in the
world, and I am heartily willing to leave them with you as my farewell; be truly
wise, take good counsel in these following particulars.



a swearer, a profaner of the Lords Day, a reviler of his people, etc. and do
it against the light of thy Conscience, what can thou say for thy self at
that day of account when this Book shall be laid open among the rest, and all
thy deeds of darkness discovered? Thou that in matters of Religious Worship
do any thing against thy conscience, runnest upon inavoidable misery and
woe, and thou shall find bitterness in the end.





evil company; therefore forsake bad company, resist temptations at first
rising: if thou do not watch the first beginning of temptations to sin, all
thy vows and promises will vanish as dew before the Sun.

friends of the unrighteous Mammon; that when you fail, they may receive you
into everlasting habitations, Luke 16. Make friends with your estate, lay it
out upon christ's poor Members; really the world is going away apace, Heaven and
Earth is changing and waxes old, there are joys everlasting: Oh then exchange
temporal joys for eternal.

rejoice in the Lord: and again I say, rejoice. Oh be truly wise, let God,
Heaven, and the Holy Spirit continually fill thy soul with religious joys,
sweetness, and beauty which will banish thy cares and dangers; if thou art
religious expect troubles, but overlook them and cast thine eyes upon that joy
that is in thy soul, that thou art out of the reach of Satan and his
instruments, being under the safe conduct of Omnipotency, who will undoubtedly
bring thee safe through all to himself.

going away and am not to speak any more unto you, except God find out a way
beyond our expectation; I would therefore leave that counsel that may do you
most good, and make you truly wise. Remember to have death always before your
eyes, and provide for it; there are none wise but those, and all such are truly
wise that keeps death before their eyes: most people in the world are looking
the other way, they are providing for long life, not for their death. Put your
hearts into a serious meditation of death, and seriously consider, that
although troubles here comes thick upon you, and temptations daily assault you,
death when it comes will put you out of the reach thereof, and make you happy
for ever and ever.



from my soul may be your portion.

Give me leave to take my leave of you, now I have endeavored to give you the
whole counsel of God, and to nurse you up, that you may grow stronger and
stronger thereby. My time approaches that I must leave you, stay but until I
bid you farewell, and then we will part here, and I hope to meet you again at
our journeyes end, where we will rejoice in the Lord our righteousness, and
our joy shall no man take from us.

The providence of God brought me hither at first in a way, and by a means
which many of you were pleased to acknowledge had much of the hand of God in
it. I was destinated from all eternity to be your Minister: For you was I
ordained, you have I loved, you have I taught, with you have I lived, and with
you could I have continued; nothing but the keeping of a good conscience could
have hindered it on my part. I came not hither on my own head, neither do I go
away upon a whimsie of my own making: Great proffers of preferment formerly
moved me not, but the terrors of the Almighty now makes me afraid; my heart
could not be strong, nor my hands endure in the day of the Lord, should I
against my conscience have continued amongst you. This I can say, Brethren, in
the presence of the Lord (that although in much weakness and infirmity, and
much slightness and little seriousness) I have labored amongst you to the
salvation of your souls, for which I have prayed and waited for.

I desire this day to humble my self before God and you, and beg the mercy of
God in our Lord Jesus Christ for all my miscarriages, and neglects, and
failings amongst you, for the want of so good an example as I should have been
before you, that I have not melted in pity and compassion over your souls, nor
have been so zealous in private admonition as I should; yet let the good you
have seen and heard of me abide with you; let the spiritual rules and motives
you have abundantly heard dwell richly in you; take heed of hypocrisy, be
sincere, watch and examine your hearts, look into eternity, and live by faith
upon Jesus Christ.

I heartily bless God for my continuance hitherto amongst you, for your willing
reception of me, for all your courtesies and civil deportments toward me, for
all your cheerful and hearty hearing the word of God by me preached; and most
of all, I bless God for any good that any of you have received by me. I thank
you for all the entertainments of my requests, I thank every particular person
that has done me any good, the Lord reward them; I have endeavored to live
affectionately in the midst of you: and pray if any person have any thing
against me, I desire to make it known unto me before my departure, and I will
give him satisfaction; let no man lay any thing to my charge when I am gone,
that will not make it known before I go.

I thank you all for your desire of me to stay, the Lord knows how loath I am
to leave you, might I continue amongst you with a good conscience. Oh! that the
Sermons you have heard of me may be practiced; we shall one day meet at the bar
of Christ, and then I wish I may not be a witness against any soul here present.

If any of you have been my spiritual children, do so much in requital as to
pray for your spiritual Father; if I have been only a waterer and no planter,
yet let me reap the fruits of your Prayers, and let my name live in your
private prayers when it is dead in public; send tokens for me to Heaven, when
you shall see my face no more on earth; let us meet at the Throne of Grace,
though we shall not meet in this house no more: let your Prayers to Almighty
God for me be continued, that my whole soul and body may be ever present as a
living sacrifice unto God, holy and acceptable in his sight; that I may live
only to Jesus; that he would use me so as is best to his own glory, in doing
and suffering, and enable me to be faithful to what he has called me to; and
that himself would be my exceeding great reward; and that he would not deny
himself unto me, for whom I have desired to have been stripped of all things.

Neither shall your prayers be without the answer of mine; the Road where I
travel on, the Bed that I lie on, the Room that I shall lie in, shall testify
how much I bear you, that have been my hearers, in my bosom.

And my prayers continually shall be for you that you may fare well, and the
God of love and peace be with you; that shall ascend from my heart and lips
when you are asleep, at work, standing, or sitting in your Shops, or abroad in
the Fields.

Oh may you fare well in all Estates, in the day of your temptations and
trials, and the God of love and peace be with you.

Oh! may you fare well in the days of your sorrows and afflictions, and the
God of love and peace be with you in the fire, and in the water, that you may
come out seven times refined, and give you the garment of praise for the spirit
of heaviness.

May you fare well in your joys and comforts, and the God of love and peace be
with you, and bring you to his right hand, where are joys unspeakable, and
pleasures for evermore.

May you fare well in your Shops, and in your Fields, at Sea, and ashore, in
your going out, and in your coming in, shall be the hearty prayers of your
dying friend.

May you be blessed in your basket, and in your store, and in all things you
put your hands unto, and the God of love and peace be with you.

May you be blessed in your Yoak-fellows, in your Children and Servants, in
your Ministers, and all your relations, and the God of love and peace be with
you.

May you be blessed in the exercises of your graces and duties, and Ordinances,
and the God of love and peace be with you, and make them easy, fruitful, and
delightful.

May you fare well in the hour of death, the God of love and peace then speak
peace unto you, and show his reconciled face unto you in Jesus Christ.

May you fare well at the great day of Judgment, and the God of love and peace
then set you at his right hand, smile upon you, acquit and dissolve you.

May you fare well in the day of eternity, and the God of love and peace then
lead you to the fountain of living waters, to the enjoyment of himself, that
sorrow and sighing may then fly away, that you may live in praising and
singing Hallelujah in the Quire of Angels to all eternity.

May none of you here present know what Hell means, so as to feel the Torments
thereof; but that you may enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven, where the God of love
and peace shall be with you.

May mine enemies do well, though I know but of few, except those who were once
my friends; those that are, the God of love and peace be with them, and bless
them for ever. Those that have spoken ill of me, the good will of him that
dwelt in the Bush be with them, and pardon all their sins, enrich them with
Grace, and bring them to his heavenly Kingdom: I do from my soul forgive them,
and earnestly desire of God that I may know what it is to live in their company
to all eternity, whose favor here I could not gain. This I can say, there is
none I have more heartily loved then my enemies, to do good for evil; to pass
by provocations has been my endeavor: let them enjoy the love of God, whose
company here I could not enjoy.

May my friends be rewarded, let them be reaping in the day of eternity, for
every good thought, word, and work toward me, however so unworthy, seeing it
was done in the name of a Prophet, let them receive a Prophets reward; the
upper and the nether springs be their portion, all the graces and privileges
of the Gospel be bestowed on them, and the God of Grace and Glory be with them.

I cannot say more, the Sun is even down, my civil life is near an end, my
strength is almost spent, but the remainder shall be spent for your good.

Let all the treasures of Divine Love be the reward of all those who have
showed love unto me.

May every particular Family in this place be blessed. Let every House wherein
I have been, and every person therein be blessed; especially those Families
wherein I have been particularly engaged: Let every one of them be the heir of
Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal Glory, the Lord bind up their souls in the
bundle of Life.

Now as to my Administrations.

Farewell Sermons, and farewell Sabbaths, farewell Fasting, and farewell
Exhortations, farewell this House, and farewell this Seat for ever, farewell my
Preaching, farewell your Hearing, and farewell your Faces in this place, and
farewell this world, when we shall arrive at eternity, both old and young.

My Brethren and Sisters all farewell, and God give us himself, which is all in
all. And now to conclude with the farewell in my Text, and so to commend you all
to God by Prayer, which is my last work.

Finally my Brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be ye of one mind, be of good
comfort, live in peace, and the God of love and peace be with you all. Amen.

Mr. Edward Hancock's Prayer before his Farewell Sermon, at St. PHILIPS, in
Bristol, August 24. 1662.
Holy Lord God, Thou who art the Spring of Being, the Root of the World, the
Foundation of all, the Center of Immortal Souls, unto thee shall all Flesh come.

Souls must have vent, they have not a competent happiness at home to live
upon, they must look out and seek abroad; and it is vanity to give vent to the
Soul any way, except upwards. Prayer is the greatest vent and hearts ease in
all the world unto immortal Souls: Lord at this time lift up our Hearts by
Prayer unto thee in and through the Lord Jesus Christ.

O Lord, we are unworthy to come into thy presence at this time; truly we do
confess it, being considered in our state of Nature; Oh how were we by the
transgression of our first Parents born Children of Wrath and Heirs of eternal
Damnation; and our whole Life ever since has been a life of Sin and actual
Rebellion against thy Majesty. Alas, we are unworthy to pour out our desires
before thee, we are Dogs, yet truth Lord, the Dogs may eat of the crumbs that
fall from thy Table. O Lord, are there so many now about thy House, and shall
none of them be filled with good things that they be not sent empty away. O
Lord, thou art a bountiful Housekeeper, that deals out a large deal of
spiritual gifts for every poor soul that is poor and hungry, and empty in his
own apprehension. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven. Thou have bid us open our mouths wide, and thou will fill them; Oh open
our mouths abroad, our hearts do thou open at this time that they may be filled.

O Lord, time would fail us, strength would fail us, and memory would fail us,
to make a particular recapitulation of all our Sins and Transgressions
committed against thee: We carry bad hearts about us, hearts that are never
weary of offending a good God, that waits that he may be gracious. O Lord, we
would fain lay open the desires of our souls before thee, it is pardoning mercy
and healing mercy we would beg of thee, for Jesus Christ his sake pardon all
our Sins original and actual, and wash our souls in that fountain opened for
the house of Judah and Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. Change our
natures, chain up our corruptions; Oh subdue our iniquities, and give us thy
Holy Spirit.

For by nature we are prone to all wickedness, we have not a rag to cover our
nakedness; Lord cover us with the Robes of Christ's Righteousness. O Lord we
pray thee bring us into the bond of the Covenant, sanctify our hearts and
lives for ever, to the honor of thy great Name. Take this opportunity of
working upon us, deal with us mightily by thy Spirit, who knows what a day may
bring forth? we know not how soon death may beat up our quarters and storm our
castles, the next messenger that knocks may be the messenger of Death; let us
therefore be serious, and betake our selves to soul concernments. Let us
consider Sabbaths were not made for naught, to please an itching ear, or unruly
fancy; but to save our souls.

O Lord make us diligent and careful at this time to receive spiritual good
from thee. Put us into thy Covenant, carry us safe through this world, bring us
out of a natural condition, give sincerity to souls that groan under
hypocrisy; give us a heart to know thee the Lord our Righteousness, do saving
good to us this day; our last days are not the least but of the greatest
concernment; the desires of our souls unto thy Majesty is, that it may go well
with us at those two last great days of Death and Judgment. O that our dying
days and dooms days may be delightful and pleasant days to us!

We are but seeming Actors in a play in this world, we are but a shadow, how
soon are we gone, and our Habitations shall see us no more.

O Eternity, Eternity, Eternity, that our souls must shortly launch into a vast
ocean; where there is a great account to be given how we have behaved our
selves in this life: Oh grant that we may so provide for that day, that we may
render our account with joy, and not with grief.

O Lord to whom shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life; make us (like
thy self) partakers of thy Divine Nature, deliver us into the mould of thy
word; thou know the condition of us, let thy Word reach us all. Oh Lord run
up thy Sword to the Hilt in the hearts of all impenitent Sinners, make thy Word
sharper then a two-edged Sword.

O Lord thou have done good by thy servants in their departing from us, do good
at this time amongst us: Oh let thy strength be put forth to the conviction,
humiliation, enlightening, and converting of many a Soul this day. Our strength
is but small, we cannot be so importunate with thee as our hearts does desire;
thou know our state and wants, do exceedingly for us above and beyond what
we are able to ask or think.

O Lord, thou art willing to do us good, thou professest thou take no
pleasure in the death of a Sinner; what then should hinder in all the world,
but a secret unwillingness in our hearts to come over to the Lord Jesus Christ:
For his sake, by this last throw of the Administration of thy Grace, let some
poor fouls that sticks and stays long in the place of bringing forth, be born
to Jesus Christ at this time. Although this be the last Sermon (in an ordinary
way) that ever thy unworthy servant is like to preach in this Congregation, let
it be a quickening Sermon, an effectual Ordinance, sanctified by thy Spirit, to
convert many and many a Soul: work like a God, work like thy own self; let the
power of the Lord be seen in the weakness of thy Servant.

Lord show mercy unto all, carry on thy glorious Churches design, let not the
gates of Hell prevail; Let not the rod of the wicked always rest upon the back
of the righteous; stand by thine in this hour of temptation: though they be but
weak in grace, yet they have a strong God; O support them, and let the name of
the Lord be great in the midft of them.

In much mercy look on these sinful Nations; Oh bless our Sovereign Lord the
King in his person, and in his Relations; thou that know all things, does
know, that it is the desire of our souls, that thou would bless him with a
competency of Spiritual, Temporal, and Eternal Glory.

Oh make him a King after thy own heart, we are resolved to wait on thee; who
knows what a day may bring forth? what a God can do to the terror and
astonishment of all his enemies? Let them see that the Kings heart is in the
hand of the Lord, and he can turn it as pleases him: and make him the choicest
instrument of thy Glory, and the good of thy Church, that ever was.

Thou art a good God in great faithfulness; do thou afflict us, let us learn
our lesson quickly; deliver us from dullness and security; Lord we pray thee let
instruction and correction go together: thou do appear in thy Providence, as
a God that art going about to sit upon the Tribe of Levi, even that is most
precious as a Fullers fire, etc. Oh take away the dross, that they may offer to
God acceptable service. It has been much upon the thoughts of some of thy
People, that God had a scourge for the Ministry; because of their failings and
defects: send thy Spirit with thy Rod, we look upon the dispensation as
corrections for Sin, humble Ministers for their Defects, and People for their
Sins.

We look upon it as matter of Thanksgiving, and so have cause to bless thy
Name, that thou countest any of us worthy to bear a testimony of thy Name. Lord
whatsoever thou take from us in this World, make it up with the Emoluments of
another World; with the Incomes of thy Grace, that shall make us more glad,
then when their Corn, Wine, and Oil increases. We have spiritual wants, and it
is nothing but spiritual remedies that will cure us; Oh be thou nigh unto us in
all that we shall call upon thee for.

Oh look upon all in affliction; upon those that have begged our Prayers; the
Lord be merciful to them, lay no more on them, then thou shall enable them to
bear; those that complain of unprofitablenefs under the means of Grace, Lord
convince them, convert them, turn their hearts, take away the stony heart, and
give them a. heart of flesh: take away the old rotten disposition, and give
them a soft and flexible.

Be in the midst of all Congregations this day met together in the faith, and
fear of the Lord; we beg that thy servants who have had the seal of their
Ministry, may now at their departure prove powerful Instruments in thy hands of
saving good to their people.

Oh let them destroy more lusts, more temptations; beget, quicken, and raise up
in the hand of thy Spirit, more Sons and Daughters unto the Lord this last
time, then in all their lives before.

Be with us in this Congregation, prepare our hearts to handle thy Word, which
is able to save our souls; give us suitable affections, proportionable
abilities, both in Soul and Body. Do thou the work, thou shall have the glory.
Let Satan's Kingdom at this time lose a little ground, that those who are yet in
a Christless condition, may now make up the match between Christ and their poor
souls. And for those who have given up themselves to Jesus Christ, and yet have
back-slidden from him; let them this evening be recovered, and give up
themselves to Jesus Christ in an everlasting Covenant; and and in a day of
Confession, take a part with God, and side with a power of Godliness, against
all things that hinder.

Carry thy servant through his work at this time, remove corruptions, give in
grace; let not thy word come as a slight thing, but with a deep and serious
impression upon every one of our hearts, and all for Jesus Christ his sake, but
dear Redeemer; To whom with thee, and thy Blessed Spirit, be ascribed as is
most due, Kingdom, Glory, Power, and Praise, now and to all Eternity. Amen.

FINIS.

