Madagascar, THE RICHEST And most FRVITFVLL ISLAND In the WORLD. WHEREIN The
Temperature of the Clymate, the Nature of the Inhabitants, the Commodities of
the Country, and the facility and benefit of a Plantation by our people there,
are compendiously and truly described. DEDICATED To the Honorable JOHN BOND,
Governor of the Island, whose proceeding is Authorized for this Expedition,
both by the KING and PARLIAMENT,

By WALTER HAMOND.

LONDON: Printed for Nicolas Bourne, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1643.

To the Honorable JOHN BOND, Governor, and Captain General of MADAGASCAR.
GReat Actions are not enterprised by vulgar Spirits: without eminent Virtue,
man seldom rises above private Interests: in this design, you have given the
World a Testimony of what Latitude your thoughts are, how not to be
circumscribed within the common narrow Limits. The Romans, in that glorious Age
(which remains an Envy to all succeeding) employed their most famed Generals;
in discovery of remotest Islands, and our own had the Honor to be invaded by
the greatest Caesar: and when he made his attempt here, the Indies can afford
no people more divided in it self then we were; more weak in fortresses on
land or ships at Sea: but time has reformed us to the Excellency we now so
much glory in. The Nobleness of his Example serves you for encouragement; and
I am certain, the largeness and fertility of the Island of Madagascar,
promises you a far more rich return: And it may be possible something of his
Honor. Before you could set sail, you met with a rough storm at Land, and
your Fleet was in danger of Wrack, before it lanch't forth: but the opposition
became your advantage, and who labored the ruin of your expedition, raised it
up, and confirmed it on that height, that no Envy now can undermine it, nor can
it lie open to any future question. The Parliament after full debate found how
Just and Honorable to the Kingdom was his Majesty's Favor to you, and by
their approbation added a second kind of Seal to your Patent. I here present
you with the Island you aim at, drawn in a little Tablet, the Cloth course,
and the colors poor, and ill laid, but it may challenge the better reception,
in regard it was taken to the life by me an eye witness, in whom the memory of
that fruitful and pleasant Country so far prevails, that it makes me
ambitious to forsake my Native, and wait upon you thither: if you will please
to admit me

Sir, most devoted to your self and the Service WALTER HAMOND.

To the Reader.
NAture imprisons the Natives of our Country within the Seas: but Art revengeth
the injury, and by the Invention of Shipping, makes us free of the whole World,
and joins our Island to the remotest continent; The Sun does neither set nor
rise, but where we are addmitted, or make our selves free denizens; and
farthest Nations acknowledge us either with veneration or terror. And however
the scornful folly of our Neighbors reproacheth us with the name of
Islanders; yet have we enlarged our victories on the maine Land, and by being
immured with the water, gained the privilege to be Chief Masters of that
Element. Our forefathers in their discoveries, left us a noble envy of their
fortunate attempts: And Captain Bond (to whom I dedicate this weak Description
of the Island, as I am confident the Island shortly will it self) is now
following their glorious tracke, and may arrive to be an equal wonder to after
History. For if we value the riches of the Land he is bound for, either
natural, or to be gained by Industry, It assures the Adventurers the most
plentiful return, being furnished with such Commodities as no other Plantation
ever afforded. If we regard the whole somenesse of the Air, and pleasure of
the soil, It promises the Planters health and delight. And if we look on the
nature of the people we are to deal with, they, how ever not civilized into
our manners, retain the first incorrupt innocence of man. An Earth, like that
of Eden, pleasant without artifice, and plentiful without labor: a people
approaching in some degree near Adam, naked without guilt, and innocent, not
by a forced virtue, but by ignorance of evil, and the creatures as humble, and
serviceable to man as they were before his transgression. But what particularly
persuades us to this Honorable Expedition, nature has ingrafted in their
souls a strange affection toward our nation, and by their submisse
enterteining us, seems to prophecy the easiness of that victory we are even
courted to: But we intend not to betray them to servitude, though conquest lies
open to us: Religion and the Arts we shall instruct them in, will be
sufficient gain to them, for whatsoever riches their Country shall afford us.
But how happy soever our fortune may be, they will share at least with us, and
perhaps preceed us: For what will be our wealth, will no way impoverish them;
and what will enable us at our return, cannot make their treasure one grain
the lighter.

Since opinion is the Common judge of Riches, and what in the West is of
highest value, as gold and precious gems, among them are esteemed trifles, as
our beads and other low-prized vanities, are their riches. But what serves as
the most powerful Adamant to draw us to this Adventure, we sail not to this
Island to plant, but to reap, and no sooner shall we arrive but we shall find
our harvest, so many wealthy Commodities there attending only the leisure of
the happy Adventurer, and perishing for want of the Judicious, who know how to
distinguish what Nature has so liberally enlarged.

In a word, as it was said of Thebes, so may I trulier say of this Island, That
the Sun in all his progress does not not behold a richer and sweeter Country.

W. H.

A brief and most True Description, of the Rich and flourishing Island of
MADAGASCAR.
MAdagascar, as it is generally called in all our Maps, and Chartes, (though by
the Natives called by a different name) is an Island situate on the South of
the Equator, The general Description of the Island.
and extends it self North and South, from 12. degrees, to 26. degrees of
latitude, in length 14. degrees, that is 280. leagues, or 840. English miles,
and is the greatest known Island in the world, having on the West the main
Land of Africa, on the North the Islands of Comoro, on the East the Island of
the Mauritius, and on the South the maine Ocean.

Here in the Bay of Augustine, Augustine Bay.
is the place where the English Ships bound for India, do usually put in both
outward and homeward, to take in their Wood, Water, and other Provisions;
chiefly to refresh and Cure their sick people, where commonly their longest
stay is but for five or six days, in which time they are perfectly cured. This
Bay lies on the West side of the Island, in the latitude of 23. degrees under
the Tropic of Capricornus.

In this Bay we arrived in Anno 1630. in the Charles and Jonah, Captain
Weddell Commander, on the first of July, and stayed there till the beginning of
October following, which time we spent in coasting along the Country, and in
observing the customs and qualities of the people.

For the Island it self, on the East side it shows to be a low Champion
Country, with many large creekes and In-lets, but on the West it is more
mountainous and woody, the Valleys yielding large plains for pasture, full of
Navigable Rivers, the soil is generally a kind of Red earth. White Marble.
Here I observed that for the most part all the Rocks and Stones are white
Marble.

For the Season, when we arrived there, it was in the depth of Winter, the Sun
then being in the Tropic of Cancer, at which time we found the Trees and
Plants in their full verdure, The wholsomenes of the Air,
all laden with green fruit of several kinds, the Air so temperate and
wholesome, that although our people as they did oftentimes sleep on the bare
earth, yet in all the time of our stay there; (as diverse can justify) we never
had any man sick.

To particularise of the nature and qualities of the Trees, fruits, and Plants
of the Island, would rather require an Herball, then to be Epitomized in my
Relation, and would be impossible for me to perform, seeing that Almighty God
does dispose to each Country and climate, their particular plants and fruits,
to our Nation unknown, yet some of them I will describe as best known of us.

As for Timber, there is great variety, their whole Woods consisting of many
kinds, fitting both for Mast and Planck, Tamarind Tree.
the chiefest of them is the Tamarind tree, whereof there are abundance of
that growth, that we sawed some of them into Planck, that carried four foot
Diameter. Ebonie black and white. Redwood.
Of Ebony there is great store, both white and black, Trees of a kind of
Red-wood like Brasill, and as hard, whereof the Natives make their Darts, which
I have to show; other trees there are whereof our men made their Mathematical
Instruments, and by them preferred before Wall-nut tree or Box, Box:
besides infinite other kinds serving for Planck, Clap-boord, and Pipe-staves,
whereof we made trial.

One thing I observed, that not one tree but bore fruit, though unknown to us,
yet the Munkeys were our tasters, for if they did eat of them, we durst boldly
adventure.

All the Valleys near the Sea, and along the fresh Rivers, Palmito, or wild
Datetree.
are full of Palmito trees, from whence by making a small incision with a Knife
or Hatchet, in a quarter of an hour and less does issue forth a most pleasant
and wholesome liquor, Palmito Wine.
in taste like white Wine, and will inebriate as soon, and this being kept, in
two days does become excellent Vinegar.

Besides the Palmito there is an other kind of them that can be hardly
distinguished, but that it does bear a fruit which we called the Sea-Cocus,
The Portugals call this Fruit Coco dimar.
whereof I have some to show, the Kirnell whereof is esteemed to be of equal
virtue with the Bezar-stone.

I may not forget that admirable tree which we named the Flesh-tree, The Flesh
Tree.
whereon I would have all those that desire to try their blades and to glut
their eyes with the effusion of Humane blood, to be exercised, for it is so
like to material Flesh, that if you strike at it and wound it with your Sword,
it shows like an incision made in flesh, and bleedeth forth a Crimson sap
like very blood, we supposed the Sanguis Draconis, Sanguis Draconis,
whereof they brought us a great quantity, to be made of the juice of this tree.

Oranges and Limons are here in abundance, Oranges and Limons.
where although our Countrymen have known and frequented this Island above 30.
years; George Gosnell Purser.
yet we were the first that discovered them, for showing them by chance a dried
Limon which one of our company had in his Pocket, the next day we had more
brought unto us then we knew what to do withal; we showed them Pepper,
Cloves, Pepper, Cloves. and Nutmegs.
and Nutmegs, which they knew, and made signs to us by their gesture, that
they grew up in the Country four or five sleeps, which we interpreted nights.

Their Cattle here, Their Cattle.
I mean their Oxen and Kine, are the goodliest and largest for size that the
world affords, Oxen.
and as fat, their Oxen having a great bunch of flesh on the top of their
shoulder as a Camel has on his back; some of them I have seen weigh above
30. lib. being so curiously enterlarded, that we esteemed that part to be the
daintiest part of the beast.

For Sheep they have likewise in great abundance, Sheep.
which are both larger and fatter then ours, but of a courser wool the tails
of some of them waighing above 20. lib. Goats they have in great plenty, Goats.
all which Cattle are exceeding tame because they do live among them and are
in a manner bred up together. Of all which Cattle they brought them down to
us every day in whole droves, so that we were compelled to buy more then we
could spend, which we committed to them to keep, who at our departure did
faithfuly restore them to us again.

Hogs they have wild in the woods, Hogs.
whereof we killed some, but they nourish none amongst them. As for Lions, No
Lions, or Tigers, nor Woolves.
Tigers, and other ravening beasts, we neither saw nor heard of any, and I
believe there are none, for their Cattle feed abroad day and night in the
plains in safety, the greatest enemy their Cattle have, is the Crocodile or
Alligator, who being in the fresh rivers, meets with them sometimes when they
come to water, but of these there are not many, and those might soon be
destroyed if the Natives had either wit or skill to do it.

Of Foul they have of all kinds both wild and tame, Their Foul. Hens. Ginny
Hens. Peacocks. Patridge: Swans. Geese. Ducks. Passula flamingos Great store of
Fish.
as well of those kinds best known to us as of others that I cannot name, but
of those we knew are these, Cocks and Hens, Ginney Hens, Peacocks, Parrats of
diverse kinds, Patridges both wild and tame, wild Swans, Geese and Ducks,
Herons, Cranes, Passula flemingos, whereof we have killed a dozen at one shot,
Curlewes, and infinite other kinds to us unknown.

For fish their Rivers abound with great store of all kinds, tedious it were
for me to reckon them, we have taken ordinarily above 500. Mullets at a
draught, and the like of all other kinds.

Now concerning the quality and disposition of the People, Nature and
disposition of the people.
they are generally of a very loving and affable condition, for in that three
months that we lived amongst them, we had as much freedom and lived as
securely as if the Country had been our own, Their affability.
and if at any time our people by wandering abroad had lost their way, they
would carefully bring them to us in safety without offering them the least
injury. Their Equity.
They are just in all their dealings, whereof we had good experience: For
example, during the time of our abode amongst them, they bringing down daily
such an abundance of Cattle, which being sold to us for small prices, we
bought every day more then we could spend, to the number of an hundred head of
Cattle, An example of their fidelity.
which we committed to one of their own people to keep for us, not greatly
caring whether we had them again or no, yet at our coming away when we had
cleared our selves of the shore, and all our men and provisions were aboard,
our Grasier brought down to the Marine all our Cattle to a hoof, and did
help us to get them aboard, and in all our trayding with them we never
sustained so much as the loss of one Bead. Their Justice.
For theft they punish it with death, the father having that power over his
own children, for there we saw the father danced his own child, a Maiden of
some ten years of age, for stealing of some two or three Beads.

For their persons, Constitution of their bodies, and ornaments*
they are a lusty ^all people both Men and Women, the most part exceeding us
in stature, of a brown or Chestnut color; as well the Men as the Women wear
their hair about a foot long, which they braid up as we do an Horses maine.
In their hair and ears the Women chiefly wear Beads, Shells, or pieces of
Copper, also bracelets about their arms, either of sweet Wood, or of Shells,
the better sort of Copper or Brass. Every Man for the most part wears about
his neck his Razor, pick-tooth, and Mullets, to pluck out the hair, (for you
must note they wear no beards) also his sticks to kindle fire, all which I
have to show. The Women likewise wear neck-laces of Beads, sweet Wood, or
Shells, or what their fancy best pleases. They go generally all naked as well
the Men as the Women, except a small piece of Cotton of their own making,
Apparel.
some two hardfulls broad and ten long, which coming about their waste they
cross it betwixt their legs and so make it fast behind them, and this is the
ornament of the Married, the rest go naked.

Nor did their nakedness any way tempt us to any uncivil action, Nakedness
no motive to incivility.
at the first our curiosity made our eyes unchaste, but after one week they
conversed with us, with the same observation as we behold ordinarily our
Cattle, and I do believe that apparel and the dress of Women, alures more
then their nakedness. They are generally of a lazy condition, for they
neither plant nor sow, Their disposition.
for in the Summer time they feed on those fruits which the earth naturally
produces, and on milk all the year long, Their diet.
which for want of vessels the most part of them like great Calves suck from
the Cowes, a thing ordinary with them. For bread they have some Cuscus and
gravances which I believe grow naturally; they kill no Beast without the
allowance of the King or Governor, who divides to every one his part
according to his family, wherein I noted both their community and Justice.

They are in continual Wars one against another, which is chiefly for warring
places, for whilst we stayed amongst them we desired them to show us the manner
of their fight, Their manner of Fight.
which they did to make us sport, their Skirmishes are on this manner; They
divided themselves into two Companies, some fifty on a side with Lances and
Darts without heads, and so betwixt running and leaping with a terrible hubbub
or cry, they traverse their ground and so deliver their Darts, which the
adverse party either avoydeth or catches, and returns back to them again;
Their Women and children in the mean time employ themselves in gathering up of
the enemies weapons, wherewith they supply their husbands and fathers.

A^ our first coming a shore when they beheld us set up our Tents and had
planted a couple of Fowlers, they imagined that we came to inhabit there,
Their behavior at our first landing.
whereupon their King Andrapela with his Company, to the number of an hundred
came to our Captain, Captain Weddell.
submissively laying their Lances at his feet and kissed them, offering
himself and his people unto his subjection, praying him to receive them, their
Wives, Children, and Cattle under his protection, and to defend them from
their Enemies, which the Captain accepted; he told us of the mortal wars they
had with the Massagores The Massagores.
their next borders, but before we departed we left them good friends.

Upon a time, I know not whether upon policy or necessity they came to our
Captain with a lamentable cry, A policy of Andrapela.
that the Massagores were come down upon them and had drove away their Cattle,
and that unless we came speedily to rescue them, they should be either all
slain or Captived. Whereupon in half an hours time we had at least 200. of
our men in arms, with our Drum, and Colors flying, to look out for this
supposed Enemy, having marched thus a mile or two into the Woods, they brought
us at length unto a place where the King had provided three or four fat Sheep
and other things to feast us, and this was all the Enemy we found.

When our People first discovered this Island, which was about 37. years
since, In Anno 1606.
we had no Commodity to trade with them for their Cattle, Royalls of Eight
they refused, Our first trade with them.
at length having espied the Boat-swaines whistle and Chain they had a great
mind to the Chain, so that for a foot of Chain we bought an Ox, whereupon
the next Voyage we carried over silver Chains on purpose to trade with them;
afterward when our men showed them red Agat Beads they became in love with
them, and would trade with us for Chains no longer, so that for a few Samsams
or round small Beads, we bought up all our silver Chains again. Every morning
during our abode there they brought us down at least two or three hundred head
of Cattle of all kinds, as Oxen, Great plenty of Cattle, and good Cheap.
Sheep, and Goats, of which the largest and fattest Ox we bought for five or
six long Beads, called by them Arango's, which cost us in India not two pence
the Bead, and the smaller Cattle after that rate, and these are the Jewels
they most esteem, for as I said before being a naked people, and having no
settled Habitations, they affect nothing but what they can hang about their
necks and arms, wherein they take a great pride, and is indeed all the wealth
they have. As for their Kine they do not willingly part with them but keep
them for breed, and for their milk for the sustenance of them and their
children.

When we came first among them we could never see above four or five hundred
of them, Not above 500. at the most live together.
Men, Women, and Children, that lived together under one Raiae or Governor,
nor could we see more all the time of our stay, and these came to us armed with
Lances and Darts neatly and artificially made, for other weapons they know
none, A good policy of Master Richard Wild (...) our Pre^^dent.
but by the policy of Master Richard Wild our President, we bought up all their
weapons for a few Beads and so disarmed them, so that for two months after we
could scarsely see twenty Lances amongst them all, for although all their
employments be about the making of them, yet for want of Tools they cannot
make one in a fortnights time.

In coasting along the shore to the Northwards in our Barge, A large River
discovered to the north of Augustine Bay.
some twenty leagues from Augustine Bay where our Ships road, we fell within a
great fresh River as broad as the Thames at Lee, whereon we sailed some four
or five leagues, where we saw the goodliest Country that ever eyes beheld. We
sounded as we went, and found no less then four or five fadome water, and
therefore Navigable for Ships. The Natives seeing us (whom they had never seen
before) used all the means they could by calling to us, making wests and using
other gestures to cause us to come on Land, which at the last we did, being not
above twenty of us, every man having his Musket, who entertained us with a
great deal of respect, presenting us with their fruits, sweet gums, and the
like, making signs to us to go with them to see their Town which we yielded
unto, near about 100. of them being our convoy armed after their manner, who
brought us first through a great Wood at least half a mile through of Palmito
and Tamarind Trees, then we came into a great large-plain or Pasture of as good
grass and Herbage as ever I beheld in England, whereon a number of Cattle
were grasing.

Beyond this plain in a little copse or wood were their houses, made like
Summer Bowres of boughs and Mats, here they entertained us with songs and
dances, bringing their young children to us to take in our arms, Their manner of
entertaining
to whom we gave a few glass Beads, and they presented us with Lambs, milk,
eggs, and the like. Here they offered us their Oxen, Goats, and Sheep, for
Beads at half the rate we paid in Augustine Bay. And not only at this time
but at another time we found out the cunning of Andrapela, Andrapela's
subtlety.
for we had not been there a month but the rumor of our arrival coming up
into the Country, they brought down great droves of Cattle to us on the other
side of the River to sell to us, but he would by no means have us to trade
with them, making signs to us that they were Man-eaters, but when he saw that
we were resolved to trade with them, he gets over to them before us and deals
with them for half the profit, as we knew afterward.

In our Voyage back again, we fell into a deep Bay where we found abundance
of excellent Oysters, Oysters growing on Trees.
growing or rather sicking to the roots and branches of Trees which you must
conceive grew in salt water, which were both large and fat, and not much
inferior to our English Oysters; this Bay or creek is not much above a league
from Augustine Bay.

For their Religion, Their Religion.
as far as we could trace them, we conceived them (if of any) to be Mahometans,
which they have gotten by their affinity and near neighborhood to the Moors;
that filthy Sect like a contagious Leprosy has generally infected almost all
those Eastern and Southern parts of the world; for we observed them to be
circumcised. Their Priests came often to us, Their Priests.
and were present sometimes at our Devotions, where they behaved themselves
with a great deal of reverence. They showed us their books which were made of
Parchment or sun-dried sheepskins; Their m^ner of writing
their characters were like the Egyptian Hieroglyphics, some like a fish, a
tree, a flower, a beast and the like, which they would read to us in a confused
manner, being as they told us a prayer to God. We showed them one of our Books,
which when they had well viewed and turned over, they delivered us b^ck again,
requesting us to read therein, whereat they gave good attention, yet they
understood us no more then we did them.

Now for the Commodities and Riches of this Island, Commodities of the Country.
which every one does hearken after, what greater wealth would any man desire
to have then to have abundance of all good things that this present life does
require? Ecclesia^.
The Preacher says, that the principal things for use of Man are Water, Chap,
3^. ver. 28.
Fire, Iron and Salt, Corn, Honey, Milk, Wine, Oil, and Clothing, all which
this Country does naturally even plentifully afford. For the Island it self, it
lies in a most temperat climate under the Tropic, a Virgin never yet
deflowred either by the plow or spade. Gold, Silver, Gold. Silver. Copper*
Brass. Iron.
Copper, Brass and Iron, we have seen among them, which are therfound
naturally, although they value them not except it be Iron, which necessity has
taught them to melt out of the hard Rocks for their Lances and Dart heads, and
what other rich minerals and precious Stones they have are unknown to us,
neither what rich gums and drugs those parts afford we know not. By chance
those people brought us a kind of Red gum having the smell of Balsome; Sangui
draconi^
which being cast on the coals yielded a most excellent perfume better then
Benjamin: We brought from thence a good quantity, whereof I have some to show,
the powder thereof put into any wound or ulcer does presently cure it as I have
often experienced, it proved to be a kind of Sanguis-Draconis; ^^oes.
the Herb Aloes does grow there in such abundance all along the Marine, that
one of our men by my direction in three or four days made half a hundred
weight, which was sold Master Sadler a Druggest in Buklersbury for a noble the
pound, and by him preferred to be better then that which is brought us from
Soccatore, from whom the next Voyage after I received instructions in writing
how to refine it, and of this an hundred tun might be made in a year, if there
were good vent for it, to speak nothing of Sugar and Ginger, ^ugar. ^inger*
^ilke ^ormes.
which naturally grow there in abundance, and for the Silk worms, I can
testify upon my oath and produce witnesses, that in walking through the woods
we have bin entangled so fast with raw silk, that we have had some trouble to
clear our selves.

Now how easily might there be a Plantation made upon this Island by our
Nation, let the indifferent Reader judge, how honorable for the Kingdom,
^ncou^ageme^ts (...) a plan^ation.
and how profitable for the Adventurers. And first for the facility thereof,
they are a people with whom we have had trade and commerce near upon forty
years, and therefore they are well acquainted with our conditions and friendly
deportment toward them. And as for the length of the Voyage, ^he length ^f the
Voyage four months.
it being near upon two thirds of the way to India. Consider that now by our
anuuall trading into those parts our Seamen are more skillful, and better
experienced in those Voyages then formerly they were: For having past the
Canaries you sail always before the wind, in a smooth and peaceable Sea out
of the range of the Turkish Pirates, ^s the la^y Sher^y* the Lady Haw^ins, and
many other (...) women.
so that Ladies may and have often gone those Voyages, even to the utmost parts
of India.

And lastly, what an infinite Commodity would redound to our Country if we had
a Plantation there, it being only fittest for us, and I do believe reserved
for us in this latter Age. To which purpose that truly Noble Gentleman
Captain Bond our Governor, Captain John Bond.
what a sea of opposition has he waded through to settle a Colony of English
in that rich and plentiful Island, for the honor of his King and Kingdom,
and for the propagation of the Christian Faith, among those poor seduced
Souls?

For the trade we have in India, let us consider upon what a tickle point it
stands, subject to the tyranny of the ambitious Moors, who upon every slight
occasion quarrel with our Merchants that live among them, confiscating their
goods, imprisoning their persons, and threatening them every hour with their
terrible Chawbucks or Whips, The trade of India.
extorting from them infinite sums of money, for little or no cause at all. And
then again to consider what a world of Treasure is every year transported to
those Infidels, by the English and Hollanders, and nothing returned but leaves
and blossoms, I mean Cotton and Indico; as for Cotton it does grow there
natura^ly, for Indico if it do not grow there as I think it does, the seed may
easily be brought thither from India and Planted there, and workmen brought
thither to work it. Aloes, as I said before, may be made there in abundance.
Building of Ships and Frigates.
Ships and Pinnaces may therbe built. Ships that are bound for India, may there
be victualled both outward and homeward, which would be a great benefit for all
those ships that go for India and Persia, For the Victualling of the Indian
Fleets.
for if their Beef be well killed, salted, pressed, and repackt again; it may
be preserved in Caske a twelve month and longer. For salt there is no want
thereof, for besides that which you may find kirned on the Rocks, salt-pans may
easily be made.

But it may be here objected; An objection Answered*
that i^ this Island of Madagascar were of that worth, wealth, and so
commodious as I would infer, the Portugals had long since planted upon it as
they have done on many places both in Africa and on the firm Land of India. To
this I answer, that when the Portugals first passed the Cape of good Hope; to
discover the Kingdoms of Cambaia and Calicut, now named the East India, they
coasted along the maine Land of Ethipia, and fell with Mosambique, where they
planted a Colony for the relief of their ships coming out of Europe, where
they take in fresh Provisions, and their wants supplied they proceed on their
pretended Voyages to India, where they intended their conquests and
plantations, using that other but as an Hostery or a place of relief for their
Ships outward and homeward, not coming scarsely within the sight of
Madagascar. Nor can either Spaniard or Portugal here claim any title, having
had never any footing here, much less that they should any way oppose us, they
having more Forts in India already then they are able to hold, and are almost
beaten off of their Trades since the English and Dutch used those Seas.

Consider withal, how that a few Portugalls have for the space of near upon
two hundred years fortifyed themselves on the maine Land of India, as at
Cambaia, Gogo, Daman, Muscat, Dabull, Goa, Callicut, Mallacca, Macao, and
others; and do hold them still in despite of the Moors, a warlike and
powerful Nation. I need not tell you of Ormus a barren Island, or rather a
Rock of salt, yet by the industry of the Portugalls in a few years; by forcing
the Indian trade thither, it became the greatest Mart in the world.

And to conclude, this Virgin Island of Madagascar, does here by me friendly
and lovingly invite our Nation to take some compassion of her Nakedness, her
Poverty, and her Simplicity, both Corporal, and Spiritual, and does earnestly
and affectionately, even beg of us to Redeem her out of her miserable
thraldom, under the Tyranny of Satan, to be united with us into the fellowship
of the Sons of God, by our Union in Christ Jesus.

FINIS.

