THE FABLES OF Young Aesop, With their Morals. With a Moral History of his Life
and Death. Illustrated with Forty curious Cuts, applicable to each FABLE.

The Fourth EDITION, Written by B. H.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by Benj. Harris, at the Golden Boar's Head, in
Grace Church Street. MDCC.



Though Aesop's Crooked, Strait is his Virtuous Road,
Which Points the Way to Heaven's blessed Abode:
Shall we therefore, the better part despise,
Because deceitful Beauty from it flies?
Abhor reflecting on the Cripple's Fate,
Who would be Crooked, when he might be Strait?
To the READER.
Reader!
ONce more I Dedicate this Pocket Companion to thy Use: If thou love Virtue,
thou will accept it, and Read with a Desire of Improvement; but if thy
Affections are in the Heart of the Earth, and admirest Darkness, I advise thee
not to hinder thy Friend from looking upwards, and beholding the Sun: And if
thou would live Happy here, and have the Unum Necessarium hereafter, get
Wisdom, get Virtue, which cannot be changed by Fortune, nor separated by the
Cavils of this World; which cannot be demolished by Age, nor abated by
Sickness; but will make Peasants Kings, and Beggars Princes; the Sick Whole,
and the most Miserable the most Happy.

I have here prefixed (being sensible how Diverting Lives are to the Public) A
Moral History of Aesop' s Life; showing the Vanity of immoderate Passion, the
Deceitfulness of Beauty, and the Misery attending a perjured and vicious Soul.
I have also made the whole more Correct than any of the former Editions, by
altering the Style to Gratify some Persons of more Profound Judgments, but so
as the meanest Capacity may Understand me: Indeed the World has Obliged me to
this, by their Candid Acceptance of Three Impressions; and the Obligation I
think to return (GOD willing) with a Second Part, in a little time.

However, if thou will improve this in the mean time, thou will find it more
Beneficial than the Transitory Enjoyments of this Life, which Fade before we
can perceive 'em to Flourish: But Virtue well Rooted in the Soul is like a Rock
in the Sea, all the Affections being guided thereby, to the Crowning their End
with immortal Glory: Which that thou may attain to, is the Desire of thine,

Janua, 10. 1700. B. H.

Young AeSOP's Life.
IN one of the farthest Parts of Germany, there Lived once a worthy and sober
Dr. of Physic, by Name John Lozmani, of an Ancient and Honorable Family: He
was a Gentleman no less to be Admired for his Exquisite Learning, than Beloved
for the internal Endowments of a Virtuous and Generous Soul; and One, whose
Aspect might Excite the Affections of a Chaste Princess, as well as Check the
wanton Glances of the most Lascivious Lover. To all which, (besides the great
Observance, and profound Respect the People paid him) were added, a copious
Estate, and plentiful Revenues. He had not arrived to above the Age of Twenty,
before Heaven Crowned his Sunshine Years with the chaste Enjoyments of a
Marriage Bed, and made him the Husband of a Young Lady, in whom Love and
Beauty, as well as Virtue and Chastity, were eminently Predominant. But, though
Heaven had showered its Blessings down in so singular manner upon their Heads,
yet it seemed to deny 'em a long time, That which is the End and Design of
Wedlock; the Thoughts of which, with the Apprehension of not leaving Issue
behind, to keep up the Name and Honor of a Family, depressed Lozmani's
Spirits, and forced him to Affect a solitary and retired Life: But all this, by
his Lady's being happily Delivered of a Son, quickly Vanished, and the Clouds
of Melancholy Dispersed; his Spirits became more Strong and Lively, and his
Joy raised to a higher Pitch than before. Glad was he to see Heaven bless him
with a Son so Fair, so Beautiful, and so well Proportioned, in whom the very
Heart and Soul of its Parents were bound up. But, alas! when we go about to
Assure ourselves of a Constant Flux of Felicity, and Promise Happiness with its
Duration, then are we not only the most Deceived, but rendered, by Fortune's
inconstant Motions, (as to this World) the most Miserable, and the most
Unhappy: For,

As in all things, so in poor Mortal's Heart,
Sorrow and Joy, by Course, do Act their part:
For, Fortune's Course, b'ing Fickle as the Wind,
How then can That be Constant, when she is Blind?
Nor is she ever Worshipped by the Wise,
But only Fools, who make her Throne the Skies.
Thus we see the Mutability of all things: For, this Son, whom they Named
Christianus, growing into Years, and proving the exact Picture of his Father,
he was Educated and Instructed by him, in the ways of Virtue; and had already
Learned Manners enough to prove himself an Ornament to his Parents, when (about
the Ninth Year of his Age) he Unfortunately fell from the Turret of his
Father's House into a Garden adjoining, whereby he was not only taken up for
Dead, but had his Back broke, his Joints dislocated, and his whole Body bruised
in a Deplorable manner.

Imagine now what Scenes of Sorrow attended it: And Guess how great an
Impression it made upon the Hearts of Two loving and indulgent Parents, who
would have parted with all their Wealth to have prevented It, if possible! But,
such is the irrevocable Decree of Heaven, that an Alexander, whose Arms
Punished all the known World, till it Confessed him Conqueror, can no more
Evade the Poison of his Cup Bearer, Antipater's Son, than a Croesus, with all
his Wealth, pretend to Bribe a Deity! If we expect to Enjoy an immortal Gift,
we must not allow ourselves in the excessive Transports of the Passions of the
Mind: A Mediocrity in Temper, will Fortify us against all the Disappointments
in Nature; and preserve to us, at least, the Idea and Remembrance of what our
Senses once Delighted in, when Passion robs us of this, and our Reason too.

Passion, ah Passion, spoils the Nobler Parts,
And makes fond Mortals Deify their Hearts;
Vexing the Spirits with Impure Dissentions,
Pushing us on, To Adore our own Inventions.
''And very few are free from this Infection,
''For every one's a Slave to some Affection.
But, ah! Ten Thousand times more Happy's he,
Who Subdues Passion, and sets Reason free;
That his weak Optics may more clearly 'spye
The Imperfections that proceed thereby.
But, to return, As Christianus was so Unfortunate in the Juvenal of his Years,
to be made a Cripple; so he became the more Helpless, and outwardly Miserable:
For his Deformity so Discomposed his Mother, that soon after she made a Chamber
her Consinement, and in a little time her Aspect became Pale and Wan; the
Vermilion of her Cheeks were washed off with Pearly Tears; and her Eyes
affected nothing more than the ghastly Ideas of the King of Terrors, and his
silent Urn; her Brows were Depressed with Clouds of Melancholy; and all her
Actions, Discourse and Conversation, spoke nothing but deep Resentments of a
troubled and discontented Mind: The Excess of which Passion hurried her into a
Hectic Fever, of which, (maugre all the Indearments of a tender and loving
Husband) she in a most Sorrowful and Tragical manner, gave up the Ghost.

Never was a Gentleman more Disconsolate than ^ozmani: Grief overwhelmed his
Heart; and his Soul continually disburthen'd it self, by breathing out
passionate Complaints, and dolourous Sighs: And, what with the Death of his
Lady, and the Deformity of his Son, he was reduced to a low and weak Condition.
His Friends being Concerned to see him so, and perceiving him in a deep
Consumption, they, with all the tender Expressions of Love and Affection,
endeavored to expel the Grief which had Seized his Mind; but all in Vain, for
he rejected their Visits, refused their Counsels, despised their Comforts, and
wholly denied himself the Society of his own Family. Thus he Lingered out a
Month or Two, till he found his Vitals ready to take Flight, when he sent for
his Brother in Law; to whom he Communicated his Grief in the following Manner.

Brother! Mortals may imagine, that by their Wealth they are secured from
Vicissitude and its Consequences; and that Fortune has lost her Power, and is
Subject to the Controuls of a Gilded Purse, or the Amorous Looks of a Fair
Beauty: But, alas, so long as we are Born with Affection, and suffer it to
Reign Arbitrary over our other Powers, we are not Sensible that she is
Hood-winck'd both to Wealth and Grandeur, as well as Poverty and Want: Nor will
we Believe, that what Favors she heaps upon us at One time, she may Sweep away
at another. Who would have Thought, a Person so Rich and Wealthy; so
Well-belov'd, and Esteemed; so much Refpected, and Admired; so Blessed in the
soft Embraces of a virtuous and loving Wife; and, in fine, once so Happy in the
Enjoyment of a Son, who^e Beauty seemed to be the Masterpiece of Nature -- I
say, Who would have imagined a Person once so Fortunate, should have Lived to
see so dire a Catastrophe befall him? Ah, have I Lived to see the Lady of my
Affections, my Bosome-Friend, and the Soul of my Love, surrender up all the
Efforts of Nature, all the Ravishing Endearments of Love and Beauty, and all
the Conjugal Affections of a Wife to her Husband, into the Hands of that grim
Tyrant Death! And, shall this Memory of mine forget her, and Live, with nothing
to feast my Optics on, but the Deformity of a Son? No, no; Maugre all the
Delusive Advice, to stay and linger out my Days here, I Will force my Fate, and
compel Atropos to Cut this Thread of Life --

And here Lozmani Swooning, he seemed as if he had already taken Possession of
another World, till his Senses were retrieved, when opening his Eyes, he thus
went on: -- I am glad my Dissolution arrived not, before I Bequeathed my Son to
your Care, and my Estate to your Self, for his Maintenance: I Conjure you by
all that is Just and Sacred, on pain of suffering here all the Horrors of
Conscience that can be inflicted on a Perjured Soul, to do no otherwise by him,
than becomes a loving Uncle, and what the deplorable Condition of a Fatherless
Kinsman calls for: To which the Brother Assenting with an Oath, Christianus was
called for by his Father, who in the midst of a Flood of Tears, Embracing him,
recommended him to his Uncle, and Died.

Thus we see the Tragical End of Lozmani and his Lady. By this, I would have my
Young Reader observe, what Love and Affection, some Parents have for their
Children; as well as Advise Parents to see the Folly of immoderate Grief, the
Misery of Idolizing their Children, and the Danger of Repining at the Decree of
Heaven. Shall we hasten the running out that little Sand left us, because the
Almighty Recalls the Talent HE has Lent us? Consider; -- Facilis descen^us
Averni;
Sed revocare gradum, superasque eva dear ad auras
Hoc Opus, hic Labor est --
Virg. Aen. 6.Thus; Down-hill to the Shades you go a Facile way;
But to return, and re-enjoy the day,
That is a Work, a Labor, --


An Impossibility! Is it not better then, to prompt Nature with a Mind Calm and
Serene, than to hurry ourselves with Passion into those dark Recesses of the
Dead, from whence there is no Regress into this Life again? Chilo the
Philosopher, (Plin. l. 7. c. 32.) who so much abhorred the Excess of Passion,
and used to say, Nequid nimium Cupias; Desire nothing too much. Was not exempt
from the Punishment thereof: for the Old Man died with Joy, when his Son
returned Victor from the Olympic Games. Without we can take to ourselves
Immortality, it is Madness for Mortals to imagine Heaven is obliged to Preserve
what we Affect; and a Crime often Punished, not only by the removal of the
Object, but by the privation of the Adorer's Life. None can Evade those
Decretive Actions Subordinate to the Series of their Lives. And this I call
Fate, which Tully says, GOD has Decreed and Resolved shall come to pass.

But to proceed, Christianus was no sooner taken home to his Uncle's House, but
he as soon ^ound the Want of his Parents His Uncle soon broke the Oath he had
made, forcing him to Labor with his Slaves beyond his Strength; and in a
little time most unnaturally turned him into the wide World to shift.
Christianus being thus deprived of an Habitation, he wandered up and down
Contented with the Courtesy of some, and the Reproaches of others: All which
drove him the more to Contemplate his own Frailty, and Contemn the Vanity of
this World's Enjoyments: Till at length, as he was returning through the Fields
into the City, with a Company of wicked Children attending him, he was Pityed
by a Religious Merchant, who took him into his Family; where he Lived Beloved
and Admired nigh Two Years, at which time, to the great Grief of the Merchant
and his Lady, he fell Sick of the Smallpox, and Died, being Honored with a
Decent and Solemn Funeral.

Thus he was taken Care of by the Almighty, and no doubt has the Reward of
those who shun Vice, and its Attendants. But to let my Reader see, that Heaven
never suffers the Guilty to go unpunished, I will Conclude all with this one
Instance.

The Perjured and Unnatural Brother having Lived in Excess and Prodigality on
his Brother's Estate, a considerable time, and afterward meeting with great
Losses at Sea; the Thoughts of which, together with the Gnawings of his
Conscience, for Perjury, and Villainy, to his Brother and Christianus, forced
him in Despair, to sling himself Headlong from the Top of a high Clif^ into
the Sea: Where we will leave him, suffering the Punishments of the Furies,
which are the Stings of an evil. Conscience; where, as Cicero says, Every
one's own Fraud, and his own Terror Frets him most: Every one's own Wickedness
Torments and Inrages him; his own Evil Thoughts, and the Lashes* of Conscience
affright him. These are Constant and Domestic Fur^es to the Wicked, that Night
and day expect the Punishment that their Crimes deserve.

This World affords, at best, no other Life,
Than what is Complicated up with Strife:
For in this lesser Orb, we Mortals see,
The very Eliments at Variance be;
The flitting Air, and solid Earth make War;
And the Fire and Water, nothing do but Jar:
No Wonder then, we Mortals Change and Fade,
When we of Fickle Elements are made.
Wealth, Beauty, Honor, and Preferment high,
No sooner come from Heaven, but back they fly:
Whilst those poor Souls who fix therein their trust
By Heavens Blasts are blown away like Dust,
And plunged in Misery with the Ambitious Soul,
For, where is the Mortal can the Fates Control?
But if we would Live Undisturbed and Free,
And shun the Labyrinth of Misery,
Let Us seek [ah, seek and find, poor Souls distressed!]
A humble Cottage, where Life lives at Rest;
And feed our Vitals, [maugre horrid Strife]
On that we Mortals call, The Bread of Life:
Quenchin^ that Thirst, which does our Spirits cloy,
By Drinking everlastig Streams of Joy.
This Summum Bonum if we hope to have,
We must Conform to the Advice which Solon gave
Contemn this World, and follow Wisdom's Rule:
(...) is most Wise who thinks himself most Fool.
1. The ROSE crop'd by Youth.


LOOK in the Morning, and you will see
the Rose-buds to awake,
And from their Beds most fragrantly,
a pleasant Odor make.
And when the Gardener to it goes,
it cannot his Knife withstand;
But strait descends this Damask Rose,
to wither in his Hand.
Ah! gentle Youth, thus strive to crop
from off this Bush a Flower;
Turn back; behold! one ready stands
thy Youth for to devour.
The MORAL.
IT IS most expedient, that Man first of all should Meditate upon Death; whether
he will be a Philosopher, or not: For, we find but two Certainties in this
World, Life, and Death: From whence I infer, As soon as Nature has done her
Duty in the first, and set the Wheels at work, the latter should be put in
Practice: i. e. We should be putting our selves in the Grave, every day we
live. To which end, consider, O my Reader! that thou art brought forth in a
Garden, whereof God is supreme Lord and Master; thou art set (as a Plant) in
such a Soil, to grow up according to its Fertility; Death is thy Gardener, who
is appointed to Root up evil Weeds, and to gather fragrant Herbs and Flowers
for his Master's Palace; therefore is it not better for thee, to Converse with
thy Gardener, to understand his Natural Qualities, that thou may be the more
Potent in Pruning-time, to lose a Branch or two, than to have the whole trodden
despicably amongst Briars and Thorns? Consider, thou can not Fee Death, nor
evade his Darts; and that every one must kiss his cold Lips, and fall asleep in
the Dust.

2, The Innocent Lambs Sporting and Playing.


HOW innocent and lovingly
the tender Lambs do play;
Bah, Bah, they cry most cheerfully,
as trav'ling on their way:
They think no hurt: With quiet Mirth
they are drove with Whip in hand;
Nor do they Dream at all of Death,
when Butchers by them stand.
Amongst the Grass, in the pleasant Fields,
these harmless Lambs Consort;
They leap for Joy, and toss their Heels,
till Death does end their Sport.
The MORAL.
WHY will thou Delight thy self, O my Child, in provoking thy Brother to Wrath?
Is it for thy Credit to be Quarrelling one with another, when every day
Providence drives thee nearer toward the Slaughterhouse? Thou little think
of this, but know, that thou art going, wherever thou art, to the Court of
Justice; and, is it not better to take thy Brother by the Hand, and run
quietly, that the Judge may Smile on thee, and Sing thee Asleep in his Arms.
Consider, Brotherly Love is as Chains of Gold about the Neck; and without it we
are worse than Savage Beasts: Love Sweetens our Dispositions, and flings away
all Acts of Hostility, constraining us to turn and Kiss one another in the Heat
of Broils and Animosities: But where is this to be sought for? In Relations
there is very little Sympathy to be found; every one's Heart is case hardened to
the Afflictions of his Friend; and to say, in Extremity, I am thy Brother, or
Kinsman by Blood, etc. is like Whistling to the Wind, or rolling Stones up-hill.

3. The Turtle Surpised and took Sleeping.


WHen blustering storms are blown away,
and Waves begin to fall,
Then Sol, with his warm glittering Rays,
most calmly up does call
The Turtle, pleasingly to float
asleep upon the Sea;
But when it is caught by Men in the Boat,
it wakes immediately.
And when too late it sees it self
surpised and taken fast,
It sighs and sobs with briny Tears,
so long as Life does last.
The MORAL.
IF thou will Hunt, be sure let it be with all the innocent Diversion
imaginable: For, what occasion have thou to Curse thy Horse, because thy Game
out runs him? Or thy Game, because it endeavors to escape thee with its Life?
Surely thou art asleep when thou do so; and, no Wonder if thou art taken
Napping, when thy Horse is Leaping a Hedge, or Style, by the common Hunt, who
is at the Back of every one, to catch'em when they fall. Let this be thy Rule
in all thy Recreation, and thou will Discern him plain enough to Shun him.
Besides, when thou art about a Journey, or Some other Sporting Exercise of
Body, form an Idea, of its Nature, and Quality; thereby no Mischief shall
ensue, nor will thy Senses be Stupify'd with the Fatiegues thereof. Farther,
let this Consideration rouse my young Scholar out of that Lethargy of childish
Pleasures, which terminate in Affliction: So he shall have true Pleasure and
Delight in his Satchel, the Love of his Superiors, and escape the Epidemical
Consequents of Excess and Wantonness; when the impure Child, shall be devoured
by the Jaws of Satan, and Weep when it is too late.

4. A Dog returning to his Vomit.


Is It not a Nasty sight to see
a Dog to Spue amain;
And when it is out, immediately
to eat it up again?
So strangely does this Cur delight
to swallow down his Throat,
What he before with all his might
most loathfully cast out.
Would it not make Man's Stomach loathe
the daintiest Dish of Meat,
To see this nasty brutish Dog
its Vomit up to Eat?
The MORAL.
IT IS common with Schoolboys to Spue out Repentance upon one another Backs,
when they are under their Master's Correction; and as frequent to wipe it off
with their Tears: For, how many irreiterated Promises will they make to save a
little Smart? But when it is over, they forget 'em, and run to their unlawful
Exercise with as much Celerity and Egregiousness, as before. Indeed, some Cry
up Correction as the Chief, to be used in Governing Youth; but, for my Part, I
abhor it (especially the Excess) and esteem it as Bestiality, and fit for none
but Irrational Creatures, Slaves and Criminals: But rather, on the other Hand,
that they should be managed with all the Freeness and Generosity imaginable.
Will thou then, my Child, turn Beast, to Eat and Drink thine own Dung and
Nastiness? GOD forbid: Consider, it is better to Disgorge thy self of that
Venom of Pleasure, which infects thy Conscience, and henceforward, loath the
most daintiest Dish in the World.

5. The Fly and Candle.


ALas, what makes the pretty Fly
to hover thus about,
But with its silly Wings to try,
the Candle to put out.
It flutters round the glimmering Light,
and pleased is to see
A burning Tapour in the Night,
which works its Misery.
Poor senseless Insect thus to toil
to have thy fond desire;
'Twill prove to thee a fatal Foil,
and set thy Wings on fire.
The MORAL.
THere is one grand Folly which possesses the generality of Mankind, and
obstructs their Happiness; and that is, Inconstancy: This puts him upon the
Wing to Honor and Disgrace, Wealth and Poverty, Ambition and Content, and a
World of Contrarieties; it carries him from Hope to Despair, from Joy to
Sorrow; and, like a Ball of Snow, gathers as it rowls, to make its Fall the
greater. This is hovering round the burning Taper, and working thine own
Misery. The glimmering Pleasures of a Dissolute and Wanton Life, attract Man
(as the Flame does the Fly) till he is somewhat Disabled, and forced to
withdraw, but immediately his Madness and Folly turns the Tide of Sobriety,
when egregiously he crosses it backward and forward, till he is forced to yield
as Victim to his Lusts and Hearts Desire. There is nothing like shunning
Extremes, and keeping to a well-grounded Mediocrity, which will prove another
sort of Honey, than that which ends in Gall and Bitterness; when Malorum esca
Voluptas; Pleasure is the Baits of Iniquity, Char. l. 3. c. 38.

6. The Laborious Be sucking Honey from Flowers.


What makes the industrious Be to strive
with his Wings abroad to Roam,
But only for to fill the Hive
with Luscious Honeycomb.
It ranges through each fragrant Bower
amongst Valleys, Meadows, Hills,
From Violets, Cowslips, and each Flower,
it Nourishment distills.
And Humming, Labors hard all day,
upon the Thistle, Rose,
And Lilly; Laden, strait away
unto its Hive it goes.
The MORAL.
THere is but one Habit to be got at one time; the Novelty of which is the
Memory's Whetstone, till it becomes palled and insipid: Vice seldom is
Burdensome in it self, and consequently the longer Retained. Now, there is a
Duty incumbent on Parents, viz. To secure their Children from ill Precedents;
which they must do, if they will have 'em free from ill Manners. And there is a
Duty adopted for Children too, viz. To avoid Vicious Companions, and Consort
themselves with the Lovers of Virtue. The Effect of this Practice will be this:
You shall send your Son out, and he will return with an Improvement of his
Talent; he will say, Father, I heard a Boy contemn God, by telling a Lie, which
made my Heart Ach till I had Reproved him: Mother, I saw a Rarity, a rich good
Man take his Coat off, and Cloth a poor Miserable Wretch therewith; Would to
God I were firmly Ri^eted in Wisdom also, Is not this Honey in thy Hive, O
Parents? Surely thou shall be Happy in the goings out, and comings in, of such
Children.

7. The Nightingale.


WHen Winter's hoary Frosts retire,
to usher in the Spring,
Up strikes th'harmonious winged Quire,
melodiously to Sing.
Hark, how the well-tuned Nightingale
sounds forth her quivering Note,
And warbles out a pleasant Tale,
with Music in her throat;
All Life, she flutters in the Bush,
her strenuous Notes to raise,
And whilst her Life does last, she thus
Chants forth her Maker's Praise.
The MORAL.
THere is in Nature, says Seneca, a most villainous and odious Vice; the which
is so Aggravating, that it Dissolves all Humane Society; Grave vitium, intoler
abile, quod dissociat Homines: And this I call Ingratitude: Of which (if Man
would but rightly consider) he might be Ashamed, and justly Reproach himself
with the worst of Infamies. He may learn otherwise of irrational Creatures; and
when he finds the Charity of another extended toward him, he ought to extend
his Thanks to the Donor; and blaze abroad with just Encomiums his Deliverer's
Praise. Thus the grateful Man will Reflect and run over the Mercies of the
Day-past; adore his Maker, and make use of all the Faculties of his Soul and
Body in Singing his Praise: He will sit down more contented with his Morsel of
Bread, and Bottle of Water, than the ungrateful Wretch with all his Delicacies
and Dainties. It is a Passion to be abhorred, as base and sordid, and not to be
found in a virtuous and generous Soul.

8. The Ostrage hiding her Eggs in the Sand.


LOok how the Ostrage rakes the Sand,
her Eggs therein to hide,
Alas, she does not Understand
what may them soon betide.
Unnat'ral Ostrage, thus to make
a Nest within the Earth,
To lay thine Eggs in, and not take
some care to see their Birth.
Suppose Men's Feet should crush them down?
or, what if Beasts of Prey
Should with their Paws break every one
when-e'er they come that way?
The MORAL.
WHat says Plato? I cannot imagine, why Man should be more studious in any
thing, than in bringing up his Children Well! In this he speaks right; because
the Chief Good of a Commonwealth consists in the Virtuous Education of their
Youth: And this Duty lies wholly upon the Parents, (especially the Father) as
it is Branched out into these four depending Parts, viz. Life, Nourishment,
Instruction and Communication. All which the Parent should take more Care of,
than his Estate: For, as Crates Exclaims, To what Purpose do Mortals fatigue
themselves in the laying up Riches; and trouble themselves so little with those
that are to enjoy them? Is it not valuing the Shoe more than the Foot? And, to
do like the Ostrage, bury thy Son alive in the Quick sands of Hair-brained
Extravagancies? This is Pindarus's Vanity; The Dream of a Shadow: And the Child
is more injured, by not learning to Govern himself, than Benefited by giving
him all the Wealth and Power in the World to Govern others.

9. A Ship Sailing to her desired Port.


BEhold the Ship which steady steers
its Course through th'watry Main,
Nor Rocks, nor Sands, nor Storms it fears,
But cuts the Waves in twain.
It suffers many bitter Shock,
and many rouling Sea
Makes it like to a Cradle Rock,
Before't can harbored be.
When any Hurricane appears,
or, when the Land is nigh,
The Seamen are possessed with Fears,
and to their Pilot Cry.
The MORAL.
BEhold, O Man! an Emblem of thy Life, thy swift Journey, thy passage into
another World, to the Port of Delivery, and to a State which puzzles the most
Sagacious Philosophers living: How is that feeble Bark, thy Body, blown up and
down by every Gust of Vanity and Pride? tossed upon the Shelves of Poverty and
Want? elevated by the Waves of Ambition and Honor? and cast down by the
inconstant Frowns of Fortune? We are all like Ships newly Launched when Born;
some fall in pieces before they set to Sea; some founder half way their Voyage;
others are swallowed up in Sands within sight of the Harbor; and few escape
Pirates, the Dangers of the Sea, and other Casualties, to arrive with full
Sails at the highest Akme of Perfection. There is a Pilot to guide us, which,
because he is invisible, and his Being in Dispute, we will not accept as we
ought: Some will weigh Anchor, and drop again; some pretend an Imbargo, others
steal away in the Night, whilst most fall short of the desired Port.

10. The Ants and Sluggard.


THE Ants a People are not strong,
yet Pains they daily take
Before the Summertime is gone,
their Winter-store to make.
For what does make this little Ant
in the Season dry to get
Her Food; unless she fears to want
when Winter's Cold and Wet.
The Sluggard fast a sleep does lie,
and Idly takes his Ease,
Because it is now Prosperity,
he thinks 'twill never cease.
The MORAL.
AS Providence has allotted every Creature its respective Office, or Duty, to
Exercise its Powers and Faculties upon: So Man (the Nobler of all others) more
especially is Commanded to Work and Labor with his own Hands, to feed his
Mouth. He is not enjoined to seek after more than is sufficient for himself and
Family, and occasional Acts of Charity; nor allowed to live in Idleness, till
what has been complicated up by the Confluence of Heaven's Blessings, is
Exhausted through Riot and Excess. Nature in it self is not Extravagant, but
Generous and Liberal; but, through Speculation, it is Corrupt and Degenerate:
Lust cannot be without Sight; whence it comes, that the Passions are set to
Work, so soon as the Optics inspect a Beauty: From whence I infer, That the
Simple will not Labor for Necessaries, any longer than they can form the least
Idea of Substance, or forced to by Acts of Compulsion.

11. A Boy taking a Birds nest.


WHen Spring her Sunshine Mantle weilds
upon the hoary Earth;
Then Madam Flora decks the Fields,
and gives the Flowers new Birth.
Which makes the Idle Boy abroad
oft-times a Truant make;
To travel over each Field and Road
a Birds nest for to take.
When ever he 'spies it, up he crawls
the Tree, in hopes to find
Live Birds, or Eggs; but Oh he falls,
and leaves them all behind.
The MORAL.
THere is a Proverb that says, Nature is never Content: Nor will it be
satisfied, give it never so much: And he whose Nature is such, is continually
pestered with Ambition; which (says Seneca) has this Vice, Non respicit; Not
to look back. Now, the Ambitious Man cannot be Courted to Consider, What he
was; that he takes another's Place; and that, he knows not how soon some One or
Other may justle him out: All he Ruminates on, is; Honor, Wealth, Authority,
Glory, and a Thousand Extravagancies; These are the Nests he looks up after,
and crawls up on other Men's Shoulders too, till his Ambition is too Heavy for
its Supporters, which sinks, and slips from under him, whilst he tumbles
Headlong down the Precipice of Despair. In fine, it is a Vice, restless and
Vexations, and has no Bounds. Present to the Ambitious Soul, the Sight of
Children catching frothy Bladders in the Air, he will Laugh at you, when at the
same time his Actions are far more Ridiculous in the Eyes of all Wise Men.

12. Two Drunkards pretending to Travel, Kill themselves.


TWO Drunken Sots had both agreed
a Journey long to take:
Who had not gone 'bove half a League,
when to a House they make;
Then called for Drink, and drank so long,
their Senses flew away.
One Swore the other did him wrong;
but could not tell which way.
Thus they contend; at length they fight
to end the Drunken Strife,
In rage each drew his Knife, and quite
deprived themselves of Life.
The MORAL.
OF all Vices, there is none more Odious, more Destructive, and more Abusive
than Drinking to Excess. The Drunkard is [by our new Critic's leave] an Element
of Noise and Impiety; a Chaos Complicated up with every thing his confused
Fancy forms into an Idea. The Drunkard not only Confounds the Business he just
before engaged in, but acts Arbitrary to the Law of Nature, and Unravels
Oaths, Vows, and sacred Obligations, that have been Scores of Years winding to
a Bottom. The Drunkard, will hasten from Prayer to Curse an Adversary; And will
promise to do That for Another, which (when he is Sober) he wants to have done
for Himself. He will endeavor to divert you with a long Harangue of the Ill of
others, when at the same time, if you happen to Misconstrue one of his Words,
you yourself shall be the greatest Enemy he has: Nay, tho thou art his Brother,
he will believe thee to be no other than a Dog, and a Dog's Life will thou
Live, all the time it is thy Fate, to be in Subjection to a Sot.

13. The Lion and Lamb.


A Lamb, by chance, had gone astray,
And wandering through a Wood,
A Lion met in Masquerade,
Who Fauning by him stood.
Good Lion, (quoth the Lamb) I crave,
My Liege will lend an Ear,
And save me from the ravenous Wolves,
Whose Jaws I daily fear.
Never heed; I Will see you safe from them:
The Lion strait did Rore;
'Till to his Den he came, when he
The Lamb in pieces tore.
The MORAL.
Here Is a Mystery! Men will not forbear running into Bypath to hunt after
Shadows, when they may travel in a pleasant Road, and have the Substance
brought 'em. Immoralists will seek the Pleasures of this Life, tho it cost 'em
never so dear; never so many Oaths, Lies, Cheats, Lusts, Murders, Villainies,
and the like. Believe it then, O thou guilty Man! That thou art alone, tho thou
have Three Parts of the World to bear thee Company: For, where are thy
Companions, when thy Reason is fled. You and they are all like Senseless Posts
jostling one another into the Fire. Well then, if thou love Wisdom, thou will
not come within the Decoys of this World, where Sins are bypath to lead us
till the Devil finds us: Neither ask thy Neighbor, which way thou must go;
for, who knows but he has worldly Business near the Lyon's Den, and may desire
thy Company: But pull thy Conscience by the Sleeve, Consult That, and thou
shall escape the Snares of Satan.

No Wonder Satan makes of Men a Prey,
When from a conscious Bias they do stray
14. The Apish Fox.


IN Parayn breeds a certain Beast,
Whose Head's much like an Ape,
The hinder part like to a Fox
In Color and in Shape.
This Creature takes a Wondrous care,
To suckle all her Young,
'Till they are full grown, and able are
From the Enemy to run.
But if by chance the Hunters come,
For fear her Young should lag,
She puts them in a Skinny place,
Much like a Leather Bag.
Yet she her Young will always smother,
Whenever they chance to Suck another.
The MORAL.
LIke begets Like: It Is true, it does so in the Course of Nature: But, the
Child may lose great part of it is Origin Nature, by the Reception of unnatural
Nutriment. This may be done thus. Let an Infant suck a Moross, Surly, Woman,
and it will receive not only Nourishment, but the ill Qualities of the Nurse.
No wonder then, the Child degenerates from its Parents, when it participates of
another's Nature! There can be no true Affection between the Mother and such a
Child: For what difference will there be between the Legitimate and a Bastard,
when thou shall take them both Young, and bring them up, saying, I am thy
Mother, and the like? In fine, every Mother ought to Suckle her own Child, when
she is not infirm. Besides, Do thou think the Breasts were made for no other
Use than to excite Lust? Consider, All Objects ought to be hid, which have
force enough in themselves to attract Vice. Let this suffice: If thou would
preserve tender Flowers till they are Ripe, they must not be exposed to every
unwholesome Blast.

15 The Hawk and Birds.


A Hawk flew Scaling through the Air,
With hopes to find some Prey,
But strait the Birds perceived her near,
And up they flew away:
One mounts her Back, a Hole to pick,
The other Three together,
At Head, Tail, Wings, do snatch at quick,
Plucking from thence a Feather.
Thus they the greedy Hawk assault,
Which makes him cry and rore,
Good Birds forgive me now this Fault,
I Will never do so no more.
The MORAL.
IF (my Child) thou will live to a good Old Age, and leave behind thee a Name,
not enrolled in the black Leaves of Oppression, Extortion, Fraud, and Usury,
now is the time to fly Covetousness, and check all unjust Desires after the
Enjoyments of another. Why will thou turn Hawk? Have thou not seen One hurried
to the Ducking-place by a Multitude? Nay, have thou not held an Arm, or a Leg,
till thy Companions have Pumped him? This is only a Seasoning him for Bridewell
and the Gallows. Let me advise thee then, if thou will divert Disgrace from thy
Family, and avoid Shame and Misery thy self, look not on thy Play-fellow's Toys
with Affection. Meddle not with thy School-fellow's Top Book, or Satchel,
because it is finer than thine, or because thou have not the same: Nay, if
something molests thy Teeth, and thou see a Pin drop off his Sleeve, use it
not without his Consent. Thus thou will inure thy self in the ways of Virtue,
and be happy in a Contented Mind.

Palfer from none, for Gain ill got,
Will, with that Party's Memory, rot.
16. The Gulon.


BEhold this glutt'nous Gulon,
how She seizes on her Prey,
And never leaves with Teeth to tare,
Till all is consumed away.
But fills her Belly monstrous full,
Then, to give Nature ease,
Betwixt two Trees she pulls herself,
The Meat from thence to squeeze.
So emptied, runs again to Stuff
As much, or rather more,
And never thinks she has enough,
But still for Food does roar.
The MORAL.
Would thou be a Man of Understanding, endowed with a Thinking Soul,
endeavor to keep thy Spirits free from the Rapine of an unnatural Apetite:
For, as too much Oil retards the motion of the Watch wheels, so Gluttony
depresses the Spirits, and keeps 'em from Soaring above the reach of Nature.
What Idea can thou form of a Summum Bonum here; (which is nothing but the
searching out the Bounds of Nature, with the enjoyment of a Mind Serenely bent
to Benefit the Public) when thou art fit for nothing but to lie down and
wallow with Swine? When I was in America, I saw an Indian with a Belly stuffed
like a Wool-pack, begirt about with a Belt; I asked him, Why he did so? He
replied, When we find a Prey, we devour it all, be it never so much; and till
we catch another, we take in our Belts a Hole every time we go to Stool, and so
remain satisfied. This may allow of some Excuse in them, but for those who have
the Use at Discretion, it is most Unnatural, especially where there are Objects
enough ready to Starve for want of That which is wasted.

17. Young Storks and their Dams.


AN ancient Stork, who well had lived,
Began for to Decay,
And fearing none would lend Relief,
Thus to her self does say:
Ah, woe is me! I cannot fly
To seek my daily Food;
For Age has clipped my Wings, whereby
They do me little good.
Whereat some young Ones to her came,
Who with Affection great,
Took care to Labor that she might
Have daily Food to eat.
The MORAL.
Have thou got Wealth (o Man!) in an Honest way, and thy Parents brought thee
up to Years of Discretion, to dispose thereof? Consider: Is my Father or Mother
Poor, in Debt, or Necessitated? Have they bestowed that upon me, when I was
incapable of helping my self, which now would Nourish them in their Aged
Extremity? Have I not Substance to repay, which I wasted under their Tuition?
Do I not owe my Being to them? And am I not likewise their Debtor for all the
Expense, Care, Sorrow, Love and Affection they were at, to bring me to what I
am? This will teach thee to make thy Purse thy Parents and to open it to all
thy distressed Friends, that Heaven may enlarge what thou have, with a Life
Long and Happy. But do not as some, who perhaps will every Holy-tide, afford
'em a Meal, but with this Proviso, that they shall either Eat with their
Servants, or be Seated at the lower-end of the Table: Some such Devils I have
seen my self!

Support thy aged Parents, and besure
The Almightys blessing will attend thy store
18. The Ambitious Vulture.


A Ravenous Vulture long had stood
The Phoenix Nest to view,
And for that purpose, in a Wood
She went, and lay perdue.
Which having seen, Ambition so
Did stimulate her Heart,
She carries Spices too and fro
To act the Phoenix's part;
And with the same a Nest does build,
Immortal's her desire,
To have a Golden Crown, but then
The Sun set all on fire. (combust,
With that she Sinks, her Nest, and all
Vainglorious Hopes, and Projects turn to dust!)
The MORAL.
THus the Lofty Soul, whose Ambition is Elivated above the Decree of Fate,
would impose upon his Fellow Creature, a Belief that he is something more than
mere Man, when all his Glory, is gotten by the Ruin of others, and his Fame
supported by the Echo of a dangerous Parasite. From this I infer, Two
Indisputables, Truth, and Error: There are Moral Vultures, as well as Religious
Devils; and they both profess Infallibility: The Moral Impostor never discovers
his Morality to any but Strangers, who are not acquainted with his
Neighborhood. The other would be Gold, before it is Refined in the Furnace, A
GOD before the Elements of Nature are Qualified and Sublimated by the Power of
Omnipotency! This Vulture would have all the Nectar and Ambrosia out of Heaven,
to be devoured by Swine on Earth: And would keep the Keys by his Side, to make
a Prison of Paradise. Here Is Infallibility with a Witness! If thou would be a
Wooden God, after thy Decease, away with thy Coffers beyond the Alps.

19. The Lion and Dragon.


ALyon ranging over a Plain,
To find (no doubt) his Prey,
Met with a Dragon, when began
A fierce and bloody Fray:
The Lion knew his Power great,
Commenced unto a King,
Which made him rore and stamp his Feet,
To feel the Dragon's Sting:
At length he bravely Won the day,
And made the Dragon Yield,
Who falling on his Back does say,
O let me quit the Field!
The MORAL.
WILL thou become Victor over thine Adversaries, and be able to grapple with
Monsters? This is not attained to presently. First try thy Skill with Dwarfs
and Pigmies, then profess thy self Master of the Science. I mean (my Friend)
thus: In the Juvenal of thy Years begin to encounter with petty Vices; such as
Lying, Jesting, Coveting, Reviling, and profane Babbling, all which, as the
Domestics of thy grand Adversary, are to Worry thee with Despair, that He may
with the more ease overcome thee at last. Begin to make this thy Study, and
let Conscience be thy Master, who never will Fight but when thou art in
Danger, and thou shall not only free thy self from Wounds, but evade the
Assaults of a Satanick Host. Is it not easy to say thus; If I do not leave off
drinking now, I shall fall asleep, and my Enemy will come and Surprise me,
etc. Do these things, and thou shall be a Man of War more Politic than the
Devil himself.

Nip Vice in the Bud at first, however,
If cropped at last, its better late than Never.
20. The Parliament of Bees.


THe Bees, in Parliament, agree
To choose themselves a King,
To make such Laws, as Liberty
And Property may bring.
At length they to a Royal be,
Do make a grievous Moan,
Imploring him their King to be,
To sit upon the Throne.
Which done, some idle Drones contrive
Their lawful King to Slay,
Because he had preserved their Hives
From all the Beasts of Prey;
But in the very int'rim they were took,
And justly hanged on a Triangle Hook.
The MORAL.
MOnarchy! Thou Witchcraft of Felicity, and Enemy to a State free from the pale
Cabals of Blood and Slaughter; in thy Bowels are Vipers, and on thy Breast
Vultures! Kings that should be most free from Danger, move as if every step
they took were in the Dark; and are (if not Hated) Envied by all. The Courts of
Princes, are full of Minions, Parasites, and Favorites, Conspirators in the
Palace, and Regicides in the Bedchamber; with innumerable Emmissaries without.
And though Mortals have universally Consented to the Punishment of Treason, yet
they will indulge themselves therein, though they see Quarters exposed to view
on the City-Gates. For my part, I do not love to imbrew my Hands in the Blood
of any Creature, especially in the Blood of that Monarch, who has restored me
Liberty and Property, unto whom I owe Subjection. Nor is it consistent with
Nature, that the Feet should kick against the Head, because it is Elivated above
all the other Parts of the Body, and Governs the same.

21. The Vine and Bramble.


AS flourishing a Grape Vine grevv,
A Farmer's House about,
Some Brambles in a Hedge hard by,
Had newly taken Root:
Who quarrels with the Vine, and cries,
Where are thy Weapons now,
That able are to save thy Fruit
Which grovvs on every Bough.
The Vine replies; I Am well content
My Fruit should gathered be,
Rather than Hevven down and burnt,
As is the Bramble-Tree.
The MORAL.
ARt thou One not given to Contention; and would live Peaceably with ^hy
Neighbor? Value not the Reproa^hes of the Simple: What if thou have ^ot Money
enough to Corrupt a Judge, ^r Parasites to pervert Justice, yet thou ^ast a
Friend within, who will send thee ^way Justified! What if Heaven blesses thee
with Wealth, a fruitful Wife, and Virtuous Children, for a time, and afterward
sends one Messenger for thy Son, another for thy Wealth, a Third ^or thy Wife,
and, a Fourth for the very Bed from under thee; it is only to see what Sap is
in thy Heart, and to make ^hy* Virtues grow and Flourish the more. And, is it
not better for thee to be pruned with the Hook of Affliction, than to be cut
down by the Ax of Destruction, and said up for Fuel with the Thorns of this
World? Consider, thou can not have (...) better Master than Providence, and
tho ^mmoralists brand thee with Simplicity, ^et this suffice to Content thee,
That thou art not Listed under their Banner. If thou have peace within though
poor in purse, Never mind Reproach: That shall be all thy Curse!

22. The Parrot.


HOw apt Young Parrots are to learn
What Is by their Owners taught,
They Will sing or Whistle forth a (...)
And plainly speak by Wrote.
Thus lives poor pretty, pretty Poll,
And in a Cage is hung
On high, there to be seen by all
Who love his prateling Tongue.
Advanced he is within a Hall,
To live a Life of ease,
Till from the Hook the Cage falls down
And Death does on him seize.
The MORAL.
Do thou take delight in the prateling Discourse of thy Child, and art
^esirous to see it terminate in Sagacity, ^egin to be a good Dictator betimes,
so ^^alt thou be held in Veneration, and ^e styled in Old Age, the Parent of
good Manners. Let not thy Child's first Les^^n be a Song, an Air, or Jocose
Re^artee; but rather an Instance of Moral Duty, or an Imitation of some Virtue
^is Understanding is able to conceive; ^hen instill into him Death and an
After-State, with the Knowledge of a Deity, who is the Chiefest Good, and
Creator of Heaven and Earth: This will put him upon Knowing Himself, and enable
him to Form a true Idea of the Contempt of this World: It will bu^^ him up
under all the Oppressions of Fate, and lead him at last to rest on a higher
Power than Nature. In fine, he will be a Wise Man, of Use to the Public, when
he that has been Educated in all Tongues, without Improvement, shall be a
Rattle for Wise Men to Laugh at.

Teach not thy Children what is naught,
For they will Learn That, without b'ing Taught.
23. The Mairmaid and Fish.


A Mairmaid combs her Amber Lock
As sporting on the Sea,
The which a neighboring Fish invites,
This wondrous Sight to see:
Who Swimming underneath did think
Securely there to hide;
For fear that any danger might
The Enterprise betide.
Mean while the Mairmaid 'spies her out
Using a Syren's Art;
Enchanting first her Mind, and then
Acts a more Tragic part,
The MORAL.
THe way to avoid Falling, is not to Climb up a Precipice. Come not ^ithin the
Stench, if thou would avoid ^^fection: Nor let the Gilded Bait lure thee to
Swallow the Hook. Why ^ilt thou suffer thine Optics to behold that which thou
know beforehand ^ill prove Prejudicial to thee? But ^^re's thy Misery:
First thou will sit ^^d look on, and then turn Practitioner. ^^rst, thou will
stand afar off and View, ^^d then draw near and Touch. If thou ^oud'st be out
of Danger, fly Gameing, ^ioting, the Play house and the like: For ^^e Stage
Now, serves only to deiude un^ary Souls into the Snares of Vice; and become
almost the greatest Piece of ^mmorality in the World: Run not ^ither then to
have thy Mind Enchanted ^ith Ravishing Imagination, and thy Bo^y Corrupted with
the Consequence of ^ust. Besides, who knows, whilst thou ^^t Vindicating thy
Friend, but thou ^ay'st receive a Wound through thy Body (...) a Hector? Thou
ought not to de^^ght in seeing thy Fellow Creature mi^ick'd into the Shape
of a Beast.

24. Friendship of Mice.


IN an Old House, run to Decay,
That ready was to sink,
There stood a Tub of Water, where
The Mice did use to drink.
At length it happened, as in haste,
To Drink they going were:
The foremost missed his Footing, and
Fell down, for want of care.
At which the Mice did all agree
To help him out with speed,
Each hung by th'other's Tail, when he
Caught hold thereof, was freed.
The MORAL.
What Is the Old Proverb? Claw me, and I will Claw you: One good Turn deserves
another. But, if thou wilt be neither Scribe, nor Pharisee, remember this: If
thine Enemy Hunger, Feed him; if he Thirst, give him Drink: Down comes Heaven's
Fire upon his Head, if afterward he proves Ingrate. But, when thou do Good,
to those who Deserve it not; and, at the same time, Wishest Ill to the Party; a
Fig for thy Compassion! Is there not That within thee, which thou call
Conscience? Beware of its being an unwelcome Evidence, another Day.

In fine, If thou see an Object Naked, Consider thus with thy self: Have I
not an old Garment at home, useless to me? Or when one meets thee, going to
Spend Twopence with thy Friend, and asks thine Alms, Lend one Half, and
Spend the other, etc. This is pulling a Man out of the Water. But, be not thou
as some Men, with some Souls, who love to pass by Affliction Blind fold.

Be Friends with all, and ready stand,
To lend in Need, thy helping Hand.
25. The Salamander and Man.


IN Flames the Salamander lives,
Burning in Sulfurous Fire,
Whose Heat the Beast fresh Vigor gives,
Making the Man admire;
Who thus Disputes: Pray, whence came you?
Thou art Immortal, sure;
Or else, those fiery, red-hot Coals,
You never could endure.
I Am not Immortal, (quick says he)
Though Fire I can feel;
But Naturally it suits with me,
According to my Zeal.
The MORAL.
It Is no difficult matter to Guess, who is meant by the Salamander, because
^^ere is no Creature under the Sun, more like it, than an Atheist: For,
stifling all Convictions, his Conscience is Seared as with an Hot Iron; making
his own shallow Reason his God; which being False, is utterly Incapable to
direct him to search and find out the most True and Holy GOD, and Creator of
Wisdom it Self; and so he Lives diving in the Fire of his own boundless, and
foolish Imaginations. His hellish Zeal Obliging him to venture his All, on the
Notion of Dying like a Beast; and yet not Suffered to Live a Life like it. Thus
he spends his Youth like a witty Fool; his Manhood worse than an unreasonable
Beast; and his Age (if Justice cut him not off) like a Devil incarnate.

Avoid then, the Society of such Mortal immortal Devils, lest you are Infected
by their Bituminous Poison, and Atheistical Conversation.

Ah, pity me! I do Believe, dread GOD;
Those who do not, Lord, Scourge them with thy Rod.)
26. The Unnatural Eagle.


A Wealthy Eagle, chosen King,
Had by his Queen, a Son;
Who, by his Father's Will, was made
Successor to the Crown.
But mind, This wicked Paricide,
Who, not Content to stay,
With spreading Wings at's Father Flew,
And took his Life away.
And so usurped the Vacant Throne;
When all the Birds agreed,
To Cut him off: And so he died
A Parri Regicide.
The MORAL.
I Could Wish none in the World were like this young Eagle. But, scarce a Year
revolves, without some Unnatural Instance, or other. All that the Wise Man
says, is True; and this we know to be so: Covetousness, is the Root of all
Evil. From whence springs Ambition, Restlesness, Discontent, and a World of
Miseries. Murder is Subordinate to Ambition, and Discontent: And, with that,
Peasants, as well as Princes, are made Impure. I my self have known, one
Relation Murder another, for less than Half a Crown. It is indeed most Benefit
to thee, to arrive at the highest Zenith of Glory, by Gradations, that thou
may know Others Dispositions, as well as thine Own: But neither Ambition,
nor Discontent, will suffer this; but force thee to Jump in the dark Abyss of
Disorder. If thou will wait Nature's due Time, thou shall be Happy, and have
what Providence designed for thee: If not, then you are Unworthy to enjoy the
Elements of Life. Content's a Iem: Let what you have suffice Let Nature have
its Course, Man quickly dies.)

27. The Boys and Bear.


TWo Boys, as rambling through a Wood,
By chance a Bear espied;
At which, one took to's Heels, and loud
Unto the other Cried:
Who strait fell down on's Back, and lay
Perdue, until the Bear
Came up; when thus the Boy began
To Whisper in his Ear:
You hollow Tree, with Honey, full
Unto the top is heaped.
Away the Bear runs, and the Boy
Immediately escaped.
The MORAL.
POlicy goes beyond Strength. But that Man who lies still in a Ditch crying,
Lord, Help me! and never offer so much as one Struggle toward it, merits no
more Pity, than he does Encouragement, who lies Gaping under a Plumb-Tree,
expecting the Plumbs to drop into his Mouth, without lifting up his Hand to
Gather 'em, though within Reach.

Therefore wish not, or pray for such a thing, or such a Deliverance; but use
also the Means to attain it: And if thou see thine Enemy prove too Strong for
thee, then Resist not, but turn to thy Money-Politicks; for, 'twill certainly
prove the securest Safety, in such an exigent Extremity.

Observe this as a certain Maxim: One Yard of subtle Policy, joined to an Inch
of experienced Strength, if well used, may Measure the whole Universe.

When, Lord, in any Danger ever I fall, By Satan's skill, O then attend my
Call! I Will use the Means, but wait on thee for all.

28. The Hen and Chickens.


A Careless Hen, that Chickens had,
As from her Coop does stray;
A Hawk espying, darted down,
And carried one away.
One Chicken, bigger than the Rest,
Upon her Back does fly,
And over all the other Chicks
Makes an attempt to Fly:
Again the nimble Hawk darts down,
The silly Chick to ensnare,
Which done, away with motion quick,
She cutts the ^^itting Air.
The MORAL.
BY this Fable, we may learn Two Duties. First, The Duty of Parents, to their
Children: Which is, To restrain the Haughtiness of their Dispositions, that
they may not Ride Paramount on their Backs. And to signalize no more Favor for
one, than the other. If thou do, one shall be Oftentatiously Impudent, and
the other Carelessly Remiss in Duty. Secondly, Childrens Duty to their Parents:
Which is, To keep (if not otherways Ordered) within Call, or Sight of their
Parents; and not run Loitering up and down the Streets: But if thou will
wander, (my Child) then away to the Churchyard, where thou shall find Graves
of all Sizes: Seat thy self on One about thy Length; and Consider thus: Is
there not little Sinders, as well as great Coals in Hell? If thou love Good,
this will put thy Conscience to the Test; and thou wilt be as a Brand snatched
out of the Fire. If not, expect no other, than to leave thy Father and Mother,
and all thy fine Clothes, and Toys, to go and live with a Stranger in eternal
Burnings.

29. The Dog and Bag of Money.


A Friendly Couple, with their Dog,
Were Trav'ling to'ards a Mart,
To buy some Merchandise; when soon
One of them did divert
Himself behind, Nature to ease;
And leaves upon the Ground
A Purse of Money, and strait hyes
Toward the Seaport Town.
This Purse the watchful Dog espies, and down himself he lays
Close by it, till his Masters were
Gone out of Sight Two Days, hy'd,
Before they miss'd'em both, when back they
Finding the Purse of Money by his side.
The MORAL.
FRiendship is an inestimable Jewel: For, Two or Three Friends joined, become
the Geryon described to be a Man with Six Hands, and Three Heads: So it is with
those whose Friendship is knit together by Truth; for the one will not suffer
the other to be wrongfully Prejudiced, without taking his part; nay, tho Death
it self stands in the gap, if one passes through, the other must of Necessity
follow: Like Euthydicus and Damon, who Sailing toward Athens, it happened
Damon fell overboard; when, being almost ready to Sink, his Cries awaked
Euthydicus; who seeing his Friend in such a deplorable Condition, jumped in,
and saved his Life.

Likewise Servants ought to be Faithful to their Masters, and not suffer
themselves nor others, to imbezzle their Effects; for, if a Dog will preserve a
thing only for knowing it is his Master's, much more should Man, who knows the
Owner, and what Value he has for it.

No Blows a Servant should Disgust,
So, as to quit his Master's Trust.
30. The Fox and Coney.


WHen crafty Reynard long had sought
A Coney to betray,
And could not do it by any Means,
To the King he goes away,
Accusing him of Thievery
And Humbly begs he might
A Warrant have, that so thereby
The Law should have its Right.
Unto the Bar the Coney's brought, through Reynard's Subtlety;
Where quick two Foxes plead the Cause
So, as he is judged to dye.
The MORAL.
MIght generally Overcomes Right: And as it is with the poor Coney, so it is
with those Men, who go to Law for their just Estates: For, whether the Cause be
Right, or Wrong, Does it not fall to those who give the greatest Fee? But if
thou must go to Law, beware of Running: Why will thou be Mad, or over Hasty to
Ruin thy Self, or Neighbor? Go not one Step farther, when thou see Ruin a
far off; for its Motion is Swift as a Dromedary: Fling Coat, Cloak, and all
away, and take Blows into the Bargain, rather than stay to see the Events.

Have a care of gratifying thy Appetite in a Hectic Fever. I mean; When thou
Wishest the Death of any, [as GOD forbid!] beware that thy Passion lead thee
not to taste the Cup; Revenge is not easily Satisfied with a Sip: And, What
wilt not thou do then, to Obtain thy End? What shall I say unto thee? If thou
love Swearing, Woe to thy Neighbor's Landmark!

Malice abhor: Nor falsely Swear
Against any. Speak the Truth with Fear.
31. Of the Monkey and Whelps,


A Monkey having Two young Whelps,
In one she took a great
Delight; but void of natural Love,
The other she did Hate.
But mind, too fond of this young Whelp,
As Suckling it one Day,
She 'spyes the Hunter drawing nigh;
And up she runs away,
Hugging that Whelp so hard, until
Of Life it was bereaved:
But the other jumping on her Back,
Held fast; and so was Saved.
The MORAL.
JUst so it is with those Parents, who place their whole Joy and Delight, in
one peculiar Child; cockering him up with that which proves his Bane. For, by
so doing, they not only prove Libertines, and Profane, but often happen to
bring lasting Disgrace on their Families, by making untimely Exits on a
Gallows. Besides, if Parents mind it, such Children hate 'em most; being
Impudent, and Haughty, and always the first who forsake them in their
Extremity: Whilst the others (kept under by a Moross Disposition, and Rigid
Hand) bear more Affection, and Filial Duty to them; becoming thereby Ornaments
of an Hoary Head, and Staves to a feeble Old Age.

Be not therefore too Fond with thy Child, lest you do, as that Silly Phrygian
Woman, who seeing her Darling Child, fall in the Fire, rashly takes it out, and
flings it into the River hard by, where it was Drowned: When, through Care, it
might have been Saved.

A Medium's Good: the Balance keep thou just:
Those Children Cocker'd, often prove the Worst.)
32. The Chastity of Turtle-Doves.


IN a Dove house, where Turtles lived
Together Lovingly;
Each had its Mate to Bill withal,
And keep their Chastity:
But on a Season, in the Spring,
When 'twas fine, Sunshine Weather,
Two Pair upon the House did sit
A Billing one another:
When strait a Pidgeon to them flies,
A Hen t'entice astray,
Who with just scorn his Suit denies:
So back he flys away.
The MORAL.
HEre is a Glass for all Immodest People; wherein they may see, how far
different they are from Turtles, who (void of Sense and Reason) are Naturally
Chaste: For they have a confused, innate Obligation to keep themselves so,
after they have Coupled. Men and Women have a double, Rational Tie, Divine, and
Moral; Inward Conscience, and Outward Ceremony: Yet, for ought I see, the
Generality value Neither, a Button. One will have his Whore, and the other, her
Rogue; Licentiously turning that blessed State, into a Common Road of
Bestiality.

For shame then, thou Yoked Leacherous Satyr, leave off Surfeiting thy Lust;
and when thou art again the like Tempted, powerfully Resist; and perform thy
Marriage Vow, with a Just and Sacred Chastity. Nor may those Unmarry'd, take
any such wicked Course in Filthiness, since No Whore-mongers, (as well as
Adulterers, and Fornicators) shall enter into the Kingdom of GOD. (file. Keep
chaste, do not thy Marriage Bed de-Resist the Tempter, and he will soon Recoil.

33. The injured Lark.


A Lark having an Ill Name got,
Amongst the other Birds,
Could not, by any means, persuade
Them from't, through dint of Words.
But so it happened, that as they
Were sitting on a Tree;
One called him Fool; and quickly, all
Unto the same agree:
Each picking at him, down he falls;
(Though Innocent he was)
Where weeping lies, he sore bewails
The Iujustice of his Case.
The MORAL.
GIve a Man an Ill Name, and you Wound him to Death: For, whether Guilty, or
Not, pass but the Sentance, and it shall spread Wildfire like: Every one will
turn Executioner. Well, this then follows of Consequence, When he is Falling,
he will want none to keep him down: If so, then his very Bosom Friend, shall
lend her Assisting Hand thereto. Abhor then this base Principle: for it Profits
thee nothing, more than making the Party Miserable: How can that be thy real
Happiness, which is another man's Bane? Well then, meddle not with any Man's
Business, but thy Own; nor Prattle that to Others, which thou know is False
to thy Self: For, it is a sign of an Hypocritical Spirit, which Destroys its
Neighbor: And he that keeps his Mouth, keeps his Life: but he that opens
wide his Lips, shall have Destruction.

A Good Name got, is better far, Than Ointments, which most precious are. Hence
then, of Wounding it, beware.

34. The Dogs and Veal.


SOme Dogs that meet within a Street,
With one consent, do all
Agree, to Steal a Loin of Veal,
From off a Butcher's Stall:
The fore most, he, most Cunningly
Contrives the same to take,
That so no One, might see it done,
Nor any Outcry make.
Which done, into a Field they run,
And altogether Fight,
To get the same; whose Barking there
The Butcher does invite:
So took they were, the Butcher by,
Who strait Condemned 'em all to dye.
The MORAL.
MArvail not, thou liver upon other Men's Substance, if Fortune at ^ast decieve
thee. Perhaps, if thou lowest not Women, Wine, nor Prodiga^ity, then thou
may escape: But, if neither of these is thy Heart's desire, then art thou
Sedate in Mind; and he that is Right in his Wits, will not turn Thief. But,
suppose thou live Unjustly as long as Nature will let thee, and fancy'st
there is no After-State, Can thy Reason slide away with ease, upon the
Gravelled Blocks of what thou call Conscience? If thou willt have Executors,
and Gold Rings given at thy Funeral, order none to be thy Guests, but those,
from whom thou have stole their Wealth: Let them build Alms, houses. But I am
of Opinion, Justice will thwart Nature: For, it is much if thou do not make
too great a Figure, and discover thy self: Or, one of thy Associates, to avoid
Misery and Shame. And, what will become of thee then? Thou will dye Poor, to
live so eternally.

Keep void of all offense, thy conscience clear
Tho Sins here hid, hereafter will appear.
35. The Crocodile and Dogs.


THree Shepherds Dogs, that thirsty were
Went down unto the Brink
Of th'River Nyle, with hopes, that there
They might some Water drink:
Whereat, they fall to Quarrel, who
Thereof should Drink the First:
But one (an ugly, greedy Cur,
And likewise very Cursed)
Beat all the rest, and fell to Lap
Out of the River Nyle;
When suddenly at him does Snap,
A monstrous Crocodile.
The others run away, and are Content
To miss their Fellows heavy Punishment.
The MORAL.
WHen Men are eager after Vain pursuits, they care not into what hazardous
Extremes, they run themselves Headlong: For they think, Nothing Venture,
Nothing Have, governs the Universe, not apprehending the Sequel. And, tho the
greedy Cur by his ravenous Nature, overcomes the Dogs in the Fable, yet he pays
for it with Severity. Will thou then, o thou Covetous Man! venture thy All, for
that which is worse than Nothing? Stand amazed at this: The Devil is at no
Charge, no Expense, and yet has Body, and Soul, and ALL for Nothing! In fine,
Consider, when thy Table is spread, if thou go to it with an unsavory
Heart, thou do not know but the Devil may be in the first Morsel and Choke
thee: and then thou wilt remember this common Sentence, Possession is Eleven
Points of the Law! Children, Quarrel not, one with the other, (Doglike) lest
Heaven permits One, to come and end the Strife, with, Vengeance.

Look up to Heaven before you Eat;
Discord often proves a Sowre-Sweet.
36. The Fox and Lamb.


WHen Reynard long from Food had gone,
And Hunger did prevail;
Quoth he, I wonder that so soon
My Politics should fail!
Which said, away he goes to meet
A Lamb, that went astray,
And complaisant he does her greet,
Giving the time of day.
Now this base Fox had made a Trap,
The Lamb to flatter in,
But the other 'spying it, by hap,
Tumbled poor Reynard in.
The MORAL.
THE direct Road to Destroy thy self, is, The seeking. Others Ruin: And this
too, often falls out, when the thirsty Homicide is within Reach of the intended
Sacrifice. What Profit is there in Hypocritical Intrigues? Fraud and Deceit are
the Progenitors; Misery and Ruin the Consequents of a Covetous Thinking Soul:
Which, to be sure, will Brand thee amongst the Degenerate Race of Mankind
hereafter; if not Upbraid thee to thy Face in the Sight of the World now.
However, to shun this, Fancy to thy self thus: Man; thou can not be in League
with the whole Universe, (tho a Grandee thereof) and, who knows but some One or
Other, thou have Injured, has laid a Snare close by that of thine Enemy's. Do
not run to Justify others Villainy, lest thou art caught and Condemned thy
self; whilst the innocent and thoughtless Soul is delivered by thine own Mouth.

Dig not a Pit, nor make a Gin
For others, lest you fall therein.
37. The Cat and Rats.


When Puss with mewing made the Rats
their Holes quite to forsake,
She reaches down a Violin
and strait does Music make:
At which they came from far and near
dancing with nimble Feet:
But some, more wiser than the rest,
found Food and fell to Eat:
The Cat upon those Rats soon seize,
who next unto her were;
But all the rest escaped with Cheese,
and other wholesome Fare.
The MORAL.
WEll then, tho Innocence is of Force enough to justify thy Conscience, yet,
still it is a piece of Imprudence, to Trace the common Road of Danger: What!
because thou have not committed Robbery, thou think to escape the Robber?
Rest not here; but, first of all, Examine what Dangers may befall thee in thy
Adventures, that thou may not afterward Grumble at the Events: But, besure
come not within Arms length of the Flatterer, for he will soon unmask himself
to thy Ruin. Besides, in dangerous Enterprises, be not too Hotheaded, through
Pride, or Vain glory, in hopes to ingross all to thy self, lest you first fall
into the Snare and Destruction thereof: But rather give way to others; for
thereby Men many times (like the more wiser Rats in the Fable) become the
greatest Gainers, and incur the least Danger.

Let Wisdom's Conduct be your chiefest care
And of all flattering Enemies beware,
Run not too rashly, lest there is laid a Snare.
38. The Stubborn Ass.


A Stubborn Ass, who laden was
drove by his Master, till
With much ado they came unto
the bottom of a Hill.
Whereat the Ass would not proceed
farther a Step to go:
Which made his Master, with his Whip,
to give him many a Blow.
Nay, though he beat him very sore,
he would not stir nor wag;
Night coming on, the Man himself
was forced to bear the Bag.
The MORAL.
THE Ass is called in Latin Asinus, in Greek Onos and Killos, by reason of his
Labor in bearing Burdens; and by some he is called Magamucos, for his
unpleasant, fearful, braying Voice: But amongst many Epithets given him, he is
called a Vile, Slow-paced, Sluggish, Idle, Blockish Beast: Like to him is the
Duncepated Scholar, that is not at all apt to Learn. Nay, though his Master
Whips him, and Whips him over again, it is all one, for his Brain is so
impenitrable, it is impossible to infuse any thing therein: Let his Master keep
his Learning to himself for what value he sets on it. For whom I think that is a
fit Sentence, to bid such a Scholar [Sell an Ass,] thereby signifying his
Blockish Averseness to Learning. But, my Child, if thou love Wisdom, be not
Stupid to the Sage Advice of thy Parents, nor Refractory to the Dictates of thy
Master, lest thy School fellows point and hiss at thee for a Block-head, a mere
Scholar, amongst thy Neighborhood.

A Blockish Scholar wont the Ass outstrip,
Although he is often made to feel the Whip.
39. The Coney and Spider.


A Coney being hunted out
of many Holes, did range
Into a Neighboring Sandy Field,
her Boroughing to Change;
Where meeting with a Spider, who
not satisfied in Mind,
Was seeking where to weave her Web,
that none should ever find.
So they Consult: The Spider goes
and builds within a Hall,
Where being brushed down, was killed,
by reason of the fall.
The Coney'mongst the rocks did make a nest
Where from the Hunters she does live at rest.
The MORALS.
I Cannot but observe from this, the truly Honest and Generous Spirit of an
humble and patient Man: How he will pursue the internal Peace of his Soul,
before the external Enjoyments of his Body; and Value a composed Solitary Life,
before the common Luxurious Delicacies of an infatuated Republic. Whilst the
Discontented run too and fro amidst the Venomous Streams of Infection; and
suffer themselves to be blown up like Bubbles, in the Air, to Dance a little,
and Vanish. The Distressed Coney would have stayed in her Borough had she not
been pursued by the Hunters; so, O Man! if thou art Persecuted either in Body,
or Estate, and can not stay Secure in thy Habitation, for fear of Enemies,
then have thou a lawful Call to Evade 'em by flying from one place to another,
till at last they drive thee to the Rock where thou vvilt be secured to all
Eternity. Whilst Vagabonds like the Spider are svvept away by the Wrath of
common Justice.

Contented be wherever your Lot is cast,
The Pitcher often safe goes: It Is broke at last.
An Emblem of God's Wrath, In Thunder and Lightning.


AH me, when I behold
The Heavens begin to frown,
And wrinkled fiery Sulfurous Clouds
Sends red-hot Arrows down!
When I behold the Sky
Bring Darkness 'stead of Light,
Methinks the Portion I espy
Of every damned Wight!
When Flashes thence do spring,
And naught but Flames of Fire,
And mighty Cannons thundering
Do echo forth their Dire!
Ah, sure it shows a GOD,
And that this God is Just,
Who Will Scourge the Wicked with his Rod,
And burn them up to Dust.
When I the Heavens hear
With Thunder break their way,
Ah, Lord! I am possessed with Fear,
Thou Wilt burn this Lump of Clay!
But Blessed shall those be
Who in the Lord do trust;
For they will enjoy Felicity,
And live among the Just.
A Miscellany of Divine Maxims.
Would thou be truly perfect? love God with all thy Heart, and thy Neighbor
as thy self.

Let thy eye be always upon God and thy self, and thou shall never see him
without Goodness, nor thy self without Misery.

Let us be what God will, so we be but his; and let us not be what we will our
selves, against the Will of God.

He that neglects his own Will, complies best with God's.

So love thy Neighbor upon Earth, as that thou may enjoy his love in Heaven.

Thou can not love thy Neighbor too much, but thou may too much show thy
love.

One great Argument of our love to our Neighbor, is to bear with his
Imperfections.

We should never endure to hear evil spoken of any but our selves.

We should never undervalue any person: The Workman loves not that his work
should be despised in his presence. Wherefore beware, for God is present every
where, and every person is his work.

We ought not to love our Neighbor only because he is good, or because we hope
he will be so, but because God commands us so to do.

In holy duties we should speak little, think much, but do more.

It is a great evil not to do good.

Confidence in an unfaithful Man in time of Trouble, is like a broken Tooth,
and a Foot out of Joint. Charity makes God our debtor; for the Poor are his
receivers.

Have thou an Estate, and would increase it? Divide thy riches to the Poor;
those Seeds that are scattered do increase, but hoarded up they die.

Arm thy self against a professed enemy; but he that dissembleth friendship
strikes beyond a caution, and wounds above a cure: from the one thou may
deliver thy self, but from the other, good Lord deliver thee.

The Touchstone tries Gold, and Gold tries Men.

As the Servants of God are known by their own Virtues, Humility and Charity,
so the Servants of the Devil are known by their opposite Vices, Pride and
Cruelty.

To boast is to be vain, since the greatest Conqueror; if he measure his own
Shadow, shall find it no longer than it was before his Victory.

The World is a wide Prison, and every Day an Execution-day.

Our Stomachs are common Sepulchers for Birds, Beasts, and Fish; they all die
to feed us: Lord, with how many deaths are our poor lives patched up! How full
of Death is the Life of Man!

Beware of Drink: where Drunkenness Reigns, Reason is an Exile, Virtue a
Stranger, and God an Enemy: Blasphemy is Wit, Oaths are Rhetoric, and Secrets
are Proclamations.

To shun the accidental Troubles of this Life, is to meditate on Eternity.

To have a desire to be Poor, and not to receive the inconveniences of it, is
too great Ambition: For it is to desire the honor of Poverty, and the
commodity of Wealth.

There is no better way to end happily a free spiritual Life, than daily to
begin it.

There is no reason to be given for the Fault we commit in Sin, for the Fault
would not be Sin, if it were not against Reason.

In short, the sum of all is, Fear God, and keep his Commandments; for this O
Man, is thy whole Duty, which if Sincerely performed, will terminate in eternal
Salvation

FINIS.

