TRACTS OF 1. Conscience. 2. Scandal. 3. Will Worship. 4. Superstition. 5.
Resisting the lawful Magistrate under color of Religion. 6. Sins of
Weakness. Wilfulness.
7. A Late, or, a Deathbed Repentance.


(...).

OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL, Printer to the UNIVERSITIE 1645.

The Preface.
IT is a strong presumption that that Religion is false which is apt to be made
use of for secular advantages, that those opinions have somewhat of the (...)
ingredient in them, which are produced as the ground to justify or authorize
practices, otherwise impious and infamous, There is so little Communion or
compliance betwixt God and Belial, that it is very hard even for Satan
himself, that great mpure Artificer, to prostitute or debauch any truth of
Gods, (which is really so) to that mean of vile submission of yielding it self
pliable or isntrumental to any design or interest of his. He which can be
corrupted or employed by an enemy is either not so honest or not so clear,
either not so faithful, or not so wary as might be expected. This one
consideration would prejudge a great part of the divinity of these unhappy
times, which in a perfect contrariety to the wisdom which comes from above,
Jam. 3. Or the fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5. is so far from purity,
peaceablenesse, gentleness, love, joy, long suffering, etc. that it is engaged
to own another extaction, to confess it self his creature, and progeny, whom
in the lineaments and features it so visibly resembles. Among the many
severals of this kind I have long conceived that the vulgar notions of those
four names, which these ensuing Treatises have taken confidence to examine,
have had no small part of the guilt of those fatal evils under which this
calamitous wretched Kingdom now pants a prostrate ghastly, and direful
spectacle. And consequently that the obstructing of these fountains might
possibly abate those streams and torrenes (which have taken rise from thence)
of uncharitableness first and then of blood. The mistaking of every phansy or
humor, carnal or Satanicall persuasion for Conscience (the acknowledged rule
of action) and the setting up upon too weak a stock for that high privilege of
a Good Conscience, has emboldened most of the vices of the world, (...).
Arrian. in ep.
* petrified the practical faculty, and made it insensible of any of those
stripes, or threats, or discipline, which the law of nature or of Christ has
provided for the restraint of their Subjects. And from thence it daily happens
that not only the most unchristian but unhumane practices, the most unnatural
savage barbarities of these last years, (which no parasite can flatter, or
president extenuate) are now avowed to be dictates and commands of Conscience,
and so not only reconcilable with piety, but advanced and set up for the
only measure of it, and no man allowed to pass for Conscientious which has
any remainder of Moral or Christian virtue (in the ancient notion of the word)
discernible in his actions; and so not only Zozimus his slander of
Constantine is become the real guilt of too many professors, (those sins
confidently committed by them, for which no other Religion allows any
expiation) but, beyond the malice of that false tongue, the sins themselves
resolved on as a special (...) or purgative, an act of supererogating virtue,
sufficient to sanctify any other impurities. To these so gross errors both
in opinion and practice the present height o^ animosity, and vehemence of the
flame may possibly have betrayed men; but what it should be that has so
heightened the passion, and first elevated it to this pitch of distemper, will
not be discerned any otherwise then by conjecture from the quarrels which have
been most insisted on, against the established government and discipline of the
Church, and the indifferent actions, and ceremonies, and observances either
prescribed, or customary among us; to which when no direct immediate blame or
accusation could be affixt, it has been the manner to object obliquely,
sometimes that they have been matter of Scandal, and that thought to have been
sufficiently proved, if any could be produced who have disliked them, (as if
their being displeased were to be scandalized, or one man's being angry once
without a cause, were for ever a just cause for others to be angry at that
which were of it self most innocent;) Sometimes that the crime of Will Worship
were chargeable on them, supposing first, (but not proving) Will Worship to be
a crime, and then every the least observance uncommanded (though withal as
perfectly unprohibited) by Scripture, to be the interpretation of that crime;
and sometimes that they have been Superstitious; by the equivocallnesse of that
word, first persuading themselves and others that every excess in Religion
comes under that title, and then that the uncommandednesse of any thing induces
that excess, and consequently involves in that guilt. To which three so
inauspicious (I may add Scandalous) misprisions broached by Satan, (...), to
the fall, and so truly to the offending of many in Israel, these ensuing
Treatises were designed as Antidotes or cures; to which end if they may prove
in any degree successful, the writer of them will never repent that he has
subjected them to the various and passionate censures of the many, hoping
thereby that the mature and impartial judgments of the few may be also
provoked to interpose. By whose pleasure and serious examination, whether they
shall stand or fall, they are in all humility submitted.

H. Hamond.

OF CONSCIENCE.

(...).

By H. Hamond, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, at the sign of the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1645.

OF CONSCIENCE.
Conscience. That which the Philosophers could call their Guardian Angel, and
justify the phrase by vouching none but Angelical dictates from it: That
which some good-natured Atheists did so revere that they defined the only
deity in the world, (...). Tatian.
and in proportion phansied nothing but God-like of it, is now by some
Christians (like the true God among the Heathens) worshipped in so many
corporeous shapes, that there is at length scarce any thing so vile (Fancy,
humor, passion, prepossession, the meanest worldly interest of the ambitious
or covetous designer, like the Calves, the Cats, the Crocodiles, the Onions,
the Leeks of Egypty but has the favor or luck to be mistaken for Conscience,
and receive all the respect, that I say, not adoration, that belongs to it.

1. What is the proper notion of conscience. 2. What is required to entitle a
man to a good conscience.




Conscience, is no more then Science or knowledge, (and therefore being but
once used by the Gre^k Translators of the Old Testament, Eccles. 10. 20. it is
there set to express a word which is otherwise by them commonly rendered (...)
and (...)) only with a peculiar relation added to it, as that knowledge is in
order to action. Thus Tit. 1. 15. when (...) and (...), mind and conscience are
distinguished, it is obvious to any to discern the ground of that distinction,
(...).
that former being properly the denotation of the faculty merely speculative,
or intellectual; this latter, (...).
of the practical judgment, or that whether act or faculty of the
understanding soul, which extends to practice; the Apostle by that phrase, [
the mind and conscience are defiled] meaning distinctly this, that this error
in men's judgments, (which is the defiling of their mind) carries Un-Christian
practice along with it, (which is the defiling of the practical faculty) this
Judaicall mistake in their understanding is attended with Judaizing actions in
their lives, the former apportioned to the (...), the false Judaicall
doctrines, which relate to (...) the mind, the second to the (...), the
commands of men perverting the truth, v. 14. which relate to the (...) the
Conscience.

Pet. 2. 19. This is thank-worthy, if (...), for Conscience of God a man suffer
griese, etc. i. e. if for this obedientiall practical knowledge of God (this
knowledge of truth attended with a resolution not to disobey God, though it
cost a man never so dear) he suffer g^iefe, etc.

Conscience has upon practice; One forward in the direct line, another
backward, or by way of reflection; which are ordinarily expressed by the double
office of Conscience, 1. as a cust^s or monitor, advising and instructing and
keeping us to our duty; 2. as a witness testifying to our selves and to God
what we have done; which is in plainer terms no more but this, That there are
two sorts of Conscience; 1. Conscience of duty to be performed, or full
persuasion that such a thing ought to be done, or not to be done by me, a being
resolved of the necessity or unlawfulness of any thing, and 2 conscience of
having performed, or not performed it, a knowing or judging my self to have
done well or ill. And under these two notions, all the severalls in the New
Testament, (and the one sole place of the apocryphal books of the Old) will
be contained, If you please, you may see how.

Romans 13. 5. You must be subject (to the Supreme powers, v. 1.) not only for
wrath, i. e. fear or danger of punishment, the effect of wrath (the Magistrate
being Gods Minister, an avenger for wrath, or punishment to him that does
evil, v. 4.) but also (...), for or because of Conscience, i. e. because it is
the command of God, and consequently that which all interiours ( every soul)
may, if they be not wilfully blind, know to be their duty, [ to be thus
subject.]

Cor. 8. 7. For some with conscience of the Idol, i. e. being resolved in mind,
that it is not lawful to eat or taste of any (...) or (...), part or portion
of the Idol-feast (whether (...), at the idol table, or having bought it at
the Shambles, as it seems, was the fashion for those (...) to be sold there at
second hand c. 10. 25.) accounting it unlawful to eat any meat consecrated to
that use, do yet eat that which is of this nature, and by so doing, their
weak i. e. uninstructed conscience is polluted, i. e. they sin against their
conscience, do that which they are persuaded they may not do, which although
it be never so innocent a harmless thing in it self (an idol being simply
nothing) yet to them which do it, when they think it unlawful ( and all have
not knowledge, says he in the beginning of the verse, i. e. are not
sufficiently instructed in their duty) it is pollution or sin, according to
the forementioned place Tit. 1. 15. To the pure all things are pure [ all
things] i. e. all things of that nature of which he there speaks, though in
themselves indifferent, [ are pure] i. e. may lawfully be used [ by the pure]
i. e. by them which are rightly instructed, but to the polluted and unbeleevers
( i. e. to them that are misled by Jewish fables, or by the dogmatizing of
false teachers, and brought to believe things to be prohibited by God, which
are not prohibited) to them that are guilty of this kind of Judaisme, and (as
it is interpretative) unbelief there is nothing pure, but their mind and
conscience are polluted, both their understanding is in an error, taking
falsity for truth, and their practical resolution is sinful also, Tr. of
Wilworship.
nay obliged to sin, which way soever they turn themselves, whether they
abstain superstitiously, when they are not bound by God to abstain, (which is
the sin of those that are subject to ordinances, Col. 2. 20. of which I have
spoken at large in another place) or whether they abstain not, when they are
persuaded that they ought to abstain, which is sin against conscience.

impure (for to such (...) nothing is pure) they are, as long as they remain
so, obliged to sin, which way soever they take to, abstain or not abstain.
For though in things indifferent and uncommanded, simply to abstain were no
sin, yet then to abstain (...), as from a thing abominable or unlawful, is
both by Scripture and the ancient Councels, in case of marriage and meats,
every where condemned as sinful: and yet on the other side to eat without, or
against Faith, i. e. being doubtful whether it be lawful or no, or being
persuaded it is unlawful is sin, (says the Apostle) and there is great
necessity to such of seeking, (and in others great charity of helping them to)
(...) instruction, or right information in this case, which is the only cure
for this unfortunate malady.

conscience of him that is weak, or (which is the same) v. 7. and v. 12. the
weak conscience] signifies the false persuasion of him that is in an error,
an erroneous conscience, weakness noting sickness in the Scripture style John
5. 14. 1 Cor. 11 30. and error being the disease or sickness of the soul,
and that with a little improvement growing destructive and mortiferous; as in
case he that has that erroneous sick conscience, do act somewhat againsgt
conscience, and so add sin unto error, for then (...) v. 11. that sick man
dies, perishes of that disease. Soch. 10. 25, 27, 28, 29. the word Conscience
is still in the same sense, for conscience or consideration of duty, and so 1
Pet. 2. 19. forementioned.

Pet. 3. 21. where Baptism is called (...) the answer of a good conscience to
God, the good conscience signifies conscience rightly instructed in its duty,
as in baptizing those of full age it is supposed to be; which Conscience is
then to answer and consent to all Gods proposals in baptism (or the ministers
in Gods stead) such as [wilt thou forsake the Devil, etc.] and so the words
will be interpreted in a sense proportionable to that of denying ungodly lusts,
Tit. 2. 12. which there the appearing of Christ is said to teach us. For as
lust proposes ungodly questions to us, which we are bound to deny; so God in
baptism is supposed to propose good questions to us, which we are bound to
grant, and stipulate the performance of them, and that is the (...) the answer
of a good conscience to God or to his questions proposed in baptism, after the
manner of ancient pacts among the Romans made by way of question and answer, as
part of the ritus solen^s or formalities of them.

acquitting or 2 condemning or 3 considered in a third notion common to both
those, passing sentence in general) so shall you find it in many other places,
and indeed in all the rest which we have not hitherto named.

acquitteth, you have it Act. 23. 1. I have lived, (or behaved my self in all
my conversation toward men (...) in all my politic, or public relations)
with or in all good conscience, in such a manner, as I cannot excuse my self
of any thing done contrary to my Christian profession, or dignity of my
Apostolicoll calling. So 1 Cor. 9. 12. the Testimony of our Conscience is
expressed by what follows, that in simplicity etc. we had our conversation in
the world. So good conscience is taken 1 Timothy 1. 5. and 19. and 3. 9. and 2 Timothy 1. 3. Heb. 13. 18. 1 Pet. 3. 16. but above all you have a special place
belonging to this first branch of the second in Act. 24. 16. [(...)] we render
it a Conscience void of offense, the meaning is, a confidence and assurance
that he has done nothing subject so much as to the censure of having
scandalized others; for Saint Paul being there accused by the Jews v. 5. 6.
for 3 crimes, sedition, heresy, and profaning of the Temple, he answers to the
first v. 12. to the second v. 14. to the third v. 16. 18. and his being
purified in the Temple after the Jewish manner he makes an evidence of his
innocence in that particular, a proof of his not having scandalized any Jew,
which to have done would have been a fault in him, whose office it was to
become all things to all men, that he might gain or save all, and not to
discourage or deter any who might be gained by compliance; and the doing so, is
it which is called being (...) 1 Cor. 10. 32. giving none offense to the Jews,
the very word in the place of the Acts.

John 8. 9. Convicted by their conscience, or reproved some for one sin, some
for another. So by intimation Heb. 9. 9. where it is said of the Legal
sacrifices that they could not make perfect as pertaining to Conscience, where
the word [(...)] rendered to make perfect, signifies in the sacred idiom [to
consecrate,] to make a priest, whose office being (...) to draw near to God,
proportionably (...) to perfect or consecrate as pertaining to conscience
signifies to give access with boldness to God, by taking off that guilt which
formerly lay upon their conscience, the same that v. 14. is called, to purge
the conscience from dead works, to wash off that guilt of sin past, which
hinders their approach to God, obstructs all entrance to their prayers (for we
know that God hears not sinners, Joh. 9. 31. and Is. 1. 15.) whereupon it is
observable, that Heb. 13. 18. when he bespeaks their prayers for him, he adds
this reason to encourage them to do so. For we trust we have a good
conscience, that good conscience being necessary there to have other men's
prayers heard for them, as here to give themselves access to God in prayer. So
Heb. 10. 2. Conscience, or conscienciousnes of sins, and v. 22. Evil
conscience, and so Wisd. 17. 11. there is mention of wickedness condemned by
her own witness and pressed by conscience.

Romans 2. 15. Romans 9. 1. 2 Cor. 4. 2. and 5. 11. and 1 Timothy 4. 2. all clear
enough without the help of our paraphrase to add light to them.



which walk (...) exactly or conscientiously, must (...) walk by rule, Phil.
3. 16. and (...) have their eye or thought always upon that one thing, their
rule of direction, or else be they never such (...) in the beginning of that
verse, such forward proficients, their end may be perdition v. 19. This when
once we have done, the difficulty will soon vanish.

thesi I never heard any doubt of, (though many of our actions look otherwise
in hypoth^si) that law is this only rule; (...) and (...), rule and law being
words of the same importance, and nothing fit or proper to regulate our
actions, but that which the lawgiver, to whom obedience must be paid, has
thought fit to rule them by. To which purpose it is ordinarily observed that
(...), Sin, or ab^rration from that rule by which we ought to walk (for so
that word naturally signifies) is by Saint John 1 Epist. 3. 4. defined (...)
which we render a trangression of the law. I^ which place of Saint John, though
the truth is, (...) and (...) denoting more then the bare commission of sin
in that Author generally, viz. the wilful perpetration of it, and an
indulgence in, and habit of so doing) the word (...) and (...) must
proportionably also signify not only transgressing, but wilful habitual
contemning the Law, b^^ng an exlox, or without law (as the Idolatrous Atheist
is said to be without God in the world) i. e. without any account or respect of
it, (and so (...) Joh. 31. 3. notes the greatest degree of sinfulness, we
render in workers of iniquity, and so very frequently in the Septuagint we
find (...), where we render the Hebrew by mischief) yet still the observation
stands good, that law is the rule, in aberration from which all sin consists,
and so (...) is (...) in both senses, the least degree of sin a deviation
from the law, and a malicious contentious sinning a malicious contemptuous
deviation, or transgression, and so Saint Paul has also resolved it, that
where ^here is no law, there is no transgression, no (...), Romans 4. 15. no
going awry, when there is no rule proposed to go by.

world b^come so necessary to be thus farther cleared; Two things there are
which will hence inevitably follow, the first Negative, the second Positive;
The first or the Negative, that Whatsoever undertakes to direct, or guide our
actions, to tell us our duty, that this we must, that we may not do, and has
not some law, (in force, and still obligatory to us) to authorize those
directions by, is not Conscience, whatsoever it is.



those laws in the members) which Conscience has to intellectual ( those
laws of the mind) and then, as Aristotle says, that in those creatures which
have not reason, fancy supplies the place of reason; so they which have not,
or will not have conscience to direct them, fancy most commonly gets into its
place. Or

Aristotle has defined in his Rhetoricks, being not (...), according to
knowledge or conscience, Romans (...)
10. 2. for the Hebrew word, as I told you, is rendered by those two words
promiscuously, (...) and (...), knowledge and conscience. Or

that black spirit; as it is, (or of some thing as bad in effect) infallibly,
whenever Rebellion, Sedition, Murder, Rapine, Hatred, Envy,
Uncharitableness, Lying, Swearing, Sacrilege, etc. come to us under the
disguise of Religion and Conscience; and therefore the Spirits must be searched
whether they be of God, or of the Devil; and no surer way to do it, then by
these and the like Symptoms, these fruits and productions of that infernal
Spirit, which so perfectly represent and own their parent, that none but blind
or mad men or daemoniacks can believe them in earnest to come from God. Or

having men's persons in admiration] or by the earliness of its representation,
being imbibed and taken in first, swallowed and digested before the truth was
offered to us, and then it is prejudice or prepossession, and this again
always assisted by the force of that old axiom, [ Intus existens etc.] and by
that which is natural to all habits, to be hardly moveable, and yet further
improved sometimes by pride and obstinacy, always by self-love, which makes
us think our own opinions ( i. e. which we are already possessed of) the truest;
which in this case is in effect to think our luck the best luck, and the same
which was observed in one worst sort of Heathens, who, whatsoever they saw
first in the morning, worshipped that all the day after; a choosing of
persuasions as country men choose Valentines, that which they chance to meet
with first after their coming abroad.

Negative or first thing.

Christian law is the rule of Conscience for Christian actions; the law of
reason, or moral law, for moral; the law national, municipall, or local,
for civil; the natural, law of all creatures, for natural actions; and the
law of scandal, (a branch of the Christian law) for matters of scandal; and
the law of liberty, for indifferent free actions. And as it is very irregular,
and unreasonable to measure any action by a rule that belongs not to it, to try
the exactness of the circle by the square, which would be done by the
compass, and in like manner to judge the Christiannesse of an action, by the
law of natural reason, which can only be judged by its conformity with the
law of Christ, superior to that of nature; So will there be no just pretense
of conscience: against anything, but where some one or more of these laws are
producible against it; but on the other side, even in the lowest sort of
actions, if they be regulated by the law proper to them, and nothing done
contrary to any superior law, even by this God shall be glorified, 1 Cor. 10.
31. a kind of glory resulting to God from that readiness of submission and
subordination of every thing to its proper rule, and law, to which the great
Creator has subjected it, and of all laws to that supreme transcendent one,
the law of Christ. And though some touches there are in the Scripture of each
of these laws, some sibrae or strings of them discernibly there, so far,
that there is nothing almost under any of the heads sorementioned, but by the
Scripture some general account may be given of it, and again, though that of
Scripture be the supreme law of all, and nothing authorizeable by any
inferior law, which is contradicted or prohibited by that, yet is not that of
Scripture such a particular Code or Pandect of all laws, as that every thing
which is commanded by any other law, should be found commanded there, or be
bound to prove its self justifiable from thence, any further then that it is
not there prohibited, or thereby justly concluded to be unlawful.

i. e. where no command interposes,) may keep me from doing what I doubt, yet
it ought not to be of that weight, as to keep me from my lawful Superiors
lawful command, because that very command is a sufficient ground to supersede
my doubting, when I have no plain prohibition of Scripture to the contrary,
(which in this case I am supposed not to have, for if I had, Then, first, it
were not a lawful command, and secondly, I should not doubt but be assured) it
being my duty, and part of my Christian meekness, in doubtful matters to take
my resolution from those whom God has placed over me, and it being the sin
of dogmatizing to affirm any thing for me or others to do, which some law of
God, etc. still in force, does not prohibit; which sin being added to that
other of disobedience to my lawful Superiors, will sure never be able to make
that commence virtue, which was before so far from any pretentions to that
title.

Aerodius's Pandectae rerum ab omni aevo judicaturum, and all the Schoolmens
and Casuists volumes, de legibus, de jure and justitia, and on the Decalogue,
would be but imperfect parts of this; I shall give you but one taste or (...)
of it, by which the Reader will be persuaded to spare me, or rather himself
that trouble.

piety, and love of our brethren in general, and more particularly of Faith,
Hope, Charity, Repentance; selfe-denyall, taking up the cross, etc. of
humility, meekness, mercifulness, peaceablenesse, obedience to superiors,
patience, contentedness, and the like; and the relation of a Christian being a
grand transcendent relation, there is no action imaginable, but may either in
respect of the matter, or motive, or principle, or circumstances, offend
against one of these, (and then, malum ex quolibet defectu, the least of these
defects blemisheth it) and so conscience directed by that rule or law, will
direct me either to do it, or not to do it in that manuer, and then it is not
any complaynce with, or agreeableness to any or all other laws, which will
make this action Christian, which has any such notable defect or blemish in
it; Not to pursue this any farther, having thus named it, and showed you the
vastness of the sea it leads to, it will suffice to our present design to
tell you, that from what is said these 3 corollaries, to omit many others, will
be deducible.

profaneness into piety, sacrilege into justice or holiness, rebellion into
obedience, faction into humility, perjury, or taking of unlawful oaths into
religion, rapine into contentedness, inhumanity into mercifulness, adultery,
fornication, divorces, (save in case of adultery) or any uncleanness into
purity, laboring to shake a Kingdom, (to remove the cross from my own
shoulders to another man's) into taking up of the Cross; but contrariwise, if
it be truly and univocally Conscience of duty, it will tell me that every one of
these foul titles belongs to every such action (the Scripture being so clear
in these particulars, that there is no place or excuse for ignorance or
mistake) and by setting before me the terrors of the Lord, persuade me not to
venture on any one such action upon any terms; or if I have ventured, it will
smite and wound me for it, and drive me to timely repentance; or if it do not,
it is either a cauterized insensate conscience, a reprobate mind, or else some of
these Images, which even now I mentioned, mistaken for Conscience; or if it be
a full persuasion of mind, that what I thus am about, I am obliged to do, (if
that be a possible thing in such matters and under so much light) it is then in
the calmest style an erroneous Conscience, which is so far from excusing me
(unless in case of ignorance truly invincible, which here is not imaginable)
that it brings upon me the most unparalleld infelicity in the world, an
obligation to sin which way soever I turn my self, on one side appearing
and lying at my door the guilt of committing that sin which I have so
mistaken, and on the other the guilt of omitting that (though sin) which my
Conscience represented to me as duty; and nothing but repentance and
reformation of judgment first, and then of practice, will be able to retrive
the one or the other.

Conscience which is so divided from, and contrary to knowledge) yet to scruple
and interpose doubts most tremblingly, and most conscientiously in matters of
indifferency; not so much as pretended to be against the word of God, (and so
within the law of christian liberty, that they may be done if he will) and yet
over and above their natural indisterency commanded by that authority, in
subjection to which the christian virtue of obedience consists; and all this
either first upon no ground of conscience at all, but only that it is contrary
to their Phansy, their Humor, their Prepossessions; or Secondly because it is
a restraint, upon their christian liberty, which yet Christ never forbid to be
restrained quoad exercitium, as far as belongs to the exercise of it, but
has permitted sometime the care of not offending the weak brother, i. e.
Charity, and sometime Obedience, to lawful superiors, to restreine it, (for
if in things indifferent they may not restreine, there can no obedience be
paid to them;) or Thirdly because they are offensive (though not to them, yet)
to others, who are persuaded they are unlawful. Whereas I that persuasion of
those others is erroneous, and not sufficient to justify disobedience in
themselves, much less in other men, in case of lawful humane command, And 2
that their censuring of such indifferent actions, i. e. being angry without a
cause, may be greater matter of scandal, and so more offensive to others, and
more probable to work upon them to bring them by that example to be so angry
also, then the doing that indifferent action, mistaken by others, and condemned
for unlawful, would be to bring them to transcribe that reprobated samplar, i.
e. to do what they thus condemn; all men being far more apt and inclinable
to break out into passions, then into acts against conscience, and so more
likely to be scandalized or offended, or ensnared, by following the former,
then the latter example, to sin (for company or after another man) by
censuring whom he censures, which is being angry without a cause; then by doing
what they are advised and resolved they ought not to do, which is sinning
against conscience. Or fourthly, because they are against their conscience to
do, whilst yet they produce no law of God or man against them, and so in
effect confess there is nothing in them against conscience; unless, as before
was noted, they wilfully aequivocate in the word Conscience; which will and
skill of theirs, as it will not make any thing, unlawful, which before was
indifferent, so will it not conclude ought, save only this, that they which are
so a^tificious to impose on others, and form scruples where there were none,
would not be thought the likeliest men to swallow gross sins under the
disguise of virtues, or if they do so, will have least right to that only
Antidote of invincible ignorance to digest them.

some lighter less important matters (if it may be supposed excusable, ^s a
weakness of an uninstructed mind, joined with that good symptom of
tenderness of quick sense, yet) can never hope to be accepted by God by way of
commutation or expiation for grosser sins, so that he that falls foulely in
any confessed sin, should fare the better at the great day of account, or be
in less danger of being cast out of Gods favor for the present, because he is
over-scrupulous in other things: For sure this were a strange way of
supererogation to pay one arreare to God by running into another with him, to
discharge a debt by owing more. And yet this is an error which may seem worth
the pains of preventing, it being so notoriously seen, that some men, which
profess to have care of their ways, and must in charity be believed to have
so, go on confidently in grievous sins, which they cannot but know will damn
without repentance, (the sentence of not inheriting the Kingdom of God, Gal.
5. being so distinct, and punctual, and absolute, and indispensable against
them) and yet have no Antidote to rely on for the averting that danger, but
only this of their exactness and scrupulousness in things indifferent; which
if they shall say they do not confide in, they are then obliged, in
conscience, and charity to their brethren (who may follow them to this
precipice) either to give over hoping, or to set to purifying, without which
there is no true ground of hope. This hint puts me in mind that there is
another part of my design still behind, belonging to the second notion of
conscience, to examine

particular single performances, or to the whole state of life and actions. To
the first there is no more required, but that that particular action be both
for matter and circumstance regulated by the rule, or rules which are proper to
it, and have nothing contrary to any superior transcendent rule. As that my
meal be with sobriety and thanksgiving, my alms with cheerfulness,
liberality, discretion, done in gratitude and obedience to God, and
mercifulness to my brother, without reflection on my own gain or praise in
this world. But for the Good Conscience, which belongs to the whole state of
life and actions, which is called a good Conscience in all things, Heb. 13. 18.
or a good Conscience consisting in having a good conversation in all things,
(for so the punctation in the Greek will direct rather to render it, (...).
[ we have a good conscience, willing to live well, (or have an honest
conversation) in all things] there the difficulty will be greater. And yet two
Texts there are which tend much to the clearing and disinvolving of that one, 1
Pet. 3. 16. where (...), Good Conscience in the beginning of the verse, is
explained in the close by (...), a good conversation in Christ, or a good
christian conversation, or such as now through Christ, by the purport of the
second covenant may and shall be accepted for good. Where the word [
conversation] denoting first the actions and behavior both toward God and man,
and secondly, the whole course and frame of those actions, (wherein it seems a
good conscience consists,) cannot better be explained then either by the
Apostles, (...), an accurate exact walking, Ephesians. 1. 15. or the phrase to Titus,
c. 2. 12. living soberly and righteously and godly in this present world; the
first respecting our duty to our selves, or actions, as private men; the
second, our duty to our brethren, in our more public capacities; the third,
our duty to God as creatures, men, and Christians; or Saint Lukes character of
Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6. Walking in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord blameless; Walking Blameless, In all: Universal
sincere obedience, (not entire or perf^ct without ever sinning, but) considered
with the rules of (...), or moderation of strict law, (which is now part of the
(...), the Gospel-law, by which a Christian is to be tried, as equity is a part
of the municipall law of this land; Such is mercy for frailties, and
infirmities, and grosser lapses recovered and retracted by repentance) now
under the Gospel, so as to be acceptable to God in Christ; which was intimated
(as in the (...), in Christ, 1 Pet. 3. so) in the former part of that verse,
and their character (...), righteous before God: Which phrase [ Before God]
has a double intimation worth observing in this place, first of the
perseverance or perpetuity of that righteousness (as opposed to the temporary
of the hypocrite) for the phrase (...) [ before him] refers to the show bread
of old, Exodus 25. 30. which was to be set before God always; and therefore is
sometime called (...) the bread of faces, or (...) bread before his face,
literally (...), before him, and sometimes (...) perpetual bread, and
secondly, of the acceptance or reception in the sight of God, for that again
was the end of setting the bread always before God, that God looking on it
might accept them; and so righteousness before God, is such righteousness as
God will please in the Gospel to accept of, as when visiting the fatherless,
etc. Jac. 1. 27. is called, religion pure and undefiled before God the Father;
it notes such a degree of unblemisht purity, not as excluded all sin, but as
God in Christ would (or has promised to) accept of. And the same phrase
therefore is in another place of the same Chapter, Luke 1. 75. rendered by our
Church in the Gospel for Midsummer day by these words, such as may be
acceptable for him.

it is such a continued good conversation as God now under the Gospel promises
to accept of; the only difficulty behind will be, what that is which God
promises to accept of; To which end, it will be very isntrumental to take in
that other place which I promised, and that is that forementioned, Heb. 13. 18.
where the Good Con^cience is evidenced (or the ground of confidence that he
has a good conscience, demonstrated) by this [(...)] willing, or resolving, or
endeavoring to live honestly, or to have honest conversation in all things.
From whence the only thing which I desire to collect is this, That the sincere
resolution or endeavor to live honestly in all things (which I remember, one
of our ancientest Church-writers Saint Cyrill of Jerusalem calls, (...), and
opposes it to (...), works) is the Scripture nomination of a good Conscience,
or the (...), that great treasure of confidence to all which have it; that
ground of mature persuasion for any, that he has, or shall by God be allowed,
and acknowledged to have a good conscience.

minimum quod sic of this sincere resolution, or endeavor, although that, I
confess, will be hard if not impossible, to define in such a manner, as shall
come home to every particular, (the proportions of more or less, knowledge or
strength, the inequality of the talents of illuminating and assisting grace
still interposing and making a variation) yet will it not be matter of much
difficulty to give some general advertisements, and (...), which will be
acknowledged as soon as mentioned, and being put together, and by each man
single applied to his particular case, by way of self-examination, will be able
to tell him in some measure, whether he has a good conscience or no. And the
first of these will be, That

sorrow, (...).
but a through change) are reconcilable with a good conscience. The truth of
which is clear, first, because the Gospel allows place for repentance, and
promises rest to the heavy laden, so he come unto Christ, and mercy to him that
confesses and forsakes. Secondly, because the sincerity of resolution and
endeavor now, (which is all that is required to a present good conscience) is
reconcilable with past sins, even of the largest size. Thirdly, because Saint
Paul himself, which was once a Saul, can yet say confidently, that he has a
good conscience. And fourthly, because (which I shall a little enlarge on) the
sin against the holy Ghost, which alone is by the Gospel made incapable of
remission, is, as I conceive, no act, no nor course of any special sin, but
a state of final impenitence, a continued persevering resistance of all those
saving methods which are consequent to the descent, and are part of the office
of the holy Ghost.

Matthew and Saint Mark upon occasion of that speech of the Jews, that Christ
cast out Devils, by the Prince of Devils, which was clearly a blaspheming or
speaking contumeliously against Christ himself, or the son of man, and there
is no passage in the Text which can conclude that that speech of theirs was by
Christ called the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, but rather the contrary
that it was a blasphemy only against the son of man; for it is apparent that
Christ Mal. 12. 15. for the space of six verses sets himself to convince them
of the falsity of that speech (which probably he would not have done, if they,
to whom he sp^ke had been in an irrecoverable irreversible estate of blasphemy.
For that he should take such pains only to leave them unexcusable, 1. there
was no great need, in this case they were so already. 2. it is a mistake to
think that Christ does so at any time, they are bowels of mercy and not
designs of mischieving, or accumulating their sin, and judgments, which
incline him to call and knock, and labor to convince sinners) and having done
that, does both invite them to repentance by showing them the possibility of
pardon yet, and give them an admonition able to shake them out of all
impenitence, by telling them the danger which attended, if the only last method
of working on them which was yet behind, did not prosper with or work upon
them, This is the importance of that 31 and 32 verse concerning the speaking a
word, i. e. standing out against the son of man on one side, and the Holy
Ghost on the other; the sum of which is this, there shall be by the coming of
the Holy Ghost a possibility of pardon and means of reformation for those that
resist and hold out and even crucify Christ (as by the coming of Christ, there
was for those that should believe on him, though they had formerly lived
disobedient unto God the Father, resisted those methods of mercy used on them
under the old Testament) for them that speak a word. i. e. by an Hebraisme do
an action (of affront, of injury, of contumely) against Christ, yea that resist
and believe not on him, but conceive and affirm him to cast out Devils by the
power of Beclzebub (which was as contumelious a thing as could be said of him)
but when Christ shall be taken from the earth, and the Holy Ghost shall be sent
down to convince the world of that great sin of crucifying Christ, and to
s^ttle in the Church of God such an orderly use of all Gospell-meanes that may
tend to the bringing sinners to repentance (the use both of the word and
sacrament and censures and all other things necessary to that great end of
working on the most contumacious) that if this prevail not, there is little
hope left of ever working on such perverseness, then it is to be resolved,
that those that thus stand out against all those saving methods of Gods last
economy, shall be left incapable of any good, of any whether means of
yet-farther working on them, or of pardon either in the Church or in heaven,
there being no more persons in the Godhead now behind (unless we will change
the christians Trinity into Pythagorasses (...)) nor consequently means in the
providence of God, for the reducing of, or obtaining mercy for such. By this it
will appear that this blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is not any one act no
nor habit of sin (particularly not that speaking against Christ there, which
you will also guess by Saint Luke, who mentions not that speech of theirs
concerning his casting out Devils by the Prince of Devils, and yet sets down
this speech of Christ, of the irremissibility of this blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, Luke 12. 10. which argues that this has no near relation to that)
but a final holding out against, and resisting the whole office of the Holy
Ghost, and all those gracious methods consequent to it.

any that repents to find pardon and mercy, which is sufficient for the
confirmation of my present proposition.

No peace to such wicked, says my God, and it is as true that the recovery of
such a man out of the grave of rottenness, that Lazarstate in sin, is a
miracle of the first magnitude, a work of greatest difficulty (Christ groans
at the raising of him that was 4 days dead and putrified in the grave) and
costs the sinner much dearer to be raised out of it. Saul is struck down in
his march toward Damascus, blind and trembling before his conversion; but yet
still when this conversion is wrought, he may have a good Conscience what ever
his foregoing sins were.

And although the Apostles Censure Heb. 6. 6. and 10. 26. light yet heavier
upon those who after the knowledge of the truth and gust of the life to come,
and participation of the holy spirit relapse to their former sins, it being
there affirmed that there is no possibility to renew them, (...).
or (as the Greeks read it) for them to renew or recover to repentance, and
consequently the sacrifice for sin [(...)] no longer belonging to or
remaining for them, yet does not this hinder the truth of the present
proposition; for 1 those places to the Hebrews belong not to the sins of the
unregenerate life, which only now we speak of, but of the relapse after the
knowledge of the truth, 2. even in those places speaking of those sins, the
doctrine is not, that there shall be any difficulty of obtaining pardon for
them upon repentance, (for the Subject of the Apostles Propositions is the
(...) and (...) men considered exclusively to repentance, as abiding in sin
unreformed impenitent, and to such we design not to allow mercy) but that this
is so great a grieving and quenching of the spirit of God, that it becomes
very difficult, and in ordinary course impossible for them that are guilty of
it to repent, (...), (...) again to recover to repentance: It being just and
ordinary with God upon such sins of those to whom he has given grace, to
withdraw that grace again, according to his method and economy of providence
expressed in the parable of the talents, [ from him that has not made use of the
grace or talent given, shall be taken away even that which he hath] and Wisd.
1. 5. the holy spirit of discipline will not abide where unrighteousness
comes in; and so being thus deprived of that grace, it is consequently
impossible that those should (...), in a neutrall sense, renew and recover, or
in an active reciprocal renew or recover themselves to repentance, though yet
for God to give a new stock of grace it is not impossible, but only a thing
which he has not by revealed promise obliged himself to do; and therefore
whether he will do it or no, is merely in his own hand and dispositive power,
and that which no man has ground to hope and title to challenge from him. All
which notwithstanding our present proposition stands firm, that where there is
repentance, or true through change, those former retracted acts or habits are
reconcilable with good Conscience.

Sins of weakness of all kinds, whether first, of ignorance, or secondly, of
natural infirmity, the one for want of light, the other for want of grace, or
thirdly, of sudden surreption, such as both by the law of [ Si quis
praecipiti calore] in the Code of Justinian, and by the municipal laws of most
nations, are matter of extenuation to some crimes, to discharge them from
capital punishment, at least to make them capable of pardon, or fourthly, of
daily continual incursion, either for want of space to deliberate at all, or
because it is morally impossible to be upon the guard to be deliberate always,
( opere in longo ^as est obrepere somnum) or fistly, which through levity of
the matter passes by undiscerned, and the like, are irreconcilable with a good
conscience, because again, be a man never so sincerely resolute and
industrious in endeavor to abstain from all sin, yet as long as he carries
flesh about him, (which is such a principle of weakness, that ordinarily in
the New Testament, the word flesh, is set to signify weakness) such
weaknesses he will be subject to, such frailties will be sure to drop from him.
This, I remember, Parisiensis illustrates handsomely, first, by the similitude
of an armed man provided with strength and prowess, and wrestling with another
in lubrico, on a slippery ground, who though neither weapons nor strength nor
courage fail him, yet may he very probably ^all, the slipperinesse of the
footing will betray him to that; or secondly by an horseman mounted on an
unmanaged or tender-mouth'd horse, who cannot with all his skill and caution
secure himself: from all misadventures, the beast may upon a check come over
with him, or getting the bit into the mouth (...) into the enemies quarters; or
thirdly, by a City that is provided for a siege with works, and men, and
victuals, and ammunition, and yet by a treach^rous party within may be betrayed
into the enemies hands; there is a principle of weakness within like that
slippery pavement, that tendermouthed beast, that insidious party, which will
make us still liable to such miscarriages, and nothing in this contrary either
to courage or diligence, to resolution, or endeavor. And* for such as these
frailties, ignorances, infirmities, etc. So they be labored against, and the
means of preventing or overcomming them sincerely used (which if it be done,
you shall find them daily wain in you, and if they do not so in some measure,
you have reason to suspect, and to double your diligence) there is sure mercy
in Christ to be had, obtaineable, by daily confession, and sorrow, and prayer
for forgiveness of trespasses) without any complete conquest achieved over
them in this life. It being Saint Paul's affirmation, very exactly and
critically set down, Romans 5. 6. that Christ (...), we being weak, dyed for
the ungodly, to note the universal benefit of his death for such weak ones and
such sins as these to which mere weakness betrays them. The very doctrine
which from that text at the beginning of our reformation our Reverend Bishop
Martyr did assert in his excellent Preface to his explication of the
commandments. Hooper.


Paul's exhortation Romans 15. 1. We that are strong, says he, must bear the
weaknesses, (...), of them which are not strong, (...), and not please our
selves, for v. 3. Christ did not so, but etc. which reason sure must come home
to both parts, the affirmative as well as the negative (or else the Logic will
not be good) and so the affirmative be that Christ bare the infirmities of the
weak; and so again v. 7. [(...)] applied to the same matter he took us up when
we were tous fallen. I might add more, but I hope rather that I have said too
much in so plain a point, and abundantly evinced the irreconcileablenesse of
such frailties with a good conscience.

The lusting of the flesh against the spirit is reconcilable with a good
conscience, so it be in him that walks in the spirit, obeys the desires and
dictates of that, and fulfilleth not the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5. 16, 17.
There is no spiritually good thing that a man ever does in his life, but the
flesh has some mutinyings, lustings, and objections against it, there being
such a contrariety betwixt the commands of Christ and the desires of the flesh,
that no man, which has those two within him, does the things that he would.
(For so it is, (...)) (...) that you do not, not that you cannot do) [ The
things that he would] ( i. e. the things, which either he resolves to do, or
takes delight in) those he does not, i. e. either purely without some mixture,
or still without some opposition of the contrary, or (as again the place may
be rendered) this opposition of these two one against another tends to this,
that we may not do, or to hinder us from doing every thing that we would, as
indeed we should do, were there not that opposition within our own breasts.
This is the meaning of that 17 verse, which notwithstanding it follows verse
18. that if we be led by the spirit, if that be victorious over the contrary
pretender (as it may, though the other lust against it) if the production be not
works of the flesh, adultery, etc. v. 19. but the fruit of the spirit love,
peace, etc. v. 22. against such there is no law, no, condemnation, no
accusation of conscience here, or hereafter.

this lusting of the flesh against the spirit in them that are led by the
spirit, Gal. 5. and the warring of the law in the members against the law in
the mind, which brings into captivity to the law of sin, i. e. to it self,
Romans 7. For those in whom that latter is to be found, are there said to be
carnal, sold under sin (as a slave was wont sub hasta to be sold) and so
(...) to be led by the flesh and fulfill the lusts of the flesh, which is of
all things most unreconcileable with that man's state, against whom there is no
condemnation in Christ, Romans 8. 1. and so with a good Conscience.

mind, or the law moral, of the spirit, or the law Christian, be sufficient
to excuse that action or habitual course which is committed and lived in, in
opposition to both of these, or while both of these check and contradict, then
sure are sins against conscience become (if not the most excusable sins, yet)
the more excusable for this, that they are against conscience; that woulding or
contending of the mind, or the law of the mind being no other but the dictate
of the instructed conscience, (in them which know the law, Romans 7. 1. which he
that obeyes not, but follows the law or command of sin against it, has no^
sure a good conscience, in our second sense as that signifies a Conscience of
well-doing or doing nothing against rule of Conscience, for that this man in
terminis is supposed to do.

i. e. whether it be reconcilable, or unreconcileable with a good Conscience.
And that is the single Commission of some act of known sin, which has not
the Apology of weakness to excuse it, and yet is not indulged or persisted, or
continued in, (for of those that are so, you shall hear anon in the 8
Proposition) but without delay retracted by humiliation and reformation; For
the stating and ^atisfying of which it will be necessary first, to observe that

First, has in it self a being, and so is capable of a notion abstracted from
the retractation of it. Yea secondly, is a work of some time, and though it be
never so suddenly retracted by repentance, yet some space there is before that
retraction; and if we speak of that time or space, there is no doubt, but that
act, first, is contrary to good conscience, and contracts a guilt, and
consequent to that, the displeasure of God and obligation to punishment, which
nothing but repentance can do away; yea and secondly, is a natural means of
weakening that habit of good, of sauciating and wounding the soul, and for that
time putting it in a bloody direful condition, and should God before
repentance strike, for ought we know there would be no remission, and so,
fearful would be the end of that soul.

Ambroses expression, qui cum ceciderint, quandam tenent quietis and patientiae
disciplinam, are taught, when they fall in the rac^, not to strive or endeavor
to get up again, lie still on the ground with great stillness and patience)
walk not after the flesh, To. 8. ^. Then presently is he set right again in
Gods savor, upon (performance of the solemnities, as it were, payment of the
fees of the Court) humiliation, contrition, confession, and lowly supplications
to God for pardon in Christ, and so then to him thus repaired there is no
condemnation; beside the forementioned effects that attended that sin at the
time there is no future arrear behind in the other world.

find not any threat in Scripture that God will, upon this provocation of one
single act not persisted in, presently withdraw all grace, but we have reason
to hope what the Article of our Church supposes, that in this case he leaves
sufficient grace to enable that child of his, that thus falls, by that his
grace to return again.

Heb. 6. 6. seem to any to withstand this, the answer will be prompt and easy,
by observing that the word (...), there [ the fallers away] signifies more then
some one single act of sin presently retracted again, even a general
Apostacy in their practice, (if not in their faith) a return to their former
unregenerate sins, (as the phrase (...), [ they being entangled are overcome]
notes 2 Pet. 2. 20. a place perfectly parallel to this, and) as in this place
the ancients have generally interpreted. And then though such indulgence in
sin, such retu^ning to the vomit or mire again in that other place, do
provoke God to withdraw his grace necessary to enable them to repent, yea and
cast them back into a worse estate then they were in, not only before such
sinning, but even before their conversion, 2 Pet. 2. 20. Yet that God will so
punish with total desertion any one act or commission presently retracted
again, it is not affirmed here nor any where else, that I have observed, but
rather on the contrary, that he will visit them with chastisements which are a
grace and a means to recall them, without any utter forsaking or taking of his
loving kindness from them, Psalm, 89. 33. 35.

i. e. any deliberate presumptuous sin, (which supposition if it were true,
would infer an impossibility of the regenerate man's thus sinning, not an
assurance of his pardon without (or abstracted from the consideration of) his
repentance, which is the only point, in hand) for if he do, then upon
confession and forsaking there is promise of mercy, and not otherwise; and in
brief, without repentance there is no remission: and therefore it is
observeable, that they which thus affirm, find themselves enforced to fly to
Gods omnipotence and immensity, to whom all things are present; by help of
which they can conceive and resolve that at the time of that sins being upon
him unrepented of, God yet seeing his future repentance as present, may seal
his pardon, and then may by the same reason do so also before the commission;
the weakness of which arguing, I shall no farther demonstrate then by this
rejoinder, that by the same reason it might be said, that a man is justified
before he is borne, which yet the objectors do not affirm, but that at the
time of his first conversion, be it as such a Sermon or the like, he was
justified, and then all his sins past, present, and to come forgiven him, which
is as contrary to the notion of all things being present with God, as to say
that this act of commission is not forgiven till it be repented of, for sure
the time before that man's birth, and the time after it, are as truly present to
God before all eternity, as the time of this commission and that repentance.

repents him of his sin, and amends his life, he shall have his sin blotted
out and put out of Gods remembrance, i. e. forgiven unto him and not till then:
and to suppose he may have remission before such repentance, is to suppose God
perjured who swears he shall not, and to lay falsity to the charge of the
whole Gospel, which resolves, Except ye repent, ye shall all perish.

justifying Abraham and calling him friend (in the sense wherein they are
Christ's friends, which do whatsoever he commands them, so approve themselves
unto him) if it were now seasonable to examine that business. This being
supposed, it would be most evident, that such an act of known deliberate sin
committed in time of trial, is quite contrary to justification, even as
contrary as Abraham's refusing to believe Gods promise first, or after to
sacrifice Isaac, you may suppose would have been. Of which the least that can
be said, will be this, that such a failing is a shrewd blemish to sincerity,
which will make it necessary for him that is guilty of it, to repair his
credit with God by expressing a great sense of his miscarriage, and by many
future performances of constancy, and resolution, if ever he hope to be
approved, or justified by him.

of his family, and yet afterward receive him into it again.





niddui separation, not total turning out of either sacred or civil society,
but remotion to a distance, that the offender should not come within four
Cubits of any other, and so be denied the peace of the Church, and the familiar
kind of communion, which others enjoy. Above this there was cherem which was a
total exclusion or distermination with anathemas or execrations joined with
it, but yet was not final, then thirdly there was Schammatha giving up to
destruction or desolation, delivering up to Gods coming in judgment, and that
was irreversible.



i. e. thus wrought on and effectually changed by the Spirit of God, is bound
by the Gospl-law, to operate according to this principle, to use this talent,
and this is called, to have grace, Heb. 12. 28. i. e. to make use of it to the
purpose there specified of serving God (...) ( i. e. either well pleasedly,
cheerfully, willingly, or well pleasingly, so as God may and will accept) in
righteousness and godly fear, according to the notion of Having in the
parable of the talents, where it is said that to him that has shall be given, i.
e. ^o him which makes use of the talent entrusted to him, operates accordingly,
does what that enables him to do, offends not against it by idleness, or by
commission of contrary sins, which he that does, is the non habens, he that
has not there, from which shall be taken away, etc. And this having of grace
is it which I mean by the second notion of sanctification, as it is a duty of
man's, which I conceive is meant by the Apostle, when he says, this is the will
of God, even your Sanctification, and he which has this hope purifies himself,
and let us cleanse our selves from all filthinesses perfecting holiness, all
which places suppose the thing spoken of, to be the duty of man* which by the
help of Christ strengthening him, he is able to perform, and therefore upon the
supposition of Gods working in him both to will and to do, to will, by
sanctifying, to do, by assisting grace, he is incited and exhorted by the
Apostle, to work out his own salvation.

duty of the sanctified man, from which breach of duty it was, that we bound
him before under that guilt, which nothing but repentance could rid him of, and
if you mark it, that is the only thing which contracts a guilt, the doing
somewhat contrary to duty, and so the want of this second notion of
Sanctification it is, the want of sanctifi^d operations, which interposes any
rubs in the business of our justification, and not so properly that wherein
God only was concerned, his not giving grace, guilt being still a result from
sin, and sin being a breach of the law, a contrariety to duty and not to
guilt; and though he that has not received the gift of sanctification be not
justified, yet the cause of his non-justification then, is not, in proper
speaking, Gods not having given him grace to sanctify, (for that is but a
negative thing, and cannot produce non-justification, which is in effect a
positive thing by interpretation, signifying condemnation, two negatives making
an affirmative, non-justifying being non-remitting of sin, and that the
actual imputing of it to condemnation) but the sins of his former and
present impenitent unsanctified life.

i. e. shake and waste, though not utttrly destroy, that sanctified state that
before the man was in, by the gift and grace of God.

grieving the Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 30. resisting it, trashing of God in his
course of grace and bounty toward us, putting our selves under niddui, as it
were, in respect of Gods grace, as well as his favor, and so weakening our
stock of sanctity, and this the deliberate act of sin may be thought to do.
The second, is quenching of the Spirit, 1 These. 5. 19. putting it quite out,
rebelling and vexing his holy Spirit, Is. 63. 10. a total extinction of grace,
the Cherem that brings the present curse, or anathema along with it; and this
is not done by one sin not persisted in, but only by a habit or indulgent
course of sin; and the third, is the despighting, or doing despite to the
spirit of grace, Heb. 10. 29. that which is proportioned to Schammatha, that
makes the final irreversible separation between us and Gods sanctifying
grace, the first did not wholly deprive the sinner of all grace, no nor of
sufficient to enable to repent; the second, did so for the present; the third
did so finally also.



have him to winnow, by inflicting punishments upon him, and God yields many
times to this demand of Satan's, delivers the offender up to him in some limited
manner.

ability to bear, 1. Cor. 10. 13. (...), passage out of those difficulties in
that same place, (...), sufficient grace, 2. Cor. 12. 9. and assistance of his
faith, that it fail not totally, (which is the importance of Christ's having
prayed for Peter, Luke 22. 32. his intercession being a powerful intercession
(as may appear by his [ Father, I knew that thou hear me always, Ioh. 11.
24] and so in effect, the obtaining from his Father, and actual conferring on
his Disciples the grace which he prays for) And therefore it is observable,
that as those which are thus accused and demanded by Satan are generally such
as, were it not for this present particular commission, would pass both with
God and him, for faithful Disciples, and good Christians, and therefore do still
retain that title (as appears by the word (...), when Satan is called the
accuser of them, Rev. 12. 10. (...), the accuser of the brethren, or the
faithful, it seems they are faithful still, though they have been guilty of
some act, for which he thus accuses them, and so he is called (...), 1 Pet. 5.
8. the plaintiff or enemy, (...), of you, i. e. the elect, to whom he writes,
c. 1. ^.) so the end of yielding to Satan's request in delivering them up to him
is also fatherly and gracious* (...), that they may be disciplined, or taught
not to blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1. 20. (...), that he may be ashamed, 2. These. 3. 14.
(...), that the spirit may be saved, 1. Cor. 5. 5. Whereupon it is, that the
Fathers so clearly resolve it far better, and more eligible to be delivered up
to Satan, then to be delivered up to ones self, or ones own affections or
desires; the first of them being the ordinary punishment of some act, or acts
of sin on purpose to recall to repentance; the second being the great plague
of spiritual desertion, inflicted on indulgent continuers in sin, the first of
them a mark of their not-yet-totall abdication, their continuance in sonne-ship
whom God thus chastens here, that he may not condemn them with the world; the
second, of heir being cut off from that prerogative, whom God thus forsakes.

Luke 17. 4. If he trespass against thee seven times a day, and seven times a
day return again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive; where
trespassing seven times is a phrase, for [how often soever he trespasse] the word
[ forgive] notes the obligation to punishment without forgiveness, and the
interposing the word [ Repent] proportioned to every trespass, shows the
necessity of that condition to wash often that guilt; and the word [ Turne]
prefixed to that, argues the Repentance unavailable, if it contain not turning
in it; upon which, forgiveness being there commanded, if we shall now add
that other place Mat. 6. 36. where Gods mercy to us is made the measure of our
mercy to our brethren, the argument will come home to prove that God does* so
deal with us, and consequently that every such act of sin contracts a guilt,
which is never pardoned but upon repentance, that upon the speedy performance
of that duty the patient is preserved from any heavy spiritual punishment,
which would otherwise attend that sin.

David. He, we know, had been guilty of several acts of sin, marked and
censured in the Word of God; and some of them such, as for them he was in a
manner delivered up to Satan to be contumeliously used (as he seems to
conceive from Shimei's cursing of him, 2 Samuel 16. 10. For Shimei being an
instrument of Satan's in cursing, and Satan thereto permitted by God upon some
crime, for which he had accused him to God, he there calls it, Gods saying to
Shimei, Curse David,) And yet because he continued not with indulgence in any
of them, (his heart presently smiting him, as in the case of numbering the
people, and recalling him to instant reformation) save only in that concerning
Uriah the Hittite (wherein it appears that he continued near the space of a
year, from before the conception till after the birth of the child, as is
clear by the time of Nathans coming to him, 2 Samuel 12. 1.) it is therefore left
upon record by God, That David did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, and turned not aside from anything that he commanded him all the days of
his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite, 1 King. 15. 5.

David but that in the matter of Uriah, (because I know he saw and punished that
of numbering the People, and for that other though no^ acted, yet designed under
oath against Nabal. 1 Samuel 25. 22. Abigail discernes that it was a causeless
shedding of blood, and an act of revenge, v. 31. (and so no small sin in Gods
sight) yet it is clear, that the sin in the matter of U^iah, that only sin
continued in for any long time, made another manner of separation between God
and David, contracted another kind of guilt, (and was a far greater waster to
conscience) then any of those other more speedily retracted sins did, was the
only remarkable (...) drawing back, or turning aside from obedience to God,
the only grand defection, shaking off Gods yoke, and so the only chasme in
his regenerate state.



i. e. acknowledging in them a guilt proportionate to their nature, I cannot
see why the bare desire to conceal them from the eyes of men (separated from
the sins or frailties themselves, and from any treacherous design in such
concealing) should be thought to superadde any farther degree of guilt; when on
the other side the publicknesse of a sin is an aggravation of it, makes it
more scandalous, and so more criminous also. Nor again do I mean that
hypocrisy, which is the taking in any thought of the praise of men (and the
like) in our best actions: for as long as we have flesh about us, some degrees
of this will go near sometimes to insinuate themselves, and then though they
prove blemishes to those best actions, and by anticipating the payment and
taking it here before hand, rob us of that heavenly reward hereafter, which
would otherwise be rendered to us according to those works, yet still being but
spots of sons, reconcilable with a regenerate estate, (as the straw and
combustible superstruction, is (in Saint Paul) compatible with the true
substantial foundation,) they will be reconcilable with good conscience also,
which is always commensurate to a regenerate estate.

i. e. only the pretense of it to disguise the poison of a bitter heart.
Secondly, the deceiving of God, or thirdly, his own soul, not dealing
uprightly with either, and nothing more contrary then this to a good conscience.

Samaritanes fearing the Lord and serving their own Gods, joining others with
God, and paying to them a respect equal or superior to that which they pay to
God, serving Mammon and God, or Mammon more then God. Or



dye the death of the righteous, to have all the gainful part, the revenue and
crown of a good Conscience, but will not be at the charge of a conscientious
life; Or

serve the Lord his God of that which costs him nothing, will do some things
that have nothing contrary to passions in general, or particularly to his
passions, like Herod that could hear John Baptist gladly, be present at as
many Sermons as he could wish, (and many the like painlesse performances) but
when the weightier matters of the law expect to be taken up also, cannot submit
to such burdens. Or



damnation is just, Romans 3. 8. Or

sincerity, some to the resolution, and some to the obedience, (...) in all,
and some to the perseverance which is absolutely necessary to the good
Conscience.

noted and censured in his Disciples, Their not fasting and praying to cast out
that Devil that would not otherwise be cast out.) Or the not avoiding such
occasions which are apt to betray me to it; Such acts as these, are (as Christ
says to those Disciples) acts of faithlesnesse and perverseness, Mat. 17. 17.
and cosequently the continued course of them contrary to the sincerity of
endeavor, and so unreconcileable with a good conscience.

Obdurate] which signifies the hardening of the heart against the knowledge of
the truth, against exhortations, against threats of Gods word, against checks
of natural Conscience, or illuminations of grace, against resolutions and
vows to the contrary, for this will make any habit certainly unreconcileable
with a good Conscience; Whereas it is possible that some Customary sinning may
be through ignorance of the duty, and that ignorance if it be not contracted by
some wilfulness of mine may be matter of excuse to me, and so reconcilable
with a good conscience by force of the second Proposition. But the obdurate
holding out against Gods spirit, either knocking for admittance but not opened
to, or checking and restraining from sin after conversion, and not harkned to,
resisting all Gods methods of working on us and still resolutely walking after
the flesh, this is by no means reconcilable with a good conscience, nay nor
any habit of sin simply taken (for that is exclusive of the habit of piety
necessary to the good conscience) unless it have that authentic plea of
faultlesse ignorance to excuse it.

Cor. 7. 11 is wholly unreconcileable with a good conscience. Such are Gal. 5.
19. Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, (four distinct
degrees of incontinence) Idolatry, witchcraft, (two degrees of impiety) hatred,
variance, emulation, wrath, strife, sedition, heresies, envyings, murders,
(nine degrees of the pride of life, or that other branch of carnality flowing
from (...), or the irascible faculty) drunkenness, revelling, (the species of
intemperance) and such like: and the same with some variation and addition, 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. and Ephesians 5. 5. Every one of these at the very commission have the
nature of Peccata sauciantia, wounding the Sinner to the heart, letting out a
great deal of good blood and vital spirits, and weakening the habit of
Christian virtue, of peccata clamantia, crying sins, the voice of conscience so
wronged by them, calling to heaven for judgment against such oppressors, or
perhaps Satan carrying an accusation thither against such offenders; and if
upon this they be not straight retracted by an earnest contrition, humiliation
and repentance, they then proceed farther to be (any one act of them) peccata
vastantia conscientiam, Sins wasting and despoiling the conscience, betraying
to some sadder punishment, even desertion, and withdrawing of grace, and
delivering up to our own hearts lusts, a consequent of which are all vile
affections, Romans 1. and that (...), cursing, Heb. 6. 8.

Vid. Coch. exe. Gem. San^. p. 148. and Buxto^s. instit. Ep. p. 75.
on that contumacy was then smitten with their (...) the anathemation or
execration, and sometimes cast into prison. So is Gods dealing with the sinner
remaining impenitent for such a space, substraction of Gods grace and spirit,
the curse of the Gospel is his portion.

Cor. 7. 11. this direful punishment of desertion is then to be expected as
the reward of any one such sin, and from thence will follow any impossibility
for that man so diserted ever to return to repentance again, Gods special
aid, which is now withdrawn, being absolutely necessary to that.



John 5. 16. which makes a difference between sin unto death, and sin not
unto death (both of them states of impenitence and persisting in sin, but
differing as the two latter degrees of excommunication did among the Jews,
C^erem and Sc^^matha both noting a total separation, but the latter a final
also, and by the composition of the word intimating death or desolation, giving
up the sinner to divine vengeance, as hopeless or contumacious, in reference
to which the phrase is here used, a sin unto death, whereas the other, of
impenitence, not arrived to that desp^rate contumacy, is a state of curse under
cherem and anathema, but not unto death yet) and allows this privilege to the
prayers of faithful men for others, that they shall obtain life for those that
have sinned not unto death, where that (the not being to death] of a sin, is
to be taken not from the matter of the sin, but from the disposition of the
sinner, and so from this desiring to get out, though he remain in it, or
somewhat answerable to that, might, if any doubt were made of it, be proved as
by other arguments so by putting together the peculiar use of the word (...) in
that Author, for abiding and continuing in sin, and the no extenuation that
such abiding is capable of (so far as to make one such abiding so much less
then another such abiding, as that one should be called (...), the other not)
save only this of wishing and heaving and laboring to get out, (which supposes
some remainder of exciting, though not of Sanctifying or assisting grace) while
the other goes on without any care or love or desire of reformation.

John, that this privilege belongs to the prayers of other faithful
penitents, for such a more moderate degree of unfaithful impenitents upon
their request God will give l^fe to such, i. e. such a degree of grace as shall
be sufficient to enable them to recover back to repentance, of which being
given them upon the others prayers, if they make use, (as infalsibly they will
if they were and continue to be really sollicitous to get out of that state)
they shall undoubtedly live eternally.

John's thus explayned, you shall see every where in the stories of, or canons
for the paenitents, where they that for any sin of Ecclesiastical cognizance
were excommunicated, did return to the peace of the Church, (an image of the
peace of God) by several degrees, of which the first was, to stay and often lie
without the Church doors, and in the portch at hours of prayer; and desire
those that retained the honor of being accounted faithful, and so had liberty
to go into the Church, to pray to God for them. Which as the secure supine
negligent impaenitent was not likely to do, so was he not to expect the
benefit of it, nor the Christian brother obliged to pray for him, though yet by
Saint John's [(...) I say not of that or concerning that state of sin that he
shall pray] I am not convinced that it were unlawful so to do.



i. e. of a Good Conscience, will be sure never to commit deliberately and
presumptuously, or having by surreption fallen, never to lie down or continue
one minuit unhumbled unreformed in any such sin, on which that direful fate
is by Christ or his Apostles inscribed [shall not inherit the Kingdom of
heaven] where yet as I shall not affirm that none shall subject us to that
danger but those which are there specified; (for there is added and such like,
and other sins there may be committed with the like deliberation and
presumption, and so as contrary to Conscience) so shall I not say that all that
commit any one act of any of these without that deliberation and presumption,
or that are presently by their own heart smitten and brought to repentance for
them, shall incur that danger; for the words (...) and (...), the doers and
committers of them signify the deliberate committing and indulgent yielding to
them, contrary to which the use of surreption at the time and the instant
subsequent retractation of them (by contrition, confession, forsaking, and
reinforcement of greater care and vigilance for the future) will be sure means
to deliver from that danger.



conscience, as the spreading of the skall or leprosy after the Priests
inspection is sufficient to pronounce the patient unclean. Levit. 13. and as
that disease in the relapse may be mortal which at first was not.



Pray for us, for we trust we have a good Conscience, in all things willing to
live honestly. Heb. 13. 18.
FINIS.

