AN ELEGY On the Much Lamented DEATH of DR. SANDERSON, Late Lord BISHOP of
Lincoln, Who Deceased the latter end of January, 1662.
BRing hither Sacrifice, and Feral Yue,
The sacred pavement with deaths Frondage strew.
The Malign Cypress, and sad Myrtle Bough
That wreath the mighty Libitina's Brow
Sprinkle with pious Tears, the Dew of Love;
With suppliant sighs, her slanting Garland move.
In soft procession let us obvious meet
The insulting Foe, and gently her entreat;
The insulated tribe advance before,
And with propitiating words adore,
^
And for the Altars do thy self Devote.
When will the unhallowed doom of death surceas
When will the Prelates Fatal Bill decrease?
Far more contagious then that pest'lent Heat
Of zeal, which but their Honors did unseat.
Their precious lives did propagate the Creed,
Instaur'd the Church by living Martyrs seed;
But this Barbarian rage the Flamins Kills,
And robs the Church with complicated Ills;
The Church int's infancy, not yet matur'd,
Beyond the sense of what it had endured.
For scarce the common woe was over blown,
When the sad Church distinctly weeps her own,
If the pale Horse drive on this furious rate,
Time will over taken be and faulter Fate;
Nor will succrescent strength so fast succeed;
As soon will pillars rise from bending reed.
What heavy ta^k then has this muse to mourn,
In this most useful blessed Bishops Urn?
This Age's unable, or unfit to grieve,
Knows not where to begin or where to leave;
Horror becomes the times that passed are,
Treasures of grief relieve not present care;
And who so bold to undertake the Debt,
That to the account of future time is set?
And will run up to such a vast arrear,
That Pearls w'ont pay if grief could crust a Tear.
As Moses, who the Wildred Jews did guide,
On Nebo mount in sight of Canaan died,
And was enterd where is grave could not be found
That murmurers might not Idolize the Ground;
So Heaven resumes this our great Leader hence,
And leaves the late gainsayers in suspense;
Fain would they Honor Goodness they confess
But (...) sacred Order (...)
Whose Institution being next divine,
Leaves the ungrate, lost in a fond design.
But who thy Title to thy worth oppose,
Do the whole Orders brighter Fame disclose.
EPITAPH.
HEre lies Conscience enshrined,
To its first excellence refined;
There under lies the Solemn League,
And Presbyterian Intrigue;
Whose Ashes passing his strict Sift,
There' s not a Scruple of'um left:
He proved, the Kings success and force
Was placed in Reason and Discourse,
Death took upon it to declare the Rest,
By its Resolving of this Casuist.
Ja. H.

LONDON, Printed for W. Gilbertson at the Bible in Giltspurstreet, 1663.


