OF SVPERSTITION.

(...).

OXONIENSIS ACADEMIA

SAPIENTIA FELICITATIS



OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL Printer to the UNIVERSITIE. 1645.

OF SVPERSTITION.
SUPERSTITION being a crime so ordinarily charged on those whose Consciences 1.
assure them that they are fair enough from the guilt of it, it will be an Act
of double charity, first to the honest calumniated Protestant, Secondly to the
contumelious unjust defamer of his best actions, to consider a while of this
matter, and first to enquire what is the natural importance of the word in
Latin and Greek, especially as we find it in the New Testament.

Superstition in Latin is most clearly according to the use and Origination
of the word, 2.
Superstitum Cultus, The worship of some departed from this World, supposed yet
to have life in another, This is observed and acknowledged amongst many others
by Lactantius, and made probable even by the different conceit of Cicero, who
deduceth the word from the practice of those that used to pray whole days
together, ut sibi liberi superstites essent, that their children might outlive
themselves; by that acknowledging the truth of the Etymology from the word
[Superstites] but disguising it into a ridiculous phansy, out of fear, says
St. Austin, to condemn the practice of the Romans, among whom he lived. These
Superstites, 3.
whom the Heathens thus worshipped, were by them called Heroes, men of worth
and excellency (...), assumed into the state of Gods, but among Christians the
Souls of the Saints departed, quae supersunt corporibus; which when their
bodies are buried in peace, are imagined to live for evermore. And the
worshipping of these (as among the Papists it is most ordinary) is most properly
called Superstition. And in that sense I conceive it is, that in some
authentic writings of our Church, the Idolatry and Superstition of the
Papists is censured; by Idolatry meaning the worship of Images among them,
and by Superstition the worship and prayers to Saints departed. A censure
authorizable by that part of S. Austin's words, De Doct. Christi. l. 2.
Superstitiosum est quicquid institutum est ad colendum, sicut Deum, Creaturam,
partemve ullam creaturae. Superstition is the worshipping a Creature as God, or
any part of a Creature. By the latter of which I know not what he should mean
so probably, as those supposedly deified parts of Creatures, the souls of
dead-men.

The Greek word parallel to this is (...), 4.
which literally is, De ver. Relig.
as S. Austin defines the Latin Superstition, Daemonum Cultus, the worship of
Daemones.

The full importance of which must be taken, 5.
1 from the various use of the word (...). 2 of the other word [(...)]
ingredient in the composition.

(...) Signifies sometimes in a wider sense a God, 6.
as generally among the Poets, Juno and Apollo and Minerva, and all beside the
supreme Jupiter, are numbered among Homer's (...). This Maximus Tyrius
demonstrates at large, and adds (...)* that there are a great flock of those
(...). Sometimes 2. in a stricter sense the Angels, as it is used among the
Philosophers, especially the Pythagoreans and Platonicks; for so the
description of them in Hierocles, and Maximus Tyrius, and Plotinus, and Proclus
will evidence, particularly that every man's proper tutelary Angel the (...) or
(...) or (...), as Plotinus calls him. The cohabitant or domestic Demon or
Angel that is allotted us.

A thing so frequent among those Philosophers, 7.
that the word (...), Philosophy, Col. 2. 8. seems to me to be directly all
one with (...); worshipping of Angels v. 18. And so those two exhortations in
those two verses to be coincident, (...) in one (which we render receiving of
reward) being aequipollent to (...), spoiling in the other, only in diverse
notions. The first referring to prizes in the Olympic games, the other to
spoils in war. the reasons of which conjecture it will not be seasonable
here to insert.

And thirdly again the departed worthies, 8.
which (besides the frequency of that acception among the Philosophers) may
seem to be meant Apoc. 9. 20. where the (...), which are said to be
worshiped, are joined with Idols of Gold, etc. and communicate with them in
their effects and livelesnesse, that they neither see, nor hear, nor walk.

To these senses might be added that other most vulgar for evil spirits,
agreeable to which, is that definition of (...), 9.
in the Etymologicum magnum, that it is (...), a care and fear of evil
spirits. And a fifth less frequent, yet to be found among the Philosophers,
for wise men here in this life, which Hierocles describes at large under the
Title of (...) earthly spirits, or Demons.

Now the word (...) refers indifferently to the three first of these, 10.
and signifies the worshipping either of the many Poetical Gods, or Angels, or
Dead-men, or indeed any thing but the one supreme God. Thus is it said of the
Gentiles, 1 Cor. 10. 20. That what they Sacrifice, they Sacrifice (...), and
not to God. i. e. not to the one true God. And in the book of Baruch 4. 7.
Offering (...), and not to God. where (as also in many other places of holy
writ) it is not proper to render it [Devils or Infernal Spirits] but (with Mr.
Mead) Damons, meaning thereby either Angels or Dead men, or any thing else
beside the true God. Which seems to be expressed Romans 25. by worshipping the
Creature (...), besides (not as we render more then) the Creator.

Thus when S. Paul tells the Athenians Acts 17. 22. (...), 11.
I consider and behold you in all things (or in all that I see of you) as men
that are more superstitions then any other. He means they worshiped more Gods
or Demons then the Romans, or any other sort of Heathen people; or were more
devout, more pious in the Heathen worships then any others; for so it follows
(...), v. 23. Ye worship: and so indeed it is generally attested by the Greek
writers Pausan. in Atticis p. 15. (...), (...) p. 22 Philostratus if Apollonius
l. 4. c. 6. (...). and Strabo. (...). etc. Max. Tyr. (...).
Pausanias, Philostratus, Strabo, Max. Tyr. etc. That the Athenians were more
religious then other people, at least were more hospitable to new and strange
Deities, then the Romans, who (says Dionysius Halicarnasseus) were so averse
from all foreign Deities (unless some few that their ancestors had from the
Grecians) that they might be more truly said (...) to be haters of such
kind of hospitality or admission of foreign Gods, then lovers of it.

So Acts 25. 19. Festus or Saint Luke in his story says, That the Jews had
certain (...), Quaestions, or Accusations against Paul (...), concerning his
own Religion, or Superstition, or worship, peculiar to him from them, and (as
it follows to explain what they meant by the word) (...), Of one Jesus that
was dead, putting him under the vulgar notion of a (...) or dead Heroes, and so
meaning the worship of him by (...).

Beside this method of examining the sense of this word, another I mentioned by
observing the force of the word (...), the former part in its composition,
which though it signifies simply to fear, (and therefore the word is rendered
by Hesychius (...), fearing God, or Religion in general; by others (...), The
fear of God and Demons) yet perhaps may be set sometimes to import a cowardly
trembling fear; and so may have an influence on the word in some Authors. Thus
the Etymologist, (...), the superstitious man is religious and cowardly, Strom.
p. 377.
Fears the Gods, 12.
and is afraid of them; and Clemens (...), 13.
Superstition is a passion, being a fear of the Demons; and Theophrastus
(...) it is a cowardly fear of the Demon. Thus Maximus Tyrius having compared
a pious man to a friend, Char. cap. (...):
a superstitious to a flatterer, [(...)] he explaines the meaning in the words
following, the pious man comes to God (...) without fear, the
superstitistitious (...) with much fear, (...), etc. dreading the Gods as so
many Tyrants. according to which notion of the Greek word, Saint Austin is
affirmed to say, Deum a religioso vereri, a superstitioso timeri. The Religious
man reveres God. the superstitious is afraid of him; and consequently to that,
Religio Deum colit, superstitio violat. Religion is the worshipping of God,
Superstition the wronging and violation of him. So again Plutarch. (...). The
Atheist thinks there are no Gods, In Alex*
but the superstitious wishes there were none, but in spite of his Teeth
believes that there are. An argument whereof is, that he is unwilling to dye.
Where the believing of any punishment after this life is the maine piece of
Superstition.

I conceive my self able to give the reader some light in this matter,. 14.
by what I have gathered out of some scattered (...) of Epicurus's Philosophy,
Cic. l. 2. Academ. Quaest.
and it is this: Epicurus, we know, Sic ille deum opere magno liberat, and me
timore; Quis enim potest, cum existimet a Deo se curari non and numendivinum
horrere? etc. Cic. Ib. Intelligitur a beatae immortalique natura and iram and
gratiam segregari qut quibus remotis nullos a superis impendere metus. Cic. l.
1. de not. de.
was willing to rid God of the trouble of a providence or care of humane
affairs, resolved that all things were done naturalibus ponderibus, and
motibus, by natural weights and motions, and consequently that men were to
revere and adore God for his greatness, and excellency, and be atitude, and
immortality, and transcendent beauty; but not to fear, or dread, or be afraid
of him. Of those therefore that differed from him in judgment, as they which
thought there was no God at all, were the downright (...), and for that by
him censured; so those that believed a providence, and consequent to that,
rewards and punishments, he rejected also, as the other extreme, under the
title of (...), or Superstitious, or fearers of a deity. This appears by
several passages in Cicero and other of the ancients out of him, and by what
we find in the lives of the Epicureans in Laertius. In Cicero l. 2. de not.
de. ut Superstitione liberatem, etc. to be freed from Superstition, is
explicated by metum omnem Deorum pulsum esse, to have all fear of the Gods
banished from us. L. de fin:
And again having described the wiseman to be such as can sine metu vivere,
live without fear, he repeates it again in these other words, Omnium rerum
natura cognita levamur Superstitione, liberamur mortis metu, the knowledge of
the nature of all things (and among them of God himself) frees men and
releases them from Superstition and the fear of death. This in the same book
he calls metum religionis, Imposuistis in cervicibus nostris sempiternum
Deminum quem dies and noctes timeremus, Quis enim non Timeas omnis providentem,
curiosum and plenum negotij Deum? Hinc (...), Hinc (...) qui tanta imbueremur
superstitione, si vos audire vellemus at, etc. His terro ibus ab Epicuro saluti
non metuimus eos, quos intelligimus nec sibi fingere ullam molestiam, nec
alteri quaerere etc. Cic. l. 1. de Not. De:
fear of Religion, or such a fear as the beleiving Gods providence was apt to
beget in men, (especially in those which did what they ought not) viz. terrors
and expectations of evil from God, which they which took it to be an error
in divinity (as Epicurus did,) must needs count a very uneasy, unpleasant
error, and so as much dislike Superstition, i. e. a religion that brings so
much affliction to their lives, as any man now adays does under the most
odious notion of it.

Agreeable to this is that of Aristippus and the Cyrenaici in Laertius, which
upon the same principles resolve that it is the part of a wiseman neither to be
moved with envy, nor to be superstitious, and afterward explained the [(...)]
being without Superstition by (...), putting off all fear of death, and as a
foundation or consequent of that fearelessenesse, a resolution that nothing is
by nature just or unjust, but only (...), by positive law or custom, and from
thence never doing any ((...)) unbecoming thing, never admiting any
unfashionable piece of Piety on contemplation of any Mulct or danger.

Whereupon it is, that Lucretius an Epicurean Philosopher speaking of the
eternity of Torments threarned in another world, confesses that, if that were
true, there would be no way of resisting the religions and threats of the
Divines. Nam si nullum finem esse putarent Aerumnarum homines, nulla ratione
valerent Religionibus atque minis obsistere vatum.. 15.
Making that belief of the infinite Torments in another life,. 16.
and the menaces of the Priests attending it, to be the Religion or
Superstition, that was to be confuted and banished out of the world. And I wish
'twere now uncharitable to suspect, (what the actions of many makes too
visible) that the abhorring of Superstition (which men we boast of, and by
which they so discriminate themselves from other men) has at least brought
them to this piece of Epicurean faith, To discarde all fear of another life as
a relicke of superstition, and to resolve with him in Plutarch, (...).
Unbelief and contempt of all that is Divine is a shrewd fault indeed but on
the other side Superstition is a shrewd fault too, the shrewder of the twain,
and meant by superstition what you had even now from the same Author. The fear
of death, or any ill thing after it. But this by the way.

This generally is the notion of (...), 17.
Superstition. (and the same of Religion too) among the Ancient heathen writers
when either Epicureans or Atheists speak of any Religion, or those who are
neither speak of some kind of Religion which they do not like. For in both
these cases whatsoever they see men of other persuasions do, which they like
not, or think them not bound to, they call it straight their Superstition or
Religion.

Thus in Plutarch's Tract (...), 18.
it goes indefinitely for Religion, but particularly for some fearful
apprehensions of the Gods, which he makes to be contrary to Atheism, and to
offend as ill in the other extreme; a being awed with some frightfull
Doctrines to do some things which he thought not men obliged to, an
Astonishment of soul, looking on the Gods as so many (...), furies or
sprights, conceiving them to be cruel, bloody minded, and other such things,
which rather then he would believe, he professes he would wish there had been
never a man in the world, (...), and that Plutarch himself had no being. All
which are but odious expressions fastened on those practices of Religion which
he did not approve of, and the very same that Epicurus before him had laid upon
Religion or belief of Providence.

Among these he mentions keeping of Sabbaths, 19.
and casting on the face, or Prostrations, particularly that so strict
observation of the Sabbath among the Jews, that when they were Invaded by the
Enemy they would not rise from their seats (...), tied and bound by their
Religion or Superstition as with a Net, that they could not move. And then adds
the killing and sacrificing of children which by the description one would
think referred to the custom in the valley of Hinnom, or Tophet mentioned in
the scripture.

20.
And so have we passed through the second part of our designed course or method
to find out the meaning of the word.

21.
From whence it appears that the word in Greek and Latin both in the
classical Authors and the scripture use is set to signify one or more of
these severalls.

22.
In general Religion or worship of God without any censure or mark set upon
it of true or false; agreeable to which is that of the old Greek and Latin
Lexicon found at the end of some of Cyrills works (...), Superstitio, Religio,
rendering it, indifferently by those two words. And what Stephanus observes of
Cicero that he renders (...) Religio, and that in Athenaeus (...) is religione
teneri, (and thereupon Budaeus, has so rendered it) and an ancient glossary,
(...). To which purpose a considerable place there is in Polybius a grave and
an excellent heathen writer who speaking of the Romans l. 16. p. 497. and
giving his opinion of their government that it excelled other commonwealths
extremely (...) in the opinion and apprehension they had of the Gods, expresses
what it was, he so commends in them, (...), I mean says he, their
Superstition, which (...), was raised so tragically, or to so high a pitch,
(...) etc. was so far taken in both to their private and public affairs
(...) that it was no less then an excess. Where although (that I disguise not
any part of his words) it be by him affirmed, that this was (...), made matter
of reproach to the Romans among other men, as indeed every thing in Religion is
spoken ill of by those who are of other persuasions and practices) yet 1 that
which those others are said to reproach in the Romans is their (...) or
excess, or that which others counted to be so, and not (...) it self, and
secondly Polybius himself does not only commend and extol extremely ((...))
both the (...) and the excess of it, but attributes much of the good
government of that nation to it, and that it does (...), keep their affairs
in good order and compass. If any doubt be made of this importance of this
place, I shall then, instead of farther asserting it, add one other to it
which seems to beyond all exception to demonstrate the word to be used in a
good sense, it is in Diodorus Siculus bibl. l. 5. p. 305. Where speaking of the
ancient souls he takes notice of one special thing in them in their
behavior toward the temples of the Gods, Their lies (says he in their
Temples) a great deal of gold consecrated to the Gods, which yet no one of the
natives touches (...) through their superstition or Reverence they bear their
Gods, (...) although these country me hare extremely covetous. Which words must
needs set a good notion on (...) to any that do not count sacrilege a good
quality, and absteining from that a vice or scrupulosity. The only thing I can
foresee possible to be objected to it is, that the not touching of the gold may
be such a scrupulosity, but that will be soon answered by putting the reader in
mind that (...) to touch signifies to take away, and that it does so in this
place appears by the addition of the mention of their covetousness which
surely would not put them upon the desire of touching only, but also of taking
it away.

Secondly the worship of the deified dead men and Angels which the Heathens
took to be true Gods, 23.
but the Christistians do not, and therefore says the Etymologist, (...). The
word among the Heathens is taken for a good thing, but among Christians for
impiety.

Thirdly, any part of Divine worship, 24.
which in obedience to his God, or for fear of vengeance from him, any
worshiper does perform to him. A thing which every sect or sort of people
liking in themselves, but disliking in others of a distant worship, do either
honor or defame with the Title (as of Superstition, so) of Religion also.

Fourthly, 25.
A trembling fear of Gods punishment due for every sin, which the Epicureans
were willing to scoff out of the world, lest every man being a sinner, every
man should be left to terrors and astonishments of Conscience, and so loose
that (...), that tranquillity and ease of life, which they proposed to
themselves as the chiefest good.

To which I need only add a fifth not yet tourcht upon, 26.
The use of magical Spells, Ligatures, Characters, etc. (of auspicious and
ominous days the not observing of which Hesiod makes to be impiety, (...).
(...) (that whole book being a direction to that purpose) (...)) and all the
observations and books of the Augures and Aruspices, a Catalogue of all which
Clemens Alexan: (Strom. 3. p. 312.) tells us, was to be seen in a Comedy of
Maenanders called (...), in which he scoffs at those that make every Accident
almost (...) a presage, or sign of something, divining by the flight of birds
((...), in Homer,) by the feeding of chickens, as in that famous story of
Valens which cost so many men their lives for having names which began with
those letters which the chicken peckt at on the table: to which you may add
the (...) by striking a stafle against the ground; to which it is thought the
Prophet referred, Hos. 4. 12. and (...), and a many more collected by learned
men out of their books, and the rest of the (...) auspicious signs, such as
(...), lightning on the right side in Homer Id. (...). The like with more ease
you shall find in Saint Austin de Doctr. Christiana l. 2. under the Title of
Significationes superstitiosae, superstitious significations, which says he
Epist. 73. ad serviendum Daemonibus adhibentur, are used to serve the Devils,
and thence it seems are called Superstitious, and they that use them (...) in
Suidas, superstitious observers of signs.

All which being thus premised, 27.
three things there are in our modern customary use of this word among men,
that will appear very inconsequent and improper at least. First that
Superstition simply and abstractly taken should be resolved in all Authors to
signify somewhat which is evil; That sin particularly of False-worship.
Whereas first those that use the word to express their own worship either of
God or Angels, or Saints, conceive that to be a creditable word, or else would
not call it by that name, and the Etymologists even now affirmed that among the
heathen (...) It Is taken for a good thing, and for religion in general. And
secondly When Saint Paul's Religion, or Christianity it self is called by that
name by Festus an heathen Acts 25. 19. it appears not that he did use that
word as an accusation, or in an ill sense, but only in general to signify
Paul's Religion, or somewhat in that different from the Religion of the Jews,
and no whit less favored by him then the Jews Religion. For he that reads
the story, shall see that he rather favored Saint Paul's part against the
Jews, or at most doubted whose side to judge on, so far is he from
prejudgeing Saint Paul's cause, or his Religion in comparison of theirs, or
expressing that by this word. Thirdly Saint Paul himself Act. 17. 23. says,
they do (...) worship the true God, though ignorantly, taking him for a (...),
as the rest of their many Gods were) whom he had called (...). Fourthly he
calls them (...), more religious then other men, not in relation to any vicious
rite or performance, where in they exceeded others, but in relation to their
worshipping the unknown God, which others worshipped not, which says he was the
true God of heaven whom he preached, 28.
though the truth is they knew him not.

A second inconsequence is, that the use of Ceremonies or Rites in the worship
of the true God, if they be not distinctly prescribed either by the example or
precept of Christ, should 1 be called superstition, then without farther matter
of accusation be condemned only for deserving that Title. Whereas first there
is no example in the Scripture, nor ancient Author nor ground in the nature of
either Greek or Latin word to affix that Title to that matter (Superstition
to unprescribed Rites) or if there were, yet secondly no Authority to defame
that Title, being so applied; or to conclude every thing evil that were called
by it, unless it might appear to be in it self evil, abstracted from the
Odium of that Title.

The Third Inconsequent thing is, 29.
that men on pretense and in the name of Piety should abstain from some
observances (in themselves and their own nature acknowledged to be
indifferent) as superstitious, either because they are commanded by lawful
authority, or at most, because they are or have been used by Papists; And yet
themselves not expect to be accounted superstitious in hating and detesting and
not daring to practice any one of them (and that sometimes for no other crime
but because they are by lawful authority commanded to practice them) but as
strictly obligeing themselves to do the contrary sometimes that which
Anabaptists, and other Persons (1 not in authority, secondly as much or as well
condemned by our Church both for doctrine and manner of worship as the Papists)
are wont to do; Whereas in things indifferent, first it is certainly as
criminons, and Superstitious to place piety in the Negative, as the
affirmative, in not kneeling, as in kneeling; in absteining scrupulously from
Ceremonies, as in using them as scrupulously, And secondly it is as dangerous a
kind of dogmatizing to teach the necessity of abstinence from lawful
unprohibited Ceremonies, as from lawful unprohibited meats, Col. 2. And
thirdly it is not imaginable that the intervening of a command on one side and
not on the other, should leave the Superstition only on that side, where the
command lies, for then the Superstition must consist in obeying lawful
magistrates, or else the magistrates themselves be the only Superstitious
Persons in commanding. Either of which acts (either of giving or obeying
commands in things indifferent) if it were acknowledged a fault, might sure be
Adultery, or Witchcraft, as well as Superstition.

If to all which has been said in this matter, 30.
it be still objected, that superstition may and does in some authenticke
writers either sacred or profane signify a nimiety or excess in Religion, I
shall breifely make this return.

1. 31.
That the word Superstitious may indeed denote such excess from the force of
the termination [osus] and so also (says Agellius out of Nigidius Figulus) the
word Religiosus denotes; but then, first, by that Grammatical observation I
might conclude, that Superstitio denotes this no more then Religio does; Nay
secondly, that it is Agellius his animadversion upon Nigidius Figulus, that all
such excesses are not culpable, nor consequently all words of that termination
to be taken in ill senses.

But then Secondly, 32.
granting the word to be thus used by some Authors, I must first say, That
some, and those not of the meanest of the ancient Heathens (as appears by what
we produced out of Cicero) did it on that ground of Epicurean Divinity, Gods no
providence, no punishments in another life, to which it was but consonant to
condemn all superstition (because all fear of God) for a Nimiety in opinion
first, and then in practice. 2ly. that for other later christian writers the
use of a word in this or that sense in some Authors, is so slight and casual a
thing, that it must not be thought sufficient to fasten an ill character on any
thing, to which those Authors have applied it, unless that thing be first
proved to be ill by some other Topic. Thirdly, that those Authors which come
home to the point in hand, are so few or so modern and of so small authority,
that they would scarce be worth producing. Fourthly, that this supposed
Nimiety, or excess in matters of Religion may be reduced to these two sorts,
as consisting either in the degree, or in the number of Actions; either in the
quality or quantity: in the intension or extension.

If it be supposed in the first kind only, 33.
then I shall without scruple deny, that there is any such thing as Nimiety or
excess in Religion. There is no possibility of being Religious in too high a
Degree, of praying too fervently, or too often. For though the Messalians or
Euchitae were condemned in this matter, yet it is clear, that that which was
their crime, was not that excessive practice, but the laying that obligation
upon themselves and all others, to be always a praying, upon authority of
that Text [Pray continually] which being by the Apostle delivered in reference
and in analogy to the continual i. e. daily Sacrifices, was by them
misinterpreted and applied to uninterrupted, incessant pouring out of Prayers.
And again though it is possible also, that in too frequent or intense a
practice of holy Duties some incident fault there may be, as for example, if by
so doing a man neglect the Duties of Charity or of his own particular calling,
yet then also it is clear that this fault is the neglecting of those Duties,
and not the Excess of Devotion (to which this neglect is but extrinsecall and
accidental, and so not fit to deprave the nature of that devotion it self)
which you will discern by this, that if that supposed excess might be
separated from those adherent Neglects or Omissions, it would then never be
accounted criminous, no man that discharges all his other Duties will ever be
said to be too zealous, or to pray too often; and that he does not discharge
those Duties, though a fault it is, and an argument of partial hypocritical
obedience in him that is wilfully guilty of it, yet sure not properly the sin
of superstition. For it is Saint Austin's argument against Cicero (who thought
that the praying day and night, ut filii essent Superstites, was superstition)
de Civi. l. 4. c. 30. Si Superstites dicti, qui dies totas precabantur and
immolabant, nunquid non and illi qui instituerunt deoru^ simulachra? If 'twere
Superstition to pray and sacrifice whole days together, then sure they were
superstitious also that set up those Images of the Gods to which they so Prayed
and Sacrificed, intimating his opinion that the frequency of Prayer could not
be Superstitious, unless the worship and institution it self were
Superstitious: that is the Gods or Images to whom they thus prayed, false Gods.

34.
But if this excess be supposed to be in the extension, i. e. the taking in
too many things, to wit too many Rites and Ceremonies, etc. into the service of
God, I shall then say. First, that by this it seems to be granted, that the
Rites and Ceremonies themselves are not superstitious, but only the multitude
of them. I make such have to assume this as granted, because I conceive it such
a reasonable postulation, that I would persuade my self no pretender to
rational discourse would deny it me; it being demonstratively as impossible to
divest Religion of all Rites and Ceremonies wholly, as to perform the duty of
Prayer in a humane body, and yet to do it at no time, in no place, with no
gesture.

35.
Or if our opposite Brethren will distinguish betwixt Circumstances and
significant Ceremonies, and only disclaim the latter; Then first they must
fall out with their friends who generally use elevation of the hand in taking
of Oaths, and that is a significant Ceremony. And some of them assert the
necessity of sitting at the Sacrament as significative of their assurance of
their Familiarity with Christ on Earth at his second coming. And secondly,
they must affirm it to be a fault too in a Ceremony, that it is significative,
which seems very unreasonable also.

For the significancy of a Ceremony may be of three sorts. 36.
First, when it naturally signifies the thing which I am about, and properly
flows from it; as the lifting up the eyes to Heaven flows from zeal in
Prayer, and signifies or expresses it; and no sober man would ever think fit
to quarrel with that for being significative, or to prescribe limits to the
use of such kind of Ceremonies. Secondly, When by the custom of the place it
becomes in like manner also significative of the Action in hand. As, among us,
kneeling signifies humility, etc. and to blame such a significancie again, or
such a Ceremony, because it is significative, were as irrational, 'Twill not
be fault in any thus to use it privately himself, or being a Magistrate to
prescribe others (for decency and uniformity) the use of it. Thirdly, when it
is set to signify something else, whether that which it signifies be matter of
Christian Doctrine; as in the Ancient Church, the custom of standing in the
Church between Easter and Whitsuntide, was designed to signify the
Resurrection of Christ; or whether it be matter of promise, as the Types in the
old law were of Christ to come; or whether matter of fact and Story, etc. and
then also to quarrel with the significancy of them, and dislike them more then
if they were empty and unsignificant, is First, very irrational again (for it
will not be more fault to have some profit in them, then to have none.)

Secondly, it will lay a censure upon the Types of the Law appointed by God
himself, 37.
for they were such; And though those particulars are now out-dated by the
coming of Christ whom they signified, yet since others that are now still
seasonable by signifying and commemorating somewhat past, or prefiguring
somewhat yet future, will by that Analogy and proportion which they hold with
those which were then lawful, be evidenced to be lawful too.

The not observing of which matter, 38.
and of the sole reason why the old Jewish Ceremonies, Circumcision, etc. are
interdicted us Christians (not because significative Ceremonies are toto genere
unlawful, but because the observing of those particularly which foreshewed
Christ, and teaching the necessity of observing them, would be interpretative
the denying of Christ; or that the Messiah was come) is conceive, that which
has given occasion of the mistakes of thinking significative Ceremonies to be
now unlawful; which error if upon this advertisement it may now be reformed,
and this so reasonable a postulation for the lawfulness of Ceremonies
significative be thus granted, the greater part of this present Controversy
will be at an end; for I shall not then be Advocate for the multitude or
abundance of that last sort of significative Ceremonies, but rather give my
full vote to the confirming of the old rule concerning them, that they be
paucae and salubres, few, and wholesome; and particularly few for these Reasons.

First, 39.
because there are really not many such wholesome Ceremonies to be found;
Secondly, because those that by Law are received into the Church, are but very
moderate for number; which with me has no small Authority. Thirdly, because
it is not impossible that the number may encumber the Soul, by busying it about
many things, and so diverting it from the One great Necessary. Fourthly,
because the multitude of such was counted a Burden to the Jews. Fifthly,
because it seems sometimes to be an ill symptom of some inward neglect, to
spend overmuch Care and Time in the Outer-washings; as in the Pharisees it is
noted to have been; And as Aristotle observes of the insectile Animalls, that
the want of blood was the cause that they ran out into so many legs.

But then Secondly, 40.
I must add by way of caution, that in this matter men are sometimes mistaken
(as Misers are in judging of excessive expenses, or sluggards of excessive
labor) think, they or others exceed, when they do not.

To which purpose you may please first to take this direction, 41.
that though the premised caution concerning Ceremonies in a Church be very
good, that they be paucae and salubres, few and wholesome, yet if they be
wholesome, not only negatively, but positively, not only harmless but tending
to edification (for so salubrity, or wholsomnesse imports) then there will be
little reason to accuse them of excess; for if they be salubrious, they will
then more probably help the inner devotion, then encumber it.

Secondly, you must distinguish of such Acts, 42.
wherein that excess is supposed to be, that they either are ordinable, fit,
etc. proper to that end, the service of God, to which they are annex't; and
then again being used in their kind, they are salubrious, and no danger of
excess; or Secondly, they are inordinable, unfit, improper, of which nature
there are great store noted in the Church of Rome; and in this case though any
one may be a nimiety, and that nimiety a fault, yet still this not the fault of
Superstition, but rather of folly and vanity, or what ever other guilt, the
using things in the worship of God, which do no whit tend to that end (but are
aliene from it) may amount to. And these vanities, or this fault, I desire to
allow no favor or patronage or countenance to, but have as full dislikes to
them as any charitable man has, though as yet I am not satisfied, that they
are to be called Superstition.

And yet concerning a word I shall not conend neither, 43.
but rather grant them liable to that title also, on condition that I may but
evince and be granted this one thing, that it is a circle of injustice, and a
noxious fallacy, first to apply the title of Superstition to such trifles or
faults as these, then to extend it farther to those things which have no such
fault to be charged on them, and then to condemn those also, as faults and
crimes, because they are Superstitious; just like the old heathen Tyrants
dealing with the primitive Christians, first to entertain themselves with the
bloody spectacles of bayting of wilde-beasts, then to take off those
wilde-beasts skins, and put them upon Christians, then to bring forth those
Christians to be baited and devoured in those shapes, The injustice of which is
the (...), the prime thing which this paper was designed to demonstrate.

44.
And it still it be urged and pressed that Superstition is a Nimiety and
Excess in the use of good Authors, and demand be made wherein, or what is that
Nimiety, that may properly be called Superstition? I answer, that if we will
needs take Superstition in that nature, then the most proper matter of it will
be.

First, 45.
The placing more virtue in some things then either naturally, or by the rule
of Gods word, or in the aestimation of purer ages of the Church of Christ may
be thought to belong to them; as the placing virtue or force in the sign of
the Cross, and the women's parvula Evangelia in S. Jerome on Mat. Cap. 23. The
Opus operatum of the Sacrament, and other Christian performances. (parallel to
the (...) or amulets among the Heathen, to the (...) the Phylacteries among the
Jews (having their audi Israel Deuteronomy. 5. fastened to their wrists and foreheads)
to drive away Devils, and to the precatiunculae the little Prayers that the
Turk carries about with him, as a defensative against all dangers, The doing
of which is either utterly groundless, and then it is folly; or else it
fastens some promise on Christ which he has not made in the Gospel, or some
doctrine on the ancient Church, of which that is not guilty neither, and so is
a Nimiety: or else,

Secondly, 46.
(That to which the literal importance of (...) referr's) An excess of fear,
or (...), being afraid of God, when we need not, thinking our selves bound (or
obligeing others) as from God, when God immediately neither commands nor
forbids, nor the lawful power under which we live (which would be mediatly the
command of God also) of this kind is the doing or absteining religiously (i. e.
upon pretense of divine praecept or prohibition) from those things which the
word and the law of Christ does neither immediately, nor by consequence of
commanding obedience to the higher powers, command nor interdict us. I say not,
the simple doing and abstayning (for that may be simply lawful) nor the doing
and abstayning upon ground of command or prohibition from our lawful
superiors, (for if there be any such, we are bound by the word of God to such
obedience, and the not paying thereof is as truly, I will add, as immediately a
breach of Gods Law and sin against God, as any act of theft or adultery, or
sin against the second table: for though the commands of the Magistrate, are
but mediatly the commands of God, yet the disobeying of those commands is an
immediate disobedience to God, in the fifth Commandment which commands to
honor, i. e. to obey him, and then to be most exact and praecise in caution
never to sin against that obedience, cannot be superstition, or fault, though
perhaps by being in a man that makes little Conscience of greater disobedience,
it be an ill Symptom of that Hypocrisy which consists in strayning at Gnats
and swallowing Camels) but the doing or absteyning religiously (which is in
effect dogmatizing Col. 2. 20. laying burdens upon our selves, and others as
from Christ) where Christ has wholly left us free. As if a private man should
think himself obliged by (or a Magistrate press upon others by virtue of the
Mosaicall praecept, the obligation of) the Jewish Law long since abrogated by
Christ, or any other outdated or not-yet-given command; This might be called
Superstition, under this Notion of Nimiety, because that man add's to the
Commands of Christ (as the former to the Promises) annexed to the Christian
Religion, to the Gospel Rule, those things which belong not to it, and so is
an exceeder in the fear and service of God, does things in obedience to God,
which he neither immediately nor mediatly commands, and so walks (...) Ephesians.
5. 15. Circumspectly, but as a fool, fearing where no fear is, doing some
things servilly (that is, fearing damnation if he should not do them) wherein
Christ has left him free, and no authority of the Church or lawful Magistrate
restrained that Liberty.

And this is a culpable or criminous Excess, 47.
not in doing what God commands not (for that may be innocent enough) but in
affirming (as a false Teacher) God to command when he does not command, or to
forbid when he does not forbid; and so inthralling himself or others, whom
God has freed. Which way of dogmatizing, or imposing as necessary such things
as the law of Christ has not made necessary (no, nor so much as the higher
powers authorized by Christ, nor the Primitive or universal Church of Christ,
which will have authority amongst all sober men) and so proceeding to make such
things marks and characters to condemn others and illustrate themselves by, is
the special kind of Superstition, which I have reason to believe any kind of
Protestants to be guilty of. Yea and

The only one, 48.
unless it be that ridiculous one of making groundless observations of
ominous things, inauspicious events, unlucky days, and such like old-wives
divinations, to which one part of Theophrastus his character of Superstition,
and of Agellius his notion of it, and of S. Austins also referrs; which yet is
rather believing firmly what we have no ground to believe, and so an excess of
credulity, then doing what we are not bound to do, and so an excess of
Religion; or if you will, a civil Superstition (being not in any order to the
worship of God) in an affected retayning or embracing of some old Heathen
traditions, taken up by the (...), first foolish in them, and then of evil
report for us to continue from them, being so much better instructed then they
were; and if taken up upon their authority, and continued under that notion,
then also possibly matter of scandal (as the eating of the (...) Things
offered to Idols, was 1 Cor. 10. 29.) But then still th is is rather an effect
of natural magic, or Heathenish persuasions, then an Excess of the Christian
Religion; and not at all the thing which is now a days pressed with that odious
title of Superstition, and therefore it may suffice to have named this without
farther enlarging on it.

As for those other things which are so ordinarily brended under this name, 49.
by many that are now ill pleased with the legal state of things in our
Church, though I shall not descend to the particular consideration of them, and
vindication of each, yet this it will not be unseasonable to have advertised in
this place, that that maine proof and common way of evidencing the
superstitiousnesse of some observances or performances among us* only because
either we do place (or others have placed) holiness in them, is, (whatsoever
may be said of it in thesi) in hypothesi or application to the particular cases
generally very false, or impertinent.

For, whenever in any such particular I shall be thus accused, 50.
I shall first ask what is meant by holiness? any real inherent virtue? or
only (according to the (...)
Hebrew, and so Scripture notation of the word) separation from common uses?
For the first of these, that real inhaerent holiness, no Protestant that I
have heard of, affirms it of any created thing, but only of persons, as God,
in the high degree, and Saints of his, in a lower and imperfect degree, by way
of communication from him. Either therefore the charge must be false, or else
by holiness must be meant that second kind of it, separation to holy, from
common uses; and thus times, and things, and actions, etc. may be truly called
holy, and if we place no more of this holiness in them, then thus truly
belongs to them, then sure we offend not again, nor are to be defamed (for
Superstitious in so doing.

In this case the only thing behind for inquiry will be, 51.
by whom and how far this thing what ever it is, is thus separated, and that
I shall suppose will be found to be done either by Christ or the Apostles, or
the universal Church in the purest ages, or the particular Church (and rulers
thereof) wherein we live; or if by none of these, then (being left free and at
our own disposing) by our own voluntary act, or that confirmed with a
resolution, or vow perhaps in some cases. Now if these or any of these be the
authors of the separating any thing, then to discern whether we exceed in any
of these, and whether we place more holiness then is due to them; it will not
be very difficult: For, if that; which is thus separated by Christ, I shall
count holy in that degree, and conceive my self obliged to it virtute
praecepti divini, by virtue of divine praecept, I surely offend not. And so in
the second, If I count my self obliged by the Apostolic pracept, or in the
third by the example or praecept of the primitive universal, or in the fourth,
of the particular Church, (each of which ought to have their authority with us,
though that in different degrees) all this while I offend not, because the
holiness which I place in them is still proportioned to the ground of it, the
authority of him that thus separated them.

And so again, 52.
if my voluntary oblation I perform as a voluntary oblation, and only expect
that God that has promised to accept such, will, if it be as it ought, accept
this; and in case of resolution and vow, add that respect in my performance,
which is due to such, all this while I am not blameworthy.

53.
But if I strain either of these any degree above its rank, elevate an
Ecclesiastical or humane Constitution into a divine Praecept, etc. then I
shall acknowledge this a fault, and that fault perhaps capable of the title of
Superstition: which yet must not be extended thus far, that the giving of the
like obedience to one as the other, is this fault, (for obedience being due to
both Divine and Humane laws (keeping their terms of subordination) I am alike
bound by Christ to obey both, and I must not make any difference in that
Obedience, but do both for Conscience sake) but that the confounding the
grounds or foundations of my obedience, which ought to be distinguished, is in
it self an error, and that which may prove of ill importance, by making me
equal them, when perhaps they come in competition with (and so thwart) one
another; in which case the inferior ought to give place to the superior.

If to this it be replied, 54.
that though I do not elevate this above its pitch, do not thus attribute more
holiness to this or that then it deserves, yet Papists or other Superstitious
persons have done so, and therefore the thing is become Superstitious, and
consequently must be forborne by me also. To this I answer First, That the ill
use of any will not, corrupt a thing in it self either commanded, or but
laudable, or only innocent before; and consequently though the Papists be
superstitious, yet will not every thing from them be sufficiently proved to be
superstitious unless it have some other crime beside their using it, for
otherwise, not only the Creed and Paternoster, but even the Scripture it
self must be superstitious also.

This inconsequence being acknowledged, 55.
I ad, Secondly, that there is nothing which can obliege me to abstein from
that which they have used superstitiously, unless either the danger that I be
thought to do so too, to be as Superstitious as they, or the possibility that
others following me in doing it, may follow them in doing it superstitiously,
and either of these dangers being supposed, will not yet come home to prove it
Superstitious, (which is the only thing we have now to consider) the most that
they can do, is to make it scandalous, and (beside that this belongs to
another matter and is abundantly handled in another Discourse on that Subject)
I shall add one thing more that this consideration of the danger or
possibility, is not so much a religious as a prudentiall one (for an act of
prudence it is to weigh and ponder whether this be a probable danger or no) and
so belongs to the higher powers to consider of (not to every private man) who
if they think fit by law to forbid it, I must not then venture on it; if (non
obstante this appearance of danger) to command it, though it is possible they
may do amiss in so doing, yet I (having nothing to do in that act of theirs,
unless I am of Counsel advised with in it) may be innocent enough in so
obeying, and if they have thought fit neither to command nor forbid, then am I
left free in my own particular, and may do either, so I do it with those
cautions, that in the tract of Scandal are set down.

To which if it be replied, that though this be true in thesi, 56.
yet in hypothesi 'twill not be pertinent in this kingdom. The laws of this
kingdom have taken away all Ceremonies used in the Roman Church, save those
that are named in those Laws, and so have left no man any such liberty. I
answer, They have taken away the obliegingnesse, but not lawfulness of them,
unless of those which either our Church or some higher principle has
pronounced unlawful; my meaning is, that whatsoever laudable performance was
taken up by the Papists, and by them commanded, now though that command be
taken away, and so we free from the obliegingnesse or burden of it, yet it is
not therefore made unlawful or prohibited to us (for that were to restrain our
liberty also, and only to exchange one burden for another) or if it were, I
should then think my self obliged to abstain also.

The Conclusion from all this discourse will be, 57.
that if some men, as they will abide no Rites, so they would avow no quarrels
but what Scripture will give them particular directions or commands for, and
consequently if they would not judge or damn their brethren, when neither
Christ and his writ, nor the authority of the primitive universal Church, nor
the orders of the particular within which they live, nor the indecency of the
thing it self (of which yet every private man must not be allowed a competent
judge) condemns them, it might be hoped that truth and peace and justice and
charity that have taken their joint flight from this earth together, might
together return to it again, which till it be done it must be still expected
that they who have learned one of the Devils attributes, that of Satan,
Adversary, or (...) enemy Man, will also advance to another, that of (...)
calumniator, and (...) accuser (as of the brethren. i. e. true believers so)
of every christian or innocent action of theirs, and that if there be no known
plain sin to be charged on them with any probability, then some unknown,
obscure, misunderstood name shall supply that place, and as once Aerodius
observed that there was a Law made that no crime should be capital but
treason, but then every the least misbehaviour, or even innocent harmless
action, in such whom they had a mind to punish, was brought in under the title
of Treason; and so every thing became capital by that means, so now it being
by some men resolved (if the testimony of the rest of their lives may be
believed) that there is no capital damning sin, worth heeding, or abstaining
from but Superstition, every rite or gesture or motion in them whom they please
to quarrel with, shall be accused and arraigned and sentenced under that title.

58.
It were to be wished that the pains that is taken in defaming all bodily
worship, under the morma of Superstition, were more profitably employed, either
in finding out means to increase our inward attention and fervor in performing
that great duty of prayer (to which purpose (I am confident) fasting, and
humility of bodily gestures, those two maine branches of the modern
Superstition, will not be found unprofitable) or else in the search of that
spiritual pride and uncharitableness and contention, that filthiness of the
Spirit, which is apt to steal into and defile the best men's hearts, and if it
may please, of one real, blasting, damning, and yet (as if out-dated) little
considered sin, you may take your option, either that of (...) Sacrilege.
To. 2. 22. or that other of irreverence and profaneness.

Take heed that no man deceive you with vain words.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. lin. 35. read (...). p 3. l. 35. r Romans 1. 25. p. 4. in marg. (...). p.
5. in marg. Char. (...). p 5. l. 15. p. 5. l. 15. (...) p 7. l. 3.for, men we,
r. many so. p. 9 l. 3. (...). l. 9. r. ^ome beyond. l. 11. for, souls r.
Gauls. l. 13. r. There lies (says he) in their Temples ^. l. 22. r. not
touching. p. 12. l. 37. r Superstitiosus. p 15. l. 36. r. since that others. p.
21. l. 4r. have placed) p. 22. l. 36. for them r. thence.


