OF RESISTING THE Lawful Magistrate Under color of RELIGION: AND Appendant to
it, of the word (...), rendered Damnation, Romans 13. REPRINTED.

ALSO, Of the Zelots among the Jews. Of taking up the Cross. A Vindication of
Christ's reprehending St. Peter, from the exceptions of Mr. Marshall.


OXFORD, Printed for H. H. and W. W. 1644.

Of resisting the lawful Magistrate upon color of Religion.
IN this proposal of the point for debate, there are only two words will need
an account to be given of them: 1. What is meant by Resisting. 2. Why the word
Color is put in. For the first, Resisting, here signifies violent, forcible,
offensive resistance, fighting against, as Hesychius the best
Scripture-glossary explaines it, ((...) and (...) all one, and (...) (...).
(...)) and the Apostle in like manner, Romans 13. 2. using (...) and (...),
promiscuously for the same, and so in other places, although it is true, it is
used sometimes in a wider sense; but that will not here be material, when we
here set down beforehand what we mean by it. For the second, the word
[Colour] is in the Title added, only for this reason, (not to prejudge the
Religion, which is fought for, to be only a color, but) because it is
possible for a man to fight for Religion, and yet not upon color of Religion;
to wit, in case the Religion for which he fights be established by the Law of
the Land, for then his color for fighting may be the preservation of Law,
which the Magistrate is bound by oath to maintain, and though he fight for
Religion, yet it is under that other color: whereas he that fights upon
color of Religion, making that his only pretense of fighting, is ipso facto
supposed to fight for a Religion distant or contrary to that which is
established by Law, and so all pretense or color of Law excluded, yea, and all
supposition of falling in the Magistrate; he standing for the Law present, not
against it; which I desire may be the setting of the case, to exclude the
fallacy, plurium interrogationum, and to distinguish the quarrel of Religion
from that other of Law, and so to meddle at this time only with that which is
fully within the Divines Sphere, and leave the other to some body else.

Those two terms being thus explained, and so the state of the question set,
the lawful Magistrate, and the established Law of the Kingdom on one side; and
some person or persons inferior to him, upon color of Religion, i. e. for
some Religion not yet established by Law, on the other side, that it should be
lawful to them to take up Arms against him, would seem not very reasonable,
if he were but a private man, abstracted from Regal power, (which sure does
not make it more lawful to resist him then any body else) having broken no
established Law, (as is supposed in the case) for what legal accusation can
lie against him in a point wherein he has not broken the Law? But then this
will be more unreasonable, it moreover it be considered, that color of
Religion is so wide and unlimited a thing, that no man, that is never so much
in the wrong in any opinion, but thinks himself in the right, (for otherwise
he would not continue in that error) and so that color will be plea equally
good to all sorts of errors, as well as truths: and besides, he that has not
so much Religion as to be in an error, may yet have so much wit as to make use
of that Apology for his sedition, (to wit, color of Religion) and plead it as
legally as the most zealous professor; and consequently, if that will serve
turn, who ever shall but pretend to believe contrary to the Religion
established in any Kingdom, shall be ipso facto absolved from all bond of
Allegiance in foro humano, and if he will adventure the hazard of the
judgment to come, shall have no restraint laid on him by any earthly
Tribunal; and so by this means already, the grounds of the dissolution of any
government are laid by this one unpolitick principle, and the world given up to
be ruled only by the Religion (which is in effect, the will) of every man;
whereas before, there was a State as well as a Church, Policy as well as
Religion, a power in the Magistrates hand, besides that in every man's own
breast or conscience; and yet more particularly, a restraint for hypocrites, as
well as any else, i. e. for pretenders of Religion, who, if this ground would
hold, were left unlimited. Where, if it be interposed, that such an one that
fallaciously pretends Religion, though by this disguise he escape here, yet
shall surely pay for it hereafter; and that that is sufficient, because there
is no other Court, but of that searcher of hearts, to which the hypocrite can
be bound over: I answer, that although that be true, yet it is not sufficient;
because, although there be a judgment to come for all crimes, yet it is
notwithstanding thought necessary to have present judicatures also, not to
leave all offenders to terrors at such a distance: and indeed, for the
continuance of the peace of Communities, to provide some violent restraint at
the present for those, whom those greater but future deterrements cannot
sufficiently work on. This every man knows is the original of humane Laws,
yea, and of Dominion it self, a praevision that all men will not do their
duties for love or fear of God, (it is apparent, the Jews would not under
their (...)) and therefore for good men's sakes, and for peace sake, and for the
maintaining of Communities, those superadditions have been thought necessary,
as some thorns in the hedge of Gods Law, that may pierce the hands and sides
of him that shall attempt to break over or thorough it. From whence the
conclusion will be evident, that the Rules for the preserving of government
must be such as shall have force to restrain the Atheist or the Hypocrite, as
well as the good Christian (which sure will less need those restraints) or
else they are utterly unsufficient to the attaining of their end, i. e. to the
preserving of government, peace, community, or protecting any that lives under
it: Which being supposed, it will also follow, that nothing must be indulged
upon any color of Religion, (be his Religion never so true, and himself never
so sincere in it;) which will open this gap or outlet to others, that may make
the ill use of it: For this will be utterly destructive of the end of
government (which is, that we may lead a peaceable quiet life, 1 Timothy 2. 2.)
yea, and of government it self.

This argument being thus prosecuted and cleared, might be sufficient to
determine this whole business, were it not for one rejoinder which is
ordinarily made, the force of which is taken from that supreme care that every
man ought to have of his own soul, and consequently of the maintaining of his
Religion, on which (to abstract from all possible disputes concerning the
particular truth of it, he being perhaps not acute or artist enough to uphold
it against all objecters) he is fully convinced, the health and salvation of
that wholly depends. For the maintaining of which against all the humane power
in the World, if he may not take up Arms, or do any thing, he cannot see what
can be fit for him to fight for, (nothing sure being more precious then that;)
or consequently, why he may not take up that opinion of the
Beyond-Sea-Anabaptists, That it is not lawful to fight at all: which if it
should be yielded to, although for the present it would produce peace, yet it
would be little for the advantage of Magistrates in the issue. To this I shall
answer, by concession of these four things: 1. That Religion is to be every
man's supreme care, the prime Jewel in his Cabinet. 2. That it cannot, at least
in humane consideration, be expected that any man should be less careful of
his false Religion (if he be really persuaded of the truth of it) then any
other is of the true. Nay, 3. that if he do not use any lawful means to
defend that false (whilst he is convinced it is the true) Religion, this is a
sin of lukewarmnesse in him; though indeed through prepossession not to open
his eyes to greater light and revelation of the truth offered to him, and
perhaps through sluggishnesse not to seek that light, be yet a far greater
sin in him. For though no man ought to defend the contrary to what he takes to
be truth, yet ought he to be most ready to deposite his error, not only when
it does, but also when it may appear to him to be so, and to seek to those
helps that may be isntrumental to that end. 4. That in some cases the use of
Arms is not unlawful. But then all this being thus granted, and so in effect,
that all lawful means may be used for the maintaining of Religion, we must
yet secondly deny the inference of the Objection, upon this only ground,
because though Arms may lawfully be used in some cases, and Religion be
maintained by all lawful means; yet Arms are not a lawful means for this
end, and so may not be used in this case; that is, by Subjects against the
lawful Magistrate in case of Religion, at least when some other Religion is by
Law established in that Kingdom. Which Assertion I shall confirm only by
four Arguments: 1. Taken from the nature of Religion. 2. From examples of
Christ and Christians. 3. From the very making of Christianity, and
particularly of the Protestant Doctrine. 4. From the Constitution of this
Kingdom, which being subordinate to the other three, may deserve consideration,
as far as it agrees with them.

1. From the nature of Religion, which is an act of the soul, which cannot be
forced or constrained by outward violence; and therefore, it is apparent, needs
no outward defense for the maintaining of it, much less invasion of others. A
man may be as truly religious under all the tyranny and slavery in the world,
as in the most triumphant prosperous estate? They that have power to kill the
body, are not able to commit them least rape upon the soul; they may rob me of
my life, they cannot of my Religion; the weakest creeple in the Hospital may
defy the whole Army of the Philistines in this matter. But you will ask, Is
not the outward profession and public exercise of Religion some part of it,
and that to be thus maintained, where any attempt to hinder it? To which I
answer, That the first of these, the outward Profession, can no more be hindered
then the former act of the soul, but rather may be most illustrious in the
time of depression. I may confess Christ in the den of lions, in the furnace,
on the rack, on the gridiron, and when my tongue is cut out, by patient,
constant suffering in that cause. Religion is not so truly professed by
endeavoring to kill others, as by being killed patiently our selves rather
then we will renounce it. When I fight, it may be malice, revenge, some hope of
gain (or impunity at least) by the present service, any one of a hundred
worldly interests, that may help to whet my sword for me; or most clearly, a
hope I may kill and not be killed: and so all this while here is no act of
confession of Christ in thus venturing my life, although I do affirm I do
this for my Religion; because, though I so affirm, men are not bound to
believe me, there being so much odds against me, that I do it for somewhat
else. But when I say down my life patiently, the sacrifice of my God, resign
up all possible worldly interests for the retaining of my one spiritual trust,
this is to the eye of man a profession capable of no reasonable suspicion of
infincerity; and indeed none so, but this.

As for the second, the public exercise of the true Religion, it were by all
men heartily to be wished that it might be enjoyed at all times, for the
advancing of Gods glory, increase of charity, conversion of others, etc. But if
it may not be had by the use of lawful means, it will not be required of us
by God, without whose special providence it is not, that he permits us to
be forbidden that exercise. Till the same providence be pleased to remove such
hinderance, and open to us a lawful way of obtaining it, the primitive
Christians secret meetings will first be imitable to us; and if those be
obstructed also, their folitudes next. And however, that design of obtaining
free exercise of our Religion, will never make any practice lawful to be used
in order to that, that before was utterly unlawful.

But are we not to take care of our children and posterity, as well as of our
selves? If our Religion be now suppressed, our poor children and progeny to the
end of the world may in all probability be kept in blindness and ignorance,
and so left to the place of darkness irrecoverably. This objection sounds
somewhat pathetically, and is apt to affect our bowels, more then our reason;
moves our compassion first, and through those spectacles is then represented
with improvement to our judgment. But for answer to it, though the Doctrine of
Election of particular men, as well and as absolutely to the means as to the
end, might be to him that acknowledges it a sufficient amulet against this
fear, and so no need of that their jealous care for their posterity, any
farther then it is in their power to contribute toward them (which sure is no
more then to do what is lawful for them to do;) yet the answer will be more
satisfactory to all that acknowledge Gods providence, however opinionated
concerning decrees, that whosoever considers himself as a man, much more as a
father of a posterity, must have many things to trust God with, and only God;
and among those nothing more, then the future estate of those which are come
from him. Yet, if he be importunate and still unsatisfied, unless he himself
contribute somewhat to the securing of his posterity in this matter, let me
tell him, There is nothing (after his prayers to God, and paternall blessing on
them) so likely to entaile his Religion upon them, as his sealing it by his
sufferings. This sure will be a more probable way to recommend his Religion to
them, (when they shall hear, and be assured by that testimony, that their
fathers thus hoped in God) then that other so distant, that they died in a
rebellion against the King; or, that this Religion had been in their time
turned out of the Land, had not they done something so unlawful to protect it.
Besides, the greatest prejudice which but posterity (of which we pretend such
care) can suffer by my non-resistance, is only to be brought up in a contrary
Religion, to hear that way first, but sure not to have their ears deafed
against all others when they shall be represented, nor to bring the guilt of
non-representation upon them if they be not. And if I bring forth reasonable
creatures, I hope they will, by the grace of God, make use of the reason and
his grace, to find out that truth that their souls are so much concerned in:
and if (through no default personal of theirs) they should miss of it, I hope
the invinciblenesse of their ignorance, and their sincere repentance for all
their sins and errors known and unknown, and their readiness to receive
the truth, if it were or might be represented to them, would be antidote
sufficient, by Gods mercy in Christ, to preserve them from that poison, so they
were careful according to their means of knowledge to escape all other
dangers. And all this upon supposition, but not concession, that the Religion
of him that would fight for it, were the truth and only truth; whereas indeed,
there is not a more suspicious mark of a false Religion, then that it is feign
to propagate it self by violence: The Turks and Papists being the only
notable examples hitherto of that practice; till some others, directly upon
Popish principles a little varied in the application, have fallen upon the same
conclusion.

Now secondly for the examples of Christ and Christians, but first of Christ:
His example (as to this purpose) is evident in three passages (besides that
grand transcendent copy, proposed from the aggregate of all his life and death,
Mat. 11. 29. Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly.) The first is, Luke 9. 54.
The inhabitants of a Samaritan village would not receive Christ, verse. 53. upon
that, James and John remembering what Elias had done in the like kind, 1 King.
18. and 2 King. 1. ask't his judgment of it, whether he, would be pleased that
they should command fire to come down from heaven and consume them, as Elias
did, that is, in effect, whether they should not do well to use whatever power
they had (and be confident that God would assist them in it) to the destroying
of those who-ever they were (and yet that they were not their Magistrates it is
clear) which affronted them in the exercise of their Religion, or indeed,
which would not receive Christ. To this Christ answers sternly, the words are
emphaticall, he turned (as to Peter when he gave him that check, Mat. 16. 23.)
and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit you are of: that
is, Elias was a Zelot, 1 Mac. 2. 58. (the full importance of which will belong
(...).
to another disquisition) and jure zelotarum, might do somewhat against Baals
Prophets, which will not agree with that distant calling or profession of a
Disciple of Christ, or Christian; they are mistaken if they think they may do
as Elias did. From whence, by the way, is a prohibition fully legal put in
against all examples of the Old Testament, (if any such there were) from being
pleadable amongst Christians, upon this ground of Josephus his observing, that
the Jews were governed by a (...), God being as it were their King on earth
for a long time, presiding immediately, and interposing by his Oracle, and
other particular directions, as well as standing Law, as in that case of
Phinees and Elias, etc. By which those acts of theirs, though authorized by no
settled or ordinary Law, were yet as legal as whatever in any other
Commonwealth were done by authority legally descending from the supreme
Magistrate. Which whosoever shall now apply to Christians, besides that he
professes himself an asserter of Enthusiasmes, will meet with Christ's check to
the Boanerges, You know not what spirit you are of: I have not authorized you
to pretend to the Spirit of Elias, or to do what a Zelot among the Jews might
do.

The second exemplary passage to this purpose in the story of Christ is, Mat.
26. 51. when Christ was apprehended by those tumultuous persons, at the best
but servants of the chief Priests and Elders (not again by any power of
lawful Magistrate) Peter drew the sword, and smote off one of those servants
ears; upon that, Christ's Answer is the thing to be observed, verse. 52. Then
said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place, for all they that
take the sword, shall perish with the sword: The speech particular to Peter, a
prime Disciple or Christian, that he having drawn the sword in defense of
Christ, and in him of Christianity it self, (a more justifiable course then
ever any man since undertook under the color of Religion) must put it up
again; but the reason added, of an unlimited universal obligingness to all
Christians; For all they that take the sword (as Peter did, in defense of
Christ, etc. or else the citation had not been pertinent to him) shall perish
by the sword. And the two parallel places which are noted in the margent of our
English Bibles, are somewhat considerable; the first, Genesis 9. 6. where that Law
was given to the sons of Noah, (...) concerning the effusion of blood, which
sure was not any prohibition to legal, though capital punishments of
Malefactors, (but rather the investing the Magistrate with that power of the
sword) and yet is by Christ urged as a prohibition to Saint Peter; signifying,
that effusion of blood by him in that case to be utterly illegal, and against
the intention of that old Law, not abrogated (it seems) by Christ. The other
parallel place is Revel. 13. 10. where immediately upon the repeating of those
words, He that kills with the sword, shall be killed with the sword, is
subjoyned, Here is the patience and faith of the Saints. i. e. Christian
Martyrs, verse. 7. whose faith it seems and patience must go together; which
sure is most irreconcilable with forcible resistance. The for of this ^lace of
Christ to St. Peter, see M. M has labored to delude, an^ therefore (...) have
labored to vindicate in anoth^^ Discourse hereto appendant, to which I refer
the Reader.


The third exemplary passage of Christ was in his suffering, wherein many
particular circumstances might be observed, especially his answer to Pilate,
John 19. 11. in acknowledgement of his legal power given him from above. But
all that I shall observe is only in the general, That he that had so many
legions of Angels, certainly sufficient to defend him and invade his enemies,
(whatsoever will be thought of the Christians strength in Tertullians time to
have done so too, of which more anon) did yet without the least resistance give
himself up to suffer death. And if it should be objected, that this was to
accomplish what God has decreed (ought not Christ to suffer these things, and
thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer) and in obedience to
that decree, not as matter of example to us, or of intimation, that it had not
been lawful for him to have done otherwise. To this I answer, That as Christ
was decreed to that death, and non-resistance, so are Christians (if Saint Paul
may be believed) predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, Romans 8.
that is, to that pattern of his in suffering, not fighting for Religion: and
that revelation of Gods will in that decree being supposed, it will follow,
That though Christ might have lawfully done otherwise, yet we Christians now
may not, especially being commanded to learn of him particularly his
meekness; i. e. especially that Lamb-like quality of the Lamb of God in his
sufferings, Isai. 53. 7. So much for the examples of Christ.

Now for the like of Christians; it will be needless to mention any other then
those of whom Tertullian and Saint Cyprian spoke, being so perfectly home to
that purpose, Tertul. in Apol c. 37. and his book, Ad Scapulam, wholly to this
purpose: and Saint Cyprian in his book against Demetrianus, etc. The sum of
which is this, That the Christians of that age had strength sufficient, either
to have resisted, or avenged themselves upon their heathen persecuting
Governors; but in obedience to the Laws of Christ, chose rather to die, then
do so. The several testimonies (of which this is the Abstract) being so fully
produced by many, and known by all, it will be more to purpose to vindicate
them from all exceptions, and intercept all evasions, which the wit of this
last year (beyond all that any former age pretended to) has invented to
evacuate those testimonies; witness Goodwins Anticavalierisme, p. 23. etc. And
this I shall take leave to do at large, because it is said, many have been
satisfied in the lawfulness of their present course, by those Answers and
Objections which that book has helped them to.

1. It is objected, The father (Tertullian) might easily be mistaken, in making
the estimate of the strength of Christians, in comparison of the strength of
them that were to oppose them. This is in civil terms, to say, Tertullian
wrote he knew not what; or at the softest, He might be ignorant of what he
affirms he knew; and I am confident, was more likely to know, living then,
then the Objecter now, seeing or conjecturing at the distance of so many
hundred years; who has not the least authority (which must be the Judge in
matter of fact) on his side, against so distinct and clear affirmation, not
only of Tertullian in several places (and that in an Apology against the
Gentiles, who could and would certainly have tript him in so manifest a
falsehood, if it had been such; and though the negative Argument be not fully
convincing, that they did not thus trip him, because we do not hear or read
they did, yet will this be of as much force as any he has to the contrary:
This certainly, the writing it to the Gentiles, will be able to conclude, that
Tertullian had been very imprudent and treacherous to his own cause, to have
affirmed a thing in defense of it, which his adversaries could so manifestly
have proved a falsity, if it were not so as he affirmed) but of Cyprian also,
who lived about the same time; and no Writer of that age or since produced (I
doubt not but I may say, producible) to the contrary.

Of the proofs that are offered to make it appear possible and probable, that
Tertullian should be so mistaken, the first is, Because this was no point of
faith, etc. and therefore a devout father might fall under a misprision herein.
I grant he might, but that does not prove he did; no nor that it is probable he
should be a more incompetent judge in such a matter, then he that now
undertakes to control him: Nay sure, less reason is there to deny the
authority of the Ancients in matters of fact (which if they were not evident to
them, must needs be much less evident to us, who have no means to know any
thing of them but their relations, nor cause to suspect such relations, but
either by some impossibility in the things themselves, which is not here
pretended, or by some other as authentic relation contradicting it, which is
as little pretended) then of faith, the ground of which being only the written
word of God, is common with them to us; and therefore may enable us to judge,
whether that which they affirm to be matter of faith, be so indeed, to be
found really in that sacred Writ, from whence they pretend to fetch it.

And whereas it is farther added, That no rule of charity or reason binds us to
believe another, in any thing which belongs to the art or profession of
another, and wherein himself is little versed or exercised: I answer, that
this saying, thus applied, will take away, the authority of a very great part
of those Histories which no body yet has questioned. If it were spoken of
Doctrines, it might hold, and sure to that belongs the axiom quoted, Unicuique
in art sua credendum est; but in narrations it is the unreasonablest thing in
the world, to require the Narrator to be of that profession of which he
relates the fact; for then no man must adventure to write a Kings life but a
King: and if Mr. M. Mr. A. or Mr. S. being Ministers of the word, shall write
their letters concerning the Parliaments victory at Keinton, and relate the
number of the slain on that side, so far inferior to those on the Kings, we
must now upon this admonition retract that belief we then allowed them, and
begin now (though too late) to question whether it were indeed a victory or no,
which caused such solemn thanksgiving in this City. But then secondly, why
this Relation should so wholly belong to the profession of another, i. e. not
to Tertullians, I cannot yet discern: For the maine of Tertullian's testimony
was, That the Christians chose rather to suffer then to resist, though they
were able; because Christian Religion taught the one, and forbad the other: And
this sure was not without the sphere of the Divine. But for their strength to
resist, depending on the number of Christians, not as even ballancing the
Heathens in the Empire, but as very considerable, and able to raise an Army, if
they would make head, I doubt not but Tertullian, a Presbyter, that now
labored in converting and confirming Christians, and was not always in his
study, nay, who had lately been a Lawyer, and so not unacquainted with the
Public, might know and relate with far better authority, then any who has
dared now to contradict him. For, for the art of ballancing the power of
parties in a Kingdom, and grounds of precise determination of such
differences, (which as the Objecter denies Tertullian, so he is unwilling to
yield to the Statesman himself) you shall see anon that we have no need to
make Tertullian Master of it, his relation will stand unmoved without it.

The second proof to blast Tertullians Relation, is the ordinary one in
fashion now-a-dayes; if any man differs in opinion from us, presently to
examine his whole life, and if ever he did or spoke any thing unjustifiable,
lay that vehemently to his charge, and by that defame him, and then we may
spare the pains of answering his reasons, disproving his assertion; he once
lied or sinned, and therefore it is ridiculous to expect any truth from him.
The Argument is this, He might mistake and miscarry in this, for not long after
he miscarried so grievously, as to turn Montanist, who called himself the
Holy Ghost, etc. Just as if I should resolve to believe no relation of any
Minister (present in either of the Armies) of the strength of that Army, until
I had examined, and were assured that he were not a Chiliast, an Arrian, nor
guilty of any others Heresy condemned by the Church: Yea and more, till I had
some degree of assurance that he would never be such. Or, as if I should
resolve this man knew no Logic, because in this period he offends so much
against Grammar in these words, [to turn Montanist, who called himself the
Holy Ghost;] where the Relative [who] has certainly no Antecedent; Tertullian
cannot, for he called not himself the Holy Ghost, but only used that style
so ordinary now-a-dayes [nos spirituales,] and all others [animales psychici;]
and Montanist cannot, unless as once Areopagi signified the Areopagites, so
now by way of compensation, Montanist must pass for Montanas; for he it was
that called himself the Holy Ghost, not all or any of his followers. This way
of concluding, from a slip in Grammar, an ignorance in Logic, (especially
being backed with the suffrage of so many unconcluding Arguments) will be as
fair Logical proceeding, as to infer, because Tertullian afterward turned
Montanist, therefore then he spoke he knew not what. But then Saint Cyprian
was no Montanist, and yet he affirmed the same that Tertullian does, contra
Demetrian: As for the approving of dreams and furious fantasies for true
prophesies, (which is added to be revenged on Tertullian, for contradicting
this Objecter) I confess I excuse not him, but wish we might learn any thing
of him, rather then that. But I hope the narration we have now in hand, was
neither Maximilla's nor Prisca's dreams: If it was a fantasy, it was quite
contrary to a furious one. And for the close of this Argument, wherein the
warning is given as it were from heaven, how unsafe and dangerous it is to
build on the authority of men, as I desire the Reader may take it home with
him, and from thence resolve to believe no longer any thing upon this Objecters
authority, so denudate of all reason; so I do not yet see, why he that once
erred, must never be allowed to speak truth; the making of true narrations
being compatible with the greatest heresy in the world.

The third Argument against Tertullian's testimony, is an observation of (...),
that there is a pronenesse of inclination in much devotion, in persons devoutly
given, to overvalue the works and piety of other men. To which my only
Answer shall be, That yet I hope it is not observed, that devout men are so
strongly inclined to tell plain lies, to this end, that they may make
themselves over-valued by others. This must be Tertullian's infirmity, (if the
Objecter guess aright) being a Christian himself, and in his Apology
laboring to raise an high opinion of Christians in the Gentiles, to whom he
writes; to which purpose, if he should forge falsities, I must confess it were
a shrewd weakness, very ill becoming devotion, whatever the practice of later
times may say in excuse of it.

The fourth proof is from a second observation, That in the pious and orthodox
Fathers themselves, there are some touches and streins, some fibrae of the root
of bitterness, which afterward grew rank in the times of Popery, etc. The
Answ. All that I can collect from hence toward the conclusion designed, is,
that this Objectors sense is, that for Tertullian to say there were Christians
enough in the Roman Empire to work revenge on their oppressors, was a spice of
Popery; and so there is one new piece of Popery more added, to the many which
this Age has concluded under that title, above the inventory of the Trent
Catechism. And so now to debate this any further, or profess my self to
opine as Tertullian did, is to acknowledge my self Popish, and that is as bad
as Prelaticall; and so from henceforth all my Arguments will but pass for
temptations, which none but carnal men must submit to, be they never so
demonstrative. Yet must I have leave to wonder, how in the close of this
Section these words [the sounder and more considerate knowledge of these latter
times] can have any reference to the point in hand: For certainly, for the
strength of the then Christian party, our knowledge in these latter times
cannot be sounder or more considerate, then theirs that then lived amongst
them: or if it be, the words [latter times] will be improper, for sure it will
be affirmed only of that time wherein Mr. J. G. wrote this part of this book;
for I am confident he was the first that ever revealed this act of more
considerate knowledge to the world.

The fifth and last proof is, That what ever their number was, yet it is no
ways likely they should be fuffered to have any Arms, etc. To which, and to
all the prudentiall state motives whereon it is grounded, (and so to all that
Section) I shall return no answer but the very words of Tertullian, which if
all put together, they do not defend their Author from all their assaults,
neither will I believe the Christians strength was sufficient to buckle with
their adversaries. His words are plain: first, if we would hosts exertos
agere, deal like professed enemies, desiisset nobis vis numerorum and copiarum?
should we have wanted force of numbers (i. e. men) or armed soldiers? (for so
sure copiae signifies.) Secondly, he says as plainly, Castella vestra, castra
implevimus, we have filled your Castles and Camps, (there, sure they were
armed; and so the Thebaean Legion, which yielded themselves to the Emperors
butchery, wanted neither number nor arms to have resisted.) Thirdly, he says,
cui bello non idonei? what war had we not been fit for? etiam impares copiis,
though we had not had so many armed men as they, qui tam libenter trucidamur.
Their despising of death, (nay, gladness to dye) might have put them upon any
hazard unarmed; and he professes the only thing that kept them from
resisting, was the Doctrine which they had learnt, That it was more lawful to
be killed, then to kill. Fourthly, he says, They had a way of revenge without
Arms, to wit, by departing from them, by that secession to have brought envy
upon them; (as for example, upon dislike of the present state, to have gone to
New England, etc. to raise an odium upon the Old) but this they would not be so
malicious as to do neither: nay, besides, amissio tot civium ipsa destitutione
puniisset, the loss of so many Citizens would have been a punishment, by
making them less able to resist other enemies; plures hosts, quam cives usque
remansissent, there would have been a greater number of enemies, then there
would have been Citizens remaining. Fifthly, to put all beyond exception, he
puts them in mind how one night with a few firebrarnds they might have wrought
their revenge, if it were lawful for them to repay evil with evil. This one
last particular being considered, is so full a demonstration of the truth now
in debate, that supposing there were but one Christian at liberty to use that
one firebrand, there can be no longer doubt but that there was sufficient
strength to work their revenge, if their Religion would have permitted them to
do so. And if their Religion (as was said out of him) were the only
restraint, then certainly their weakness was not. Nay, though they should
after all this (by a morally impossible supposition) be supposed weak, yet if
their Religion did truly restrain them, as he professes it did, this were
abundantly sufficient to decide the controversy betwixt us and the Objecter.

Having proceeded thus far in answer to the several exceptions against the
truth of Tertullian's assertion, concerning the strength of those Christians, I
am invited farther by a second proffer of the Objecter to make appear, that
although Tertullian's assertion should be supposed true, yet it were
unsufficient, it would not reach the question, or case in hand. This certainly
is strange at first sight, the case in hand being, Whether the reason of their
non-resistance were their want of strength. Which in all reason must be
determined negatively, when once these two things are supposed; first, that
they had strength; secondly, that the command of Christ, or making of
Christianity was the cause of their nonresistance, and not want of strength.
But there is no truth so evident, but the cunning of such a crafts-master will
be able to transform, both from evidence and truth; and therefore (though in
all justice a man might vow never to have commerce with such a man more, that
should undertake thus to master his understanding; that he should believe and
not believe the same thing; yield the want of strength to be the cause, at the
very time when he acknowledges or supposes, first, no want of strength;
secondly, somewhat else, to wit, the command of Christ, to be the cause;) yet I
shall (to exercise that Christian meekness which I desire to assert by my
actions, as well as words) wait on this great Artificer to the second part of
his Answer. The sum of which, as he first sets it, is this, That supposing
the father spoke truth concerning their strength, yet on some considerations he
mentions, It had been in those that were called to suffer, both want of wisdom
in respect of themselves, and of charity in respect of others, if they should
have made the least resistance. To which my only answer shall be, to beseech
him to consider, that this is part of Tertullian's testimony, that the thing
that restrained them was (not this wisdom, but) the doctrine of their Christ;
concluding it more lawful to be killed, then to kill; and utterly unlawful to
repay evil for evil. And as for charity to others, I humbly wish that were,
or may yet be considered, how much burden, etc. this resistance (of which he is
the professed a better) has brought on others, who are no parties on either
side; nor, I hope, ill Christians, if their only punishable crime be, making
conscience of non-resistance.

To the next Section, in answer to a supposed Reply, where he says, That it is
not probable they had any sufficiency of strength. I answer, that I cannot be
so tame as thus to be caught, or so wild as to imagine that improbable, at a
time when Tertullian's testimony is supposed to be true, (as now it is
supposed) the special part of which testimony is yielded to be, that they had
sufficient strength. And where he adds 2. that 'twas not necessary they should
be of one mind and judgment touching this sufficiency, etc. I answer, that we
do not assert any such necessity, nor does our cause any way incline us to it,
or want that refuge: For sure we affirm not, that they did actually resist (to
which only, that concurrence would have been necessary) but only that they
would not, though they were able; and to the evidencing of that, the
concurrence of judgment you speak of, is not material; for if they that did
so think of their strength, were upon grounds of Christian patience and
obedience, as far from doing or attempting it as any other, these men would
certainly have continued in the same obedience, though all the world had
concurred with them in the opinion of their sufficiency. For, to profess
Christian meekness first, and then upon any supervenient occurrence to be
ready for resistance, though it might be a character of the temporary (that I
say not hypocritical) subjection of our days, yet must not we be so
groundlesly uncharitable, as to affix it on those Christians: and though the
Objecter should renounce his present supposition, and again contend, that
Tertullian lied, and so divest him of all authority as a father, of common
honesty as a relater; yet sure he will not be so severe to deny him so much of
an ordinary Rhetor, as to make that an ingredient in his Apology for
Christians, which were the highest piece of an accusation. Grant but Tertullian
to have any skill in any of his professions, suppose him but an Orator, if not
a Divine, a tolerable pleader, if not a tolerable man; allow him but skill at
the Deske, (his first trade, before he was a Christian) the reputation of a
little eloquence, though no sincerity, and his very pleadings will be
argumentative, though his words may not.

But it is added in the third place, That having no invitation, countenance, or
command from any authority, etc. their case was differing from ours. To which I
answer again, 1. That it was not still the want of such command or invitation,
that restrained them, but the contrary command of Christ; as has been clear.
But then secondly, I pray let me ask a question, as of one which I will in
reason suppose not to be unacquainted with the sense of Junius, Brutus, and
Buchanan, and it is only this, Whether, if all temporal Magistrates neglect
the work of Reformation, the Ministers may not and ought not to attempt it, if
they can hope to prevail? If so, then though the case be not just the same now
and then, yet the difference is not material or pertinent; for then sure
Ministers there would have been to invite, if that had been the Christian way.

But when it is added within three lines, that we are invited, etc. by as great
and as lawful an authority as this State has any: I must confess, I had
thought that the King and both Houses had been a greater authority, unless the
meaning be not simply, but ad hoc, as great and as lawful an authority as this
State has any, to do what is now done; and then sure it shall be granted by
me, who profess my self to suppose it impossible, that any command given to
this purpose should be lawful, or able to secure any from that sentence of
Saint Paul's, They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Yet once
more, It is possible that the Author, by this State may mean a Republique,
which though it be a word of some signification in some other Countries, yet
that our Laws acknowledge any such here, I have not yet been taught; nor sure
can any part of this Kingdom without the King be capable of this Title, till
we have molded a new form of Government, and new Laws, as the Model of
that; for undoubtedly the old ones are not acquainted with any such. But that I
will hope is not the meaning, because it is added, that inferior Magistrates,
etc. which seems to acknowledge, that the Parliament without the King are but
inferior Magistrates. Of the agreeableness of that Title of Magistrates and
Rulers, to that body without the head, I purpose not to speak; only to that
which is added, That they should be obeyed, as well as Kings. I answer,
(without canvasing of the place in Saint Peter, which others have done) That if
they are to be obeyed; but as well as Kings, then 1. The King that commands not
to do it, is to be obeyed, as well as they. 2. Not they against the King, for
that the inferiority implies. An inferior Magistrate, in that that is lawful,
and within his Commission, and not thwarted by a superior, is to be obeyed as
well as if he were superior in that, or as well as the superior in any thing
else; but sure not to the despising of the superiors lawful commands, when
they do interpose; for that were more then as well. When the King commands
that which God and the Law does not forbid, it may be said, that his commands
are to be obeyed as well as Gods; which the Apostle intimates, when he says,
You must be subject for conscience sake; and the ground of this truth is,
because indeed God the supreme, commands that subjection to the King in such
matters. But sure for all this the King is not to be obeyed against God, or
where any countermand of his has intervened; for this were, in Saint Peter's
phrase, to obey men (not as well, but) rather then God. Thus is it in that
other case, the inferior is to be obeyed, as well as the superior, (in things
lawful, and not contradictory to the Superiors commands) upon that ground of
necessity of obedience to the Superior, from whom he has his Commission, and
as Saint Peter says, (...), is sent of him; i. e. of, or by that (...),
supereminent person, the King; but sure this holds not against the superior,
as in the other case it did not. 3. Not they, when they command to take up
Arms against him whom Saint Paul bids me not resist, upon pain of damnation;
and by my oath of Allegiance (if it were otherwise lawful) I have bound my
self that I will not. Whereupon it is observable, that the Assertors of this
war are now brought to undertake, that damnation, or (...), Romans 13. shall
not signify damnation, (poor men, what a weak thread does the sword hang in,
that is just over their souls? and what a sad condition would it be, if to one
that dies a confident Martyr in this war, damnation at the day of doom
should prove to signify damnation?) but some temporary mulct; and yet withal,
that this war is not against the King; (when yet that other against the Earl
of Essex his Army, is not doubted to be against the Parliament;) which two so
strange, and yet distant holds, (for if it be not against the King, what need
of that other evasion from the damnation that belongs to resisters? or if
resisters shall carry it away so easily, why may not War be avowed against
the King, by any that will adventure his wrath?) do sure signify men's
consciences to be strangely grounded, and themselves very groundlesly
confident, which are satisfied upon no better principles, and whose practices
are capable of no better security.

Upon these grounds thus laid, of obedience due to inferior as well as
superior (supreme it should be, for so (...) must here signify, and I hope
that our King amongst us is such) Magistrates, the Objecter puts a case, that
the inferior Governor requires that which is only honest, etc. as to do our
best to defend our selves against those that contrary to law and conscience
assault us, the superior that which is contrary to both, viz. to sit still,
etc. In this case he resolves it is most clear on his side, for (whether the
lawfulness or necessity he intimates not of) resistance against the superior.
To this I answer, that it is hard to believe that the Objecter did not
purposely intend to deceive his Reader by that phrase [onely honest, etc.] for
that is a very doubtful sense; it may signify, that nothing else were honest,
and then it is in that sense apparently false; for if it were honest to take up
Arms against a King, yet sure may not-taking-up Arms be honest too; for
(whatever that crime of neutrality signify in these days) it may be lawful
for a man to suffer injury, to suffer himself to be defrauded (and that by a
King, as well as by an equal) 1 Cor. 6. 7. I hope resistance, though it have
lately commenced, and taken upon it the degree of virtue, yet has not turned
Projector, got the monopoly of virtue and honesty into its hand, that it should
engrosse and enclose that title, and there be no other virtue or honesty
besides this: yet would the affirmations of some, out of no meaner place then
the Pulpit, [that all that are for the King at this time are Atheists or
Papists] conclude and persuade thus much. But I would fain believe, that the
meaning of the phrase [onely honest, etc.] is, [no more then honest] i. e. not
necessary. But if that be it, then sure the superior Governor may deserve to
be obeyed in forbidding it, as well as the inferior in commanding: For it will
not follow in that case, that the King commands somewhat contrary to the Law of
God, and nature; but only somewhat contrary to something which was agreeable,
i. e. not against the Law of God and nature; i. e. prohibits a thing lawful,
not necessary; as the other is supposed to command a thing lawful, not
necessary: which sure were as free for him to do, as for the inferior;
supposing, as the Objector supposes, that the command of God indifferently
extends it for obedience to either, in things that are lawful. Hence it
appears, that in the case here put, the command of the superior is falsely
affirmed, to be an unlawful command; (for then the matter of the inferiors
command must be supposed, not only honest, but necessary) and if it be a
lawful one, it may and will then make void that obligation for that
particular, which is supposed by the Law of God to lie on us, to obey the
inferior in that which is lawful. The short is, if that which is here spoken
of, be in it self necessary, we must do it, as in spite of all countermands
of the superior, so without all commands or invitations of the inferior
Magistrate; but if it be not necessary in it self, neither will the commands
of an inferior make it necessary to any who stands prohibited by a superior.

In the fourth Section the Objecter offers at a reason, why those ancient
Christians (supposing strength in them) should rather patiently suffer, because
before their conversion they had consented to the Emperor's power, whereby
those Edicts were made for the murdering of Christians, etc. To which I
answer, that it is ridiculous to seek out, or impose upon the Reader probable
or possible reasons for their non-resistance, when Tertullian in their name
specifies the true only reason, the Gospel Doctrine of Christian patience and
obedience. But for the particular of their consent, much might be added, to
show the vanity of that plea, if that were tanti, or pertinent. I shall only
say, that if the Emperor legally murdered Christians, then their consent to
that Law (or to the power of the Emperor who made it) would not bind or
dispense with them to omit any thing necessary, or otherwise commanded by any
greater power; for if I swear to do so, I must break my oath, non obstante
what is concluded from Psalm. 15. 4. And if it were not otherwise necessary, or
commanded by greater power then, neither is resistance now. And then, the Kings
prohibition will as much restrain me in any thing not necessary, as their
heathenish consent could be supposed to restrain them then. Nay, he that makes
that consent a nullity. (as this Objecter in fine does) what reason can he
render, why he that gave that consent, might not plead that nullity, for such
(though carnal) advantages as life is, if he could make good his pleading, and
no other restraint lie on him, but only that nullconsent?

For the fifth Section: How that may be lawful [for an entire body to do,
which may not be lawful for a part,] and so for us now, though not for them. I
answer, That if the phrase [entire body] signify the head and members too,
then the period is true; if not, then the whole Section is fallacious: for it
follows not, that though the representative body without the head is more then
a party in the Empire, without the representation of the rest, therefore the
first may resist forcibly, though the second should not; for he that from Saint
Paul denies resistance of Subjects indefinitely to Kings, will not be moved
from that hold, by discerning some other flight differences between Subjects,
unless they may appear such that on one side they may authorize resistance.
But then secondly, If the Doctrine of Christian patience, etc. were the cause
of Nonresistance, then sure was not this other consideration wherein they
differ from us, the cause of it.

Well, having gone thus far, in attendance on this Objecter, and to exercise
that patience, which we so much desire to persuade; there is yet the greatest
Fort, behind unvanquished, erected in the sixth Section, and rescued from all
supposed assailants in six particulars following, set up like so many
fortresses about it: The sum of it is (for I would not be bound to recite
what every one may read in a printed Book) that if those Primitive Christians
had strength, and might lawfully have resisted, (by the way, Tertullian only
affirms the first, and is so far from supposing, that he absolutely denies
the second) yet might God hide this liberty from them; and so his after
dispensations did require that he should hide it from them, and yet manifest it
to us: and these dispensations he specifies to be Gods counsel of Antichrists
coming into the world than, and of his being destroyed and cast out now. The
hiding of this truth, of Subjects power and right to resist their Superiors,
being necessary to help Antichrist up to his throne. And the commonalty of
Christians doing contrary to the will of their Superiors, being the men that
must have the principal hand in executing Gods judgments upon the Whore,
Revel. 18. 4, 5, 6, and 9. that is, in the pulling him down.

To this whole discourse (the first I am confident that ever was written on
this Subject) I must answer by degrees, (that I may not omit any thing that is
added for proof or explication by the Author) and first, I must desire the
word may or might [may hide] may be changed into plain intelligible sense.
Say, did God hide the liberty of resistance from those Primitive Christians, or
no? If he did not, then away with this whole Section, and particularly that
affirmation, Page 30. that Gods dispensations did require that it should be hid
from them. But if God did indeed hide it, then first, this is more then a
supposition; it is a plain concession, that those Christians Tertullian speaks
of, might not lawfully have resisted, though they had had strength (which was
so long denied); for the light being hidden, they must have done it without
faith, or against conscience; yea, and against Gods determinate counsel; who,
(the Objecter says) had great causes to hide it; of which one sure must be,
that it should not be used. 2. Here is a great secret of new Divinity, that God
hides truths (not as Christ spoke in parables, because they seeing see not,
Mat. 13. 13. but) on purpose to help Antichrist to his throne; (of which more
anon.) As for that instance of those that eat herbs, I pray consider, whether
that be pertinent to prove that God purposely hides truths from us, or
particularly this truth in hand: For sure that liberty God hid from none in the
Apostles time; for the preaching of the Gospel manifested the lawfulness of
meats, as well as herbs; only some saw not, or considered not that that was
manifested; and thinking some old legal obligation (as others did
circumcision) to lie still on them, submitted to it out of piety. Now apply
this to the point in hand. Certainly, the liberty of forcible resistance
against Superiors (though it should be granted) would never be found of this
kind, a liberty brought into the world by Christ, which before had not been
there. If he shall affirm it was, (as he must, if that instance of eating be
pertinent) though by the concession of the latter part, he must disclaim all
his former Old Testament pleas for resistance, from the people about Jonathan,
from David, and from Elisha; yet will he never give any probable appearance
for the affirmation in the first part, that Christ gave any such new
before-unrevealed liberty: but rather, if any such liberty before there were,
it was undoubtedly taken away by Christ, from whose example and precepts it was
that those Primitive Christians, and we also, dare not make use of that
supposed liberty. The only thing I can imagine possible to be replied, is,
That though the comparison hold not exactly, yet it may hold in this, that as
that liberty of eating was hid to some, (it matters not by whom, or how) so
this of resisting to others. To which I return, that then it is confessed, that
this instance does only illustrate the Objecter's meaning; but not so much as
probably confirm his assertion: and then I am sorry I have considered it so
long. And therefore to bring the point to an issue, I must thirdly ask, Where
this liberty, or the authority for this liberty was, when it was thus hid? Was
it in the Old Testament? Though it should be there, as it is not, yet it might
be taken away in the New, (as those things which in the Old Testament, or the
law of nature, are nearest to giving of that liberty, are absolutely reformed
by Christ's doctrine and practice) and then that were good for nothing. Was it
in the New? Then deal plainly, show the place in the New Testament which gives
that liberty, and is now found out by posterity, though hidden to them. Sure we
have found out no new Scripture, to them unknown, (the Nazarites Gospel, though
it rehearse some speeches of Christ not in our Canon, yet is not produced for
any of this nature: that famous one which it fathers on our Savior, Nunquam
laeti sitis nisi cum sratrem in charitate videritis, is of another stamp; I
would to God this Apocryphal Precept might be Canonical among us) and for any
place of the known Canon mis-understood by them, and now clearly unclouded and
revealed to us in a right understanding, which inforces this, I must be so
charitable to the Objecter, as to think that if he had discerned any such, he
would not have failed to have showed it us, (as well as his interpretations of
Romans 13. and Revel. 17. 17.) if it were but to leave us unexcusable for not
being his Proselytes. Beyond these several ways of revelation, if posterity
have had any other, (or indeed any but that, of understanding of Scripture by
Scripture light, or assistance of Gods Spirit, which was not before understood)
from whence to fetch a liberty which is not in the Old Bible, or is denied in
the New, this is it which we desire so to warn men of, under the name of
Enthusiasme, which is hardly ever distinguishable from a demure frenzy, and I
must call it now, the dream of the dreamers, Jud. 8. that despise dominion,
speak evil of dignities, but far from divine revelation. And yet that this
is the thing that this Objecter has an eye to, (and not the understanding of
Scripture more clearly then before) may appear, in that he affirms this
truth hid from their teachers, (though not from all without exception) who yet
if it were hid in the Scripture, were of all others most unlikely not to find
it. As for that offer of proof, that this truth might lie hid, because there
was no occasion of studying it: I answer, that in Tertullian's days, when
there was occasion to study it, (as great as ever can arise any, because the
persecutions then were as heavy persecutions) we may by that argument think
they would have searched into it, at least the light then would not in ordinary
account have proved more dim, as he says it did, if the Scripture were the
candlestick where this light was held out. That which he adds in the next
place, of the spirit of courage, patience, and constancy, which was by God
poured out on the Church in those days, and so made martyrdom seem a
desirable thing to them, is more like a reason indeed of their not-inquiring
into this liberty: and herein, I must acknowledge the ingenuity of the
Objecter, or the power of truth which extorted this reason from him, so little
to the advantage of his cause, and so much of ours: For this is certainly the
bottom of the business, the want of Christian courage, patience, etc. (for
that kind of courage is not in fighting, but suffering) has helped us of this
last age to that [dreame, not] revelation of liberty, which was never heard of
among the ancients. But by the way, it seems by the Objecter, that now
martyrdom is no desirable thing, nor taking up Christ's cross, nor following
of him. We are resolved to have no more to do with martyrdom, think that the
thousand years for the Saints to reign on earth are now at hand, and so
suffering, or conformity to the image of Christ, no longer the thing we are
predestined to; we must set up a new trade of fighting, destroying, resisting,
rebelling, leave enduring to those Christians which were furnished with
extraordinary strength from heaven. Which are the Objecters words of the
Primitive Christians; which, says he, kept them from studying cases and
questions about lawfulness of escaping (which word mere shame has put in,
utterly impertinently, instead of resisting) I confess, I had thought our
Queen Mary Martyrs had had this strength from heaven too; and that it was not
like miracles, an extraordinary gift only for the infancy of the Church: but
now it seems we must expect to see no more Martyrs, till we can remove
mountains again: This Objecter, it is clear, is resolved against it at this
time, and that his actions, as well as writings, will be ready to testify. For
my own part, I trust I shall be as ready to oppose the one, as I am to confute
the other, and to think nothing more Christian still, then to be crucified with
my Christ; and if I might choose the Article of Christian Doctrine which I
should most desire to seal with my blood, I think it would be that of
meekness, patience, non-resistance, peaceablenesse, charity, which I conceive
Christ has been so passionately earnest to recommend unto me, as most
diametrically opposite to the most unchristian damning sins of pride,
ambition, malice, rebellion, unquietness, uncontentednesse, etc.

Fourthly, for the whole discourse about Antichrist, there must many things be
returned: 1. That it is not tolerable in a Christian to affirm, that God
purposely hid truths, that Antichrist might come into the world: This so harsh
sense the Objecter first disguises in another phrase, that God by special
dispensation suffered him to make many truths his footstool; but indeed that
reaches not home to the business undertaken to be proved, for it follows not
thence, that this of resisting superiors was one of those truths: if it were,
then God suffered him to make use of it, which he could not but by its being
made known, whereas he supposes it was then hid. If he mean Antichrist hid
it, and so made the holding it, his footstool; Then 1. It was not God that hid
it, as before he said, but Antichrist. 2. It had then been manifest before,
and then began to be hid, when there was most occasion to use it; which before
he made improbable. If I were put upon the rack, I could not give a rational
account of those words of the Objecter last recited, or such as may but be
consonant to his present undertakings. That which follows is more clear, that
God caused a dead sleep to fall upon those truths: If he did, I wonder who
first raised them out of that dead sleep, Jun. Brutus, or Buchan. or Mr.
Goodwin? But still it seems God did on purpose hide truths, in favor and
assistance to Antichrist, to help him into the world; and this, not like the
spirit of slumber sent on men for their punishment, but on divine truths, which
sure had not deserved it. Yet more particularly, that the doctrine of liberty
to resist superiors should be so opposite in a special manner to Antichrist,
that it was fain to be laid asleep to give him passage into his throne, seems
very strange to me. 1. Because one piece of Antichrists pride is, to exalt
himself above all that is called God, which is mostly interpreted Kings; and
if rightly, then they that do so enhaunce the power of the people, as to make
the King universis minorem, and loose the reins of obedience so far as to
permit resistance, will I fear discern some part of the mark of the Beast
upon their own breasts. 2. Because the (...), 2 These. 26. and (...), verse. 7.
that hindered, or let Antichrist, and was like to do so still, till he were
taken out of the way, was by the Fathers commonly resolved to be the Roman
Empire, or Imperial Sovereignty of Rome: See Tert. de resurr. c. 24. Ambr.
com. in 2 These. Hier. qu. 11. ad Algas. Chrysostom. in 2 These. Cyr. Hier. catech.
1^. Aug. de civ. Dei, l. 20. c. 19. Lact. l. 7. c. 25. Oecum. in loc. and ib.
Sever. and Genesis and therefore on the sacking of Rome by Alaricus the Goth, S.
Jerome presently expected that Antichrist should come; and in his book ad
Ageruchiam de monogam. wonders that any one would think of marrying at that
time. Hence, have learned men observed, was that custom in the most ancient
times to pray in their Lyturgies for the lasting of the Roman Empire, that so
Antichrist might be long a coming, Tert. Apol. c. 33. ad Scap. c. 2. From
whence, though nothing else can be demonstratively inferred, yet this certainly
may, That in those many Fathers opinion, the power of Kings continuing intite,
was not like to help Antichrist in; nor consequently, the bringing down that
power, by the revelation of the doctrine of resistance, like to cause an
abortion in Antichrists birth, or now tend to the casting him out of the world.

As for the evidence of that Revelation-rule, that the communalty, in
opposition to their Kings, must have the great stroke in executing Gods
judgment on Antichrist, proved, Revel. 18. 4, 6, 9. I must answer, 5. That I
shall never wonder enough at the power of Prejudice evidenced in this Objecter,
by what he has put together to this purpose, page 32. To prove that the
people contrary to their Kings shall destroy Antichrist, this is thought by him
sufficient evidence, that the people are commanded to go out of her, verse. 4.
when verse. 9. it follows, that the Kings of the earth shall bewail her, and
lament for her: The unconcludingnesse of the Argument I shall not insist on,
but only look forward to another place which he cites immediately, Revel. 17.
17. Where the ten Kings are said to hate the Whore, and make her desolate. Now
the word Kings in this last place signifies, says the Objecter, not the
persons of Kings, but their States and Kingdoms; and to this purpose proofs
are produced: But, first, I beseech him to deal ingenuously, Does the word
King ever signify the Kingdom opposed to the King; 1. Any part of the
Kingdom excluding the King? But then, 2. See the mystery of prejudice which I
mentioned, where it is for the Objecter's turn, Revel. 18. the Kings of the
earth, must signify their persons, in opposition to their people; but where it
is not for his turn, Revel. 17. there the word Kings, must signify the
people, or any but the King. Would not the spirit of meekness have easily
compounded this business, and have given the word [Kings] leave in both places
to signify both their Persons and their Realms; and so have reconciled the
places, that some Kings with their Kingdoms should bewail her, and some
again hate her; they bewail her, that continued with her till her
destruction, when they see the smoke of her burning, 18. 9. and others hate
her, who had once tasted of her filthiness, and repented and left her before:
This were very agreeable to those Texts, if we had not peremptorily resolved
to fetch some other sense out of them. 3. That first place alone by it self
concludes only thus much, that good men come (or are exhorted to come) out
from Antichrist, and avenge the Whore; and earthly men that have love to her,
bewail her; but not that either the first are all common people, (for sure
Kings may be called Gods people, or be in that number) or the second none but
Kings. As for the proof that those people, verse. 4. are the Subjects of those
Kings, verse. 9. because they are such as come out of Babylon, sure that is very
weak; for Babylon being the Province of the Whore, there may be Kings as well
as Subjects there, and those Kings come out too, as well as those Subjects.
For, suppose King and People of England all Popish, why might they not all
reform together? It seems Antichrist must never be cast out of a Kingdom, till
the people do it in spite of the King; and therefore it is concluded, that it
was not done here in the days of King Edward, nor Queen Elizabeth, nor King
James: and now since the new Revelations have assured men, that Antichrist must
now be cast out utterly from among us, it is become necessary that our
Sovereign should be a Papist; and as much zeal, and as solid arguments used
to persuade our friends that indeed he is so, (though his constant word and
actions now evidence the contrary) as are produced to maintain any other
article of our new Saints belief: One of the most suspected and hated heresies
of these days is, to doubt of the Popish affections of our Superiors,
especially the King. Well, by this doctrine, if the King should chance not to
be a Papist, he must turn to be one, or else Popery cannot be cast out in his
time. If so he should do, turn Papist on purpose to prepare, or dispose his
Kingdom to turn Antichrist out, this might be but answerable to Gods hiding
of truths, to that end to help Antichrist in. But should his Majesty be so
malicious as to prove Protestant in earnest, then what would become of that
sure word of Prophecy, that so many have been persuaded to depend on, That
Antichrist must now be cast out of this Kingdom; which, says the Objector,
cannot be, unless the people do it while the King bewailes. I hope I have said
enough of this.

As for the connection of this observation, with the conclusion in hand, (though
it matter little now, the observation is proved so false, yet) I shall add,
that if the people were to do that great feat of casting out Antichrist, yet
it appears not how liberty of forcible resisting their Kings should be a
necessary requisite to the work, unless the lawful King be the Antichrist in
every Country; for otherwise it is very possible, that though they obey their
Kings, they may resist Antichrist; though they love and revere their lawful
Superior, they may hate and abjure their unlawful. Once more, whereas it is
again repeated, that the knowledge of the supposed Subjects liberty would have
kept Antichrist from his throne; I repeat again, that if it would, God sure
would have revealed it to them of all others; unless it appear, that God was
more angry with the sins of Christians in Tertullian's age, and so more
fought against them, then he does in ours against us; for though God may of
mercy undeserved throw down Antichrist, yet that he should so immediately and
illustriously labor to set him up, unless out of deserved indignation to a
people, is not easily resolved; yet if this may appear de facto to be so, I
shall yield; till then, (...).

The last blot laid on Tertullian, to obliterate all whatsoever can be fetched
from him, is, That the authority of Tertullian, and the submission of the
Christians, being both Apocryphal, is too light to weigh against the practice
of the great Prophet Elisha, etc. To which I answer, That that being supposed,
yet the grounds on which Tertullian says the Christians of his time did so
patiently suffer, viz. the doctrine of Christian patience and meekness, are
not Apocryphal, nor inferior to that of Elisha, though it were supposed to be
argumentative, or concluding for resistance. For any thing else added by the
Objecter in this business, as the disproving of Tertullian's relations on
grounds of Christian doctrine, from the contrary practice of David and Elisha,
though I might answer in one word, That Christians are restrained from some
things, which were practiced without fault in the Old Testament; yet because
those Old Testament-examples have been fully cleared by many others of our
Writers, and indeed are not pertinent to the discourse I was upon, when this
Objecter first met me in the way, and led me this chase after him, I shall not
be so impertinent as to add any thing, but conceive my self to have
vindicated the testimonies of those Fathers from all possible objections, and
so to have joined the practice of Christians, (those ancient Primitive ones)
and proved them correspondent to the example of Christ, and so to have made
good my second Argument, proposed from the example of Christ and Christians.

My third is, from the very making of Christianity, and particularly of the
Protestant Doctrine. And 1. Of Christianity, which as it differs from the Laws
both of Moses and Nature, so it constantly reformes and perfects those
(dissolves not any thing that was moral in them, nor promises impunity for
nonperformance, but upon repentance and reformation) elevates and raises them
up to an higher pitch, at least then Jews or natural men had conceived or
understood themselves obliged to, which the ancient Fathers generally resolve
to be the meaning of his (...), Mat. 5. 17. to fill up all vacuities in those
former Laws, and add unto them that perfection which should be proportionable
to that greater measure of grace now afforded under the Gospel. Thus in that
Sermon upon the mount, that (...), that top of practical Divinity, (set down
by way of particular instance of Christ's purpose, (...)) besides the third
proaemiall beatitude, Blessed are the meek, which certainly though it may
contain more, yet excludes not, but principally notes the meek, obedient
subjects under government, the non-resisters, and therefore has the same
promise annexed which the Law had given in the fifth Commandment; ('it was there,
That thy days may be long in the Land; it is here, They shall possess the
earth, (...), which Psalm. 37. 11. whence it is cited, refers clearly to the
land of Canaan, though improved into an higher sense now in the Gospel.) And
again, besides the seventh beatitude of the peacemakers, or peaceable, ((...)
and (...), being equivalent in the Scripture style, vid. Jam. 3. 18.) and the
eighth, of those that are persecuted for righteousness sake, (whence sure is
not excluded the cause of Religion and Christianity it self) as also of taking
up the Cross (of which I design another discourse to speak more largely)
which sure are opposite enough to forcible resisting of lawful Magistrates,
especially for Religion: besides all these, I say, in the introduction to that
Sermon, there is in the body of the Sermon it self, an (...), which sure
prohibits all forcible resisting or violence even to the (...), the injurious
or ((...) from (...)) troublesome person, which if it should chance to be our
King, would not certainly be more lawfully or Christianly resisted, then any
body else; especially, when it is our religion which is invaded, which of all
other things a whole Army of plunderers cannot rob us of, (as they may of the
cloak, verse. 40.) and therefore needs not our violence to retain it; nor is
ever injured, but more illustrated by our suffering. To this may be added the
consideration of the depositum left by Christ with his Disciples, pacem, peace,
John 14. 27. (which it seems only the beloved disciple had recorded) Peace I
leave with you, external peace, for the pacem meam, my peace, follows after
as a gift perhaps peculiar to them that prised and kept this legacy: and if it
be objected that Christ came not to send peace, but a sword, Mat. 10. 34. that
sure refers not to Christ's prime counsel or purpose, but to the event; what he
foresaw it would be, or what he had determined it ought (which manner of speech
is very ordinary in all Authors) for the precept is punctual to Peter against
the use of the sword, and to all the disciples for preserving of peace, Mar. 9.
50. and to that it is thought the mention of falt belongs in that place, which
among other qualities is, (...); unitive, have falt in your selves, and have
peace one with another. On these texts, many effectual emphaticall descants
are added by the Apostles, Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as in you
lies, live peaceably with all men, and Heb. 12. 14. follow peace with all men,
(...), an agonisticall word to run for it as for a prize, or (...), and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. (...), we render it, study (it is, be emulous, contend, strive,
make it your ambition) to be quiet, to which I shall only add two places
more, Jam. 3. 17, 18. The wisdom which comes from above is first pure, then
peaceable, etc. Which before, ver. 13. he had called meekness of wisdom, then
1 Pet. 3. 3. where after direction for the (...) obedience of wives to husbands
(and we know the Kingdoms relation to the King is besides others, that of a
wife to an husband who is therefore espoused to it with the ring at his
Coronation) it is added, (...), that her bravery consists in the sincerity (I
think it should be rendered) of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight
of God of great price. If it be objected, that these many places of peace are
but general wide illations against resistance, or however, no more pertinent
to the case about resisting of Magistrates, then of any other private man: I
answer, that though I might thus argue, a minori, (and also assume that no
other resistance is near so destructive of peace, as that resisting of the
Supreme power, that being indeed the shaking of government it self, which is
the band of peace, and the dissolving of which returns us to the state of
common hostility, leaves us a wilderness of Bears or Tigers, not a society of
men) yet I shall confess, that I intended not to lay any more weight on this
part of the Argument, then any man will acknowledge it able to bear, and that
therefore before I infer my conclusion of non-resistance from the making of
Christianity, I must add to these places so passionate for peace, another sort
of places concerning obedience, of which (without naming the places being so
known already) I shall venture this observation, that in the new Testament
especially the Epistles of the Apostles (which were all written in time of the
reign of wicked Heathen bloody adversaries of Christianity, and can refer to
none but those) there is no one Christian virtue, or Article of Faith more
clearly delivered, more effectually enforced upon our understandings and
affections to be acknowledged by the one (against all pretense of Christian
liberty to the contrary) and submitted to by the other, then that of obedience
to Kings, etc. It were most easy to vindicate those places from all the
glosses and scholia's that the writers of this year, Mr. Goodwin in anticav.
Mr Bur. Mr. Bridges, etc. have invented to free themselves and others from the
obedience most strictly required there, but I would not again trouble any
ingenuous man with such extravagant discourses as even now I learnt by
experience would be necessary to answer such exceptions, which men's wit or
somewhat worse has produced; besides, those places have been by others
vindicated already. I shall only say, whosoever can without colored
spectacles find ground for the present resistance in those places of Scripture,
Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 18, etc. so far as to settle and quiet a conscience, I
shall not conceive my understanding fit to duel with his, any more then I
would wrestle with a fiend, or combat with the fire, which Pythagoras tells me
would avail little; he that can be sure that damnation (Romans 13. 2.) signifies
not damnation, but some temporary mulct only (if the King should proveable to
inflict it) when, verse. 5. it is added we must needs be subject, not only for
wrath, (i. e. fear of temporary punishment) but also for conscience sake,
(which when it accuses, binds over to eternal wrath, or damnation) I profess
I know not what camel he may not swallow; I shall only in the bowels of
Christ desire him to consider, what a sad condition it would prove, if being on
this confidence engaged, and by Gods hand taken away in this war he should at
Gods tribunal hear Saint Paul avouch, that by (...) or damnation in that
place, he did mean no less then eternal damnation without repentance: O how
would his countenance change, his thoughts trouble him, the joints of his
loins be loosed, and his knees smite one against another, one general (...)
possess all his faculties, and Mr. Bridge: etc. be unable to settle him or give
him confidence any longer, when the Tekel shall come out of the wall over
against that interpretation of his, that it is weighed in the balance (of
truth and judgment) and found wanting; Of this word (...) I design another
disquisition: only I could not defer to forewarne the Reader of his danger
in this place, and now I shall not doubt from the making of Christianity to
infer my conclusion of non-resistance, not doubting but the premises will
bear it.

For the other part of this third Argument from the making of the Protestant
Doctrine, I would feign be very brief by way of compensation for my former
importunity, and therefore shall engage my self not to trouble the Reader with
citations or names, which yet might be brought by hundreds of reformed Writers
for every Junius Brutus, and Buchanan that has appeared for the contrary since
the Reformation. Though the truth is, suchas these if they must be called
Protestants, are yet in this somewhat more then that title ever imported, I may
say perfect Jesuits in their principles, and resolutions concerning Kings (no
Papists of any Order has gone so far) although they differ somewhat in the
seat of that power of making such resistance. That which I designed to say on
this point is only this; That the doctrine of Allegiance to Kings, and of
their supremacy in all causes, has always been counted a principal head of
difference between the Protestants and the worst of Papists, and a special
evidence, which most men have used, to conclude the Papacy to be (...) the
Antichrist, is this that the Pope exalts himself above all that is called
God: 1. The Kings of the earth, that he in case the King be not a Catholic,
absolves Subjects from their Allegiance to him, that he pretends power over
them in spiritual things, and in temporal in ordine ad spiritualia. It is not
unknown to any that the Oath of Supremacy if not of Allegiance among us is
principally designed to discern and discover Papists, of whom, one of the
prayers appointed for the fifth of November affirms, that their Religion is
Rebellion, that sure is, that one maine difference betwixt Romish and English,
Popish, and Protestant doctrine, is that of liberty to Rebel in some cases,
particularly in that of Religion: In opposition to all which doctrines or
insinuations of theirs, there is no Church that ever-exprest their sense in any
Article more fully and largely, then ours has in this particular, witness the
several parts of the Homily of Disobedience and Rebellion, printed in Queen
Elizabeth's time. And if herein all other parts of the Reformed Church have not
gone as far as we, yet shall I not retract my asserting this doctrine purely
Protestant, 1. Because this Kingdom has always been esteemed a prime part
of the Reformation, wherein the Papacy was legally cast out, not by violence or
tumults of the people, and so nothing rejected but what in sobriety was
necessary to be rejected, and therefore our Church has generally been the
Norma, or rule, by which others have desired to compose themselves, and never
yet any other so preferred before us, as that our ancestors could think sit
to conform to them. 2. Because in many other countries the government is not
Regal, or Monarchical, as here it is, Bodin. l. 2. c. 5. de rep. can find
none of this nature in Europe, but France and Spain, and England and Scotland
(I conceive Ireland he contained under the word Angliam) in which, says he,
Reges sine controversia jura omnia majestatis habent per se: Singules civibus
nec universis fas est (it seems Master Dale our Ambassador, from whom he had
received his advertisements of the state of this Kingdom had not then heard
that our King, though Singulis major, is universis minor, which certainly had
divested him of all Sovereignty, it being impossible that the Sovereign or
Supreme of all should be Minor then any) Summi principis vitam, famam aut
fortunas in discrimen vocare, seuvi, seu judicio constituto id fiat, etc. As
for the Emperor of Germany, Charles the fifth by name, he says plainly,
Tyrannide cives ad rempublicam oppressit, cum jura majestatis non haberet,
which if it be true, will be some excuse to the Germane Princes in what they
did at that time in taking up Arms for Religion, though it is most certain
what he affirms, that when those Princes consulted M. Luther about it, number id
jure divino liceret, whether it were lawful in the sight of God, Ille negavit,
he resolved it utterly unlawful: this answer, says Bodin, Luther gave Perinde
atque si Carolus summam imperii solus haberet, and therefore much more must it
be given when the case is of a Monarch indeed, as he concludes; and though he
acknowledge that distinction, which it seems Luther did not, betwixt that
Emperor and true Monarchs, yet is he feign to pass a sad observation upon the
fact of those Princes, in taking up Arms for Religion, against Luther's
advice, Ita funestum bellum reique publicae calamitosum susceptum est, cum
ingenti principum ac civium strage, quia justa causa nulla videri potest
adversus patriam arma sumendi. I would to God those words were Englisht in
every of our hearts: a direful and calamitous war with the slaughter of all
sorts, because (though it were for Religion) yet no cause can be counted just
of taking up Arms against one's country. The truth is, what was done there
though, 1. very unhappily, and 2. against no Monarch, has been thought
imitable by Knox and Buchanan in Scotland, and from thence infused into some
few into England, as Penry, etc. But by Gods providence has formerly been
timously restrained, and not broken out to the defaming of our Protestant
profession. It seems now our sins are ripe for such a judgment, the land
divided into two extreme sinful parts; one by their sins fitted to suffer
under this doctrine, others sinful enough to be permitted to broach and
prosecute it. I meekly thank God, that though my sins are strangely great, yet
he has not given me up to that latter judgment. I conceive I have also given
some hints at least of proving my position from the making of the Protestant
Doctrine.

Now for the last Topicke, taken from the constitution of this Kingdom. Though
that be the Lawyers task, very prosperously undertaken by others, yet one
general notion there is of our Laws, which from my childhood I have imbibed,
and therefore conceive common to all others with me; and it is this, That the
Laws of this Kingdom put no man (no Papists I am sure) to death for Religion.
When Jesuits and Seminary-Priests have suffered, every man is so perfect in the
Law, as to know that it is for Treason, by a Statute that makes it such for
them to come into this Kingdom. The truth of this, and the constant pleading
of it against all Objecters, has made me swallow it as a principle of our Law,
that even Popery strictly taken (and not only as now this last year it has
learnt to enlarge its importance) is no capital crime. From whence, I
profess, I know no impediment to forbid me to conclude, that in the
constitution of our State no war for Religion is accounted a lawful war;
for that it should be lawful to kill whole multitudes without any enditement,
yea, and by attempting it, to endanger, at least, our own, 1. Many good
Protestants lives, for that, which if it were proved against any single man,
would not touch his life in the least degree, is, I must acknowledge, one of
the Arcana belli which I cannot see into. And therefore Sleidan tells us of M.
Luther, that he would not allow a war, though but defensive, with the Turk
himself, com. lib. 13. page 403. and though after he had mitigated his opinion
upon a new state of the question, and persuaded the Emperor to it, yet it was
with this limitation, Modo nec vindictae, nec gloriae, nec emolumenti causa
subeatur, (three things that are very rarely kept out of war) sed tantum ut
sparcissimum latronem, non ex religionis, sed furti and injuriarum action
aggrediantur. It seems the cause of religion, although it were of Christianity
against Mahometisme, was not to him a sufficient warrant for a defensive war.
But then 2. For this war to be waged against the Prince, (or by any one but
the Prince, in a Monarchy, as this is) who whatsoever he has not, has
certainly the power of the sword immediately from God (or else must be
acknowledged not to have it at all, for this power cannot be in any people
originally, or any where but in God, and therefore it may be most truly said,
that though the regal power were confessed to be first given by the people, yet
the power of the sword, wherewith regality is endowed, would be a superaddition
of Gods, never belonging to regal or whatever other power, till God annexed it:
in Genesis 9. 6. which also seems to be out of all dispute in this Kingdom, even
at this time, where the universal body of the commonalty, even by those that
would have the regal power originally in them, is not yet affirmed to have any
aggregate power, any farther then every man single out of government was
presumed to have over himself, which sure was not power of his own life; for
even in nature there is Felonia de se, and therefore the representative body of
the Commons, is so far from being a Judicature in capital matters, that it
cannot administer an oath) and therefore is not justly invasible by any
subject, or community of subjects, who certainly have not that power, nor
pretend to have it, and when they take it, think it necessary to excuse that
fact by pretense of necessity, which every body knows, is the color for those
things which have no ordinary means of justifying them (like that which
Divines say of saving of children and idiots, etc. by some extraordinary way.)
Nay, 3. For this war to be waged, not against Popery, truly so called, but
against the only true Protestant Religion, as it stands (and by attempting to
make new Laws is acknowledged as yet to stand) established by the old Laws of
the Land, and therefore is feign to be called Popish (and our Martyr-reformers
not able, by those fiery chariots of theirs, to get out of the confines of
Babylon) that it may be fit to be destroyed; just as the Primitive Christians
were by the persecuters put in wild beasts skins, that in those shapes they
might be devoured: this I confess is to me a complication of riddles, (and
therefore put by some Artist under that deep-dark-phrase, and title of
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom) to which certainly no liberty or right of
the subject in Magna Carta, no nor legislative power, will enable any man to
give any intelligible, much less legal name: At which I profess I am not ill
pleased, because this I hope will keep it from being recorded to posterity.

I have done with my fourth Argument, and am heartily sorry I have kept my
Reader so long from his prayers, which must set an end to this controversy,
for sure Arguments are too blunt to do it; I beseech God to direct all our
hearts to a constant use of those means (together with fasting and abstinence,
at least from farther provoking sins) to exorcize that evil spirit that has
divided his titles (of (...), and now at length, (...), and (...)) among us,
and by those means infused his mortiferous poison into the very veins of this
whole Kingdom. [I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace to him that is
far off, etc. and I will heal him. Thou have moved the land, and divided it,
heal the sores thereof, for it shakes.]

The word (...), according to its origination signifies Censure, Judgment, Of
the word (...).
and in its making has no intimation, either of the quality of the offense to
which that judgment belongs, or of the Judge who inflicts it: that it belongs
to humane judgments, or sentences of temporal punishments sometimes, is
apparent by Luke 23. 40. where one thief says to the other, (...), meaning it
seems, the same sentence of death, or capital punishment, called (...), c.
24. 20. judgment of death, temporal; and that at other times it signifies
also divine judgment, is as apparent, Act. 2^. 26. (...), judgment to come,
that is, certainly at the end of this world, at the day of doom. So Romans 2. 2.
(...), the judgment of God, and so again, verse. 3. which verse. 5. is
explained to be wrath or punishment against the day of wrath, etc. so Heb. 6.
2. resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment. The truth is in this sense
it is most-what taken in this Book, see Matthew. 23. 14. Mar. 12. 40. Luke 20.
47. Romans 3. 8. and therefore Hesychius, the best Glossary for the
New Testament, renders it (...), Gods retribution or payment, or rendering
according to works. It will not be worth while to survey and consider every
place where the word is used, he that shall do so, will perhaps resolve with
me to accept of that glossary, and understand it constantly of Gods judgment;
unless, when the circumstances of the place shall enforce the contrary, as
they do in the places first mentioned, and 1 Cor. 6. 7. But then when the
context rather leads to the second sense, there will be great danger for any
man to apply it to humane judgments, for by so doing, he may slatter himself
or others in some sin, and run into that (...), as it signifies eternal
judgment, when by that misunderstanding he does not conceive himself in any
danger of it. Of places which without all controversy thus interpret
themselves; I will mention two, 2 Pet. 2. 3. (...), we render it, whose
judgment of a long time lingereth not: which that it belongs to eternal
vengence, appears by the next words, (...), we render it, Their damnation, it
is literally, Their destruction sleeps not. The second place is, 1 Timothy, 3. 6.
(...), fall into the condemnation of the Devil; that is, sure into that
sentence that fell upon Lucifer for his pride (being cast out of Heaven, and
reserved to chains of eternal darkness) for the person spoken of here, is
the Novice, or new Convert, lifted up with pride, just parallel to the Angels
newly created, lifted up with pride also, the crimes and the persons parallel,
and so sure the punishment also. Now three places more there are which appear
to me by the same means of evidence, or rule of interpreting, to belong to the
same sense, though I cannot say of them as I did before, [without controversie]
For I see it is not only doubted by some, whether they do belong to this
sense or no, but that it is resolved they do not: which resolution sure must
be obnoxious to some danger, that I say no worse of it. The first of these
places is, Romans 13. 2. (...): we render it, They that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation: But say others, it must be rendered judgment, as that
signifies some temporary punishment which the higher powers may inflict, and
nothing else: and this they labor to make appear by the words following: For
Rulers are a terror to evil works, and he bears not the sword in vain,
etc. To which I answer, That there is no doubt made by me or any, but that
Rulers are to punish men for evil works, particularly that of resistance
against them, and not only that, but also crimes against our brethren, and
God; and in that respect it is added, verse. 4. (...), the Minister or officer
of God he is, and executioner for wrath, that is, punishment temporal to him
(indefinitely) that does evil. But does it follow from hence, that either he
that makes forcible resistance against the Superior or Supreme power, or that
commits any other sin (which the Supreme power is set to avenge or punish
temporally) shall incur no eternal punishment? If this new Divinity should
be entertained, it must be privilege and protection to other sins, as well as
resistance and rebellion, even to all that any judicial laws have power to
punish, for in these also he is the Minister of God, (...), an avenger, or
executioner for punishment, and there is no avoiding it; but this must be
extended indefinitely, or universally, (...), to any malefactor punishable by
that power, or that comes under this cognizance; and so by this Logic, he
that is hanged, may not be damned, what ever his crime be; an execution on
earth shall be as good as a Purgatory to excuse him from any other punishment.
But then secondly, suppose a Rebel escape the hand of justice here below, by
slight, etc. nay, that he prosper in his rebellion, and get the better of it,
that the King be not able to punish him; nay, yet farther, that he proceed
higher, Despose the King, and get into his place, What (...) is he like to
receive, if that signify only the Kings wrath or temporal punishment? Sure
this prosperousnesse of the crime must make it cease to be a crime, make it
commence virtue, as the Turks on their principles are wont to resolve it,
says Busbequius, Ep. 4. -- Ex opinione quae Turcis insedit ut res quocunque
consilio institutas, si been cadunt, ad Deum Authorem referant, etc. Or else
give it, (though it be a sin never so great, and unrepented of) perfect
impunity both in this world, and in another: And certainly this is no jest, for
he that observes the behaviors of many men, (the no manner of regrets or
reluctancies in their course of forcible resistance, (save only when they
conceive it goes not on so prosperously as it was wont) and the great weekly
industry that is used to persuade all men of the continued prosperity of the
side, as being conceived far more useful and isntrumental to their ends,
then the demonstration of the justice of it, men's consciences being resolved
more by the Diurnall, then the Bible, by the Intelligencer then the Divine,
unless he turn Intelligencer also, I would we had not so many of those
Pluralists.) Will have reason to resolve that this Divinity is the principle by
which they move; which if it be not yet brought to absurdities enough, then
look a little forward to the conclusion, deduced and inferred verse. 5.
Wherefore ye must be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience
sake. Words by Prophetic Spirit added by the Apostle, as it were on purpose to
contradict in terminis, that new interpretation. Wrath signifies that temporal
punishment, verse. 4. which if it were the all that is meant by (...), then how
can it be true, that we must be subject not only for wrath? Certainly he that
resists is not subject ((...), is all one with (...), and both directly
contrary to (...), the word used both in the third and fifth verse) and
therefore if we must be subject not only for wrath, as that signifies
temporal punishment, then he that resists, shall receive more then wrath, as
that signifies temporal punishment, viz. (...), in our rendering,
condemnation, if he do not prevent it timously by repentance: which sure is
the importance of the (...), but also for conscience sake; that if he do it
not, it will be sin to him, wound his conscience, bind him over to that
punishment which belongs to an accusing conscience, (which sure is more then a
temporal mulct) which is farther clear from the first verse of that Chapter,
the command of subjection. For sure, every Divine or Apostolical command
entered into the Canon of Scripture, does bind conscience; and the breach of it,
known and deliberate, is no less then a damning sin, even under the Gospel,
mortiferous and destructive without repentance; which is just equivalent to the
(...), he shall receive damnation, in our way of interpreting it. So much for
that first place.

The second is, 1 Cor. 11. 29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks damnation (or as our margent, judgment) to himself, etc. This
place I find avouched for the confirming of the former interpretation, Romans 13.
That (...) signifies only temporal punishment; and thus it is known the
Socinians commonly interpret this place, per (...) non sempiternam damnationem
nominatim, sed supplicium in genere intelligendum esse. Volkelius l. 9. de ver.
rel. l. 4. c. 22. That which is used to persuade this to be probable, is that
which follows verse. 30. for this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and
many sleep; which belonging only to temporal punishments, is conceived to be
a periphrasis of the (...), judgment, which should seem consequently to be so
also: And, indeed, Volkelius has added other proofs, 1. Because the Apostle
speaks of any one single act of this sin of unworthy receiving, (not of any
habit, or custom) which he conceives not actually damning now under the
second Covenant. 2. Because it is verse. 32. and when we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned, etc. To these three
(and I know not that there are produced any more) probabilities, I conceive
clear satisfaction may be given by those who affirm (...) to contain in it
eternal punishment: Though if it were only temporal punishment, yet being
sickness, etc. which are not inflicted by the Magistrate, but by the hand of
God, it will not come home to that which was by Master Br. affirmed of the word
in Romans 13. For this must be premised, that we do not conceive it to signify
eternal punishments, exclusive, or so as to exclude temporal, but eternal
and sometimes temporal too; (for so sure he that for his rebellion receives
damnation, hereafter, is not secured from being hanged, drawn, and quartered
here) or else eternal if he repent not, and perhaps temporal though he do:
by (...), as I said, I understand with Hesychius, (...), Gods vengeance,
whether here, or in another world; but, I say, in this place both of them, (and
so ordinarily in the former also.) This being premised, the word (...) may
still contain in it eternal punishments, verse. 29. though many for this cause
of unworthy receiving did fall sick and die, verse. 30. for 1. they might both
die and be damned too; or if, as Volkelius says, the word (...), obdormiscunt,
sleep, be never used in the New Testament, of those that are destined to
eternal destruction, then still may this be very reconcilable with our
interpretation, that many for this cause are weak and sickly, and many others
sleep, God chastising some by diseases to reform them, and punishing others,
who, as Volkelius acknowledges, were guilty only of some single act of the
sin only, with death temporal, or shortning their days; which certainly
hinders not but that God might punish others that did customarily commit this
sin (and perhaps with greater aggravations) with no less then eternal
death, however that it were just for him to do so, whatever he did, it is
plain by verse. 27. which is parallel to the 29. Whosoever shall eat and drink
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord; that is, in
Volkelius his own words, Ipusm Christi corpus ac sanguinem contemnere and
ignominia afficere, ac quantam in ipsis est profanare proculcareque censendi
sunt, shall be thought to contemn and disgrace, and as much as in them lies to
profane, and tread under feet the body and blood of Christ; which, what is it
but to count the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, Heb. 10. 29? Which yet
there is used as a maine aggravation of that sin, for which, says the
Apostle, there remains no more sacrifice, verse. 26. It is apparent that the
phrase (...), guilty of the body, etc. is parallel to the Latin, Reus
Majestatis, used for a Traitor, and sure signifies no less then a guilt of a
great injury to Christ; which how any man can affirm to be a sin to which no
damnation belongs, (supposing no antidote of invincible ignorance or weakness,
nor recovery by repentance, nor gracious pardon of God in not imputing some
single act of it) I profess my self not to discern, though I think I have
weighed impartially all that is said of it. This sure will keep the first
proof from being any longer probable; and for the second, (or first of
Volkelius) it is already in effect answered too; for though he that is guilty
only of some one act of this sin found mercy, yet sure they that are guilty
of the customary sin, may speed worse: and indeed of all indefinitely the
Apostle speaks according to the sin; as when he says, The drunkard and
adulterer shall not inherit the kingdom of God: Where yet perhaps he that is
guilty only of one such act, may find mercy. For the last proof, I conceive
it so far from being a probable one against me, that I shall resolve it a
convincing one on my side; for if those that were sick, etc. were chastened of
the Lord, that they should not be condemned, then sure if they had not been so
chastened, nor reformed by that chastening, they should have been condemned
with the world; and so their temporal judgments may be a means, through the
mercy of God in Christ, to free them from their eternal, but not an argument
that eternal was not due to them, but a perfect intimation that it was.

The third place (which is not indeed of much importance in it self, but only
is used to give countenance to the interpretation in the two former places) is
1 Pet. 4. 17. The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God.
Here, say they, (...) judgment, is that that befalls the house of God, the
godly; therefore but temporal judgments.

To which I answer in a word, that here is a mistake in applying judgment in
its latitude to the house of God, when only it is affirmed by Saint Peter
(...), or (...), the beginning or first part of judgment: for of the (...), or
judgment, in this verse, there are specified two parts, (...), the first part,
and (...), the end (or as the word (...) seems to sound in our English, the
tail) of it; as Psalm. 75. 8. the cup of Gods displeasure, or punitive justice,
is supposed to consist of two parts, 1. red wine, (or (...)) and 2. mixture of
myrrh and other poisonous bitter spices, called (...), Apocal. 4. 10. and
(...), Mat. 24. 17. and both together, (...), myrrhate wine, Mar. 15. 25. Now,
this cup is poured out, and tasted of indefinitely, by the godly some part of
it; but the dregs thereof, i. e. the myrrhe-bitter part, that goes to the
bottom, is left for the wicked to wring out and drink: so that only the
tolerable, supportable, easy part of the judgment belongs unto the godly; but
the end, the dregs, the unsupportable part, to those that obey not the Gospel
of God. Or yet a little further, the beginning or first part, (...), of the
judgment, is (...), from the godly, (and so it was (...)) intimating, that the
judgment does not stay upon them, but only take rise from them: but the
(...), the second, sadder part of it, is (...), of them, (or belongs to them)
that obey not, etc. So that still in this place also, (...) signifies Gods
judgment of this life and another both; not of this life only, to the
excluding of the other, but one part in this life, another in that other: And
though the godly had their part in it, yet there was somewhat in the (...) that
the godly never tasted of, but only the (...), they that disobeyed the Gospel
of God: and this is apparent by verse. 18. For if the righteous (...), we read
it, scarcely be saved; it signifies (by comparing that place with Pro. 11. 31.
where instead of recompensed on the earth, the Greek translation reads, (...))
be rendered unto, or recompensed, i. e. punished in the earth, then where shall
the ungodly and sinners appear? There are again the two parts of (...), one
(...), Gods retribution to sin here, wherein the godly have their part; and
the other, his rendering to the wicked hereafter; and so neither of them the
punishment of the Magistrate in this life, as Mr. Bridge. out of Piscator,
contends to have it, Romans 13. and as it must be here also, if others speak
pertinently, who use it to avoid that interpretation, which I confess Mr.
Bridge. does not. They that are unlearned and unstable wrest the Scriptures to
their own destruction. Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things
before, beware lest you also be led away with the error of the wicked, and
fall from your own steadfastness, 2 Pet. 3. 16, 17.

Of the Zealots among the JEWS, and the Liberty taken by them.
THere was among the Jews, either truly or pretendedly, a judicium Zelotarum,
a peculiar liberty or power of Zelots, (i. e. of private men led by zeal) to
punish or execute Malefactors, whether with death, or any lower punishment.
These they style Pious-men inflamed with the zeal of God: And these were wont,
when they found any man in the fact, guilty of sedition, blasphemy, or any
other crime of the greater size, openly and publicly committed, presently to
set upon him, to smite, and if need were, to kill him, without any process of
Law against him.

The original of these came from the fact of Phinees, Number. 25. 7. of whom
Mattathias, in his dying oration to his sons, has these words, (...).
Phinees our father (by zealing the zeal of God, says the Vulgar Latin) by
behaving himself zealously, received the promise of an eternal Priesthood, 1
Mac. 2. 54. Which is also affirmed of Elias, verse. 58. (...). Elias by zealing
the zeal of the Law, or behaving himself zealously for the Law, was received
up to heaven; (which belongs to that fact of Elias, immediately before his
assumption, when he called twice for fire from heaven on Ahaziah's messengers,
2 King. 1. 10, 12. unless you will rather apply it to that fact of his, 1
King. 18. 40. against the Prophets of Baal, whom he apprehended and slew
together every man of them:) by which examples he there stirs up and incites
his sons, (...), to be zealous for the Law, verse. 50. though not to commit
any such particular act of that nature, as that which those had done.

Testimonies of Jewish Writers to this purpose, Master Seldom has put together
in his book, De jure Nature. and Gent. ad Heb. plac. lib. 4. cap. 4. and given
some hints of explaining some difficulties in the New Testament from thence. To
this belongs that fact of Christ, Joh. 2. 15. as appears by the Disciples; of
whom it is said, verse. 17. that upon that occasion they remembered how it was
written by the Psalmist, Psalm. 69. 9. The zeal of thy house, or for thy house,
(...), has fed on me, or carried me with a kind of fury.

That Christ did not take upon him to be a Magistrate, or a Judge, or a public
person here on earth, is sufficiently acknowledged: as also, that as a private
man he neither did, nor attempted any thing contrary to the Laws or customs
of the Jews or Romans: Or if he had, that the Jews who had a competent
measure of animosity against him, would not probably have suffered him to have
done it Scot-free. From all which it will follow undoubtedly, that this was
done by Christ, jure Zelotarum, by the power that belonged to the Zealots, for
whom only the Law allowed this liberty. The same is to be said of that attempt
of the Jews, Joh. 10. 31. (...), The Jews therefore carried stones again that
they might stone him, no legal process having preceded.

The same Master Seldom notes of the servant of the High Priest that struck
Christ, Joh. 18. 22. whose answer is a seeming argument of it, verse. 23. If I
have spoken well, why smitest thou me? intimating, that if he had said any
thing amiss, or irreverently of the High Priest, he should not have
questioned his striking him: And yet the truth is, the phrase (...), bear
witness of the evil, seems an advertisement, that if Christ had offended, it
would have better become the servant to have accused and witnessed against him,
proceeded legally, then thus, jure Zelotarum, to have stricken him. On the same
ground was the fact of Ananias, Act. 23. 2. though sitting in the Sanhedrin,
when he appointed Paul to be smitten, though without any just crime also. The
like proceedings the Scribes were, it seems, afraid of, Luke 20. 6. The
people will stone us: which must have been an act of popular zeal, without
public judgment. That Saint Steven, Act. 7. 57. was stoned after this manner,
is observed by Hugo Grotius, and certainly upon good reasons; for although he
were accused of blasphemy, c. 6. and false witnesses brought to that purpose,
yet after that, there was nothing legally past against him through all the
seventh Chapter, beside his Apology for himself to the High Priest. In the
conclusion of which (no sentence passing against him) it follows, that the
people (...), verse. 54. which Hesychius will help us to render thus, They were
very angry, they were madded with fury or zeal against him, and gnashed their
teeth (it seems that flame of zeal produced the same effect in them that the
flames of hell are said to do, Mat. 8. 12.) against him, and crying with a
loud voice, they stopped their ears, and ran with one accord upon him, (all
which, were evidences of a most violent zeal) and cast him out of the City,
and stoned him; which out of doubt was not now lawful for the Jews, (all
power of capital punishment being before this taken from them, Joh. 8. 31.)
nor before legal condemnation ever lawful by the common way of proceeding; no
nor after condemnation, to be done thus tumultuously by the people: save only
that by the liberty of Zealots it was permitted. So Act. 14. 19. it befell
Saint Paul, (God in his providence permitting him to be thus dealt with, by way
of retaliation, for his having an hand in stoning Saint Steven, when Barnabas
met not with the like adventure) certain Jews that came from Antioch and
Iconium having stoned Paul, etc. by this judgment only of zeal, which we now
speak of.

Hither perhaps we may refer that of the Jews, who brought the woman taken
in Adultery to Christ, that she might be stoned; not desiring, as it appears,
that Christ should give sentence of death on her by ordinary legal judicature,
(for neither was Christ a Judge, nor had the Jews now power of capital
punishment) but by the liberty of Zealots, which was thought principally to
belong to that case of one taken (...), in the very fact, as appears by the
example of Phinees. So Act. 23. that (...), great cry (such as was observed in
the story of Saint Steven) was the beginning of the flaming of zeal, and verse.
10. it follows, that the chief Captain, or Tribune, sent Soldiers to rescue
and defend Paul, that he might not be taken by that party of Zealots, who,
verse. 12. had bound themselves under a curse, that they would neither eat nor
drink until they had slain Paul; who sure could not have done so impune, had
it not been thus indulged to them, as Zealots. So when James and John demand of
Christ, whether they should command fire from heaven to descend on a Village of
the Samaritanes, Luke 9. 54. this they did by the liberty of Zealots, for the
legality of their action taking their pattern from the example of Elias, and
presuming of the power to do it, because Elias had. (In reference to both
which, we read of (...), Luke 1. 17. the spirit and power of Elias; that
spirit, by which he was incited to that act of zeal, and that power by which
he could call for fire from heaven; whereupon it is Procopius his expression
of Elias, that he was (...), accended with divine zeal, or set on fire by
it.) Now when Christ reprehendeth those Disciples, telling them they knew not,
i. e. considered not, what spirit they were of, he advertiseth them that this
practice of Zealots is not agreeable to the spirit of the Gospel, nor generally
to the temper which he came to plant among Christians.

And having now among the Apostles of Christ themselves found some footsteps of
the Jewish zeal, 'twill not be amiss to interpose a conjecture, that from the
same original sprung that bloody fact of Peter, cutting off Malchus his ear,
Mat. 26. 51. For that this was not lawful for him to do, or justifiable by
the ordinary rule, may be guest by Christ's answer of reproof and vouching the
Law, (All they that take the sword, shall perish by the sword;) and yet that it
was not a fact very enormous among the Jews, or being compared with their
avowed practices (though clearly forbidden by the Gospel) Origin and
Theophylact seem to intimate. Origin on Mat. 26. Unus eorum qui erant cum Jesu
nondum manifest concipiens apud se Evangelicam patientiam illam traditam sibi
a Christo, nec pacem quam dedit Discipulis suis, sed secundum potestatem datam
Judais per legem de inimicis, extendens manum accipit gladium, etc. One of them
that were with Jesus, having not yet any full clear conception of that
Evangelicall patience delivered them by Christ, nor of that peace which he
gave to his Disciples, but according to the power given the Jews by the law of
enemies, took out his sword, etc. Theophylact yet more clearly in Mat. 26.
(...). Let us not find fault with Peter; for what he did, he did out of
zeal, not for himself, but for his Master: but the Lord reducing him to the
Gospel-discipline, teaches him not to use the sword, though thereby a man
should seem to defend or vindicate God himself. And in another place in Luke
(...), the Disciples are moved with zeal, and draw swords. And in a third
place in Mark. (...), intimating, that Peter himself counted this fact of his
a piece of zeal, for which he might be commended.

Thus much was not amiss to produce in behalf of this conjecture, that what
Peter did in defense of Christ, he did as a Zealot; and yet to see, Christ is
so far from approving it, that it incurres the same reprehension which James
and John before had met with; nay, somewhat a severer, that all might discern
how distant the spirit of Zealots was, from that other of Disciples; the
Judaicall fervor, from the meekness of the Gospel: Though the Apostles
themselves had not yet perfectly learned this truth at Christ's death, nor
until the Holy Ghost came to teach them all things, and to bring to their
remembrance whatsoever he had in person being present said unto them.

A plain mention of these Zealots we find, Act. 21. 20. where of some of the
Jews it is said, they are all (...), Zealots of the Law, that were like to be
very hot if they saw any thing done to the prejudice of the Law: Of whom
therefore Saint Paul is advised to beware. So of Paul himself before his
conversion, Act. 22. 3. it is said he was (...), a Zealot of Gods, or in Gods
cause; and presently it follows, (...), I persecuted to death, etc. for so the
Zealots were wont to do. So Act. 17. 5. (...), the Zealots of the Jews, or,
the Jews inflamed with zeal, (as the old Translation reads it, Zelantes,
better then the new, invidia commoti) of whom it is added, (...), took unto
themselves certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and made a tumult, and set
all the people in an uprore. Of which kind Master Seldom has observed, that
Simon was one, Luke 6. 15. Act. 1. 13. called by Saint Luke, (...), Simon the
Zealot; but by the other Evangelists, Saint Matthew and Saint Mark, (...), or
(as Schindler and other learned men are bold to mend it) (...), which we
render, the Cananite; but it is apparent the word is to be fetched from the
Hebrew (...), Canna, which signifies, Zealot; not from the name of the place:
and so is all one with the Greek (...), as perfectly the same as (...) and
Cephas, (...) and Tabitha, and many the like. And thus far by Scripture light
have we past in this disquisition.

Now what tumults and riots have been wrought by the rude multitude among the
Jews, (or those at least who had no lawful power in their hand) under the
pretense of the privilege of Zealots, no man can be ignorant, who is not
wholly unacquainted with Josephus story. For in his relation there is nothing
(...).
more ordinary, then to find all things disturbed by them, the Temple or holy
place defiled, (...), by their profane feet, to the reproach of God; chief
Priests removed, and others placed in their room without all respect of blood,
elected by them either according as they pleased, or else by lot; (as it was in
the election of one Phannias the son of Samuel to the high Priesthood) a man,
says Josephus, who (...) (...).
(...), was not only unworthy to be high Priest, but that did not so much as
know what the high Priesthood was, such was his rusticity.

Many passages we find scattered in this Author, in his books of the
Captivity, and large stories of the seditions, and uprores, and massacres, by
two sorts of men among the Jews, the one called (...), Swordmen or Cutters;
(of whom Saint Luke makes mention, Act. 21. 38. we render them, Murderers; and
it seems four thousand of them got together in a company) the second (...),
Zealots; of whom he makes relations, especially lib. 4. c. 11. where he says
of them, that they killed many of the chief men of the Nation, and still when
they did so, boasted and bragged of themselves, (...), that they were become
the benefactors and preservers, or saviors of the City. And by the timidity
and baseness of the people concurring with their insolence, advanced so far,
(...), that they took to themselves the election and constitution of the high
Priests. (...), and contemning the rules of birth by which the high Priests
were to succeed, they constituted ignoble obscure men in those places, that by
that means they might have some abetters and partners of their villainies. And
cap. 12. he says, the name of Zealots was of their own imposing, (...), as
if all that they did (Murders, Sacriledges, Profanations, before mentioned)
were by them done in good intentions, and not, as indeed they were, in
emulation, and even to the out-stripping and exceeding the worst actions that
had bin recorded. Thus far Josephus.

That these Zealots were a fourth Sect of the Jews, (added to Sadduces,
Pharisees, Essens) having its original from Judas Gaulonita and Sadduchus, is
the affirmation of Bonaventura Cornelius Bertramus, in the end of his book De
polit. Jud. A Sect, says he, Judaeis ipsis omnibus perniciosissima, ut quae
Judaeorum omnium excidium totiusque reip. Judaicae prostrationem non modo
accelerarit, sed and eam tam miseram and calamitosam effecerit: A Sect most
sadly pernicious to the Jews themselves; the destruction of all whom, and the
prostration of their whole Commonwealth, it did not only hasten and
precipitate, but made it so miserable and calamitous when it came.

Having proceeded thus far by way of narration, it may chance to be worth the
pains to present unto the Reader a conjecture upon the twelfth verse of, the
fourth Chap. of the 1 Epistle of Saint Peter, (...), The vulgar Latin renders
it by words utterly unintelligible: nolite peregrinari in fervore. Beza, ne
tanquam peregrini exploratione illa per ignem percellimini: as if (...)
signified a strangers being stricken or amazed: and (...) trial by fire: which
whatsoever it may in some other place, it cannot do here: because here is
added (...) which is befallen for your trial, which word would be superflous,
if (...) noted trial by fire. The more simple and clear rendering will be to
set the words so, that (...) may signify a combustion, or fire, or burning,
(so both the Vulgar and Beza, Revel. 8. 9. render (...) fumum incendii, and the
smoke of her burning) and (...) may denote these 3 things. 1. To wonder (so the
Greek Scholiast, (...)) 2. To be affrighted: (so Tertullian, ne expavescite)
3. So as it may be all one with (...), to be stricken as with an accident
wherewith we are unacquainted. These three senses each, as all of them, may be
allowed their places here. Now the conjecture is, that by the (...), the
combustion or burning, etc. should be meant, that notable combustion of the
Zealots before mentioned, (for indeed the words are of some affinity, the one
coming from (...), fire, the other from (...), growing fervently hot or
burning.) The grounds of the conjecture are these; 1. Because that last fatal
day, the destruction of Jerusalem is spoken of in that very Chap. ver. 7. as
that which for some time had been at hand: for I conceive I can make it plain
by comparing of places of the new Test. that (...) the end of all things is
(not the final period of the world, but) that destruction of Jerusalem or the
Jewish Commonwealth, and of that it is said, (...), it is, or has for some
time been at hand, it was not yet comen: but of this (...) or combustion, that
it was then (...), already come; which is directly agreeable to the observation
of Josephus, and others conversant in the Jewish, who affirm that that raving
and rioting of, (and sad civil combustion wrought by) the Zealots, was
antecedent and precursory to the final destruction of the Jews by Titus. It Is
affirmed of this (...) that it was (...), i. e. among you, in your Land, in the
midst of you, (as that phrase frequently signifies in the new Test.) by which
is marked out some remarkable thing, which was fallen out among the Jews, as
that time when Peter wrote; to which time that the raving of the Zealots
endured, is apparent by mention of them, Act. 21. 20. Act. 22. 3. and that by
their stirs these Christian Jews of the (...) or the dispersion to whom he
writes, had been first scattered abroad, may be conjectured by Act. 8. 1. This
may suffice for a conjecture, which whether it stand or fall, will not be much
concernant to the business which occasioned this (...).

To conclude this historical uneven discourse, I shall only annex these few
animadversions by way of corollary.

1. That this law, or power, or custom, or liberty of Zealots, was never of
force but among the Jews.

2. That the original and ground of it among them is to be fetched from hence,
that among that people, God immediately presided, and reserved many things to
be managed and ruled by his peculiar and extraordinary incitation and
impulsion, not by any rule of standing public law; that so that Commonwealth
might be truly capable of that title which Josephus bestowed on it, none of the
kinds of humane Governments, but (...) the government of God.

3. That it follows not from hence, that all things which were by the Jews
themselves done under pretense of this right, and passed unpunished, were
therefore well done; but only those which were undertaken by men truly incited
by God, (such as Phineez and Elias) for that privilege is not therefore styled
zeli privati, of private zeal, because private men by their own incitation
((...), as that is opposed to Gods) did what they did; but because they did it
without legal process, or public judicature. And though I should be so
scepticall, as not to dare peremptorily to affirm, that nothing was well done
or justifiable in that kind, but what they did who were truly and immediately
incited to it by God; yet should I not be so cowardly as to doubt, but that all
those Jews were so bound to observe those examples of Phineez and Ellas, that
if they were not immediately incited by God, yet they should not dare to exceed
the limits of those patterns commended by God, either in respect of the manner
of doing, or matter of the action. In one of which you shall find all the
examples mentioned in the New Testament, except that of Christ, to have
miscarried. And therefore I hope no man will be so unjust to the charitable
design of this Paper, so treacherous to his Readers, so unkind to his own
Soul, as to borrow from these premises new hints of arguments to sustain a
desperate cause by his pretense of zeal; for that would be to extract Rosacre
out of Treacle, poison from that which was designed for antidote. And he must
withal resolve, that if the practice of Christ first mentioned, be his
president, he must also prescribe to Christ's power; or if any of the other New
Testament examples; he must be content to fall under their condemnation, for
not one of them that I ever yet heard of, was excused by any.

4. That this Sect of Zealots when they thus got together into a body was by
the Jews themselves (among whom the privilege of Zealots was yet in force)
taken for the most unlawful, yea pernicious and fatal, most eminently
destructive to that Commonwealth (as appears by Josephus and Bertram) and
that those things which they did under pretense of law and color of zeal,
were violations of law and mere sacrilege.

5. That all use of this liberty, all imitation of that Jewish privilege of
Zealots in the Old Testament, is clearly interdicted all Christians; First,
because the written word is the only Oracle wherein God constantly reveals
himself to Christians now under the new Testament, neither are any other
incitations to be expected from God, but what in the Gospel or New Test. the
(...), the administration of the Spirit (as preaching the Gospel is called)
does yield or afford us; what is more then this, yea, though it come to us from
the Pulpit, savours of enthusiasmes and seducing spirits; Secondly, because
Christ has both by his doctrine and example commended to his Disciples all
manner of meekness (and Saint Peter, the meek and quiet spirit, as most
precious in Gods sight under the Gospel, and this a grace most directly
contrary to that Spirit of Zealots) yea and has forbidden all private revenge
of injuries (done not only to our selves, but God) referring all to the
Magistrate (whom Saint Paul calls (...), Romans 13. 4. the minister of God to
execute wrath, or an executioner for wrath) and therefore himself meddled not
with the woman taken in Adultery; Thirdly, because he interdicted James and
John the use of this power, adding a reprehension, and words emphaticall to
this purpose, he turned and rebuked them, saying, you know not what spirit you
are of; intimating, the Christian spirit to be very distant from that of the
Zealots among the Jews.

I shall add no more, but my prayer, that as many as have zeal, may have it
according to knowledge, and that knowledge, according to the directions of the
Gospel.

Of taking up the Cross.
MAny places of the New Testament there are that require this duty of a
Christian, (of which I think I may truly say, that it is a duty never so much
as in kind required before by God in the Old Testament, nor by the laws of
nature, or Canons of any other Religion, and so a peculiar Christian duty) the
chief places are these, Matthew. 16. 24. If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself and takeup his Cross, etc. and in the same words in the parallel
places, Mark 8. 34. and Luke 9. 23. So again, to him who desired to be put in
a course by Christ to inherit eternal life, Mark. 10. 21. in the close, Come,
take up the Cross, and follow me. In all these places it is a duty of plain
command; yet somewhat farther, Mat. 10. 38. He that takes not his Cross and
follows not after me, is not worthy of me: and in Luke 14. 27. the words are
most punctual, and of unlimited extent, from whence 'twill be hard for any man
to obtain any dispensation, or excuse, (...) -- whosoever does not bear his
Cross and come after me, cannot be my Disciple. No man will be exempted from
the (...) -- and no Christian it seems can be without it; for that is the
meaning of [my Disciple,] not only those peculiar twelve of his, and their
successors in the Ministry, for that Relation belongs to them, considered
under another notion, as Apostles sent out after by Christ, answerable to the
(...) among the Jews under the Temple, but the disciples are all true
followers of Christ, all sincere Christians, and so the doctrine is most
plain, that whosoever does not bear (which as from those other former places
appears, implies a taking up) the Cross of Christ, cannot be a true Christian.

Now the (...), taking up the Cross, will be easily explained what it is full
importance extends to, the voluntary embracing of shame, contumely, (for the
Cross was a contumelious death Heb. 12. 2.) and consequently all other loss
of goods, liberty, etc. and beyond that, pain of body and death it self:
which are said, to be taken up, not when we bring them unnecessarily upon our
own shoulders, (for that is to pull the Cross upon us) but when by the
providence of God they are laid, or permitted to lie in our way to Christ, or
Christian obedience, so that we cannot serve Christ perfectly, but it must
become detriment or damage to us, then voluntarily to undergo that detriment,
whatever it is, is to take up the Cross; and patiently and cheerfully to bear
it, is (...), to carry or bear the Cross of Christ, which is the duty,
without which a man cannot be a Christian.

There is now one thing to be a little more punctually considered, the strict
and near dependence and connection betwixt Christianity and the Cross; and
that from the pleasure and providence of God, and dispensation of things under
the Gospel, so ordering it generally that we should not serve the Lord our God
of that that costs us nothing, but that true Christian piety should bring
endurances and sufferings upon us. Thus it is plain it did to Christ our elder
brother; the discharge of the office he had undertaken, brought him to the
Cross, and that Cross was the only way to his consecration to the office of
high Priest, to which at his resurrection he was inaugurate; vid. Heb. 2. 10.
it became him, etc. i. e. God (...) (not in bringing, but) bringing, (or being
about that most gracious and mighty design of bringing) many sons unto
glory, (...) by sufferings to consecrate or inaugurate, (for so (...)
critically signifies, being the word solemnly used by the Septuagint to
signify the legal consecration of the Priests under the Law) the captain of
our salvation, that is Christ, who (...), being so consecrated, became the
author of eternal salvation, etc. Heb. 5. 9. From hence, without more places
it would follow, that we Christians are to expect our (...) (whether
consecration to our (...) our dignity of being Kings and Priests, i. e.
Christians here; or consummation and crowning hereafter, as (...) also
signifies ((...). Nyss.) by the same method and means that our captain had his,
which is (...) by sufferings: which course of divine Economy is so general
and without exception, (2 Timothy 3. 12. yea, and all that will be godly in this
world, (...), shall be persecuted) that Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8. the words are very
remarkable, Whom God loves, he chastneth, and scourges every son whom he
receives, if you endure chastning, God deals with you as with sons, for
what son is he whom the father chastneth not? But if you be without
chastisement whereof all are partakers, then are you bastards, and not sons.
Words of a large unlimited latitude, which I cannot discern any way in the
world to soften, so as they may be supportable to him, that (as the Psalmist
says) has no changes, has enjoyed an age of an uninterrupted continued
prosperity, without ever having the Cross on his shoulders. I confess I would
feign find out some (...) or mollifying distinction, as that of the animus
martyris, the preparation to suffer, though God never send occasion, that that
might suffice for his qualification, who has no other, but sure that will not
be able to allay or take off the force of [and chastneth every son, etc.] and
if ye be without, not only if you be not prepared to bear, but if you be
without chastisement, then are you bastards, etc. which when it is set down as
an aphorism of divine observation under the Kingdom of Christ, an Axiom of
Gods Gospell-providence, there will be no safety in disputing or laboring to
avoid the literal importance of it. To that purpose I conceive those words
tend Romans 8. 28. where to prove the conclusion premised, verse. 28. that all
things tend to the good of them that love God, (and what those all things are,
is specified, verse. 35. tribulation, distress, persecution, famine,
nakedness, danger, sword,) the Apostle thus argues: From whom he has
foreknown, i. e, fore-appointed, the lovers of God premised, those he has also
predestined to be conformable to to the image of his Son, i. e. in suffering;
and whom he has predestined, those he has also called; to wit, to that
conformity to which he has predestined them, (as 1 Pet. 2. 21. the phrase is
used, (...), for to this ye were called, i. e. to this suffering as Christ did,
and c. 3. 9. ye are thereunto called, that you should inherit (...), blessing
(not as we render it, a blessing) i. e. that ye should bless enemies as
Christ did, and so inherit that exemplary grace of his, which as a grace may as
properly be said to be inherited; thus the context seems to enforce it [not
rendering evil for evil, but blessing, knowing that you are thereunto called,
that you should inherit blessing, etc. i. e. possess that grace after him, so
eminently discernible in him.] And whom he has thus called, he justified and
glorified. Where the first and second proposition must be acknowledged
universal, that all whom he has foreknowne, all lovers of God, are thus
predestined, and all that are predestined, called (by their very title or
profession of Christians) to this conformity with Christ in sufferings. Add to
these 1 Pet. 4. 18. if the righteous hardly be saved; which must be understood
by the sense of the Hebrew phrase, Prove. 11. 30. rendered by the 72. (...), and
here retained by Saint Peter, and then the sense will be [and if the righteous
be recompensed, i. e. by an Hebraisme, punished in the earth, etc. or more
literally to the Greek, If he escape hardly or with difficulty.] (as 1 Cor. 3.
15. (...), he shall be mulcted or suffer loss, but shall escape) which
interpretation the former verse in Saint Peter, confirms [(...)] for it is the
season of that act of divine dispensation, viz. of judgments beginning from
the house of God, i. e. of Gods inflicting judgments of this life (which are
the beginning or first part ((...) as it follows) of Gods retribution for
sin) on the Godly] which signifies that the state of the Gospel, is that
season, though the Law was not: and to the same purpose, the verse following
also, (...) etc. They that suffer according to the will of God, It seems by
all put together, that the (...) [scarcely saved] is spoken of suffering, and
the will or providence of God is that that disposes it so, and so the
conclusion from thence is clear, and universal. The righteous shall be
punished in the earth. It Is true indeed, under the Old Testament we find not
any such economy, but promises of a long and happy life, in a temporal Canaan
to the obedient servants of God, (though sometimes, God was pleased to
interpose some variety in this kind, many troubles of the righteous in David's
time) but under the Gospel it is quite contrary, even those duties which are
promised a reward on this earth, as mercifulness or almesgiving, are yet to
expect the payment of this reward with some mixture (like Homers good cup
powered out always with a dash of the bad) the hundredfold which such men are
promised to receive (...) - in this time, this first inferior harvest of
retributions, though they be secular blessings, houses, and lands, etc. yet
must they be with persecutions, Mark. 10. 30. Which particular though neither
S. Matthew nor S. Luke records, yet S. Peter (who had most reason punctually to
observe those words of Christ, being an answer directed to a question of his
proposing, as all the three Evangelists acknowledge) remembered them, and so we
find them in S. Marks Gospel, which is resolved to have been dictated by
Saint Peter.

Having thus far in the passage briefly pointed at this piece of
Gospel-Providence, 'twill not be amiss as briefly to guess at the ends of
this divine Economy. 1. To administer occasion of the practice and exercise of
many Christian duties, and graces, as of patience, meekness, waiting on
Christ, of loving our enemies, of the (...) the non-resisting evil, we render
it, or not using any violence against him that molests us, (rendering [(...)] of
the Person, etc.) which if we have in seed or habit, it is certainly a great
felicity to us, to meet with oportunities to actuate them, both inrespect of
the evidencing the sincerity of them to God, to our brethren, to our own
souls; and in respect of that reward, or Crown promised, the great degree of
glory, Math. 5. 12. that is proportioned to the (...) according to his work,
Psalm. 62. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 10. (...) according to the nature and number of the
Acts, or operations of those gifts or graces, as on the other side, a greater
portion of the Torments of hell is allotted to the more multiplied acts of
wilful win. 2 To help to mortify any remainders of sin in us, which by
continued prosperity are ready and apt to take root, and reflourish in us. 3 To
assimilate, or make us like to Christ, to conform us to the image of his son,
Romans 8. 29. that is the image of the crucified Savior, as was said, that he
might be the first borne of many brethren, that is, might have a Church or
family, a multitude of brethren like himself, all sufferers as he was. 4 That
our sins being punished here, there might remain no arreare to be paid in
another world; having had all our Purgatory here, there might remain nothing
but heaven hereafter; which the Apostle expresses 1 Cor. 11. 32. We are
chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World: to which
Father Abraham referres Luke 16. 25. Lazarus received his evil things in this
life time, and now he is comforted.

These and such like being the designs of this act of Gods Gospell-Providence;
It is next observable what a character the Spirit of God sets upon the Cross,
i. e. Tribulation or affliction here, that it is the happiest, blessedest
estate, the most comfortable joyful condition that a Christian can meet with.
This riddle and paradox, or prodigy to carnal reason, is become the most
ordinary beaten acknowledged truth in the new Testament. It Is the close of the
beatitudes, in that institution of Christians, the Sermon in the mount, Matthew.
5. 10. Blessed are they that are persecuted, and verse. 11. reviled: and the
exhortation in this case (...) rejoice, and be exceeding glad, so Luke 6. 22.
(which there is some reason to think was spoken by Christ at another time)
blessed are you when men shall hate you, and separate you, and reproach you,
and cast you out, etc. (...), rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy, etc.
Saint Paul had learnt this, Col. 1. 24. who now rejoice in my sufferings, yea,
and glory too. 2 Cor. 11. 30. 12. 5. 9. Saint James his exhortation is
remarkable in the front of his Ep. 1. 2. My brethren, count it all joy when ye
fall into diverse Temptations, (...), all joy; i. e. The most joyous accident
possible, and verse. 12. blessed is the man that endures Temptation, etc. and
cap. 5. 11. (...), behold we count them happy, we render it; it signifies
more; behold we account them as a kind of Saints in Heaven, (for so (...)
usually signifies) and Aristotle speaking of some heroical super-humane
excellencies, (...), says he, (...)) it seems that of suffering, a most
blessed condition. To these add Saint Peter, 1. Ep. 3. 15. but sanctify the
Lord God in your hearts; where the word (...) is to sanctify, as that is all
one with glorifying, or hallowing, or praising; a consequent of the general
rule, verse 14. if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; and
perfectly opposite to [being afraid of their terror, and being troubled,] in
the end of that verse. and so is an expression of this duty of praising,
thanking, blessing God for our sufferings in this life. So again, 1 Ep. 4. 13.
(...), verse. 12. be not frighted or stricken, etc. but rejoice in as much as
you are partakers of Christ's sufferings, and verse. 14. If ye be reproached for
the name of Christ, happy are you, etc. and verse. 16. If any suffer as a
Christian (not as a murderer, a thief, an evil doer, a busie-body in other
men's matters, verse. 15. no great joy or comfort in any of those sufferings) let
him not be ashamed but let him glorify God on this behalf, (...), that it is
the season for judgment to begin, or of judgments beginning, at the house of
God, as has been explained; it is seasonable that the (...), the first part of
Gods (...); retribution to sin, that which is in this life, should befall the
house of God, Christians, and the most obedient of them; and being so, this is
matter of rejoicing, and glorifying God. Other places ye will observe easily to
the same purpose, let these for the present suffice, to soften this carnal
paradox.

But now having proceeded thus far in a matter, to him that is conversant in
the new Testament, so obvious and vulgar, that I shall presume it matter of
wonder to him, what should move me to so superfluous and unnecessary an
undertaking; I must now take confidence to proceed to that which Arrian calls
the (...), the applying of (...) known and granted principles, to particular
persons, or cases, or practices. For therein as that excellent Philosopher
observes, consists the ground and beginning of all strife and difficulty, and
difference betwixt men; no man having any considerable Temptation, to keep him
from consenting to the truth of a general proposition sufficiently assert, as
long as he appears not concerned in it, and yet every man almost having some
irreconcilable quarrel to it, when his actions are required to be ruled by
it; hence is it, that the speculative part of knowledge, is far easier then
the practical; and as Aristotle says, the Mathematics which are the most
abstruse Science, are most easy to be learnt by a young man, or a dissolute,
of any the most untamed affections, so he have but an ordinary natural
capacity, (and it is evident by his Organon, that he supposed children to have
learnt Geometry before they came to Logic) whereas of the precepts of
Morality, such are utterly incapable (...): they can recite them by rote, but
believe not a word of them.

I wish it were now uncharitable to affirm the same, of many that have taken
upon them, to be the best, and most reforming Christians amongst us; that it
continued still to be but our jealousy, what is now proved our sense, that
some of those who have hitherto been admired for our strictest Christians, have
at length confessed themselves farthest from the merit, and true desert of that
title, if the doctrine of the cross which hitherto we have laid down for
acknowledged truth, do not at last prove a fable.

The Apostle Phil. 3. 18. tells us even weeping, that there are many walkers, (I
think he means by that phrase (...), Christian professors) whom judging by
their actions, he cannot choose but call (...), (of whom it seems he had often
admonished them, (...)) enemies of the Cross of Christ; what those were in the
Apostles time will not be pertinent now to examine, I shall only with a sad
heart (not desiring to judge my brother, but if it were possible, to direct him
to prejudge, or at least examine himself, and so either anticipate and
prevent, or else prepare himself to approach with confidence Gods judgment,
and withal, to help undeceive others whom we find ductile to some modern
sins, much-what upon that dangerous prepossession which the Apostle calls
having men's persons in admiration) make these few quaere's, and leave every
man's own soul to answer them.

1. Supposing our grounds laid to be true, I demand whether it be the temper of
a true Christian, and not rather of an enemy of the Cross of Christ, instead
of rejoicing, to repine and murmr under the Cross, and evidence that by
speaking evil of those powers who have laid it on our shoulders?

2. To be more refractary after such sufferings, (instead of being more meek
and more humble) more violent in matters of indifferency, (by our own continued
practice acknowledged to be so in our account, till after such sufferings our
judgments or rather our practice altered) and more resolved not to yield
obedience in them, then before we thought our selves bound to be.

3. To plot and project, and to that purpose to hold correspondence with other
men, (whom we conceive already moved with discontents, or our selves have
labored so to move) to find out the most probable way of delivering us from
the Cross, whatsoever that way be, beside our addresses to God in prayer to
remove it, if he see it best for us in all respects.

4. To make use of any means to this purpose, which we are not assured is
administered and offered unto us by God, of which we can no way possibly be
assured, but by the evident goodness and justifiablenesse, at least,
lawfulness in all respects of that means which we thus design to make use of.

5. To move or stir the quiet and peace of one or more Kingdoms, (though not
principally, yet collaterally, or at all) in this contemplation, that we shall
get the Cross off from our own shoulders, come to a more prosperous condition,
yea, though it be but to a more peaceable enjoying of our manner of Religion,
then hitherto we have attained to.

6. To venture on, and (though not primarily to design, if it may be done
without it, yet if it may not, then secondarily and consequently) to resolve on
the shedding of any one man's blood, which we know would not otherwise be shed,
especially if it proceed further, to the waging or but occasioning of a war,
in which (whether offensive or defensive on our parts) it cannot be hoped but a
great effusion of Christian and Protestant blood will follow.

7. To attempt or desire the removing of the Landmarks, the altering of the
Government of Church and State, the working of any considerable change in
either, (which we can have no revelation to assure us may not prove author of
some inconvenience which we foresee not) the better to secure our selves or
others, that the Cross shall not return to our shoulders again.

8. To think it just and reasonable (and our selves injured if it be not so)
that we should have the greater portion of secular dignities for the future,
in regard of some former sufferings of ours; which if it should befall us,
would be parallel to that curse, Mat. 6. mercedem habent, they have their
reward, in this life.

9. To endeavor to lay this Cross on other men's shoulders, of which we have
freed our own, whether those other men be such as were not guilty of our former
sufferings, but perhaps pitied and mourned, and prayed for us, (for that were
rewarding good with evil) or whether they be our greatest persecuters, (for
that will be rendering evil for evil) most perfectly contrary to Christ's
doctrine, Mat. 6. 44. Romans 12, 17, 19, 20, 21.

Secondly, supposing things to be as now they are in this Kingdom, my Question
is, First, Whether we have no great reason to believe, that (the doctrine of
the Cross being not so well laid to heart by those who three years since
conceived themselves the principal Scholars in that School) God is now
pleased to call another sort of men into that form, to try whether they will
prove better proficients then their predecessors have done. Secondly, Whether
those on whom that lot is now fallen, be not most eminently bound to glorify
God in this behalf, 1 Pet. 4. 16. Thirdly, Whether by the experience of other
men's failings in this kind, they have not reason to be earnest in prayer to
God, and diligent in using and improving all Gods directions, for the due
Christian discharging of so glorious, and withal, so difficult a task; that
when they are proved to the utmost, are brought forth to resist to blood, they
may be found faithful. Fourthly, Whether the obtaining of this grace from God
be not more highly conducible to every man's own individual interests, then
the removing of the Cross from us, though wrought most directly, and by means
administered undoubtedly by God himself. Fifthly, Whether it can become a
Christian to make use of any means which he is not on sure grounds satisfied
to be purely and perfectly lawful (i. e. agreeable first to the Gospel-rule of
obedience to Christ in every particular, and second to the lawful commands, of
our undoubted Superiors, not contradicted by any law or power higher then
they) to get now either totally or in part from this Cross, i. e. from any
pressure which in the discharge of a good conscience God shall permit to fall
on any of us.

When every man in this broken State and Church, most sadly militant, of what
persuasions soever he be, has laid the several parts of these two Quaeries
to his heart, and examined himself by them, (which truly I should not have
laid thus plainly before him, had I had any other thought or aim, but this one
of making it impossible for him to be blind in judging himself) I shall hope
he will pardon his Monitor, and save this paper the labor of proceeding
further to bear witness against him at any other tribunal then this of his
own conscience.

The Lord prosper this short discourse to the end to which it is designed.
A Vindication of Christ's reprehending Saint Peter, from the Exceptions of
Master Marshall.
THere is nothing more unjust and uningenuous, then Master Marshall's dealing
about Christ's reprehension of Saint Peter's Vid. supra page 7.
using the Sword; whilst he labors to answer the Objection, which from thence
is brought against the use of Arms, though but defensive, taken up against a
lawful Magistrate. The Argument is briefly this: Saint Peter, in defense of
his Master (Christ himself) drew his Sword, and cut off the Ear of Malchus,
one of the High Priests Servants, sent by Commission from their Masters, to
apprehend Jesus: and our Savior commands him to put up his Sword; adding by
way of reason, for they that take the sword (take it not when it is put into
their hands by God, or the supreme Magistrate, or any Delegate of his, who has
the power of the Sword; but take it, usurp it, without legal authority or
concession, giving or permitting it to them) shall perish by the sword. Which
reason, or backing of Christ's reprehension, is brought to infer, That it is a
sin for any to use the Sword against the supreme Magistrate, though for
defense of Christ, or Christian Religion. To this Master Marshall's Answer is
threefold: 1. That the speech of Christ to Peter, is not a reproof of the
sword taken for a just defense; but of the sword taken for unjust oppression,
and a comfort to those who are oppressed with it. For Origin, Theophylact,
Titus, Euthymius, interpret the meaning to be, that Christ does not rebuke
Peter for using defensive Arms; but to let Peter know, that he need not
snatch Gods work out of his hands; for God would in time punish those with the
sword, that came thus with the sword against him. And that these words are a
prophecy of the punishment which the Roman sword should exact of the bloody
Jewish nation, according with the like expression, Revel. 13. 10. He that
kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword: here is the patience and
faith of the Saints; i. e. this may comfort the Saints in their persecutions,
that God will take vengeance for them: and for all this, the Margin advises
the Reader to consult Grotius de jure belli, l. 1. c. 3. n. 3. This is the
place at length in Master Marshall his Letter to a friend, which (being of some
concernment and importance to the present controversy of the times, though not
to confirm his cause by this exposition, yet to dispatch one of his special
adversaries out of the way) I shall now beg leave to examine; and of all
together, observe these four things: First, that the ancient Writers, vouched
by him, are not vouched from his own reading, but taken upon trust from
Grotius, as also the observation of the Roman Sword, and the place in the
Revelations. Secondly, that the interpretation, asserted by him out of them, is
not asserted by them. Thirdly, that it is not asserted by Grotius. Fourthly,
that Grotius, to whom he owes all this seeming aid to his cause, is the most
declared enemy of this whole cause of his, in behalf of defensive resistance
of the Magistrate, that he could possibly have fallen on; and upon occasion of
these words of Christ to Peter, has said as much against it. If these four
things be made good, I cannot guess what could be further added, to prove the
injustice and uningenuousnesse, I shall add, the untowardnesse and
unluckinesse of this Answer. And for the particulars, I shall but require a
Reader with eyes in his head, and suppose him not possessed with a belief of an
absolute infallibility in Master Marshall, and then I shall be confident to
demonstrate them.

For the first, the proof will be short, if you please but to look on Grotius
in the place directed to in his Annotations on the Gospels, page 465. almost
verbatim transcribing what he had before published de jure belli; you shall in
each find every of the particulars mentioned: but for this I would not charge
Master Marshall, I wish he would always gleane out of so good Writers. The
only fault here is, that having borrowed so much from him, and digested it
into nourishment of his own error, he did not also take the pains to borrow
what was present to be had, a most sovereign antidote for his own poison,
means of rectifying his mistake: but like the man in Gellius, that had eat so
much poison, and therewith so envenomed his blood, that he could poison the
Flea that came to bite him: so, he the Grotius, that came to prick and wound;
or, if he had pleased, to convert, to b^ing him to repentance.

For the second, I shall not expect to evince it against so great an authority
of Master Marshall, without transcribing the very words of those Writers in
this matter. Origin upon the place in Mat. 26. tr. 35. p. 118. explaines the
whole period in these words, (I shall omit no word that is pertinent to the
matter in hand:) Unus eorum qui erant cum Jesu, nondum manifest concipiens
apud se Evangelicam patientiam illam traditam sibi a Christo, nec pacem quam
dedit discipulis suis, sed secundum potestatem datam Judaeis per legem de
inimicis, extendens manum accepit gladium, etc. Peter it seems had not
perfectly learned the doctrine of Christian patience, and the peace which
Christ commended to his Disciples, but proceeded according to the Jewish Law of
dealing with enemies. This concludes Peter's act contrary to Christian patience
and peaceablenesse, and so makes him capable of Christ's reproof, which Master
Marshall will wholly divert from him, and cast upon the Jews. Then he goes
on, Mox Jesus ad eum, converte gladium in locum suum: Est ergo gladii locus
aliquis, ex quo non licet excipere eum, qui non vult perire maxim in gladio.
(This clearly of Saint Peter again, and not the Jews, that he must not take
the sword out of its place, unless he will be content to perish by the
sword:) Pacificos enim vult esse Jesus discipulos suos, ut bellicum gladium
hunc deponentes, (O that Master Marshall would remember this, and after so
fair an admonition, put the military sword out of his mouth also.) Alterum
pontificium accipiant gladium, quem dicit Scriptura gladium Spiritus. Simile
autem mihi videtur quod dicit, Omnes qui accipiunt, etc. i. e. omnes qui non
pacifici, sed belli concitatores sunt, in eo bello peribunt quod concitant,
etc. Et puto quod omnes tumultuosi and concitatores bellorum, and conturbantes
animas hominum, maxim Ecclesiarum, accipiunt gladium, in quo and ipsi
peribunt. Excellent seasonable doctrine for these times, if it might be laid to
heart; but no way excusing Saint Peter. Again, Qui accipiunt What if a man
should construe this (not o^ occasion of the Militi^
gladium, etc. cavere nos convenit, ut ne occasion militiae, vel vindictae
propriarum injuriarum (remember, not for revenge of ones own injuries)
eximamus gladium, aut ob aliquam occasionem, quam omnem abominatur haec Christi
doctrina, praecipiens ut impleamus quod scriptum est, Cum his qui oderunt
pacem, eram pacificus. Si ergo cum odientibus pacem debemus esse pacifici,
adversus neminem gladio uti debemus. These are the words of Origin; out of
which, he that shall infer that Origin conceived the meaning of the Scripture
to be, that Christ did not rebuke Peter for using defensive Arms against
Malchus, I shall resolve, he has gotten the Philosophers stone, is Alchymist
enough to extract fire out of water; any the most contrary sense out of any
words. Not so much as one word here of the Jews or the Roman sword that should
give them their payment; but all of Peter's sword, and the miscarriages of
that. And so much for Origin.

Then for Theophylact; he is also punctual enough to this purpose: (...) In
Matth^ p. 162.
(...). Let us not find fault with Peter, (make not too much haste Master
Marshall to catch that, till you see the consequents) for he did this not for
himself, but in zeal for his Master: Herein I shall interpose my conjecture,
that Theophylact might think Peter did this, as a Zealot; as James and John
would have destroyed the Village of the Samaritanes, jure Zelotarum: so his
words also sound on Luke, page 518. (...): and then though that were unlawful
for a Christian, a piece of Judaisme outdated by Christ; yet in Peter, as a
Jew, not perfectly illuminate, or instructed in the Christian doctrine, (as
Origin before observed) it was not so blameable yet, till after the coming of
the Holy Ghost, who was to bring all things to their remembrance which Christ
had taught them. And therefore perhaps it is, that, although Saint Augustine
calls this of Peter, earnalem amorem; yet, amorem Magistri still. The same
Author upon Saint Mark has these words, upon this same occasion, (...).
Counting this zeal, as in a Jew, rather a commendable thing. If all this be
yielded, yet will it be no justification of the like in a Christian; because
now Christ has reformed that law, and checked that Peter, And therefore, the
same Theophylact goes on; that though we should not aggravate Peter's fault,
nor chide him for it, (...)* yet Christ reformes him, turns him to the
Gospel-discipline, and teaches him not to use the sword, though by so doing he
seem to defend or vindicate God himself. Could any man have spoken more
expressly or prophetically against Master Marshall his doctrine, then this
father does. (So likewise in other places upon Saint Lukes Gospel, page 518.
(...)* he confesses Peter was chid for his zeal. And on Saint John's Gospel,
(...) etc. The Lord reprehends Peter, and threatening, says, put up, etc.
threatening whom? sure that person, in Theophylact's opinion, to whom he said,
put up: and that sure was Peter, not the Jews.) But to show you the occasion
of Master Marshall's mistake: It follows indeed in Theophylact on Matthew,
(...). Insinuat autem, as Oecolampadius renders it: Christ insinuates that by
the Romans sword, the Jews that took the sword against him, shall be
destroyed. This acknowledged truth, (that the Romans should destroy the Jews,
the apprehenders and crucifiers of Christ, i. e. that were guilty of crucifying
him,) was, says he, insinuated in those words of Christ, wherein, as before
we showed out of Theophylact's words, he reproved Saint Peter. Now we know
that (...), or insinuating, or intimating, signifies a secundary or
allegorical sense of a Scripture, as it is frequent in that Author. Speaking
of the cutting off Malchus his Ear, (...), says he, he insinuates, (...),
that the Jews did not hear and obey the Scripture, as they should: a mere
allegorical interpretation. So when Christ bids him that had no sword, sell
his garment and buy one, Luke 22. 36. (...), etc. he speaks aenigmatically;
and tells them by way of insinuation, what wars and dangers should betide
them. Which insinuated or aenigmaticall sense, though it be acknowledged true,
will not evacuate that other literal. For I hope, in Master Marshall his own
judgment, that it is lawful to use a sword in ones own defense, in time of
war and danger, and that that lawfulness is authorized by Christ, in those
words: which I shall not doubt to acknowledge with him, if it be not against
the lawful Magistrate.

The product then of Theophylact's interpretation will be this; that by those
words, (for all they that take the sword, shall perish by the sword) Christ
reprehends and chides Peter for drawing his sword, and using it, as he did:
and withal, insinuates aenigmatically the destruction of the Jews by the
Romans. Which if it be acknowledged true in both senses, 'twill no way
prejudice us, or serve Master Marshall, whose cause depends upon rejecting of
the former sense, not on asserting the latter: and does not only affirm, that
it is a reproof of the sword taken for unjust oppression, but also that it is
not a reproof of the sword taken for just defense: which is absolutely false
in Theophylact's opinion, if defending of Christ be just defense, or chiding be
reproving; or if teaching not to use the sword, though one seem to defend God
himself, be rebuking Peter for using defensive Arms for Christ. The short is,
though Theophylact's interpretation bring the Jews under Christ's threatening
and reprehension, yet does it no way free Peter from the same; but primarily
subjects him to it: The contrary to which is the only thing would be for
Master Marshall his purpose. It Is true indeed, in his Scholia on Saint John,
he says, Christ comforted Peter, which seems opposite to rebuking; but that
was not in those words, For they that take the sword, etc. but in those, the
cup, etc. ((...), etc.) which Saint John immediately adds, omitting the words of
the threatening out of the law. And so much for Theophylact also.

Now that which has been thus largely set down out of Theophylact, will
sufficiently clear this whole business, without proceeding to examine what
may be found in Titus Bostrensis, or Euthymius, to this purpose. The former of
these, in his Exposition of Saint Luke, in the Bibliotheca patrum Graec. has
not the least word sounding that way, but rather contrary; interpreting Christ's
command of buying a sword, as a designation only of the Jews preparation
against him, (...), and that they were about to apprehend him: which (as
Theophylact did, so) he calls, (...), the intimation of the sword; and says,
that therefore Christ adds, that the things written of him must be fulfilled.
And again, that if Christ would have had his Disciples use any humane help at
his apprehension, a hundred swords would not have been sufficient, (...), and
if he would not, even these two would be too many. But all this he says upon
the passage of the two swords. The truth is, in the Exposition of the Gospel,
he says nothing of this reprehension of Peter, but passes it over in silence.
And for his notes on Saint Matthew, as also for Euthymius his, though, I
confess, that I have them not by me, yet (besides that I find nothing that way
in those Excerpta that Lucas Burgensis has out of them, who would not probably
have omitted the mention of such a rarity, if it were there,) I think I may
take upon me at a venture to say, that he that examines those books, shall
not possibly meet with more then out of Theophylact was cited: These three
Expositors running generally on the same notions, and all of them for the most
part gleaning from Chrysostom, (Euthymius being his Scholar, Titus his
professed Epitomater) who I am sure has nothing in favor (...) this Exposition.
Out of him, as the Homes of those after-Expositors, I shall transcribe these
few passages, (...), in his homil. 54. on Mat. c. 26. Why did he bid buy a
Sword? to give them assurance that he should be betrayed: (...) Not that they
should be armed on that occasion, (away with that) but to signify his
betraying. Then, that their having those two weapons at that time, was upon
occasion of killing the lamb for the Passover, and the Disciples then coming
from Supper, and hearing that some would come to apprehend him, took them out
from thence with them, (...), meaning to fight for their Master; (...), which
was their opinion only, not Christ's intention: (...), wherefore Peter is chid
for using of it: (...), and that with a sound threat; which what can it be, but
that about which we now contend, they that take the sword, etc? upon the
hearing of which words, says he, he straight obeyed, and did so no more.
Again, citing the passage in Saint Luke, (...), he chid and threatened the
Disciples into obedience; and then sets down the words of the threat, (...),
etc. for all that take, etc. And yet after all these plain words of
reprehending and threatening Peter, in those words (all they that take the
sword, shall perish by it) he yet adds, that he comforted his Disciples by
two things, first the punishment of the betrayers, applying to that the same
speech in a Parenthesis (They that take, etc.) and that he suffered not
unwillingly. All which together signify clearly the same that we found in
Theophylact, (and presume the utmost either of Titus or Euthymius their
exposition) that in that threatening of Peter, is intimated also or insinuated
aenigmatically a threat of those other Swordmen that came out with swords and
staves to take Jesus: which will not be denied by any, or disputed of by me, so
the other be granted, viz. that Peter was here reprehended and threatened; which
is the only thing we quarrel in Mr. Marshall. And so much for the second
under-taking.

Now that, in the third place, Grotius himself who cites these four Ancients,
and is here cited by Master Marshall, de jure belli, l. 1. c. 3. n. 3. does not
in this place, or any other of his writings, assert this interpretation, I
shall thus prove: The thing that in that place he has in hand is to enquire,
Whether all use of the sword, for a man's own defense, be unlawful under the
Gospel? And he resolves, that in case of one private man's being invaded by
another, it is lawful by the law of Christ, (not necessary, but lawful; a man
is only not obliged to the contrary) or notwithstanding the prescribed rules
of Christian patience, to kill another in defense of my own life. Against
this, three objections he mentions out of the New Testament, Mat. 5. 39. Romans
12. 19. and the saying of Christ to Peter, Put up thy sword, etc. For all they
that take the sword, etc. To those three he answers:

1. By opposing some other places of Scripture; that of Christ to his followers
Luke 22. 36. that to buy a sword, they should sell a coat. In which company of
his auditors there were, says he, at that time none but his Disciples; and
although, says he, it be a proverbiall speech, signifying the great dangers
approaching, yet it referred to the ordinary use of swords at that time, for
private men's defense in time of danger, not there prohibited by him: applying
that of Cicero, Gladios habere certe non liceret, si uti illis nullo pacto
liceret: We might not be allowed to have swords, if it were in no case lawful
to use them. Which still confirms his point in hand, that in some case, the
use of the private sword is lawful.

2. He proceeds to the particular places, says, in the (...), there is some
exception allowed, that it binds only in tolerable injuries; such as the box
on the cheek, etc. there mentioned: in the (...) signifies not defense, but
revenge. Then for that of Peter, it contains, says he, a prohibition of
using the sword, but not in case of defense: for he needed not defend
himself; for Christ had said, Let these go, Joh. 18. 8. nor Christ, for he
would not be defended, etc. Besides, says he, Peter took up the sword (in eos
qui nomine publicarum potestatum adventabant, quibus an ullo casu resistere
liceat, peculiaris est quaestio, infra a nobis peculiariter tractanda;) against
those that came in the name of the public powers; against whom, whether it be
lawful to make resistance in any case, is a peculiar question, to be handled
afterward peculiarly. (And, let me pawn my faith for it, stated negatively.)
As for that which Christ adds, All they that take the sword, etc. that is,
either a Proverb, or (which is the opinion of Origin, Theophylact, Titus, and
Euthymius,) indicat, it shows or intimates, that we should not snatch revenge
out of Gods hands: and to this applies the place in the Revel. a place in
Tertull. Adeo idoneus patientiae sequester Deus, etc. and adds, Simulque his
Christi verbis vaticinium videtur inesse de poenis, quas a sanguinariis Judaeis
erat exacturus gladius Romanus: And also in the words there seems to be
included a Prophecy of the punishment, that the Roman sword should exact of
the bloody Jews. From all which put together, this will be the utmost that
Master Marshall can conclude, That Grotius conceived, that the speech of Christ
to Peter prohibited not all use of the sword, for private defense; (no man
says it did; or that all such defense is unlawful; our case is only of
resisting Magistrates) that Origin, Theophylact, etc. owned an exposition of
it, that thereby we should be taught, not to take Gods office of revenging out
of his hand; (which we also make a special part of the importance of that
speech, both there, and in the Revel. and so a plain check of Peter, who did
take it;) and that withal in these words a Prophecy seems to be implied, of
the revenge of Christ's death, wrought by Titus upon the Jews; (and we can
acknowledge the Scripture so rich a mine of variety, that it may have this
propheticke sense also: though by the way, Grotius cites not this out of those
four Writers, (nor could he, for in Origin we find it not) but as from
himself, simulque vaticinium videtur inesse, etc. But for the literal sense,
that Peter should not be rebuked by Christ, for using defensive Arms against
the Magistrate, (when with the use of those, the leaving vengeance to God is
utterly unreconcileable) and Christians conceive themselves bound not to use
those Arms against the Magistrate, for this very cause, because he is (...),
punishable, revengeable by God alone:) and yet be rebuked for snatching Gods
work out of his hand: Or that these words should not belong in the prime sense
to Peter's fact, as well as in a secundary prophetical seeming one to the
Jews, there is not any appearances of sound of any word in Grotius there, or
in any other place in that book, or his large Annotations on the Gospels: which
if Master Marshall had read with his own eyes, he would confess with me. And
so much for his citation of Grotius.

Now, in the last place, for the opinion of this learned man Grotius, (an
excellent Casuist, exactly distinguishing the several obligations of Nature,
of Moses, and of Christ; a Protestant, and, if an Arminian, far from
deserving that part of the censure which Master Cheynel lays on such, of being
^f Socin. ^3.
as lawless as that faction at Munster, whose law it was, Magistratibus ac
Principibus nullus subjiciatur) in the business of taking up Arms against a
King for just defense, I shall refer you to his first Book de jure belli, and
cap. 4. (Not that I can hope you will be moved with his authority, when he
appears against you, that is not the manner of men now-a-dayes, to be content
to be tried by your own witnesses; but for the satisfaction to conscience,
which this Authors reasons and perspicuity will yield any Christian Reader)
the very place whereto he referred the Reader even now for his resolution in
that point; and the state of this question being set (An aut privatis aut
publicis personis bellum gerere liceat in eos, quorum imperio subsunt;) Whether
any private or public persons may lawfully wage war against them, under
whose command they are; he defines, that by the very Law of Nature (so much
now talked of) it is not lawful. 2. That by the Law of the Jews it was not
allowed. 3. That it was less allowed, but become more unlawful by the
Evangelicall Law, Romans 13. 1. and 1 Pet. 2. 12, etc. and practice of ancient
Christians. 4. Confutes the opinion of those that affirm it lawful, for
inferior Magistrates to wage warreagainst the Supreme, by reasons and
Scriptures. 5. Proposes the case of extreme and inevitable necessity, when the
King goes to take away a man's life unjustly: and (whatsoever might from nature
or practice of the Jews, as of David, or of the Macchabees, be brought to
assert resistance in this case) he defines from the Christian Law, (which
commands so often to take up the Cross) an exacter degree of patience; and
particularly, when for Religion our Superiors go about to kill us, though he
will allow flight to some sort of men, yet to no man more then flight; but
rather rejoicing when we suffer as Christians. This, says he, was the course
that brought Christian Religion to such an height in the world: and resolves it
the greatest injury that can be done to the ancient Christians, to say, that it
was want of strength, not of inclinations that way, that they defended not
themselves in time of most certain danger of death. Tertullian, says he, had
been imprudent and impudent, if in a writing presented to the Emperors (who
could not be ignorant of the truth) he had dared to lie so confidently, when
he says, Non deesset nobis vis numerorum, etc. most admirable passages out of
ancient Writers he there cites, for a leaf together to the same purpose, of
dying for the truth of Religion; and never defending themselves by Arms,
against the illegal will of the lawful Magistrates. (I beseech Master
Marshall to send to the shop and read the passages, and consider how far he
has departed from the Primitivenesse, and Christianity of those examples.) And
to conclude, Though Grotius (according to his manner; which is to say all that
can be wished in any subject) mentions some cases wherein a King may be
resisted, yet if you read them, you will find little joy in any of them: As in
case a King shall abdicate his Kingdom, and manifestly relinquish his Power,
then he turns private man, and so may be dealt with as any other such. And
some other the like.

Well, I have said enough of Grotius in the business, and should add no more;
but, I remember, I promised to show that on occasion of these words of Christ
to Saint Peter, he has as much against the Exposition pretended to be his,
and the whole doctrine of resistance, as the Kings friends could desire; and
that is in his Annotations on the place, Mat. 26. 52. (...), In Luke p. 464.
etc. Neque vero ad Petrum tantum admonitio ista pertinet, sed and ad
Christianos omnes, qui a publicis potestatibus ad poenam expetuntur ob pietatis
professionem: The admonition belongs not to Peter only, but to all Christians,
when they are called by the Magistrate to suffer for the profession of piety:
and sets the rule in that case, (...), to commit our souls to God, to expend
our lives in his cause that gave us them; alleging to this purpose, what this
Peter had learned from this Master, 1 Pet. 4. 16, 19. and answering the common
frivolous objection, fetch from the law of natural defense, or
selfe-preservation, showing the difference between the use of that liberty
against thieves, etc. (against which the Laws and Magistrates give us the
liberty) and against the commands of the Supreme Magistrate; whom if in any
case of injury, etc. private men may have permission to resist, or repel force
with force, omnia erunt tumultuum plena; nulla legum, nulla judiciorum
authoritas: the perfect image of our Kingdom at this time, when the words are
Englished, as God knows the sense is: and then he concludes with the case of
Religion, wherein there is no place of resisting the higher powers, be their
violence never so unjust.

I have undoubtedly made good my four under-takings in this business; and
shall beseech Master Marshall hereafter to write more cautiously, lest he
provoke men to put him and the world in mind of other unjustifiable passages in
his writings; to tell him of (that which in mere charity to him I desire he
should know men do take notice of) his dealing in a Sermon of his, about
Josiah's reformation, preached before the House of Commons long since: and of
the applying of the curse that fell on the Inhabitants of Meroz, Judge. 5. (for
not helping their Sovereign, namely Deborah, against a foreign Enemy, Jabin)
to those that will not join with himself against his Sovereign, and his
Cavaleirs; i. e. those Forces raised by him. I wish heartily that Master
Marshall, having gotten so much authority as to be the Augustine, the truly
polemicall Divine of our times, would be so charitable to his disciples, as to
imitate him, in retracting so many of his misadventures, as he cannot choose
but know to be such; and not to impose too intolerably on their credulity: or
so tender of his own reputation, as to acknowledge those himself, which every
man that has eyes does discern in his books; and would, were it not for mere
pity, and the duty of loving enemies, give a large account of.

But I must remember, that Master Marshall adds two appearances of answer more
to that allegation from Christ to Saint Peter; a word or two of those.
Secondly, says he, supposing it was a reproof of Peter's using the sword,
then the plain meaning is to condemn Peter's rashness, who drew his sword,
and never staid to know his Masters mind whether he should strike or not; and
so reproves those who rashly, unlawfully, or doubtingly use the sword. But, I
pray Sir, are those the words of Christ, They only that take the sword without
asking, or knowing my mind, shall perish, etc. Or have we any reason to think,
that Christ would have then dispensed with a known law if he had answered him,
and not rather have referred him to be regulated by it, as you see he does,
for all that take, etc.

2. To see the unluckinesse of it again, the text Luke 22. 49. says expressly,
that they did ask him, said unto him, Lord, shall we smite with the sword? so
that the question was ask before he smote: And sure, if it had been Christ's
pleasure they should smite, one syllable would have expressed it, and justified
them; and that might have intervened before his striking: and that it did not
intervene, is no argument of the lawfulness of that striking in him, or the
like in us; especially when so sharp a reprehension immediately follows.

3. I shall grant the meaning is to condemn Peter's rashness, in doing a
thing so unlawful, without any commission; especially, when it was denied by
Christ upon asking; but not that the matter of the fact was perfectly
justifiable, if abstracted from that rashness: or that now Christ's judgment
being declared by his answer to him, it should be more justifiable in us, who
have his example for our document.

4. I shall ask Master Marshall, whether he has asked and received knowledge
of his Masters mind or no? he must not mean any of his great earthly Masters,
(that join with him in the war against the Supreme; for sure, if such tell
us we may, or be so minded, that does not prove that it is lawful; for then I
must ask them what Master they asked? and so, if they have none, conclude them
in the number of the rash smiters;) but Christ, (for sure he was Peter's
Master) or some taught by him in his word, who may give him assurance of the
mind of Christ: and if this be produced we will be his disciples also. For,
for his Supreme Master on earth, the meer-humane Christ, the Lords anointed, I
believe he means not that he should be asked, whether he may be, and should
be resisted? and as little reason is there for us to be satisfied by being told
by any others inferior to him, (especially by the chief resisters) that we
may lawfully resist.

3. Master Marshall adds a consideration, that now was the hour come of
Christ's suffering, and not of his Apostles fighting, wherein Christ would not
be rescued, no not by twelve legions of Angels, much less then by the sword of
man: therefore he says to Peter, Put up, etc. but intended not, that it
should always be unlawful for his people to use the sword in their just
defense against unjust violence; for then he would never have commanded them
but a little before, that he that has two coats, let him sell one and buy a
sword. To this I answer, 1. That Christ might suffer, though Peter did resist;
as we know he did; and consequently, the hour of his suffering being come,
could not make it in him a crime to resist, if otherwise it were not: It might
make Christ refuse the help of his sword, but not produce the text proper to
man-slayers against him, unless the fact in it self were of that nature. 2.
This patient manner of Christ's suffering, and prohibiting resistance in his
just defense, though it were then peculiar, and by decree necessary to Christ;
yet is it since become matter of example, and necessary imitation to us, by
force of that observation past upon it by Saint Peter, and entered into the
Canon of our Scripture, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Christ suffered for us, leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps, etc. And this used as an argument to
enforce on us that duty, verse. 18. of being subject not only to good and
gentle, but also to froward Masters. So that now, thirdly, though that check
had been peculiar to Saint Peter's act, clothed with those circumstances, of
being done when 'twas Christ's hour of suffering; yet it will be obliging to us
also, who are hereunto called, verse. 21. to suffer as patiently as Christ did.
But then fourthly, we conclude not from any or all of this, that it should be
always unlawful for Christians to use the sword in their just defense: nor
indeed, that it was unlawful then; Kings may and might subdue by the sword
their rebellious Subjects: and private men might defend themselves from private
invaders, and besides the proverbiall meaning of that speech (of selling a coat
and buying a sword, whereby, say the fathers, he foretold them the dangers
impendent over their heads, (...) Chrysostom. and advised them to provide for their
own security) I shall not doubt to acknowledge that this liberty of private
defensive resistance is authorized by that same Scripture: But the resisting of
the Magistrate by the Subject, is the thing that from Christ's words to Peter
we undertake to show unlawful, and not any other resistance; and that the
swords were appointed by Christ to be bought to that purpose, is not attempted
to be proved by Master Marshall; and to suppose it without proof, is to
affirm, that no man could invade, or be fit to be killed, but Magistrates. The
truth is, here is some art used, either by Master Marshall, or some other
Artificer (interest, prejudice, or the like) by Master Marshall to deceive the
Reader; or by that other to deceive the Composer, by using the phrase of just
defense against unjust violence, (which every man grants lawful among private
men) and concluding that not to be made unlawful by this text, (which we do
not affirm,) whereas all the dispute is, of resisting (not simply any man, but
peculiarly) the Magistrate (and those that come with authority from him,) which
we do affirm to be the very thing exemplified and rebuked in this Text, and
so still stands (by that reprehension of Christ) forbidden to us, in despite
of Master Marshall's evasions.

'T will be now matter of wonder to any, that all this paper should be spent in
defense of this one Argument, so briefly confuted and dispatched by Master
Marshall; but I shall answer that wonder too: First, that at the entering on
this examination of those few, the necessity of this length of words was not
foreseen. Secondly, that though the escaping the force of this place would not
be matter of triumph to Master Marshall, because there be other places of the
New Testament produced by his adversaries, yet unanswered, and one is enough to
establish a Christian truth; yet the vindicating and clearing of this one from
all exceptions, is the absolute carrying the cause against him by that one: And
therefore if this may be compassed, (which I am confident is by this discourse)
we may spare all further travel in this business; and command the Subjects
sword taken out (though upon supposition of just defense, how unjustly soever
that be pretended) against the lawful Magistrate, to return to its sheath
again. I wish to God it would obey the command.

Tu vero discipuli and amorem pium and humilitatem considera: alterum enim ex
diligendi fervore; alterum ex obedientia fecerat. Nam cum audisset, Mitte
gladium tuum in vaginam, statim obtemperavit, and nusquam postea istud fecit.
Titus Bostr. in Matthew.

Non se sed magistrum est ultus, praeterea nondum perfectae and consummatae
virtutis erat. Quod si vis Petri sapientiam intelligere, videbis postea caesu^
and sexcentas injurias passum, nullis malis, nullis calamitatibus pertur^^^^
(...) omnia tolerantem. Euthym. in Johan.

Ille utitur gladio, qui nulla superiori ac legitima potestate vel jubente vel
concedente, in sangninem alicujus armatur. Nam utique Dominus jusserat, ut
ferrum discipuli ejus ferrent, sed non jusserat ut ferirent. Quod ergo
incongruum, si Petrus post hoc peccatum factus est pastor Ecclesiae: sicut
Moses post percussum Aegyptium factus est rector istius Synagogae? uterque
enim non detestabili immanitate, sed emendabili animositate justitiae regulam
excessit, uterque odio improbitatis alienae; sed ille fraterno, iste Dominico,
licet adhuc carnali, tamen amore peccavit. Aug. lib. 22. cont. Faust. Man. cap.
70.

FINIS.

