Deuterai PHrontide, OR, A REVIEW OF THE Paraphrase and Annotations On ALL the
Books OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. WITH SOME ADDITIONS and ALTERATIONS. By H. Hammond,
D. D.

2 Pet. 3.18. (...). LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher for R. Royston at the Sign
of the Angel in Ivy-lane, MDCLVI.

TO THE READER.
AT the publishing of the Paraphrase and Annotations on the New Testament, It
was easy to foresee that many things would daily tender themselves by way of
farther contribution to that design, either as lines omitted in the first
draught, or as colors to be superadded to the former lines; Which having
accordingly fallen out, I could not have so good an opinion of what was already
done, as to reject any the least mite, which was willing thus to add unto the
Corban. Besides, I found sometimes that the sponge was as useful as the
pencill. And now after three years I thought it not amiss to examine the heap,
and see what this Collecta would amount to, and finding it such as is here
presented, it seemed an act of some justice to those who have already furnished
themselves with the greater volume, to dispose of these gleanings so as they
might with least cost or trouble be partakers of them: This is the only reason
both that the course here taken of a few additionall sheets is preferred before
a new augmented and more emendate impression, and also that some very minute
unconsiderable additions and alterations are here inserted; that in case a
second impression of the whole should be called for, it may bring nothing with
it which is not here already to be found in the former volume, and this Review
of it. If any further plenty shall hereafter offer it self, the same easy
method may still be taken. And this is all that was necessary to advertise the
Reader in this Praeloquium.

O pray for the peace of Jerusalem!

Hen: Hammond.

A Review of the Paraphrase and Annotations on the GOSPEL according to St
MATTHEW.
Chap. I.19. Note g. THe notion of (...) righteous for merciful may further be
confirmed by Prove. 11.18. where He that sows righteousnesse] appears to
signify the merciful, Pro. 11.18.
who sows, i. e. scatters, v. 24. and disperseth abroad his alms, and, as
the sower, receives this back again with the greatest usury, (...), says St
Chrysostom, To. 7. p. 618* l. 30.
he seems to scatter, but really he gathers together, (...), as the sower lends
his seed to the earth upon interest, and accordingly there it follows, to him
shall be a sure reward.

Chap. II.22. Paraphr. Add. And another reason of Joseph's thus diverting into
Galilee was, because Herodes Antipas, that was now Tetrarch there, was not such
a tyrant as Archelaus had already discovered himself to be.

Ibid. Note a. For an ancient heathen, read an ancient Commentator on Plato.
So Note c. In stead of these words [ And for the confirming of the truth of,
etc.] read: Concerning this it is observable which we find in Chalcidius in
his Comment upon Plato's Timaeus, who relating some portentous significancies
of stars, adds, Est quoque, etc. And in the margent dele [ in Greek no doubt
(...).]

Ibid. 6. Art ee not the least] ee Some doubt has been of the agreement of
this phrase [(...), (...).
thou art by no means the least] with the Hebrew Mich. v. 2. (...) which the
Septuagint render (...), and the Vulgar, Parvulus es, thou art little. But Mr
Edward Pocock, a great Master of the Oriental languages, has evidenced out of
many learned Grammarians that the word (...), little] signifies also the quite
contrary, and is used for Primaria, Judex, Princeps, Magistratus, all great
ones: So Jer. 48.4. Rabbi Tanchum renders (...) his Princes and Governors; And
so the Chaldee Paraphrast there, (...) his Sultans or Rulers: So Ehn Jannahium
a Learned Grammarian, affirms of (...) that it is one of the words that
signify contraries, and cites Zach. 13.7. where (...), says he, signifies
Nobles and Princes. And so the Author of the Hebrew-Arabick Glossary sets
(...) Sultan, Ruler, or Prince, for one of the significations of (...), and so
in that place of Zachary, the Septuagint render it (...) Pastors, and the
Syriack (...) Superiors, and the Arabic Pastors or Rulers. Many words of that
sort which have such contrary significations Mr. P. has collected to confirm
this interpretation.

(...).
Chapter 3. Note c. To confirm the fitness of applying [ make straight his paths,
and every valley shall be exalted, etc.] to the Roman armies coming against
Jerusalem, Add to the words of Josephus, Geog l. 5. p. 162.
a like passage in Strabo. (...), they plained the ways through the region,
cutting down the hills, and filling up the hollow places. And so the verses of
Sibylla Erythraea set down by De Civic. Dei l 18. c. 33
St Augustine and De praedict. par. 2. c. 1.
Prosper, beginning with Judicii signum, the sign of judgment, and Ecoelo Rex
adveniet, the coming of the king from heaven, and that in carnem, into the
flesh, praesens ut judicet Orbem, that being present he may judge the world,
there follows, Dejiciet colles, valles extollet ab imo,
Non erit in rebus hominum sublime vel altum,
Jam aequantur campis montes --
He shall cast down the hills, and advance the valleys, There shall be among men
nothing lofty or high, The mountains are now levelled to Campagnia, And then
soon follows, -- Tellus confracta peribit, the destruction of the earth or
land, i. e. (in the sacred Dialect) of Judaea.

Ibid. Note f. That (...) signifies not only to appear but really to be, (...).
appears farther by 1 Cor. 12.22. where (...), the members which seem to be
more weak, (...).
are all one with (...), those that are the weaker: So in Optatus, speaking of
the flesh of Christ, quae nullum videbatur admisisse peccatum, Lib. 1.
which seemed to have committed no sin, his meaning must sure be that really
he had no sin.

Chapter 5. h. To the testimonies of Theophylact, for Christ's increasing the Law,
add. In Rom 6.14.
(...). When Christ was come, our contentions became easier, wherefore we had
also greater tasks, as having greater assistance afforded us. And Ibid. in 1
Cor. 9.21.
(...), having a law more sublime then the old Law, viz. the Law of Christ. And
Ibid in Gal, 5.13.
(...), We are not therefore free, that we may transgress the Law, but that we
may transcend or exceed the Law; where in stead of Christ's (...) to fill up] he
sets (...) to exceed and go beyond. And In Gal. 5.23.
(...), He casts out the Law as inferior and less then the philosophy, or rule
of living, given by the Spirit.

Ibid. Note o. To the matter of the Incontinence of the Eye prohibited by
Christ, Add, And even among the heathens, the answer of Pericles to Sophocles,
showing him a beautiful woman, is considerable, (...), A sober General must
keep at home, or in his power his eyes as well as hands. Stobae. Sermon. 17.

Ibid. Note q. To the discourse of patience of injuries in opposition to
private revenge, Add, The Philosopher has stated it excellently, Rufus ex
Epict. hist. amicit. ap Stob. Ser. 20.
(...), It is the part of degenerous and foolish men to think they shall be
contemned by others, if they do not by all means avenge their first enemies.
(...), For as we say, that a man will be deemed free from contempt by his being
able to hurt, so much more will he be deemed, by his being able to help.

Ibid. Note r. To confirm the notion of (...) for an inner garment, Add the
words of (...).
Aristophanes, (...): where (...) signifies, and is by the Interpreter rendered
interula, the inner garment. So in In Iliad b Easil. Ed^^. p. 128. l. 43.
Eustathius (...), it signifies the inner garment, and giving it an Etymology
(somewhat remote) from (...), he says it is so called, (...), because it is
immediately next the body. So Quaest. l. 4. c. 22.
Alexander Aphrodisaeus, speaking of the unfitness of using clothes to soften
or effeminate the body, which should rather be designed as arms to fortify and
make it courser, and so stronger, says, that it is much fitter to use (...),
one inner garment then two (which they that took care for softness and
smoothness did) and yet better to use none at all (...) but the outer garment
only; where the Interpreter of Stobaeus (in whom this passage is set down p.
18.) most absurdly renders (...) interula, quite contrary to the design of the
place, where it must needs signify the outer (which is generally the less
smooth or soft) garment, not the shirt or inner garment, which in Homer has
that Epithet, (...), to contra-distinguish it from (...), says (...). Basil.
Ed. p. 83. l. 36.
Eustathius, which word (...) he p. 128. l. 4.
elsewhere expresses to be (...), and here to be the upper garment, (...). The
whole matter is put out of question by the words of Plutarch in his nuptial
precepts, speaking of the wind and the Sun, contending which should force the
man out of his clothes, (...); where (...) being the outer garment, that which
only the wind had force on, and that which in the Sunshine was first put off,
(...) must needs be the inner garment.

Chapter VI. 16.

Of a horrid, ghastly.
sad countenance, for [they cover their faces, or spoil their looks.
disfigure their faces, that they may appear to men to fast.]

16. They put on sad and mournful looks, appear in foul sordid garments and
unwasht faces, which make them look lamentably, or perhaps they cover or veil
their faces, etc.

(...).
Note h. (...)] is not surely by any outward applications to consume, or
destroy, or spoil their faces, but denotes only so much as shall make good the
opposition betwixt them, and those immediately after mentioned, which anointed
their heads, etc. Another second notion of the word is ordinarily pretended for
disfiguring or discoloring, (...).
acquiring an artificial pallidnesse; But this as it will hardly be
exemplified either in sacred or profane Writers (nay on the contrary it is
used for painting to advantage, i. e. beautifying, in Stobae. p. 445.
Nicostratus, (...)) so will it not be found that the Jewish hypocrites used
any such arts either in time of mourning or fasting: Neither is it easily
defined or explained what particular way of disfiguring, or discoloring, or
causing pallidnesse it is which is meant by it. The most that I can discern
toward this sense, is this, There is a disease which is called (...), defined
by Phavorinus to be (...), a disease that fetches off the hair from the head
and beard, makes it very thin, a scurf that grows upon the head or face, so
called from (...) a Fox, because as the urine of a Fox (...), makes the place
where it falls fruitless, the grass will not grow after it; so this deals with
the head or face: Now the countenance which is thus affected, is usually called
(...), as being so dismally discolored by it, as the ground is, when by the
urine of the Fox it has lost its verdure, and is dried up. And to that I
suppose belongs the place in Hesychius, though corrupt in the ordinary copies,
where to (...) and (...), he adds, (...), some say it signifies one of a
macerated, discolored, or (as (...) is rendered by (...)) of a dark
countenance. (...).
And then this agrees with Phavorinus's notion of (...), which is here used in
the same sense, (...), one that has such a dark, discolored, macerated
countenance. And so that may possibly be conceived the meaning of (...), to
macerate and discolor their countenances: (So the Lexicon Graeco-Latinum,
(...) extermino, disperdo, deformo, depravo, not only to destroy, but to deform
and deprave. So Antiochus Hom. LV. says of Envy, (...), it causes a pale
countenance; So Devit Contemp l. 2. c. 4.
Prosper seems to render the phrase here, Jejunant* says he, ut vultus sui
pallorem perniciosis laudibus vendant, they fast that they may sell the
palenesse of their countenance for hurtful praises, (...), that they may by
their looks be taken for austere ascetick persons, men that fast very often,
having thus macerated themselves with that exercise. And then proportionably
with that, (...) in the beginning of the verse must be more then sad* Hesychius
renders it (...) and (...), of a fierce and horrid, ghastly countenance, such
as men have when they are well nigh starved. ^ut passing by this, there is yet
a third rendering of the phrase, which seems more commodious to the place, by
interpreting (...) [ the looks] and not [ the faces] and then it may fitly be
rendered, they spoil their looks, endeavor to look as ill as they can; And for
this, it is to be observed, that foul or sordid apparel will contribute much
toward it: So in Eustathius on Edit. Basi. p. 261. l. 10.
Odyss. (...), The body carefully washed becomes fairer, and so also by putting
on white clothes; as on the other side sordidnesse and ill-tatterd clothes
((...), it should be read in Hesychius) darken a bright countenance: where the
word is used of that illness of looks, which sordid clothes do cause. To this
I may yet further add, that (...) which Hab. 1.5. is rendered (...), signifies
such a confusion of countenance, as attends astonishment or vehement trouble;
(See Note on Act. 13. gg.) and so may here in that sense be fitly joined with
(...) forming, and putting on such a sad, troubled confounded countenance,
which cannot but be taken notice of by any. But this still not by any outward
means of discoloring it, but by an affected sadness or change of looks, or by
foul and sordid garments, and the like.

(...).
Ibid. Note l. To confirm the notion of (...) for liberality, Add the testimony
of Theophylact on 2 Cor. 8.2. (...), It signifies a mind void of envy or
parsimony, apt to communicate.

Ibid. Note n. That a cubit is set to note a very small measure, Add the use
of the phrase [(...)] in Ap. Stobae. p. 528.
Mimnermus, a cubital time, or space proportionable to a cubit, meaning a very
short space, such as leaves and the most transitory frail things enjoy. By this
also farther appears, that these measures of cubits and the like, are
applicable to the age or life of man, and not only to the stature. And so the
Psalmist, Thou have made my days as it were a spanne long. A measure much
less then a cubit, applied to our days, or space of life.

Chap. VIII.5.

A Centurion.

A Captain or Commander of a hundred Soldiers.

Chapter IX. Note c. For the infamousnesse of the Publicans trade among the
heathens, (...).
Add the passage in Ap. Stobae. p. 31.
Musonius, that Theocritus being demanded what was the cruellest beast,
answered, Of those on the mountains, the Bear and Lion, but of those in the
City (...), Publicans and Sycophants. And accordingly Theophrastus puts
together (...), Char.
keeping whores, and being Publicans.

Ibid. Note h. in marg. To the testimony from Ovid of the use of Music in
Funerals, Add, (...).


Tri^^ 5. Eleg. 1.
Tibia funeribus convenit ista meis: and p. 177.
Petronius Arbiter, licet ad tibicines mittas, of one desperately sick: See Jo.
a Wower. ad loc.

Ibid. Note m. (...)*
Of the use of (...) for fatigati wearied, see H. Stephanus in his Preface to
Herodian. And so it is surely used in that author, l. 4. (...), he took his
voyage with a few horsemen, that he might not tire the whole army, and lib. 7.
(...), after he had tired them with long journeys and abused them. And so To 7.
p. 107. l. 3.
St. Chrysostom (...), I would not have wearied you with so long a voyage. So
Ib. p. 169. l. 16.
(...) to take so wearisome a journey as it must cost thee to come to us: In
all which it denotes the lassitude that comes from travel. Thence in Ib p 554.
St Chrysostom (...) is (...) full of labor and care; And in the ap Eus^b.
^4. c. 15.
Epistle of the Church of Smyrna (...) is used for (...), easily, without
trouble or labor.

(...).
Ibid. For the use of (...) for fainting, Add 2 Samuel 17.29. (...) etc. The
people is hungry and weary, or faint and thirsty in the wilderness.

Chap. X.16.

Mild, meek, wrathlesse.
ff Harmless as doves.

Ye must most strictly preserve your mildness, revengelesnesse, meekness,
using no violent or forcible means toward your persecutors, though it be to
preserve your selves, because ye are as sheep.

(...).
ff For the notion of the word (...), the origination of it must be considered
from (...) to butt, or strike, or wound with the horns; from hence says In
Iliad. C. p 476. l. 3.
Eustathius, comes (...), and consequently (says he) it signifies (...) simple
and mildly disposed, and not butting or using of horns against any body. So
Iliad ^. p. 1353. l. ^5.
again, (...), the word so derived signifies wrathless, angerlesse, as one that
uses no horns hurts no body: And this notion perfectly agrees with the nature
of the Dove, which, say the Naturalists, has no gall, is never angry, nor
hurts any, and so in all reason is to be resolved the meaning of it in this
place. So Dial. IV. (...). 191.
Caesarius (...), not retributing evil to any man, (...), for the dove has no
malice in it, hurts nothing, having not the Organ of choler in it.

Ibid. Note c. Of Mattathias and his son Judas which took upon them to destroy
the prophaners of the Temple, add, that they put in their colors these words,
(...) i. e. Who is like thee among the Gods, O Lord? or as others read it,
(...) Who is like thee among the Princes of Judah? From the initiall letters
whereof (...) they seem to be styled Maccabees, which though literally it do
not, yet in effect denotes Zelots. But Ferrarius in his Nomenclat. Sir.
translates the very word (...), aemulator, Maccabaeus, writing it with Koph
which is not answerable to the Hebrew Caph, which others generally use in this
word.

Ibid. Note e. For the notion of (...) to acquire, add Musonius, (...).
in whom (...) ap Stobae. p. 4^^.
(...) those things that are acquired with difficulty] are distinguished from
(...), such as are hard to keep.

Chap. XI. Note i. To the confirming of the notion of (...) for the state of
death (not any place, heaven, or hell, or the grave) add, (...).
That the writers of the Church had this notion of the phrase in the Creed, may
be discerned (among many) by this place in Theophylact in Romans 4.25. (...);
Seeing he died, having no sin, it was reason he should rise again, for how
should he that was sinlesse be detained by Hades? where being detained by
Hades] is by the opposition to rising again, explained to be no more then
continuing in the state of the dead: So the same Theophylact on Ephesians. 4.9.
interprets the lower parts of the earth to be Hades, and that in the same
notion as when Jacob says, You will bring my old age with sorrow, (...) to
Hades, (not to hell certainly,) and as it is all one with (...) to the pit, in
David. Thus the Arabians use Al-Barzach for that space or state which is
betwixt this life and the next, the time of death and the resurrection, and
every one that dies is said to go Al-Barzach.

(...).
Ibid. Note l. To confirm the notion of (...) for exceeding good or gracious,
Add the Septuagints rendering of Psalm. 34.8. O taste and see, (...), that the
Lord is gracious.

(...).
Chap. XII. Note e. For the acception of (...) unprofitable, for wicked, See
Philoxenus's Glossary, Nequam (...), and Nequitia (...), and so in Cyrils Greek
Glossary: So in Hesiod, (...), an unprofitable man is he that neither
understands himself nor heeds others, the most senseless, wretchlesse person:
Of the same nature is illaudatus, unpraised, in Latin, of which see A. Gellius
l. 2. c. 6. where he proves that word to signify omnium pessimum ac
deterrimum, the worst and basest of all: And so l. 7. c. 11. he makes (...),
riotous, intemperate, unprofitable, useless, ill-mannerd, detestable, to be
all one, the interpretation of the Latin Nequam, a wicked man, but literally
good for nothing.

(...).
Ibid. Note m. For the acception of (...) not for gainlesse but ill, Add the
advice of Pythagoras, (...) (...), Let it be more desirable to thee, or choose
rather to cast a stone at an adventure, than an idle speech, where it is
evident that (...) is at least a rash speech, and such as from which a man
himself, or others may as probably receive some considerable hurt, as from a
stone rashly cast we have reason to expect.

Ibid. Note n. That the reckoning of days by the evening and morning was in
use, as among the Jews, so among the Athenians also, see A. Gellius l. 3. c. 2.

Chap. XIV. Note a. (...).
For the notion of (...) to admonish, or instruct beforehand, Add the Vulgar
Latin which reads praemonita, admonished beforehand. So in Xenophon (...).
the Masters* having showed their Scholars how to do their business, (...) do
also by words premonish them.

Chap. XV.5.

[ It is an interdict, or he is obliged.
He shall be free.]

He is under obligation not to give it his father, etc.

Note c. To the (...) vow of not rele^ving his parents, Add the words of
Philo, (...).
(...), he confirms by oath the barbarousness and ferit^ of his disposition.
And what has thus passed under their vow, is, say they, (...) i. e. utterly
forbidden, or unlawful, or (...) unlawful as Corban, which being consecrated,
must not be touched, or employed to any other uses: Which therefore in all
probability is the word omitted in the Ellipsis, which others supply by (...),
he shall be free, but should rather be, he as obliged, may not give his Father.
So that the plain meaning of the place is. A Father being in want requires
releef of his Son; the Son answers, that he has vowed he will not, and so that
to him it remains not lawful to releeve him: And the Pharisees approve of this
practice, that he may thus evacuate his duty to his parent. Of this see Mr.
Pocock, Not. Miscell. p. 414. This without question is it, which is here
charged on them by Christ. As for the other notion of Corban, or (...), that
what is asked, they cannot give, because it is consecrated to God, though it be
taken up by the ancients, yet it appears not to be agreeable to the Jewish
practice, for there are no footsteps among them of any devoting to God, or
consecrating, in this matter, as the testimonies produced by Mr. P. do fully
evidence.

(...).
Chapter XVI. Note h. To the mention of the Key of David, Rev. 3.7. Add, where a
difference must be observed betwixt the Key of David, and the Keys of the
house of David: Keys are an ensign of power, but that power is not all of one
kind, it is greater, or less, principal and independent, or inferior and
derivative, and the several keys are emblemes of these severals. David we know
was a King, and independent from any on earth, and consequently the Key of
David notes an independent supreme power, and that applied to the Church,
belongs only to Christ, in that prophetic expression Apoc. 3.7. But the Keys
of the house of David notes an inferior power, that of a steward in David's
family, which being perfectly subordinate to him, has yet the (...), the
administration of the affairs of his family entrusted to him. Now Christ is
the Original, and prime fountain of all power over the whole Church, that
spiritual kingdom of David, etc.

Chap. XVII. Note d. (...). p. 67.
For the notion of (...) for tradere delivering up (not betraying) Add
Athenaeus, l. 5. of Quintus Oppius, (...), a prisoner delivered up to custody.
So Ps. 88.8. (...), I was imprisoned, etc.

Chapter XX. Note b. (...).
To the notion of (...) for (...) working, Add the phrase Ruth 2.19. (...);
where have thou labored? and (...) where she had labored, and (...) with whom
I labored, where still the Hebrew has (...) laboring.

Ibid. Note c. (...).
To the notion of (...) for picked or choice men, Add, Aristotle in his
Oeconomickes l. 2. in the passage of Antimenes Rhodius, where we find (...)
subjoyned to (...) approved officers, where probably it must signify special
picked Artificers.

Chapter XXI. Note b. (...). To 5. p. 242. l 23.
Of the notion of (...) for dividing into small pieces, to Plato Add S.
Chrysostom, who speaking of his homilies, more then one of the same matter,
says, (...), we have cut it out into many minute parts for several days.

Ibid. (...).
That the word (...) signifies any kind of utensil, Add Nicolaus Damascenus of
the Sordo Libyes, of whom he says, (...), they have no (...) but a cup and a
sword, where the sword is called (...), as well as a cup, and so is a sheet,
Act. 10.11.

(...).
Ibid. Note g. To the notion of (...) for breaking into small pieces, Add Dan.
2.44. (...), he shall beat small and break into chaff all the kingdoms.

Chap. XXII.19.

[A penny.]

A coin that was half the Alexandrian, but the whole Attick drachme, and so
the fourth part of the shekel of the Sanctuary, or half the ordinary shekel.

(...).
Ibid. Note f. Of the notion of (...) for conspiration or conjunction of
affections, Add, as in Chrysostom Epist. K. (...), is, earnestly to desire
his Epistles.

(...)
Ibid. Of (...) Lu. 19.48. in the notion of taking his part, being of his side,
agreeing with him, Add, were very kind to him, so in Chrysostom, Ep. (...).
He affects you much, and is an earnest lover of me, and Ep. (...), loving and
tendering. So in La^s. histor. p. 907. B.
Palladius, (...), placing all her affection on the young maid.

Chap. XXIII.4.



Severe ordinances over and above what the law exacts.

(...).
Note a a. What is meant by these (...) heavy burdens imposed on men by the
Pharisees, may be discerned by their own writers. R. Joshua before Christ's
time, among the several things, that are pernicious to the world, numbers
(...), plagas Pharisaeorum, the strokes or severities of the Pharisees. And
these are mentioned in the Talmud c. 3.. 4.
tr. Sotah, Plagas Pharisaeorum vocat superfluos cultus, ac ritus molestos ab
ipsis in religionem lege Mosaica praescriptam subintroductos, by the strokes of
the Pharisees he means, superfluous worships and troublesome rites, introduced
by them under hand into the Jewish religion. And Maimonides, Appellarunt
additamenta illorum quibus legem gravem reddiderunt, plagas, they called the
additaments by which they made the Law heavy, strokes or severities.

Ibid. v. 27.

[For ye are h like to whited sepulchers which indeed appear beautiful outward,
but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness.]

27 Ye may fitly be resembled to sepulchers, which are fain to be whited over,
that they may be discerned to be such, and so avoided, being otherwise grown
over with grass, and not discernable from other ordinary ground, by the outside
Lu. 11.44. whilst yet within like real sepulchers, ye are full of all
pollution.

Note h. (...).
There is little difficulty to determine what is meant by (...), sepulchers
washed over with white lime, on purpose, that they may be discerned by
passengers, and avoided, lest they contract legal pollution by them; For thus
the Jews were wont to mark Sepulchers, Calcem aqua maceratam effundit in locum
immunditiei, they use lime macerated with water, and pour it upon the place of
uncleanness, Yad. Tum. Met. c. 8. And Rashi ad Gemar. Moed Kat. c. 1. f. 5.
renders the reason, quod ipsa alba sit instar ossium, quam ergo videntes, eo
non accederent, because lime is white like bones, and therefore they see, and
go not near it. So among the Christians in l. 3. p. 90.
Optatus; Corpora (occisorum) per dealbatas aras aut mensas poterunt numerari,
the bodies of the slain may be yet numbered by the whited altars or tables, i.
e. by the tombs in fashion of an altar, or table, laid over them, and whited.
All the difficulty is, (...).
in what respect it here follows that they appear (...) outwardly fair, when
Lu. 11.44. it is said of them, that they are (...) as graves that appear not.
And this will be fitly salved, by considering, that this faireness is not all
one with their being whited before, but denotes the reason, why they had need
of being thus whited; these graves were, it seems, grown over with grass, and
so were undistinguishable from other ordinary ground, were outwardly as fair
green grass, as if there were no graves under, and so as they are properly said
to appear (...) outwardly fair, so most fitly said of them in Luke, that they
are (...) undiscernable graves, or monuments, (...).
so that the men that go over them are not aware of their being graves, and so
are polluted by going over them. And that makes it necessary, that they should
have some mark set upon them, be washed over with lime, proportionable to
which was Christ's reproving of these Pharisees hypocrisy, that so as fair as
they were outwardly, they might not deceive and pollute silly disciples, which
were not aware of their wickedness. See Mr. Pocock Miscell. c. 5.

Ibid. Note c. To that custom of calling the wise man, Father, Add the
Testimony of Maimonides com. ad Peah, c. 1. (...) The Parents must be honored,
and the wise men, which are Fathers of all.

Chap. XXIV. Note c. (...).
That (...) conclusion of the age, belongs to the destruction of Jerusalem,
Add the Testimony of l. 7. c. 3.
Orosius, who evidently so understands it, for speaking of the times before
that destruction, Cum Christus, says he, a discipulis interrogatus esset de
conclusione temporum subsequentium, sic ait, Audituri estis praelia, etc. when
Christ was asked by his disciples of the conclusion of the following times, he
said, Ye shall hear of wars, etc.

Ibid. Note d. In the end, Read, (...).
As for the Pseudo-Prophets and Pseudo-Christs, v. 24. they belong to a third
time or period, immediately consequent to the great tribulation, ver. 21. upon
Titus's building the wall about the city, which made the famine rage so
horribly, and the soldiers firing of the Temple, which soon followed after.
For at this point of time, l. 8. c. 2.
Josephus tells us of a false prophet, who as from God, promised deliverance to
all that should go up into the Temple, and many believing him, six thousand
were by that means burnt in that fire. Beside this, says he there were many
false Prophets, set up by the (...) seditious, promising help from God, and
conjuring them neither to fly, nor think of delivering up the city, and though
Josephus mention it not, yet it seems by v. 24. that by evil arts they wrought
some strange feats, to gain belief from them. Of these some exalted Simon, with
his army in the wilderness, as the person by whom the work would be wrought,
others directed them to John, and his faction of Zelots, which kept within the
city, as it follows there v. 26. If they shall say unto you, Behold he is in
the desert, etc. For by these means they were still kept in hope, and
restrained both from flight, and delivering the city, and so more ascertained
to all sad distress, and destruction finally.

Ibid. Note h. In the end, Add, Of this whole passage, that it belongs to the
Jews in Jerusalem, see Caesarius, Dial. 4. (...). 194. (...), etc. Christ
foretelling the future flight of the Jews, commands them to fly to the
mountains, for after Vespasian, Titus arising, utterly demolished and
depopulated Jerusalem, destroyed the Jews, the men with the sword, the
children by dashing them against the ground, cutting up them that were with
child, with all kind of death and destruction blotting out those fighters
against God. And it happened that the city was taken on the sabbath day, all
the people staying at home to observe the sabbatick rest, and this in the
winter also, and so none could avoid or escape the destruction. He that was on
the house top, indevoured to hide himself, and so preferring life before
possessions, would not take any thing out of his house. He that was in the
field, or country about, did not only not return to his house, but fled as
far as he could, seeing the burning and taking of the city.

Ibid. v. 26.

[He is in the desert]

There is in the wilderness an eminent person, which will fight your battles,
deliver you from the Roman yoke, such was Simon, who had gathered an army of
forty thousand, and was in the desert country of Judea.

Ibid.

[In the Storehouses, cellars, places of strength, fortifications, Magazins,
(...).
secret chambers]

In such or such a frontier town or place of defense, or in such a strong hold
within the city of Jerusalem, for there John with his Zelots fortified himself.

Chap. XXVI. Note b. To the mention of golden Alabasters, Add, and so the
style in Athenaeus imports, (...), the boys carrying about unguents in
alabasters and other golden vessels.

Ibid. Of the use of Alabasters for anointing, to Julius Pollux, Add Athenaeus
out of Alexis, (...), He was not anointed out of an alabaster, as the custom
had been of a long time.

Ibid. Note d. Of the five double shekels, (...).
i. e. twenty five shillings. In proportion to which the thirty (...) here will
be three pounds fifteen shillings.

Ibid. Note f. (...).
Of the notion of (...), Act. 1.4. for (...) Christ's eating and their eating
with Christ after his resurrection, Add the consent of Theophylact, and
Oecumenius. (...), it signifies partaking of the table with them, and on Act.
10.41. the Scholion is, (...), he confirms the resurrection of Christ by their
eating with him after it, (...), for after he was risen he did not work any
miracle, for the resurrection it self was a great miracle, and of that none so
great an evidence as to eat and drink. So Leontius de Sect. (...). 1. p. 630.
C. (...), that he is said to eat after his resurrection, this he did by way of
economy, not as being really hungry, but that he might show his disciples,
that he was risen from the dead, after the same manner, as he is said to have
showed the disciples the prints of the nails. And so In Luc. p. 836. C.
Titus Bostrensis, among the arguments Christ used to assure his disciples of
his resurrection, laying special weight on the (...), his asking for meat, and
eating before them, adding, (...), he eat after his resurrection, but not that
his flesh wanted nourishment.

(...).
Ibid. Note m. After the notion of (...) in Hesychius for striking with a rod,
Add, But then the old Greek and Latin Lexicon has it otherwise (...)
expalmo, alapo, to box, or strike with the hand. And so Tr. 7. in Ep. Johan. ^.
9. col. 626.
S. Augustine reads it, Si cum expalmaretur voluit se vindicare? Would he
revenge himself, when he was box'd? So Nonnus on John, -- (...)
(...).
The rude man struck his divine cheek with his audacious hand, and Sedulius, --
Non denique passim
Vel colaphis pulsare caput, vel caedere palmis,
Aut spuere in faciem plebs execranda quievit.
The accursed multitude ceased not to cuff him, or to strike him with the
palms of their hands, or to spit on him. And so Suidas, (...), it signifies to
strike the cheek with the bare hand, and so Juvencus of the passion of Christ.
Et palmae in malis, colaphique in vertice crebri
Insultant, -- and
-- prophetabis cujus te palma cecidit,
Their hands insulted on his cheeks, and Prophecy whose hand struck thee, and
Nonnus again, -- (...)
(...).
One after another by turns gave him blows on the cheek.

Chap. XXVII.56.

[The mother of Zebedees children]

Salome Mar: 15.40. the mother of James and John, his disciples.

Ibid. Note a. (...).
Hesychius's notion of (...) for falling on the face, (not down any steep
place) Add Phavorinus also. (...), it signifies falling forward on the mouth,
on the face, and (...). He is said to lie (...) who lies upon the face, and
opposite thereto is lying on the back.

(...)
Ibid. To what is said of the manner of Judas's death by a suffocating fit of
sadness, Add, This seems to be In 2 Cor. 2.7.
Theophylact's understanding of it, who speaking of the excessive sorrow, that
the incestuous Corinthian, if not timely absolved, might probably fall into,
expresses it by (...) coming to a suffocation, as Judas did. And this seems to
have caused Oecumenius on the Acts, having resolved that he dyed not by
hanging, to fly to some fables of Papias, of his being so swollen, that he could
not pass by a chariot in the way, etc. In which fable I suppose there might
probably be so much truth, that by this fit of extreme melancholy he was so
swollen, that, as the text says, he burst asunder and his bowels gushed out.

(...).
Ibid. Note f. Of the stupifying wine given to them that were put to death,
Add, So in the last of the Proverbs, Give strong drink to them that are ready
to die: Where the Hebrew Sichar, softened by the Greek into (...) signifies,
says S. Basil, (...), all that can cause drunkenness. So Ps. 60.3. (...) the
wine of stupidity is by the Chaldee, rendered the wine of malediction, such as
is given to them that are to be executed, of which says Rabbi Schelomo, that
it obnubilates the heart, and strikes the brain, i. e. disturbs and takes away
the senses. (...).
And accordingly S. Paul uses (...), Romans 11. for the spirit of stupidity or
slumber, having eyes and not seeing, etc.

(...)
Ibid. Note g. Of the notion of (...) for being pleased with] Add a fragment
of Perictyone the Pythagorean in (...).
Stobaeus, where we find (...), She shall be kind to her husband.

Ibid. Note h. Of that figure (which the Graecians call (...), or (...)) Add a
further example from Heb. 11.37. where we read (...) they were sawn asunder] in
the plural, which yet is not found to belong to any, but to Isaias only. But
it is also possible, that both these thieves might at first blaspheme, and
reproach him, and afterward one of them confess him and pray to him. Thus
Prosper understands it cont. Collat. c. 12. Cum aliquandiu blasphemasset in
Jesum Christum repent est mutatus, etc. when for some time he had railed on
Jesus, he was suddenly changed. And so Titus Bostrensis, p. 833. B. (...). At
first the two thieves spoke as the Jews did, perhaps by that means expecting
some help from them toward getting their pardon, but that expectation being
frustrated, and hearing him pray for his crucifiers, Lu. 23.34. one was thereby
wrought on, v. 40. And if so, then the words here will refer to the former
time, and in S. Luke to the latter.

On the GOSPEL according to St MARK.
Chap. II. verse. 16.

HOw is it that he eats and drinks with Publicans and sinners?]

16. If your Master be a pious and holy person, how comes it to pass, that he
observes not that which all pious Jews (those of the sect of the Pharisees,
Chapter 7.3, 4.) observe most carefully? viz. to abstein from all pollutions, and
so not to eat or converse with any heathen person, or such as frequently trade
with such.

(...).
Chap. IV. Note b. That (...) signifies the ripeness of fruit, Add, this
reason, because when fruit is ripe, it does, as it were, deliver it self to the
gatherer.

Chap. VI. ver. 20.

[ keep him, or look to him.
and observed him] to keep him safe. had a care


(...).
Note a a What (...) here signifies, is a matter of some Question. That which
seems most probable is, that it signifies, as the literal notation imports, and
as the Vulgars [custodiebat] expresses, kept him guarded, and so secured, and
preserved him. For though he were imprisoned by him before, yet it is clear,
that he suffered him not to be hurt by any, and accordingly Herodias, though
she bare him a grudge, and would have killed him, yet she could not, v. 19. And
the reason is rendered in this verse, for he bare such a reverence to him for
his justice and piety, that he preserved, and guarded, and kept him safe from
her malice.

Ibid. Note a. To (...) in Hesychius, Add, (...).
it should be (...), and for (...) in Phavorinus, Add, or probably (...) is
angry with. So (...) signifies, and so it seems to note, Lu. 11.53. (...) to be
very angry at, or displeased with him.

Chap. VII. ver. 2, 3, 4.

2. [Take bread with a defiled (that is to say, with unwashen) hands]

2. Take their dinner, their meal, without using that known ceremony of washing
their hands before it.

3. [Eate not, holding the tradition of the Elders]

3. Do not eat any meal, and this in obedience to an ordinance made by their
Predecessors not recorded in the Scripture of the Old Testament.

4. [The b market, except they c wash they eat not]

4. The market, or hall of judgment, or any the like mixed assemblies, they
solemnly wash their hands (for fear they may have been defiled there) before
they go to meal.

Ibid. Note a. (...).
That the laws which required washing before eating any meal were the
injunctions (not of the Sanhedrin, but) of the Rabbis among them, see
Maimonides on Tr: Chagigah, c. 11.. 5.
Misnaioth. Dicimus non licere homini panem edere, antequam manus laverit: We
say a man must not eat bread before he wash his hands. And lib. Yad. c. 6.. 1.
tract: Berachoth, Quicunque comederit panem, super quem dicitur benedictio
Hammotsi, Benedictus qui producit, panem opus est ut lavet manus ante and post.
Whosoever eats the bread, over which they recite the benediction Hammotsi,
Blessed be he that produces bread, he must wash his hands before and after. By
this is noted not all kind of eating, for say the Rabbis, Super illud quod non
vocatur proprie panis, over that which is not properly called bread (as cakes
made of honey and sugar and Almonds, etc.) they recite not the benediction
Hammotsi. And therefore it is not simply [ eating] here, but eating bread, ver.
2. and 5.

(...).
Ibid. To the notion of (...), for washing with such an elevation that the
water may come to the wrist, Add the testimony of Maimonides, Yad. tr:
Berachoth, where he asks the question, ^ c. 6.. 4.
Quousque pertingat manuum lotio, how far the washing of the hands reaches,
and answers (...) usque ad Perek, by Perek understanding that joint, which sets
on the arm to the hand. So Joseph Ben Levi, and R. Alphes, that to wash the
hands according to the rite of the Sanctuary, it must be ad eam compaginem,
quae ad finem mamus est, that joint which is at the end of the hand, i. e. to
the wrist. So R. Solomo Bar Nathan, Before eating bread properly so called,
requires washing of the hands up to the wrists. See Mr. Po. Miscell. p. 367.
etc.

(...).
Of this use of the word [(...)] we have a clear example in Palladius Lausiac.
Hist. (...). where Salvia seeing Juhinus (...), take a laver and wash his hands
and his feet (...), tells him that she was now sixty years old, and that (...)
(...), except her (...), and that for receiving the Communion, neither her face
nor feet, nor any other part had ever touched water, where though the
interpreter Gentianus Hervetus render (...) palmis and (...) extremis manibus,
the matter is clear, that (...)] signifies the hands and wrists together, and,
applied to the feet also, the feet and ancles, and (...)] the hands only,
which, as was said, are called (...), the extreme parts of the (...), as that
signifies arms.

Ibid. Note b. (...),
After the interpretation of (...) for a Court hall, from whence all Jews that
came were obliged to wash themselves, as from a legal pollution, Add, But I
now rather adhere to that which Not Miscell. c. 9.
Mr. Pocock has conceived, in reference to (...), as it signifies a Market,
interpreting the place from a rule of the Rabbines set down by Maimonides in
these words: Tr. Berachoth, c. 6. (...) etc. A man shall wash his hands in the
morning so that it shall suffice him for the whole day, and he shall not need
to wash his hands as often as he eats; which holds in case he do not avert his
mind any other way (i. e. go abroad, or meddle with business, go to the Market,
etc.) but if he do so, he is bound to wash his hands as often as there is need of
washing; i. e. before he eat or pray; And so that may well be the meaning of
the place, that the Pharisees eat no meat, before they have washd their hands,
and in case after the morning washing they go to the market, or fall to any
worldly business, wherein there may be very easily some legal pollution, they
must wash their hands again before they dine.

(...)
Ibid. Note c. Of (...) (as it differs from (...) v. 3.) i. e. It signifies not
only the washing of the whole body, (as when it is said of Eupolis that being
thrown into the sea, (...), he was immersed all over, and so the baptismes of
cups, etc.) but washing any part, as the hands here, by way of immersion in
water, as that is opposed to affusion, or pouring water on them. For that is
all the difference, says learned Mr. Pocock, observable in Hebrew betwixt
(...), and (...), that the former notes immersion, the other affusion of water,
both indifferently used of any part, and both sometimes for any kind of washing
that part. And so (...) Lu. 11.38. is plainly used for the washing of hands
before meat.

(...).
Ibid. Note e. To the rendering of (...) by one of a stammering speech, Add,
Attubus, one that was tongue-tyed, and to that the next verse seems to agree,
where we read (...), the string that tied his tongue was loosed.

(...),
Chap. IX. Note a. For the notion of (...) for fullers earth, Add
Theophrastus's character of a niggardly person, where (...)] signifies much of
this fullers earth. (...), he earnestly entreats the Fullers that his garment
may have a great deal of earth, that it may not be sullyed quickly.

Ibid. ver. 50.

[And have f peace one with another]

Let it have that other quality of salt, as that is a sign of union, and of the
perpetuity and firmeness of that, and so let it engage you in all amity and
peaceableness with other men.

Note e. After the notion of (...) for (...), in the Conclusion Add, The
agreeableness of this interpretation both to the words and to the context,
shows how unnecessarily that conjecture was taken up by Ep. 443.
Jos: Scaliger, of the text being corrupted, (...) for (...), taking (...) for
(...) Lev. 2. when neither any one copy gives countenance to the emendation,
nor the Septuagint nor any other ancient author has ever used this word (...)
for (...). And then it is strange to conceive, what should suggest those
inordinate expressions which there follow in that Epistle, especially this, Mea
est vera hujus loci interpretatio, quem fedissima menda ab incunabulis usque
ipsius Christianismi invasit. Sunt and alia passim in textum Euangelicum ab
ultima vetustate vitia admissa, quae nemo praeter me indicaverit. Et hoc quod
jam aperuimus praecipuum est ex omnibus. Qui aliquo sensu communi praeditus
est, non poterit non laudare sententiam nostram. Nihil enim verius esse potest.

salt is (...), (...).
a symbol significative of friendship and peace, is ordinarily said; in
reference to which is that of Aeschines de Ementit. Legate. (...), the salt of
the city, meaning thereby the public peace and prosperity; and from hence
says In Iliad. a.
Eustathius (...) (...) salt before all other meats was set before the guests.
The only difficulty is, from whence this custom sprang, or wherein this
Symbolical nature of salt consists, and that is answered by the same
Eustathius, (...), for as salt being compacted of many drops of water, every
one in it self fluid and unsteady, becomes one solid body; so they that from
distant places conjoyne into a league of friendship, meet together both in
place and friendly disposition.

(...)
Chap. XI. Note a. To prove that figgs were then ripe at the time of Christ's
cursing the tree, Add, that the Passover was the time of putting the sickle
into the corn, Deuteronomy. 16.6. and of offering their first fruits, etc. And this
may be farther confirmed by a passage in Aristophanes in (...), (...)
(...).
(...).
At the time that the Cuckoo sounds out his note (that we know is at the
beginning of our spring) then all the Phaenicians (i. e. the inhabitants of
Canaan, Mat. 16. Note f.) reaped their wheat and their barley in their fields,
and that was the meaning of the Proverb, (...), i. e. says the Scholiast,
(...), when the Cuckoo cries, we reap, by [ we] noting the (...), i. e. the
circumcised, as appears by that Scholiast in these words, (...) (...), among
the Egyptians there were many circumcised (so Herodotus in Euterpe says of
them.) And then that the fruits of trees were gathered also at the same time
with the corn, appears among many other evidences, by the express words of
Philo, Leg. ad Caium p. 795. E. where Petronius in his letter to Caius about
the setting up the image of Jupiter in the Temple, tells him his fear* that the
provoked Jews would set on fire all the fruits of the ground; (...), for the
fruit was now ripe (where by the way, (...), not (...), is the proper word for
the time of fruits being ripe) and therefore care must now be taken for the
(...) the taking in of the fruits, (...), not only the corn of the field, but
the fruit of the trees, from which circumstance it is, Anno Ch^. 42.
that Baronius duly concludes that this of the designed dedication of that
image, was at the Passover, and so a punishment that might mind the Jews of
their sin of crucifying Christ at that time of the year. As for that objection
which is apt to deceive many, and so imposed upon S. Chrysostom, because this
time of Easter is not the time of harvest in other places, whereupon that
Father Tom. 4. p. 629. l. 20. speaking of Pentecost, says, it was the time
(...), when the sickle was to be put into the harvest and the fruits to be
gathered in, it is easily answered, that the difference of the Climate betwixt
Judaea and Greece, and much more betwixt Judaea and, us etc. There can be no
strangensse in it.

Chap. XIII. v. 32.

[Neither aa the sonne]

(...).
aa. That this whole discourse belongs to the destruction of Jerusalem there can
be no doubt to him that compares it with Mat. 24. and Lu. 21. and what has
been said in the Annotations for the evincing of it. Which having been the
matter of Daniels praedictions, and afterward of some of John's visions in the
Revelation, and here of Christ's; It is most certain, that the time of it was
revealed by God to this son of man, and other his servants, and therefore of
that, and of the particular circumstances connecting to the last point of that,
it cannot be understood, that of that knows no man, (...).
etc. That day and hour therefore, of which the words are to be understood,
must be more nicely interpreted, to signify not the time more loosely but more
strictly that very point of time, wherein this fatal blow was to be struck; And
of this, to preclude the curiosity of men, and to engage their vigilance,
Christ is pleased to tell them, that no dispensation of Gods, either by man
(viz. Daniel, or any other Prophet,) or by Angel, or (which is highest) by the
son of man, had ordered us thus to know the times or the seasons, this being no
part of the Prophetic office of any man, or within the Commission of Christ
himself to reveal this secret to them. What the Agnoetae taught in this
matter, and wherein their supposed mistake consisted, is not obvious to define.
They were thus called, says De Sect. (...). p. 514. A.
Leontius, because they defined from this text, that (...), that Christ as man
was ignorant of some things, (...), in the same manner as we say he suffered
greef, etc. For this, says he, Theodosius Bishop of Alexandria wrote against
them, but his authority is not great, being himself tainted, and deemed as an
Heretic, as there appears, and so accounted by Ann. 535. n. 71. Theod^sius
Alexandrinus Episcopus Haereti^
Baronius, and his followers Theodosiani or Jacobitae. But Eulogius Bishop of
Alexandria also wrote against them, and the Epitome of his arguments and
answers we have in n. 230. p. 882.
Photius, and the sum of them is, that what is here said of Christ, was said,
(...), secundum respectum, (...), So Aquinas from Origin par. 1. qu. 10. art.
2. ad. 1.
in that his body, viz. the humane nature, of which he was the head, was not
without ignorance, as, says he, he is said to be made sin and curse for us,
because the head appropriating to it self the things of the body, he thus took
upon him the things of the body, viz. of us sinful men. Yet p. 883.
after this, though he much dislike, that either according to his divinity or
humanity, ignorance should be attributed to him, he cannot but Ibid.
acknowledge with Gregory Nazianzen, (...), that he knows indeed as God, but
is ignorant as man, only adding, that the Fathers that acknowledged, or
admitted ignorance in our Savior, in respect of his humanity, (...), did not
produce this, as a doctrine, but to repress the Arians made use of it. Now of
this discourse of Eulogius Ep E^ Reg. l. 8. Ep. 42.
Pope Gregory gives his opinion in his Epistles, that he admires much in it,
but dislikes nothing, that he had written a great deal to Anatolius the Deacon
to the same sense, that what he said of Christ's words, that they were to be
referred to him juxta corpus ejus, nos quod sumus, in respect of his body,
which we are, is most true, and that S. Augustine had often expressed himself to
the same sense, adding also another interpretation of the words, not that the
son of man was ignorant of that day, Intelligi subtilius potest.
Sed quia hunc sciri minime permittat, (...). Caesarius Dial. 1. (...). And so
Aquinas also part 3 qu. 10 art. 2 ^d. 1.
but that he would by no means permit it to be known. After this another
subtilty, as he styles it, he proposes, that the only son being incarnate,
and made for us perfect man, in natura quidem humanitatis novit diem -- Sed
hunc non ex natura humanitatis novit, knew the day in his humane nature, but
not from his humane nature, because being made God-man, he knew it only per
deitatis suae potentiam, by the power of his deity. This certainly has truth
in it, but will not easily be discerned how it opposes them, who acknowledging
Christ God-man to know all things in this hypostatical union, do yet affirm
him, in respect of his humanity, to be ignorant of some things; For it is not
necessary, they should mean any more in thus affirming, than that he has not
this knowledge of all things from his humanity, but from his divinity only In
that Epistle of Gregory's, one thing is resolved, which may possibly give some
light to this whole matter, viz. Res valde manif^sta est, quia quisquis
Nestorianus non est, Agnoeta esse nulla tenus potest.
that he that is no Nestorian, cannot be an Agnoeta. If this be true, then we
have a competent cause of the Agnoetae being reckoned up for heretics, for
such the Nestorians doubtless were, denying the union of the divine, and humane
nature in Christ. But the history rather inclines us to believe that the
Agnoetae were Eutychians than Nestorians, for Theodosius, was one of the (...),
that opposed the Council of Calcedon, and these that brake off from him (about
this point of Christ's being ignorant of some things, in respect of his
humanity) had been, till then, of his communion, and so opposers of that
Council, see Leontius, p. 514. A. These Eutychians heresy consisted in this,
that they affirmed so close an union betwixt the word and the humane nature,
that they became but one nature, and this was refuted in that Council of
Chalcedon, and the Agnoetae being opposers of that Council, must be supposed to
adhere to this heresy, and then indeed it must be acknowledged they were
heretics, and their heresy so much worse than bare Eutychianisme, as it is
blasphemy to impute nescience or ignorance to God. For supposing, as an
Eutychian supposes, that the divinity and humanity were by union (...).
become one and the same nature, 'twere prodigious to believe, that this nature
were ignorant of any thing. This therefore I suppose to be the ground of
defining these Agnoetae to be heretics; for such they were, if they thus
taught. But for the doctrine of those, which hold firmly the decrees of all
the four first General Councels, and so condemn all the heresies there
condemned, particularly that of Nestorius, dividing the persons, and of
Eutychus confounding the Natures in Christ, and only affirm, that though as
God, he knew all, yet, as man, he was ignorant of some things, just in the same
manner, as he was passible and subject to all humane infirmities, which had not
sin in them, and that this is his own express affirmation, that the son of man
knew not that day and hour, this sure is so far from heresy, that, as the same
Leontius elsewhere tells us, it is the unanimous assertion of all the Fathers,
to which neither the Council of Chalcedon, nor any other has taught any thing
contrary. For so in his tenth (...), resuming this business of the Agnoetae,
and recounting the answer that some gave, that those words [(...), neither the
son] were spoken by Christ, (...) -- by way of prudential oeconomie, to avert
the disciples from their inquiry -- he adds, as (...). p. 531. B.
his own affirmation, that it is not fit to speak over subtily in this matter,
and that therefore the Synod did not make any decree in it.

(...).
Chap. XIV. Note a. Of the notion of (...) for sincerus, Add, p. 476, 477
Vadianus, Epit. de Insulis Mar. Mediterr. Dignum cognitu, says he, quod
Plinius tradit l. 13. scilicet novem herbarum species esse, quae nardum
imitentur, and adulterent; unde intelligimus in tanta fraudis materia usum
loquendi obtinuisse ut pistica nardus diceretur quae sincera and absque vitio
est, and plane (...), germana, and nulla art vitiata. It is worth knowing,
what Pliny affirms, that there are nine species of herbs, which imitate and
adulterate nard, whence it is, that, in so great matter of deceit, that nard is
called (...), which is sincere, and without fault, deceitless and not vitiated
by any art.

(...). l. 17. c. 9.
Ibid. Note b. Of the notion of (...) for knocking or shaking the cruise to
make it run more fluently, Add the testimony of A. Gellius speaking of a boy
that was to power out oil, from the cruise into a sallet of herbs, the oil
not coming at first, concussum vehementius, says he, iterum in aulam vertit,
he shook, or knocked it very vehemently, and then turned the mouth of it over
the dish.

Ibid. Of the notion of it for rubbing together, or scraping with the spathula,
Add, Thus the simple word (...) vulgarly signifies terere, to rub, and (...)
to rub upon, as in Laus. his^. c. 29. p. 947. C.
Palladius (...), rubbing the head of the viper on the parts, on purpose that
it might bite him; and then by analogy, (...) must be, to rub together.

Ibid. Note d. Of the notion of (...) for sufficit, Add, Thus is (...) used
also, (...).
as Number. 16. 3. (...) let it suffice you, where Symmachus and Theodotion out of
the Hebrew literally read (...) it is much for you, So in Anacreon, (...), It
is sufficient, for I see her.

Ibid. (...).
To the notion of (...) for giving an acquittance, Add the testimony of i^ 2.
phil. 4.18.
Theophylact that it is (...) as upon receiving of a debt. So Genesis 43.23.
(...), I received your money, good and lawful money, and acquit you of it, and
accordingly Suidas interprets (...) in the present tence by (...) in the
aorist, I received, and so does Theophylact, (...) they that are praised have
received all from men, i. e. have acquitted God.

Ibid. Note e. (...).
To the notion of (...) for soldiers, Add, and so Juvenes in Latin do
usually signify. See Lipsius Epistol. quaest. l. 1. Ep. 1.

Ibid. Note f. (...).
To the instance out of the Novels of the taking one notion of (...) for the
other, Add the Translator of Irenaeus, who, l. 1. c. 19.
in a discourse how all things were created by God himself and not by the
Angels, has these words, Ea omnia non per Angelos, neque per virtutes aliquas
ablatas ab ejus sententia, All these were created not by Angels nor by any
virtues pulled off from his sentences [where the Greek being questionless
(...)] should have been rendered ab ejus gloria, from his glory, according to
the opinion of those who supposing the Angels to be made of beams and rays of
Gods glory, ((...) and (...)) taught that the world was created by them. Thus
has In voce (...).
Phavorinus observed of Pindar, that (...) signifying two things, reward in a
good sense, (...).
and (...) punishment in a bad, from (...), he uses (...) punishment often for
(...) retribution in a good sense.

Chap. XV. ver. 43.

[d Counseller]

A Decurion or Counselor in the Province.

(...).
d. What is meant by (...) Counselor here, is matter of some question. Most
probable it is, that it imports one of the Decuriones placed by the Romans in
their Colonies or Provinces; So says, Fornerius, Decuriones (...), dicebantur
quod consilii gratia allegerentur, the Decuriones were called Counselors,
because they were chosen to give counsel. So the old Greek and Latin Lexicon,
(...), Decurio, Curialis. So the old Glossarie, Decurio, (...). Now what the
Decurio is, we find in the Digests, Lib. 50. Tit. 16. de verbor. signif. leg.
239.. 5. Decuriones dictos aiunt ex eo, quod initio, cum coloniae deducerentur,
decima pars eorum qui ducerentur, consilii publici gratia conscribi solita sit.
They were so called, because at first when Colonies were sent out, the tenth
part of them were appointed to sit as a standing Council to manage affairs.
And such an one at this time was Joseph, and he (...), a person of great
eminence.

Chap. XVI.2.

[At the a rising of the sun]

When the Sun was now appearing in their Horizon.

a. The various readings in this place, (...).
may deserve to be taken notice of. 1. Gregory Nyssen Sermon. de Resurr. says,
(...). The most exact Copies put in (...) now. And so Eusebius de Demonstr.
Euang. l. 10. in the end reads (...) the sun being now risen, and so Lucas
Brugensis cites it out of some Manuscripts. 2dly. The ancient Greek and Latin
MSS. read (...) in the present tense, and if the (...) now, be joined with
that, the plain sense will be, the sun now rising, or as our English, at the
rising of the sun, and so it will agree exactly with St. Matthewes (...), the
day beginning to appear, or shine, (...), the Lords day beginning to shine,
says Ignatius ad Trall.

On the GOSPEL according to St LUKE.
Chap. I. verse. 5.



The eighth of the four and twenty courses of the Priests which ministered in
the Temple by their weeks.

(...).
cc. Though the word (...) do literally denote the service of no more then a
day, yet is not so to be taken here, but in a greater latitude, for the space
of a week. p. 763. ^.
So says Titus Bostrensis (...), you must not understand the word of daily
continuance and serving in the Temple, but of weekly.

Ibid. verse. 60.

[And his mother.]

And Elizabeth being also inspired by God v. 41. and having by that means
received knowledge of the name appointed by God, and not from her husband, who
was now dumb and so had been ever since the Angel spoke to him, v. 22. (see
Titus Bostrensis p. 771. B.)

Ibid. verse. 72.

To perform the mercy promised to our fathers.

Deal mercifully with our fathers, (...). --

(...).
Ibid. Note a. Of the notion of (...) for being perfected or completed, Add.
So in Hesychius Presbyter, Cent. 2.10. (...), the Old Testament did not perfect
or complete the inward man to piety, or in that respect. (...), and (...) in
the same sense.

Ibid. Note c. (...).
That Theophilus was probably a feigned title, to the Testimony of Epiphanius,
Add, Thus Salvian, in his Epistle to Salonius, prefixed before his books ad
Eccles. Cathol. giving him an account, why he inscribed those books not by his
own name, but by that other of Timothy, says he followed this Evangelists
example, qui in utroque divini operis exordio Theophili nomen inscribens, cum
ad hominem scripsisse videatur, ad amorem Dei scripsit, who in the beginning
both of his Gospel and of the Acts inscribing the name Theophilus, seeming to
have written to a man, he wrote to, or for, the love of God.

Ibid. Note i. (...)
Of the notion of (...) for (...), thou have found favor, Add, the testimony
of Theophylact, who thus expounds it, (...), etc. when he had first said thou
that art favored, he adds by way of interpretation, for thou have found
favor, etc.

Ibid. To the notion of (...) for good and gracious, Add. So Ps. 18.26. where
the Hebrew reads (...), and the Septuagint (...), with the merciful thou shall
be merciful, the Greek Scholiast reads (...) with the gracious thou shall deal
graciously.

Ibid. Note m. Of the notion of (...) for declaring the will of God by mission
from him, (...)*
without reference to predicting things to come, Add, So the author of
Synopsis Prophetiarum, (...), Any that receives knowledge from God of things
past is called a Prophet. So To 3. p. 485. l. 42.
Chrysostom, (...). A Prophet is no more but an interpreter, but that of God.
And Grammarians have observed that the word naturally signifies no more, then
this of speaking from, or in the stead of another, i. e. of God, as a Proconsul
is he that supplies the Consuls place, (...) in composition being all one with
(...). So the Poets were said to be the Prophets of the Muses, as in Pindar
(...), Let the Muse inspire and I will prophesy. And in Theocritus, (...), the
sacred Prophets of the Muses, that speak under them, or as they are inspired,
and directed by them.

(...).
Ibid. Note o. The Addition of (...) in seculum at the end of the benedictions
of the Jews, was not in but after Ezra's time.

(...).
Ibid. Note q. Of the joining (...) without fear] with [(...) delivered] and
not with [(...) serve] to Irenaus's words, Add, and p. 772 C.
Titus Bostrensis (...) -- (...) (...) -- (...), because some ofttimes are
delivered from the hands of enemies, but with fear; therefore he says, that he
gives us to be delivered without fear, adding (...) -- (...), for Christ's
coming caused us to be without fear delivered, (...) for we felt not, had no
apprehension of the treachery of our enemies, (...) etc. but he presently
snatched us out, and transferred us from them into his own lot and portion,
(...) etc. which lays the obligation on us (as on those that are now become
his) to serve him in holiness and righteousness, etc.

Of the notion of (...) fear for danger, Add ap. Sto^ae. p. 433.
Menander -- (...) (...). A fair-spoken woman is an exceeding great fear, i. e.
is very much to be feared, a great danger.

Ibid. Note r. (...)*
To the expressing of Christ by (...), Add. To which purpose also may be
applied that of Philo (...), the Father of all things sent him forth (in the
word from whence the original (...) comes) his most ancient son, or first
born.

Chap. XI. Note a. Of the notion of (...), (...).
after the reference to Hieronymus Magius, l. 4. c. 15. Add, And so Suidas in
the word (...), says, (...), Augustus sent out unto all the regions of those
that were subject to him, officers by whom he made the enrolings, and in the
word (...), he says, he decreed to number (...) by head (...), all the
inhabitants of the Romans, and reciting the number, his style is, (...), there
were found so many myriads inhabiting the dominions of the Romans.

Ibid. Note. b. Of the notion of (...), (...).
To the vulgars reading v. 3. Ibant profiteri, they went to tell what they were
worth etc. Add, Suidas indeed in the word (...) mentioning this of Augustus,
says it was to the other end, of bringing into his treasury (...), a
sufficient proportion, and that it was therefore called, (...), the first of
this kind, by way of equal and moderate distribution, because they that were in
power before him, were wont to take away what they would. But though Suidas be
an excellent Grammarian, yet in matter of history his authority is not great,
and it is sure enough the Roman subjects paid their vectigalia, certain taxes,
before this, and the Publicans were the gatherers of them. And Cassiodore's
words, which somewhat look toward that of taxing, yet refer it not to the cause
assigned by Suidas, but because by the civil wars men's dominions or
possessions were uncertain and confounded, and therefore this Census was
appointed together with a survey and division, ut possessio sua nulli haberetur
incerta, quam pro tributorum susceperat ratione solvenda, that every man might
have his possession certain, and proportionably his tax be certain also.
Cassiod. var. l. 3. Ep. 52. It is therefore by learned men affirmed,
particularly by Is. Casaubon in Bar. p. 105. (and is most probable) that this
decree of inrolling was an effect of Augustus's curiosity (and neither of his
desire to enrich his treasury, nor to reform the excesses of those before him)
and this overruled by Gods special providence, says Hom. 8. in Matt.
S. Chrysostom. that this Emperor might (...) serve or be isntrumental to the
conserving the record of the birth of Christ, whose name and his mothers as
well as Joseph's, were now enrolled. And that is a farther evidence of the
nature of this (...), that it was not a tax, for that would not have belonged
to women and infants, but, as Cassiodore said, to the possessors only. And
thus Suidas himself understands it in Augusto, that he decreed to number by
head all the inhabitants of the Romans, being willing to know (...), how great
the multitude was, which must take off all authority of his to the contrary.

Ibid. Note h. (...).
Of the notion of (...) for his fathers house, Add, Thus the Syriack reads it,
and thus Theophylact, (...), in his temple. So Chrysostom Hom. 52. in Genesis
speaking of Abimelech driving Isaac out of his country, asks, (...); whither
drivest thou the righteous man? (...) do thou not know that whithersoever he
sha^^ ^^^pen to depart, it is necessary he should be in his Fathers house, i. e.
within his providence? And Con. Paul. Sam^sat (...).
Dionysius Alexandr. (...), They found me in my house, says he by the prophet,
but in the Gospel, I must be in those of my father, i. e. in his house
likewise. So p. 778. E.
Titus Bostrensis, (...); Being in the Temple of God he said, knew ye not that
I must be in my fathers (house?)

Chap. III. ver. 1.

[ Procuratour.
Governor a of Judaea.]

Note a. Some question may be, (...)*
what is here meant by (...). But Observe. l 9. c. 13.
Ja^. Cuja^ius the learned Lawyer has cleared it; Rectius Vetus interpres Luc.
1. Procurante Pilato, quam alii, praeside. Praeses enim Syriae tum fuit
Vitellius vir Consularis, Procurator Pilatus, Eques Romanus. Cujus rei authors
habeo Tertullianum, Tacitum, Josephum. The ancient interpreter Luc. 1. renders
it more truly Pilate being Procurator, then others, Pilate being President, or
Governor: for Vitellius was then Governor of Syria, one that had been Consul,
but Pilate a knight of Rome was Procurator: So I learn from Tertullian, Tacitus
and Josephus.

Ibid. ver. 23.

[Thirty years of age.]

Thirty years old, the age before which the Levites were not to be admitted to
sacred functions. Number. 4.3. and 43. 1 Cron. 33.2.

Ibid. Note b. Of the high priests being chosen by the Procurator, In Heb. 5.4.
Add Theophylact. (...). They who were at that time high priests of the Jews,
invaded that dignity, bought it, and so destroyed the Law, which prescribed a
succession in the family of Aaron.

(...).
Ibid. Note. d. For the difficulty concerning Cainan in the Genealogy, see the
learned Sam. Bochartus in his Phaleg. l. 11. c. 13.

(...).
Chap. IV. Note a. Of the notion of (...) for a roll, Add In Heb. 10.7.
Theophylact, who explains it by (...) a roll.

Ibid. ver. 23.

[This Proverb, Physician heal thy self.]

That which among the Jews is by way of gibe vulgarly used to a Physician, who
is himself fallen into any disease, or infirmity, Physician etc. (which
signifies a man that pretends to do cures abroad, but is able to do none at
home) is become appliable to me etc.

Chap. VI. Note g. (...)*
To the notion of (...) (not for hoping to receive again, but) for distrusting,
as that is opposite to liberality, Add, Ap. Stobae. p. 523.
In the same sense (...) is used in Teles his Commentary of riches and poverty,
speaking of Covetousness, that it permits not men to use, or communicate their
wealth, he adds, (...), some men's illiberality and diffidence has sealed up
their possessions.

Ibid. ver. 40.

[Every one Shall be perfected as his Master. (...).
that is perfect shall be as his Master.]

Note i. (...).
What is the full meaning and grammatical construction of [(...) -- ] has been
intimated. Note on 2 Cor. 13. c. To it I here Add the consentient judgment of
Epiphanius. A disciple, says he, is not above his Master, (...), but let him
be made perfect as his own Master was (of whom the Apostle tells us Heb. 11.10.
that he was to be made perfect by sufferings) i. e. ready for persecution, and
evil speaking.

(...).
Chap. VIII. Note a. Of the notion of (...) Add, It is a military word, of
soldiers releeving and defending and rescuing one another, which is (...), and
a work of mercy. And he that exercises it, is called indifferently (...) (see
Romans 16.2.) So in (...)
Demosthenes, (...), who helped Aphobus to defraud me. And in Strabo, (...), he
maintained, defended a false opinion. And many the like.

Chap. IX. ver. 8.

[Elias had a appeared.]

Elias was come.

(...).
Note a. The word (...) appeared] seems here to be taken for (...) was come. So
it is evidently in 2 Mac. 7.22. (...), I know not how ye came into my womb. So
the Scholiast of Theocritus, (...), appearing signifies coming. So Plato in the
beginning of his Protagoras; (...); that is, whence come thou Socrates? (...)
3. in Mat^.
So Chrysostom, (...), thou can not come to the city which is above.

(...).
Ibid. Note b. Of the notion of (...) for Christ's coming to destroy the Jews,
Add. To this may be added an observation of (...) 4 p. 44^. l. 27.
S. Chrysostomes, (...) -- (...). Our Lord Jesus Christ calls his coming in the
flesh by this title of (...) or going out, citing Mat. 13.3. of the Sower going
out, and John 16.28. of his having come out from the father; and the same li.
35.
again, (...), Christ fitly calls his coming (...), which observation, if it
have any force in it, then may this other middle coming of Christ to the
destruction of the Jews, so often styled (...) the coming of the Lord, and of
Christ, be as fitly here expressed by (...), not the going away, or departure
from this earth, but his coming in power and vengeance from heaven, a
consequent of his Ascension thither. On Tom. 8. p. 560.
this place of S. Chrysostom the learned Andrew Downs observes, that the
Hebrews express (...) and (...) any administration or discharge of any office,
by going in and going out. Which if it be applyable to the latter of them,
taken alone, (as it is both here and in that place of S. Chrysostom) then it is
a farther account of the propriety of this sense which I have affixed to it,
this coming of Christ to the destruction of his crucifiers being an eminent act
of administration of his regal office (and thence often called the kingdom of
God) in the executing judgment on such traitorous opposers of his kingdom.

Ibid. ver. 62.

[No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the
kingdom of heaven.]

He that holds the plough must follow it close, and not make errands home, or
betake himself to any other business, till his days work be done, if he do he
will not be fit for that employment: So thou if thou will undertake my service,
must not (...), etc. Titus Bostrensis p. 79^ A.
defer or procrastinate, but presently set to it, without any delay, and then
follow it with the same diligence, and if thou art not thus ready to set out
with me, if thou either pretendest, or really have such kindness to thy former
course and what thou have left at home, as to take thee off one day from my
service, thou art not worthy of the dignity, and advantages of a Christian
life, art no competent judge of them, nor consequently fit for a disciple of
mine.

(...).
Chap. X. Note a. Of the notion of (...) for concurrence or meeting, of two
things, Add, In Tim. p. 251.
Calcidius's definition of fortune, that it is concursus simul cadentium
causarum duum, originem ex proposito trahentium, ex quo concursu provenit
aliquid praeter spem cum admiratione, a concurrence of two causes falling
together, having their beginning from counsel, from which concurrence something
proceeds besides hope with admiration.

Chap. XI. ver. 29.

[And when the people were gathered thick together, he began to say.]

As for the second question proposed v. 16. he now in the presence of a great
multitude gave answer also to that (see Mat. 12.39.)

Ibid. ver. 41.

[ What you have or are able give alms or in alms:
Give alms of such things as you have.]

The best way of purifying etc. is by works of mercy and liberal almes-giving;
As far as you are able restoring to the injured, or if there be not place for
that, giving to those that want.

(...).
Ibid. Note c. Of (...) etc. after the place from Deuteronom. 16.10. Add; But
because the precept is here given to the hypocritical Pharisees who may have
been guilty of great sins of injustice, and it is not impossible (...) may
signify that v. 39. (though I conceive it may fitly be taken in another sense,
noted 1 Cor. 5. Note h.) and because this sin of oppression, and rapine, and
cheating, and wronging others, is so ordinary in the world, that it may be
reasonable for our Saviors speech to respect that among other sins, and so to
propose here the way, on the sinners part, required for the cleansing of that;
Therefore it is not amiss yet farther to observe, that the place here [(...)]
and not [(...)] or [(...)] may in construction be so rendered, as that the two
accusative cases shall be set by way of apposition, and both follow the verb
[(...)] and then the meaning will be, give what you have, or as far as you are
able, as far as all that you have will reach; This we know the injurious is
bound to, in case of rapine, to restore all that he has taken away, before he
can hope for pardon; but in case he be not able to restore all, yet certainly
he must go as far as he can, and that is the least that will be accepted, (nay
Zaccheus's example when he repented, may be fit in that case to be considered,
who made a fourfold restitution to the injured person, and gave half of his
goods to the poor, over and above.) And he that either restores to the utmost
or does it as far as is now in his power, he does restore (...) in this sense.
But because many cases there are, where^n there is not place for exact
restitution to the person injured, he may be gone, and all that have right to
what was his and the like, and in that case, giving to the poor, in works of
mercy or pity, is the only way left of restitution, and the like holds in
other sins; wherein though no other man be wronged, yet there is pollution
contracted, and that must be cleansed by some effectual works of repentance;
and mercy to the poor is specified as an eminent work of this kind, Dan. 4.27.
therefore in all these, and the like respects, the precept is here given more
generally, to make use of these works of alms, where the case requires, as
restitution, where the case requires that, and even then, after Zacheus's
example, alms also; And so the full of the precept, is (...), give what you
have in alms, even all that you have, where all is ill gotten, and the whole
lump is by that means unclean, or as much as you have taken by rapine, and
oppression, whatever that is (with advantage) if you have so much: If you have
not, (...), what you have, will by Gods mercy be accepted. And so in other
sins, wherein others have not been injured, or wherein no restitution is
required, still a very liberal almes-giving is required, not only so much, as
were every man's duty, abstracted from these pollutions thus contracted (as
almes-giving, we know, is simply under precep^, and some degree of it is our
righteousness, in the sacred style, we are unjust if we perform it not) but in
some proportion to a trespasse-offering, so much more, as a fruit of
repentance, and a revenge on our selves, and an evidence of our true contrition
for our sins. And this, in respect of the quotum, set down indefinitely (not
defining the just proportion, but leaving that to our choice) (...), what we
have, or are able to give, and not only some small mite, unproportionable, as
it would perhaps be interpreted, if it were here [(...)] in Gemisthus's notion
premised, or as that is no more than [(...)] in Tobit, out of what thou have.

Verse. 44.

[Which appear not, and the men that walk over them are not aware of them.]

Grown over with grass, and they that see the green outsides of them, Mat.
23.27. know not what is within, viz bones of men and putrefaction, and so are
defiled and polluted by them, (See Note on Mat. 23. ff.)

Ibid. Note f. (...).
Of the notion of (...) for pozing, Add, as an angry schoolmaster that seeks
occasion of severity against a scholar; Theophylact expounds it by (...), and
(...), and (...), asking often, one question after another, ensnaring.

Chap. XII ver. 15.

[ Or, no man's life if he have never so much abundance, depends on his
possessions.
Man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.]

Verse. 19.

[ Feast. (...).
Be merry.]

Live festivally, please himself and entertain others.

Verse. 50.

[ I am to be baptized with a baptism.
I have a baptism.]

Note e. Of the notion of (...) for fixedness of attention, Add, T^ 6. p. 965.
(...).
Chrysostom (...), to look earnestly, without ever looking off, on him that
holds up the mappa or white cloth in the races.

(...)
Ibid. Of (...) for doubting, or suspense, Add, So in Dorotheus, P. 806. E.
(...). 1. (...) and (...) are all one, when one is not intent on what he has
in hand, but is uncertain, and indifferent which to take to, all one with (...)
following, being carried about without any certain aim.

(...)
Ibid. Of (...) taken for solicitude, Add, Theophylact, (...), he forbids
sollicitous care under that phrase.

(...).
Note c. Of (...) in an expression of wish and desire, preferred before the
second rendering, Add, unless we prefer that other reading, which we find in
Marcus Eremita p 923. D
de baptis. (...), and I would be pleased, or glad, if it were already kindled.

(...).
Note d. The phrase (...)] is all one with (...) the note of the future. So 2
Esdr. 4.45. habet venire is used for (...) is to come. And in the Athanasian
Creed (...) they shall rise] is rendered in Latin, habent resurgere. So in To.
1. p 92. li. 29.
Chrysostom. (...) for (...)* and again (...), i. e. (...), And so Ins^t. l.
4. c 12. Ib c. 30.
often in Lactantius, To. 2. p. 64. l. 4.
quod carne indui haberet in terra, i. e. that he was to be incarnate, and
again, quod plurimae sectae and haereses haberent existere, that there should
be many sects and heresies.

Chap. XIII. ver. 3.

[Except ye repent.]

If you continue your present wicked practices raising sedition under pretense
of piety, as frequently you are apt to do (see Titus Bostrensis p. 803. C.)
then as they perished etc.

Ibid. ver. 31.

[The same day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying unto him, get thee
out, and depart hence, for Herod will kill thee.]

Upon his instructing the people and doing miracles, in this manner, some of
the Pharisees unwilling that they should thus see his power, and hear his
doctrine, were very desirous to have him gone, and for a pretense suggest the
danger that he was in from Herod, if he should stay any longer, saying, Go out
of Galilee, Herod's jurisdiction; for if thou stay here, he will put thee to
death.

Verse. 32.

[ This, (...).
That fox.]

Herod, (by the manner also of the expression, left dubious, (...). Titus
Bostrensis. p. 805. B.
intimating the subtlety of the Pharisees, disguised by them, but by him
discerned, who by the mention of Herod's design to kill him, thought to drive
him out of their coasts) that I attend etc.

Note b. (...). Ap Stob. p. 280.
To the testimony of Simplicius concerning (...) for instruction, Add,
Zaleucus in his prooem to his Laws, where (...) and (...) are put together as
phrases of the same importance, wise men and such as meant to be safe.

(...) etc.
Ibid. Note b. Of the notion of (...)] for the time of his doing miracles, Add
Theophylact, (...), I must stay here a while and do miracles.

Chap. XIV.35.

[It is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dunghill, but men cast it
out. He that has ears to hear let him hear.]

It is not fit, or useful (as some things are) to enrich the ground, no nor to
mix with other things, which being corrupted from their primary use, are yet
good for that; and so are kept, though in a mean place, for that use, but is
utterly unprofitable, and generally dealt with as such, cast out without any
respect. Let every disciple, every Christian, designed by Christ to be the salt
of the earth, lay this to heart, for he is nearly concerned in it.

(...).
Ibid. Note c. In the end, Add, But perhaps, and indeed most probably, (...)
here may, in the husbandmans notion, signify [ land] whether pasture, meadow,
or tillage, all which are improved by manure. So is (...) used Heb. 6.7. Now
two sorts of manure there are; Some things have a peculiar propriety to the
enriching of ground, and are used alone, without mixture of any thing else with
them, as to some ground, marle, lime, etc. Some things having not this
propriety in any special manner, yet being in mixture with those that have,
are fit for this turn, and of such generally our mixum's or compost's are
made, whe^e^n all kind of dung being one special ing^^d^^nt, that mixum may
will be the thing ^^at is he^e expressed by (...) or dunghill, whither, as is
here intimated, many other things are cast, as well as dung. Now salt, which is
very good for domestic uses, when that loses its virtue, when it is corrupted,
(...), and so is no longer good for those uses, it is likewise good for nothing
else. Other things, when they are corrupted, do but change their use; dung it
self, in the utmost degree of putrefaction is good for enriching of land, but
salt corrupted, quite unlike other putrid things, is not good singly by it
self, to be laid on any sort of land, no nor in mixture, or compost with any
thing else, no not with dung, which is most useful. And this is the state of a
putrid disciple, a corrupt Christian, he does hurt, wheresoever he is, but no
kind of good, and therefore as a wicked, and not only unprofitable servant (or
as (...) unprofitable is the worst character, that can be) (...), he is cast
out, as here the unsavory salt, as (...) rejectaneous, or reprobate, whereas
the good Christian is elect, precious, a good and faithful servant, very
profitable to his Masters use, and honor, and the advantage of other men.

Chap. XV. Note c. N^aple.
To the use of (...) for one engaged in a wicked course, Add, 1 Timothy 5.6. She
that lives in pleasure is dead, while she lives. So the Jews have a saying,
Ill men while they live are said to be dead. And so the ancient Arabs. Not he
that is at rest is dead, but the living dead man he is truly dead.

Chap. XVI. ver. 25.

[And Abraham said, Son remember, that thou in thy life time receivest thy
good things.]

25. And Abraham with all (...) etc. (...), Titus Bostrensis, p. 818. C.
mildness and gentleness, and compassion, without any reproaching or reviling
said unto him, All that I can in this thy sad condition impart to thee, is only
to tell thee what thou art now to expect, and to mind thee of the
reasonableness of it; For all thy portion of abundance and prosperity and ease,
and felicity, without intermixture of afflictions, thou have already enjoyed,
and spent upon thy self in thy life time, without imparting them to any other
though in neversomuch want of thy releef.

Note e. The phrase of receiving thy good things seems to be agreeable to the
Hebrew style which uses (...) receiving his world] for an uninterrupted course
of secular felicity, when all things succeed according to a man's will in this
world, according to an ancient saying of theirs, (...), whosoever shall pass
thorough forty days without chastisements has received his world, a full
abundant reward for all the good he has done here.

Verse. 17.

But (...).
[And it is easier.]

Which you are not to look on, as any design that the Law, and Prophets, the
substancial parts of the Jewish religion should be abolished, or any carnal
liberty brought in, instead of it by Christianity, that shall never be, See
Matt. 5.17. and Note g.

Chap. XVIII. ver. 2.

[Neither regarded man]

Nor was moved with shame or remorse, or compassion toward any man.

Ibid. Note b. Of (...) read, (...).
which Ps. 103.9. is rendered (...), and so 1 These. 2.16. signifies long
duration, etc.

Ibid. Note i. (...)
Of the reading of (...) not (...), to Chrysostom Add, p. 1075. C.
and Antiochus, (...).

Ibid. ver. 38.

[Jesus thou son of David, have mercy on me.]

O thou omnipotent eternal son of God of whom the Prophets have told us,
that thou should be born of a Virgin, of the offspring of David, I beseech
thee to pardon my sins, and show thy divine power in healing me.

Ibid. ver. 42.

[Thy faith.]

Thy believing me to be the Messiah, expressed by thee, v. 38.

Chap. XIX. v. 14.

[ But his citizens.]

Now the reason of his journey to that far country, v. 12. was because those
his contrymen, etc.

Chap. XXII. ver. 41.

[Was d d withdrawn.]

Note d d. The use of the word, (...).
(...) is observable among the Hellenists, signifying no more than to depart.
So 2 Mac. 12.10. (...), when they were departed thence nine stadia. So Act.
21.1. (...), we were gone or departed from them. And so if that be the word in
this place, it must certainly signify no more, but will be thus best rendered,
[ he departed from them] But then the Kings MS. reading (...), that is not
capable of any other rendering.

Chap. XXIII.29.



Heavy days are shortly to come upon this people, miserable streights and
distresses by famine first, and then soon after even utter destruction, etc.

Ibid. ver. 31.

[If they do these things on a green tree, what shall they do on a dry?]

The righteous and the wicked together Ezec. 21.2, 3. or the rich and the poor
together, etc. And if my portion, etc. be so sad and lamentable under the Roman
Judge and Soldiers, what will become of the professed enemies of God, who, etc.
and shall fall into the hands of whole armies of the Romans? Or if in the
distress that shall come upon you, the rich and noble shall be put to such
streights, then what will the condition of the meaner sort be?

(...).
Note b b. This expression of the days approaching, that they shall say (...),
blessed are the barren, etc. had certainly its completion, in what befell
Jerusalem in the time of the siege. But more particularly it may refer to one
passage: After that Titus had encompassed the city with a wall, so that none
could come out to forage, they were forced to feed on dung, says Josephus, on
shoes and girdles, etc. and for want of such provision as this, one Marie, a
noble and rich woman, daughter of Eleazar, bereaved of all by the Seditious,
killed her sucking child, and dressed it, and eat part of it, and the soldiers
breaking in upon her, and finding a part left, went away in detestation, and
presently the news of it went over the whole city, and every one, says l. 7.
c. 8.
Josephus, looked upon it with horror, and with the same compassion, as if they
had done it themselves. Then was this speech fit for them to take up, on
hearing this horrible news, Blessed are the barren, and the womb that never
bare, and the paps that never gave suck* in comparison to those that are forced
to feed on the fruits of their wombs, and devour their own sucking infants. And
then that which follows; [ If they do these things on a green tree, (...).
what shall be done on a dry?] may perhaps be best interpreted in relation to
this particular fact also, of that noble and rich woman, Marie. If such
horrible things befall the wealthyest among you, what a dismal state shall all
others be involved in? This may possibly be the meaning of the phrase. But if
not, then in that other notion of the righteous and the wicked, it may have had
its completion also.

On the GOSPEL according to St JOHN.
Chap. I. ver. 14.



(...).
NOte cc. For the signification of the particle [(...), as] S. Chrysostom's
note is worth reciting, (...), says he, (...), It is not a note of similitude
or comparison, but of confirmation and unquestionable definition; as if, says
he, the Evangelist had said, we saw his glory, such as became, and was fit for
the only begotten, and true natural son of God, the king of all. To the same
purpose says Adrian, in his (...) to the Scripture, p. 9. (...), The Scripture
uses [(...)] two ways; 1. By way of comparison: And 2. Of confirmation: and
as an instance of the latter he gives (...), Truly God is good to Israel,
Psalm. 73.1. and this text, where says he, it is used (...), the glory of the
true only begotten son.

Chap. II. ver. 21.

[He that does the truth.]

A sincere upright person.

Chap. IV. ver. 6.

By.
on the well.]

In this place was the well which Jacob once dug, on which occasion Jesus
being weary of travail sat down close by it on the ground. --

Note a. (...).
The word (...) thus] is by Theophylact interpreted (...), simply, after any
manner, not on a seat, without any provision made for sitting upon the ground.
And if so, (...)
then (...) must be not [ on] but by, or near, the well, as (...) Genesis 16.7. is
at, or by the spring of water.

Chap. V. ver. 4.

[ Descended in (...)
Went down into the poole.]

Descended by some steps on the brink of the poole, and by that advantage, and
by some instrument for that purpose, stirred up the lower, and grosser parts of
the water.

Note a. In the end, Add, In this variety we can but resolve what the context
makes most probable, and that is, to adhere to our ordinary reading without
admitting either of those changes, which those venerable copies, so contrary
one to the other, suggest to us. For as to the former, the troubling of the
water being taken notice of, both v. 4. and v. 7. as the only thing that gave
or rather excited (for a very short time) the medicinal virtue in the water,
there was no need of the miraculous interposition of one of Gods holy Angels,
to effect that; any ordinary man, sent down for that purpose, was sufficient
thus to move or trouble the water. As for the bathing of an Angel at a certain
time, there is no probable account to be given of that, nor can it have any
special energie, to the making of the waters medicinal, for the bare troubling
the waters did that, v. 4.7. As for the latter, which leaves out the whole
fourth verse, the remainder of the context utterly resists that, being all
built on that relation of the medicinal nature of the poole, and the
circumstances of it, which are given us in that verse. The context then
remaining entire, as it does in our ordinary copies, the only objection I
discern to offer it self against the way of interpreting it, of a medicinable
virtue, naturally arising from the fresh warm blood of the entrails of the
sacrifices that were washed there, is, that the cure was limited to one, to him
that first stepped in, and this man had been there long in vain, because
another still stepped in before him; which may be thought unreconcileable with
that opinion of the medicinable virtue of the blood, in that poole, which would
as probably minister to the cure of more, as of one. To this I answer, that it
is very probable, there might be causes of this (more than one) arising from
some circumstances of the place, etc. which being not taken notice of in the
text, cannot with any certainty be assigned by us, at this distance, and yet
this very possibility that there were such, be sufficient to avoid the force of
that objection. For instance, the place that contained these medicinal waters,
might be of no larger capacity, than to hold one at once (and the steps down to
it somewhat proportionable) and that on purpose designed, in order to curing
diseases, to which it was most likely to contribute, if the virtue that came
from the entrails, were kept within so narrow a compass, as when a medicinal
bath is to be provided by infusion of herbs, etc. it is ordinary to use a
vessel of no greater capacity, than will suffice one patient at once, that the
infusion of the drugs may be the stronger, and so more medicinal. And then
considering how apt those grosser parts are, when stirred up, to sink again,
and some space being allowed to the officer, that moves the water, to ascend
before the patient can descend, it follows regularly, that the cure should be
thus limited to one patient at one moving of the water, and if T^m. 5. p.
585.40.
S. Chrysostom judge aright, in one year; (...), says he, one only in a year
(at this (...), season, or Paschal festival, when the great multitude of
sacrifices were newly washed there) was cured by that water. All this is here
very fitly supposeable, non obstante either the mention of the poole, which may
be deemed to signify a place of a greater capacity, or the five porches, v. 2.
For the five porches, those being parts of Bethesda, the house of mercy, or
hospital, as has been showed, there might be uses of them for the sick, and
diseased persons, which lay there, v. 3. without imagining them to be so many
entrances to this poole. And then for the (...), though by rendering it in
Latin, piscina, and poole in English, it may seem to be of a larger capacity,
yet being, we know, by the ancients used vulgarly for the font in the Church,
and that expressly from the use of it in this place, it need not be supposed
here to have been of any such large capacity. And then this being thus
premised, and supposed, all that is here said, is very consonant. 1. That after
the moving of the water, it should be medicinal only to one at once; and 2.
That he only that could make most haste, and so come first, was likely to
receive benefit by it, and so this lame man miss of it, because he could never
get to be foremost: other ways there are also supposeable, to remove all force
of this objection, and secure the probability of this conjecture; But because I
propose it only as such, I shall not farther insist on them.

Verse. 13.

[For Jesus had conveyed himself away, a multitude being in that place.]

13. For by reason of the great multitude that was there at that time, Jesus
had opportunity to depart from among them, without any man's taking notice of it.

Verse. 17.

[Worketh.]

Has done works of providence, (see Chrysostom Hom. 10. in Genesis p. 63.)
preservation, etc.

Chap. VII. ver. 14.

[Now about the midst of the feast.]

Now on some middle day of the feast, on one of the eight days of which the
feast consisted, but neither on the first, nor the last of them, v. 37.

Verse. 21.

[Ye all Marvel because of it, for Theophylact reads (...).
marvel.]

Ibid. Note d. lin. 13. read, whereas others are called (...) etc.

Ibid. lin. 18. dele, as the Hebrews Act. 6.1. used the Jerusalem paraphrase.

Note g. read, (...), and afterward (...).

Chap. VIII. Note b. (...).
To the notion of (...) for prorsus, omnino, (...), Add, So in Alexander
Aphrodisaeus (...). speaking of that honor, and piety, which is the end of
making the statue or image of any, (...), says he, (...), A statue had not at
all been made without that cause. And after speaking of chance, (...), but
somewhat that was utterly unexpected. And again speaking of the duties of man,
Without them, says he, the life of man is not a life, (...), nor indeed at all
the life of men any longer; and many the like in that one book. But the other
interpretation also [(...), at the first] may well enough be born, and has the
example of the Septuagint, Genesis 13.4. and 43.18. and 20. and of C. 30.
Nemesius (...), having held out at the first, they yielded at the end.

Chap. X. Note b. (...).
To the notion of (...) for preaching, or being heard, in the passive, not
active sense of hearing, Add, Plato in Phaedro, (...), I desire to temper the
brackish hearing with sweet, or potable speech, where (...) hearing] is used
for the word, or speech which is heard.

(...).
Chap. XIII. Note b. Read, The Hebrews had their (...), and their (...), or
(...), the former washing the whole body, etc. the other two, of the hands, or
feet, of one part alone, either by immersion, or pouring on of water.

(...).
Chap. XIX. Note b. Of the reading (...), it was about the third hour] Add, And
so Peter Bishop of Alexandria reads it, adding (...), as the accurate Copies
have it, and that written with S. John's own hand, which is still preserved in
the Church of Ephesus, and is had in great Reverence by the faithful there.
But of what authority that relation is, may yet be questioned, and the ancient
Alexandrian Copy which we have often cited by the name of the Kings MS. accords
in the maine with the Printed Copies.

Chap. XXI. ver. 7.

Upper garment or apron.
Fishers a coat.]

(...).
Note a. What (...) signifies, may thus be collected. 1 Samuel 18.4. Jonathan is
said to put it off, and give it to David. Where, as the Hebrew has (...),
pallium (see Matt. 5. Note r.) the upper garment, so by Jonathans giving it to
David, it appears it was of some value, and that agrees also to the upper
garment, which was such. Now though Suidas in one place interprets it (...),
the inner garment or shirt, yet it is clear by him elsewhere, that this was his
notion not of (...), but (...), for so he sets down the difference between
these two, making (...) to signify (...), the inner garment, and (...), the
outer. So the old Greek and Latin Lexicon, (...) Instata superaria, garments
that are put over. Nonnus expresses this here to be cast over them, to cover
their thighs, -- (...)
(...),
A covering to their nakedness, Theophylact gives a larger description of it,
(...) -- It is a linen garment that the Phaenician and Syrian fishermen gird
about them, either when they are naked, or when they have other garments on,
such as the Painters put on the Apostles, over their other cloths; and this was
the reason why Peter being naked, toyling about catching of fish, to cover his
nakedness, girt this garment about him. This description of his inclines to
believe, that it was simply an apron, which is worn over cloths sometimes to
keep them clean, sometimes is cast over the naked body to hide the shame, as we
read in the story of Adam.

On the ACTS of the holy APOSTLES.
Chap. I. ver. 4.

AND Eating, or familiarly conversing with (...).
being assembled with them.]

And as he did eat and drink and was familiarly conversant with them, thereby
to give them all possible assurance of the truth of his resurrection, and so of
his power and Godhead, and that he was indeed the undoubted Messiah, (see Note
on Matt. 26. f.) he gave, etc.

Ibid. ver. 7.

Moments.
seasons.]

(...).
Note a a. The word (...), which sometimes signifies an opportunity, or
seasonable time, sometimes also signifies a moment, or least particle of time.
Thus it is wont to be defined, (...), it is that wherein there is no time; And
so it seems to signify here, where Gods reserving the (...) times and moments,
in his own hands, so that they shall not be known by them, seems parallel to [
the day and hour knows no man] the day, and the times noting a larger
proportion of time, and the hour, and the moment a lesser, and accordingly the
Vulgar reads vel momenta, or moments.

(...).
Ibid. Note c. Of the notion of (...), house for the Temple, Add, And
accordingly Theophylact and Oecumenius, (...), by the house he means the
Temple, for in that they did eat.

(...).
Ibid. Note d. Of the notion of (...) name] for a person, Add, the use of S.
Chrysostom p. 4. l. 1.
Hom. 1. in Romans (...), not sufficient for twenty names, i. e. for an assembly
of so many persons.

Verse. 18.

[ On his face.
Headlong.]

He sell forward on his face upon the ground.

Ibid. Note f. Read, (...).
That Judas's death was caused by a suffocation of greef, was showed Note on
Matt. 27. a. The death is here described by (...), and that does not
necessarily import any more, than falling forward on the face, (contrary to
supinus, falling or lying on the back) as it is on the place in Matthew
expounded from the Grammarians; But it is possible also, it may denote the
throwing himself down a precipice, etc. But whether this were the manner of his
death or no, the context gives us no means to define.

Ibid. ver. 25.



h h. What is here meant by (...), (...).
may be best collected from the (...), lot, or portion of ministry and
Apostleship, i. e. of Apostolical ministry, in the beginning of the verse, the
taking of which is preparative here, to his going to this. That certainly
signifies (...), in Phavorinus, a part, or portion, that falls to any,
particularly a province that belongs to any Governor, and if that be a Bishop
or Governor of the Church, then such a Province, styled, v. 20. out of the
Psalmist, (...), Bishopric, which he that succeeds in, is said (...) to take
there, as here (...) to take the portion of ministry, etc. And then that
which is thus become any man's assigned Province, cannot more fitly be
expressed, than by (...) the place, or Province proper to that man, assigned to
him. This therefore regularly belonging to Judas, if he had not, by his treason
against his Master, forfeited it, (which is here said as in a parenthesis,
being enclosed with two comma's, (...),) Matthias now succeeds him in it, takes
his (...), lot or portion, and so is now to go to this, as his own place or
Province, which had else belonged to another. Many prejudices there are against
understanding this phrase of hell, as some have understood it; as the place
whither Judas was to go. For 1. That was not his (...) the proper place or
assignation of Judas, but common to all other damned spirits. 2. 'Twas not S.
Luke's office to pass sentence on Judas, any farther, than by setting down the
hainousness of his crime, which he had done, v. 16, 17, 18, 19. and was not to
proceed to judge, or affirm ought of Gods secrets, such is his going into
hell. And it is S. Chrysostomes observation on v. 16. (...), behold the wisdom
of S. Luke, how he does not reproach or insult on Judas; but simply sets down
the matter of fact, without any descant on it, and what he adds, [(...), he
discourses of the present vengeance] belongs evidently to what befell him in
this present world, and so excludes all enlarging, to his future damnation. 3.
There is no propriety in saying of the one, that he sinned to go to hell, but
of the other it is most proper to say, that he was elected to such a (...) or
portion, to go or that he might go to it. To this accords Theophylact, (...) --
He calls that his own place which Matthias should obtain. -- So Oecumenius,
(...). It may be interpreted of Matthias, that Judas being fallen, he should
have his place for his own, receiving his Bishopric, making place and
Bishopric synonyma. So Didymus; the word (...) among many things signifies,
says he, an order, as the place of a Bishop or an Elder. So the Ordinary
Gloss, ut abiret in locum suum, i. e. sortem Apostolicam, his own place, i. e.
the Apostolical lot, making (...) and (...) all one, just as I have interpreted
it.

Chap. II. Note e. Of the liberality of the Christians, v. 44.45, 47. Add,
where, says the text, they had all things common, sold their possessions and
parted them to all, as every man had need, etc. living all as it were out of
one common stock, as those that are joynt-sharers, and partners in all. To
which purpose it is observable from Levit. 6.2. that the common or
joynt-interest, that Merchants or Tradesmen ofttimes have in Traffic, called
there by the Hebrew (...), the putting to of the hand, is by the Septuagint
rendered (...) communication or communion, or (which is used also in this sense
of joynt-interest) fellowship, and in the Chaldee, (...) a society of hand,
from (...) sociavit, participem fecit, a trading of partners, and so in the
Syriack also, in the same word, which they use in the New Testament to render
(...), and particularly here in this 42. verse. And this is thought fit to be
recorded by the Apostles, etc.

Chap. III. ver. 26.

Or in every one of you turning from -- (...)
In d turning away every one of you.]

To turn every one of you from your unbeleefe and impenitence, and so to make
you capable of his pardon, in case you should be thus wrought on, and converted
by so efficacious means.

(...).
Note d. It is matter of some question whether the (...) turning] refer to
Christ, or the Jews. It may fitly refer to Christ, turning them by his grace,
and so blessing them. But Oecumenius refers it to the Jews, (...), if ye will
turn every one from his iniquities. And so it may be also, as an effect of
Christ's grace in us, and as a condition to qualify us to receive benefit by
his resurrection and blessing of us.

Chap. IV. ver. 33.

Rendered.
Gave c the Apostles witness.]

Confirmed their preaching and accounted it as a debt which they ought Christ
for his great dignations among them.

(...).
Note c. The Greek [(...)] is by Theophylact observed to have some energie in
it, (...), he signifies somewhat to be entrusted with them, as a depositum,
which they were to restore, and so speaks as of a debt. Accordingly the Vulgar
Latin duly reads reddebant testimonium, they rendered testimony.

Chap. VI. Note a. (...).
To the Syriacks rendering (...) Jews, that understand Greeks, Add, And so by
To. p 731. l. 11.
S. Chrysostom, (...), those that speak Greek, in opposition to the (...), The
profound, or deep Hebrews. And thus chapter 9.28. when the other Jews, those of
the profounder sort, had such an aversion to S. Paul the Apostle of the
Gentiles, that they would not see him, says S. Chrysostom, he was yet
admitted to speak, and discourse with the Hellenists.

Ibid. Dele, [ which used the Jerusalem paraphrase which is now extant.]

Chap. VII. ver. 2. (...).
That Mesopotamia there comprehends the place of Abraham's birth, Vr of the
Chaldees, appears by Ammianus. Vr, says he in Mesopotamia fuit in via e Tigri
Nisibem. Vr was in Mesopotamia, in the way from Tigris to Nisibe,

Ibid. ver. 19.

In o^ by casting (...), or exposing their children.
So that they cc cast out their young children.

Note cc. What (...) signifies, (...).
there can be small doubt, It Is after the Hebrew idiome no more than (...), to
expose, or cast out helpless, to certain ruin, in the same manner as (...) to
do mercy* Luc. 1.72. is (...) to pity, or commiserate. All that is here to be
taken care of, is that (...) be so rendered, as that it may with truth belong to
Pharaoh the agent in this verse, and not to (...) the Israelites, who were so
il^ handled by him. As it lies in our ordinary English, and the Vulgar Latin,
it seems to refer to the Israelites, exposing their own children, Pharaoh dealt
subtly with our Fathers, so that they cast out, that must be, our Fathers,
cast out, and so the Latin, ut exponerent infantes suos, which perhaps was
thought to have truth in Moses's mother, Exodus 2.3. But it must be remembered,
that what she did, was by her designed (as the hiding, v. 2.) to the preserving
of the child, whereas here the exposing the children is said to be (...), to
the end they might not be preserved, or kept alive. It must therefore be
resolved that (...) belongs to Pharaoh; he that evil entreated the Israelites
did it, in or by exposing, or casting out their children, for so the Infinitive
mood with, or without the article, but especially with it, is to be rendered,
after the manner of a Gerund, faciendo, in, or by exposing; without the article
it is Act. 15.10. why tempt ye God, (...) in or by imposing a yoke; with it, so
Ruth. 1.6. where the Hebrew read, the Lord had visited his people (...) (which
we rightly render) in, or by giving them bread, the Greek has (...), and in
Asulanus's copy, (...), as here (...). And Ps. 78.18. they tempted God in their
hearts (...) (we rightly render) by asking meat for their lusts, the Greek in
all copyes has, (...), they tempted God by or in asking. Now what Pharaoh did
by his bloody Officers, or by his people, i. e. the Egyptians to whom the
charge is given Ex. 1.22. himself is fitly said to do.

Ibid. Note f. Of Chiun, another name of Saturn, Add, So in Plautus's second
Punick scene, Mo lechianna is by learned enquirers discovered to be no more
then (...) the image of Chiun, all one with temunah sell ucoch in the former
scene, i. e. (...) an image which is El God, and sculpture, i. e. God engraven,
the word (...) God among the Phaenicians signifying peculiarly (...) Saturn.

Chap. VIII. ver. 27. [ Queen] the Kings mother (see Oecumenius.)

Chap. IX. Note a. (...)
Among the parallels to the Proverbial speech of kicking against the goads,
Add, (...), striking the Adamant, (...), treading on the fire, in Hom. 42. in
Matt. p. 278. l. 2.
Chrysostom; So Hom. 24. in Matt. p. 174.
again (...), He that strikes the Adamant is himself stricken, and he that
kickes the goads, is himself goaded.

Ibid. Note c. (...).
Of the use of (...) for teaching, Add, So it is used in the Septuagint Exodus
4.12. (...), I will open thy mouth and teach thee, and so Jud. 13.8. and Ps.
31.8. and Isai. 40.13.

Ibid. Note d. (...).
Of the notion of (...) edifying, Add, The word is elsewhere very often used
in these books, especially in S. Paul's Epistles; And therefore it will here be
fit to premise that which may give light to it in all those places. It Is
generally used in this metaphorical sense with application to the Church of
God, and the spiritual building thereof, partly in respect of knowledge, but
principally in respect of Christian practice; The Church is the house of God,
(...), 1 Pet. 2.5. a spiritual house, and every Christian, one of the (...)
living stones, which (...) are edifyed, or built, and of which this house is
made up. And the building it self, i. e, edification is the compacting, or
orderly joining together of these living stones, in belief of the truth, and
charitable living together, from both which proceeds the strength and
comeliness of the structure, and the fitness for the use and honor or him,
whose it is, i. e. Christ. So that whatsoever tends in any eminent manner
either to the converting of infidels, bringing them into the Church, to the
advancing of Christian knowledge, or especially of piety, in any one or more
particular men, or to the planting of unity, peace, and charity in any
particular national, or in the Universal Church of God, that is said to edify,
or build up, and which of these senses peculiarly belongs to the word in any
place, must be judged by the context, and circumstances of the place, where it
is sound, and may not be here set down more particularly.

Chap. X. ver. 4.

[A aa memorial.]

Accepted as a special sacrifice.

memorial in this and some other places is here fit to be observed: (...).
it is a form of speech signifying an oblation or sacrifice. So Lev. 2.^. The
priest shall take from the meat offering a memorial thereof, and burn it upon
the altar, it is an offering made by fire of aswe^t savor unto the Lord: where
it is clearly affirmed of the (...) (...) the memorial] that it is an offering,
etc. So v. 9.16. and c. 5.12. c. 6.15. and often elsewhere. And so the ascending
or coming up before God] inclines it here, for that is proper to sacrifices and
oblations to go up and render a sweet savor to God, and this is here fitly
attributed to his prayers and alms, which are the Christians sacrifice, an
odor of sweet smell, (...), a welcome sacrifice to God, Phil. 4.18. and Heb.
13.6.

Ibid. ver. 20.

[ Hellenists many Copyes printed and MSS. ^ead (...).
Grecians.]

Those Jews which spoke and used the Greek Language and Bibles

Ibid. Note a. Of the use of (...) in a passive sense, Add, On I^de.
Occumenius, (...), they also are called wandering stars.

Chap. XIII. ver. 7.

[The a Deputy.]

(...).
Note a. That Sergius Paulus should here be called (...) Proconsul in Cyprus,
v. 4. has some difficulty in it, it being resolved by Strabo, l. 14. p. 470.
that after the Romans taking this Island. it became a Praetorian Province,
(...). And again, p. 471. mentioning the subduing of it, and possessing it by
Cato, (...), says he, (...), from that time the Island became, as now it is, a
Praetorian Province; which concludes it under a Praetor, not a Proconsul. And
so Zonaras on the 8th. Canon of Ephesus, (...), from the Duke of Antioch a
Commander was sent to Cyprus, on which pretense it was that the Bishop of
Antioch did at the time of that Council pretend right of ordaining the Bishops
of Cyprus. This difficulty Baronius endeavors to remove Anno Chr. 46. n. 11.
by conceiving that the Proconsul of Cilicia had the administration of this
Praetorian Province also, and consequently that this Sergius Paulus was now
this Proconsul of Cilicia. This he collects from Sigonius De Antiq. Jure
Provinc. l. 1. c. 14. who affirms it of P. Lentulus and some others, that
being Proconsuls of Cilicia, they administered Cyprus also, which says
Baronius, non illi tantum sed and successoribus esse aeque concessum, par est
credere, it is reasonable to believe, not of him only, but of his successors
as well as of him. But the words in Sigonius do sufficiently refute this
conclusion; For he having indeed affirmed that this honor of holding Cyprus
together with Cilicia was granted by the Senate not only to P. Lentulus, but
also to Ap. Claudius and M. Cicero, as special honors designed to those three
Proconsuls, adds, Post Ciceronis autem proconsulatum, ut a Ciliciae Praeside
tres Asiaticae Diaeceses, sic etiam Cypri administratio ablata est, ac
proprius, ut ex lege debuit, Praetor, cum suo Quaestore in eam missus est.
After Cicero's Proconsulship, as the three Asiatick Diaeceses were taken away
from the Praesident of Cilicia, so was the administration of Cyprus also, and a
peculiar Praetor with his Quastor sent thither, according as by the Law it
ought to be. And therefore so it must be supposed to be at this time of
Claudius's reign, long after Cicero's time. It remains therefore that the most
obvious way of removing this difficulty be resolved on, as the most true, viz.
that the (...) or Commander of this Praetorian Province is here improperly
called (...) Proconsul, not in a strict acception of that word, but as that is
more loosely taken for any Governor sent thither by the Roman power.
Accordingly the Vulgar Latin calls him only Praesidem praesident or Governor;
a title used in the place newly cited from Sigonius, for the Proconsul of
Cilicia, which notes the promiscuous acception of such words. To which may be
added, that the title of Proconsul, belonging duly to the Governors of Cyprus
for some time, viz. whilst Lentulus, Claudius, and Cicero, Proconsuls of
Cilicia held Cyprus, it might now abusively and vulgarly continue to the
Praetor of Cyprus, though properly it did not; especially considering the
flattering nature of the Greeks, which would still bestow the most magnificent
titles upon their Governors.

Ibid. ver. 27.

For they that Dwelt (...).
dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, Not knowing him, condemned him and
fulfilled the sayings of the prophets, (...).
because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the Prophets which are read
every Sabbath day, ee they have fulfilled them in condemning him.



(...).
That there is in this verse a trajection, or (...), there can be no question,
the [(...)] in the latter part belongs to the [(...)] in the former, and the
[(...)] to the [(...)] they adjudged or sentenced him, and they fulfilled or
accomplished them. And such trajections are ordinary among writers, and go for
elegancies, where they are used. The only difficulty will be, to what sense
the [(...)] before [(...)] shall be rendered. For either that may couple the
(...) and (...), and then the construction will lie thus, For they that dwelt
at Jerusalem, not knowing, and (consequently) condemning him, fulfilled the
sayings, or voices, or words of the Prophets; or it may possibly not be a
copulative, but (as often it does) emphatically affect the words to which it is
joined, viz. (...), and then the rendering will be, not knowing him, they
fulfilled the words of the Prophets, even those words that are every Sabbath
read in their ears (and therefore should in reason be taken notice of by them)
in or by thus condemning him. But the former or these is the most probable.

Ibid. ver. 41.

[Ye gg despisers, and wonder, and Be confounded.
perish, etc.]

Beware that by your obstinate resisting and rejecting this way of salvation
now preached, and confirmed from heaven by Gods raising Jesus from the dead,
when ye had opposed and crucified him, you do not bring a remarkable
astonishing destruction upon your selves, in the same manner (and a heavier
d^^gree) as it fell upon the Jews from the Chaldaeans ^^ab. 1.5. as a just
punishment of their despising the rich mercies of God ^fforded them, and going
on impenitently in their sins against all the messages sent them by the
Prophets, and b^ so doing cause the Gospel to be removed to the Gentiles, v.
46. A thing which will come to pass suddenly, in both parts, (the Gospels being
taken from you, and preached to the Gentiles, and the Romans coming in and
destroying you) though so incredible to you, that etc.

Note g g. (...)
The words (...) Behold ye despisers] which from the Septuagints reading the
Apostle here embraces, are very different from what not only the Vulgar
Latin, and our English, but also the Chaldee, and the Interlineary retain in
the place of Habakkuk c. 1.5. from whence it is clearly cited, the Hebrew
(...), being by them read, as if it were (...) and (...) in gentibus, among the
heathen, which the Chaldee read (...) Gentes. Hereupon learned men have made
conjectures, that the Greek interpreters had some other reading; Beza, and
Capellus, and from him Grotius's Posthumous Annotations have mentioned (...),
and Capellus has thought (...) possible. But Mr. Pocock by his acquaintance
with the Arabic writers, has superseded these conjectures, and given
assurance that (...) was the word, which as the Greek rendered (...) despisers,
so the Syriack in Habakuk express by (...) arrogantes, transgressors, and the
Arabic by negligentes, taking the word for the plural of (...) from (...),
which though it be not met with in the Bible, yet may be resolved to have been
anciently in use among the Hebrews, both by the notions, which the Greeks and
Syriack and Arabic interpreters had of it, and by the frequent use of the word
in the Arabic, for injustus fuit, se super aliquem extulit, a vero declinavit,
recessit, insolenter se gessit, mentitus est, fastuose incessit, being
unrighteous, proud, transgressor, insolent, liar, fastuous, as he there cites
out of the Arabic Grammarians, showing that the Syriack (...) maroche, is by
Bar Ali in his Syro Arabic Lexicon expounded by the same word, by which
Aliauharius renders Albagyo. As for the later words of this verse, though some
have been willing to make some alteration, yet there will be little need of it,
for (...) clearly signifies (...), and wonder, and then (...) that follows,
will be as fitly (...), (...)
not so, as that signifies a dissolution or destruction, but as in the Arabic
it is used for any change to the worse, as when meat has lost it is smell or
taste, and is applied to such a change, as is in one astonished or confounded.
So R. Tanchum, the former word signifies admiration, the latter amazement or
confusion. Where though the literal notation of the words do not predict the
ruin or destruction of the Jews, yet the rational importance does, to all
that are not thus moved by admiration, and shame to embrace the Gospel now
preached unto them, for as those that did so, were the (...) rescued, from the
approaching destruction, so all that still stood out, should certainly be
destroyed.

(...).
Ibid. Note c. To the use of (...) in the Septuagint, Deuteronomy. 1.31. Add, twice
used in that verse, (...). So the Roman and Basil editions have it, for that
which is in the Hebrew, has born thee as a parent or nurse does a child, not
only bearing in arms, but feeding and sustaining, (As sure God did those
Israelites, when he sent them quails and Manna (...), bread ready dressed, and
sent down from heaven for them) thus in Hom. 46.
Macarius speaking of a mother and her little child, (...), says he, (...),
she takes up, strokes, and nurses with great affection. And 2. Mac. 7.27. when
the mother entreats the son to pity her (...) that bare, and did for him as a
nurse does, answerable to the Hebrew (...) to take up or carry.

Verse. 42.

And As they went out of the Synagogue of the Jews. (...).
when the Jews were gone out of the Synagogue, the Gentiles --

And as they departed from the Jews, the Proselytes, or pious etc.

Chap. XIV.7.



The rain and the like, which are acts of his particular power and bounty, by
those means inviting, etc.

Note a. (...).
The reason of S. Paul's naming of rain from heaven, as a peculiar testimony of
Gods power and goodness, seems to be taken from that notion which the Jews had
of it, expressed by this ancient saying in Sanhedr. and in Chelek Taani, c. 8..
2. in Ein Israel, that there be three keys not given to any Legate or Proxy
(kept peculiarly in Gods own hand) (...), of life, of rain, of the resurrection
of the dead; making rain, as immediate and incommunicable a gift of God, as
either giving or restoring of life. Hence it is frequently styled by them,
(...) the power of rain, because, say they, it descends not but by power, and
it is one of the things, in which the power of God shows it self. The difference
of it from other the like acts of power, they say, is this, that it belongs to
the just and unjust (whereas, say they the resurrection belongs to the just
only) and so says our Savior of it, Mat. 5.45.

(...).
Ibid. Note a. Of the use of (...) for acts of single persons, not suffrages of
many, Add, And so Maximus Tyrius, of Darius's horse, which by neighing made
his Master King of the Persians, says, (...), the Persians did not adore or
salute Darius, till his wanton horse had created him King.

Ibid. To the place of Theophylact explicating imposition of hands, 2 Timothy 1.6.
by ordaining Bishop, Add, And so S. Chrysostom on those words Act. 6.6. [
having prayed they laid hands on them] says, (...), they were ordained by
prayer, for this is ordination, making (...) and (...), stretching out the
hands, and laying on the hands to be all one.

Ibid. Of the promiscuous use of (...), for constituting indifferently, whether
by one or more, to 2 Cor. 8.19. Add, So Hom 32. in Man. p. 218.
Chrysostom speaking of Christ. (...) (...), he presently constitutes them.
And l. 1. c. 38.
Socrates of Constantine, in the twentieth year of his reign, (...), but in the
thirtieth, (...), where it is all one with (...), both noting the constituting
or creating of Caesar, l 8. p. 175.
a work of the Emperor only. So Theodoret (...). in the person of Joseph,
(...), my Master has constituted me over all in his house. So Disp. c^nt.
Philos. p. 360. B.
Zacharias Bishop of Mitylene, speaking of Gods creating of man, as a King, and
guest, for whom a palace, and a feast were before prepared, he expresses it by
(...), he was chosen (sure not by the suffrages of many, but by God the one
Creator) and set forth to be both the King, and the guest of the good things,
which the Great Master of the feast had set before him.

Chap. XV. Note d. Of the fourth precept (...) of disclosing nakedness, i. e.
of abstaining from all uncleaness, Add, and interdicted marriages, within
those degrees, which are set down L^v. 18.

Ibid. p. 424. col. 1. l. 27. (...)
Of the notion of (...) from blood, for the effusion of man's blood, Add. So
Saint Cyprian understood it l. 3.119.
ad Quirin: Abstinere a sanguinis effusione, to abstain from effusion of blood,
which he cannot mean of the blood of beasts, for that they were commanded (not
forbidden) to power out upon the ground, Lev. 17.13. and so others whom S.
Austin mentions l. 32. c. 13.
Cont. Faust. Manich. Intelligunt a sanguine abstinendum nequis homicidio se
contaminet, they understood the precept of abstaining from blood, that none
should pollute himself with homicide. And for those that understand it of the
blood of beasts, many of them leave out the mention of things strangled, as
being all one with this notion of it. So does Irenaeus l. 3. c. 12. Tertullian
de pudicit. c. 12. and S. Austin in that place against Faustus, giving this
interpretation of it, ne quicquam ederent carnis cujus sanguis non esset
effusus, not to eat any flesh, whose blood has not been powered out, though
some others (by mistake I suppose) understand it of the blood of beasts, and
yet retain the mention of things strangled also.

Ibid. lin. 43. In the notion of (...) fornication, to that of unnatural
pollutions from Thomas Magister, Add, As also the marriages within forbidden
degrees, which are called the disclosing of nakedness, Lev. 18. and appear to
have been interdicted before the Levitical Law, by the punishment that fell
upon the nations for the breach of them v. 27. and are expressly styled
fornication, 1 Cor. 5.1.

Ibid. lin. 47. Before the Aethiopick interpreter, Add, Irenaeus, lib. 3. c.
12.

Ibid. col. 2. lin. 15. For [ where if it be asked, etc. to lin. 37. 2dly that
they -- ] Read thus, Now if it be demanded, whether by virtue of this decree,
thus explained, All these particulars (the whole seven Precepts of the sons
of Adam and Noah) be not here given to all Christians, and consequently whether
all such are not here commanded strictly to abstain from things strangled, to
power out the blood of beasts upon the ground, and not to eat it in any manner
of preparation? To this I answer, by remembering, 1. That (...) things offered
to Idols are here joined with these under the same interdict, and those in S.
James's first draught of the Canon called (...), pollutions, or abominations of
Idols, which yet Saint Paul expressly defines, after this time, not to be
unlawful for Christians to eat of, unless in one peculiar case. 2dly. Then it
must be considered, that these Precepts of the sons of Noah were not all of
one kind, in respect of the matter, some of them were branches of the Law of
Nature, written in men's hearts, before they were given to the sons either of
Adam, or Noah; some of them were not so, but only of Gods positive Law given
first to them, and after to the Jews. Those which were of the former sort, did
no doubt remain in force to all mankind, and so obliged the Gentiles, which
then received the faith, and so all other Christians, to the worlds end. As for
those of the second sort, they are again to be distinguished, some of them
being given to Adam in the first creation, of which Asterius says, Hom. de
Repudio, p. 590. E. (...), they became the nature of the whole posterity:
others not to Adam, but to the sons of Noah; some again confirmed and
continued by Christ, others not. That of fornication, or disclosing of
nakedness, as a branch of the matrimonial, and so positive law, given at the
first creation of male and female, and containing under it the prohibition of
incestuous marriages, or such as are within the degrees limited, Lev. 18. is
sure obligatory to all, specially being under the same interdict by Christ, as
in the Gospel is expressly set down by him in point of divorce, and
polygamie, (wherein he referres them to the Original Law, given to the sons
of Adam, but for the hardness of hearts, dispensed with among the Jews) and by
the Apostle is taken for granted in that other branch of prohibited degrees, 1
Cor. 5.1. and therefore of this there is as little doubt, but that it still
remains in force among Christians. But for those other two, of meats, of
abstaining from things offered to Idols, and blood or things strangled, as
neither of them were of the Law of Nature, which leaves all meats indifferent,
and free to all men in all times, but stand only by positive Law, given to the
sons of Noah, the latter expressly as a ceremony to secure men from murder,
by giving them a great awe and reverence to blood; and the former to keep them
at the greatest distance from Idolatry, so are they not confirmed or continued
by Christ; who on the other side restores the natural liberty in this kind,
takes away all difference among meats, so that after this, nothing that goes
into the mouth should pollute the man, no sort of meat should be deemed common
or unclean. In the Old Testament Deuteronomy. 14.21. a mark we have to discern, that
all mankind, was not then under this obligation, for the morticinum, which is
of this nature, as having the blood in it, the Jews might give or sell to an
alien, though they might not eat it themselves; and for the whole New Testament
there is not in that any the least appearance, or color, of interdict of any
sort of meats, save only in this one Canon, but rather every where liberty
proclaimed, and that expressly in one of those, that are here named, after the
time of making this Canon, 1 Cor. 10.27. and more generally in all sorts of
meats, Romans 14.3. Col. 11.16. only, with this exception, that it be not to the
scandal, or detriment of weak Christians: who these weak Christians were,
(...).
is set down Romans 14.2. the Jewish believers, who yet took themselves to be
obliged to observe the Mosaical Law, and upon that score there (...), eat
herbs, abstain from many sorts of meats, which others freely used. And in mere
compliance with these, it was, that these words of the Canon were inserted.
This I shall best set down in the words of S. Augustine, Contr. Faust. l. 32.
c. 13.
Si hoc tunc Apostoli praeceperunt, ut ab animalium sunguine abstinerent
Christiani, nec praefocatis carnibus vescerentur, elegisse mihi videntur pro
tempore rem facilem, and nequaquem observantibus onerosam, in qua cum
Israelitis etiam Gentes-aliquid communiter observarent, When the Apostles made
the decree that Christians should abstain from the blood of living creatures,
and not eat flesh that was strangled, they chose for the time an easy thing, no
way burthenous to the observers, wherein the Gentiles might observe somewhat
common with the Jews. This then being the only ground of the decree, and
observance, viz. compliance with, and unwillingness to scandalize the Judaizing
Christians, and except in that one case of scandal, all meats being pronounced
free, and indifferent to all Christians, and so both things strangled (and
blood) and the (...) or portions of sacrifices sold in the shambles, It
follows regularly, that as soon as this one reason of the Decree ceased, i. e.
as soon as the Jews and Gentiles were formed into one Communion, as soon as
the fear of this scandal was removed, all force or obligation of this decree
ceased also. This is also distinctly S. Augustines sense, Ibid.
Transacto illo tempore, qua illi duo parietes, unus ex circumcisione, alter ex
praeputio venientes, quamvis angulari lapide consordarent, tamen suis quibusdam
proprietatibus distinctius eminebant, and ubi Ecclesia Gentium talis effecta
est, ut in ea nullus Israelita carnalis appareat, quis jam hoc Christianus
observat, ut turdos vel minutiores aviculas non attingat, nisi quarum sanguis
effusus est; aut leporem non edat, si manu a cervice percussus nullo cruento
vulnere occisus est? But when that time was past, wherein the circumcised and
uncircumcised were differenced one from the other, and when the Church of the
Gentiles was so framed, that no Israelite according to the flesh appeared in
it, what Christian does now observe this, not to touch any little bird whose
blood has not been powered out, not to eat of a Hare struck on the neck with
the hand, and so killed without any effusion of blood? And this, it seems, so
universally the sense of the Church in that Fathers time, that he concludes, Et
qui forte pauci adhuc tangere ista formidant, a caeteris irridentur, Those few
which perhaps still make scruple of touching, i. e. eating those, are laughed
at by the rest. Adding, Ita Omnium animos in hac re tenuit illa sententia
veritatis, Non quod intrat in os vestrum, etc. That sentence of Christ's has
possessed all men's minds in this matter, not that which enters into the mouth
(i. e. nulla cibi natura, no sort of meat) defiles the man, is unlawful under
the Gospel. Thirdly, for this Canon it self, at that very time, when it was
given, it cannot fitly be deemed a precept, there being then no need of such.
For it must be remembered, that they who were concerned in this question, etc.

Ibid. lin. 6. (...).
To the interpretation of [(...) necessary] for necessary not to all
Christians, but to all Proselytes ofthe Jews, Add, And this will appear, by
considering, that there were many more things necessary to Christians in the
latitude, than those which are here named, whereas the Text says, that only
these necessary things are by the Apostles and the Synod required, which makes
it needful to understand this necessity in reference only to those proselytes
of the Jews. And there the mention of that, etc.

Ibid. p. 425. col. 1. lin. 24. Read, Not all the Gentile Christians every
where, (for to the Corinthians he gave very different directions, viz. that
they might freely eat any kind of meat, even the (...) portions of the
Idol-sacrifices, save only in case of scandal) but those particularly about
whom the question was asked, etc.

Ibid. lin. 40. Read, the prohibition of those things here mentioned, which are
not in their own nature unlawful (viz. that of things strangled, and offered
to Idols) will now evidently not belong to the Gentile Christians of other
places, all force of this Canon, having by long disusage of the Western Church
etc. been superseded in those very Churches, where it had been observed.

Ibid. lin. 54. Read, Meanwhile it cannot be denied but the practice of this
abstinence from blood and things strangled had a long continuance in a great
part of the Church, especially among the Greeks; See Tertullian Apol. c. 9. and
Minutius in Octav. Eusebius. l. v. c. 1. Clemens Alex. Paedag. l. 3. c. 3.
Nicephorus l. 4. c. 17. in the story of Biblys. Leo Novel. 58. (...), that no
man should make blood food, and expressly against puddings of blood. It has
crept in also among the Apostolical Canons, not among the first fifty, which
have had always a venerable authority in the Church, but those other
supposititious additions of the Greeks where Can. 63. are together forbidden,
(...), flesh in the blood of its life, and that which is torn by beasts, or
dies of it self. A touch of it there is in the Couniell of Gangra, Can. 11. in
the year of Christ, 324. (...) ((...)) (...), If any condemn him that eats
flesh (except it be blood or what has been sacrificed to Idols, or strangled)
let him be anathema. And in the 6t Council in Trullo, the 67th Canon is
agreeable, (...) etc. The holy Scripture has commanded us to abstain from
blood and things strangled and fornication. Those therefore that for delicacy
by any act dress the blood of any creature for food, and so eat it, we
vehemently rebuke. If therefore any man shall from henceforth dare to eat the
blood of a beast after any manner, if he be a Clerk, let him be deposed, if a
Laick, excommunicated. Among the Latins we have the 20th Canon of the second
Council of Orleans, in the year 536. Qui ^ibis Idolorum cultibus immolatis
gustu illicitae praesumtionis utuntur, ab Ecclesiae caetibus arceantur;
similiter and hi qui bestiarum morsibus extincto vel quolibet morbo aut casu
suffocato vescuntur, They that eat meat offered to Idols, shall be
excommunicate, and so likewise they that eat any thing that is killed by
beasts or suffocated by disease or casually. (which particularly belongs to
morticina, which are generally accounted unwholesome for food, and comes not
quite home to the (...) things strangled in the latitude) And other like
instances will be met with. But though most of the Greeks continue this kind of
abstinence very strictly, and scrupulously, yet of the Western Church it is
sure, that this abstinence, is and long has been disused by them, so says
Balsamon on the Can: 63.
Canon Apostol. (...), this Canon is to be noted for the Latins, who eat
things strangled indifferently. Can. 66.
And so again on the Canon in Trullo, adding (...) etc. I hear also that they
of Hadrianople use beasts blood with some meats. And so certainly they may,
though others use not that liberty, it being doubtless left free by Christ, all
meats clean and lawful, being taken with thanksgiving, and as rites and
ceremonies, so such outward observances being variable in respect of time and
place, and the Greek practice of no force to conclude other men.

Chap. XVI. ver. 1.

[A certain woman which was a Jewess, and believed.]

An Hebrew woman named Eunice, convert^d to the faith of Christ 2 Timothy 1.5.

Ibid. verse. 3.

[Because of the Jews.]

Because the Jewish Christians had a special aversion to all that were
uncircumcised, as transgressors of their Law, and would never hearken to, or
receive benefit by the preaching of any such.

(...).
Ibid. Note a. The words in Cleomedes, concerning the Epicurean forms, are,
that they are (...) fetched from the middle of a proseucha from those that use
to beg there, certain Jewish obsolete words or phrases, (...), much more
humble than those that creep on the ground. As for that of Oratories, which is
the Scripture-acception of the word, we find mention of them in Josephus, in
his life, p. 645. (...), they are all brought into an oratory, a great house,
says he, able to contain a great multitude, and so soon after again, and
again. The custom of building such, is said to come from Isaac, etc.

Chap. XVII. ver. 6.

Troubled the world. (...).
Turned a the world upside down.]

Note a. What (...) signifies, will best be discerned by the use of the word
Gal. 5.12. there we render it troubling, and so it appears to signify by
comparing it with, v. 10. (...), but he that troubles you shall bear his own
judgment, as before he said, c. 1.7. (...), but that there are some that
trouble you. So Act. 15.24. the same is expressed, (...), some troubled you
with words. And thus we may resolve by the use of other Authors, (...), says
In Iliad. 1. p 60 l. 27. l. 29.
Eustathius, is (...), and that (...), to put in disorder, or confusion, such
as in state of anarchy; and li. 25.
in the same place he interprets (...) by (...), to stir up by troubling, or
disturbing. Contrary to this is (...), a quiet tranquillity, and so is used by
the Stoics, and Epicureans for (...) untroubledness. Thus Cicero renders (...)
sometimes constantias, sometimes sedationes, as the contrary perturbationes.
And then (...) contrary to (...), must be to disturb, disquiet, stir up. And
so it will most properly be here rendered also, (...).
in the same sense that (...) is used, Jam. 3.16. for disturbance, confusion,
etc.

Ibid. ver. 8.

[They troubled the people.]

The people were troubled* see Note on Luc. 16.6.

Ibid. ver. 11.

[More noble.]

Of a more ingenuous, mild (see S. Chrysostom) pliable temper. --

Ibid. Note a. To the testimony of Apollonius in Philostratus, Add, And
therefore in his discourse with Timasion, he tells him, l. 6. c. 7.
(...). It was the soberest way to speak well of all Gods especially at Athens,
where there were altars of unknown Gods. See Suidas in (...).

Ibid. To the testimony of Strabo concerning the Athenians hospitable reception
of strange Gods, Add, So Himerius, in his declamation against Epicurus, when
says he, I named Athens, (...), I named the greatest sum of piety. So
Theophylact, setting down the full inscription of the Altar, v. 23. (...)]
supposes them to have received all the strange Gods of the world, of Asia,
Europe, Africa, and moreover one strange one, which they knew not, who or
whence he was.

Ibid. Note d. Read, Their Areopagus was the Senate, or standing court of
judicature in Athens. Two judicatures they had in Athens, one every year
changed, made up of five hundred chosen men, of whom the Republic consisted;
the other perpetual, which judged of murders, and the like capital offenses,
and this was in Areopago; of which, and the customs thereof, see Budaeus on
the Pandects. This Juvenal calls curiam Martis, and At^ic. p. 26. l. 44. and p.
19 l. 19.
Pausanias tells us, that it was so called, because when Mars had killed
Neptunes son Alirrothios, he was the first, that was there judged. (...). But
this says De Civ. l. 18 c. 18.
S. Austine, Varro would not yield to, but produces another original of it, de
obscurarum notitia literarum out of the knowledge of dark learning. (...).
The word (...) in the composition signifies a rock or rise of an hill, so
says Suidas, it is called (...), because the judicature is on a pagus and on
an ascent or high place, p. 55.
and Stephanus Byzantius out of Apollodorus (...), it is an eminent place or
hill at Athens, and so l. 2. ep. 9.
Isidore Pelus: (...), it is an high place, (...), for that judicature was on
an ascent, or upper ground. Then for the other part in the composition [(...)]
it denotes, as they both say, the sort of the causes, which were there judged,
viz. murders, etc. So Stephanus, (...), in it they judged causes of murder,
because such were done by the sword, and Suidas, (...), it is so called,
because it judg^th causes of murder, (...), and Mars is used for murders, yet
having before said, (...), it administers other affairs of the Commonwealth
very wisely. By this it appears, how fit it is to retain in Latin and other
languages the compound Greek, rather than to divide it, as the English have
done, into Mars's hill, as if it had its denomination from that heathen God of
war, which is not acknowledged, nor intimated in the word. Now the judges
which sat in this Court, (...).
(and not the inhabitants that dwelt in that part of the city) were called
(...) Areopagites, men famed for their gravity, and uprightness in judging, not
admitting rhetorical pleas, but simple narrations, chosing the dark, that they
might not be moved to compassion by the sight of the malefactor, and giving
their judgment without a word speaking. And this judicature was by all looked
on with such reverence, that an Areopagite signified proverbially an excellent
person; and when the Romans had conquered Greece, and sent their Proconsuls of
Asia, to rule there, they frequently committed difficult causes to the
judgment of these Areopagites. So did Dolabella in Gellius, l. 12. c. 7. Rem
Athenas ad Areopagitas, ut ad judices graviores exercitatioresque rejecit,
says he, he referred the cause to them as to judges more grave and exercised
(and so skilled) than ordinary. And because to these belonged the affairs of
religion, and accordingly Anaxagoras for teaching that the Sun, which they
deemed a God, was a fire-stone, and Diagoras as a derider of their Gods, had
been condemned to death by them, and so Protagoras, and Socrates also, and
Plutarch says of Euripides, l. 1. c. 7. De Plac. Phil. that having some doubts
of the Gods, he durst not openly profess it, fearing the judicature of the
Areopagites; therefore is Paul here brought before them, as an assertor, and
preacher of such a Deity, as they had not admitted among them. And one of these
judges, Dionysius v. 34. therefore called the Areopagite, was converted by his
discourse there.

Ibid. ver. 34.

Dionysius, etc.

Particularly Dionysius one of the Senators or Judges in Areopagus (see Note
d.) and Damaris his wife, and some others.

Ibid. Note f. To the passage of Laertius in Epimenide, about the (...), Add,
So Hesychius, (...). Strange Gods are worshipped among the Athenians, which
Apollophanes reckons up in his Cretians.

Chap. XVIII. ver. 5.

[Pressed in spirit, and testified.]

Troubled or greeved at the obstinacy of his countrymen the Jews, did his
utmost to convince them.

Ibid. ver. 9, 10.

Be not afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace:

Fear nothing, for I will be present with thee, to secure thee from all harm;
but on the contrary preach confidently in this place, considering, that though
some oppose, yet there be many, etc.

For I am with thee etc.]

Ibid. Note a. Read, (...).
(...) signifies to be pressed, or held fast, Mat. 4.24. Lu. 4.37. Act. 28.8.
So (...) to be pressed or held with fear, Job 3.24. and Luc. 8.37. (...) in
Jeremy, to be held fast by wine, to be overcome by it, (...), says Hesychius,
and again (...), to be entangled, or held fast, which as it really notes being
in the power of another, so it may be applied to sorrow, or any other passion,
as well as to fear, and peculiarly to sorrow. (...).
So (...) Luc. 21.25. is used for anxiety, and 2 Cor. 2.4. (...) anguish of
heart, and so (...); how am I straightened or pained? Luc. 12.50. And thus
according to the nature of the word, it may be proper enough for the place,
with which soever it be joined. If with (...), then it is either his own spirit,
or the Spirit of God, If his own, then it may signify him to have had some
such extraordinary sorrow, or grief upon him, to think of his obdurate
impenitent countrymen, to whom he was then preaching, with very little
success, And so of Apollos we read, v. 25. etc.

(...).
Chap. XIX. Note b. Of (...), Add, that it is an apron or napkin, supplying the
aprons place. (...).
The difference which Theophylact and Oecumenius make between (...) and these
is that Sudaria are applied to the head, as a cap, or kirchief; the latter to
the hands, as an handkerchief. (...) says Oecumenius (...), they carry them in
their hands, to wipe off moistures from the face, swet, spittle, tears and the
like.

(...). l. 2. Ep. 18.
Ibid. Note c. Of the notion of (...) for sorcery, philtres etc. Add, So in
Aristaenetus (...), he seemed to be a Magician, and (...), acting the part of
witches, l. 10. c. 42.
So in S. Augustines Confessions, Curiosae visiones, are Magical apparitions.

(...).
Ibid. Note e. Of the notion of (...) for little chapels with images in them,
Add, Thus we have mention in Athenaeus of (...) which says he, is (...), a
vessel wherein they place their images of Jupiter. On which says the learned
Deipnos. l. 11.
Casaubone, p. 500.
erant simulacra haec armariis inclusa, quae ad sacellorum modum fiebant, these
images were put in cases, which were made like chapels. So S. Chrysostom,
making them to be (...) as little cases or shrines.

Ibid. What (...) or Diana is, (...).
there is little question, no other than the moon, and therefore says
Cleomedes Meteor. l. 2. c. 5. p. 111. it was the fashion (...) to give torches
to those that went into Dianas Temple, adding, (...), for this is a sign set to
express that the moon receives her light from without, i. e. from the Sun.

Ibid. Note f. Of the sacred agones, (...).
wherein the (...) praesided, Add, The Original of them is set down by Antiq.
Romans l. 4.
Dionysius Halicarnasseus, as from the Grecians they were imitated by Servius
Tullus, and put into one body. They built Temples, says he by Common charge,
some to Diana of Ephesus, some to Apollo, and assembling there at set times
with their wives and children they employed themselves both in sacrifices and
in merchandice. There were public Agones, Racehorses, Wrestlers, Musicians,
and rewards were proposed to the Victors, and presents were by the cities
brought to the Gods. And when the Games and Marts and other festival and
public jollities were ended, if any city had a quarrel against another, the
Judges were ready to compose it. Then they consulted of common affairs of
war against the barbarians and peace among themselves. Thus far
Halicarnasseus.

Ibid. This office of the (...) etc. was sacerdotal. Whence in the Epistle of
the Church of Smyrna, concerning S. Polycarps Martyrdom, Philip the Asiarcha,
who presided there in their spectacula, their (...), which are there called
(...), as in the Fathers Venationes, is after styled (...) Philip the Chief
priest. So (...) are by l. 6.. 14.
Modestinus recited among the (...) chief priesthoods of those nations. And so
Phoeniciarchia, and Syriarchia, among the species of priesthood by Constantine
the Great, l. 1. de Natural. liberis.
in his Rescript. So in the Basilica. (...) the priesthood, i. e. the office of
managing their sports, or spectacles. Beside these which were National
Officers, to whom belonged (...) in Aristides, the common priesthood of Asia,
the managery of their (...) common games, there were others in particular
cities, (...) c. 17.6. etc. These were subject to the people, as being
executioners, and ministers of their will, and not sent them from Rome, but
chosen by themselves out of the chief men, or wealthiest citizens among them.
To these belonged also the execution of Malefactors etc.

(...).
Ibid. Note h. Of the (...) appeasing the people, Add. For that this should be
applicable to Alexander the Jew ver. 33. and that it was he, of whom it was
here said, (...), he said, (...).
Ye men of Ephesus, etc. is a strange oversight of the learned Cardinal An. C^.
57. ^. 180.
Baronius, caused by not adverting to the Greek* (...). Where it is visibly the
(...) which had appeased the tumult, and which said, Ye men of Ephesus. etc.

(...).
Ibid. Note i. Of the (...), or Sacrist, Add, Dial. 6.
That this was the title of a sacred office, appears by Plato de Legib. (...),
they must constitute priests of both sexes, to be in this Office of Sacrist to
their Gods.

Chap. XX. ver. 45. In the Paraphrase blot out, 2 Cor. 2.12, 13.

Ibid. ver. 20.

[ How I have not drawn back or refused to declare unto you whatsoever was
profitable, and to teach -- (...) --
How I kept back nothing that was profitable to you, but have showed you and
taught.]

How without all fear or tergiversation I freely, etc.

Ibid. ver. 35.

[How that so laboring ye ought to support the weak.]

How that such as ye, i. e. Bishops and Governors of the Church, are to take
care of the sick and poor (see 1 Cor. 12. e) and rather endeavor by pains
taking to enable your selves to releeve others, than to be chargeable, or
burthen-some to others.

Ibid. Note b. Of (...), (...).
Add, Nay it is possible it may signify no more than resolved, and so bound in
spirit, or full purpose of mind, as chapter 19.21. (...), he purposed in spirit,
but this more unmovable than that, See chapter 21.12 13.

Chap. 21.16.

[With whom we should lodge.]

Who would gladly entertain us at our journyes end.

Ibid. Note b. Of the Sicarii, Add, (...)
That which S. Chrysostom says of them is somewhat strange, (...), The
Essenes were also the Sicarii because they were Zelots, where he conf^unds
these three, Essenes, Sicarii, and Zelots, whereas the Sicarii are certainly
far distant from either of the other two. This the learned Annotator on
Chrysostom justly suspects to be a mistake in him, p. 693. but the original of
it he observes not. That is very happily showed by Mr. Fuller in his
Miscellanies, to have been by turning (...) into (...), the former noting the
Karaeans or Scripturarians (as they are distinguished from, and opposed to the
Traditionals) those that adhered strictly to the Letter of the Law, and so were
(...), zealous for the Law, and such the Essenes were, it seems, affirmed to be,
by some from whom Chrysostom took this. The like error also is committed by
Suidas in this name, (...), the Pharisees are called Sicarii as being Zelots,
he had sure read (...) and took it for (...), which is the more strange,
because he had immediately before rightly interpreted (...) -- they were a sort
of thieves, which in Claudius's time killed all they met with (...) hookt
swords, which the Romans call sicae, which, says he, the Egyptian lead out
into the wilderness, and Felix punished.

Chap XXII. ver. 2.



And these enemies of Paul's being averse to the Hellenists (see Note on chapter 6.
a.) and so to him, as using the Greek language, when they heard him speak
Hebrew, were a little pacified, and so gave him the hearing. Thus therefore he
began his Oration.

Note a. (...).
What the reason was of Paul's speaking Hebrew at this time, and the Jews
giving him audience thereupon, may here briefly be noted. Two sorts of Jews
there were at this time, some called by To. 4. p. 731.12.
S. Chrysostom (...) profound Hebrews, such as used no other language but the
Hebrew, admitted not the Greeks Bible into their assemblies, but only the
Hebrew, and the Jerusalem Targum or Paraphrase. Others that spoke Greek, and
used the Greek Translation of the Bible, and these were called Hellenists (see
Note on c 6. a.) Now these several uses bred some unkindness betwixt these two
sorts, as may in part be discerned, even after their receiving Christianity, c.
6. 1. And of this latter sort Paul sure was one, and accordingly in his
writings makes use constantly of the Greek Translation of the Old Testament,
and in that respect (among others) much disliked by the other sort. Those of
them that were converted had great prejudices to him, c. 21.21. and that is
said to be the reason why he concealed his name in the Epistle written to the
Hebrews. But for those of them that were not converted they would not endure to
hear him, or hear of him, which is the account S. Chrysostom gives of his
discoursing, and preaching to the Hellenists only c. 9.28. because the other
would not endure or admit him. Hereupon to avert this great displeasure
conceived by them, he here speaks to them in the Hebrew language, and they were
in some degree pacified thereby, so far as to give him audience.

Ibid. verse. 24.

[ Beaten or tormented.
Examined.]

(...)
Note b. The notion of (...) among the sacred writers will be discerned by two
places in the Book of Wisdom c. 2.19. (...) let us torment him with the wrack,
and c. 6.6. (...), the mighty shall be mightily tormented, in both which it is
clearly used for tormenting or cruciating. And S. Chrysostom Hom. 26. in Mat.
p. 186. citing the latter of these places, applies it to the words of Christ,
that he that knows his Masters will and does it not (...) shall be beaten with
many stripes, (...), the greater knowledge is the cause of greater punishment,
thus interpreting (...) by beating and punishment. So Genesis 12.17. (...), God
scourged or cruciated Pharaoh with great and sore plagues.

(...).
Ibid. Note b. To the replication of (...)] Add, The learned Mr. Bois of Ely
has here a conjecture, that the phrase should have an hypallage in it, for
(...), he extended the scourges to him, or showed them him extended, making it
the description of a Lictor holding his scourge in his hand, and shaking, and
fitting it for execution, and striking a terror into the prisoner also by that
means. This conjecture being ingenious it was not unfit to have mentioned.
Josephus Scaliger also has another, Epist. 146. that it refers to the manner
of scourging, expressed in the Comaedie, Ego plectar pendens, I shall be
scourged hanging, viz. that they were lifted up from the ground, their heads
higher than their heels, and tied with ropes hands and feet, making those
ropes to be the (...) here, and that elevation of the body (...).

Chap. XXIII. ver. 1.

[I have Lived to God (...).
lived before God.]

I have designed my whole life, and all the actions thereof sincerely to Gods
service.

Ibid. ver. 23.

Two hundred watch men.
Spearmen b two hundred.]

A guard of two hundred men to watch and ward.

Note b. (...)
What (...) signifies may be best learnt from Phavorinus, who interprets it
(...) warders or guard, and so H. Stephanus, Satellites, Stipatores, to the
same sense; Thus called, says Meursius, quod maleficis manum injicerent,
eosque apprehenderent, and carceri mancipatos ad supplicium producendos
custodirent, because they apprehended or laid hands on Malefactors (which yet
would rather be the importance of (...) from (...) laying hands, and indeed so
the Kings MS. reads here, not (...), but (...)) and putting them in custody,
kept them and brought them out to execution, adding that these are the same in
the Camp, that the Lictors or Sergeants are in the city. From all which it
appears to be most fitly rendered a guard, to which in the militia, the
prisoners are committed.

Chap. XXIV. ver. 1.

[Informed.]

Brought in a bill of information against him (see Theophylact) to the
Governor --

Ibid. ver. 2, 3.

[ By thy providence always and in all places.

3. We accept it -- (...).


By thy providence. We accept it always and in all places.]

How happy the Jews had always in every of their cities counted themselves
under his Government, etc.

Chap. XXV. ver. 4.

[That Paul Was kept (...).
should be kept at Caesarea, and that he himself would depart shortly thither.]

That he had left Paul in prison at Caesarea, c. 24.27. whither he himself
would shortly go, and hear the cause betwixt them and him.

Ibid. ver. 23.

A great train.
Great b pomp.]

A great r^tinue.

(...)
Note b. What (...) here signifies will be judged by the use of the word in
other authors, Laertius speaking of Dio, says, he was (...) sumptuous, and
accordingly went from city to city, and sometimes (...) using arts to have a
great train, he persuaded Mariners to put on Scholars attire and follow him. So
Athenaeus Deipnos. l. 5. speaking of Athenion returning in great pomp to
Athens, (...), no Roman ever outbraving Attica with so great a train. So in
Planudes vit. Aesop. (...), taking servants -- he went to Egypt using this
great train and glory to the astonishment of those that were there. So in Tom.
6. p. 466.
Chrysostom (...); To what purpose do thou carry about many servants,
parasites, flatterers and all thy other train? (...) that thou may appear
the more venerable. So Hom. 4. on Mat. speaking of Nebuchadonosor his (...),
Nobles, Captains, innumerable forces, plenty of Gold, he adds, (...), all the
other train and splendour belonging to him. In this notion of the word, a very
learned Critic Mr. Bois, is willing to understand (...) Ecclus. 4.30. and so I
suppose it may be rendered, one that thinks himself a brave fellow among his
servants, being attended with a great train of them, one that pleases himself
with the magnificence of his train, as (...) applied by Eustathius to Tantalus,
is expressed by (...), fed with vain hopes, and this sense agrees well with the
context there in the son of Syrach; Be not as a Lion in thy house, the pride
of the Lion, and his stately gate being as observable as his terribleness, to
which our English translation referres, and it being unagreeable to the pride
of that creature to be cruel toward inferiors (such as servants are) according
to the proverb, satis est prostrasse Leoni, submission mollifies his wrath.

Chap. XXVII. ver. 13.

[Loosing presently.
b thence.]

Considering the inconstancy of the wind, and that it might not hold long thus
favorable, they made use of the first opportunity, and put out presently, and
so got beyond the shore of Crete.

(...).
Ibid. Note b. To the notion of (...) for (...) nigh Add, But 1. It is among
the Poets only, that it is thus used, and 2dly etc.

And to the conjecture of reading [(...)] and joining it to (...) Add, And
this I now see to have been the Conjecture of the very Learned, and Judicious,
Mr. John Boyse of Ely.

Ibid. ver. 14.

[There Beat. (...).
arose.]

Ibid. ver. 15.

[ Resist or hold up against the wind (...) --
Bear up into the wind.]

Ibid. ver. 21.

Escaped.
To have bb gained.

(...).
Note bb. What (...) signifies here, being joined with (...) harm and loss,
may appear by Himerius in his declamation against Epicurus (...) thou shall not
by thy orations gain i. e. avoid or escape punishment, but shall be punished
the more -- So in Philemon, (...), every poor man gains, i. e. escapes great
evils. So of the Latin lucrifacio says Donatus on Terent. Andr. Act. 3. sc.
4. ut corporis impulsionem lucrifaciam, i. e. vitem, that I may gain, i. e.
avoid, or escape.

As for the notion of (...), (...).
which we render harme] the context restrains it from that general, to this
particular sort of ill, wherein at present they were, viz. that of the Tempest,
as in Pollux we find (...), a tempestu^us wind.

Ibid. ver. 28.

[They sounded and found.]

By letting down their plummet and founding, they discerned, etc.

Ibid. Note c. Of the notion of (...), Add, (...).
But if it should be applied to all the precedent fourteen days, then it must
be taken in that Latitude, wherein Zetzes on Hesiod expounds the phrase, --
(...) they eat not meat] (...), because they were not at leisure, or quiet even
at meal-times, but eat in their arms, and with their hands fould with blood,
therefore he said, neither did they eat meat. (...), for the meal-time is a
time of leisure, and rejoicing.

Chap. XXVIII. ver. 6.

[ Burst (...).
Swollen.]

Ibid. ver. 15.

[The Tres Tabernae. (...).
dd three Tavernes.]

Note dd. Tres Tabernae is a proper name of a Town or City, and so not to be
rendered with Isidore (...) and (...), l. 1. Ep 337. So Z^simus l 2. Hist. (...).
Innes, and victualing houses (as he will also have Appii forum to be a place
which had (...), an image of Appius) but (as all other proper names) is in
reason to continue the same, without translation, or considerable alteration of
sound, in all Languages; Thus the example of Areopagus, Act. 17.19. and Appii
forum in this very verse demonstrates, and so here S. Lukes Greek (...), which
is the retaining not translating, nor interpreting the Latin. And this the
rather, if we consider what the ancient signification of Tabernae was; This
Auson. Lect. l. 1. c. 1.
Scaliger tells us on occasion of those verses of Ausonius, Praetereo arentem
sitientibus undique terris
Damnissum, riguasque perenni font Tabernas.
Tabernae, says he, was the name of the frontire towns, which were built
against the inrodes and insolences of the Barbarians. That there were such
every where erected by Dioclesian in the borders of the Romans, we are assured
by Zosimus, Hist. l. 2. p. 65. (...), The Roman Empire being on every side of
the borders divided and fortified with Cities and Garrisons, and Castles, and
all the military forces dwelling there about, there was no access for the
Barbarians. And so no doubt it was in these former times. And in all reason, as
this was the notion of the Tabernae Montanae prope Weissenburgum, and Tabernae
Renenses, which Scaliger mentions, so also of the Tres Tabernae here, which
says he, Ausonius himself seems to signify, when he says that the Sauromatae
had their habitations assigned them there, agreeable to what we cited out of
Zosimus. That this place was an Episcopal See, and so an eminent city, in
Constantines time, appears by Optatus l. 1. Ed. Causa^. p. 28.
where amongst the nineteen Bishops delegated by Constantine to decide the
Controversy betwixt Donatus and Caecilianus is reckoned, Felix a Tribus
Tabernis, Felix Bishop of that City, called Tres Tabernae.

Ibid. Note e. (...).
Of the manner of the soldiers guarding the prisoners, described by Lipsius on
Tacitus, p. 60. Add, Many examples he there gives out of authors: One
especially from l. 5. p. 67. lin. 13.
Athenaeus of Quintus Oppius (for which Aldus's Edition has (...) corruptly)
(...), a prisoner delivered to custody, and of Bastarnes, whom Manlius
Aquilius, one that had been Consul, and came now in triumph from Sicily, (...)
(not (...) as Aldus reads it) (...), having him bound to him in a long chain,
went himself a foot, with his prisoner on horseback. Thus here ver. 20. S. Paul
mentions his chain, (...), I am bound with this chain.

On the Epistle of PAUL the APOSTLE to the ROMANS.
Chap. I. verse. 25.



Above, and in opposition to.

(...).
OF the use of (...) for [ above] one instance will suffice in the Aristeas.
hist. 70. interpret. p. 861. A.
Epistle of Eleazar the Highpriest to Ptolome, telling him by way of great
acknowledgement, and gratitude. (...), All things that are profitable to you,
though they be above nature, we will obediently perform. Thus Lu. 13.2. and 4.
(...) sinners above all others, though Lu. 3.13. it be more fully expressed by
(...), more besides, or above. As for the other notion of (...) for contrary to
(which here may have place also, for he that worships any thing above, or
beside the one true God, does it in opposition to him, and to the wronging and
robbing him) we have an express testimony for it, Act. 18.13. (...), contrary
to the Law.

Ibid. ver. 32.

[Have pleasure.]

Approve, and patronize (see Theophylact.)

(...).
Ibid. Note h. For the notion of (...) for inordinate lust, to the testimony of
Photius, Add, So in To 2. P. 24. l. 13.
S. Chrysostom, speaking of these unnatural lusts (...), says he, (...), you
see that it comes all from this inordinate desire (...), lust not enduring to
stay or be contained within its own bounds. So in Antiochus (...), desire of
women and such like inordinations.

Ibid. Of the use of the word for any kind of exceeding, to the testimony of
Themistius, Add, and in In Nico^^.
Isocrates speaking of Monarchies, (...), they comprehend, says he, all the
advantages that are in war. And so in (...).
Eophantes, (...), a King has a great eminence, or excellence over the common
nature of men.

Ibid. Of the use of it for (...), alowing himself too large a portion, to the
testimony of Alex. Aphrod. Add, Asterius Hom. Cont. Avarit. (...). It is not
used only for the mad love of money and other possessions, but in a more
general acception to desire to have more of any thing then is due and
convenient. So Hierax in his book of justice (of which we have a large fragment
in p. 1^0.
Stobaeus) makes (...) and (...), all one, and then exemplifies it in Milo and
Lais, and as it is one branch of it in Milo, (...)* to snatch away the estates of
those that are weaker then he, so it is another (...) to force their wives from
them. And so in Lais, as it is one act of it, (...) to require and gain
immoderately by her lovers; So it is another (...) to dissolve the marriages of
some women, to get away their husbands from them.

Ibid. Of the equivalence of (...) and (...), to the testimony of Holcot out of
Papias, Add, And so when Theophylact on 1 Cor. 3.12. in the highest rank of
cumbustible matter (i. e. of sins) reckons (...), in all reason it is to be
understood of unnatural lusts, so as to agree with uncleanness and Idolatry.

(...).
Ibid. Note i. Of the acception of (...) for those that are guilty of unnatural
lusts, Add, Thus is it manifestly affirmed and defined by In Phaedro.
Plato, (...), when desire draws us irrationally to pleasures, and gets
dominion over us, this is named (...) contumely. So Ap. Stobae. p. 443.
Dio in Oeconomico (...), by weeping none ever incited the Contumelious, i. e.
the unlawful lover. So in Ap. Stobae. p. 444.
Phintys's book of the woman's sobriety, the adulterous wife is said (...), to
be for pleasures sake guilty of sin and contumely. And so in I^d p. 447.
Nicostratus (...), are adulterous brats. So in Ap Stobae. p 291. S^r. 4^.
Charondas's Proem to his Laws, speaking of maritall chastity, and prescribing
the care of procreation, not of pleasure, he adds, (...), using (...) for any
inordinate or unlawful act of impurity. And this agrees well with the
character of the Gnostickes here set down, who disliked marriage, and used all
unlawful liberties, and pollutions.

Chap. II. ver. 12.

[Shall perish without Law.]

Though they be punished yet shall not they have that aggravation of their sin
and punishment, which belongs to those which have received the Law of Moses,
they shall only be judged, for their not observing the Law of nature (see
Theophylact) the Law of Moses being not able to accuse them.

Ibid. Note f. Of the notion of (...), (...)
Add, or as Theophylact interprets (...), by (...) the things that belong to
every man, and (...) profitable, those things which are proper and expedient
for you to do.

Ibid. g. Of (...), Add, (...).
Theophylact has another notion of it for (...), painting to the life, and
interprets the place of the Jewish Doctor, who (...), forms and draws to the
life the knowledge of good, and the truth, in the hearts of disciples.

Ibid. ver. 17.

[ I^.
By h the letter.]

Being in that legal state.

Note h. (...)
The notion of (...) is here to be observed, and is best expressed by [ in.] So
in Pausanias (...) in metu versari, to be in a condition of fears, or dangers.
So here chapter 4.11. (...) those that being in uncircumcision, i. e. in the
Gentile state, do yet believe, and so here (...), thee, who being in the Law
and circumcision, i. e. in that external condition of Mosaical economy, art
yet a transgressor of the Law. Of this, or the like use of (...) see Note on 2
Pet. 3. d.

Chap. III. ver. 3.

[The Faith of God.]

Exhibition of Gods promised mercy, as also trusts of God (so Theophylact
renders it) Gods committing or intrusting his Oracles to them v. 2.

(...).
Ibid. Note b. Of the use of (...) for waging a suite at Law, Add, So in Ap
Stobae p. 228.
Demaratus Arcadicor. 2. (...), being impleaded of murder, he was freed from
the accusation, where (...) must signify not judged, or condemned, for it is
added, he was absolved, but accused, or impleaded, and again it was by his
mother, that he was (...), not by the Judge; another evidence that it signifies
accused, prosecuted, not condemned.

(...).
Ibid. Note h. Of Christ being our propitiatory, Add, Either as Theophylact
conceives in that our human nature in Christ (...), was the covering or veil
of his divinity, or because God exhibited, and reveled himself in Christ, as
the Propitiatory was the place, where God was wont to exhibit himself
peculiarly.

Chap. IV. ver. 11.

[ In uncircumcision, see Note on chapter 2. h.
Though they be not circumcised.]

Of every uncircumcised believer, who etc. Dele [not only of the Jews
circumcised but.]

Verse. 12.

Them that are not of the circumcision only but also walk in the steps --

The Jews that having been circumcised do now convert to Christ, and so besides
circumcision, which they drew from him, do also transcribe his diviner Copy,
follow his example of faith, and obedience, which were remarkable in him,
before he was circumcised, leave their sins, as he did his country, etc.

Ibid. ver. 16.

[Of us all.]

Of all the faithful Gentiles as well as Jews.

Ibid. ver. 17.

[ Answerable to him.
aa Before him.]

In like manner as God in whom he believed is the Father of the Gentiles as
well as Jewish believers, and accordingly justified Abr. etc.

Note aa. (...)
The importance of (...) is not ordinarily observed, and must be fetched from
the use of (...) in Hebrew, as it is used Genesis 2.18. where God says he will
make Adam an help, we render it meet for him, and the vulgar, simile ei, like,
or agreeable, or answerable to him, where the Septuagint have (...), by him, or
on the side of him, or answerable, parallel to him. And to this Hebrew the
Greek (...) bears exact proportion, the word (...) signifying coram, ex
opposito, and yet used to denote that, which is like and answerable. Thus it is
certain S. Chrysostom understood the word in this place, for so says he,
(...) (...). The meaning is, as God is no partial God, but the Father of all,
so Abraham? and again, if he were not the father of all that dwell on the
earth, (...), this word should have no place, (...) but God's gift would be
maimed, and in express words, (...), the word signifies [in like manner.] And
so Theophylact from him, (...), [ before God, is instead of like God. -- This
observation may possibly be useful to the finding out the full importance of
some other places. As when the commandment is given to Abraham of walking
before God, and being perfect, Genesis 17.1. which in this notion of [ before]
will be all one with, be ye perfect as your Father in heaven is perfect.]

Chap. V. ver. 6.

[ weak.
Without strength.]

In a sick, mortal, sinful (see Theophylact) damnable estate.

Ibid. ver. 20.

[That the offense, etc.]

Though it were not designed to that end (see Theophylact) yet it by
consequence became a means to aggravate, etc.

(...).
Chap. VI. Note b. Of the notion of (...), 1 Cor. 10.12. for ordinary, common
among men, Add, So S. Chrysostom there (...), it signifies little, short,
proportionable to their strength. So in Demosthenes Contr. Midiam (...), an
humane and moderate consideration. So in Horace lib. 2. humane commoda
signifies parum commoda, little profitable. And if it be here considered how
moderate and equitable a proposal it is, which here follows, twill be
acknowledged that this of (...)] in this notion, may well be the form to
introduce it.

Chap. VII. ver. 9.

[Sinne revived, and I dyed.]

The sin of disobeying a promulgate became greater, and the disobedient Jew
more punishable by reason of the Law, and no way the better for it; As when a
man is sick and does not know his condition and danger, the Physician coming
tells him of both, and prescribes him a strict diet for the future, if he will
recover; but he observes not his prescriptions, continues intemperate and so
dies under the Physicians hand, and in spite of his care.

Ibid. ver. 13.

[Exceeding sinful.]

Is extremely aggravated by this, that it will not be repressed by the Law.

Ibid. Note d. (...).
Of S. Paul's not speaking of himself in the [(...) I knew not] Add, So Marcus
Eremita, de baptism. p. 921. E. (...) etc. Thus do men pervert other
Scriptures, Read the chapter from the beginning, and you shall find that S.
Paul speaks not of himself after his baptism, (...), but assumes the person
of unbeleeving Jews. And so Theophylact distinctly affirms, (...), In his own
person he speaks of humane nature, and again on v. 15. he speaks of men
before Christ's coming, though he sets it in his own person.

Ibid. Note f. (...)
Of knowing the contrary to what they do, Add, As Euripides says of it,
(...), That it is the author of the greatest evils unto men, so it is by Plutarch
set down for the greatest aggravation, etc.

Ibid. Of the irrationalness and brutishness of this condition, mentioned from
Plutarch, Add, And so li. 4 de dict and fact. Socr.
Xenophon from Socrates, (...); he that considers not the best things, but by
all means seeks the most pleasant, how differs he from the foolish beasts?

Ibid. verse. 23.



(...)
Note g. For the understanding the sense of the Apostle in this whole chapter,
it is useful to compare this passage with Gal. 5.17. The spirit lusts against
the flesh, and the flesh against the spirit, etc. Which is thought to be
parallel, and to import the same sense with this. Of these two places therefore
it must first be remembered, that the difference, which is between these Texts,
arises not from the distinction between the spirit in the one, and the Law of
the mind in the other, nor consequently is it to be placed betwixt the lusting
of the flesh against the spirit, simply taken, and the warring of the Law in
the members against the Law in the mind, as that is no more than a war, but
betwixt the former, simply taken, or with the addition of the spirit lusting
back again against the flesh, or with the circumstances mentioned Gal. 5.17.
(none of which imply a yielding to the lusts of the flesh) and the latter,
taken with that addition, here mentioned, of bringing the man into captivity
into the Law of sin. And this indeed is all the difference that can be
assigned betwixt a regenerate and unregenerate man, that in the one the spirit
prevails, in the other the flesh is victorious, i. e. the will of the one is
led by the spirit, chooses and acts the deeds of the spirit (the will of God)
but the will of the other follows the carnal dictates, (...) performs the
will of the spirit, and so falls under the condemnation, which belongs to such,
(...), says Dorotheus (...). ^. such a state is altogether subject to
punishment, for every sin that is acted is under hell, and (...), they are
all under hell, in that they act. And if it be suggested, that the consequents
in the place to the Galath. (...), so that what things you would, ye do them
not] seem parallel to (...), what I would that I do not] here, v. 15, 19. and
so neither of them signify this carnal state, to this it must be answered that
these two are not parallel, but on the contrary that passage [(...) what I
would, I do not] is really equivalent with the captivation to the Law of sin,
(as by the whole context appears) though indeed there is some obscurity in it,
which till by the context it be explained, may mislead one to think otherwise.
The truth is evident, these two things are conjoined in both those verses, what
I would, that do I not, but what I hate, that I do, v. 15. and the good that I
would, I do not, but the evil that I would not, that I do, v. 19. And being so
conjoined in the same person, the subject of the discourse, and but equivalent
phrases with those other of captivation to the Law of the members, and being
carnal, and sold under sin, the meaning must be, that he neglects to do the
good that the Law of God and his own mind dictates to him, and does commit, on
the contrary, the evil, that according to his mind and the declaration of Gods
will in the Law, he disliketh, and hates, and so evidently acts in
opposition to conscience, commits the sins of the flesh willingly, and
knowingly non obstante the contrary dictate, and solicitation of conscience.
But then this is much more than is contained in that lusting of the flesh
against the spirit, Gal. 5. (styled by Nemesius (...). c. 37. (...) the strife
of the reason and lust, (...), a dissension and emulation betwixt them) For as
there the flesh lusts, so the spirit lusts too, and it is not affirmed of
either of them, that it leads the other captive. All the event that is taken
notice of is, (...).
(...) that what you would that you do not] which being the effect of the
double (...) or lusting, must have such a sense proportioned to it, as shall be
founded in that double (...), and that can be no other than this, that (...) to
will] be taken in the sense of (...), to lust, and so not for an act of the
elective faculty, which to one matter is but one, either choosing or refusing,
but for an act of some kind of woulding, or appetite, and that is constantly
twofold, to the same matter; the flesh has one woulding, and the spirit has
another, the flesh desires, and would have a man yield to the pleasant
proposal, the spirit would have him resist it, and both these are evidently
mentioned in that verse, one called the lusting of the spirit, and the other of
the flesh: from the contrariety of which it necessarily follows, that
whatsoever (in matters of this nature, good or evil) any man does, he does
against one of these wouldings, and consequently he does not (...), do what he
would: whereas if (...) were taken for the elective faculty, which we
ordinarily call the will of man, it is evident every voluntary agent does
(...), do what he will, his actings follow his will or choice, and whenever
he does not so, he acts by violence, or rather is acted, and to that is
required, that he be conquered by some other; and yet of any such conquest
there is no mention in that place of Gal. 5.16. which mentions only an (...)
lusting equally on both sides; and so the result is, that Gal. 5.16. there is
no more said but this, that which way soever a man act, he acts against some
(...) desire, or lusting of his; if he act according to the flesh, he acts
against the solicitation of the mind, and spirit; and if he act according to
the spirit, he does not (...), but acts contrary to all its importunities; and
he that does the latter or these is far from being led captive to the law of
sin, which is in the flesh, or members, being indeed a conqueror over it,
though he have not eradicated or extirpated it. For the yet fuller clearing of
this, take the plain importance of those two verses, and set them severally and
then you will soon see how no correspondence there is between them; Gal. 5.16.
The Apostle sets down this plain Aphorism, that the desires of the flesh and
spirit are one contrary to the other, and consequently that to whichsoever of
them the will of man consents, it must needs reject the other. But Romans 7.15,
19. the Apostle sets down the state of a particular man, which deliberately
chooses and acts the evil which he knows he should not do, or which the Law of
God in his own mind tells him distinctly he ought not to do, as when Nemesius
(...). chapter 33. speaks of an intemperate man, that he is (...), his election is
contrary to his lust, yet he is overcome by his lust, and acts what that
suggests. What agreement now is* or can there be betwixt these two verses? It Is
true indeed that they which do what they hate, and would not, may well be said
not to do the things which they would, and are included Gal. 5.17. but that
proves not that those places Romans 7. and Gal. 5. are parallel; because Romans 7.
it is determined to doing the ill which he hates, whereas Gal. 5. the speech
lies open to both parts, to the doing the good which the flesh hates, as well
as the evil which the flesh loves. Now this being spoken of men indefinitely,
is very distant from defining it on one side, and applying it to a particular
person, as it is evidently done Romans 7. when he says, Non quod volo bonum, hoc
ago, sed quod ^di maelum, illud facio, and consequently though the fleshes
disliking the virtuous actions, and liking the vicious be perfectly
reconcilable with walking in the spirit, and so with a regenerate state, and
so the place to the Galatians, (though not spoken particularly of the actions
of regenerate men, but delivered as an Aphorism indefinitely, appliable to
men's actions whether good or evil) may be appliable to the actings of such; yet
the place to the Romans, being determined to the facio malum, and that
evidently against the dictate of the mind, the resistance of the conscience is
still unreconcileable with that spiritual walking, and so with the regenerate
state, Romans 8.1. Another notion there is which some of the ancients have had of
the words (...), (...)
what I hate that I do] viz. that it should belong only to Concupiscendo sed
eidem concupiscen^ae non consentiend^.
desires or thoughts unconsented to. So S. Jerome and S. Augustine, l. 1. Cont.
2. Epist. Pelag. c. 10. being persuaded by some Doctors, and a conceited
advantage against the Pelagian heresy to retract in some part, what before he
had asserted, and spoken the most for, of any man. And of this opinion is Ap
Epiphan. haer. 64. Basil. Ed. p. 252.
Methodius also, (...), says he, that which I hate, I do, is to be understood
(...), not for the doing that which is ill, (...), but only of thinking, or
imagining; and again, (...), of aliene imaginations which frequently make
incursions on us, and bring us to phansy things which we would not, adding,
(...), for it is not wholly in our power, to think, or not to think, absurd
things, but either to use or not use such thoughts or phansies, for we cannot
hinder thoughts from coming upon us, but we can choose whether we will be
persuaded by them, or use them. And again, (...), How did the Apostle do evil,
if he spoke not of absurd thoughts? This interpretation of S. Paul's words, if
it were secure from being any farther extended, then the authors of it
designed, could have no hurt or noxiousness in it, it being certainly true,
that every regenerate man is thus infested with phansies and thoughts, which he
hates, and gives no consent unto; Yet if the words of the text be well
considered, this cannot but appear a strange interpretation. For when it is
certain that (...) signifies neither less, nor other then (...) to do, and when
that word is varied into (...) and (...), v. 15. and both those are directly
all one with (...), and when (...) what I hate] in one place, is (...) what I
would not, v. 16. and that again (...) the evil that I would not v. 19. and
(...) and (...) are directly all one, it is not imaginable how (...) what I hate
I do] should not be understood (...) of doing evil, this being no less than a
direct contradiction to interpret (...) by (...), for that is (...) by (...) by
(...), do by not do, which neither Methodius nor any other man's authority can
prevail with any reasonable man to receive from him. This inconvenience when
Methodius foresees, his only answer is, that he desires them, who make this
objection, to declare, what evil it was that the Apostle hated, and would not
do, and yet did; whether when he willed to serve God, he yet committed
Idolatry. But sure the whole force of this answer (if there be any) is founded
in interpreting the words to be spoken by S. Paul in his own person, and so is
perfectly prevented by him, that understands the Apostle not of himself, but of
an unregenerate man. From which process of Methodius, and what he there adds
in that place of the Apostles pronouncing against Idolators, and other such
sinners, that they cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven, the conclusion is
regular and unavoidable, that if (...) signifies (...), and (...) and (...) be
interpreted of actions, or of any more than thoughts unconsented to, then the
person that is spoken of by S. Paul, Romans 7. is one that shall not inherit the
kingdom of God, and then sure no regenerate person by Methodius's arguing;
which therefore is most constringent, and convincing, that this chapter speaks
of an unregenerate person; for that it is beyond all controversy, that he cannot
use those words (...) etc. of mere (...), or (...) of phansies, or thinking
only, and not of consenting, or doing, and so in like manner that being
carnal, and sold under sin, and carried captive by the Law in his members, i.
e. by his own carnal heart, cannot be affirmed of him that lives in, and walks
after the spirit.

Chap. VIII. ver. 6.

[To be spiritually minded.]

The desire and pursuit of spiritual things (see Theophylact.)

Ibid. ver. 15.

[Ye have received the spirit of adoption.]

Christ has given us liberal commands adding to them the promise of an eternal
inheritance. And for the punishments now left in his Church, they are not those
servile of stoning and the like, but paternal such as toward children, removing
them from the Table of the Lord by such fatherly discipline, frowns, and
chastisements to reform them (see Theophylact.)

(...).
Ibid. Note b. Of (...) Heb. 9. Add Theophylacts gloss, (...), by them are
meant types, institutions and positive Laws.

(...).
Ibid. Note d. Of the notion of (...) for man, After 2 Pet. 1.4. Add, So (...)
a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. is all one with (...) the new man, Ephesians. 4.24. All
by Hebrew idiom, wherein (...) creature, signifies man, among their Rabbis, as
when they say of God, (...) he shall come to judge the creatures, i. e. men.

(...).
Ibid. Note e. Of (...), Add, Theophylact fetches it (...), from holding out
and bending forward the whole head to that which is firmly hoped for.

(...).
Ibid. Note n. Of the notion of (...) in S. Cyrill for sincerity of Christian
resolution, Add. In the same sense as Ed. Sylb. p. 325. l. 18.
Clemens Alexandr. Strom. 7. speaking of the one true Church, in opposition to
heretical mixtures, says, (...) into which those that are just according to
purpose are admitted, in the sense, that elsewhere p. 197. l. 15.
(...), (...), every man's purpose, and p. 200. l. 52.
(...) a purpose, or resolution of single life is used by him. In like manner
Theophylact, (...), A man becomes called according to purpose, i. e. according
to his own choice, for, says he, (...), Calling is not sufficient, for then
all should be saved, for all are called, but there is need of our will and
choice in obeying the call.

Chap. IX. ver. 7.

[In Isaak shall thy seed be called.]

Or (as Theophylact) those shall be the seed of Abraham, who are born after the
manner of Isaaks birth, i. e. by the word or promise of God.

Ibid. Note b. (...).
Of the notion of (...) for being Excommunicate, Add, To. 6. p. 441 li 13.
So in S. Chrysostom, (...), they that excommunicate any man, or make him
anathema from the Church.

Ibid. Note d. Of the force of that text, v. 5. (...).
God blessed for ever] to confute heretics, Add, So Theophylact, (...) From
hence is Arius confuted and put to shame, S Paul proclaiming Christ to be God
over all.

Ibid. Note h. Of (...) Add, (...).
Theophylact renders it a little otherwise, (...), I have set thee in the
midst, brought thee out as a person to be exemplarily punished.

Ibid. Note i. Of the way of Gods hardening Pharaoh, by giving him respite,
Add, (...).
As says Theophylact when a Master forbears to punish a wicked servant, (...)
he makes him much more wicked.

(...).
Ibid Not m. Read; The Hebrew in Isaiah chapter 28.16. read, (...) make haste, but
the Greek are thought to have read (...) which signifies most obviously
erubuerunt. So Capellus cites it as the opinion of a learned man* and so
Grotius's Notes have it. But Mr. Pocock seems to have hit upon the right (and
then there is no need of that conjecture) that the Hebrew (...) had anciently
three significations of some affinity one with another, which are all retained
in the Arabic Haush and Hish which answers it; 1. To make haste. 2. To fear.
3. To be ashamed: and it may well be here used in that sense, that comprehends
all three, for he that is in a fright, or consternation turns this way and
that way hastily, and is in confusion of face or shame. In the first of these
senses the Syriack interpreter and Chaldee Paraphrast understod it, the former
read (...) he shall not fear, the latter (...) they shall not be troubled; or
in commotion; In the second the Vulgar non festinet, shall not make haste; In
the third, the Greek (as also the Arabic) (...) he shall not be ashamed, and
this last is here made use of by the Apostle (...), and so 1 Pet. 2.6. where
the Syriack and Arabic and Vulgar are all to the same purpose. And this is
capable of a double sense etc.

(...).
Chap. X. Note e. Of (...) Read, here the Septuagint seems to have read (...)
their voice, for (...) their line, and so render it (...) (...), etc. Others
rather think that the Septuagint, respecting the sense and not the word, did
thus render it paraphrastically. But Mr. Pocock conceives from the Arabic use
of the word, that the very (...) was anciently used by the Hebrews for
vociferation. See his Miscellan. p. 48.

Ibid. Note f. Of Stipulations, Add, (...).
Those consisted, says Theophilus, (...) of a question, l. 3. c. 1.15.
and an agreeable answer, l. 3. c 15.
and thence by a metonymy (...) may signify stipulor as in Seneca de
beneficiis, interrogatio is used for stipulatio, and so it may be appliable
here, because he that comes to God to desire directions, is presumed to promise
to perform what shall be required. But then still this sponsio is not an
answer, but rather a question, the answer being Responsio, or (...) in
Theophilus, etc.

Ibid. Of the notion of (...) for an address to some other for counsel, Add,
p. 782. A.
Dorotheus, (...), I never permitted my own conceit to persuade me, without
asking some others counsel. And (...), Ibid. C.
be careful to ask others counsel, and not to be directed by your selves.

Chap. XI. Note b. (...)
Of the notion of (...) for stupidity, Add, So Ps. 60.3. (...) is the
stupifying wine used to be given to them that were to be put to death. And so
in Marcus Eremita (...). p. 948. A. speaking of (...) drinking of wine, he
adds, (...), the pain of stupidity or intoxication from it. The word, says
Theophylact, properly signifies (...) being nailed and fastened to any thing,
and so denotes (...), an incurableness and immutableness of mind. But this
referres to the Attical notion of the word as it is rendered compunction, which
is not it, which the Hellenists understood, or used it in.

(...).
Ibid. Note d. Of the notion of (...), for the body of the Church, Add, So in
(...) p. 2.
Meletius, (...), the Governors and priests with all the fullness, i. e. Church
that bears the name of Christ. So in Ep adv. Paul Samos. p. 293. C.
Dionysius Alexandrinus, (...), all the fullness of the congregation of Israel,
from Exodus 12. where the Septuagint read (...) multitude. So in S. Basils
Liturgy, p. 43. d. (...), preserve the fullness of the Church.

Ibid. Concerning the future return or calling of the Jews, that there is no
reason to expect such, Add, And so Caesarius, Gregory Nazianzens brother,
being asked of the (...) revocation of the Jews about the end of the world,
answers resolutely, Dial. 4. (...). 195.
(...), etc. I will never be persuaded that the Jews shall be recalled, nor
indeed does the Apostle teach any such thing in the words that are well and
truly delivered by him, but not rightly understood or applied by others. And
all this seems to have foundation in the express words of Daniel, chapter 9. 27. he
shall make it desolate even to the consummation.

Chap. XIII. ver. 13.



In revellings, and pursuits of lusts.

Note e. What (...) signifies, (...).
is not so commonly observed, Theophylact defines, (...), songs with
drunkenness and contumely, In which definition, as the word (...) contumely: is
often used in an impure sense, to denote unlawful loves, and pursuits, so in all
probability does it there, for the night-amorous revels are they, that are
peculiarly signified by (...). So Wisd. 14.23. where speaking of the Heathens,
(...) secret mysteries, he joins with them (...) mad revels, and as the
effects thereof, adds, (...), they keep neither lives or marriages pure. So 2
Mac. 6.4. when he says the Temple was filled (...), he adds (...), dallying
with harlots, (...) -- And he that does this, is in Theocritus (...). So say
the Scholiasts on that Poet, (...), the word is used for those that go by night
to their sweethearts; This they used to do with torches and fiddles, singing
amorous ballads at the doors of their beloved, (from thence called (...), and
(...), a pattern of which is set down in Plautus Curcul. Act. 1. Scen. 2.

Quid si adeam ad fores, atque occentem?
Pessuli heus pessuli, vos saluto lubens. --
To this belongs that of Aristophanes in Pluto, (...), He looks as if he were
going to a revel, having his crown and his torch, and more fully in the right
reading of the verse, in Cu^cul. Act. 1. Scen. 1
Plautus. Tute tibi pr^is lotis, luces cereum. You go before your self with
fiddle, you are your own torchbearer: some body else it seems they were wont to
have, to perform these offices for them: so says the Commentator of
Herm^genes, (...) -- Pythagoras studying the stars at midnight, saw a young man
with a fiddler revelling with a torch -- Agreeably the word is here to be
interpreted, the night revels or pursuits of their unclean designs* and so it
is, Gal. 5.21. and 1 Pet. 4.3. Comissationes, which some have mistaken for
Comessationes, as if it were from comedo, and so render it surfetings, whereas
the Latin word is but a light derivation from the Greek (...), and (...).

Chap. XIV. ver. 1.

[Him that is weak, etc.]

Great dissensions and divisions are already gotten into the Church of Jewish
believers (not only against the Gentiles, but) among themselves, some Jewish
converts discerning their Christian Liberty and freedom from the Judaical
Yoke, others conceiving themselves still to be under that obligation. The
latter of these is zealous for the Mosaical Law, and observances of
circumeision and mea^^, etc. and condemns all others as breakers of Gods Law,
that do not observe all these. On the other side they that are instructed in
the knowledge of their Christian liberty, seeing others stand on such things as
these, that had never any real goodness or virtue in them, and now are
abrogated by Christ, are apt to despise, and contemn them that continue under
that Yoke, and resolving to maintain that liberty which they have purchased by
Christ, freedom from such obligations, are apt to separate from the Judaizers,
chapter 2.18. and so betwixt one, and the other, the communion is likely to be
broken. To both these therefore I apply my self at this time. Those of you that
do not think your selves obliged to keep the Law, do not ye reject the
scrupulous, or erroneous Judaizer, that thinks himself bound to observe those
Laws, of abstaining from many meats, etc. but receive him to your Communion.
Yet not so, etc.

Verse. 2.

[For one believes, etc.]

He that is sufficiently instructed in his liberty, makes no scruple of eating
any thing etc. but the Judaizer being not sufficiently instructed etc. either
abstaineth from all flesh, for so some did, says Theophylact (that they might
not be taken notice of to abstain peculiarly from swines flesh) or else from
some sorts of meats, etc.

Verse. 3.

[Him that eats.]

The Jewish believer, that discernes his liberty and eats all meats
indifferently.

[Him that eats not.]

That other who being instructed in the nature of his Christian liberty does
not think himself obliged to abstain from those meats, from which a Jew under
Moses religiously and Judaically abstains.

Verse. 4.

[One man.]

The Judaizing Christian.

[Another.]

But he that knows his liberty.

Verse. 5.

[ Prefers o^e day before another, another approves every day.
aa Esteems one day above another, another esteems every day alike.]

The Judaizing believer observes some special days appointed by Moses's Law,
the Sabbath or other Jewish Festival. But the other which is no Judaizer makes
not that difference, etc.

Verse. 6.

[To the Lord he does not regard it.]

Thinks it Gods pleasure now under Christ, that he should not make any
difference.

Verse. 10.

[Why do thou judge thy brother?]

Why do thou that observest the Law, condemn thy fellow Christian?

[Or why do thou.]

Or thou that usest thy Christian liberty, why do thou*

Verse. 13.

But judge this rather that no man put a stumbling block, etc.

Only be careful, that you do not Scandalize any Christian brother, i. e. put
in his way a stumbling block to hinder his coming to Christianity, or a
gall-trap in his progress to wound him and make him go back, as the Judaizer is
in danger to do, when he sees those liberties used among Christians, which he
deems utterly unlawful.

Verse. 14.

[Nothing is unclean.]

To a Christian Jew no kind of meat is unlawful to be eaten.

Verse. 15.

[Thy brother.]

Thy fellow Christian that knows not his liberty.

Verse. 17.

[Joy in the holy Ghost.]

Delight to do good, or that joy which results from unanimity, says
Theophylact.

Verse. 19.

[One another.]

All sorts of Christians though of different persuasions, Judaizers or those
that are instructed in their liberty.

Verse. 20.

[The work of God.]

That peace, and unity which God in Christ has planted among believers of
different persuasions about indifferent things.

Verse. 21.

[Thy brother stumbleth, etc.]

Any other man is kept from receiving the faith, and so falls by some occasion
of thine, or galled or discouraged and driven from the profession (as the
Jewish believer is by seeing others cast off the Mosaical yoke, whom they think
obliged by it.)

Note aa. What (...)] here signifies, (...)
must be resolved by the special, not vulgar use of the word among authors. It
is used sometimes for approving, giving the suffrage in a competition; So Tom.
4. p. 435. l. 27.
S. Chrysostom uses together (...), he gives his suffrage, and his sentence
or judgment to this. So in Xenophon, (...). l. 8. (...), he hated them that
did not adjudge the victory to him. So Aristotle l. 1. de An. c. 11. (...),
every of the elements, but the earth, had some Philosopher or other that gave
his suffrage to it, that it was the soul, or principal of all things. So Plato
in Philebo, (...), if we prefer any before it. So when of Epicurus it is said,
(...) he defends, or gives his vote to pleasure that it is the summum bonum.
And in the Epigramme, (...), For the soul rejoices not, as preferring eating
before all things. And so here, (...), one preferres one day before another,
but another approves every day, i. e. preferres not any before any.

Ibid. Note c. Blot out [So Philip. 2.4. etc.]

Ibid. ver. 23.

[Is d sin.]

(...).
Note d. In this place, it is certain the ancient Copyes generally added that
Benediction, which we now find, chapter 16.25. (...), etc. Now to him that is able
to stablish you according to my Gospel, and so on to the end. Thus we find it
in S. Chrysostom, and Theophylact etc. And from thence the Posthumous notes
under Grotius's name, infer that the Apostle first designed to end his
Epistle there. But there is no ground for such conjectural inference. It Is
certain, Doxologyes may be seasonable in other places, and not only by way of
conclusion, and so we find in the like style; (...), Now to him that is able
etc. Ephesians. 3.20, 21. in the middle of the Epistle, and so incidently (...), to
whom be glory, Gal. 1.5. and more solemnly, (...), Now to the incorruptible
King of Ages, etc. 1 Timothy 1.17. almost in the beginning. And it is S.
Chrysostomes Note, (...), It it customary with S. Paul to conclude an
exhortation with prayers, and praises, And Theophylact, (...), After an
exhortation he always uses to pray. The petitory part of this doxology is
contained in the (...), which is a praying that God who alone is able, will
stablish them; And this so proper to the whole business of the precedent
chapter, that it cannot without great injustice be taken from it; And therefore
without examining the reason of its removal (for which we have only probable
conjecture) it is all reason that it should be fetched back from chapter 16.25. and
placed here, as it ought to be.

Chap. XVI. Note b. (...).
Of Lukes being meant 2 Cor. 8.18. to the testimony of Ignatius, Add, And
though Baronius affirm it to be Silas, and An. Chapter 51. n. 64.
Theodoret, Barnabas, yet Titus Bostrensis on Luke 1. p. 763. C. and S. Jerome
on 2 Cor. 8. and from him others have generally conceived him to be there meant.

On the first EPISTLE to the CORINTHIANS.
Chap. IV. verse. 6.

Not to opinionate.
Not to a think of men.]

Think of us not as Masters of your faith, but as officers of Christ, etc. And
accordingly not to make it matter of pride to your selves, or contemning of
others, that ye are the disciples of such or such, in plain terms to beware
that you do not break out into factions, etc.

(...).
IBid. Note a. What (...) signifies in this place, will best be ghest by (...)
puffed up, which follows on purpose to explain it. That signifying elation of
mind to the despising of others, (...) must in all reason do so also. Thus the
Scholiast on Thucydides, l. 1. says of (...) that it is (...), where (...)
must be a degree of pride, as the other a great, or high degree of it. So in S.
Chrysostom Tom. 3. p. 177. l. 4. (...); why art thou disturbed and abusest thy
opinion of thy self, thy pride to folly? and l. 6. (...) is by elation of mind,
by pride, to become a fool, contrary to (...), natural folly. So Romans 12.3. it
most literally signifies (not to be wise, but) to opinionate, to think great
matters of himself. So in Demosthenes (...), one that thinks at high of
himself as is fit. Only here the notion of the word seems a little to be
restrained by the [(...), for one] in the latter part of the verse, and so to
denote not so much pride of their own gifts, as Romans 12. as pride and high
opinion of their teachers, boasting of them to the disparagement of others.

Chap. V. ver. 12, 13.



12, 13. (What have mine or the Churches censures to do with them that are not
members of the Church? Ye know it is the practice among you to inflict censures
on Church Members only, leaving all others to Gods tribunal) And by doing thus
ye shall remove the accursed thing from among you, free your selves from those
punishments that the neglect of your duty, permitting such offenders to go
unpunished, and unreformed, may bring upon you.

But them that are without God judges. And ye shall put away the evil from
among you* ^or it is, (...) not (...), and (...) ancients read (...).
Therefore put away from among you that wicked person.

Ibid. Note h. (...) p 333.
Of (...) violence in a notion of uncleanness, Add, The full description of
this will be best fetched from Strabo, l. 10. setting down the customs, and
among them the amors of the Cretanes, altogether after this manner, of force
and rape, (...), they do not get their beloved youths persuasion, but by force.
The lover, says he, some three days before tells the friends that he means
(...) to commit the rape, and they must not hide the youth or divert him from
walking his wonted way, for to do so is to confess that be is not worthy of
such a lover. The whole manner of it is there set down, not worthy to be here
transcribed, by which it is plain that this of (...) rape was among them the
ceremony of their Mascula Venus, and very creditable and customable among them,
and (...), it was a shame to any hansome youth of good parentage not to have some
such lover, that should take him by violence; which being the heathen custom
of this Island of Crete, may well be thought to have given occasion to that
direction of S. Paul Tit. 1.6. that he that were chosen to be Bishop should be
such an one, who had faithful children, (...) not accused of riot, not guilty
of having suffered any such villainy as this.

Ibid. Note l. Some doubt there is of the reading, and rendering the words from
this place, to the end of the chapter. (...).
Theophylact tells us of some that set the point after (...), and then began a
new sense without an interrogation. And then the reading must be, what have I
to do to judge those that are without? No, Judge ye those that are within,
adding as in a parenthesis, (but those that are without God judges) and ye
shall take away the evil from among you, which best agrees to the (...) ( and,
not therefore) in the Greek, (...).
and to the reading of Chrysostom and Theophylact, who read (...), ye shall
remove the evil thing, (not (...), remove the evil or wicked person) from among
you, referring (...).
Say they, to the passage in the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 13.5. and 22.21. And
accordingly Theodoret and the vulgar read (...), the evil. For this later part,
that this reading and rendering is to be adhered to, there will be little doubt
to any, that considers how evidently these last words [(...) -- and ye shall
remove the evil from among you] refer to the phrase in the Old Testament, Deuteronomy.
22.21. (though there the Rome Edition reads corruptly (...)) all the question
is of the former part, which depends on the pointing of the (...), of which
Theophylact adds, (...), some read it conjoined with what follows, and by way
of interrogation, as we do, and all the Copyes, that now we meet with; And that
I prefer this reading, beside the consent of Copyes, these are my reasons. 1.
Because the context agrees very well to it, the thing that the Apostle now has
in hand, being to disclaim meddling with heathens, in the beginning of the
verse, upon which that which is here added [(...), if it be read all in one
interrogation, Do not ye judge those that are within, but those that are
without God judges?] will follow, and cohere very commodiously; For thus it
will ly. I have nothing to do to judge those that are without, but as ye, i. e.
the Church, use to censure those that are within, who belong to your
cognizance, so for all others they must be referred, and left to Gods tribunal:
(many speeches of this kind are taken notice of, Note on Matt. 9. d.) 2dly.
Because in the former reading, (...) is made an answer to (...), which I
believe to be without example, the question by (...) being so strong, and
familiar a negative, that generally there is not any negation added to it, and
if there were, (...) would be it most regularly. 3dly, Because (...), is very
frequently an interrogative form, and (...) and (...) and (...), the forms of
answering the question, and that argues the necessity of retaining the second
reading. The only difficulty remaining, is, how [(...), and ye shall take away
the evil from among you] shall fitly connect with this sense, (...)
For that (...) should be rendered [ therefore] is not very reasonable, and that
also which supposes the right reading to be (...), take away the evil person,
not (...), ye shall take away the evil [thing] which we have already with great
reason pitched on for the true. The probablest way to salve this difficulty,
is, either to affixe these last words of the Chapter, and of this matter, as a
testimony out of the Old Testament, to conclude, and to belong to the whole
business of this Chapter, that by their obeying his directions in it, they
should thus put away the evil from among them, and secure themselves from the
punishments, which else might fall on them, among whom notorious sinners were
thus permitted to live impune, as it had often fallen out among the Jews; Or
else to put the whole 12 verse, and the beginning of the 13th, in a parenthesis
(and not the beginning of the 13th only) and then to read it in sense thus,
from v. 11. But now I have written to you not to accompany, or so much as to
eat or use any familiar converse with any unclean, or drunken professor, and by
so doing ye shall put away the evil from among you: secure your selves from the
judgments, which else you have reason to fear will come upon you, then adding
the parenthesis in its due place, to give an account of his restraining these
censures to professors, or Christians only; And this seems the fairest way of
composing all difficulty.

Chap. VI. ver. 2.

Of the smallest judicatures.
To a judge the smallest matters.]

Note a. That the word (...)] signifies not matters but places of Judicature,
(...).
appears by Hesychius ((...)) and authors and Glossaryes generally, and so in
the sacred style, Susan. 49. where we read, the place of judgment. So Judge.
5.10. sit in Judgment, and Dan. 7.10. the Judgment was set, i. e. the Court
of Judges. And Jam. 2.6. (...) are distinctly and necessarily rendered
Judgement-seats. And so here the Arabic interpreter renders it by words which
are thus in Latin, Subsellia Judicii ad mundum pertinentis, seats of
judgment belonging to the world.

Ibid. ver. 4.

[ If therefore ye have secular judicatures, see Note A.
If then ye have judgment of things pertaining to this life, Those that are
set at naught in the Church, set those in them, (...).
set them to judge who are least esteemed in the Church.]

If therefore there fall out any matters of controversy concerning the matters
of common life, which are to be brought to Judicatures, or will not otherwise
be composed, and if ye do despise the Governors of your Churches, etc. Yet
sure ye have all reason to refer it to the simplest and meanest Christians, or
even to set them in the tribunal, rather then carry your matter to the Gentile
Courts.

Ibid. ver. 5.

[Between brethren.]

Between fellow Christians, whose inclinableness to peace is to be presumed of,
and then that must needs work somewhat toward the pacification.

Chap. VII. ver. 23.

Or, Are ye bought.
Ye ee are bought with a price, Be not ye made (...).
be not ye the servants of men.]

On the other side they that have bought out their liberty, and obtained
manumission, having been formerly servants to heathens, ^et them not ^ell
themselves again, or revert voluntarily into that condition of slavery, but
prefer their liberty rather, v. 21.

e e. In this place the whole context persuades to read [(...);]
interrogatively; For so will it best answer [(...)] Art thou called being a
servant? or is thy calling that of a servant? Thus ver. 18. both parts of the
speech are delivered interrogatively, (...); Is any man called being
circumcised? and presently, (...); Is any man called in uncircumcision? For the
^onfirming of this reading, it is to be observed; 1. That as before, and after
those two questions, ver. 18. the rule is given, that every man walk in, or
abide in that calling, or condition, wherein God has placed him, contentedly,
without making advantage of Christianity, for his pretense of a change. So it is
here likewise, before v. 21. (where the interrogation is varied; Art thou
called being a servant?) and after this verse, which assures us of the
continuing the same manner of speaking, and so that this latter is by way of
interrogation also. 2dly. That after the first question, and the short answer
to it, Art thou called being a servant? care not for it] all that follows, as
far as to this, v. 23. is but as in a parenthesis (but if thou may be free,
use it rather, For he, and.) and so what here follows, v. 23. answers to that,
by way of parallel, (...), etc. Which yet will not be a parallel, or answerable
to the former question, unless, as before uncircumcision was opposed to
circumcision and the mention of the latter was interrogative, as well as of the
former, so here the being bought with the price] be opposed to being called a
servant, (which it cannot be, unless it signify manumission from service) and
the form of delivering it interrogative also. Lastly it is aparent that the
design of the whole place is to assure Christians, that they are not to expect
secular immunityes, or privileges by being Christians, that their being
spiritually redeemed by Christ does not make them free men, that before were
servants, and this 23 verse, is a medium to infer that, and the conclusion
repeated immediately upon it, v. 24. Let every one, etc. Yet such a medium it
would not be (but the contrary) if speaking still to the person, or persons,
last spoken to, v. 21. i. e. to servants, he should here tell them, they were
bought, or redeemed by Christ (as the same phrase evidently signifies, chapter
6.20) and therefore must not be the servants of men; And that he speaks to any
other, viz. to freemen, it can no way be collected from any words unless from
these, v. 23. nor yet can it from these, unless (...)] signify being bought
out from humane servitude, by some sum of money, etc. as we know it was
ordinary to buy freedom from heathen Masters; Therefore in all probability
that is it, which is here meant, and then that is best expressed by form of
interrogation.

Chap. VIII. ver. 5.

[Gods many, and Lords many.]

Whether the supreme deities, etc. or inferior, etc. or whether the Sun and
Stars of Heaven, or men of the Earth de^fied, Theophylact.

Ibid. ver. 7.

[Some with conscience of the idol.]

Some that are of opinion that idol Gods are something, and who fear them as
able to hurt (and so must confess, etc.)

(...).
Ibid. Note b. Of the notion of (...) being weak] for sickness or wound, to the
place in Nahum 2.5. Add, And so generally the Hebrew (...) impingere, and
cespitare, to stumble, or fall on gal-traps, or any other mischief by the way,
is rendered by the 72. (...) being weak, because they are wounded and galled by
these means, and so made unable to go forward. So Romans 14.21. we have together
in the same sense (...) and (...) being offended (or galled) and being made
weak.

Ibid. Of the notion of (...) for sinners, Add, In To. 5.6.
So says Theophylact, (...), weak, that is sinners, for weakness is sin, as
righteousness is health.

Chap. IX. ver. 1.

[Am I not an Apostle?]

And that you may not think, that what I say c. 8.13. of abstaining from many
things that are lawful, is magnificently and speciously, rather than with
exactness of truth spoken by me, I shall now mention my practices of this kind
in other instances. And this the rather, because of another part of your
letter, etc. Now hereto I make this reply, etc.

Ibid. Note g. Of (...) Add, (...).
(...), the middle space betwixt the two terms, from-which, and to which they
ran, or leaped, says Jul. Pollux.

Ibid. Note h. To the second notion of (...) for abstaining from all things
that are hurtful, Add, the Testimony of Bibl. Pat. Gr. to. ^. p. 1035. C.
Antiochus Hom. 6. (...). We mean abstinence not only from meats, but that
which is comprehensive, i. e. abstinence from all things that are forbidden.

Chap. X. Note a. Of the fiery cloud, (...).
though in the day time it shines not, yet shining in the night, and giving
light, as fire Add, And this may yet be farther demonstrated by a passage of
Pindarus in his description of Aetna, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Which is, in his poetic expression, this plain historical truth, that it was
ordinarily seen in Aetna, that it Vsu veniebat oculisqu^ videbatur interdiu
fumare Aetnam, noctu flammigerare, A. Gell. Noct. At. l. 17. c. 10
sent out smoke in the day time, and flames of fire in the night, and though
that Poem which Virgil left imperfect, have confounded the times, and not
taken notice (in his imitation of Pindar) of the distinctions of seasons, noted
by him in the words (...) and (...), yet has he also mentioned both the smoke
and the flames, the first in the style of a black cloud, -- Atram prorumpit ad
aethera nubem
Turbine fumantem piceo --
The later by great Globes of fire going up to heaven. Attollitque globos
flammarum, and sider a lambit. Just as here a darker smoky cloud in the day
time, when the Sun outshone it, and made the light of it useless, and
indiscernible; and a fiery flaming, shining cloud in the night, when they
needed such a conduct.

Chap. XI. ver. 5.

[Every woman that prays, etc.]

Every woman that performs any office in the Church, that is employed, as a
member of a congregation, joining with the Minister, whither Pastor, Prophet,
in discharging of any Christian duty, such as is prayer, etc.

Chap. XII. verse. 1.

The spiritual.
Spiritual gifts.]

(...).
Note a. That (...)] may here be used in the Masculine, not Neuter Gender, is
most evident; And if it be so, then it must signify spiritual persons, not
things. So the word is certainly used, chapter 14.37. If any seem to be a Prophet
or spiritual, such as have any ^^vine afflation. Thus in Palladius, Lausiac.
Hist. c. 43. p. 963. D.
(...), I knew exactly that he was a spiritual person, and knew all things.

Ibid. ver. 4.

[But the same spirit.]

In them all the spirit is the same, and therefore they that have not these
extraordinary gifts in so high a degree as others, should not be sadned for
that, as long as they have sufficient to demonstrate that they have the Spirit.

Ibid. ver. 27.

[And members in particular.]

Though not the Church Universal, yet a special part thereof, the Church of
Corinth (see Chrysostom) and so the mystical body of Christ, and the several
persons of you, members of that body, that particular Church.

Ibid. Note c. (...)
Of the use of (...) for Bishops, Add. So in Bid Eccl. hist. l. 2. c. 2.
Episcopos sive Doctores, Bishops or Doctors. To. 7. p. 57. l. 4.
So S. Chrysostom, Epist. b. speaking of the incestuous Corinthian (...), many
say he had the place of a Doctor, straight adds, (...), he had the presidency
of the Church.

Ibid. Note d. Of the notion of (...), (...).
for the (...), Add, And so it is acknowledged by Theophylact.

(...).
Ibid. Note e. Of (...) in the notion of releiving and providing for the poor.
Add, So Act. 20.35. S. Paul appoints the Bishops, (...) to relieve, or succor
those that were weak or sick, which by the context, (the mention of Christ's
words, It is better to give than to receive) is applied to acts of charity,
supply of corporal wants. And so in the 41. Canon Apostolical (...), etc.

(...).
Ibid. Note g. What (...) here signifies will be best discerned by In Iliad. 1.
Eustathius, who expresses it by (...) a strange language, and by Strom. 1.
Clemens who calls them (...), the voices of barbarians which have not been
learned. And though this equally belongs to all strange languages, yet it must
be observed that (...) kinds or sorts of languages, (...)
] in this place, and v. 10. signifies with some restraint not all, etc.

Chap. XIII. ver. 2.

[Understand all mysteries.]

Comprehend all the mystical senses of Scripture, as the Gnostick heretics
pretend to do, (see Note on 2 Pet. 1.6.) etc.

Ibid.

[I am nothing.]

I am not to be compared with those, that have that most excellent gift, c.
12.13. and make use of it accordingly, to the benefit of (and preserving unity
in) the Church.

Ibid. ver. 3.

[Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to
be burned.]

If I have the liberality to give away all my goods, and even the care, and
solicitude to distribute them to those that stand in need of them, and do not
this out of any principle of charity, and compassion, to contribute to the good
of others, but either to please men, or acquire glory; And so in like manner.
If I proceed to part with my very life, adventuring the most cruel death, even
to be burnt alive, and have no charity, or sincerity of love to others, live
and die without that most Christian necessary virtue.

Ibid. ver. 4.

[Suffereth long.]

It Is the property of Charity to be so far from wronging others, that it
teaches forbearance, makes a man perfectly patient, etc. and so for the other
virtues mentioned in this verse, all opposed to that temper, which is so very
observable in the present Heretics, and disturbers of the Church, the
Gnostics.

Ibid. ver. 5.

[Doth not behave it self unseemly.]

Keeps men from using others unseemly, etc. Or from disorderly behavior in the
Church.

Ibid. Note d. (...)
To Phavorinus's gloss of (...), Add, for which S. Chrysostom reads, (...).
And what that is will be best judged from Antiochus, Bib. Pat. Gr. to 1. p.
1133. C.
(...) -- (...), not lifted up above measure, not exalted with an opinion of
himself, as appears by the opposites there, (...) lowly-minded, (...),
depressed in heart, (...), accounting himself to be an unprofitable servant.

Ibid. To the notion of (...) for rash and praecipitous, Add, p. 1204. B.
Antiochus, (...). where speaking of longanimity and lenity of mind, he says,
that he that has it, is (among other things) (...), not guilty of that
praecipitous rashness, that wrathful men are subject to.

Ibid. Of S. Basils notion of (...), for (...), Add, So in Cicero ad Attic.
Ego autem ipse, l. 1. Ep. 13.
Dii boni, quomodo (...) novo auditori Pompeio, i. e. (...), how did I set my
self out, play the Orator, decking or adorning my speech with borrowed beauty:
where it seems, it notes an ostentation of eloquence, as of any thing else.

(...)
Ibid. Note e. Read, What (...)] here signifies, is matter of some uncertainty;
That which seems competently agreeable, and commodious to some circumstances of
the place, is, that it is one effect, etc. to the end. Only it may be worthy
of consideration, whether (this chapter of the marks, and effects of charity,
being founded in the discourse of gifts in the Church, c. 12. and both compared
with, and set before them, here, v. 1, 2, 8. and also set opposite to the
factions and divisions, incident to the irregular use of them, and so
particularly pursued c. 14.) this, and many other parts of the character of
charity be not so to be interpreted, as may most immediately refer to that
matter. Thus the three immediate precedents here, (...), envyeth not, vaunteh
not, is not puffed up] seem peculiarly to mark out the malice and pride and
ostentation of the Gnostics, and then proportionably, so may (...) behaves not
it self disorderly] i. e. where true Christian charity is, (opposed to (...)
knowledge, c. 8.1.) it has this effect, it keeps men from irregular disorderly
behavior in the Church, such as are mentioned, c. 14. throughout, but
especially, v. 23.35. and in respect of which it is prescribed in the end of
the chapter, that all things be done (in the Church certainly) (...) orderly,
which may very reasonably be thought to interpret the contrary here, [(...)]
and therefore I have not omitted this interpretation in the paraphrase.

Ibid. Note f. (...):
Of (...) for imputing or accounting sin to any, to Romans 4.8. Add, To this
purpose S. Chrysostom, (...), he suspects no ill of him of whom he loves, and
(...), charity endures not to receive any ill suspicion of any.

Ibid. Note g. Of (...) and (...), (...).
Read, But as (...) is often used in a wider sense for all wickedness, and
peculiarly for the villainies of the Gnostics, Romans 1.18. So is (...) taken for
purity and sincerity of goodness, 1 Cor. 5.8. and so 3 John 3. and often in
other places. (...).
And then as (...) rejoices not] denotes the taking no pleasure, but on the
contrary being very sad, extremely grieved, etc. So the full meaning of the
verse will be, that charity is so far from the practice of the Gnostickes,
which delight in debauching men to unchristian sins, that it will make a man
truly mourn, etc.

Chap. XIV. ver. 29.

[Let the prophets speak two, or three, and let the other judge.]

For prophesying let that be done by those who are endowed with that gift, two
or three in a day, the rest of those who have the like gift of prophecy,
passing judgment, etc.

Ibid. ver. 30.

[If any thing be revealed to another that sits by.]

And if whilst one that has that gift, is reading, or expounding any part of
Scripture, another that sits by, and has the like gift, be able to give any
exposition of a sacred figure, etc.

Ibid. ver. 31.

[For ye may all.]

For ye all that have the gift of prophecy, may etc.

Chap. XV. ver. 2.

After what manner I preached unto you, if you keep in memory, (...).
If ye keep in memory what I preached unto you.]

After what manner, if your memory serve you, I delivered the story to you, etc.

Ibid. ver. 8.



As converted by him, and received through his special favor into the number
of his Apostles, though most unworthy of that dignity.

(...).
Note aa. The full importance of this phrase (...)] may best be taken from a
proverbial form among the Romans, begun in Augustus's time. It is, from
Suetonius, taken notice of by Baronius, An. Chr. 44. n. 74. but somewhat
misrepresented. The words of Suetonius ly thus, in the life of Augustus, c. 35.
Erant super mill (senatores) and quidam indignissimi, and post necem Caesaris
per gratiam and praemium allecti, quos abortivos vulgus vocabat. There were at
that time an enormous number of Senators, above a thousand, and some of them
most unworthy of that dignity, having after the death of Caesar by favor and
bribery gotten to be elected. These the multitude proverbially styled
abortives. To this proverbial style of reproach S. Paul in great humility seems
here to refer, making his own election into the Apostleship parallel to the
choice and admission of those supernumerary unworthy persons into the Senate,
viz. that he, like them, was none of the regular number of the twelve, none of
those first taken in, in Christ's life time, no way worthy to be an Apostle, as
having persecuted the Church of Christ, v. 9. and yet by Christ's grace and
special favor, called and admitted to this dignity (by the grace of God I am
what I am, v. 10.) and in these so many respects, fit to be looked on, in his
own opinion of himself, as they were reproachfully by the people, viz. as an
(...) an untimely birth, which consequently has not those full dimensions,
which those children are born with, who have staid in the womb their full
time, to which most aptly agrees that which follows, v. 9. as the reason of
this expression, for I am the least of the Apostles, as the abortive is the
least of children. And this is still but proportionable to what he every where,
when he speaks of himself, is forward to say, calling himself the greatest, or
chief of sinners, less than the least of all Saints, and attributing all to
the superabundant mercy, and grace of God, that he so unworthy, was thus
vouchsafed, and dignified by Christ.

Ibid. ver. 33.

Di^positions.
manners.]

Such easy, seducible, credulous people, as it seems some of you are.

(...).
Note cc. What (...) here signifies may perhaps be best understood by Hesychius
in the word (...), which he there explaines by (...): by which it appears that
the phrase refers not to goodness of manners, as that signifies actions: and as
Hesychius renders (...) (for which the ordinary print reads (...)) and (...),
but to simplicity and deceivableness of mind, and accordingly it is most
properly rendered good dispositions, or good natures, of which it is ordinarily
observable, that they are subject to be seduced, and mislead, into error or
false doctrine, as here the denying of the resurrection. And accordingly it is
introduced, and enforced with a (...), be not deceived, noting what corruption
was here to be taken heed of, that of error. The rendering the phrase good
manners, refers it peculiarly to the sense of being debauched and corrupt in
their lives, which is not commodiously applicable to this place, which treats
only of intellectual error, and therefore this other sense is with more reason
to be here fastened on. (...).
That conversation and discourse (so (...) signifies) with Heretics, or
Philosophers, that disputed against the possibility of the bodies returning to
life, after it was once perfectly dead, might probably seduce and deceive
(...), easy, well-natured auditors, who are not so circumspect, as they should
be; And thus has Theophylact interpreted (...), the good dispositions denote
those that are easily deceived, or cheated.

Ibid. Note b. (...).
Of the custom of abbreviatures in citing articles, or titles of
Constitutions, Add, To this purpose it is the observation of the Learned
Elench. c. 9.
Jos. Scaliger, that not only the Rabbis, but generally other Doctors
notissimas, and vulgo tritissimas sententias dimidiatas solent citare, use to
cite by abbreviature known and vulgar sentences, instancing in (...), Matt.
15.5. So it appears by Suidas, using the Proverb [(...), from the sinking]
which is but the abbreviature of (...), From a sinking ship whatsoever thou
gettest, must be counted gain.

Ibid. (...).
Of the interpretation of (...)] Add, the testimony of Harmenopulus de sect.
(...). who refuting the Marianites adds, (...), not knowing that it is spoken
of the confession of the resurrection of the dead. --

Ibid. ver. 55.

[f Where is thy sting?]

Note f. These words are taken out of Hosea, (...).
c. 13.14. where yet we read, I will be thy plague. And some have conjectured,
that in stead of the Hebrew (...) I will be, the Greek read (...) where? But R.
Tanchum, and Ebn Jannahius, says Mr. P. affirm that the Hebrew (...) is all
one with (...), and so signifies, where] in that very chapter of Hoseah, v. 10.
(...), where is thy king? and so then the Septuagints rendering will be literal,
and the Apostles words lightly varied from it.

Chap. XVI. ver. 1.

[The Saints.]

The poor Christians in Judea, exhausted partly by their former Christian
liberality, Act. 2.45. making sale of their goods, and communicating their
stock to the Christians, and partly being spoiled of their goods by the
persecuting Jews, 1 These. 2.14.

(...).
Ibid. Note c. Of the (...)] Add, To this On Romans 16.15.
Theophylact farther adds, that by this phrase is intimated the great piety of
the Masters of these families, that had made all their house Christians,
((...)) and again their great hospitality to strangers. For where, says he,
such virtues are, (...), that house is a Church.

On the second EPISTLE to the CORINTHIANS.
Chap. I. verse. 1.

[Timothy.]

Timotheus that was with you by my appointment, 1 Cor. 16.10. to see my
directions observed among you.

Ibid. ver. 22.

[The earnest of the Spirit.]

The gifts and graces of his spirit, a pledge of the full promise, which shall
after be performed.

Ibid. ver. 23.

[To spare you I came not.]

(Besides, or over and above that of the spirits disposing me otherwise,
contrary to my resolution intimated, v. 17. see Theophylact) I had heard of
such enormities, etc.

Chap. II. ver. 5, 6.

[But if any have caused greef, he has not greeved me, But in part, that I may
not lay weight upon him, all you.
but in part, that I may not overcharge you all.

5, 6. But for the incestuous person, the author of all this sadness, and
severity (sadness not to me alone, but in some measure, that I say no worse, to
all you) It is now sufficient, which he has suffered by the delivering him up
to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. and the sad consequents thereof.

Sufficient to such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted of many.]

(...).
Ibid. Note a. The sense affixed to these words in this paraphrase (very
distant from that which the words, as they are ordinarily read, and rendered,
sound) is taken distinctly from the Scholion of Theophylact, who resolving it
the Apostles meaning, in both these verses, to have his charity to the
incestuous person expressed, and to give order for his absolution, thinks this
way of rendering it most proper, that joining them with himself, in the dislike
and sorrow, and consequently infliction of censures for the sin, he might
engage them jointly with himself, in the absolving the transgressor; and this,
says he, most wisely disposed by him, that they who had so lately been
commanded by the Apostle to avoid him, as a detestable person, should not now
upon his giving orders for his absolution be scandalized at him, (...) as
inconstant, and mutable; This, says he, is the reason, that he takes them in,
as partakers with him of the sorrow and censures, that he might have them his
willing partners in the absolution, and joy of that. And so this, says he, is
the sense of the words, (...) -- For he has not, says S. Paul, greeved me
alone, but all you in part, (...).
i. e. a little, or in some degree, that I may not say, he has altogether
greeved you, lest I should lay overmuch weight upon him; or in plain words;
(...).
The truth is, he has greeved you in like manner as me, but yet that I may not
overburthen him, that was guilty of that incest, or aggravate the matter
against him, all that I say, is, that in part, or in some measure ye were
greeved by him. This is a very commodious sense, and necessarily requires some
small change of the punctation (though the printed text in Theophylact have not
observed it) partly by including in a parenthesis the latter part of this 5
verse, from (...) -- to the end of it, partly by putting a comma after (...),
that so (...)] may connect with (...), thus, 5. But if any have caused greef
(he has not greeved me, but in part, that I may not aggravate, or lay weight
on him, you all) 6. Sufficient to such a man -- And this is a plain sense, and
agrees very well with all that follows of their joint, and cheerful
proceeding to the absolution of the incestuous.

Ibid. ver. 17.

Deal as hucksters with the
corrupt the word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of
God, speak we in Christ.

This we are sure of, that we have not designed any secular advantage to our
selves in preaching the Gospel, as the Gnostick her^tical teachers are observed
to do, 1 Timothy 6.5. But have sincerely revealed to you, what we have been taught
by Christ without any other aim, God knows, than that we may perform
faithful service to him.

Note b. (...).
That (...) the word of God] signifies the Gospel here, as it was by S. Paul
made known unto men, the Christian Religion preached by him, there can be no
doubt. All the difficulty is, what is meant by, (...), not that there can be
any question of the native proper signification of that word, for it certainly
signifies doing as (...) do, and those are little pedling merchants, that buy
and sell to get gain, but because it is possible it may refer to some
practices, which such Merchants are vulgarly guilty of, mixing, and dashing
their commodities, and so deceiving others, that they may enrich themselves.
But though the word may possibly by a figure signify this, yet the genuine
proper notion, being very agreeable to the context, is in all reason to be
preferred. We are not, says S. Paul (...), as the many; This sure referres to
the false teachers of his time, and those, we know, were the Gnostickes, who as
they are said to serve their belly, to love the world, and to love pleasures,
and so generally to design themselves advantages by their profession, and of
all things hated the cross, renounced Christianity, when it was persecuted and
brought any dangers or losses upon them, so they are particularly marked out, 1 Timothy 6.5. (that chapter, where the Gnostickes are named, v. 20. and their
character particularly set down) to be such as deem Godlyness gain, think the
Christian profession brings men secular advantages of liberty, etc. and so
cannot be so single hearted, so wholly bent to approve themselves to God, as S.
Paul, here professes to be. To this interpretation of the place I am inclined
by two passages in the Epistles of Ignatius, which though they are omitted in
the Laurentian Copy, are yet constantly to be found in others, and if they were
put in by any interpolator, they may yet be of good use to us in this matter,
there being no reason to suspect the hand that inserted them, of any ill
design, not yet of ignorance either of the Gnostick heresy, or of the use of
the word. The former place is in the Epistle ad Magnesian. where speaking of
the Gnostick Judaizers, enemies of the cross, whose God is their belly, minding
earthly things, lovers of pleasures, and not lovers of God; having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof, he adds, (...), Merchants of Christ,
huckstering the word, selling Jesus, going on to other parts of the character
of the Gnostickes, corrupters of women, coveting what belongs to others, (...)
greedy lovers of money. The second place is agreeable in Ep. ad Trall. There
are, says he, some vain speakers and impostors, (...) -- not Christians, but
Merchants of Christ, carrying the name of Christ for deceit, huckstering the
word of the Gospel, and who these are, he specifies in the process of that
Epistle; Simon the firstborn of Satan, Menander, Basilides, the unclean
Nicholaitans, (...), those that are falsely named, i. e. the Gnostickes, etc.

Chap. 3. ver. 7.

Or vessels of shell.
Earthen vessels.

Ibid. Note b. (...).
To the interpretation of (...) in reference to shells of fishes, Add, It Is
true, the word (...) testa, signifies not only a shell (from whence those
kinds of fishes are called (...), the shell to them supplying the place of
skin, and some others (...) soft shelled, as (...) in (...). c. 1.
Nemesius) but also (...) baked earth, and vessel of the potter, that has past
the fire, and is taken out of the kiln, and so Theophylact interprets it here,
and so it frequently signifies in authors. The difference of such (...) earthen
ware from (...) the potters vessels, or (...) vessels of clay, before they are
burnt, whilst they remain in the potters hand, in moulding, is set down
exactly by Tom. 6. p. 855. l. 10.
S. Chrysostom in his (...). that the former if they be broken, (...), are not
capable of recovery, (...), because of the hardness once gotten by the fire,
whereas the other, that are but of clay unbaked, and unhardened, if they be
spoiled once, (...), they may easily by the skill of the potter be returned to
some second form. Whence, says he, it is, that Jer. 19.1. when the prophet
was to describe an irreparable destruction, he is bid to figure it by (...),
such a vessel, or bottle of earth, broken to pieces, v. 10. But when he would
put them in some hope of restoration, then God shows (...), an earthen vessel
fallen when it is in the hands of the artificer, c. 18.2, 3. which he takes up,
and moulds anew, the matter being yet capable of it. And this sense, and notion
of (...) also the place will bear, and therefore I have now set them both
down, and left the Reader to choose, which he shall think most probable.

Chap. V. ver. 10.

[ The things by the body, or the proper things of the body.
The things done in his body.]

Body and soul together, according to his actions, which in his life time he
has committed on his body and soul together.

Ibid. ver. 11.



Note aa. (...).
What (...) to perswade] and peculiarly (...) to persuade men] signifies in
these books, will be set down at large, Note on Gal. 1.6. (see also Note on 1 John 3. e.) viz. to pacify, to propitiate, to gain in upon men, and obtain
their approbation either of the cause they plead, or of themselves, whom they
desire to approve to them; And though it be a very obvious and commodious sense
of these words [ knowing the terrors of the Lord we persuade men] that the
consideration of the judgment to come, is a very proper, forcible suasorie to
amendment of life, etc. Yet the circumstances of the context rather incline it
to the other notion of (...), knowing the judgment to come to be so exact,
that it descends to every action that is done, whether good or bad, we
Apostles, who have a weighty task of duty lying on us, to win souls to Christ,
are obliged to pursue this work, to gain in upon men as much as we can, to
approve our selves to them in all things, that they may not be scandalized by
any thing done by us, but cheerfully lead on with a good opinion of our
preaching and our person, this being very useful toward the Apostolical
design of working good upon men. Agreeably to which it follows in this same
verse, (...).
we are made manifest to God, and I hope also to be manifested in, or, to your
consciences, where to be manifested to their, or in their, consciences, is all
one with this notion of persuading them, i. e. approving himself to them. And
to this matter that which follows, v. 12. pertains also, and therefore
Theophylact interprets, (...), we persuade men, by (...), we do all things that
we may not scandalize men, and again by (...), we cure or provide against
scandals, such as may hinder men in their proficiency in the Gospel.

Chap. VIII. ver. 18.

[The brother, etc.

The Evangelist, probably S. Luke --

Ibid. ver. 18.

Your forwardness of mind, or encouragement, (...)
Declaration of your ready mind.

Chap. 10. ver. 12.

Exalt, advance our selves. --
Make bb our selves of the number.]

Assume any thing to my self, plead any worth of mine, or seek praise, etc.

(...).
Ibid. Note bb. What (...) signifies properly, is set down by Budaeus, (...),
to choose, or admit any into any order, as in Aristides (...), they admitted
the forain Gods with the others, and in Demosthenes (...) to be chosen, or
admitted into the Senate. Thus (...), and (...) are used, as in Plato de leg.
12. (...) rejecting some, and choosing others. Hence Hesychius (...), the
participle signifies select, or chosen, and so here (...) to give suffrage to
himself, to take upon him, to be some eminent person.

Chap. XI. ver. 5.

[Cheef Apostles.]

Peter and John, the most eminent of the primary Apostles.

Ibid. ver. 9.

I asked. importuned no man.
I aa was chargeable to no man.]

I made not my wants known, I troubled none etc.

Ibid. Note aa. (...), says S. Jerome Q^ 10.
ad Algasiam, is a Cilician word, the full meaning of it here will be judged by
that which Aelian says of the fish called (...), (...)
the torpedo, (...), the torpedo fish whatsoever it touches it gives it its
own name, makes it to be benumbed. Now they which ask any thing of another, are
proverbially said to do that which the torpedo does, to give a chillness, or
numness, Molestum verbum est and onerosum, Rogo, says Seneca, asking, or
begging is very troublesome, and burdensome, and therefore (...) which
literally signifies to chill or benumme (and so in Theocritus Idyll. 7. (...))
does in respect of this consequent, signify to ask, or entreat; and so here
(...), I begged, or asked of no man, I importuned no man.

Ibid. Note c. Of (...) Add, (...).
Theophylact speaks of some, that interpreted it of a well, called (...),
profundity, because of the great depth of it, wherein after his danger at
Lystra he hid himself.

Chap. XII. ver. 7.

[A thorn in the flesh.]

A sharp affliction, etc. inflicted on me by Satan and some instruments of his
who dealt very roughly with me, beat me, imprisoned me, scourged me, etc. (see
Chrysostom. Epist. 15. to. 7. p. 101. li. 40.)

Ibid. ver. 9.

[My strength is made perfect in weakness.]

The greater thy pressures are, the more visible is the divine assistance; or,
the more thy persecutions are, the more is the Gospel propagated by thee. (
Theophylact.)

Ibid. ver. 10.

[When I am weak, then am I strong.]

The heavier the pressures, the greater my supports; or, the more I suffer for
the Gospel, the more Proselytes I gain to it. ( Theophylact.)

Ibid. ver. 13.

I Did not importune you, see c. 11.9.
was not burdensome to you.]

All has been done without my asking or receiving any thing from you.

Chap. XIII. ver. 7.

[Not that we should appear approved.]

Not that I may have occasion to approve my Apostolical power among you, by
punishing offenders.

Ibid. ver. 8.

[We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.]

Though we have no ability, etc. or we have no power or authority to punish
those, who do not offend, or if we do, God cooperates not with us in that act.
( Theophylact.)

Ibid. ver. 9.

[For we are glad when we are weak, and ye are strong, and this also we wish,
your Knitting together, see Note c.
perfection.]

And in this sense the weaker we are, i. e. the less severe the less proofs we
give of our Apostolical power, the better we are pleased, and the stronger, i.
e. the more innocent and blameless ye keep your selvees; having no delight in
inflicting censures on offenders, but much rejoiced to see your innocence, and
return to the peace of the Church, no one of you being broken off by
Excommunication.

Ibid. Note c. (...).
Of the notion of (...) for compacting in the 2d sense by way of restoring,
Add, or recovering any that has been broken off from the Church by any fault,
or criminous commission, especially if he have been for that cause cut off by
the Governors of the Church, i. e. cast out by Ecclesiastical Censures.

To this 2d sense belongs, Gal. 6.1. restore such an one in the spirit of
meekness, i. e. either by mild reprehension, and exhortation, recover him to a
sense, and reformation of his fault, without proceeding to any sharper course,
or else in case of greater severity, be soon mollified again toward him.

Ibid. (...).
Of (...) for exhortation or friendly advice, and (...), instruction, Add,
Thus Hippodamus the Pythagorean, in his book de Republ. prescribing society or
meeting together of old and young, in order to preservation of peace, and
moderating all sorts of affections, he adds, (...), because young men need to
be taught sobriety, or moderation, and to have their excesses corrected, and
allayed, (...), correctione, says the interpreter in Stobaeus, p. 250.
but that sure not by way of punishment, for the (...) and (...), the friendly
meetings and feasts were no places of judicature, nor instituted to any such
like design, but by way of exhortation or friendly advice, the elder to the
younger, who might have such an authority with them, (...) (which is all one
with (...)) to settle, or accomplish them, bring them to a staidness and
stability of temper.

On the EPISTLE to the GALATIANS.
CHap. II. Note c. To the examples of neglect of Syntaxis in the sacred
writers, (...).
Add, So Theophylact on occasion of a reading in his Copy Hebr. 10.1. (...),
in the plural, they could not, which we read (...) in the singular, he
acknowledges that so it must be read, as we read, (...), as far as concerns
the consequence of Grammatical exactness, i. e. in respect of the Syntaxis,
(...) that there may be no solecisme in it (for such it must be, (...).
in an high manner, if with his Copy we read (...) in the plural, and
understand (...), as he does, for the nominative case to govern it) (...),
says he, (...), but because the Scripture style takes no care of technical, i.
e. Grammatical, exactness, (...), we may so understand it as the copies have
it, i. e. so as the words will yield a very good sense, if only the
Grammatical exactness be dispensed with, viz. that the offerers, i. e. the
Levitical priests cannot perfect those that come (i. e. bring their sacrifices)
unto them. In which words his opinion and testimony is clear, viz. that the
sacred writers stood not upon such niceties, as other authors do, bound not
themselves to the observation of Grammatical rules; And so frequently in S.
Hierome; On the Ephesians. c. 3. Quotiescunque soloecismos aut tale quid annotamus,
speaking of the Apostles writings, and so Ep. c. 1. qu. 10. 2dly That copies
were not to be disturbed, or any change attempted in them upon this one score,
the avoiding of a soloecisme in the period. So the Learned Mr. Bois on Act.
27.10. Laudandi mihi videntur, quibus in sacris Literis, vel soloecismos
manifestos, modo veritati nihil detraherent, religio esset emendare, they are
to be commended that would not in the Scripture, mend manifest soloecismes, so
they do not hurt the truth of the matter. And the same was the account of Dr.
Reynolds a very learned man among us, when he was by Sir Henry Savile consulted
in a like matter. For when in preparing the Edition of S. Chrysostom, there
were some expressions observed, unvaried in all copies, which yet were not
allowable by any rules of Greek Syntaxis, and from thence a necessity appeared
of either receding from all copies or else admitting of false Greek, the
question was proposed to that Doctor, whether it would be derogatory to that
divine writer and learned Orator S. Chrysostom, to acknowledge, that he wrote
false Greek, and his answer was, Viros magn^s (...) inieutos emendatam verborum
structuram saepe negligere. See Note in Genesis p. 5. and 27. where after mention
of the many (...) and (...), he adds, ne quis speret haec omnia ad Grammaticae
n^^inam dirigi.
that such writers were more careful of the sense than of the Syntaxis, and,
so the former were perspicuous, often neglected the latter, especially when the
false Greek was most promptly intelligible (as in the instances produced it
generally was) adding, that indeed S. Paul himself was guilty of the like, out
of whom he set down two places (for a (...)) which were not reconcilable with
the rules of Grammatical Syntaxis; The places have already been taken notice of
in the Epistles to the Colossians, c. 3.16. and Ephesians, c. 4.2. To this I
add the observation of Maimonides, More Nev. l. 2. c. 29. Vnumquemque
prophetam ea lingua, eaque loquendi ratione, quae ipsi est familiaris and
consueta, impelli a prophetia sua ad loquendum ei qui ipsum intelligit, that
every prophet is by his prophecy impelled to speak in that language and manner
of speaking which is familiar and customary to him, i. e. (says Buxtorfe out
of the Rabbis Commentaries) si propheta est Hebraeus, impellit eum prophetia
ut loquatur Hebraice, si purum and ornatum sermonem habet, eodem modo
prophetiam suam eloquitur, si minus ornatum, minus ornate quoque prophetiam
suam profert, si Ephraimita Ephraimitice, si Galilaeus Galilaice; If the
prophet be an Hebrew, his prophecy impells him to speak Hebrew, etc. if he have
pure language he delivers his prophecy after that manner, if his language be
less pure or eloquent, he does deliver his prophecy less eloquently, if he be
an Ephraimite, Ephraimitically, if a Galilean, he speaks in that dialect.

Ibid. ver. 6.

[c In conference added nothing to me.]

When they understood what I had done, they gave me no advice to alter any
thing, nor said any more to me than what I knew before.

Ibid. Note cc. (...).
What is the full meaning of (...), they added nothing to me, is, I think,
exactly set down by S. Chrysostom, in [(...), they opposed me not, but
conspired and accorded with me, (...), they added no more to me than I knew
before, (...) when they had knowledge of my affairs, they neither added nor
altered any thing in my course: and this as a farther explication of what went
before, that they gave no appointment for the circumcising of Titus, that went
along with Paul, and never had been circumcised. And so in proportion to this
sense, follows his notion, (...), (...).
but contrariwise,] not that they were taught by Paul, for they needed not
that, but that they were too far from blaming, or altering any thing in his
practice, that they not only approved, but commended his whole course.

Ibid. ver. 9.

[Perceived the grace that was given unto me.]

Approved and commended all that we did, or had done.

Ibid. ver. 10.

[The poor.]

The Christians in Judea, who were sadly spoiled and wasted by their
unbeleeving countrymen, 1 Thessalonians. 11.14. Heb. 10.34. (see Chrysostom.)

Ibid. ver. 12.

[Fearing them, etc.

Out of fear of scandalizing the Jewish Christians, etc. (see Theophylact and
Chrysostom interpreting it by a like phrase, c. 4.11. I am afraid of you least
I have bestowed on you labor in vain.)

(...).
Chap. III. Note a. Read, If the time would agree, it is not improbable that
(...)] should refer to some beginnings of the heresy of the Ebionites. To the
description of them, in Eusebius. Add, that they taught moreover, (...), etc.
that Christians had need of legal observations, and not only of Faith and
Christian life to salvation. Of the folly of following such teachers as these,
Add, To this agrees the style, which he gives these legal observances, calling
them (...) c. 4.9. weak and poor elements, (...).
in relation, as it seems probable, to that name of Ebion signifying poor.

Chap. IV. ver. 1.

[The heir, as long as he is a child.]

The heir, which although his father is dead, is yet but a minor.

Ibid. ver. 15.

[ What therefore is or was your happiness?
Where is then the blessedness?]

And then how happy did you think your selves, etc. Or what is now become of
all that, for which you were so taken notice of, and magnified among men, as
the kindest and lovingest of any to your teachers, so kind, that I am able to
bear you witness, that nothing was so precious to you, but you would have
parted with it for my sake ( Theophylact.)

Ibid. Note c. Read, (...).
(...) is by Theophylact interpreted (...), mount Sinai being not far from
Jerusalem, but as he acknowledges also, it signifies originally to walk along
with, etc.

Chap. V. ver. 21.

[Revellings.]

Night-revels in impure pursuits (see Note on Romans 13. e.)

Chap. VI. ver. 1.

[Restore such an one in the spirit of meekness.]

Either regaine him by friendly advice, or else in case of censures inflicted,
upon sight of his contrition restore him to the peace of the Church again.

Note a. Of the spirit of meekness, Read, (...)*
It is here this milder part of the Apostolical office, which is to paercede
the more severe and, if it be possible, to prevent it. 1. Admonition and
Reprehension, which if they prevail, there is no need of proceeding any
farther, and 2. An easy Admission to penitence, etc. (...).
To this 2d the word (...) may incline, which we render restore, but signifies
properly to put in joint, etc. and so fitly belongs to the restoring an
excommunicate person to the society and peace of the Church; but yet not only
so, but signifies also to recover the offender to a sense, and reformation, be
it by admonition, reprehension, or any such milder means.

Ibid. ver. 2.

[Bear ye one another burdens.]

Ease one another, as much as ye can, as in a building every stone assists the
next, helps to bear the weight that lies upon it, and contributes its part to
the support of the whole fabric, etc.

Ibid. ver. 3.

[Deceiveth himself.]

Cheats himself, and persuades no man else, but becomes ridiculous by his
vanity.

Ibid. ver. 4.

[In himself alone.]

Looking on himself absolutely, and discerning how he is a better Christian to
day, than he was yesterday.

Ibid. ver. 11.

With what kind of letters.
How b large a letter.]

(...).
Ibid. Note b. What (...) signifies Theophylact has expressed his opinion. S.
Paul, says he, was accused to preach in other places for the observation of
the Mosaical Law, contrary to what this Epistle contains. This forced him to
testify, what here he says, under his own hand, that he did no where preach
for the Law, c. 5. 2. and c. 6.14. And therefore, whereas his other Epistles
were often written by an Amanuensis, and only the salutation with his own hand,
yet here, says he, he was forced to write all himself, and that, as he will
conjecture, though he was not very well skilled in writing, (...), says he:
And this, as he thinks, is noted by (...), is by Hesychius rendered (...), not
how long, or how great, but of what manner, what sort, noting the quality
rather than quantity. And (...) are letters, (...).
meaning the letters of the Alphabet, and not so properly an Epistle. And
accordingly, says Theophylact, (...), it is not to denote the length, or
magnitude, but the deformity of the letters, or characters, in which this
Epistle was written, S. Paul being necessitated to write it all with his own
hand. But now, granting, as we have reason, this to be the right notion of the
single words, yet there is no necessity, either that this should be thus
applied to the illness of the character, or enlarged to the writing the whole
Epistle with his own hand; That is not so much as intimated in any other place,
or in any ancient record, and this one place cannot conclude it, for (...)
notes the sort or kind of the hand indefinitely, not defining what it was, save
only that it was such as was known to be his. For so 2 Thessalonians. 3.17. the
writing the salutation (some few words in the close) with his own hand, was,
says he, (...), the token in every Epistle, that by which it was known to be
his. And so if here it be supposed, that the whole Epistle were written by an
Amanuensis, as far as to c. 6. v. 11. and then the pen taken into the Apostles
own hand, and used by him to the end of the Epistle, he may well begin thus,
(...) you see and know with what kind of letters I have written, you know the
character, that it is my own hand, under which it is, that I testify all that
is before written in the Epistle, particularly that which is in answer to the
calumny against me, as if I preached circumcision, etc. in other places, which
I have assured you, and demonstrated by my persecutions from the Jews, that I
do not; and to this purpose I here add again, under my own hand, a character
of your Gnostick seducers, v. 12, 13. and the profession of my own opinion and
practice, v. 16.18. and again an evidence of my doctrine and practice from my
sufferings, v. 17. And thus the whole difficulty is sufficiently explicated
without imagining any more. (...).
Or if the (...) I have written] be thought to conclude, that he had written
that which went before, and so the whole Epistle, I answer that it is possible
he might, but not necessarily to be concluded by that for me of that word,
because if we still restrain it to these last verses, this will have perfect
truth in it. For when he says, (...).
(...) ye see] he must needs refer to that point of time, wherein his Epistle
should be received, and read by the Galatians, and then it is certain, that
(...) I have written] will be as true of the last verses, as of the former part
of the Epistle; And so that difficulty is removed also.

On the EPISTLE to the EPHESIANS.
Chap. I. ver. 8.

[ Which he has made to abound, or abundantly powered out, (...).
Wherein he has abounded.]

Ibid. ver. 10.

[ For the dispensation or administration.
That in the dispensation of the fullness of times.]

To be peformed in these last and worst times, when the sins of men being
advanced to such an height, it might rather have been expected, that God should
proceed to execute vengeance on them.

Chap. II. ver. 7.

[The ages to come.]

All ages that shall follow this of the Apostles.

Ibid. ver. 15.

[Having abolished -- the enmity.]

Having brought the believing Christian Gentiles to that condition, that the
Christian Jews ought not to look upon them as enemies, and persecute them, as
now the Judaizers do, for neglecting the Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law.

Chap. III. ver. 13.

[ Or I desire or pray not to be troubled, or that I be not troubled, so the
Syriack that my spirit be not troubled.
I desire that you faint not.]

I that am persecuted for preaching to the Gentiles (which the Jews think
unlawful, and it is not strange they should, when it was a mystery not formerly
revealed to the very Angels, v. 10.) do desire and pray first for my self (as
after he prays for them, v. 16.) that I be not amated at any thing that
befalls me in this cause; Or I do beseech you, and pray for you, that you be
not discouraged, etc.

(...).
Chap. IV. Of the custom of largesses given in triumphs, Add, So M. Aurelius
gave eight pound a piece to the poor people, in the time of triumph. (...).
Of Christ's giving his largesses the gifts of the holy Ghost, Add, That which
is here (...) gave, is in the Greek of the Psalms, 78.19. (...) received,
probably from the nature of the Hebrew (...), which as it signifies to give, so
it is to receive also, as in English to take] sometimes signifies to give, and
in Greek (...), and (...) are all one.

(...).
Note c. Of (...) Add, see Theophylact, who comparing the false teachers to
(...) Dicers, says of them, that they do (...), remove the simple as they
please, as at dice they can cast what throw they have a mind to; and this,
says he, is the (...) here spoken of, and the (...), whatsoever their
deceitful artifice's have a mind to.

Ibid. ver. 14.

The managing of deceit. (...).
Lie in wait to deceive.]

Note cc. What (...) signifies in this place may thus be collected. Hesychius
seems to render it (...) arts, for so I suppose the words in his Glossarie must
be mended, in stead of (...) reading (...); for as to (...), that follows
after, and is rendered (...). Thus (...) in Suidas is (...), to use any
artifice, and to deceive. The word, says T^m. 3. p. 879. l 43.
S. Chrysostom, is used (...), in speeches, in works, in wrestlings. In speech
It is set down by the Rhetoricians for one of the (...), see Hermogenes, (...).
p. 217. and because these are all designed to the working on, and persuading,
the auditors, therefore (...)] is thus to contrive the speech, that it may
probably be most persuasive, see Chrysostom. Tom. 4. p. 416. l. 16. (...), he
otherwise dressed up the same thing and proposed it more softly, or calmly, and
cunningly. So Tom. 3. p. 495. l. 20. and p. 880. l. 1. (...), he proposes not
sins plainly, calling it idolatry, etc. but after another manner contrives and
forms his speech, so as it may best persuade, by concealing what is likely to
avert. So in Marcus Eremita in his (...). p. 941. D. (...), you desired some
method, and exhortatory discourses, i. e. some colors of persuasion. And the
like arts of dissimulation and disguise as these, in all sorts of actions, and
particularly in combats are in like manner expressed by this word (...). (...).
So (...), Ephesians. 6.11. the crafts and ambushes, (...), the treacheries, deceits,
and cunning contrivances of the devil. Accordingly (...)] is one, that is not
apt to be deceived by any subtilties, contrivances, concealements, as in Hermes
Trism. l. 13. p. 32. (...), a most wise Judge, that cannot be imposed upon by
any artifices of the advocates or pleaders. And thus in this place, the
craftyness of men is designed (...) to the managing and contriving of their
false doctrine so as they may be most likely to persuade and gain upon
seducible auditors.

Ibid. Note g. That [(...) be angry] is not there allowd, but supposed, and so
not conclusible thence to be no sin, to 1 Cor. 13.4. Add, And Psalm. 2.4.
whence these words are recited from the Septuagint, it is certain, those that
are there spoken to, did sin, in being displeased at Gods setting up David,
and their rebellion against him was but an higher degree of it, of which he
forewarnes them in the next words, sin not, i. e. fall not into that horrible
sin.

(...).
Ibid. Note i. Of sealing of servants, Add, So says Theophylact on Romans 8.10.
(...), He that has not the seal, is not the servant or goods of the Master,
who is expressed to be so by that seal.

Chap. V. ver. 26.

[With the washing of water by the word.]

Or baptizing us in the name of the Father and the Son and the holy Ghost.
Theophylact.

Ibid. ver. 27.

[Without spot or wrinkle.]

Purged from all spots, or newly contracted sins, and stretched out from
wrinkles, such sins as by long time of custom and habit have been grown upon
us, the former more easy, the latter more hard to be removed.

Ibid. ver. 32.

[But I speak of Christ and the Church.]

This denotes, 1. The forming of the Church after the manner of Eve, out of
Adams side. Adam was alone, God casts him into a dead sleep, then takes a bone
out of his side, and makes a woman meet for him, and she is the mother of all
living. So Christ being the second Adam, and alone also, he is cast into a dead
sleep on the cross, and then out of his side the Church is formed; and she
becomes his spouse, and so the mother of all living, in the spiritual sense.
(See Prosper de praediction. l. 1. c. 1.) 2dly The conjunction consequent to
this marriage between Christ and his Church, etc. And so the Jews say of the
taking Eve out of Adams side, that it was to signify the marriage of the most
highest, God blessed for ever, who left his father in heaven (says
Chrysostom) to cleave to this wife this spouse of his the Church.

Ibid. Note e. (...).
Of the proverbiall use of (...), Take Plutarch who sets it down for an
Apophthegme of Scipio; (...), seeing the madness of the enemies, he bid them
buy the safety of the time, i. e. avoid fighting with them at that season, for
that it was with Commanders as with Physicians, who used not the sword or
lance, but in extreme cures. T^m 4. p. 148. l. 12.
Thus S. Chrysostom interprets it by the contrariety to (...), undergoing
superfluous dangers, p. 146.
and such as bring no gain, and again he explains this exhortation by paying
tribute, etc. And never opposing them in any thing, but in preaching the
Gospel, l. 33.
(...) (...), in things wherein they hurt not, give them no occasion. (...).
The very preaching the Gospel shall bring their rage upon you, let it not take
other beginning. Thus in Nazianzens (...). etc.

(...).
Ibid. Note f. Of (...) in the notion of uncleanness, Add, So Theophylact
(...), It signifies incontinent lust, for that is begotten by drunkenness.

Chap. VI. ver. 18.

[Supplication in the Spirit.]

Prayer not so much for secular, as spiritual things (which Theophylact sets as
the meaning of the phrase in the spirit.)

(...).
Ibid. Note b. Of shoes among armor, Add. So p. 331.
Strabo lib. 10. speaking of the Cretian youths, says of them, that they did
(...), use military attire and shoes. Of the making them of brass, lin. 634.
Add, As also of silver, in Virgil, l. 7. Aut laeves ocreas lento ducunt
argento, They cover their boots with silver.

On the EPISTLE to the PHILIPPIANS.
IN the Preface, Read, the Gnostickes, the known enemies of the cross of
Christ, c. 3.18. (which are not for confessing a crucified Savior, or a
persecuted faith) joining with the Judaizing Christians, were very ready to
infuse their discouragements, persuading all to Judaize, chapter 3.2. as among the
Galatians they had done.

Chap. I. Note a. (...).
Of Philippi being a Metropolis, Add, So Epist. 247.
Photius, (...), The city of Philippi being a metropolis of the Province of the
Macedonians, and this expressly speaking of it, as it was in Saint Paul's time,
Act. 16.21. where the inhabitants of it, as of a Roman Colony, call them
selves Romans. So S. Chrysostom on Act. 16. (...), S. Luke sets down the
places as writing an history, and showing where the Apostle spent any time, he
names only the greater cities, (such are Metropoles) and passes by the rest,
making Philippi, thus named, one of those greater. And this is supposed by the
ancient writer, under Ignatius's name, in Epist. ad Tarsens. when he tells them
to whom he writes, (...), the Churches of the Philippians in the plural, salute
you, i. e. the Churches under that Metropolis.

Ibid. Of the advance of this, by being a Colony of the Romans, Add, (And
being so, it is not imaginable, it should be subject to Thessalonica, a city in
another Region, Vid Anten. August. Itine^ar. p. 103.
an hundred and ten miles off from it, which was no Colony) As when in
Palestine, Caesarea Stratonis became a Colony of the Romans, called Colonia
Prima, Flavia by Not. Hist. l. 1. c. 13.
Pliny, a Vespasiano deducta, the Prime Colony called Flavia, as being brought
thither by Flavius Vespasianus, it became also, in respect of the
Ecclesiastical Government, a Metropolis, under which Jerusalem it self was. For
that many cities became Metropoles, etc. The truth is (...), or (...) which was
now changed and advanced into Philippi, and a Metropolis of Macedonia, by being
a Colony of the Romans, was originally a city of Thrace, and so is affirmed to
be by Stephanus (...). And so In Peripl. p. 26.
Scylax Caryandeus, among the cities of Thrace has (...), next after Neapolis.
And p. 74.
Eustathius on Dionysii (...). to the same effect, (...), seating it on the
bank of Strymon, where De situ Orb. l. 11 c. 2.
Pomponius Mela in his description of Thrace places Philippi, and so does
Pliny Not. Hist. c. 11.
l. 4. in his Survey of Thrace; A Strymone -- intus Philippi Colonia. And so
Dio describing Pangaum Montem in Thrace says it is close by Philippi. But
granting all this of the former times, it is yet certain that at the time of S.
Paul's converting this city, it was changed from the ancient form, first it was
a Roman Colony, and the inhabitants thereof (...) Romans, Act. 16.21. and in
that state, made a Metropolis of the adjoining part of Macedonia where the
Roman Prefect kept his assizes for all that (...). According to this Division
says In L. in Lusitan.
Vlpian, In provincia Macedonia Dyrracheni, Cassandrenses, Philippenses Italici
Juris sunt. This may be illustrated a pari. Nicopolis is by Tom 4. p. 406. l.
36.
S. Chrysostom affirmed to be a city of Thrace, (...), and so by Theodoret
(...), Nicopolis is a city of Thrace, but borders on Macedonia, (in like manner
as Philippi did) and yet in the Subscription of the Epistle to Titus we read
(...), from Nicopolis of Macedonia. This may serve to give account of the
varieties which seem to be among writers about this city. And as in Civil, so
in Ecclesiastical divisions, etc. Those cities were cheef and Metropoles,
where the Gospel was first planted, etc. In which respect of the (...) priority
of conversion to the Faith, and being S. Paul's (...) first fruits in that
region, some privilege belongs to Philippi even before Thessalonica, that cheef
Metropolis of Macedonia, viz. that Philippi was the Elder sister in the Faith,
and so in that respect, though not in others, the Prime Metropolis of
Macedonia. Hence it is, that the liberality, etc.

Ibid. Note b. (...)
Of Epaphroditus affirmed by Theodoret to be Bishop of Philippi, Add, And so
by On chapter 2.25.
Theophylact, (...) Doctor, which that it is the title of Bishop, we have
formerly showed, Note on 1 Cor. 12. c. This Epaphroditus appears, chapter 4.18. to
have been with Paul at this time, when he wrote the Epistle (so says
Theophylact, that the Clergy are mentioned in this, and in no other Epistle,
because they had sent Epaphroditus with necessaries for the Apostles use) and
to have carried the Epistle back to them, etc.

Ibid. ver. 15.

[Some indeeed preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some also of good
will.]

Some indeed envying the dignity which God has bestowed on me, by giving such
success to my preaching, now that they see me under restraint preach the Gospel
of Christ by way of emulation, hoping and endeavoring to get that glory to
themselves; And some do it out of good liking of what I have done, and out of a
pious intent, desiring sincerely to maintain what I have preached.

Verse. 16.

[The one preach Christ of contention not sincerely, supposing to add
affliction to my bonds.]

The former sort of these do it out of unkindness to me not out of design
seriously to advance the service of Christ, but esteeming of me by their own
affections, they suppose they shall gall and greive me thereby, and so add to
my present sufferings.

Verse. 17.

[But the other of love.]

But others out of a sincere kindness toward me, and the Gospel.

Verse. 23.

Go home, or return
to h depart.]

Having before mine eyes the benefit of death as of a return to my celestial
country.

Ibid. Note h. (...).
Of the notion of (...) Add, (...) in Palladius (Hist. Lausiac. p. 506. A.) to
loose from thence, or most properly reverti, to return, or retire homeward,
alluding to Eccles. 12.7. where the body returns to the earth as it was, to
the place, from whence originally it came out, and so the spirit unto God, that
gave, or first breathed it into the first man. And so ordinarily in Christian
Authors etc. taken from mariners who are said (...) to loose from the haven,
when they go out, oram solvere, and absolutely solvere, to loose, and when they
do this by way of return homewards, then it is properly (...). So Lu. 12.6.
(...), is coming home, returning from the marriage feast. So 2 Mac. 8.1. (...)
retiring disorderly. So the method of reducing conclusions to their principles
is by Aristotle styled (...), says In 2 Post^
Phileponus, and again (...) a returning, or running back from the conclusions
or effects to their Principles, adding that it is a metaphore (...), from
travailers returning to their homes, and (...), a return from strangers to
ones own home is thus styled.

Ibid. Note g. Of the notion of, (...).
(...) for worth my labor, Add, So Theophylact renders it, (...) not
fruitless, (...), says he, for I bring forth fruit by this means.

Chap. II. ver. 15.

[ Or shine ye, for so Theophylact interprets (...) in the Imperative. (...).
Ye shine.]

Ibid. Note a. Of the notion of (...) for a real form not only an
appearance, Add, Thus does Theophylact interpret it, (...), the form of God
signifies his essence, (...), as the form of a servant is the nature of a
servant.

Ibid. Note c. Of the notion of (...) with fear and trembling] for (...) with
humility, Add, And is confirmed by Him 31. de natals Dom.
S. Chrysostom, using it of the Angels, (...), the Angelical powers assist
with fear and trembling, the Cherubims hide their faces, the Seraphims cry with
trembling, holy, holy, holy Lord, etc.

Ibid. ver. 20.

No perfect friend. (...).
No man like ee minded.]

Note ee. The notion of (...) among Greek authors is clear all one with (...),
equal to my soul, a second self, most dear to me, such as Patroclus to Achilles
in Homer, whom, says he, I love (...) equal to my head or life. Thus also the
Greek interpreters of the Psalms use it Psalm. 54.14. (...), thou my companion,
my guide, and my known friend. This therefore in all reason is to be the
meaning of it here also, not to express what care Timothy had of the
Philippians (for that is said in the next words, (...), who will sincerely take
care of your affairs) but how dearly valued he was by Paul, so that when he
came to them, they should think a second Paul was come to them. If there were
any difficulty in this rendering or place for conjecture, a man might guess S.
Paul to have written either (...) or (...), the first used by this Apostle in
this Epistle, c. 4.3. (...), true yokefellow, and the latter of the same
signification, he that draws in another yoke. So I suppose the Gloss in
Hesychius must be read, not (...), but (...), and so in Phavorinus also. But
there is no reason to doubt the reading (...)] nor to fly to this, or any other
uncertain conjecture.

Ibid. Note f. Blot out what is said of the word [(...)] to the end.

Chap. III. ver. 2.

[Evill workers.]

That live themselves in all villainy, I mean the heretical Gnostickes, v. 18.

[Beware of the Concision.]

Others also there are to beware of, as with whom the Gnostickes combine, viz.
The Jewish believers, which still observe the Mosaicall Law, and require all to
Judaize, and persecute them that do not. These take upon them to be the
circumcision, but are only the concision, those that tear the Church in
pieces, condemn and separate from their brethren, Romans 14.

Verse. 5.

[ My circumcision on -- (...)
Circumcised the eighth day.]

Having been circumcised at eight days old, as the Law prescribes the native
Jews, and so no proselyte, my parents, etc.

Verse. 12.

[ In as much as, (...)
That for which.]

(...).
Ibid. Note b. Of the notion of (...) for dividing or cutting asunder the
Church, Add, so says Theophylact, (...), they endeavored to cut asunder the
Church of Christ.

Chap. IV. ver. 15.

[Communicated. Having received of me spiritual things communicated their
carnal things.
]

(...).
Ibid. Note a. Of names written in the book of life, Add, (...), in the
knowledge and judgment of God, says Theophylact, (or else, (...), that from
thence God had already adjudged life to them, as when it it said, he that
believes not, it condemned already, and so inscribed in the book of death.)

Ibid. Of Demas, Read (not that he Apostatized, see 1 Timothy 3. Note a. but)
being one of them, Col. 4.14. and Phil. ver. 24. forsook the employment, 2 Timothy
4.10.

(...).
Ibid. Note d. Of S. Chrysostomes notion of (...), for wanting ability, Add,
And this says he, and Theophylact, (...), taken from common use of speech, as
when we say, (...), some streights have come on me, it is now an ill season
with me. (...).
So Pindar in Olymp. (...) (...), Riches embroydered or sprinkled variegated
with virtues gives ability of many things.

On the EPISTLE to the COLOSSIANS.
CHap. II. Note d. Of (...), Add, (...).
It Is that which the Rabbis call (...) and (...), cautio debitoris, an
obligation, scriptura, vel literae quibus continetur potestas quam alius alii
tradit, says This^ip. 244.
Elias Levita, a writing in which is contained a power which one gives another
over him.

Ibid. (...).
Of (...) in the notion of doctrines of Christ, Add, as ( Theophylact
acknowledges, rendering it by (...) by Faith, and (...) doctrines of Faith.

Ibid. Note h. (...).
Of the doctrines of the Angelitae concerning the intercession of Angels, Add,
And this of the Mediatorship of Angels was among the Platonists a special part
of doctrine. (...), says Plato in Sympos. (...), Every demon or Angel is
betwixt God and man, declaring and delivering to God the things of men, and to
men the things of God, the prayers and sacrifices of the one, and the commands
and returns to their sacrifices from the other. And again, (...), God
converseth not with man, but all the conversation and discourse betwixt God and
man is by Angels, both in time of waking and sleep. And this and the like being
the doctrine of those philosophers, (...).
may well be referred to v. 8. under the style of Philosophy and vain deceit.

Ibid. Note i. After the words of Clemens constit. (...), etc.] Read, that
being straightened and collar'd up ((...), says Hesychius) they might keep from
idolatry.

(...).
Ibid. To the Testimonies of the Ancients concerning the Christians performing
some things more than is required, Add Theophylact, (...), many Christians
exceed many of the praecepts.

Chap. IV. ver. 6.

[With grace, seasoned with salt.]

Gracious, pure Christian, or cheerful and merry, but then as it is such on
one side, so must it be also savory, discreet, etc.

On the first EPISTLE to the THESSALONIANS.
Chap. II. ver. 3.

[In guile.]

In design to raise seditions, etc. as many of their false Christ's had done.

NOte a. Of the notion of (...) for fallacious, treacherous, Add, (...)
And then v. 3. he expressly adds to this matter, (...), Our exhortation was
not out of deceit, or that I might deceive.

Note c. (...).
Of the active notion of (...) for seducing others. Add, Thus Theopylacts
gloss intimates, (...), says he, (...), I teach not any impurity, such as are
the doctrines or practices of the Magi and Sorcerers.

Ibid. ver. 8.



Note ff. (...)
Theophylact is so peremptory for another reading in this place (...), instead
of (...), that I cannot but set it down, (...), says he, (...), The phrase
(...), signifies bound, or close, or near to you, from the word (...) together
and (...) which signifies to bind together; Adding that some have read it (...)
for (...) desiring (...) but that it is not so. If his meaning be, that (...)
does not so signify, I suppose his authority will not prevail against the
known use of the word, and the express Glossarie of Hesychius, (...), it
signifies to love, to desire. But if his meaning be that (...) is not the right
reading, then unless we know what copies he had to authorize that confidence,
there will be no reason to consent to it, and yet as little cause to make a
controversy of it, the sense being either way the same, the word (...) rendered
by Hesychius, just as (...) is, for so in him, all that we find of that word
is, (...). It signifies to desire, as the other before had done.

Ibid. ver. 17.

[ For a space for some time (...).
For a short time.]

Ever since I was first with you, and driven suddenly from you, Act. 17.5.10.

Ibid. ver. 18.

[Satan hindered us.]

Some difficulty or other from time to time was interposed by the instruments
of Satan the obstructors and persecutors of the Gospel.

Chap. IV. ver. 4.

[That every one should know.]

Every one by study and by exercise, or practice, to learn, and enable himself.

(...).
Ibid. Note b. Of the use of (...) for unnatural, unclean excesses, Add,
Theophylact, though he acknowledge the phrase to belong to matters of
uncleanness, and so interprets, (...), yet thinks it belongs peculiarly to
(...) adultery, which, says he, is here fitly called (...) and (...) (I
suppose it should be read (...), that it may be answerable to (...)) because
God, says he, has allowed every man his wife, (...), and defined bounds to
nature, (...), that he should content himself with that one woman, and he that
does not, he may properly be said to exceed, and to desire inordinately, (...),
and this peculiarly, against, or to the wronging of his brother. But the sin
here mentioned being a specification of what was meant by (...), and an
instance of the practice of the heathens that knew not God, v. 5. and presently
attended with Gods being an avenger of all such things, v. 6. it will not so
reasonably be restrained to adultery, but be taken for those foul sins, for
which the Gentiles mysteries were so famous, and for which Gods judgments
remarkably fell upon them, and must in like manner be expected to fall on
Christians, that are guilty of them. To these S. Chrysostom applies the
phrase, Tom. 11. p. 24. l. 13. (...), He that exceeds the Laws set by God,
desires strange and not regular things. I shall here add, how the Bishops of
our Church in the days of Henry 8. thought fit to interpret or paraphrase this
place, in the book named A necessary Doctrine and erudition for any Christen
man. In the discourse of Matrimony, where falling on mention of this text of
Scripture, they thus express this part of it, [ that no man should craftily
compass, and circumvext his brother to obtain his fleshly lusts] where it is
evident, what they understood by the whole phrase, particularly by (...), to
obtain his fleshly lusts, agreeably to what we have here noted.

Ibid. ver. 16.

[With the voice of the Archangel.]

And the Archangel that has other Angels under him shall call them to be ready
at the presence of the Judge, to summon all the world, etc.

Ibid. Note c. Of the notion of (...), that their Christianity expressly
obliges, and is designed to this end of impressing this duty on them of loving
one another, Add, Thus S. Chrysostom applies the words of the Prophet, they
shall be all taught of God, to the perspicuity and plainness of the
Evangelicall precepts, To. 5. p. 244. l. 25.
(...), etc. The Apostles as common Doctors of the world proposed to all things
perspicuous and manifest of themselves, that every one might by bare reading
learn them, and to this the prophet agrees saying, they shall be all taught of
God, and shall not say every one to his neighbor, etc.

Chap. V. ver. 16.

[Quench not the spirit.]

When ye see gifts in others, by which they appear to be true teachers, ye must
not have the same aversion to them, that ye would to false prophets.

Ibid. Note e. (...).
Of the notion of (...) for kind, not bare appearance, Add, Theophylact,
(...), fly from all simply not from this or that, from every lying prophet and
from every sin. So Bib. Pat. Graec. t. 1. p. 503. B.
Leontius de sect. (...). speaking of the heresy of the Manichees, which chose
the worst things (...) out of each heresy, he adds, (...), it abstains not
even from Idolatry nor from any sort (not show or appearance, but kind or sort)
of evil.

Ibid. Note f. Of the division of the whole man into body, soul, and spirit,
(...). p. 907. D.
Add Marcus Eremita (...) the three parted hypostasis of body, spirit, and
soul.

Ibid. (...).
Of the notion of (...) for the will among the Septuagint, Add, This
Thalassius, Cent. 2.27. calls (...) the practical soul, viz. the beginning of
Action, for such the will is. And that this, etc.

Ibid. Of this Philosophy concerning the parts and division of man, before the
testimonies out of Irenaeus, Add, This (...).
Nemesius cites from Plotinus, (...), that the man is made up of three, body,
soul, and mind; And he affirms Apollinarius Bishop of Laodicaea to have
followed him in it.

Ibid. Of the fruits of the spirit, conceived, when the Spirit gets the
consent, and embraces of the will, Add, And so Cent 2.27.
Thalassius having compared the will under the title of (...) the practical
soul, or beginning of action, to a woman, adds, (...), with which when the
mind joins, it brings forth virtue.

On the second EPISTLE to the THESSALONIANS.
(...).
CHap. II. Note e. Of (...), man of sin, that it notes some Magician, Add,
Theophylact, who says of him, (...), it is a man that has Satan in him working
by him.

(...).
Ibid. That Simon and the Gnostics were Antichrist, Add, And accordingly
Theophylact speaking of the mystery of iniquity, (...), says he, (...), the
mystery of iniquity was already begun, for Simon and Nicholas leaders of
heresies did work the works of Antichrist.

(...).
Ibid. Note f. Of (...) for the thing worshipped, Add, So says Theophylact,
(...), worships, i. e. Idols.

(...).
Ibid. Note i. Of the notion of (...) for is all ready acted, Add, So
Theophylact, (...), has received its beginning.

On the first EPISTLE to TIMOTHY.
Chap. I. ver. 19.

[Concerning faith have made shipwreck.]

Have afterward fallen into foul errors in point of faith.

Verse. 20.

[That they may learn not to blaspheme.]

That they may reform, and recover from that very evil course, in which they
are both for faith and manners.

CHap. II. Note b. (...).
Of the Jews washing constantly before prayers, Add, Hist. 70. interpret, p
890 D.
So Aristeas, (...) (I suppose it should be (...), It is the custom for all
the Jews to wash their hands whenever they pray to God.

Chap. III. Note b. (...).
Of (...) that it signifies him that marries after divorce, to Athenagoras,
Add, This seems to be Theophylacts understanding of it, for as on this place
he says it was opposed to the practice of the Jews among whom, says he,
(...), polygamie was permitted, or as other Copyes read (...), multitude of
children was desired, in which respect their divorces were permitted, so on
Tit. 1.6. he applies it to him, who has so little kindness (...), that he
marries another, and after expressly to the (...), who, says he, does that
which is not (...) unblameable, (...), though it be approved by the Laws of
them which are not Christians, where if (...) be thought to signify the dead
wife, then it will be unappliable to the practice of the Jews, for all others,
as well as they, married second wives after the death of the former, and
therefore it must probably signify her that is departed by divorce, and then
that which follows of the digamist will also concur with it, to interpret
his sense to this purpose; For of such marriages after divorces we know the
practice and allowance of the Graecians and Romans, as well as Jews, and of
the Imperial Laws. And so before him Theodoret; If any man having put away
his former wife shall marry another, he were worthy of reprehension, and
therefore a Bishop, that must be (...), must not be such an one. So Chrysostom
also, from whom Theophylact had his sense and words. l. 1 adv Jovin. c. 29.
Of the practice of divorcing and marrying after it, Add, S. Hierome mentions
some that being divorced this day, married the next, and adds, Vterque
reprehendendus maritus, and cui tam cito displicuit, and cui tam cito placuit,
both husbands were to be blamed, he that was so soon displeased with his wife,
and he that so soon liked and married her. And so Ep. 3 c. 6.
Innocentius of those who after a divorce marry anew, in utraque part
adulteros esse, they are on both sides adulterers, and to be excommunicate. To
this belongs that of A^^^ 2. p^st m^t.
Justin Martyr, (...), they that by man's Law make second marriages, are sinners
in the account of Christ our master.

Ibid. Note e. Of the title of the Church, (...).
the pillar and ground of truth, i. e. a pillar standing steady on its basis.
Add, A like expression we find in the Jewish writers, from whence it seems to
be imitated; as when Maimonides in his first volume li. (...) begins his first
Hilchot, called (...) thus, (...), the foundation of foundations and the pillar
of wisdom, is to know there is a first being, etc. which phrase, though it
differ from this, in speaking of a first, absolutely first foundation, whereas
this speaks indefinitely of a foundation, yet it agrees with it in this, that
foundation and pillar are joined together, to signify not several, but one
and the same title.

Chap. IV. ver. 6.

[ Fed or nourished with.
Nourished up in the words of faith, and of good doctrine.]

Whose duty it is thus to ruminate and chew over and over again, and so to feed
continually on the doctrines of Christ, and by instructing others to make
returns for all the good instructions, etc.

Chap. V. Note b. (...).
Of the sons duty (...) to provide for the aged parent, Add, And he that
does it not was infamous among heathens, and accordingly Theophrastus in his
Characters among the vilest actions, whoring, gaming, stealing, etc. places
(...) neglecting to feed the mother, and elsewhere, next after frequent
worshipping of God, he places (...), duly feeding the aged parents. Stobae. p.
448.
Thus in Hierocles speaking of marriage and children, (...), says he, we beget
helpers and feeders of our age: and (...) he adds, when the fathers dye, their
children must in their stead perform this office to the Grandfather. So
Aristoxenus in his Pythagorean sentences, l. 4. the children must think all
they have to be their parents, and consequently must provide for them to the
utmost of their power. See Stobaeus, Ser. 77.

(...).
Ibid. Note d. Of the notion of (...) for maintenance, Add, So in Nicolaus
Damascenus of the Thyni, (...), They honor, i. e. entertain, receive strangers
exceedingly. So Act. 28.10. they of the Island honored Paul with many honors,
giving him provision for his journey.

(...).
Ibid. Note f. Of Imposition of hands in receiving of penitents, Add, Council.
Agath. Did. 5. c. 63. Poenitentes tempore quo poenitentiam petant,
impositionem manuum and cilicium super caput, sicut ubique constitutum est,
consequantur, Let the penitents receive imposition of hands, and sackcloth upon
their heads, as it is every where appointed. To the testimonies of Cyprian and
Pacianus, Add, And though Theophylact seem to understand it of Ordination, yet
what he adds in explication of the following words [ neither partake of other
men's sins] (...), etc. Thou shall be guilty both of his future sins and even of
his past, because thou have neglected them, made darkness light, and not
dismissed him to the state of mourning and compunction] seems to belong to
absolution.

Ibid. Note g. (...).
Of keep thy self pure] and drink a little wine] Read, thus. So that this
precept, and the other following of drink a little wine, though they come in
here, as in a parenthesis (the 24. and 25. being to be connected in sense to
the matter of absolution and censures, see Note h.) yet they are added
seasonably and pertinently, to the (...) immediately precedent; after this
manner, Thou art not to be over- favorable to offenders, to absolve them too
easily, or speedily. But above all thou must be sure not to join with them in
their course, and because there be two chief heads of that false doctrine which
is most frequent among you, (the heresy of the Gnostics, from which
especially flow the faults to which the censures are most due) viz. forbidding
of marriage (to which is consequent all impure abominable living) and
abstinences from wine and meats -- c. 4.3. I therefore now warn thee concerning
these two. In the former respect, that abstaining spontaneously from marriage,
not as from a thing unlawful, but only denying thy self that liberty which
thou may lawfully use, thou be sure to preserve perfect chastity, and not
fall into the least degree of Gnosticisme, (...).
for that is (...), to commit those sins which thou art to censure in others.
That is the meaning of (...) and (...), to be guilty thy self, not only to be
blameable for thy indulgence to others, and so for their commissions. So Ephesians.
5.11. (...).
(...) have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, i. e. do not
permit your selves to be drawn into their dark villainous mysteries, to commit
those heathen sins, which there are committed, but rather discover them, and
bring them to light; And so Rev. 18.4. Go out of her my people, that ye may not
(...) communicate with, or partake of her sins, i. e. be corrupted with, and
drawn into the like commissions. And so here, twill be a caution to Timothy
against the Gnostick practices (as elsewhere to avoid youthful lusts 2 Timothy
2.22.) not to fall into those guilts, which he ought to detest and punish, but
to keep himself perfectly pure from their practices. As for the second thing,
their abstinences from meat and wine, this temper is to be observed; It is no
doubt lawful for those that can do it without any hurt to their bodies, to
abstain from meats, which are most pleasurable, and so from wine; and for thee
to do thus, as long as thy health well permits, is both lawful and commendable
(and the Gnostickes heresy consists in this, that they impose such abstinences
on all, as necessary, and so (...), not (...) as the Canons Apostolical style
it, out of a detestation, and an opinion of the unlawfulness of meat, not for
self denial or austerity) but these creatures of God being created for the
benefit and refreshment of man, these thou may very safely make use of, and
thy health of body being infirm, and subject to frequent diseases, there is no
reason thou should never drink any wine, the continual use of water may be
hurtful to such an habit of body, as thine, and moderate taking of wine may be
more proper, and then it is best to remit of that austerity, which might
otherwise be laudably continued, and tend to the preserving of virginal
chastity, but is not to be imposed on those, whose health will not bear it. To
this interpretation of the words, agrees the discourse of Cyrill of Jerusalem,
(...). p. 93.
Catech. 4. (...) (so the Barocian MS. reads instead of (...) -- (...) (so the
Barocian, not (...)) (...), (the Barocian adds (...)) (...), etc. When we
fast, we abstain from wine, and flesh, not hating them as unlawful, but
expecting a reward: despise not therefore those that eat in respect of the
weakness of their body, nor find fault with those that use a little wine for
their stomach, and frequent infirmities, nor condemn them as sinners, neither
hate flesh, as unlawful; for the Apostle knew some such when he speaks of
forbidding to marry, and abstaining from meats.

Chap. VI. ver. 20.

[Oppositions of science.]

Discourses of the Gnostickes etc. who have forsaken the faith, and
disseminated discourses by way of opposition and contradiction to the Christian
doctrine.

Note i. (...).
That the (...) science falsely so called, is set down to denote the heretical
crew of the Gnostikes, there can be no question, and is elsewhere largely
showed, Note on 2 Pet. 1. c. That the first author of these was Simon Magus, is
also evident in Irenaeus and others of the ancients. Now it seems there were
thus early discourses written by him or some of his, for the opposing the true
Christian doctrine, and these are here called (...) oppositions or
contradictions, to which agrees that of Dionysius Areopagita (...). c. 6. where
mentioning them, he styles them (...), the contradictory discourses of the
dotage of Simon, by the (...), or dotage of Simon meaning the same that is here
expressed by the (...), i. e. those heretical proud but sottish followers of
Simon.

On the second EPISTLE to TIMOTHY.
Chap. I. ver. 15.

[All they which are in Asia be turned away from me.]

All the Asian Christians that were at Rome, save only Onesiphorus, ver. 16.
fell off from me in time of my distress.

Ibid. ver. 18.

[In how many things he Has ministered at Ephesus, thou better know.
ministered to me at Ephesus, thou know very well.]

Besides what he has now done to me, thou know also, better than I can tell
thee, how many liberalities he has showed at Ephesus, to those that have stood
in need of him.

Chap. II. ver. 6.

[The husbandman, etc.]

So in husbandry, etc. and such is the gaining and converting of souls, and
the far richer reward that attends that in another world.

Ibid. Note b. Of (...), Read, Their words spread as a gangrene does, when it is
gotten into any part of the body, for that is the meaning of (...). So in S.
Chrysostom, (...).
T. 3. p. 631. l. 13. (...), he feared least tht mischief would spread farther,
and going along should seize on the whole Church. The word is used of sheep,
etc. feeding, and by little and little going over a whole pasture, whence among
the Ancients the (...) a wandering people, which had no certain habitation, vagi
and incertis sedibus errantes, says Salust of the Numidae, and so Seneca, calls
the Scythians and Getes, vagos wanderers, i. e. (...). And it is used of fire
also spreading and devouring, as it goes. So in S. Chrysostom, T. 3. p. 712.
l. 30. (...), the flame of this error spread over all the Galatians. And so of
many other things, -- (...), In Hesiod, words wander here and there,
unrestrained. And Chrysostom, T. 4. p. 710. l. 1. (...), the dog wanders,
goes about with the sheep, for sure he eats not grass with them. And so Number.
14.33. (...), your children shall wander in the wilderness. So in (...).
Dorotheus, (...), it spreads, it goes farther every day.

(...).
Ibid. Note d. Of (...), Add, Theophylact goes farther yet, and will have the
phrase [ caught, and taken by him] refer to God also. But that cannot well be
admitted, because in all reason, they must be conceived to be caught by him,
who lays the snare, and that is the devil in the former part of the verse.

(...).
Chap. III. Note a. Of the parallel betwixt Simon and the Gnostics, and Jannes
and Jambres, Add, See Prosper de dimid. temp. c. 13.
Duo Magi Pharaonis Jannes and Jambres resistentes Moisi -- and contra Neronem
Petrus and Paulus Apostoli, at contrario Simon Magus, qui and se perdidit, and
Neronem decepit. Moses and Aaron came to Pharaoh, Jannes and Jambres two
Magicians of Pharaoh resisted them. Peter and Paul the Apostles came against
Nero, but Simon Magus was on the other side, and both destroyed himself and
deceived Nero. And accordingly Suetonius, etc. And that this warning of S. Paul
to Timothy belongs to these that then lived, and not to some that were to come
toward the end of the world, (...).
these latter days of ours, may appear verse. 5. by the exhortation to him to
turn away from such. And upon this consideration Theophylact confesses, that
by the last times may be meant those immediately following S. Paul's death,
(...).
wherein Timothy should survive.

Chap. IV. ver. 14.

Will or shall reward (...).
Reward.]

Note bb. Of this form of speech (...), it is not here amiss to note that the
full importance of it is no more than a Prophetical denuntiation or prediction
that should in the just judgment of God befall. Thus some of the best MSS.
read (...), the Lord shall reward; Other of the ancients who read (...) Reward,
yet expound it (...) shall reward. So the Author of the Questions and answers,
assigned to Justine, making it (...) a prediction. So Chrysostom and
Theophylact (...), it is instead of the future, shall render, adding that pious
men do not rejoice in, or desire to hasten the punishments of the wicked, but
that they foretell them, the Gospel and weak believers having need of such
comforts. To this may be added, that it is a vulgar Hebraisme for the
Imperative and Future tense to be used promiscuously, the one for the other,
(...) Psalm. 7.9. in the future, complebitur or consumetur, shall be consumed or
fulfilled, is yet by the ancient Interpreters rendered in the Imperative, (...),
say the 72. Let it be accomplished; and so the Chaldee, Syriack, Arabic, and
Ethicpick, and only the Vulgar Latin retains consumetur, shall be consumed.
Thus on the other side, Mat. 10.13. (...), Let your peace return to you, is
sure a promise from Christ, or prediction, that their peace shall return to
them, and thus is it innumerable times in the sacred dialect of these Books.

On the EPISTLE to TITUS.
Chap. I. ver. 12.



(...).
NOte aa. Of Epimenides the author of this verse, it is known that he took upon
him to teach men, how the judgments of heaven, when at any time they fell on a
city, pestilence, famine, etc. were to be averted. A story of this is notorious
in Diogenes Laertius, and is set down Note on Act. 17. f. and so says
Theophylact of him, that as he was one of the wisest men among the Graecians,
so he was (...) one that set himself to find out and teach others what
ceremonies were to be used to avert the anger of the Gods (which they that did,
are called among the heathens, priests and diviners, 1 Samuel 6.1, 2.) He farther
says of him, that he did seem (...), to be a very good diviner, and
accordingly, says Laertius, (...), one very much in the favor of the Gods;
but this, as it is elsewhere shown at large, (Note on Lu. 1. m.) not referring
only to prediction of things to come, but directing them in their duty for
present actions. This gives an account of the reason, (...).
why he is here called a prophet of their own, one so deemed by them; And as
most such were among them, so was he, a Poet also; Of him says Chrysostom,
and Theophylact, that seeing the Cretians build a Sepulchral Monument to
Jupiter, and worship him, as one that was or had been but a man, (...), in
Zeal, and jealousy, and rage for that God of his, he writes these verses to
Jupiter, beginning, (...), Which Chrysostom makes up into a Distich. -- (...)
(...).
The Cretans are always liars, for they have built thee a tomb, but thou have
never dyed, but shall continue for ever. But it must here be observed, that
these verses are in Callimachus's hymn (...), which that they are the very
lines here referred to, in Epimenides, does no way appear, but by Chrysostomes
conjecture, nay the contrary must be concluded by the (...)] that here
follows, but not in Callimachus. It is then most probable that Callimachus
borrowed thence the first words, and added the rest of his own, and so applied
it to his purpose. And then it remains that this was not the occasion of these
words of Epimenides cited by S Paul, and then all S. Chrysostomes supposed
difficulties are at an end, which he raised on supposal, that the verse here
cited by S. Paul referred to Jupiter (for it was no lie, that Jupiter was
mortal and had dyed.) However this were, Epimenides's words, as far as S. Paul
cites them, are true, and the matter notorious, even to a proverb, that the
Cretans were liars, and accordingly in Cebes's table, (...)] is justly deemed
to be falsely written for (...) in this notion of (...), for (...) and (...),
lying and deceiving, see Petiti Miscell. l. 4. c. 4. and so in that more
general account, and not in this particular respect, S. Paul here calls them
liars, (...).
for to that the [(...) always lyers] in Epimenides belonged, and not to one
act of theirs. So in like manner does S. Paul take out of Aratus, and apply to
the true God, those words, which that heathen applied (...), to Jupiter falsely
styled a God, by this means stopping their mouths with testimonies out of their
own authors, as to the Jews he elsewhere argues out of the Prophets of the Old
Testament, which were of force with them, and not out of the Gospels.

(...).
What is here meant by (...)] is matter of some question; Phavorinus seems to
have read it (...) and renders it (...), great eaters, and so indeed that word
proverbially used for gluttons, seems to be made of (...) belly, and (...), not
in the notion of (...) slow or idle, but of (...) swift (so says Hesychius
(...), and in Homer (...) are swift, eager dogs) and so signifies greedy
devourers. And to this sense has Guil. Canterus with full confidence
interpreted the phrase, Nov. Lect. l. 1. c. 15. But that which to me seems more
facile, is to render (...) belleys] a^ Hesychius does, (...), they that take no
care but for food, and so the word belleys] will be proverbially taken for
gluttonous persons, as in Hesiods Theogonia, from whence the latter part of
this verse seems to be imitated, and lightly changed, (...). (...).
And then (...) idle] annexed to it, will signify all those sins of uncleanness
consequent to gluttony, which are also proverbially expressed by idleness, as
in Sodom, Ez^ch. 16.49. and so seem to signify here among the Gnostick
heretics in Crete.

Chap. II. Note b. Of (...), 1 Timothy 3. (...).
Add, That is, says Theophylact, the Deaconesses.

Ibid. Note d. Of the importance of (...), (...).
to the testimony of Naumachius, Add, So Hector to Andromache in Homer, (...).
(...)
(...).
Go home and fall to thine own work -- on which says Eustathius, (...), the
Poet in those words delivers a moral sentence, that it is the proper employment
for women to keep home and follow their domestic affairs.

Chap. III. Note a. Of the notion of (...), (...).
for honest trades, Add, Thus in Cicero vitae acti, signifies a trade, or the
whole business of the life, l. 1. de Not. Deor. De action vitae multa
dicuntur. So Genesis 47.3. (...); what is your occupation? to which they answer
that they are shepherds. So in Sophocles's Oedipus, when the question is,
(...); What is your trade or manner of living? the answer is, (...), I have
spent most of my time in keeping of sheep. So Jonah, 1.8. (...); What is thy
occupation? (...).
This may farther appear by (...)] which is here used with it, for that
signifies to profess, or work in any art or calling. So Synesius Ep. 2. (...),
she has followed her trade bravely. So in Cicero pro Domo; Qui sacerdotiis
praefuerant, the Priests, in Chrysostom. Hom. 31. in Romans (...), they live by
their hands, and profess or work in the shop. And this is enforced by what here
follows, for these things are profitable to men, answerable to what is added,
(...).
Ephesians. 4.28. that he may be able to give to him that needs, out of the fruits
and earnings of his labor, and so here, v. 14. (where the same exhortation is
repeated) he adds (...) for necessary uses (see Note f.) that they be not
(...) unfruitful, (...).
i. e. that they may give to others, which he calls (...) fruit, Philip. 4.27.
and the fruits of righteousness, c. 1.11.

On the EPISTLE to PHILEMON.
(...).
NOte a. Of bands or obligations, Add, such as are mentioned in the Gospel,
Luc. 16.6. (...) take thy bill, i. e. the obligation, wherein he was bound to
the Steward's Master which being in the Stewards keeping he restored to him, T.
4. p. 422. li. 7.
and by Chrysostom expressed by (...) to give bond.

On the EPISTLE to the HEBREWS:
ON the Title, Note a. (...).
Concerning the Author, whether S. Paul, or S. Luke, Add, That In Epist. p.
879.
which Theophylact conceives in this matter, is not improbable viz. that S.
Paul wrote it in Hebrew, as being to the Hebrews, but that S. Luke, or as some
say, Clement translated it into Greek, and consequently that there is not so
much force in the Argument taken from the difference of the style, to conclude
against its being written originally by S. Paul, as there is in the sublimity
of the sense and matter, to conclude that none but S. Paul was the author of it.

Chap. I. ver. 3.

[Sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high.]

Ascended to the right hand of his father in heaven, there to sit, as having
finished that part of his priestly office, which consisted in sacrificing, to
which they that were separated were appointed to stand before the Lord, Deuteronomy.
10.8. and there to reign as a King, etc.

Chap. II. Note a. Of the notion of (...) for falling away, Add, And
accordingly Theophylact has (...), let us not fall away, let us not perish, to
note, says he, (...), the easiness of the full, and heavyness of the ruin.

(...).
Note c. Of (...)] Add, The word is interpreted by Cicero cont. Pison. by
retinere ad salutem, i. e. manu, aut lacinia, prehendere ac retinere eum, qui
se it perditum, to hold one back, by that means to save him, to catch by the
hand or garment, and hold him that is about to destroy himself. And this Christ
did, etc.

Chap. IV. ver. 2.

Or, who are not by faith united to them that have heard.
Not being mixed with faith in them that heard it.]

Or, we must to our hearing Gods word, add both obedience, and Communion with
all Orthodox Christians, or else the word will benefit us nothing.

(...).
Note a. If (...)] be the right reading, then questionless that being joined
with (...), the English rendering is proper [ being not not mix faith -- but it
is certain that S. Chrysostom read it (...) in the accusative case plural, so
as to be joined with (...) them, who are said not to have been profited. This
is clear by that passage in him [(...), for by not being mixed they were not
profited] which supposes the not mixing, and not profiting to belong to the
same persons. And so Theophylact expressly reads it, (...) and upon that
reading proceeds all his interpretation. If therefore this be the right
reading, as not improbably it is, then the rendering is evidently this; But the
word that was heard did not profit those who were not by faith joined or united
to them which heard. Thus Theophylact interprets, (...), not mixed, i. e. not
united or agreeing by faith with them that heard, (i. e. says he* that
believed, (...), for these are said to be hearers indeed) but breaking off from
them. To this S. Chrysostom accords in these words, (...) -- This is that
which he says, They heard, says he, as we hear, but they received no profit;
do not you therefore think that by the hearing the word preached ye shall be
profited, seeing they also heard, but were profited nothing, because they
believed not. What there follows in S. Chrysostom of those that were with
Caleb and Joshuah, that (...), seeing they were not joined with the
unbeleevers, i. e. agreed not with them, they escaped the punishment, which
went out against them,] Theophylact professes not to understand; This, says
he, Chrysostom says according to his great and deep wisdom, (...), but he
has not given me, unworthy man, to understand how he said it. Where yet I
suppose the riddle not so inextricable, viz. that that passage of S.
Chrysostom was rather delivered ex abundanti, over and above what was
necessary to the interpreting of the words, than designed to set down who were
the (...). That he had set down clearly before, viz. that the disobedient, or
unbeleeving Jews, were they, which being said, he farther adds on the other
side, that Caleb and Joshuah, and those that were with them associated not with
the unbeleevers, etc. which certainly was true also, for as the unbeleevers
joined not with them, so neither they with the unbeleevers. Having thus
expatiated, he retires again, and observes somewhat from the Critical notation
of the word, he says not (says he) (...) they consented not, but (...), they
mixed not, joined not with them, in which words he speaks not of Caleb and
I^shuah, as in the last period he had done, but of those of whom S. Paul spoke,
i. e. of unbeleevers, and so I doubt not but that which follows [(...)] is
corrupt, and should be read, (...), i. e. they seditiously differed or departed
from them, who (as he adds) were all of one, and the same mind; which he
observes, on purpose to make the parallel more complete betwixt those provoking
Israelites then, and the Gnostick heretics, referred to in that Epistle, who
brake union, divided schismatically, and seditiously from their Bishops, as
those from their leaders Caleb and Ioshuah. That this was his meaning, appears
by his conclusion, (...), In this word he seems to me to intimate a sedition,
which I suppose a competent evidence that (...) was the right reading. The
corrupting of which word was it (as appears) which made S. Chrysostomes meaning
so unintelligible to Theophylact, it being indeed by this means wholly mistaken
by him. Meanwhile it is not easy to divine, what caused the Author of the
Annotations on that place of S. Chrysostom to express his wonder, whence that
Father took that phrase (...)] adding that it was neither in S. Paul, nor in
the place of Numbers, where (...)] the participle was visible before him, in
that place, Heb. 4.12.

Ibid. Note a. (...).
Of the severity of Christ's denuntiations against the Gnostickes, Add, Sharper
says Theophylact, then war or sword was to the rebellious Israelites.

Chap. VII. ver. 3.

[Without descent.]

Of whose pedigree there is no mention in Genesis, as being indeed of another
race, not of that, which is recorded in Scripture, see v. 6.

Chap. VIII. Note a. (...).
Of the according of the Greek (...)] with Jer. 31.32. Add, But Mr. Pocock
has given me some reason to depart from these conjectures, and adhering to the
ordinary reading, to take notice of another notion of the word (...), where it
is in construction with (...), in most other places, the word is used either
with an accusative case after it, or with the preposition (...), and then
constantly it signifies dominari, but in this place of Isaiah, and Jer. 3.1. it
is used in a peculiar different manner with (...), and then it is Kimchi's
observation, as his son tells us, that wheresoever (...) is used with (...),
it is taken in an ill sense, and accordingly he interprets it in Jeremie (...),
I have lothed you, and so Rabbi Tanchumi; It signifies, says he, to scorn or
reject, in the same sense, as the word (...) is used, which is but a light
change from (...) to (...). And thus in the Arabic which is but a Dialect of
the Hebrew, the word (...) signifies not only dominari, and maritum esse, but
perturbari, separari, fastidire, nauseare, and in that sense is used in
conjunction with (...), as here it is, and with alla. So Ebn Jannahius whom
David Kimchi commonly follows, and cites by the name of R. Jonah. And so this
is a fair account of this place. The like also has he given of that other,
last mentioned, Heb. 13.15. making (...) fruit to be there taken in the notion
of (...), (...).
which the Septuagint use for an holocaust, which being ordinarily of Bullocks,
the Hebrew (...) calves may well be rendered by it. Of this see Note on Heb. 13.
d.

Chap. IX. ver. 4.

[Which had the Golden censer.]

Having a golden censer belonging to it, not always kept in it, etc.

Ibid.



And in this Ark the pot of Manna, and Aarons rod, and the tables, etc.

(...).
Note aa. It is a matter of some difficulty to determine, whether it were the
Ark, in which the Pot of Manna and the Rod are here said to be kept, or more
generally the Holy of holyes, wherein, as in a common place, both they and the
ark were. For 1. The phrase (...), in which, may equally refer to (...), the
tabernacle called the holy of holyes, and to (...) the ark: and 2. It is
positively affirmed, 1 King. 8.9. that there was nothing in the ark but the
tables of stone. But then on the other side it is apparent, that the tables of
the Law were in the ark, and therefore the mention of those being immediately
subjoyned to the mention of the pot, and the rod, and connected distinctly with
a (...) [ the pot and the rod and the tables] in all reason they must be
thought affirmed to be in the Ark, where it is certain the tables were; and 2.
It is as manifest that the (...), over it] v. 5. denotes the ark, on the
covering of which, and not of the holy of holyes, the Cherubim were. To this
difficulty that which Theophylact has affirmed is most satisfactory, that
though at that time which is referred to 1 King. 8.9. i. e. in Solomon's time,
there was nothing in the ark but the tables, yet in after times, the pot, and
the rod were put there, viz. in Jeremies time, when the Ark was to be hid by
him; and all this, says he, S. Paul may be supposed by tradition to have had
from Gamaleel his Master, a Pharisee; and accordingly, says he, (...), The
Hebrews or Jews of his time, which were of the Pharisees sect, affirmed it to
be so.

Chap. X. ver. 2.

[ Sure they would have ceased, etc. Others read the (...) not but by way of
interrogation, so Theophylact.
Would they not have ceased.]

They would not need to be offered again, etc. as if the cure were wrought, the
medicine need not be any more applied.

Ibid. ver. 5.

[A body have thou prepared me.]

Thou have decreed my body to be the perfect and complete sacrifice, which was
to supply the defects of all the rest.

(...).
Ibid. Note c. After the mention of another reading of the words in Habakuk,
2.4. not (...), nor (...), but (...), and (...), Add, But others that have
considered that place in Habakuk, conceive the ordinary Hebrew reading may be
well retained, the word (...) being of the same signification with (...) Jonah
4.8. (...) and defecit, and so Isa. 51.20. (...) thy sons have fainted. Thus
Rabbi Tanchumi renders it by withdrawing himself, being far removed, and that
is all one with our notion of (...). And the Arabic word which is answerable
to it, signifies negligere, alio animum avertere, to neglect, to turn away his
mind, and so that is agreeable also. Thus (...), which in the latter part of
the verse ordinarily signifies right, is frequently rendered (...) pleased, and
so is all one with (...), and then (...) his soul may be retained also, meaning
God's soul, from whom he averts, which therefore the Septuagint thought fit to
express by (...), my i. e. God's soul, in like manner as they have done, Psalm.
5.9. where the Hebrew has, his strength, and then read (...), my strength. See
Mr. Pocok Miscell. p. 45.

Chap. XI. ver. 7.

[By which he condemned the world.]

Thus as a prophet he foretold, and brought upon the whole world of sinful men
an universal destruction.

Ibid. ver. 20.



An act of faith also it was in Isaac, that in blessing his two sons Jacob
and Esau he foretold from God, what should befall the posterity of each of
them, first assuring himself that the promise made to Abraham should be
fulfilled in Jacob, Genesis 28.4, 5. and so that what he had done, though through
error, mistaking Jacob for Esau, would yet certainly be performed to him by
God, Genesis 27.33.37. And for Esau, he foretold also of his posterity, that at
length they should be freed from their subjection to the Jews, v. 39. which
was a kind of blessing of him also, although it were not performed to him
personally, but to his posterity many years after; And the like faith will it
be now in the Christians, that shall assure themselves, that God will now bless
and preserve the faithful constant believers, give them deliverance from their
pressures, although they be not yet present, but future.

Note cc. Some difficulty here is, (...)
where it is said of Isaac, that by faith concerning things to come he blessed
Jacob and Esau] to what part of the story in Genesis it shall belong. In chapter
27. he blesses Jacob, v. 28, 29. God give thee of the dew of heaven -- Let
people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee, be Lord over thy brethren, and
let thy mothers sons bow down to thee -- But it will 1. Be hard to affirm,
that he here blessed Jacob by faith, when it is evident he knew not that it was
Jacob, whom he thus blessed; and 2. Isaac thinking verily that it was Esau, whom
he thus blessed, it could not be an act of faith in him, or reconcilable with
that, which God had revealed to Rebecca, c. 25.23. ( that the elder should
serve the younger) thus to pronounce or foretell of Esau, that he should be Lord
over his brethren. For these two reasons it will not be fit to refer this of
the Apostle to that part of the story, wherein blind Isaac, contrary to his
intention, thus blessed Jacob. The next passage in the story will, I suppose,
be much more commodious for the turn, when upon Esau's coming with his venison,
Isaac finds himself to have been abused, and trembling very exceedingly, tells
him that Jacob had brought him venison already, and he had eaten and blessed him,
yea and he shall be blessed, v. 33. and again, v. 37. that he had made Jacob
his Lord, and given him all his brethren for his servants. Where Isaac
discerning what he had done, though by mistake, remembers the Oracle that God
had delivered before their birth, and considering how punctually the blessing
thus given to Jacob by him did agree to that, he does now by faith resolve,
that so it should certainly be, that what his affection had designed to Esau,
was by God promised to Jacob, and consequent^y should irreversibly belong to
him, and thereupon he confirms it anew to Jacob, Yea and he shall be blessed,
and I have made him thy Lord. And so this was the blessing wherewith, by Faith
Isaac blessed Jacob. Then for his blessing of Esau, that visibly follows, v.
39. Thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth -- (and in the body of it
again inserted a farther confirmation of Jacobs blessing, by telling Esau, thou
shall serve thy brother, v. 40.) and it shall come to pass that when thou shall
have the dominion, thou shall break his yoke from off thy neck. Where it must
farther be supposed that Isaac, beyond that prediction before their birth, that
the elder should serve the younger, had received from God another Oracle
concerning his two sons, that as the posterity of Jacob. the Jews should
have the praeeminence and dominion for some time over the Edumaeans, the
posterity of Esau, so in process of time, the Jews should be brought down, and
so the Edumaeans be quitted of that yoke, and accordingly Isaac foretelling
this, is here as truly said to have by faith blessed Esau. And this perhaps was
it, upon which, Isaac before had pronounced that blessing upon him, which he
took to be Esau; Be Lord over thy brethren -- which though in respect of the
times next ensuing it were true of Jacob (and accordingly was in Gods
providence thus directed to him) yet in respect of the latter times, when the
Jews should be brought low, was to be truly appliable to Esau, and so might
by faith be designed by Isaac to him.

Ibid. Note a. Of the use of (...) for courage in Polybius. Add, (...).
So often in l. 16.
Diodorus Siculus, (...), a dream raised him to this confidence, giving him a
vision of great advancement and glory, and (...), he incited them to keep the
constancy or courage of Philomelus. So in De bell. ^ud. l. 2. c. 12.
Josephus (...) their immutable courage or constancy. Thus Cicero defines
faith, Fides est dictorum conventorumque constantia and veritas; It is a
constancy and truth of all that has been said and agreed. And so the Hebrew
and Chaldee word for faith (...), and (...), and so also the Arabic (...)
signifies firmness, constancy, stability. And so here it is opposed to the
(...) falling off, or cowardly behavior, mentioned in the conclusion of the
former Chapter.

(...).
Ibid. Note g. Of the (...), Add, Such as are mentioned, 1 Samuel 31.4. and are
defined by Sopho^les in Antigona; (...), to kill and insult on the dead, and
use him contumeliously.

(...)
Chap. XII. Note a. To the notion of (...) for bare or naked, Add, So in
Georgius Alexandrinus in the p. 205. l. 9^
life of Chrysostom, a poor, helpless distressed woman, is called (...).

(...)
Ibid. Of (...) in the notion of a sin set out with goodly circumstances to
recommend it, Add, Agreeable hereunto it is, that S. Chrysostom uses (...),
applied to sin, to denote temptations. Tom. 3. p. 555. l. 20. (...), whereas he
explaines all diabolical sin by (...) sins, so he evidently interprets (...) by
(...) tentations. And of these (...) in this notion he there understands the
phrase (...) (...), for so he adds in that place, l. 21. (...), for sin is
provided with temptations being encompassed (where we see the passive use of
the word) on all sides, before, and behind, and so shoots at us, or strikes us.
So T. 4. p. 698. l. 30. (...), temptation of Satan; So Hesychius Presb. Centur.
2.85. (...), but if by any temptation we become more remiss. Thus Diogenes
Laertius in the life of Zeno, that it is the part of a wise man (...), to eat
man's flesh in case of extremity, or when he is by such forcing motives invited
to it.

Ibid. ver. 24.



Or, that has much more efficacy in it to obtain Gods acceptance then had the
blood of Abels sacrifice, which was the first type of the blood of Christ of
which we read, and of which it is said, that God had respect to it.

Note kk. (...)
The meaning of this passage (...)] or as Theophylact and others reads (...)]
is not easily resolved on. If it be (...), it may then agree with Abel as the
accusative case, and then it must be rendered [ than Abel] meaning, than Abel
spoke, or else referring the [(...)] to [(...)] going before and reading (...)]
in the genitive case, it will then be rendered [ than that (sprinkling) of Abel]
noting the sprinkling of blood which in that sacrificing of his firstlings,
Genesis 4.4. he is supposeable to have used. If it be [(...)] then as it is
certain it must refer to (...) blood] precedent, and so denote the blood of
Abel, so it is uncertain, what blood is meant, whether the blood of Abel, shed
by Cain, or the blood of Abels firstlings in his sacrifice. So that all these
four possible notions of the words are in effect but two, the first and the
third referring to that of Abel and his own blood shed by Cain; And the second
and fourth to the blood of the cattle in his sacrifice. And which of these is
now to be preferred, is the only difficulty; That the first should be it, the
authority of the Greeks Commentators, and others would incline, and the manner
of the Scripture style in many places (using words, and phrases, which must be
supposed to signify much more than their natural importance affords, see Note
on Mat. 12. e.) may help to persuade it. For thus it may then be explicated
very commodiously. That whereas the blood of Abel the first that ever suffered,
called for nothing but vengeance on the murderer, the blood of Christ, quite
contrariwise, called for mercy on his very crucifiers, and on all the world of
men besides, and so spoke as good things, as Abels did ill, cried as loud for
pardon, as his is said to do for vengeance. But if we consider the design of
the whole context, which is the comparing the state and oeconomie under the
Law, and before Christ, with that now after, or since his coming, and the
preferring the latter infinitely beyond the former, we shall then have great
reason to incline us, to accept the second sense, that the sprinkling of the
blood of Christ, that sacrifice of his upon the Cross, had infinitely more
efficacy in it (and that divolved to us) to obtain Gods acceptance, than that
sacrifice of Abels, the first great type of that shedding the blood of Christ,
this lamb of God, is affirmed in the Scripture to have had. That this Sacrifice
of beasts, offered by Abel should here be mentioned with Christ's sacrifice of
his own body on the Cross, the reason is evident, because all the sacrifices of
beasts, not only under the Law, but before it, among the Patriarchs, before,
and after the deluge, were all types of Christ's one perfect sacrifice. And
Abels being the first of these, recorded in Scripture, and attested to have had
much of Gods acceptance, particularly more than Cains (See Heb. 11.4.) is
therefore the fittest to be insisted on in this place: And that Christ's blood
is said to speak better things then that, and so than any other blood in
sacrifice, is agreeable to Heb. 9.13, 14. For if the blood of Bulls -- how much
more the blood of Christ, and v. 22, 23. And almost all things are purged by
blood -- It was necessary therefore that the heavenly things themselves should
be purged by better sacrifices than these. And accordingly in the ancient
Liturgies, and in the Canon of the Mass now in use, when the bread and wine is
consecrated into the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, the prayer
makes mention of Abels sacrifice, and Melchizedeks offering, choosing out those
two, as the most ancient, and eminent types (under the Old Testament) of this
sacrifice of the blood of Christ, commemorated in that Sacrament. This (and
much more, which if it were needful, might be added to this purpose) will make
it reasonable to have annexed this latter sense to the former, more ordinary, if
not to prefer it before it.

Chap. XIII. ver. 4.



(...)
Note aa. The main difficulty here is, what verb is here to be understood, and
taken in, for the clearing the construction; It may possibly be [(...), is] and
then the only remaining difficulty will be, (...).
what shall be meant by (...)] whether it be most fitly rendered [ in all]
whether denoting all things, i. e. all respects or all men, that being of
several ages, or of several qualities, are yet capable of marriage; or whether,
as Theophylact adds, in all times, of persecutions, or of release from
persecutions* Or whether, according to the promiscuous use of prepositions in
these writers, and particularly of (...)] often taken notice of in other places,
it be to be rendered, among all, that is, among all men, noting the general
estimation, and opinion of all men of all nations, whether Heathens Jews, or
Christians, among all whom (save the Gnostick heretics, then newly sprung up)
marriage had been looked upon with honor. This might easily be showed out of the
Jewish writers, and customs. Marriage and procreation was the means of taking
away their reproach, and so a note of peculiar honor among them. So likewise
among the Heathens the Lacedaemonians Law appointed a mulct first for the (...)
unmarried, then another for the (...) those that married late, as the third,
and the severest (...) for marrying ill. See Aristo's Commentaries in p. 412.
Stobaeus: And Ibid.
Musonius in his book, whether marriage be any hinderance to Philosophers, has
discoursed it at large, (...), that marriage is a great and desirable thing, as
being the beginning of the constitution of families, cities, kingdoms, the
only lawful means of continuing the world, and that therefore the Gods have
taken special care of it, Juno, Cupid, and Venus, and consequently that it is
unreasonable to affirm (...), that there is any sort of men, philosopher, or
other, for whom this is not convenient. See Hierocles also, as he there is set
down in p. 414.
Stobaeus, out of his tract on this subject. And plenty of the like observation
we have among the ancient Romans, who have enjoyed great privileges by this of
marriage, and propagation, the jus trium liberorum, the privilege, which they
had that had gotten three children in lawful marriage, is famously spoken of
among them. And accordingly to these premises, this sense will be very perfect
truth, Marriage is honorable among all men, Jews, Heathens, and Christians
also, among whom Christ has left it in the same dignity, in which he found it,
having instituted nothing to the prejudice of lawful marriage, but as
Theophylact adds, looking upon it with honor, as that which (...), preserves
men and women in sobriety and continence, or abstinence from all unlawful
pleasures. All which being granted, and supposed to be most true, yet it seems
most probable from the context, that not [(...) is] but [(...) let be] in the
imperative, is the verb, which is here understood. Let marriage be honorable
among all, and let the bed, the marriage bed, be undefiled, or simply, the bed,
whether in, or out of marriage, so as to contain the monial, as well as
conjugal chastity, proportionable to the fornication, as well as adutltery,
after mentioned, in the interdict. That it is thus, by way not of affirmation,
but exhortation, or precept, may appear by the verses before, which from the
beginning of the chapter are all exhortatorie, and in the imperative, but
especially, v. 5. where the style is exactly the same, as here, (...)
disposition or conversation without covetousness, and yet the sense must
necessarily be thus made up (and so our English has rendered it) Let your
conversation be without covetousness] and so again (...) he content with the
things that are present] To this agrees what Georgius Alexandrinus says in the
life of Chrysostom, p. 188. l. 15. that he always bid them (...), to keep
marriage honorable -- which being taken from this place evidently, is by him
set by way of exhortation. And to this rendering therefore I do adhere, as an
admonition seasonably given, contrary to the Sea Note on 1 Timothy 4. b.
Gnostikes infusions among them.

Ibid. ver. 15.



Not the fruit of our herds to be burnt upon his altar, but the offering of our
charity, alms and mercy, our Christian sacrifice, v. 16. joined with our
thanksgiving to God (and never omitted by the primitive Christians in their
Eucharist) answerable to the free-will-offerings or vows, Hos. 14.3. in
acknowledgement of his power and goodness.

Note d. (...).
Some difficulty there is in the phrase (...) fruit of lips] It Is ordinarily
conjectured that the Greek translation in Hosea, chapter 14.2. whence it is taken,
read (...) fruit, in stead of (...) calves, which the Hebrew Copyes retain, and
instances of the like have been given Note on Heb. 8. a. But Mr. Pocock renders
another account of it, viz. that (...) is here taken in the notion of (...),
the word used by the Septuagint for an holocaust, which being ordinarily of
young bullockes, the Hebrew (...) vituli calves, may fitly be rendered by it.
The only difficulty is to resolve what the reason is, that holocausts should
be called (...), and his conjecture is good, because these being above what was
prescribed by the Law, they bare proportion to fruit or banquet after a meal,
and accordingly they are called by the Rabbis (...) summer fruit for the
Altar, or a banquet over and above the prescribed sacrifice; for as it is the
custom after a feast, to serve in fruit, so, says Bartenorius, after they
have offered the due oblations of every day, they bring the holocausts for
their free-will-offerings. See Maimon. ad Mishnaioth, tr. Shekalum. c. 4.. 4.
But if this be not embraced, why yet may it not be resolved, that the 72.
retaining the sense, thought fit (as often they do) lightly to change the
words, and so to set fruit for calves. By this means it is become far more fit
for our Apostles turn, to signify our Christian sacrifice, or free will
oblations, works of mercy, etc. which together with our praises of God we offer
to him, proportionable to the offering to God thanksgiving, and paying vows,
Ps. 50.14. which being promised by the lips and spoken with the mouth, Psalm.
67.14. the payment of them is really (...) here, the fruit, and calves of our
lips. This fruit of the lips is here visibly set down, as all one with the
(...), sacrifice of praise; Thus the [(...) that is] enforces. (...).
Now the sacrifice of praise, is literally (...), so called, Psalm. 49.15, and
24. Psalm. 107.22. Psalm. 116.17. and that the (...) salvation, ver. 13. i. e.
the peace offering, or trepass offering, Lev. 7. where for (...) the
trepass offering, the Septuagint have (...) the sacrifice of salvation, v. 1.
(...), the sacrifice of praise, v. 2. (...), the sacrifice of salvisick praise,
v. 3. And this the Christian offers in the Eucharist, wherein, according to the
Primitive practice, every man brings his liberal oblation, the bread and wine,
and fruits of the season, in Apol. 2. p. 97.
Justin Martyrs time, and afterward, that which was proportionable thereto,
never coming to God empty, or without remembering the Corban, says Deop. and
^icem. p. 180. Dominicum celebrare te ^redis, qui Corbonam non respicis?
S. Cyprian. For this being offered to God by the Bishop or Priest with
thanksgiving (from whence it was called the Eucharist) thereby to acknowledge
God the author of all the good things we enjoy (primitias earum quae sunt ejus
creaturarum offerentes, says l. 4. c. 34.
Irenaeus) is properly our sacrifice of praise, a real sacrifice, viz. the
(...) gifts, or oblations which there we bring, and that a sacrifice of praise
or thanksgiving, being farther (...), a commemoration of Christ's sacrifice,
says Chrysostom; And so literally (...) here, the fruit, or free will
oblation of praising lips, or of lips giving thanks, or confessing in the name
of the Lord, that Lord of our salvation, whom we there commemorate. And then to
all this follows very naturally, in the next verse, to do good, and to
communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased, i. e.
Over and above this s^lemn Eucharistical oblation, we must also be mindful of
daily continual works of charity upon all occasions, and wants of our poor
brethren, this of charity and mercy being our acceptable Christian sacrifice,
required by God in exchange for those daily sacrifices of the Jews, that were
consumed with fire, went all into smoke, were not laid out to so much solid
profit, (the relief of our poor brethren, Gods known proxyes upon earth) as
these our Christian sacrifices are.

Ibid. ver. 16.

[But to do good and communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased.]

But be sure not to omit any season of charity or supply to any brothers wants
that can at any time be offered to you. For this is of the same nature, and
obligation with the former. All such are offerings to God, very acceptable to
him, (whatsoever ye do to one of these little ones, ye do unto him) and
required now of us under the Gospel as our only Christian sacrifice.

On the general EPISTLE of JAMES.
(...).
CHap. I. Note a. Of the notion of (...) for constancy, in opposition to double
minded, or wavering, Add, So in Herodotus, li. 1. (...), Men must preserve
faith in friendship, and not be polluted with a double heart, where, as here,
faith and the double heart, are opposed n^ this sense.

(...).
Ibid. Note e. Of the notion of (...) nativity in the Astronomers use of the
word, Add, And so S. Chrysostom (...), To. 3. p. 266. li. 9.
and frequently elsewhere, for the Astrologers casting men's nativity.

Ibid. Note f. After the testimony of Ignatius concerning the Gnostickes
doctrine of Charity, Add, In which respect it is manifest that this Apostle,
chapter 2. v. 14. proceeds to a punctual discourse of the absolute necessity of
superadding works of charity to faith, or else it will profit nothing, directly
opposite to the doctrine of Simon and his Gnostickes, of whom says l. 1. c. 20.
Irenaeus, Hi qui in eum and Helenam ejus spem habeant, and ut liberos, agere
quae veli^t, secundum enim ipsius gratiam salvari homines and non secundum
operas justas, They that place their hope on Simon and his Helen as free men
did what they would, deeming that men were saved by his grace and not according
to any good works or endeavors. So of the Valentinians, the progeny of those
Gnostickes, l. 1. c. 2.
semetipsos non per operationem sed eo quod naturaliter spirituales, omnino
salvari, that they are not saved by working, but because they are naturally
spiritual, quapropter and intimorate, omnia quae vetantur, hi qui perfecti
sunt, operantur, and therefore they that are perfect act without fear all
things that are forbidden. This was S. Augustines sense of the design of this
Epistle, de fide and oper. c. 14. Quoniam haec opinio tunc fuerat exorta, aliae
Apostolicae Epistolae Petri, Johannis, Jacobi, Judae contra eam maxim dirigunt
intentionem, ut vehementer adstruant fidem sine operibus nihil prodesse,
because this opinion was risen up in that time all the Catholic Epistles of
James, etc. were chiefly intended against it, vehemently asserting that faith
without works will profit nothing.

Chap. III. ver. 17.

[Without Wavering, or making a difference
partiality.]

Without all wavering or inconstancy, etc. or without making any difference, a
liberal distribution to all that want.

Note f. In the end, Add, (...).
If there be any question of this, it must be because of the connection here
with (...), good fruits. For thus indeed the word is sometimes applied, and
then it signifies an universal liberality; Thus in Palladius Lausiac. Hist.
(...). Olympias, which is there called (...), one that communicated and
ministered to all that wanted, and so dispersed or dissipated an immense wealth,
(...), she aided all liberally, and (...); where it may possibly signify
without any difference; so Gentianus Hervetus reads it, indiscriminatim, to all
that wanted, whatsoever they were; but it may also signify without doubting,
or wavering, and so cohere with the (...) (immediately precedent) dispersing
that infinite and unmeasurable wealth which she had without any doubt or
wavering or demur, arising from worldly fear of her own want, which this
liberality might cause, as when Christ commanded, Lu. 6.35. to do good and
lend, (...), despairing or doubting nothing, See Note on that place. And so
though possibly it may signify here [ without making any difference in acts of
mercy] which is a kind of partiality, yet it may as fitly also be rendered
without doubting, as that is applicable to mercy and good fruit, i. e. to
liberality also.

(...).
Chap. V. Note e. Of the understanding by (...), Bishops, Read, But because etc.
and because (...) in the Plural, etc. and because (...) -- was -- the title of
Bishops, and because when there were secondary Presbyters, more then one, in
every city, the sick man cannot be thought obliged by this text to call for the
whole college, or one sick man for more then one; And lastly, because --
therefore it may very reasonably be resolved, that the Bishops of the Church,
not the Elders of the Jewish Synagogue, but the Bishops of the Christian
Church, Seniores Christianae congregationis, as Erasmus paraphraseth it, the
Elders, or Governors of the Christian congregation, One in each particular
Church, but many in the Universal Church, and so also many in the Church of the
dispersion, to which this Epistle is addressed, are here meant by S. James.

Ibid. Note f. Of Unction, (...).
etc. on the sick bed, Add, The errors of the Romish practice in this point
are very sufficiently provided against by our Bishops in the days of Henry the
Eighth, in their book, set out by the King, and entitled, A necessary Doctrine
and Erudition for any Christian man, upon the head of Extreme Unction.

Ibid. Note i. Of charity hiding sins, (...).
or seeing few faults in others, Add, And thus the saying of Pythagoras (who
is thought to have had some knowledge of the Scriptures of the Old Testament)
seems to be interpretable, (...), A garment hides the ill proportions of the
body, but good will or charity hides sin.

On the first EPISTLE general of PETER.
Chap. I. ver. 18.

[Vain conversation.]

The Legal rites of external obedience, which wanted that inward purity which
Christ came to teach us.

CHap. III. Note d. (...)
Of Plato's understanding somewhat of the story of the creation of Adam and
Eve, Add, Writing in (...)* and Dial. (...). that anciently male and female
were put together in one body and were after by Jupiter cut asunder,
concluding, (...), every one of us is the share of a man, (...), cut asunder
like the sole-fishes, made two of one, and this is the reason, says he, that
every one seeks out and desires a wife, (...), every one the other part of
him, (...), endeavoring to reunite the divided parts, to make one of two, and
so to cure the dismembered nature: To which fable S. Chrysostom referres, To.
4. p. 157. li. 23.
when he says of man and woman (...), they are as two halves cut asunder.

(...).
Ibid. Note d. Of (...), for reward, or gift, Add, And so Aristotle, Rhet. l.
1. c. 5. among the parts of (...) honor, reckons (...), gifts, honorarie
donatives, (...), for a gift is the giving of a possession, and a sign of
honor.

(...).
Ibid. Note e. Of the notion of (...) in Hesychius for (...), Add, So in
Callimachus, (...). (...)
(...).
I wish you may suffer no ill for this mercy to me, but that you may be
rewarded for your charity, where (...) is clearly interpreted by alms, or
mercy.

Ibid. Note f. After the setting down, and explicating the notion of (...) Genesis
6.3. for shall not abide as a sword -- in a sheath, Add, (...).
For the removing all improbableness of thus reading (...) (not (...)
pernoctabit) and taking it in the notion of abiding or continuing in flesh, and
not of striving, as the Interlinear, and our English render it, and as (...)
indeed would require to be rendered, I shall only add two things, 1. That the
ancient interpreters with one accord agree in the sense of abiding or
inhabiting. The Chaldee read (...) This evil generation shall not always
remain before me. The Syriack and Arabic, My spirit shall not dwell in man for
ever: The 72. as we said, (...), shall not abide, and so the Latin, non
permanebit, shall not abide. This is a strong argument, that they, who when
they meet with (...), uniformely render it (...), etc. by words of judging, yet
rendering this in so distant a manner, did not read that word, or in that sense,
but (...), as all copies have it, in a notion of abiding, or being in another.
And although the Scripture of the Old Testament give us no farther insight into
this word, then that once we find (...) for a sheath of a sword, once for a
body of a man, yet by these so distant notions of it, we have reason to
suppose, that there was some original comprehensive notion of it, belonging to
more, or else could not have been applied, in the Chronicles and in Daniel, to
these two so distant particulars. A sheath and a body differ much the one from
the other* yet agree in this, that as one is the repositorie or abiding place
of the sword, into which it is put, so the other is of the soul; and from this
agreement no doubt it is, that they are expressed by the same word, And then it
would be very strange, if that word thus common to them, should not natively
signify that, wherein they thus agree, viz. abiding or being put in, or kept
in, or confined to such a place, or some such thing. It Is evident that many
Hebrew words are of a far greater latitude of signification, and
comprehensiveness, than we can by the use of them in the Bible (which is but a
volume of a narrow compass) discern, or conjecture, as appears especially by
the use of them in Arabic books, which language is certainly but a dialect
derived from the Hebrew. And therefore it is not unreasonable on the grounds
premised, and those more than obscure indications in the Bible, which we have
of it, that this should be the native meaning of the verb, though in other
places of the Bible we do not exactly meet with it. The second thing is, that
though (...) were not the reading, nor by the 72. and the other interpreters
believed to be so, yet it is so ordinary for words of affinity in sound or
writing, to have a neerness of signification, that these interpreters, which
did not always render literally, but often by way of paraphrase, might probably
enough have an eye to the notion of (...) for abiding, and so render it (...)
to remain, or abide, (...).
for which in this matter S. James uses (...) to sojourne, or abide, as in an
Inn, for a night, Jam. 4.5. for after this manner of liberty it is, that the
Jerusalem Targum on this verse, evidently takes in both the interpretations of
(...) and (...). In the latter sense from (...) to judge, their Paraphrase thus
begins, Non adjudicabuntur generationes quae futurae sunt post generationem in
diluvio perditioni vastationi aut deletioni universali; The generations which
shall be after the generation of the flood, shall not be adjudged to an
Universal perdition, vastation, or blotting out. A truth indeed secured by Gods
promises at large, c. 8.21. and 9.11. but no way pertinent to this place, where
the deluge it self is threatened. Only on occasion of the affinity in sound and
writing of (...), not judging, here, to (...) this part of the Paraphrase,
though aliene to the place, seems to be begotten: But then for the former, as
the words are und^ub^edly read (...) so the Paraphrase proceeds in relation to
them; Annon spiritum meum siliis hominum indidi? Have I not put my spirit into
the sons of men? an evident proof of their understanding (...) in a notion of
putting one thing into another, which consequently may be resolved to be the
general acception of the active verb, and then that which is so put* does abide
in it, as in a repositorie of some sort, or other; such is a sheath to a sword,
a prison to him that is put into it, a cabinet to that which is laid up in it,
the body to the soul, as long as the man lives, and accordingly S. Chrysostom
gives his Scholion, (...).
(...) [My spirit shall not always abide among these men] is instead of I will
not suffer them to live any longer. For as for (...) my spirit or breath --

Ibid. (...).
Of the interpretation of (...), he went and preached in, or by, that spirit by
which he was now raised, Add, Where 1. The word (...) Christ is used, not
(...) God, according to the general opinion of the ancient fathers of the
Church, that he which of old appeared to the Patriarchs, was (not the first
but) the second person in the Trinity, Christ the son, not God the Father,
and that those appearances of his were praeludia incarnationis, prelusory, and
preparative to his taking our flesh upon him. And accordingly those verses of
the Sibylline Oracle, which introduce God speaking to Noah about the Ark, and
setting down the speakers names by Numbers, ((...),
(...),
So Guil. Canterus rightly reads it, not. (...).
(...),
(...)
(...) So again, Guil. Cant. not, (...).
(...) --)
are best interpreted by (...), God savior, i. e. Christ, for to those two
words, belongs all that is said in those verses, they consist of nine letters,
four syllables, the three first of two letters a piece, and the fourth of the
remaining three, of five consonants, and four vowels, and so likewise the
numeral importance of each letter amounts to the just number of 1692. as it
is there described. See Canter. Novar. Lect. l. 1. c. 3. Secondly the phrase,
etc.

(...).
Ibid. Note h. To (...) the antitype of which, Add, As for the word (...), It
may perhaps be here fit to note, that as it is certainly best rendered Antitype,
to reserve the signification of the Greek, whatsoever shall here appear most
fitly to belong to it, so the Greek is capable of very distant senses. For 1,
It signifies (not a like but) a contrary, So in In Hierone.
Xenophon, (...), Matters of favor are done by the Prince himself, but the
contrary by other men. So says Hesychius of it. (...), and (...), It signifies
contrariety or contradiction, and so we know the preposition (...) most
ordinarily imports; And this the place would not unfitly bear, that Baptism is
quite contrary to the ark of Noah, but yet saves as that saved; There the
destruction was by water, and only they were saved, which got into the ark, but
here water is the means of saving from destruction, and they perish, which have
not this immersion or baptism here spoken of. Beside this there is a second
Notation of this word, as (...) signifies pro, as well as contra, and so it may
here be fitly rendered. For when it is compounded in the notion of pro, it notes
[ instead of another, as (...), Proconsul, is he that supplies the Consuls
place, is in his stead. And so it may be here, (...), baptism instead, or
supplying the office of the Ark, saves us now: In this sense Antitype is
ordinarily taken among us, for that which (is not it self a type, or figure,
but) supplies the place of some former type; so purity of the heart is the
Antitype of circumcision, i. e. that which is now by Christ required instead of
that ceremony among the Jews. But beside both these, there is a third
notation of the word, for (...), a copy, differing from (...), so as the
impression in the wax differs from the ingraving in the Seal. So the Old
Glossarie renders both those words (...), and (...) by exemplum and exemplar.
And thus is the word used, Heb. 9.24. and generally in the Ecclesiastic
writers, and is best expressed by parallel, or answerable, and may so here
fitly be rendered, parallel whereunto Baptism --

Chap. IV. ver. 3.

[Revellings, Drinkings. (...).
banquetings.]

Amorous addresses (see Romans 13. e.) Bacchanals --

(...).
Ibid. Note e. Read, What (...) here signifies, will easily be defined from the
notion of the Hebrew (...), which signifies two things, to persecute, and to
set on fire. So Psalm. 10.2. where the Hebrew is rendered by us [ the wicked does
persecute the poor] the 72. read [(...), the poor is set on fire] And so again,
(...) which signifies to try, either as gold is by the fire, or as men by
afflictions, is by the 72. Psalm. 17.3. rendered (...) casting into the fire. And
accordingly (...) regularly will signify in general any kind of affliction,
etc.

(...)
Chap. V. Note a. Of the notion of (...), for maintaining their state out of
their subjects purses, to Xenophon, Add, And St^bae. p. 486.
Callicratides the Pythagorean in his book of the felicity of families,
intimates the same by his definition of despotick government, (...), that which
respects the rulers own profit, and not the subjects.

(...).
Ibid. Note d. Of (...) for the Church Add, Thus I suppose the word is used in
Ignatius's Epistle to the Trallians, or by the interpolator, if that be not the
original reading, where speaking of Bishops he says, (...), Ecclesia non est
caetus evocatus, aut peculiaris, i. e. in effect the Church is not a Church of
such as it ought; And so it must be understood by those words, which follow in
Videlius's copy, and if they were not written by Ignatius, seem to be a
Scholiono, to explain them, and as such, to be added to them, (...), not a
Collection of Saints, not an assembly of pious men.

Ibid. Of Babylon signifying Rome, (...).
See Eusebius. l. 2. c. 14. and Jerome. de Scripter. Eccl. in Marco, and so the
Church in Babylon, the Christians in that heathen city of Rome.

On the second EPISTLE of PETER.
CHap. I. Note a. (...).
Of the notion of (...) for courage, Add, So as in those verses of In Beller a
phon.
Euripides, (...)
(...).
Fortitude is very useful against afflictions, a man may show virtue in his
death. For there fortitude, and virtue are all one.

Ibid. Note b. Of the notion of (...) in reference to unnatural lusts] to 2
Cor. 7.2. (...), (...).
Add, Agreeable to which is that speech of Heraclitus in his Epistle to
Hermodorus, (...), with whom have I accompanied in adultery, in murder, in
drunkenness, in corruption, or pollution? I corrupt, I wrong no man of them
all. Thus was Socrates accused (...), as a deceiver, a debaucher, corrupter of
youth; and this the sum of his accusation, (...), he wrongs, and corrupts the
young men. So in a narration of Hippolytus in Lansiac. in bist. (...).
Palladius, of a Christian Virgin put by the tyrannical Judge into a brothel
house, the debauched young men strait came, (...), to company with her for
corruption, i. e. to commit all filthyness with her. And so after he that freed
her from that house, is said (...) to have delivered her from this
dishonorable or vile corruption.

Chap. II. ver. 5.



(...).
Note a. Why the word (...) the eighth, is here prefixed to the mention of
Noah, might be matter of some inquiry, were it not so ordinary and proverbial
among all writers, Jewish as well as Heathens, to express the persons that were
saved in the deluge, by this style, the eight: Hence the very mountain, whereon
the Ark rested is found to be [expressed, and called by this style, Themanim,
i. e. (...), the mountain of the eight. So Georgius Elmacinus Hist. Saracen. l.
1. c. 1. Heraclius went thence, (...), to the town so called the town of the
eight, from (...) octo, which is there rendered Themaninum, and ascending to the
hill (...), it should sure be read, (...) Gordi (so those mountains are called
promiscuously Cardiei, Cordyei, Cordueni, Gordi, Cordaei, Curdi) he saw the
place of the Ark, the highest of all that region. So Clim. 4. Par. 6.
Geographus Nubiensis, Mons (...) Jemanim (it should be (...) Themanim) idem
qui Algode (it should be (...) Algordi, i. e. Gordiaeus) in quo requievit navis
illa, Navis Noae, cui pax. The hill Themanim which is also called Algordi, on
which the Ark rested, the Ark of Noah -- So l. 4. p. 135.
Agathias, (...), about the Cardyan mountains, at the town called Themanim, i.
e. the eight.

Chap. III. Note e. (...).
Of the use of the heaven and earth, for the whole compages, to the parallel,
Ephesians. 5.30. Add. And so in other authors, the body and the soul are set
severally, when yet they signify nothing distinct, but the whole man together.
See A. Gellius, l. 3. chapter 1.

On the first EPISTLE general of JOHN.
CHap. II. Note c. After the mention of Carpocrates, Saturnilus, and others,
Add, And accordingly Bib. Gr. pat^ ^to. 2. p. 347. A.
Hippolytus the Martyr in his book, (...). interprets the place, [ many shall
say I am Christ] of Simon Magus and others. (...), Some rose and said I am
Christ, as Simon Magus and the rest whose names it is not seasonable to
rehearse; So Hegesippus in that eminent passage set down from him in l. 4. c.
22.
Eusebius, having named the several heresies, that were come into the Church in
his time, the followers of Simon, Cleobius, Dositheus, Gorthaeus, Menander,
Marcion, Carpocrates, Valentinus, Basilides and Saturnilus, concludes, (...),
from these were the false Christ's, false Prophets, false Apostles, which
divided the unity of the Church, with pestilent doctrines against God and his
Christ.

(...).
Ibid. Of the rendering (...), Counterchrist, La^siac Histo^ c. 3^. p. 949. D.
Pseudochrist, false Christ, Add, So Palladius expressly uses the word. For
speaking of the Devil, (...), transforming himself into the shape of our
Savior, and so adored by Valens, he says, (...), he fell down and worshipped
Antichrist, or this Counterfeit Christ, i. e. the Devil in this shape of Christ.

Chap. III. ver. 2.

[It Has not yet been made manifest. (...).
does not yet appear.]

Ibid. Note c. Of the notion of (...)] to the passage in Chrysostom, Add, So
when Romans 8.7. it is said that the carnal mind cannot be subject to God,
Theophylact interprets it, (...) it cannot, (...).
whilst it remains such, (...), not that the change is impossible, and so
again, v. 8. when it is said, they cannot please God, (...), they cannot,
whilst they are such. In the same sense, as In Sto^ae. p. 100.
Menander says of the just man, (...), a just disposition knows not how to be
unjust.

On the second EPISTLE of JOHN.
IN the Note on the Inscription. Blot out [ So of the Bishops of Asia, etc.]
and read, So of Alexander S. Paul says, he has greatly withstood our words, 2 Timothy 4.15. etc. And that is the meaning of (...) -- Jude 8. and 2 Pet. 2.10.
(as of Alexanders blaspheming, 1 Timothy 1.20.)

On the general EPISTLE of JUDE:
Verse. 14.

[Prophecyed To these.
of these.]

]That prophecy of Enoch against wicked men, those of the old world, whose
excision he foretold, is appliable to these.

(...).
IBid. Note f. Of the notion of (...), for bare trees that have lost their
leaves and verdure, Add, So in (...).
Cinnamus, after (...), which is the dissolving of the word (...), and
description of this season, by the decaying of the beauty of trees, etc. It
presently follows, (...), the leaves, or shade ((...), says Hesychius) had
now left the trees.

(...)
Ibid. Note g. Of the words of Enochs prophecy, Add, That Enoch thus
prophesied in his time of these Gnostickes under Christ, we are not told, but
that he prophesied to them, i. e. that his Prophecy concerning the excision of
the old world for such sins as these are now guilty of, is very pertinent to
them, and fit to be considered by them. Thus we see S. Peter Ep. 2. chapter 2.
applies to them all the judgments, that had ever befallen sinners,
particularly that in Noah's time, of which that Enoch prophesied, there is no
question, and we have these remains of it. First the name of his Methuselah.
(...) Sela in Hebrew signifies mission, sending or pouring out waters on the
earth, Job. 5.10. (...), he sends out waters on the fields, to which, says
Bochart, Arphaxad related when he called his firstborn Sela, in memory of the
deluge, two years after which, Arphaxad was born, Genesis 11.6. And so in like
manner Enoch that prophesied of this destruction, and foresaw by the Spirit,
that it would soon follow the death of this his son, he called his name
(...), his death, emission. To this it is considerable, what we find in (...)
Stephanus Byzant. in the word (...), where mentioning Enoch, or Hannoch, he
says of him, that he lived 300. years and above, and that the inhabitants
asked the Oracle, how long he should live, (...), and the Oracle answered, that
when he was dead, all men should be destroyed (or as the word will bear,
corrupted, in that sense, in which we find Genesis 6.2. soon after Enochs death,
the earth was corrupt before God, which how it belongs to filthy lusts, has
often been showed) which he applies to Deucalions flood, and the universal
destruction there, and adds, that the news of this Oracle was so sadly
received by the inhabitants, that (...) (perhaps it should be (...), for so he
has it before in the Genitive case) (...), to wail for Enoch, is proverbially
used, (...), for those that mourn excessively. Here it is possible, that the
confounding the two stories of Enoch, and Methuselah, made up this relation;
For as to the latter part of the flood following his death, that may best
belong to the son Methuselah, whose name was thus prophetical; But for the
years of his life those seem to belong to Enoch, for he lived 365 years; Suidas
lightly mistaking his name, calls him Nannac, who, says he, is reported to be
a King before the flood, and foreseeing the approach thereof, he assembled all
men to the Temple, and with tears (...) prayed to avert it, and Erasmus out of
Hermogenes makes the same relation, ^hil. 2. Cent. 8. Adag. 19.
and cites the Proverb, (...) out of Herodes the Jambick writer, rendering it
Cannacae more plorem, as if it referred to his tears for averting the deluge,
when it more probably refers to the peoples lamenting, forecited from
Stephanus. See Eupolemus in Eusebius Praepar. l. 9. who speaking of Methuselah,
Enochs son, says, that he knew all by the Angels of God, and ( Enoch being
all one with Atlas) by these all Astrology came to the Greeks.

On the REVELATION.
IN the Praemonition, p. 906. lin. 11. Add, So says S. Jerome. Ep. 100.
(...). ^.
Jerusalem ex eo tempore non appellatur civitas sancta, sed sanctitatem and
pristinum nomen amittens, spiritualiter vocatur Sodoma and Aegyptus, Jerusalem
is called Sodom and Egypt, referring to that place of Apoc. c. 11. which must
therefore in his opinion be understood of Jerusalem.

Ibid. p. 907. li. 2. Read, his seeing these visions there yea and his return
from the Island, were in the time of Claudius.

Ibid. li. 4. Four arguments I shall add for the truth of it. The first
negative, to the disparagement of that relation, that affirms him banished by
Domitian, and returned after his death in Nerva's reign. For of the persecution
by Domitian there be but two authors mentioned by l. 3. c. 10.
Eusebius, Tertullian and Hegesippus, but of Apol. c. 5.
Tertullian he has these words (...). Domitian went about to do as Nero had
done, being a part of his cruelty, but he ceased from it presently, and
recalled those whom he had banished, which no way agrees with his banishing
John, and not recalling him all his life, as is supposed in the other relation,
and affirmed by l. 3. c. ^^.
Eusebius. And therefore Baronius, that is for his banishment under Domitian,
in the tenth year of his reign, is forced fairly to Sed plane errore ^apsu^
^^gnoscitur, dum vu^t eum quasi facti poenitentem exules revocasse. An. 93. n.
5.
reject Tertullians authority in this matter, giving for it his proof out of
Dio, viz. that Nerva released those who were condemned of impiety, and restored
those who were banished. Which affirmation of Dio's being granted, as far as
belongs to those, who were in exile, or stood condemned at Nerva's coming to
the Empire, does no way prejudice the truth of Tertullians words, of Domitians
having represt his severity against the Christians, and revoked the banished,
(wherein he is much a more competent witness, then Baronius.) No more does his
killing of his uncle Clemens, and banishing his cousin Flavia Domitilla. For
that was five years after this time of John's supposed banishment, in the
fifteenth, or last year of Domitians reign. In the relation of Hegesippus (a
most ancient writer, that lived in those times) there is no more but this, that
Domitian had made a decree for the putting to death all that were of the lineage
of David, that some de lators had accused some of the children of Jude the
kinsman of our Savior, (...), as such who were of David's seed; That Jocatus
brought these to Domitian, but upon examination being found to be plain men,
and such as believed not Christ's kingdom to be (...), or (...), of this world
or earthy, but heavenly, and Angelical, to begin at the end of the world,
(...), he set them free, and by Edict took off the persecution against the
Church, and they being released, became Bishops in the Church and continued
peaceably, and lived till Trajans days. And this certainly agrees very little
with the other relation, nor can any account probably be rendered, why, when the
persecution of Christians was taken off by the Edict, and (...) peace restored
to the Church of Christ, and when the profession of Christianity, in the sons
of Jude, being by them, avowed to the Emperor, was not yet thought fit to be
punished in the least, yet John should be banished, and continue in his exile
till Nerva's reign, for no other crime, but that of being a Christian. Where by
the way Baronius's artifice much fails him; Tertullian, says he, fell into
his error by following Hegesippus's authority, but Hegesippus, says he, spoke
apparently de ea persecutione quae mota est in Judaeos, of that persecution,
that was raised against the Jews, not against the Christians. How true that
is, will now appear, when the express words are, that by that Emperors Edict,
the persecution against the Church (sure that was not of Jews, but Christians)
ceased.

Ibid. Of Antipas being mentioned as slain, (...).
before the time that actually he was so, to the prediction of Simeon, Add, S.
Hilary in his Prologue to the Psalms, offers instances of this; As, says he,
when in some of the Psalms, of which Moses was the author, there is yet
mention of things after Moses, viz. of Samuel, Psalm. 99.6. before he was born,
nulli mirum aut difficile videri oportere, this ought not to seem strange or
hard to any, when in the books of the Kings, Josias is by name prophesied of,
before he was born, 1 King. 13.2.

Chap. II. Note. b. To Eusebius's words of the Gnostickes doctrine for abjuring
the faith in times of persecution, Add, So before him Origin, l. 6. Contr.
Cells. And the same is clearly, though sarcastically set down by Tom. 4.
Lucian, or whosoever was the writer of Philopatris, scoffing at the Christians
of his time, under the persecutour Trajane, in that Dialogue. There Triephon,
that goes for the Christian, first indevours to convert Critias to his
religion, and as in that Dialogue it appears that the Christians talked much of
the approach of (...). p. 481.
ruin to the Roman Army and greatness (which might make Triephon so well
pleased with his profession, and so forward to invite others to it, as to a
party that would soon be very prosperous) so at length in the close of the
Dialogue when Cleolaus brings them news of the Romans good successes in
Persia, and Assyria, and Egypt, and Scythia, which fell out about the
fifteenth of Trajane, then Triephon would speak no more of Christianity, but as
an Apostate or desertor, (...). p. 487.
betakes himself to the unknown God at Athens, and joins with Critias in that
worship, as that which was likely to yield him most safety, and then laughs at
the Christians, and gives them leave to say what they please, flatter
themselves with their imaginary hopes, but (...), in the Proverbial speech he
considers them not, looks no more after them. To this also the Emperor Adrians
Epistle seems to refer, which is set down by In Saturnino.
Vopiscus out of Phlegon, where speaking of the great levity of Egypt (in
reference, I suppose to these heretical Christians in those parts followers of
Simon Magus, Basilides, etc. whom, under the title of Samaritae, he
distinguishes from Christians) that it was Levis, pen dula and ad omnia famae
momen^^ volitans.
light, pendulous, flying from one side to the other upon every slight report,
he after expresses it distinctly, Illi qui Serapim colunt Christiani sunt, and
devoti sunt Serapi qui se Christi Ep^scopos dicunt.
Those that worship Serapis are Christians, and those who call themselves
Bishops of Christ are devoted to Serapis, and again, Ipse ille ^atriarch^ cum
in Aegyptum venerit ab aliis serapidem adorare, ab aliis cogitur Christum
The very Patriarch, (i. e. either some High Priest of the Jews, or some
Gnostick Pseudo-Patriarch of Alexandria, or some venerable Grave man among
them) when he comes into Egypt, is by some, (i. e. by the heathen officers)
forced to worship Serapis, for fear of persecution from them, and by others (i.
e. the Christians) to worship Christ. Adding in fine, that Vnus illis Deus est,
banc Christiani, hunc Judaei, bunc omnes venerantur and Gentes (...).
they have one God, whom Christians, and Jews, and all, even the Gentiles
worship.

Note l. Of the (...), by which the reward was adjudged, in the Agones, Add,
Accordingly the Roman Caesar's in their games, which were in some kind
imitations of the Graecians, had their tesserae ligneae, which they threw among
the people, with the name of corn, or plate, or servants, or garments written
on them, which being caught by any, and carried to such an officer, brought him
that, whatsoever it was, which was written on it. And so Aristides the Orator
says, he received (...) from Aesculapius. See Canter. Novar. Lect. l. 5. c. 21.

Ibid. ver. 27.

[Shall Feed (...).
rule them. -- ]

Ibid. Note o. (...).
Of those words out of the second Psalme] Read, And he shall feed them (so the
Septuagint reads [(...) feed] from the Hebrew (...), from (...) pavit as a
shepherd feeds his flock, though now the Hebrew copies have (...), shall break
from (...) fregit) with a rod of iron, as the potters vessels are broken, i. e.
shall begin with the exercise of regal (instead of pastoral) power, bring some
to repentance, and then destroy the rest, and by conjoyning of these two means,
(both the instruments of his power, the one of his spiritual power in subduing
souls to the faith, the other of his secular power in acting vengeance on the
rebellious and obdurate) expulse heathenisme, and plant Christianity in the
place. For it must be remembered, 1. What is the ground of this figurative
expression [ feed with a rod of iron] viz. an elegant variation from the
custom of pastors; They feed their sheep, and need no more than a rod or
Staff to manage their whole flock, but the pastor, that comes to feed any
heathen nation, with the spiritual food of the pure word of God, must come with
aids of power, strike their hearts, and powerfully convince them of sin, bring
them to contrition, and really destroy those, that will not by the preaching of
the Gospel be thus convinced: This is to feed them with a Scepter, an iron rod,
an exercise of regal rather than pastoral power, a powerful work, first of
grace, and then of vengeance, both necessary to reduce an heathen nation to
Christianity. And 2. That those words were first to be verified of Christ
himself, in subduing the Gentiles to the faith, and then as his power given him
by his father, is by him communicated to others. So this prophecy is appliable
to others also. Thus is the phrase used, c. 12.5. of the Church established at
Rome, of which it is there foretold, that it should be very powerful, and
efficacious in converting many to the faith, (...), it shall feed all the
nations, in a larger manner, then here, etc.

Chap. III. ver. 7.

[He that has the key of David.]

That has as a King (See Note on Matt. 16. h.) supreme, independent, absolute
power over the Church of God.

(...).
Chap. IV. Note g. That Paul and Barnabas were to be reckoned for two of the
(...), to their speaking at large in the Council Act. 15.12. Add, And indeed
sent this journey by immediate commission from heaven, Gal. 2.2.

Chap. VI. Note c. (...).
That the (...) is there the altar of incense, Add, To which purpose may be
observed, what we find in On Heb. 9.7.
Theophylact, that the word (...) was used peculiarly for that censer, which
the Chief Priest once a year carried with incense into the holy of holyes, and
that the standing altar in the Sanctuary was called, (...).

Chap. VIII. Note g. (...).
Of the Sun signifying the Temple the Moon the city, and the stars all the
people] Add, And all together the whole nation, as in Joseph's prophetic
dream, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, are all the family of Jacob.

Chap. IX. ver. 11.



Note dd. (...).
That Apollyon here signifies the devil, is apparent, by what is affirmed of
him in the former part of this verse, that it is the Angel of the bottomless
pit; And accordingly the famous God of the Heathens called Apollo (a word so
lightly changed from this) must be resolved to be the devil, this destroying
Angel, as he is often called in Scripture, employed altogether in destructions
and mischiefs. To which purpose the 12. chap. of lib. 5. of A. Gellius is worth
considering, where having taken notice of two ancient names of Heathen Gods,
Dijovis and Vejovis, and having deduced the former from an Original which
signifies benign, or helpful, he determines the latter to belong to a God, qui
non juvandi potestatem, sed vim nocendi haberet, which had not the power of
helping, but the force of doing mischief; adding that the image of this God is
found to have arrows in the hand, prepared for slaughters and destructions,
and therefore Apollo is thought to be signified by that title. To which
purpose, says he, it is considerable, that Virgil, a man very greatly skilled
in ancient knowledge, does in his Georgicks deprecate Numina Laeva, the
unlucky, or hurtful deities, signifying thereby quandam vim esse ejusmodi
Deorum in laedendo magis quam juvando potentem, that such kind of Gods had the
virtue or faculty of hurting, but not of helping any, and of them Apollo is the
only one named there, by that Poet, -- (siquem
Numina laeva sinunt, auditque vocatus Apollo)
Who must be sacrificed to, to avert any evils from them.

(...).
Chap. XI. Note c. Of Barchochebah killing the Christians, to Eusebius, Add,
And so likewise Orosius, l. 7. c. 13. Christianos Judaei Cotheba (i.e. Cocheba)
duce, quod sibi contra Romanos non assentarentur, excruciabant, the Jews under
their leader Cocheba, tormented the Christians, because they would not comply
and take part with them against the Romans.

(...). l. 4. c. 6.
Ibid. Note d. Of Adrians Edict of banishing the Jews from about Jerusalem,
Add, Aristo Pellaeus in Eusebius, (...) (...), the whole nation was from
thenceforth forbidden to enter the region about Jerusalem, and this by decree
of Adrian, which commanded that none should out of any eminent place so much as
behold their native soil. And Tertullian Apolog. c. 21. Quibus nec advenarum
jure terram patriam saltem vestigio salutare conceditur, they were not
permitted to salute or visit their native country so much at travailers or
guests, and so Advers. Jud. c. 13.

Chap. XIII. Note a. (...).
Of Rome being called Eternal, Add, So Ausonius Gallus.

Vrbis ab aeternae deductum rege Quirino
Annorum seriem -- and
Haec erit aeternae series ab origin mundi.
Ibid. That that title was a title of blasphemy, to S. Jeroms testimony, Add,
So in the same words, Dimid. temp. c. 7.
Prosper, Aeterna cum dicitur, quae temporalis est, utique nomen est
blasphemiae, cum mortales, licet reges, in ea dicantur Divi, eisque supplices
dicunt, Numini vestro, altaribus vestris, perennitati vestrae, etc. For that
which is temporal to be called eternal, is the name of blasphemy, when their
Kings though mortal are called Gods, and their suppliants address to them in
this style, to your Deity, your altars, your eternity, etc, See chapter 17. Note a.

(...).
Chap. XIII. Note n. Of the number of the name, to the testimony of Martianus
Capella, Add, And an example of this manner of describing a God, even Christ
himself, has been set down from the Sibylline Oracles, Note on 1 Pet. 4. f.

(...).
Chap. XIV. Note c. Of Romes being known by the title of urbs dominatrix, Add,
the style in Rutilius Numatianus -- Regina tui pulcherrima mundi, etc. (...),
in Marcianus Heracleota, the common star of the whole world.

(...).
Chap. XVI. Of Cyrus turning the river Euphrates, Add, See Orosius, l. 2. c. 6.

Ibid. ver. 17.

Was or has been. (...).
is done.]

Note i. It is usual in prophecyes to set down the sad events most covertly.
Thus Annot. in Festum.
Scaliger observes, Augures sedentes in templo abstinebant vocibus male
nominatis, ideoque alteram avem potius quam aversam dicebant; The Augurs, as
sitting in the Temple, abstained from the sadder expressions, and therefore
when they meant to signify any ill abode, they called it not the averse but the
other Augury. Accordingly is that style of Horace.

Od. 10. l 11.
Sperat infestis, metuit fecundis,
Alteram sortem --
This the Graecians call Demosib. (...).
(...), and Id. Cont. L^pt^^.
(...), not to deliver any sad thing not to speak any hard or evil saying. And
their name for this figure is (...). Agreeable to this is the ordinary style of
fuit, or vixit, he has been, or has lived, for mortuus est, he is dead,
fuimus Troes, fuit Ilium -- we have been Trojans, Troy has been; and in
Demosthenes, (...), Cont. Lepti^.
now it shall be rich, to signify that it has been, and is yet poor. (...),
says he, for thus I must speak, and not use gross, or harsh expressions. And
just such is (...) here, It has been, i. e. now it cease to be; It is
destroyed, by this figure (...), fit for prophecyes.

Chap. XVII. Note a. (...).
Of the Roman Emperor being styled (...), Add, And so when Julian introduced
C. Caligula, it is in this style, (...), an evil beast succeeds, in his Satyr
against the Caesar's, and in like manner of Vindex, Galba, Otho, Vitellius,
(...), these beasts, and of Domitian, with a peculiar Epithet, to denote his
cruelty (such as was Proverbially observed in Phalaris) (...), the Sicilian
beast, and again, (...) the bloody beast, exactly parallel to the
scarlet-colored beast in this place.

Ibid. Note e. That the Goths when they turned Christians, came over mostly to
Arianisme. Add, The Testimony of l. 7. c. 33.
Orosius, Gothi per legatos supplices poposcerunt, ut illis Episcopi, a quibus
Christianae fidei regulam discerent, mitterentur. Valens imperator Doctores
Ariani dogmatis misit. Gothi, primae fidei rudimentum, quod accepere,
tenuerunt: The Goths desired by their Ambassadors, that Bishops might be sent
them from whom they might learn the Rule of faith, Valens the Emperor sent
them Arian Doctors, the Goths retained those rudiments which they first
received.

Ibid. that it was upon the score of Christianity that Alaricus spared any at
Rome, Add the testimony of l. 11. c. 10.
Orosius, Christiani fuere qui parcerent, etc. they were Christians that
spared, Christians who were spared, Christians for the memory of whom there was
any such thing as sparing. To the manifestation of this pertains that passage
set down by Hist. R^ven. l. 2* p. 64.
Hieron. Rubeus, that Saul an Hebrew, or as others affirm, a Pagan, who had
the chief command under Stilicho, designing to take advantage, and set upon the
Goths, when they were not prepared, did it upon Easterday. And Alaricus
discerning their approach, sent to desire he would defer the fight till the
morrow, in respect of the religion of the day, promising then to meet him. But
Saul would not hearken to it, but set upon them unarmed, and holding up their
hands and eyes in prayer to heaven for aid, in tam sancti mysterii
celebratione, in the performance of the duties of the day, and so killed many
of them, till Alaricus after the space of an hour, saying that they had now
satisfied the religion of the day, and exhorting his soldiers to follow him
stoutly, brake in upon them with a great army, and repulsed, and put them to
flight; and if Honorius and Stilicho had not come to their relief, eo omnino
die de Roma terrarum domina, quae victori praemium erat futura, actum fuisset,
Rome had been destroyed upon the Fate of that day.

Ibid. Of the Gentile Senators of Rome at that time of Alaricus's seige, to the
Testimony of Sozomen, Add, l. 7. c. 38.
Orosius, Continuo de repetendis sacris, celebrandisque tractatur, Presently
they entered into consultation about restoring their Gentile sacrifices, and
offering them.

^bid. Of S. Peter's Church being a Sanctuary at the taking Rome, to Sozomen,
Add, l. 2. c. 19.
Orosius, Gothi, says he, relicta intention praedandi ad confugia salutis
(hoc est sanctorum locorum) agmina ignara cogentes, The Goths gave over their
intention of rifling, and forced troops of Christians, not knowing what they
did, to save themselves by flying to consecrated places.

Chap. XVIII. Note a. (...).
Of Rome being signified by Babylon to the testimony of Augustine, Add, And c.
22. Condita est Roma velut altera Babylon, and prioris filia Babylonis Rome is
built as another Babylon, and daughter of the former Babylon. And the ground of
it may probably be this, because Babylon was the seat of the Assyrian
Monarchy, as Rome of the Roman, and the Assyrian Monarchy being the first, as
the Roman the last (illud primum, hoc ultimum imperium, says Orosius, l. 7. c.
2.) Rome, that thus succeeds Babylon, may well be called by that name.

Ibid. of (...) 1 Pet. 5.13. Read, (...).
the fellow Church in Babylon, the assembly of Christians in that heathen city.

Ibid. That Babylon belongs only to so much of Rome as was then heathen, and
not to the Christian part of it, (that being called by the other title, by S.
Peter, the Church in Babylon, and Babylon it self never set to signify the
Church) Add the words of S. Jerome, Ep. 17. Cecidit Babylon magna, est quidem
ibi Sancta ecclesia, trophaea Apostolorum and martyrum, est Christi vera
confessio, est ab Apostolis praedicata fides and Gentilitate calcata in sublime
se quotidie erigens vocabulum Christianum. The profane heathen Babylon is
fallen, Babylon the great, in the place thereof is the holy Church, the
monuments of the Apostles and Martyrs, the true faith of Christ, or profession
of Christian Religion, that which was preached by the Apostles, and heathenisme
being trodden down, the Christian name is daily advanced on high.

Ibid. Of the General rescue of the Christians from this destruction, Add,
Some of them, says Palladius, Lausia^. Hist chapter 118.
gone out a little before, being persuaded by Melania to a monastic life, and
carried to Sicily first, and thence to Jerusalem, where says he (...), they
rejoiced that they were not together involved in the miserable evils of that
vastation, (...), glorifying God for the excellent change of aeffaires, (...),
and for their own wonderful deliverance. And the rest which were left in the
city, at last saved by flying to the Basilicae, etc.

Ibid. That the fall of Babylon signified the bringing that City and Empire of
Rome to Christianity, Add, To this purpose, see S. Hierome advers. Jovinian.
l. 2. Ad te loquar qui scriptam in front blasphemiam Christi confessione
delesti, Vrbs potens, urbs orbis Domina -- Maledictionem quam tibi Salvator in
Apocalypsi comminatus est, potes effugere per poenitentiam, I will speak to
thee who have blotted out the blasphemy written in thy forehead, by the
confession of Christ -- Thou potent city, Thou city, Mistress of the world --
Thou may avoid the curse, which Christ in the Apocalypse has threatened to
thee, by repentance, adding cave Joviniani nomen quod de Idolo derivatum est,
beware of the name of Jovinian, which is derived from the Idol God Jupiter, and
this peculiarly in respect of those remaining heathens, and heretics, which
now at the time when S. Hierome wrote, not long before the coming of Alaricus,
were at Rome, and at length set up their Idol-service again, in the time of the
siege, and were signally destroyed at this taking of it. So again, S. Hierome
in praefat. de Spirity. S. speaking of Rome, Cum in Babylone versarer, and
purpuratae meretricis essem colonus, when I lived at Rome, and was an
inhabitant of the purple whore, All noting this heathen Rome to be the subject
of these prophecyes.

Ibid. Of the Christians expecting the ruin of the heathen power at Rome, etc.
to the testimony of Lucian in Philopat. Add, So in a narration of Hippolytus
set down by Palladius, Lausia^. Hist. (...).
we have a virgin Christian accused to the heathen Judge at Corinth, (...), as
one that blasphemed the seasons, and the Kings, and the Idols, in probability,
that she foretold evil, talked of ruin, that should befall the Government of
Idolatry of the heathens, and that the seasons of it now approached. For that
is the meaning of the like phrase, when the Jews say of Stephen, that he
cease not to speak blasphemous words against the holy place and the Law, Act.
6.13. for so it follows, ver. 14. we have heard him say that Jesus shall
destroy, etc.

Ibid. Of this destruction of heathen Rome, After the Targum on Number. 11.26.
Add, So in the Sibylline Oracles, where (...) Beliar or Belial is set to
denote the Romans, as appears by (...), Beliar shall come from the Augusti, or
Roman Emperors, at length coming to the great destruction threatened by God,
under the expression of fire, this is to fall upon Beliar peculiarly, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
The flaming power of God shall burn Beliar, and all the proud men that trust
in him.

(...).
Ibid. Note b. In the end, Add, Mean while how great the destruction was, that
now befell that city, may competently appear by one testimony of Palladius that
lived at that time. Laus^ac. Hist. chapter 118. in these words, (...). A certain
barbarian tempest which the Prophets of old had foretold, seized on Rome, and
left not so much as the brazen statues in the streets, but plundering all with
a barbarous madness, delivered it up to destruction, so that Rome which had
flourished a thousand and two hundred years, according to the Sibylles word,
became a desolation.

Chap. XX. Note e. (...).
Of Julians dissembling his heathenisme, and pretending Christianity, Add, So
says Asterius, that lived in his time, Hom. 3. de avarit. (...), etc. he put
off the vizard of the Christian, and laid open the scene, by drawing the
curtain, which he had a long time kept close.

Ibid. Of his acting against the Christians, li. 7. c. 30.
more by subtilty then violence, Add, So Orosius expressly affirms of him,
art potius quam potestate, he made use of art more then of power. Of his not
admitting the Christians to any honors, Add, So Ibid.
Orosius Vt neg aretur fides Christi honoribus magis provocare, quam tormentis
cogere studuit, that the faith of Christ might be denied, he more endeavored
to provoke men by honors, then to constrain them by torments. So Asterius, Hom.
3. de avarit. speaking of his Apostasy, adds, (...), many advantages were
proposed to them that would do the same; And again, (...); How many receiving
the bait of dignities swallowed down the hook of Apostasy? (...), etc. pointed
at as traitors, and those of Christ, for a little money.

Of his vow at his expedition against the Persians, and his death in it, See
Orosius, l. 7. c. 30.

(...)
Of a cubits being no more then a foot, to Josephus, Add, So when Solinus
says of the walls of Babylon, Polyhist. c. 70.
quorum altitudo ducentos pedes detinet, that they were two hundred foot high,
and so li. 6. c. 26.
Pliny, li. 2. c. 6.
Orosius says they were fifty cubits broad, altitudine quater tanta, four
times as high, i. e. two hundred cubits, and so says Herodotus, (...), the
hight was two hundred cubits.

AN ADDITION to be inserted on Matthew 23.
Verse. 23. THe weightier matters of the law, f judgment, mercy, and faith.]

But for the great moral duties both of the second and even of the fist table,
just dealing, and works of mercy toward men, and the sovereign duty even of
the Law, Faith in God, you are far from the practice of these, which being
the most considerable weighty duties, ought --

Note. f. lin. 4. Read, Nevochim Par. 3. c. 53. lin. 6. Read, (...) and (...)
and (...). lin. 38. Now -- blot out from thence to the end of that Note, and
read, Now to the two first of these in Maimonides the two former here [(...)
and (...)] are directly parallel, (...).
(...) judgment, literally and clearly answerable to the first; and (...)
mercy to the second; (...).
All the difficulty is of the third, (...) faith, which that it is parallel to
and aequivolent with (...) righteousness, may at first sight be thought
probable also. For the Hebrew (...) which is literally rendered (...) faith, and
has the same importance sometimes, which we gave out of Maimonides to (...),
is by the 72. rendered also by the very word (...) righteousness, Genesis 24.49.
Isa. 38.19. The same is sometimes again rendered (...) truth, and so (...),
faith, righteousness, truth, are often taken promiscuously, the one for the
other, among the Jews that write Greek. So Psalm. 85.10. we have (...) and
(...), mercy and truth, but Prove. 3.3. (...) and (...), mercies and fidelities:
and Hesychius renders (...) true, (...).
(...) righteous, and so (...) seems to be taken Luke 12.57. (...), (...).
judge right, or true, and Luke 16.11. (...) the unrighteous Mammon] is set
opposite (...) to the true riches, agreeable to that of the Targum, Ezec.
23.27. who call it (...) the Mammon of vanity or falseness. All this makes it
not improbable that (...) faith here, should be taken in that notion of (...)
righteousness and so rendered not faith but fidelity. And thus Mr. Calvine has
interpreted it in this place. But upon farther consideration it will appear
that there is no place for these probabilities, the express words of S. Luke in
setting down this passage enforcing another interpretation of it. For Luke
11.42. the words are these. Ye tithe mint, and rue, and all manner of herbs,
(...).
and pass over judgment, and (...) the love of God, where as by judgment must
be understood all the duties of justice and charity to our neighbors (set down
more fully in S. Matthew by judgment and mercy) and so under that (...)
righteousness also is comprehended, viz. that mercy which is our righteousness,
as being from us due to other men, so the love of God, which comprehends all
the duties of the first table, Matt. 22.37. is set down as directly parallel
and answerable to (...) faith, which must therefore necessarily be the
believing in God, as that is the foundation of our love of him, as the Apostle
affirms. 1 Timothy 1.5. The end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart
-- and of faith unfeigned. And then as the two former may be taken from Mich.
6.8. doing justice and loving mercy, so this third may be parallel also to the
third thing mentioned there, walking humbly with thy God; and if so, will give
us an excellent definition, whether of the faith or the love of God, or indeed
of the conjunction of them; Faith perfected by love, that it is an humble
fiducial obedience unto, or walking with God, as when Enochs walking with God
is by the son of Syrach, Eccl. 44.16 and S. Paul, Heb. 11.5. out of the 72.
called his pleasing of God, and that including faith, without which, says he,
it is impossible to please God, v. 5. and that faith a believing that God is,
and that he is a rewarder -- And this faith very fitly here mentioned by Christ
to the Jews, who are so frequently and justly accused and reprehended by him
for want of faith, or not believing in God, and that their guilt evidenced by
their not believing in him, who had so signally and powerfully demonstrated
himself to be sent by God. And if it be here demanded with what propriety;
Faith in this sense can be called one of the (...), the weightier things of the
Law, when Faith is so often set opposite to the Law, and so is not so much as a
part of it, and when the Law of Moses was but the Paedagogie to that faith,
which should after be revealed, the answer will be clear that the Law, to which
Faith is opposed, is chiefly the Law of Jewish ceremonies, which being but the
shadow of those things, which are the object of the Christians faith, were to
be done away at the presence of the body it self, and so faith set opposite to
them, as perfect is opposite to imperfect, clear day to twilight. And of these
also those words are to be taken, which affirm the Law to be a Schoolmasters,
or leader of children to Christ, these being but those initial elements, fitted
for those of tender years, and grosser understandings, yet designed also to
adumbrate those things which are now more clearly taught us by Christ. As for
the Law of God, as that was given to Moses, and comprehended all the duties to
God and man, it is evident that faith in God is a part, and weightier part of
that, and so reducible to the first and great commandment, (as that phrase Mat.
22.37. comprehends the whole first table of the Commandments) being certainly
comprised in the love of God, and supposed in it, and not only so, but it is
particularly contained in the first commandment of that first table, I am the
Lord thy God, thou shall have no other Gods but me; the former part of which
are federal words, and so are to be answered by our believing what God
promises in his Covenant, viz. that he is our God, a merciful and a gracious
Father, and so to be filially depended on, trusted in, and obeyed, as well as
loved by us, and the latter part commanding us to have God for our God, must
again be interpreted to require from us a believing of him, both as that
signifies a fiducial relyance, and affiance on him, a believing his promises,
and as it is a believing whatsoever he shall say, whether bare affirmations,
(our doctrinal points, either in the Old or New Testament, revealed to us) or
more especially his commands and threats, as our belief of them is all one with
fearing and obeying him, Gods veracity being one of those his attributes, to
which our belief must be answerable, if we will be deemed to have him for our
God. As for the promises of another life, which are a principal part of the
object of a Christians faith, if they be not thought to have been revealed
under the Law of Moses, which is conceived to look only toward an earthly
Canaan, and so the felicities of this life only; This sure is a mistake,
caused in many, perhaps, by not distinguishing betwixt less clear revelations
(such indeed were those under the Law, in comparison with the luster, that
Christ brought into the world) and none at all; or perhaps, by most, through
not observing, that those diviner promises were revealed before the Law, (and
being found inefficacious among the sensual world, God was farther pleased to
add, under Moses, those earthy promises to attract even sensual men, and give
them a present taste of those good things, which he had laid up for them that
would adhere to him.) These therefore being long before revealed to Adam, and
Noah, and by tradition from them steadfastly believed by all the people of God,
were supposed in the Mosaical Law as known already, and therefore needed not
therein to be more particularly repeated; Besides, Moses in his giving the Law
to the Jews, set down, over and above the Law it self, a story from the
Creation to his time, wherein many passages there are which give certain
evidence of another life, and the joys of that, as the reward of a godly
living; as when of Enoch it is said, Genesis 5.24. that Enoch walked with God, and
was not, for God took him, when he was but 365. years old, which must needs
infer, that somewhat extraordinary befell Enoch (which the Apostle calls
translating him, Heb. 11.5.) and also that that life to which God took him, was
much more desirable than that which here he parted with, else his untimely
death (far sooner than others there recited, both before and after him) could
not be proposed, as a reward of his walking with, i. e. pleasing God, Heb.
11.5. This translation of Enoch then being known among those in whose time it
happened, and by Moses recorded for all the Israelites to know that came after,
must needs be to all them a testimony beyond all doubt of this truth, that
there remained a blessed life, after this, for those who pleased God. The like
was that of Elias in the time of the Kings, who was visibly carried up to
heaven, and this both by the sons of the prophets foretold, beforehand, and
testified by Elisha, who succeeded him in his prophetic office, and was an
eyewitness of it. The same appears by that passage of Gods being by himself
styled, in the Law, the God of Abraham, etc. after their death; whence our
Savior concludes against the Sadducees, that Abraham lived with God, and that
there was another life revealed by God in that style. To this pertains the
speech of Balaam, Number. 23.10. Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my
last end be like his. But above all, the express words of Daniel, long before
Christ, and so under the Law, Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep in the dust of
the earth shall awake some to everlasting life, and some to shame and
everlasting contempt. And in a word, though the Law given by Moses have not, in
the letter, the mention of any other life, but that in the land of Canaan, yet
all the ceremonies of that Law were principally (no doubt) designed to this
end, to adumbrate and so reveal this truth unto them, and that in such a
manner, as was most for the turn of such childish and gross and rude minds,
viz. by sensible representations, which the Apostle, that well knew their
meaning, interprets to this sense, throughout the Epistle to the Hebrews, and
assures us, that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob expected a city that had foundations,
whose builder and maker was God, Heb. 11.10. meaning heaven undoubtedly by that
phrase; And so of Moses, v. 26. that he had respect to the recompense of
reward, that sure which was after this life, (for he came not to Canaan) the
pleasures and honors of which were, on this intuition, despised by him, v. 25.
Thus much has been here added on this occasion, for the refuting the doctrine
of those men, who can discern none, but temporal, carnal promises, under the
Law, whom for farther satisfaction (if it be yet needful) I refer to the
judicious and perspicuous Treatise of P. Baro, De praestantia and dignitate
divinae legis, (dedicated to Archbishop Whitgift, but first read in his Lady
Margarete Lectures at Cambridge) Lib. 1.

Another to be inserted on Luke 1. Note m.
AFter the testimony of Theocritus, Add, Thus Sibylla, l. 1.

-- (...)
(...).
I will prophecy all things that are past, present, as well as to come. Adding
(...), And first God commands me to say, professing to do it from God.

Another to be inserted at the end of the last Additional Annotation on Act. 14.
(...).
OF the acception of this word (...), a controversy there is between the two
great Scholiasts on the Canons, Zonaras and Balsamon. Zonaras on the first
Apostolical Canon, [(...). Let a Bishop be ordained by two or three Bishops]
makes this Scholion; (...) -- Now adays the office of prayers, and invocation
of the holy spirit at the consecration of any is called (...), from the Bishops
stretching out his hand, and blessing the person ordained, (...), but anciently
the election it self was so called, for when the multitudes of the cities had
power to choose their Bishops, they assembled, and some chose one, some
another, and that the greater part of suffrages might carry it, it is said that
they that made the choice stretched out their hands, and so the suffrages were
numbered, and he that was chosen by most was advanced to the dignity, and thence
the word (...) was taken. And accordingly, says he, the Fathers of the
Councils, are found to use the word, calling election (...). Thus the Council
of Laodicea, Can. 5. says that (...) must not be in the presence of the
Catechumeni, meaning elections by that word. How unfitly this Scholion is
applied to the first Apostolical Canon, will be easily judged, when it is
remembered, that (...) used in that Canon (and sure that was (...) anciently,
and long enough before Zonaras's writing) is certainly used for Ordination or
Consecration, (...) or (...) the initiation to the Episcopal office by
imposition of hands, and not any popular or whatever kind of election. And
therefore Balsamon coming to give account of this Canon, and seeing this
Scholion of Zonaras before him, gives it (without naming him) the due
refutation. Thus, (...) -- This Apostolical Canon speaks of that Ordination
which is done by the Bishops in the Church -- (...), not of the election, as
some said (following some unwritten reports) in respect of the stretching out
the hands used in the elections of Bishops by the multitude of the cities, for
though in the 10th (it should be the 5th) Canon of Laodicea, the Fathers
command that (...) should not be in the presence of the Catechumeni, and from
thence some supposed that this Canon speaks of election, yet I believe they
say not well, because the ordination which is performed in the Church (...), by
the prayers belonging to initiation, is done, though there be never so many
there, (which concludes that this Apostolic Canon belongs to consecration,
though the Laodicean do not.) And again the 4th Canon of the first Nicene
Council resolving that the election of a Bishop shall be performed by all the
Bishops of the Province, (...), at least by three, the rest signifying their
consents by writing, I cannot think how some could understand this Canon of the
election of a Bishop, which appoints that it shall be done by two or three (and
so possibly by two, not necessarily by three) Bishops. By this it is evident,
that Zonaras, if as his premises prepared for it, so he concluded according to
them, that in the Apostolical Canon, (...) was to be understood of election,
and not of ordination, was foully mistaken; But the truth is the conclusion of
his Scholion seems to look another way, citing that Canon of Nice, which being
of elections, appoints them to be by three at least, where as this of (...)
contents it self with two or three, and in his Scholion on that Nicene Canon 4.
his conclusion is express, that the Apostolical Canon, (...), calls
consecration and imposition of hands by that title, and so not election. (So
Jus. Grec. Romans p. 1.
Harmenopulus on his Epitome Can. The Apostolical Canon is of consecration and
imposition of hands, the Nicene of election.) And so all his premises of [(...)
being taken for (...) election] are utterly aliene from the Canon which he had
before him; And his observation as far from truth, that it was in latter times
only that (...) came to signify Ordination; His own words conclude rather the
direct contrary, that at the time of the writing the first Apostolical Canon,
(which by all is acknowledged genuine, and so written not long after the
Apostles days) (...) was taken in the sense of Ordination, and that long after
that in the Council of Laodicea, 'twas used for election. And it may be worth
observing, that he that had taken such unseasonable pains, to prove it was
taken for election, had no proof for it in all antiquity, but only that one
Canon of Laodicea, where indeed it is evidently used in that sense; But whether
of any other election, save by the Bishops (to whom it evidently belongs in the
4th Nicene Canon) in the presence of the people (excluding the audientes) from
them to receive testimony of the lives of those who were to be chosen, appears
not by that Canon. In the Nicene Canon 4. the difference is clear between (...)
constituting by way of (...) election, in the beginning of the Canon, and then,
(after that regularly performed) (...) ordination, in the end of it. And by
that we may understand Theodorets meaning Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 23. when he
says the Canons forbid (...), that a Bishop have ordination without three
Bishops, not that there must needs be three Bishops to impose hands, for that
is contrary to the Apostolical Canon which is content with two (and yet is by
Zonaras himself reconciled with the Nicene that requires three at least) but
that there must be three at least, personally present at his election, (and
that Placuit ad probandam ordina ionem ^uam, ut per omnes in ista Provincia
positos lite^ae fierent. Cypr. l. 4. Ep. 8.
with the concurrence also of all the Province that are absent) before he can
be ordained lawfully, and when he is so elected, then he may be ordained by
two. So when Synesius, Ep. 67. says of Siderius Bishop of Palebisca, that he
was ordained (...) irregularly, (...), if he was not constituted at Alexandria,
or not by three Bishops there; meaning the whole affair, as it was made up of
election, and Ordination too, to the former of which the presence of three
Bishops was necessary, (though not to the latter.) And so in Theodoret again,
l. 5. c. 9. affirming from the Nicene Canon, that the custom was for the
Bishops in every Province, and the neighboring Bishops, if they pleased,
(...), to make the ordinations to the best advantage, he must be thus
understood, not that all should join in the Ordination or imposition of hands,
but (all of the whole Province, either personally, or by their letters joining
in the election) two or three should impose hands on him. But this ex
abundanti, more than was necessary for the notion of (...), when 'twas used of
the Apostles.

Another to be inserted on 1 Cor. 7.17.
Verse. 17.



dd. (...).
IN this place some ancient copies give us another reading, thus, (...) -- What
know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife, or no? As God has
distributed to every man -- This we learn from Theophylact, (...), says he,
(...), some have read thus. And then this will take away all debate, what
should be the proper notation of [(...)] in the beginning of the verse, reading
it, (...) -- For though, if it were certain that that were the true reading,
some probable account might be given of it, as that [(...)] might signify [
Onely] or the like, yet when other copies have read it in a form thus
perspicuous, and free from all question; it will be more reasonable to
acquiesce, especially considering, that if it should be, as our copies have it,
(...), not (...), yet joining that to the end of v. 16. and not transferring it
to the beginning of v. 17. (as it is certain the ancient copies were not divided
into verses, or so pointed as ours are) then still there will be as little
difficulty in it, for so the words will be very current, (...); What know
thou, O man, if thou shall save thy wife, if not? i. e. whether thou shall, or
whether thou shall not.

Another to be inserted on 1 Cor. 15. note b. after the Addition out of
Scaliger concerning abbreviations.
(...).
OF this interpretation of the place, See Chrysostom, Tom. 3. p. 514. Of whose
understanding of it, because I see some possibility of doubting, I shall more
largely consider the words; (...). After recitation of the sacramental and
dreadful word, and the venerable rules of the doctrines brought from heaven,
this at the end we add, when we are about to baptize, we command him to say, I
believe in the resurrection of bodies, and we are baptized in, or, on this
faith. (...). For after professing this with the other articles, we are put
into the fountain of those sacred waters. (...); S. Paul therefore remembering
them of this (viz. this custom of professing before baptism, with other
articles, this of the resurrection of the dead) said, Why also art thou
baptized for the dead, that is, the dead bodies? (...) (...). For on this thou
art baptized, believing the resurrection of the dead body, that it abides no
longer dead, and thou indeed by words beleevest the resurrection of the dead.
Here it is evident that the phrase (...), being baptized for the dead, is
otherwise expressed by him, by (...), being baptized in, or, on this, and that
farther expressed by (...) -- believing the resurrection of the dead body, and
(...), by words reciting the resurrection of the dead. Nothing then can be more
manifest, than that this was his understanding of S. Paul's words, that being
baptized for the dead, was being baptized in the faith and profession, as of
other articles of the Creed, so of this particularly, and in the last place, of
the Resurrection of the body. To this indeed he farther adds, (...). Then the
Priest as in an image or representation demonstrates to thee, by what he does,
the things that thou have believed, and professed by words, (...), when thou
beleevest without a sign, he allows thee a sign -- viz. in putting in, and
taking out of the water, which is (...), the sign of descending into the state
of the dead, and ascending from thence. Where though the action of the Priest
putting in, and taking out of the water, be a significative proof of the same
thing, that the baptized are baptized into the faith of the resurrection of the
dead, yet was the interpretation of the Apostles words fully accomplished in
that former, of being baptized into that article of the Resurrection, of which
this action of the Priest was the lively sign. And accordingly Theophylact, who
ordinarily copies out S. Chrysostomes interpretations, does content himself
with the first only, (...), They that are to be baptized do all profess the
Symbol of the faith (that S. Chrysostom had called the venerable rules of the
doctrines that were brought from heaven) in which after others this is set
down, I believe in the resurrection of bodies, (...); The Apostle therefore
says, that they that believe there is a resurrection of dead bodies (there is
Chrysostomes explication of dead, by bodies) and have been baptized in, or on
these hopes (there is his (...) on this) if they be deceived (i. e. if there be
no resurrection, what shall they do? (...); And indeed why are men at all
baptized for the resurrection,) that is, on the expectation of the resurrection
(still (...) and (...), for, and on the expectation of the resurrection, are
all one) if the dead are not raised? Zonaras also on Can. 18. of the Council of
Carthage, though with Chrysostom he take in the action of the Priest, in
putting in and taking out of the water, (which is but the confirmation of this,
and is not a new interpretation of S. Paul's words) yet he first insisteth on
this, that they that are baptized are instructed in the power of the Sacrament,
and so taught to hope for (that sure comprehends to believe) (...), among
others (the articles wherein the Catechumeni are instructed) (...), the
resurrection also of the dead. And Balsamon on that Canon is just to the same
purpose. To this there is but one thing to be added -- etc.

Another to be inserted on Galath. 2.
Verse. 2.

The chief men.
Them which were of reputation.]

aa. FOr the notion of (...) here, and (...), v. 6. (...).
It must be observed, that it signifies not the men's own opinion of themselves,
or their assuming any great authority over others (as of Simon Magus it is
said, Act. 8.9. that he did (...), say, or take upon him, that he was some
great one) but that they were so in the reputation and esteem of others, and
that the great opinion, that at that time all Christians had of them, above the
rest of the Apostles, was it that moved Paul to go up, and address himself
particularly to them. This is fitly expressed by (...), as from that verb, the
noun (...), reputation or glory comes, those that are in esteem in an eminent
manner, and more so by (...) those that are esteemed to be something, (...).
i. e. something above other their (...) or fellow-Apostles, not seemed, so as
that is equivocal either to seeming falsely, bare seeming, or seeming in their
own eyes, but seeming so in truth, and to the generality of the best, and
wisest Christians. In proportion to this, (...).
(...), it makes no matter to me, v. 6. is far from any thing of scorn or
despising in S. Paul, that speaks it: it is a solemn form only of insisting
on his own commission from Christ, which could no way be prejudiced by the real
excellency of their persons how great soever they were. God who accepts no
persons, and attends not to personal excellencies, may give his Commission to
an (...) to the meanest and unworthiest, as well as to those, which are really
of the greatest eminence. All this passage therefore is rather an expression of
great reverence to Peter, etc. than of scorn. Only for his mission and
revelations, he has them from Christ, not from any man, c. 1.16. and 2.6.

Another to be inserted in the Additions to the EPISTLE of JUDE.
Jude 7.

Having given (...).
GIving themselves over to fornication, and Having gone away after others, (...).
going after strange flesh, are set forth A pattern (...).
for an example, Undergoing, (...).
suffering the vengeance bb of eternal fire.

Having given themselves up to all unnatural lust, and accordingly were then
most notoriously punished with utter destruction by fire and brimstone from
heaven, and that but an essay of those eternal flames of hell, under which they
now are involved, and so may well be a warning to all that fall into the same
sins at this time.

all other places Mat. 18.8. and 24.41, (...).
48. signifying the fire wherein the damned are tormented day and night for
ever and ever, Rev. 20.10 it is yet thought probable, that in this place, being
applied to these cities of Sodom, etc. It should be taken in another notion,
for an utterly destroying by fire, such being the fire and brimstone that fell
on those cities. But for this there appears no necessity, but on the other
side there is a conjuncture of all circumstances of the context to persuade the
understanding it here of the fire of hell, as in all the other places. For, 1.
It is evident that Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities about them] signify in
this place the inhabitants of those cities, for to those only and not to the
walls and buildings of the cities, belongs the (...), having given themselves
over to fornication] And then sure those that suffer the vengeance of eternal
hell (and therein are set forth for an example, what we Christians, falling
into the like courses, are to expect) are not the walls but the inhabitants
also. Now of these it is here affirmed in the present tense, (...), they that
thus formerly sinned, are set forth a pattern, or an example (as men which are
punished are) (...), suffering, or undergoing (at the present, when Jude writes
it) the vengeance of eternal fire. Of the unbeleeving Israelites he had
affirmed, v. 5. that God (...) (in the aorist) destroyed them. Of the Angels,
v. 6. that (...), having not kept, but forsaken their principality, (...) in
the preter tense, he has kept them under darkness in everlasting chains unto
the judgment of the great day; and so of these cities in the aorist, (...),
having given themselves over to fornication, (...), and having gone -- But now
in the latter part of the verse it is only in the present tense, they are
proposed or set forth a pattern, or an example, (...), in the present
undergoing, or suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, either not at all
referring, by those words, to their long ago past destruction by fire and
brimstone, which was notorious in sacred story, and so sufficiently intimated
in the very mention precedent of Sodom and Gomorrah; or if he did, yet withal
considering it as a judgment still continued, then began as an essay
significative of what followed, but still protracted without any release; They
still suffer, or undergo that vengeance of fire, which fire is withal (...),
never likely to have an end. And this is the exactest and properest notion of
these words, which I therefore prefer before that other set down in the
Annotations, on Luke 1. o. and 2 Thessalonians. 1. b. which I therefore desire may be
expunged.

An INDEX of all the Greek words and Phrases, which are newly interpreted in
these Additional Annotations.
A
(...) 18. (...) 222. (...) 301. (...) 99. (...) 10. (...) 98. (...) 41. (...)
110. (...) 81. (...) 215. (...) 76. (...) 61. (...) 219. (...) 76. (...) 271.
(...) 223. (...) 101. (...) 93. (...) 86.

(...) 40.
G
(...) 222. (...) 274. (...) 158. (...) 158. (...) 185.
D
(...) 111. (...) 121. (...) 299. (...) 300.
E
(...) 174. (...) 186. (...) 63. (...) 295. (...) 31. (...) 162. (...) 1. (...)
148 (...) 18. (...) 70. (...) 65. (...) 168. (...) 50. (...) 42. (...) 56.
.
(...) 109. (...) 47. (...) 34.
TH
(...) 128. (...) 244.
I
(...) 186. (...) 73. (...) 198.
K
(...) 150. (...) 72. (...) 169. (...) 243. (...) 85. (...) 123. (...) 175.
(...) 49. (...) 114. (...) 84. (...) 143. (...) 151. (...) 139.

(...) 62. (...) 188. (...) 189. (...) 168. (...) 131. (...) 80.
N
(...) 126.
O
(...) 258. (...) 203. (...) 164. (...) 34. (...) 181. (...) 300. (...) 65.
P.
(...) 100. (...) 118. (...) 237. (...) 240. (...) 173. (...) 173. (...) 184.
(...) 233. (...) 253. (...) 156. (...) 77. (...) 165. (...) 224. (...) 220.
(...) 220.
S.
(...) 230. (...) 226. (...) 26.
T.
(...) 17. (...) 240. (...) 181. (...) 115. (...) 144.
Y.
(...) 115. (...) 87.
PH.
(...) 112. (...) 16. (...) 146.
.
(...) 164.
O.
(...) 64. (...) 224.
An INDEX of all the Greek words and Phrases, which having been formerly
handled in the Annotations on the New Testament, are here farther explicated.
A
(...) 284. (...) 201. (...) 213. (...) 29. (...) 11. (...) 247. (...) 261.
(...) 284. (...) 88. (...) 44. (...) 69. (...) 21. (...) 248. (...) 261. (...)
284. (...) 55. (...) 135. (...) 197. (...) 45. (...) 124. (...) 208. (...) 182.
(...) 158. (...) 267. (...) 254. (...) 260. (...) 208. (...) 49. (...) 236.
(...) 39. (...) 24. (...) 8. (...) 45. (...) 134. (...) 145. (...) 55. (...)
218. (...) 12. (...) 21. (...) 257. (...) 274. (...) 147. (...) 105. (...) 69
(...) 154. (...) 105. (...) 115. (...) 114. (...) 160. (...) 192. (...) 9.
(...) 6. (...) 44. (...) 12.

(...) 257.277. (...) 30. (...) 200. (...) 175.
G.
(...) 246. (...) 30. (...) 58. (...) 2^9. (...) 224. (...) 106. (...) 223.
D.
(...) 107. (...) 58. (...) 121. (...) 157. (...) 284. (...) 134. (...) 201.
(...) 3. (...) 3. (...) 188. (...) 39. (...) 157. (...) 178. (...) 261. (...)
13.
E.
(...) 188. (...) 218. (...) 202. (...) 56. (...) 207. (...) 166. (...) 2^6.
(...) 10. (...) 283. (...) 77. (...) 27. (...) 208. (...) 52. (...) 236. (...)
262. (...) 191. (...) 16. (...) 135. (...) 274. (...) 50. (...) 95. (...) 195.
(...) 137. (...) 226. (...) 25. (...) 9. (...) 218. (...) 86. (...) 2. (...)
236. (...) 258.
.
(...) 200. (...) 271. (...) 229.
TH.
(...) 24. (...) 135. (...) 43. (...) 272. (...) 271.
I.
(...) 218. (...) 122.
K.
(...) 48. (...) 172.200. (...) 32. (...) 223. (...) 249. (...) 155. (...)
224.230. (...) 197. (...) 136. (...) 280. (...) 256. (...) 137. (...) 183.
(...) 177. (...) 177. (...) 200. (...) 252. (...) 203. (...) 79. (...) 15.
(...) 48. (...) 43. (...) 14. (...) 15. (...) 27. (...) 213. (...) 275. (...)
16. (...) 122. (...) 283. (...) 11. (...) 134. (...) 188.
L.
(...) 16. (...) 161. (...) 272. (...) 70.
.
(...) 61. (...) 274. (...) 77. (...) 56. (...) 209. (...) 30. (...) 198. (...)
121.
N.
(...) 39. (...) 59. (...) 165.296. (...) 155. (...) 106. (...) 70. (...) 217.
O.
(...) 79. (...) 72. (...) 45. (...) 223. (...) 207. (...) 72. (...) 273. (...)
209. (...) 171. (...) 125. (...) 259.
P
(...) 15.26. (...) 225. (...) 47. (...) 125. (...) 104. (...) 159. (...) 282.
(...) 38. (...) 246.283. (...) 203. (...) 118. (...) 42. (...) 138. (...) ^4*
(...) 183. (...) 15. (...) 269. (...) 40. (...) 253. (...) 248. (...) 23.73.
(...) 13. (...) 110. (...) 211. (...) 98. (...) 50. (...) 43. (...) 182. (...)
28. (...) 256.
P.
(...) 22.
S.
(...) 208. (...) 107. (...) 104. (...) 15. (...) 135. (...) 7. (...) 104.
(...) 211. (...) 52. (...) 213. (...) 79. (...) 21. (...) 103. (...) 277. (...)
103. (...) 178. (...) 19. (...) 38. (...) 183. (...) 190. (...) 57.
T.
(...) 61. (...) 9. (...) 270. (...) 212.250. (...) 229.
Y.
(...) 120. (...) 240. (...) 192. (...) 235. (...) 232.
PH.
(...) 106. (...) 262. (...) 136. (...) 193. (...) 44. (...) 251. (...) 117.
.
(...) 161. (...) 250. (...) 212. (...) 201. (...) 88.290. (...) 281. (...) 24.
(...) 12.
PS.
(...) 19. (...) 19. (...) 268. (...) 207.
O.
(...) 70.
An INDEX of all the English words and Phrases which are newly interpreted in
these Additional Annotations.
A.
THan that of Abel 237. Added nothing to me 181. Affectionately desirous 203.
in All 240. Allwaies liars 222. Apollyon 271. graves that Appear not 18. Elias
had Appeared 50. Areopagite 101. As 64.
B.
Blessed are the Barren 62. Before him 123. slow Bellyes 222. one Born out of
due time 162. heavy Burdens 16. But 295. By the letter 121.
C.
Cast out their young children 77. I was Chargeable 175. fishers Coat 70.
Confusion 99. but Contrariwise 181. Conversation 164. Corrupt the word 169.
Counselor 40. Course of Abiah 42.
D.
that Day and hour 34. Deputy 81. ye Despisers 85. it is Done 274.
E.
the Eighth person 258. Esteems 143. Examined 110.
F.
by Faith Isaac blessed Jacob 233. Fruit of our lips 243. have Fulfilled them
in condemning him 84.
G.
Gained 114. Gave witness 76. Good manners 164. Governor of Judaea 47.
H.
Harm 115. Harmeless 10. what I Hate that I do 131. I Have a Baptism 56. in
the Hebrew tongue 109.
I.
If they do these things on a green tree 63. Judge 151.
L.
how Large a letter 184 another Law in my members 126. not the Least 1. Letters
185. Like minded 198. Lie in wait to deceive 188.
M.
Make our selves of the number 174. we are made Manifest 173. Marriage is
honorable 247. Mars hill 100. it makes no Matter to me 300. a Memorial 80.
not being Mixed 226. More than 118.
N.
Now to him that is able 144.
O.
Observed him 26. On the well 65. Oppositions of science 215. Overcharge you
168. beautiful Outward 18. his Own place 73.
P.
in Part 168. Peace with one another 31. that is Perfect shall be as his Master
49. wonder and Perish 86. we Persuade men 173. Pomp 112. golden Pot 230.
Profitable to men 224. a Prophet 220. a Prophet of their own 220.
R.
Rain from heaven 87. them which were of Reputation 299. Reward 219. Rioting
139. at the Rising of the Sun 41.
S.
Sacrifice of praise 244. the Seasons 72. ye See 186. whited Sepulchers 17.
Slow 223. nor the Son 34. Spearemen 111. my Spirit 253. Spiritual gifts 156.
T.
ye shall Take away the evil 148. Therefore 150. to Think 146. Three Tavernes
115. Thus 65. Tongues 158. kinds of Tongues 158. Turned the world upside down
98. Turning away 76.
W.
Weak 93. Where is thy sting 165. Wiles of the Devil 189. Withdrawn 61. What
you Would 128. I have Written 186.
Errata of the Annotations.
Page 14. lin. 1. r. is obliged p. 15. l. antepen. r. Sardolibyes p. 17. l. 3.
r. (...) p. 18. l. 25. r. fuly it is said p. 21. l 22. r. (...) p. 23. l 29. r.
to Hesychius p. 28. l. 2. r. product panem, p. 29. l. 1. r. (...) l. 23. r.
(...) p. 30. l. 5. r. read, It -- p. 32. l. 6. r. (...) p. 33. l. penult: r.
there. p. 40. l. 3. r. sentence, where p. 42. l. 9. r. it is p. 57. marg: l. 3.
r. (...) p. 64 l. 8. r. (...) p. 96. l. 28. r. any art p. 109. l. 6. r. (...)
p. 110. l. 22. r. explication p. 125. l. 9. r. promulgate Law p. 129. l. 29. r.
of these, p. 140. l. 6. r. the fiddle, p. 147. marg: l. 9. r. (...) p. 150. l.
6. r. (...) p. 151. l. 5. r. (...) l. 6. r. Note A p. 157. l. 9. r. forekn^w p.
161. l. 21. r. him, whom p. 165. l. 24. r. Marcionites p. 172. l. penult. r. in
p. 181. l. 4. r. cc. l. 26. r. so far p. 185. l 8. r. (...) l. 28. r. (...) p.
221. l. 11. ^. (...) p. 223. l. 25. r. act o p. 226. l. 5. r. Note E. l. 21.
de^e not l. 31. r (...) p. 229. l. ^o r. (...) In p. 232. l penult. r. and they
p 243. l 26. r. Shekalim p. 249 l. 19. r. (...) p. 256. l. ^2 r. to be set l.
15. r. (...) l. 27. r (...) p. 262. l. 29. r. h^s son Methuselah p. 270. l.
18 r. others, so p. 279 l 33. r. or Idolatry p. 285. l. 25. dele; p 286 l. 21.
dele part p 298 l. 7 r. (...) l. 27. dele)
Errata of the Sermons.
Page 2. l. 31. r. entrusted p. 4. l. 13. r. first; St l. 14. r. you, that l.
30. r. fight, as he p. 20. l. 11. r. acquisition, p. 21. l. 1. r. nor p. 24. l.
17. r. us, p. 26. l. 18. r. money, ^ p. 39. l. 26. r. employ p. 43. l. 17. r.
(...) p. 45. l. 10. r. (...) p. 47. l 5. r. answer, To all p. 55. l. 16. r.
labor; Duty is p. 73. l. 16. r. shall p. 74. l. 20. r. husbanding.
THE END.

