OF SCHISM.

A DEFENSE OF THE Church of England, Against the EXCEPTIONS OF the Romanists.

By H. HAMMOND, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane.
M.DC.LIII^

Of SCHISM. A Defense of the Church of England, against the Objections of the
Romanist.
CHAP. I. An Introduction, the danger, and sin of Schism.
. 1 Two concernments of al Christians.
TWO wishes rather then hopes there are, wherein all Christians are very much
concerned; First, That all that have given up their names to that holy
profession, would sincerely betake themselves to the discharge of all those
duties Practice of Christianity.
(as well more common, one toward another,as more particular, of each single
man toward God and toward himself) which Christ came on purpose to plant in, or
reduce into the world: The Second, Propagating of it.
That the Faith of Christ might gain an amicable, universal reception in the
hearts of all men over the whole world, and that all mankind (by an uniform
obedience to those divine precepts which are most agreeable to our rational, i.
e. humane nature, and which are able to advance us to the highest pitch of
moral excellency and dignity, that any created substance is capable of) might
attain the great end of our creation, a paradise, or blisful being here in
this world, only with the mixture of some allayes to that bliss (and those
necessary both to the exercise of some most eminent virtues, and such as the
Angels are not, for want of passible bodies, capable of, and also to the
inhaunsing of our crown) and then a state of infinite reward, and uncompounded
felicity hereafter.

What is to be done toward the latter.
. 2. That the later of these may in Gods good time be effectually attempted by
all Christian Kings, and Bishops, and advance more successfully, then of late
it has done, ought to be the endeavor of all those, whose eminency in the
world has given them capacities, or qualifications to contribute some
considerable degree of assistance to so glorious a work. And for others, whose
inferiority of condition or sphere of motion, and the improbability, consequent
to that, of advancing so magnificent a design is their just excuse for not
entertaining any such hopeless thoughts, it is yet their certain duty by
constant, fervent prayers to solicit the good hand of God, who alone can
accomplish so divine a work, and by the diligent strict observance of all
Christ's precepts to exemplify to all others the power, and real energie of the
faith of Christ, where it is admitted into the heart, thereby to attract all
others to the embracing of that, which has such admirable virtues in it.

. 3. The chief branches of the former, considered in society.
As for the former, That is (in proportion to his condition) the known duty of
every single Christian, much more of every congregation, and community of such;
who are therefore associated into one body, that each supplying the defects,
and infirmities of others, they may by so advantageous an instrument, as union
of forces is, be enabled to do what without it they are justly supposeable to
want means, or strength to do, and so are deprived of all excuse, if they be
found culpable.

. 4. In this kind 1. Charity.
The duty of Charity, and peace to all: 2. Obedience.
of ready, and filial obedience of those under authority to their lawful
authorized superiors: and 3. Paternal exercise of Ecclesiastical power.
of charitative paternal exercise of their power, in all those that are invested
with it by Christ, may be justly looked on as virtues of the first magnitude,
which have the most lively characters, and impresses of the Lawgiver, Christ's
image, and superscription upon them, and accordingly deserve the first fruits
of our care and diligence that they be most diligently conserved, where they
are, and industriously reduced, where by the malignity, or infelicity of the
times, they are torn, or escaped from us.

The contrariety of Schism to the Doctrine of Christ.
. 5. For that malices, and rancors, and animosities among single Christians,
but especially seditious, mutinous spirits, that divisions, and schisms, and
ruptures, and preparative thereto, causless anathematizing, and tyrannizing
over the Faith of Christ's flock, are most scandalously contrary to Christ's
platform, to the prophecy of the plough-shares, and the pruning hooks, the
happy exchange for the sanguinary, hostile instruments, is a truth so
eminently, and signally visible in the practice, and doctrine of Christ, and
his Apostles, that it cannot be doubted, or questioned on either side. And
agreeably, there is no one vice, which has fallen under so much of the
displeasure, and correption, and severest discipline of the holy Fathers of the
Ancient Church, as this of Schism, and the ingredients, and preparatives to it
have done.

. 6. The Fathers Censures of it.
It is but a small part of the character thereof, that from S. Paul, and S.
Jude they tell us, that it is a special piece of 1 Cor. 3.4. Jude 19. See
Fulgentius ad Mon: l 2.
carnality; an Quisquis in Ecclesia gratiam consecutus, ab Ecclesia exierit,
reus sibi futurus est, i. e. ipse sibi quod pereat imputaturus; Quod Apostolus
explanat, docens haereticum vitandum esse, ut a semetipso damnatu^ Cypr: Ep:
76. Poenas quas meruerant pependerunt, ut a nobis non ejecti ultro se
ejecerent, de ecclesia sponte se pellerent, Ep: 40. Quomodo te a tot gregibus
scidisti? Exscidisti enim teipsum. Firmilian: ad Cypr: Ep: 75.
excommunicating and condemning, i. e. voluntary inflicting of that punishment
on ones self, which the Governors of the Church use to inflict on the most
scandalous sinners; that Sciat se postea ad Ecclesiam redire, and cum Episcopis
and plebe Christi communicare non posse. Ep: 40. Aversandus est talis atque
fugiendus quisquis fuerit ab Ecclesia separatus. Ibid. De Unit: Eccles:
they that so divide on their own presumption, may not at their own will return
to the Church, and communicate again with the Bishop, and his Christian people;
that Hanc Ecclesiae unitatem qui non tenet, tenere se fidem credit? Cypr: de
Unit: Eccles: Dum conventicula sibi diversa constituunt, veritatis caput atque
originem reliquerunt. Ibid. Fidem destruit, pro Fide perfidus. Ibid.
it is contrary to the Faith, Schisma non faciendum, etiamsi in una fide and
eadem traditione permaneat qui recedit. Cypr: Testim: l. 3. c. 86.
even when it has not, in respect of doctrinal points, any heresy joined with
it; Quam ver^ dilectionem custodit and cogitat, qui discordiae furore vesanus
Ecclesiam scindit, pacem turbat, charitatem dissipat. Cypr: de Unit: Eccles:
Arma ille contra Ecclesiam portat. Ibid.
Contrary to charity, yea to all the Quisquis ab Ecclesia segregatus adulterae
jungitur, a promissis Ecclesiae separatur. Cypr: de Unit: Eccl: Habere jam non
potest Deum patrem, qui Ecclesiam non habet matrem. Ibid. Quomodo potest ei cum
aliquo convenire, cui cum corpore ipsius Ecclesiae, and cum vestra Fraternitate
non convenit? Quomodo possunt duo aut tres in nomine Christi colligi, quos
constat a Christo and ab ejus Evangelio separari? Ibid: Extra Ecclesiam
consistens, and contra pacem and dilectionem Christi faciens, inter adversarios
-- computetur. Ep: 76.
advantages that belong to a member of the Church, the (...), Ignat: Ep: ad
Ephesians: Audet precem alteram illicitis vocibus facere, Dominicae hostiae veritatem
per falsa sacrificia profanare? Cypr: de Unit: Eccl: Vnum manifestum est apud
omnes Spiritus Sancti gratiam non esse, nec little sacrificiis posse Deo
placere, neque spiritualis gratiae sanctificationem sacrificiis little tribui,
qui offerunt ab Ecclesiastici corporis unitate disjuncti, solius enim Ecclesia
Deus delectatur sacrificiis, quod sacrificium Deo facit unit as spiritualis,
ubi pacis tenacitas fraternam servat in charitate concordiam. Fulgent: ad
Monim: l. 2.
benefits of prayers and sacraments; that it is (...). Chrysostom: in Ep: ad Ephesians:
Edit: Savil: p. 823.
as bad as heresy; that Quis unquam haereses instituit, nisi qui se prius ab
Ecclesiae Catholicae universitate, and antiquitatis consensione discreverit?
Vincent: c. 34.
there was never any heresy in the Church, which was not founded in it; and
Nullum schisma non sibi aliquam fingit haeresim, ut recte ab Ecclesia
recessisse videatur. Hieron: ad Tit: c. 3.
that it is constantly forced, in its own defense, to conclude in some heresy
or other (all of which being put together will be sufficient to keep men from
being in love with the guilt, or company of schismatics) but it is farther
branded with these superadditions of terror, that Non esse quicquam gravius
sacrilegio schismatis. Aug: contra Parmen: l. 2.2. Ingens flagitium schismatis
Tradition* junxerunt. Optat: p. 23. Edit: Casaub:
there is scarce any crime so grear as schism, not (...). Dionys: ap: Eusebius: l.
6. c. 36. Pejus hec crimen est quam quod admisisse lapsi videntur. Cypr: de
Unit: Eccl:
idolatry, Vide Optatum l. 8. c. 25.
sacrilege, parricide; that it has been under peculiar marks of Gods
indignation, in the story of the Jewish Church, as in the Quam sine spe sint,
and perditionem sibi maximam de indignatione Dei acquirant, qui schisma
feciunt, declarat in libro R^g: scriptura, ubi a tribu Juda and Benjamin december
tribus scissae sunt, and indignatus est, inquit, Dominus in omne semen Israel.
Cypr: Ep: 76.
case of the ten Tribes, and of the Addendo autem civitatem Samaritanorum
debere omitti, ubi erant schismatici, ostendit schismaticos Gentilibus
adaequari. Ibid.
Samaritanes, who are ranked with the Gentiles, Mat. 10.5. Exemplo Core,
Dathan, etc. ostenditur and probatur obnoxios omnes and culpae and poenae
futuros, qui se schismaticis irreligiosa temeritate miscuerunt, Ibid. Deus quod
in sacrilegos and parricidam non secerat, [Cain and Ninive] in schismaticos
fecit, Core, etc. Optat: l. 1. p. 25.
and so in the story of Core, etc. that it is the Novatianus nec debet nec
potest excipi, quo minus ipse extra Ecclesiam consistens, inter Antichristos
computetur, Ibid. Apparet Antichristos omnes esse quos constet a charitate
atque ab unitate Ecclesiae recessisse, Ibid. Videndum quis for as exicrit, quis
altar contra altar erexerit, quis jaceat sub sententia Johannis Apostoli, qui
dixit multos Antichristos feras exituros, Optat: p. 1. l. 18. Ab Ecclesia
separatus haereticus est, and Antichristus, Prosper de Prom: and Praedict:
implend: c. 5.
Antichristianisme mentioned by Saint John, the (...), Ignat: Ep: ad Smyrnens:
worshipping or serving the Devil, and, in a word, so great a crime, that it is
not Tales e^si occisi in confessione nominis fuerint, macula ista nec sanguine
abluitur, inexpiabilis and gravis culpa discordiae nec passione purgatur,
Cyprian: de Unit: Eccl:
expiable by Martyrdom to him that continues in, and has not repented, and
returned from it.

. 7. No excuse for it.
Much more of this subject is every where to be met with in the Ancient
monuments, and nothing of alleviation to be had for any, who have not the
Caeteri tantum vel simplicitate capti, ve^ errore inducti, vel aliqua sallentis
astutiae calliditate decepti, a fallaciae laqueis vos solvite, Cypr: de Unit:
Eccl:
excuse of involuntary seduction, of error, or simplicity to plead for them,
and the surest way to do that effectually, to qualify them for that plea, is
to forsake their course, to get out of so dangerous a snare.

. 8. Nay it is farther observable, how unsafe it has been deemed by these, for
Judicabit spiritalis and eo^s qui schisma operantur, qui propter modicas and
quaslibet causas, magnum and gloriosum corpus Christi conscindunt, and
dividunt, vere liquantes culicem, and camelum diglutientes, Irenae: l. 4. c. 62.
light, and inconsiderable causes to break this unity, it being in their
opinion very Nulla ab eis tanta potest fieri correptio, quanta est schismatis
pernicies* Irenaeus l. 4. c. 62.
hard, if not impossible to receive such an injury, or provocation from the
Governors of the Church, as may make a rupture, or separation excusable. And
for the Universal, or truly Catholic Church of Christ, it is not, in Si
possunt aliqui (quod fieri non potest) habere causam justam quo communionem
separent a communione Orbis terrarum. Aug: Ep: 48.
S. Augustine's opinion, possible that there should be any just cause for any
to separate from it, nor consequently Apology to be made for those, that on
any, whether true, or pretended cause whatsoever, have really incurred this
guilt.

. 9. From these premises thus acknowledged and undeniable, the conclusion
follows irrefragably, that it is not the examination of the occasion, or cause,
or motive of any man's schism, that is worth the producing or heeding in this
matter; The one thing that is of force, and moment, and, by consequence,
pertinent to be inquired into, is the truth of the matter of fact, whether this
charge be sufficiently proved or confessed, i. e. whether he that is thus
accused, stands really guilty of separation from the Church of Christ; And this
will be a means of shortening our method, and giving very moderate bounds to
our ensuing discourse, which will now be regularly finished by making these two
inquiries.

. 10. The Parts of the ensuing Tract.
1. What Schism is, and how it may be most fitly branched.

. 11. 2. What Evidences are producible against the Church of England, whereby
it may be thought liable to this guilt, and withal how it may be cleared from
all force of those evidences.

. 11. Which when we have done, we shall not from the office of Advocates
proceed to that of the Accuser, or Judge, but leave all others, that are under
the same charge, to their proper tribunal, to stand or fall, as they shall
appear able, or not able, upon firm grounds, to maintain, and vindicate their
innocence.

CHAP. II. What Schism is, together with some general considerations thereon.
. 1. OUR first inquiry must be what Schism is, in the strict and proper notion
(as Non attendisti inter schismaticos and haereticos quam sit magna distantia.
Optat: l. 1. p. 13.
distinguished from Heresy, the Inter haeresim and schisma hoc interesse
arbitramur, quod haeresis perversum dogma habeat, schisma propter Episcopalem
dissensionem ab Ecclesia pariter separet. Hieron: ad Tit: c. 3.
introducing of some false doctrine into the Church.) And herein there will be
no difficulty the Origination, and universal use of the word, according and
consenting exactly, to give us the importance of it.

The Original of the word Schism.
. 2. In the origination of it from (...), scindi, it signifies literally
scissure, or division, which being a figurative, and withal a relative word,
referring to some body, which is thus cut or divided, but that no natural, but
political body, the Church, or Congregation of Christians, the literal notation
of the word in the Ecclesiastical use, will be (...) (...), a division in or
from the Unity of the Church of Christ. Only the form and termination of the
word must be farther noted, which being not (...) from the active (...),
Reciprocal passion noted by the word.
but (...) from the passive (...), the use of such passives is observable,
being of the nature (and for want of conjugations, designed to supply the
place) of the Hebrew Hithpa^l, and so noting reciprocal action or passion,
where the passion is from, and on himself, and is most fully expressed by the
Latin Neutrals, which partake both of active and passive, but are strictly
neither of them. This might be largely exemplified in the use of other words,
but the advantage of the observation will not be proportionable to the length
of such a diversion, being no more then this, that the distinct notion of the
word [ Schisme] is a voluntary dividing, Schism a voluntary recession.
or, in the neutral expression, which the Fathers familiarly use, a separating,
or receding of any member from the unity of the body, i. e. the Church of
Christ, and so that the scismatick is he that (...), Jude 19.
divides himself from the Church of God, not that is cut off, or separated, he
that (...). 1 John 2.19.
goes out, or (...). Heb. 10.38.
withdraws, or recedes of his own accord, not he that is cast out by the
Governors of the Church. Excommunication no Schism.
For whatever blame, and vengeance may justly light on such, who are by the
righteous, and charitative Censures of the Church, cut off from communion, in
case they do not by humiliation, confession, and reformation, and meet fruits
of repentance, prepare and qualify themselves for readmission to that
Communion, yet certainly this punishment of Excommunication is very disparate
and distant from the crime of schism, the Judge, i. e. Bishop or Governor of
the Church, being the only actor in the one, (and that ex officio, an act of
duty in him, when duly executed) but in the other, the offender, or guilty
person, who is therefore said to (...). Council: Laod: Can: 40.
accuse, to cast, to Propriae conscientiae videtur esse damnatio, cum quispiam
suo arbitrio ab Ecclesia recesserit. Hieron: (...). Cod: Can: Afric: Can: 22.
condemn himself, throwing himself, by his voluntary recession from the
Church, into that very condition, into which the adulterer, and obstinate
offender is cast by the Censures of it.

. 3. This is so evident a truth, that this punishment, and so judicial act, of
the Governor, cannot be the guilt of him that is punished, and though it be
supposed to be founded in some offense, is not yet in any propriety of speech
the offense it self, much less the sin of schism, especially when he is
punished for heresy, or some other crime, and not for schism, that I need not
farther insist on it. Interpretative Excommunication.
Only, as beside the formal (...), there is also an interpretative
excommunication, when he that is not under the Censures of the Church, is yet
refused admission, or reception unto it, unless he will submit to such and
such conditions, indispensably proposed to him, and because both in the one,
and the other, in the formal, and in the interpretative excommunication, the
Governors, being men, may possibly err, and consequently censure, and
excommunicate the innocent, and in like manner propose those conditions of
communion which are not lawful for that man to submit unto, Continuance out of
actual Communion, without Schism.
so it is possible in both cases, that the person excluded may be absolutely
innocent, free not only from that of schism, but from all other guilt, so that
he which is excommunicated may not be obliged to regain the peace, nor he that
is barred out, to force his passage into the communion of the Church, and so
both sorts of these, continuing out of the actual communion, neither the one
nor the other be guilty of schism in the least degree by so continuing.

Unjust excommunication hurts no man.
. 4. He that is excommunicated unjustly, cannot be rendered criminous by that
misfortune, nor concluded culpable by that argument, upon which he is supposed
innocent. Our Savior has pronounced of the anathemaes of the Jews, of their
bitterest execrations, their (...), their sharpest censures, nay the (...),
casting men out of the Synagogue, falsely or unjustly, that it is to be looked
on as a most auspicious token, a matter of the greatest rejoicing to them which
fell under it, one of the principal ingredients in, and forerunners of their
bliss (and accordingly the Apostles when they were thus cast out, and
contumeliously used, went out of the Temple rejoicing that they were thought
worthy to suffer shame for Christ's name) To which purpose is that of Photius
Patriarch of Constantinople to Michael Metropolitan of Mitylene, Ep: 116.
(...), etc. The excommunication of the Jewish Sanhedrim sent out against
Christ's disciples brought them so much nearer to their Lord and Master, and
alien'd the Jews themselves, removed them so much farther from the kingdom of
heaven, and so does all unjust excommunication now unite us to the Apostles by
this conformity with and participation of their sufferings. And I suppose the
arguments, and testimonies produced by the Chancellor of Paris are (and, when
they were first published, were so deemed by those of the Romish communion)
unanswerable to this matter; And accordingly that of Thomas de Curselis in the
Council of Basil, that it was Papae a Christo dictum, Quicquid ligaveris super
terram, erit ligatum, non quicquid dixeris esse ligatum. Jacob: Angularis in
Ep: ad Wesselum ap: Goldast: l. 1. p. 575. Which holds in the Interpretative
Excommunication.
said by Christ to the Pope, Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be
bound, not whatsoever thou shall affirm to be bound,] has with it the evidence
of undeniable truth, equally applicable to him and all Bishops in that and in
all future ages.

. 5. And then certainly what has thus been said of the Formal, will with the
same evidence be extended also to the Interpretative excommunication,
whenever the conditions of the communion contain in them any sin, and so
become as the former censures were supposed to be; For in that case certainly
it is no act of Schism from any Church, for any member to be, or to continue
thus excluded from it. For how desirable, and valuable soever an entire,
inviolate peace with all Christians, with all men, (together with the
approbation of our willing, cheerful obedience, and submission of our judgments
and practices, to our superiors) must forever be deemed by all true disciples
of Christ, Yet must not the purchase of this treasure be attempted by the
admission of any sin, any more then the glory of God might be projected by the
Apostle's lie. The least transgression of God's Law must not be adventured on
upon any the most Christian design, or consideration; The peaceable living
with all men, which is so often exhorted to* and inculcated, is yet no farther
recommended, then (...), and (...), if it be possible, and as much as in us
lies, and that, we know, must be interpreted of a moral and leg^^ possibility,
by which we are pronounced able to do that (and no more) which we can do
lawfully, and so when the Apostle 1 Thessalonians 4.11. exhorts to the most earnest
pursuit of this blisful state (this ease, and rest, and quiet from the labors,
and toils and hell of the factious, turbulent spirit) it is in a style, which
supposes this reserve, we must, says he, (...), have an ambition, and
emulation, and contention to live peaceably, and quietly, obliging us to use
all means that would be allowed to the ambitious person in his warmest pursuit,
i. e. the utmost lawful, but not the lowest unlawful means.

Mr Knots Concession in this matter. c. 7. p. 471, 472.
. 6. In which matter it is remarkable what course has been taken by the late
author of Infidelity unmasked, in his discourse of the Schism of Protestants,
where having acknowledged how perfectly unlawful it is to dissemble,
equivocate, or lie in the matters of faith -- and withal urgeing from all
antiquity, that to forsake the external communion of God's visible Church is
the sin of schism, he makes a shift to conclude (as a natural consequence)
from hence, that therefore the Church (I suppose he means, of Rome) is
infallible, and not subject to error, because otherwise men might forsake her
communion -- Where though the consequence be very strange, that we may forsake
the Churches communion, in case she be fallible or subject to error (for this
supposes it lawful 1. to forsake the communion of any erroneous Church, which
is much more then we would desire to be granted us, and 2. to forsake all that
are fallible, though they be not actually in error, which is in effect to
forsake the communion of all but Saints, and Angels, and God in heaven, for
they only have the privilege of impeccable and infallible) yet it absolutely
acknowledges that it would be lawful to separate from, and forsake the (even
Universal) Church of Christ, in case, or on supposition that we could not be
permitted to communicate with it, without lying, and dissembling, and
equivocating in matters of faith, which he there acknowledges to be the
denying God on earth.

. 7. Now (to return to our present consideration) Severe conditions of some
Churches Communion.
Of this there is no question, but that, as it is said to be customary among the
Kings of the Hunnes (as soon as they have any children, and so no need of their
brethrens assistance) to banish all their brethren out of their dominions, and
not to admit them again without putting out their eyes, ((...), says Cinnamus,
Hist: l. 1.) so it is possible (I wish it were not justly supposable) for a
particular Church so to fence, and limit, to guard, and restrain their
communion, to require such severe conditions of all whom they will admit, or
tolerate within their Church, that some men cannot without putting out their
eyes, or wilful acknowledgment of untruths, others without committing sin
against conscience, undergo the conditions thus required, nor consequently be
admitted to communion with it. Make Communion with them impossible.
As in case any unsound or untrue position be entered into the Confession, or
Catechism of any Church, and all the members of that Communion be explicitly
required to believe, Such are prescribing subscription of errors.
and acknowledge the truth of every branch of that Confession, and so that
confession be really the condition, and accordingly in the reputation of men
esteemed the tessera, or symbol of that communion, then he that shall enter
this communion thus conditionated, must certainly either actually subscribe, or
(which, as to the scandal of the action, is equivalent) be reasonably supposed
to acknowledge that untruth; and if in some persons blameless ignorance may be
supposed sufficient for the excusing, or alleviating that fault, yet 1. he that
has means of discovering that untruth, and criminously neglects to make use of
those means, and 2. he that has discovered the truth, and yet thus professes
himself to believe the contrary, will not be thus excusable; And it is not here
sufficient to object the supposable levity of the error, or intellectual
falsity, For how light, and inconsiderable (and extrinsecal to the foundation)
soever the error be supposed to be, yet if there be obstinacy in continuing in
it against light and conviction, or if there be falsness in professing, or
subscribing, contrary to present persuasions, or scandal and ill example,
temptation and snare to others, in seeming to do so; these certainly are sins,
and neither light nor inconsiderable, nor reconcilable with that fabric of
Christian practice, which ought to be superstructed on that foundation.

. 8. or Profession against Conscience.
Nay if the errors be really on the other side, if the doctrines so proposed,
as the condition of the communion of any Church, be indeed agreeable to truth,
but yet be really apprehended by him, to whom they are thus proposed, to be
false, and disagreeable, it will even in that case be hard to affirm that that
man may lawfully thus subscribe, contrary to his present persuasions; For
though it be certain, that he that thus erres, be obliged to use all probable
means to reform, and deposite his error, and, as long as he remains in it, is
so far guilty of sin, as he wants the excuse of invincible ignorance, and
being obliged to charity and peace, as far as it is possible, and in him
lies, he cannot be freed from offending against that obligation, if he do not
communicate with those, the condition of whose communion contains nothing
really erroneous, or sinful; and so though such a man, on that side, be, or may
be in several respects criminous, yet it is as evident on the other side, that
he that professes to believe, what he really does not believe, that subscribes
with his hand, what he rejects in his heart, or that does that which is under
the scandal of doing so, is far from being guiltless, he certainly offends
against the precept of sincerity and veracity (yea and of charity to his
brethren, in respect of the scandal) has added hypocrisy to his error, and so
which way soever he turns, he is sure to sin (the worst and most unhappy kind
of straight) he remains in error, and schism on the one side, and by flying
from that, he advances to lying and hypocrisy on the other, and the desire of
avoiding one of these, cannot justify the other.

. 9. This I say, in case the error be really on the man's, not on the Churches
side; But if (as in the case proposed) the errors be supposed to be wholly on
the Churches side, and withal indispensably required to be subscribed by all,
and so the conditions of that communion being exacted of him, who cannot
without sin undertake them, be to him really, and unexcusably unlawful, then
certainly to that man in that case it is no crime not to communicate (when he
is thus excluded from communicating) with that Church, but a crime, and a great
one, thus (by testifying against the truth and his own conscience) to qualify
himself for that communion. The admission of such guilts as these, hypocrisy,
and lying against conscience, and due grounds of conviction, is too high a
price to be paid even for peace, or communion it self.

. 10. A meek son of the Church of Christ will certainly be content to sacrifice
a great deal for the making of this purchase, and when the fundamentals of the
Faith, and superstructures of Christian practice are not concerned in the
concessions, he will cheerfully express his readiness to submit, or deposit
his own judgment in reverence and deference to his superiors in the Church
where his lot is fallen. But when this proves unsufficient, when peace with the
brethren on earth will not be had at a cheaper rate then this of a voluntary
offending against our father which is in heaven; in this case, the Christian
must be content to live without it, and though he would rejoice to sell all
that he has to purchase that jewel, yet his conscience, the health and peace
of that (which is interrupted by every wilful sin) is a commodity, that must
not be parted with, whatsoever the acquisition be, which is in his view and
thus offers it self in exchange for it.

. 11. Application to the Church of Rome; in relation to the present Church of
England.
The evidence of which is, I conceive, so demonstrative and irresistible, that
it will be justly extended much farther then the present case of the Church of
England gives me any temptation to extend it; For in case our Ancestors had
unjustly and criminously made a separation from the Church of Rome (which it
shall anon appear that they have not) and we their successors in that schism
should unfeignedly confess, and repent, and desire to reform that sin, and
uprightly discharge our conscience in neglecting no means, that patience,
humility, charity could suggest to us, in order to obtaining our
reconciliation, yet if that cannot be obtained by all these submissions,
without that harder condition of renouncing, or professing, or seeming (in
common reputation of men) to renounce any part of Divine truth, or Christian
practice, which we verily believe to be the truth, and our duty, it would not
be our guilt, but only our unhappiness, that we were thus forced to continue in
that separation. The reason is evident from the former grounds, we must not
sin, that we may give glory to God (such is confession, and fruits of
repentance, Jos. 7.19.) a penitent thief must not lie, to enable himself to
make restitution, nor the contrite schismatic commit any new sin (such
certainly is hypocrisy, lying, professing contrary to present persuasion) to
complete his repentance for the old.

. 12. If this last be conceived (as it is not the present case of the Church of
England, so) to be an impossible, unsupposeable case, not only upon the
Romanists grounds, who I presume will not acknowledge any such hard condition
(as is the profession of an untruth) to be required to any man's reconciliation,
and readmission to their communion, but upon this other score, because if any
false profession be now required to our readmission, the same was formerly
required to our continuance in their communion, and consequently our Ancestors
departure then could not be supposed (as in this last fiction of case it is) a
schismatical departure. I shall not need to give any more distinct answer to
this, then 1. That we that acknowledge not the Church of Rome to be infallible,
may be allowed to make a supposition, which is founded in the possibility of
her inserting some error in her Confessions, and making the explicit
acknowledgment of that the peremptory indispensable condition of her communion;
2. That it is possible also (though not by us pretended) that she should since
that supposed departure of our Ancestors, introduce some new doctrines, and
consequently some new errors, and those now be supposeable to lie in the way to
our return, though they had no part (before their birth) in driving us from
them; 3. That that may be by the Church of Rome permitted, and allowed to those
that have always remained in their communion, which to them that have
departed, and either in their persons, or posterity, desire to return to it,
will not be permitted by them; It being more ordinary to indulge liberties to
sons, that have always continued in the family, then to grant them to
offenders, and suppliants, that expect favors, and graces, and restoration to
privileges; 4. That those which have had their education out of the Communion
of the Church of Rome, may very possibly and probably come to discern that,
which in that communion would never have been (for want of representation)
discerned by them, and consequently may observe some errors in her doctrine or
practice, which their Ancestors at their very departure from them had not
discerned, and then though those errors subscribed to by them, had the
Lenitive, or Antidote of blameless ignorance, yet because those that now really
discern that truth, which the Ancestors discerned not, cannot lawfully profess
not to discern it, or profess against conscience to believe what they do not
believe, it is therefore necessarily consequent, that the return of such to the
peace of the Roman Church may by this means be rendered impossible though their
Ancestors continuance there, lying under no such prejudice, their separation
were acknowledged unlawful.

CHAP. III. The several sorts of Schism.
. 1. THus much has been necessarily premised for the true notion of Schism,
taken from the origination of the word, as that includes, in the neuter sense,
a recession, or departure, in the reciprocal, a separating, or dividing himself.

. 2. It is now time to proceed and inquire how many sorts there are of this
schism in the Ecclesiastical sense, or by how many ways the guilt of this sin
of the flesh may be contracted.

. 3. In which inquiry it will be first necessary to consider, wherein
Ecclesiastical unity consists, viz: Unity Ecclesiastical wherein it consists.
in the preserving all those relations, wherein each member of the whole Church
of Christ is concerned one toward another: These relations are either of
subordination (paternal on one side, and filial on the other,) or of equality
(fraternal. Unity of Members subordinate.
) The unity of those members that are subordinate one to the other, consists in
the constant due subjection, and obedience of all inferiors to all their lawful
superiors, and in due exercise of authority in the superiors toward all
committed to their charge: Of fellow brethren.
And the unity of the fellow brethren in the performance of all mutual duties
of justice and charity toward one another.

. 4. The former.
Of the former sort is the (...), obedience to the Rulers of the Church, Heb.
13.17. and back again the (...), due feeding, i. e. governing the flock of God
among them, 1 Pet. 5.2. And because there be (under the King or Emperor, or
supreme power, to whom all are subject in any his dominions) many possible
links in that subordination, Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Bishops, Presbyters,
Deacons, and the brethren, or congregation, the unity must be made up of the
due subordination, and Christian i. e. charitative exercise of power in all
these.

. 5. The later.
Of the later sort there are as many branches, as there are varieties of
equalities. The brethren or believers in every congregation, i. e. all beside
the Governors of the Church (however unequal in other respects) are in this
respect equalized, and comprehended all under the one title of (...) the
younger, 1 Pet. 5.5. And this whether we respect all other fellow members of
the same, or whether of any other congregation, whether Parish, or City, or
Diocese, or Province, or Nation, of the West, of the East, of the whole
Christian world, as far as each member is qualified to exercise any fraternal
duty toward them. So again the several Deacons, or Presbyters of any Diocese,
the several Bishops of any Province, the several Metropolitans of any Nation,
the several Primates or Patriarchs one with another (as the several Apostles)
over the whole world, are each of them to be looked on as equals to all others
of the same sort; And proportionably (and together with the Pastors) the
flocks, the several communities, or congregations of Christian men considered
in complexo, the Parishes, Dioceses, Provinces, Nations, Climes of the whole
Christian world. And according to these so many equalities, there are, or ought
to be so many sorts of unities, so many Relations of that mutual fraternal
charity, which Christ came to plant in his Church.

. 6. Communion.
Having seen what the unity is (to which Communion superadds no more but the
relation of external association, whether by assembling for the worship of God
in the same place, where the matter is capable of it, or whether by letters
communicatory, by which we may maintain external Communion with those which are
most distant from us) It will be easy to discern what Schism is, viz: the
breach of that Unity (and Communion) and what be the sorts or species of it*
either those that offend against the subordination which Christ has by
himself, and his Apostles settled in his Church, or those that offend against
the mutual charity, which he left among his disciples.

. 7. The branches of Schism as it is an offense against Subordination.
For the first of these, those that offend against the due subordination, they
are possibly of as many sorts as there be distinct links in the subordination.
As first those brethren or people, which reject the ministry of the Deacons,
or Presbyters in any thing wherein they are ordained, and appointed by the
Bishop, (and as long as they continue in obedience to him) and of their own
accord break off, and separate from them, Schism against the Deacons or
Presbyters.
refuse to live regularly under them, they are by the Ancient Church of Christ
adjudged and looked on as Schismatics; So Ignatius the holy Bishop, (and
Apostolical person) and Martyr of Antioch, in Ep: ad Trall: admonishing them to
beware of the poison of seducers, i. e. the Schismatics of those times, he
directs them this one way to do it, (...) -- (...), This ye shall do, says
he, if ye be not puffed up, and if ye be not separated from God, from Christ,
from the Bishop -- He that continues within the sept is pure, He that does
ought without the Bishop and Presbytery and Deacon, is not of a pure
conscience, accounting all that live out of this obedience to be so far
infected and defiled with schism. So again in the former part of the same
Epistle, (...) (...), Let all revere the Deacons as the ministers of Jesus
Christ, and in like manner the Bishop as Jesus Christ the son of the Father,
the Presbyters as the Senate of God and College of Apostles, without these it
is not called a Church. Where every particular Church being administered by
these, no man is farther deemed a member of the Church, then he lives regularly
within this obedience: And the same is the importance of his exhortation to the
Philippians, (...), Observe the Bishop, and the Presbyters, and the Deacons,
intimating this to be the only way of preserving unity against schism, as
appears by that which had gone before, (...) -- (...), There is one altar (or
sept) as there is one Bishop together with his Presbyters and Deacons, and the
living in union with, obedience to these, is the only way to do, whatsoever ye
do, according to the will of God. Where this subordination being looked on, as
that which is placed in the Church by God, it is both schism and impiety not
to continue regularly under it; And so in the inscription of that Epistle,
(...), He salutes them in the blood of Christ, especially if they be at one
with their Bishop, and the Presbyters with him, as also the Deacons designed by
the appointment of Jesus Christ, looking upon all as Schismatics, that were
not so. Thus again in his Epistle to the Ephesians, he admonishes them to obey
the Bishop, and Presbyters (...) with an undivided mind, making the
disobedience an act of schism or division in any; And so generally throughout
all those Epistles.

. 8. Against the Bishop.
In like manner; if we ascend to the next higher link, that of the Bishop, to
whom both Presbyters and Deacons, as well as the brethren, or people, are
obliged to live in obedience, the withdrawing or denying this obedience in any
of these will certainly fall under this guilt. So the same holy Ignatius in Ep:
ad Smyr: (...), Let no man without the Bishop do any of those things which
belong to the Church. (...), Wherever the Bishop appears, there let the
multitude be, (...), he that does any thing without the privity of the Bishop,
serves the Devil; the title by which those foul Gnostick heretics and
schismatics (the (...), the troublers and dividers of the Church) were
signified. So in the process of that Epistle, having mentioned obedience to
their Bishop, as a necessary requisite to their sanctification, supposing the
contrary to be an act of pollution, i. e. of the poison of the schismatics,
and again admonishing them as of their duty ((...)) to concur with the
sentence of their Bishop, he adds, that he that does not so (expressed by not
being within the altar or sept) (...), falls short of the bread of God, is an
excommunicate person, being rendered such by this act of division from the
Bishop. So in the Epistle to the Magnesians, speaking of those that act without
the Bishop ((...)) (...), says he, (...), these seem not to him to be men of a
good conscience (the phrase by which he often expresses Schismatics, whose mind
and conscience was defiled by the poison of the Gnostics at that time) because
they assembled not according to that order and establishment which was settled
in the Church. And again, as Christ did nothing without his Father ((...))
being united to him, or all one with his Father, (...) -- so neither must ye
do any thing without the Bishop, (...), but assemble together and have but one
prayer common to you all, where the living out of this regular obedience to the
Bishop, is the contrary to union and communion, and so is formally schism. And
to the Philadelphians, (...), as many as are God's and Christ's, are with the
Bishop, excluding them from the unity of Christ's body who are thus separated
from the Bishop; And in the same Epistle speaking of the repentance of
schismatics, and heretics, and God's pardon offered to such, the (...).
condition of that pardon, and (...) of the syncerity of that repentance, is,
(...), if they return to the unity of God and senate of the Bishop. So
frequently in S. Cyprian, the schism especially of the five Presbyters of
Faelicissimus his faction, Ep: 40. appears to consist in their disobedience to,
and breaking off from their Contra Episcopatum meum etc. Ep. 40. Hi tribuebant,
ne concordarent cum Episcopo suo- Ibid. contra sacerdotium Dei partionem ruptae
fraternitatis armare voluisse.
proper Bishop, and causing others to do so; and De Unit: Eccl: the
Schismatic is described to be filius impius qui contemptis Episcopis and Dei
sacerdotibus derelictis constituere audet aliud altar, an impious son, which
having contemned the Bishops, and (which is all one) forsaken the Priests of
God, dares constitute another altar; and Ep: 76. qui schisma faciunt and
relicto Episcopo alium sibi foris Pseudo-episcopum constituunt, the
schismatics are they that having left their Bishop set up for themselves
abroad another false Bishop, and all their adherents are involved in the same
guilt, qui se schismaticis contra Praepositos and sacerdotes irreligiosa
temeritate miscuerunt, who join with the schismatics against their Bishops,
and Ep: 65. Hi sunt conatus schismaticorum -- ut sibi placeant, ut Praepositum
superbo tumore contemnant, These are the endeavors of schismatics, that they
may please themselves, and proudly contemn their Bishop, and Ep: 69. Vnum scire
debes -- si quis cum Episcopo non sit, in Ecclesia non esse, One thing you are
to know that he that is not with the Bishop, is not in the Church, the Church
being there by him defined plebs sacerdoti adunata and Pastori suo grex
adhaerens, the people united to the Bishop, and the flock to their Pastor.

. 9. This of a lighter and a grosser sort.
And as this disobedience may be of two sorts, either of a lower, or of a
higher kind, the denying obedience in any particular lawful command of the
superior, or the casting off all obedience together, dethroning them, or
setting up our selves either in their steads, or in opposition to them (the
first parallel to the contumacy of the Levites, the sons of Eliab, Number. 16.12,
14. which said, We will not come up, the second to their rebellion, levelling
and equalling themselves to Moses and Aaron v. 3. ^ and both together
subjecting them first to that curse, of Gods, not accepting their sacrifice, v.
15. and then to that sudden exemplary destruction, v. 31.) so will the Schism
be also a lighter, and a grosser separation, a defection from the Bishop, and a
rebellion against him, the former ordinarily called (...) Schism, the latter
(...) Sedition, the latter adding very much to the guilt of the former, and
incapable of the alleviating excuses of ignorance or mistake (in thinking the
commands unlawful, and consequently the obedience) which may be pretended in
the former.

. 10. Against the Metropolitan.
From this of Bishops we may further ascend to the higher dignity, and authority
of Metropolitanes, over Bishops themselves, which what it is, will be fit to be
examined a while.

. 11. The original of Metropolitans.

In Titus.


And the first rise may be taken from Scripture it self, where the Commission
which is given to Titus by S. Paul, to ordain Elders, Tit. 1.5. (that is
Bishops v. 7.) in every city of Crete, demonstrates him to have had
Metropolitical authority bestowed on him; so says S. Chrysostom (on Tit. 1.
Hom. 1.) of Titus, (...). If he had not been an approved person, in whom the
Apostle had perfect confidence, he would never have committed a whole Island to
him, never have appointed him to perfect what he had left imperfect, never have
entrusted to him the jurisdiction over so many Bishops: And Theodoret in Arg.
Ep. ad Tit. That Titus was ordained by S. Paul, (...), to ordain Bishops under
him for the governing of that whole Province, being a very great one; and Eccl.
Hist. l. 3. (...).
Eusebius (...), That Titus had the inspection of all the Churches in Crete, of
which that there was an hundred in number, and Gortyna the Metropolis of them
all, appears by Dionysius bishop of Corinth about the year of Christ 175. who
inscribes an Epistle (...) (...), to the Church about Gortyna, together with
the rest of the Dioceses in Crete, of all which he mentions and commends Philip
their Bishop, i. e. the Metropolitan, under whom they all were, as appears by
Eusebius l. 4. c. (...).

. 12. In Timothy.
What has been thus said of Titus, is with the same evidence of the Text
affirmable of Timothy, when being placed by S. Paul at Ephesus the chief
Metropolis of Asia; he had by that means the inspection of all the Bishops
there, and consequently is directed both for the ordaining (1 Timothy 3.2.) and
exercising jurisdiction over them c. 5.1.19. and so says S. Chrysostom, Hom.
15. in 1. Tim. 5.15.
(...). It Is manifest that Timothy was entrusted with more Churches then one,
even with a whole nation, that of Asia, and therefore S. Paul discourses to him
of Elders or Bishops, Photii lib. number. 254.
So the Anonymus writer of the Martyrdom of Timothy (...) (...). The Apostle
Timothy is ordained by S. Paul, and enthroned Bishop of the Metropolis of
Ephesus, and accordingly is by Theodoret styled (...) the Apostle, i. e. chief
ruler or Bishop of the Asiaticks; Eccl. hist. l. (...)
and by Eusebius, (...) Bishop of the Province about Ephesus.

. 13. In James, etc.
The same might be showed of James Bishop of Jerusalem, who by that means was
evidently Metropolitan of all the cities of all Judea, And even of Syria and
Cilicia also, if we may argue concludently from the sending of that Canon to
those regions, Act. 15.23. It is likewise the affirmation of Agrippa (in Philo)
of Jerusalem, (...), that it was the Metropolis, not only of one region Judea,
but of many more, because of the Colonies it had sent out, naming (...), Syria
and Cilicia among others. And thereto agrees again (as far as Syria) what we
find in the letters of Commission, which Saul had received from the Sanhedrim
at Jerusalem* to the Synagogues of Damascus, a city of Syria, as being supposed
under that Metropolis of Judea, Act. 9.1, 2. And accordingly after the
destruction of Jerusalem, Tiberias had this privilege, as appears both by the
Imperial Code, tit. de Jud. and Caelic. and by Epiphanius, in the heresy of
the Ebionites, who refers all Syria and Cilicia to that Metropolis, in the same
manner as the Synagogues in Assyria and Media to the Sanhedrim in Bagdat, and
in all Egypt to that in Alexandria; But all this does rather belong to the
Jewish Form among themselves and the Jurisdiction of that Great Sanhedrim over
their colonies thus far diffused, and is not so appliable to the Christian
Church at Jerusalem, it being affirmed by Joseph. de bell. Jud. l. 3. c. ^. that
Antioch was Metropolis of all Syria, but this by the way.

. 14. Thus Philippi appears to have been the Metropolis of one part of
Macedonia (as Thessalonica another) (...), the prime city of a portion, or
division, or province of Macedonia, Epist. 247.
Act. 16.12. and is accordingly so styled by Photius the Patriarch of
Constantinople (...) the city of Philippi being a Metropolis of a Province of
the Macedonians, and so Epaphroditus their Bishop in S. Paul's time (as (...) --
Theod. in 1. Tim. 3.1.
Theodoret and others resolve from his being called (...), their Apostle, Phil.
2.25.) had under him many Bishops, who are accordingly named in the plural
Phil. 1.1. and all these subordinate to him as their Metropolitan.

. 15. So of the seven churches of Asia, Rev. 2. and 3. it appears (what has
been elsewhere proved) that they were all Metropoles; Of Ephesus it has been
already clear, and S. Chrysostom is express, In Arg. Ep. ad Ephesians.
(...), Ephesus is a Metropolis of Asia, and Theod. in Ep. ad Dioscor. (...),
and in Photius, the Ancient writer of the Martyrdom of Timothy (bib. number.
254.) says of S. John* that being returned from his banishment (...) he
resided at the Metropolis of the Ephesians. And in Vlpian, L. Obser. D. de
Offic. procons.
the Proconsul under Antoninus being to go to Asia, was to touch upon (...),
Ephesus one and the chief of the Metropoles of Asia: and accordingly Act.
19.38. it is said of that city, (...), the Proconsuls were there, and the
Assizes, as in the chief city of that Province, Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. (...).
and in Eusebius, Antoninus Pius his Epistle concerning the Christians is said
to have been read and proclaimed at Ephesus (...) in the common council or
consessus of Asia, Or. ad Afiat.
and in Aristides it is styled (...) the common Magazine of Asia, (...),
whither they applied themselves for all their wants. All which are evidences
that it was a Metropolis (and the chief) of Asia.

. 16. Geogr. l. 5. c. 2. Act. 5.
So of Thyatira, says Ptolomee, (...) that it was a Metropolis. Of Philadelphia
the Council of Constantinople Sub Mena (...) the Bishop of the Metropolis of
the Philadelphians of the Province of the Lydians, i. e. in this Lydian or
Proconsular Asia. So Laodicea, Sardis, and Smyrna (together with Ephesus) are
set down by Pliny as cities in which the Roman Proconsuls kept their Assizes,
Not. Hist. l. 5. c. 29.
and dispensed justice to all the neighboring cities, which is the character
of a Metropolis in the civil notion, Ibid. c. 30.
and the same he also affirms elsewhere of Pergamus: And thus the whole number
of the seven Churches appear each of them, to have been Metropoles, (...)
Steph. Byzant. (...).
and accordingly by Ignatius his Epistles to the Trallians and Magnesians, (the
Christians of two neighbor cities of Lydia on the Banks of Meander, and so of
this Asia) and by the mention of their Bishops Damas and Polybius, it is
evident that there were other Episcopal Sees in that Asia, beside those seven
named in the Revelation, and those afterward appear to have been subject to the
Metropolis of Ephesus, which alone of all the seven continued till Constantin's
time, the rest being destroyed.

. 17. From these manifest footsteps of Metropolitical power in Scripture, it is
easy to descend through the first times, and find the like; In Ignatius.
As when Ignatius the Archbishop of Antioch (the Primitive Martyr) in his
Epistle to the Romans styleth himself (...), Pastor of the Church which was in
Syria, that whole region belonging then to that Metropolis of Antioch:
Agreeable to which is that of the author of the Epistle to the Antiocheni
(whosoever it was) inscribing it (...), to the Church of God in Syria, that
belongs as a Province to that of Antioch: In the Bishop of Rome. (what his
Province.)
So the Epistle to the Romans is inscribed (...) to the Church which has the
Presidencie in the place of the Region or Province of the Romans, which gives
the Bishop of Rome a Metropolitical power over all other the Bishops of that
Province, the Vrbicarian region, as it was styled, and (...). Eusebius. Eccl.
Hist. l. 7. c. (...). Syn. Sardic. Epist. ad Alex. ap. Athan. Apol. 2. (...).
Athan. Epist. ad solit. vit. agent. Ex Provincia Italiae, civ. Med ex Prove.
Romana, Civitate Portuensi. Syn. Arelat. 1. in nominibus Synodo praefixis.
distinguished from the Province of Italy properly so called, confined to the
seven Provinces of the civil jurisdiction of the Vicarius Italiae, and the
Ecclesiastical of the Archbishop of Milan the chief Metropolis thereof. Of the
circuit or compass of this Province of the Bishop of Rome, many learned men
have discoursed excellently out of the Ancient Surveys of the Provinces,
particularly that very learned Frenchman so rarely skilled, and judicious in
Antiquity, Jacobus Leschaserius, in his little tract de Region. Suburbic* but
none with more evidence of conviction, then our Modest countreyman Mr
Brerewood, who thus describes the ancient jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome,
that it contained all those Provinces of the Diocese of Italy, which the old
Lawyers term Suburbicarias, of which there were ten, three Islands, Sicily,
Sardinia, and Corsica, and the other seven in the firm land of Italy, taking up
in a manner all the narrow part of it, viz. all Italy Eastward, but on the West
no farther extended then to the River Magra (the limit of Tuscanie) toward the
Tyrrhene sea, and to the River Esino (anciently Asius) toward the Adriatic
Sea. For at that River Esino met both the Picenum, Suburbicarium, and
Annonarium, the former of which belonged to the Prefecture of Rome, of which
that city was the Metropolis, And the later, with all the other Provinces in
the broader part of Italy (seven of them in all) to the Diocese of Italy, of
which Milan was the Metropolis. Hist. Eccl. l. 1^ c. 6.
Thus Ruffinus in his Paraphrase rather then translation of the Nicene Canon
says, that the Bishop of Rome was thereby authorized Suburbicariarum
Ecclesiarum Sollicitudinem gerere, to take and manage the care of the
suburbicarian Churches; and there is no reason to doubt but that he that lived
so near after that Council, and was of Italy, knew competently what he affirmed
of that matter. And it being evident that in all other places the
Ecclesiastical jurisdictions were proportioned to the temporal of the
Lieutenants, and that the Suburbicarian region, and the so many and no more
provinces in them, pertain'd to the Praefecture of the city of Rome, It must
follow that these were the limits of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of that
Bishop also. But this by the way, in passing.

. 18. In Alexandria. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. (...).
So when of S. Mark it is affirmed out of the anc^ent records by Eusebius, that
he (...), first constituted Churches (in the plural) in Alexandria, and under
the title of (...), the Province of Alexandria, put them all into the hands of
Anianus in the 8th of Nero, Ibid. c. (...).
it is evident that Alexandria was a Metropolitical, or Patriarchal See to
which all Egypt did belong.

. 19. In S. Cyprian.
So S. Cyprian the Bishop of Carthage, to which the whole Province of Africa
pertained, is by the Council of Constantinople in Trullo, Can. 2. called (...),
the Archbishop of the Region of Africa, And accordingly he often mentions the
many Bishops in his Province, Vniversis vel in nostra Provincia -- to all the
Bishops in our Province -- Ep. 40. And Latius fusa est nostra Provincia, habet
etiam Numidiam and Mauritanias duas sibi cohaerentes. Our Province is extended
farther, has Numidia and the two Mauritania's annexed to it, Ep. 45. in each
of which there being a Church and consequently a Bishop in every city (as (...)
Act. 14.23. is all one with (...) in every city Act. 16.4.) they were all
subject to this Metropolitan.

. 20. The subjection of Bishops to Archbishops.
By all this, and much more which might be added, it is manifest, that as the
several Bishops had Praefecture over their several Churches, and the
Presbyters* Deacons, and people under them, such as could not be cast off by
any without the guilt and brand of Schism, So the Bishops themselves of the
ordinary, inferior cities (for the preserving of unity, and many other good
uses) were subjected to the higher power of Archbishops or Metropolitanes.

. 21. Of Archbishops to Primates, etc.
Nay we must yet ascend one degree higher from this of Archbishops or
Metropolitanes, to that supreme of Primates or Patriarchs, the division of
which is thus cleared in the division and Notitia of the Roman Empire.
(Original of Primates.)
Constantine the Great instituted four Praefecti Praetorio, two in the East, as
many in the West; Of the Western, one at Rome, another at Triers, this last
then called Praefectus Praetorio Galliarum. These Praefects had their several
Vicarii, who in their power, and name judged the Provinces, As for example, The
Praefectus Praetorio placed at Triers had three Vicarii, or Lieutenants, one
placed at Triers, a second at Lions, a third at Vienna, from the greatness of
whose authority, and the resort of all other cities and Provinces to them for
justice sprang the splendour, and dignity of those cities where they resided,
and the dependence of large Provinces and many other cities on each of them.
This whole circuit which was thus subject to, or dependent on any such
Lieutenant, was by the Greeks called (...), and the style devolving from the
civil to the Ecclesiastical divisions, as the former both of cities, and of
Territories, and of Metropoles or Mother cities (the chief in every Province)
had done the Bishop being answerable to the Defensor civitatis, and the
Archbishop to the Praesident in every Province, from thence it came that every
such Metropolis which was the seat of any Vicarius or Lieutenant General, was
(over and above (...) (...)) called (...) and (...), and the Bishop thereof
Primas, (...), Patriarcha, a Primate, Exarch, or Patriarch, and all that (...)
(which is larger then a Province, the joint administration of many Provinces,
with the several Metropoles, and Metroplitanes contained in it) was subjected
to him. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. (...).
Thus S. Irenaeus being Bishop of Lions, is by Eusebius affirmed (...), to have
the over sight or Government of the Provinces of France, either those only that
were under that Primate, or perhaps of all France, Ibid. c. d.
of which Lions was then in the Ecclesiastical account the first Exarchate; for
so says the same Eusebius, (...), Lions, and Vienna (but first Lions) were
famously known to be beyond all others in those parts, the principal Metropoles
of France. And again (...), these were the most splendid illustrious Churches
there. To which first times I conceive belongs that verse of Guilielmus Brito
in Philippeide. Et Lugdunensis, quo Gallia tota solebat, Vt fama est, Primate
regi -- placing all France under the Primate of Lions, or affirming it from
tradition (ut fama est) that it was wont anciently to be so placed, which was
not well understood or taken notice of by the learned Jos. Scaliger, In Notit.
Galliae p. 8^2.
when he affirms it nuperum and novitium, and ex beneficio Romani Pontificis
indultum, a privilege lately granted to the Bishop of Lions by the Pope, quod
Primatem sese vocari gaudeat, that he calls himself Primate, which privilege,
if not title, did so long since belong to Irenaeus the Bishop of that Diocese.

. 22. I shall not need enlarge on this subject, or set down the several
Primates and Dioceses belonging to them. It is known in the ancient notitiae of
the Church, that beside the three Patriarchs of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch
(to which title afterward Constantinople, and Jerusalem were advanced) there
were eleven Primates more, there being fourteen Dioceses, or joint
administrations of many Provinces (for so the word anciently signified, not in
the modern sense of it, one city and the territory, The Primates power equal to
that of the Patriarch.
the jurisdiction of an ordinary Bishop, for which they then used (...)) seven
in the East, and the Praefecture of the city of Rome, and six more in the West,
into which the whole Empire was divided. And though the Patriarchs had in
Councels the praecedence, or deference in respect of place, either because
these three cities had the honor to disperse Christianity in a most eminent
manner to other cities, and nations, or from the great dignity of the cities
themselves, ( (...). Council. Chalced. Can penult.
Rome being the seat and first city of the Empire, and thereupon thus dignified
says the Council of Chalcedon: and Alexandria by Or. 32. ad Alexandrin. see
Aristid. Or. de Romans Laud.
Dio Chrysostom, and others affirmed to be the second, and Antioch the third,
says Josephus) yet it is certain that the power and jurisdiction of Primates,
was as great as of Patriarchs, and the Office the same (see Anacle^us Epist. ad
Episc. Ital. and Gratian Did. 99.) and many times in Authors the very titles
confounded, as appears by Justinian, who commonly gives Primates the names of
Patriarchs of the Dioceses. And if it be now demanded whether there were not
anciently some Summum Genus, some one Supreme either of, or over these
Patriarchs, I answer, that if we respect order, or priority of place again,
then the Bishop of Rome had it among the Patriarchs, as the Patriarchs among
the Primates, that city of Rome being Lady of the World, and the seat of the
Empire; But if we respect power, And no power but of the Prince above them.
or authority, there was none anciently in the Church over that of Primates,
and Patriarchs, but only that of the Emperor in the whole Christian World (as
of every Sovereign Prince in his Dominions) as may appear by the ancient power,
and practice of congregating, or convoking of Councels, Provincial by the
Metropolitan, Patriarchal by the Patriarch, or Primate, National by the Prince,
for the first 1000 years, through the whole West, and General by the (...).
Socrat. l. 5. Prooem. Ex Superioribus habetur Imperatores Sanctos
congregationes Synodales Universalium Conciliorum totius Ecclesiae semper
^^cisse. Ita ego perlustrans gesta omnium Universalium usque ad octavum
inclusive Basiliitempore celebratum verum esse r^peri. Cusan. de concord.
Cathol l. 3. c. 16. and c. 13. See S. Hierom in Apol. ad Ruffin. l. 2. where
speaking of a pretended Synod, he adds, Quis Imperator hanc Synodum jusserit
congregari?
Emperor, when for the conserving the unity, or taking care for the necessities
of the Church, those last remedies appeared seasonable. But this of General
Councels being extraordinary, and such as the Church was without them for the
first three hundred years, and are now morally impossible to be had, we need
not farther to ascend to these, but content our selves with those standing
powers in the Church, the uppermost of which are Archbishops, Primates, and
Patriarchs, to whom the Bishops themselves are in many things appointed to be
subject, and this power, and subjection, defined, and asserted, by the Ancient
Canons, The Primitive Power of Primates etc.
and the most ancient, even immemorial Apostolical tradition, and Custom,
avouched for it, as may appear Council. Nicen. 1. Can. 4.6. Council. Antioch. c.
9.20. Council. Chalced. C. 19. In the Sixth Nicene Canon, where the jurisdiction
of all Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis is affirmed to belong to the Patriarch of
Alexandria, and order is taken that the (...) or privileges of eminency which
belong to the Bishop of Rome, of Antioch, and Metropolitanes of all other
Provinces, shall be conserved entire to them, the Introduction is made in these
words, (...) Let the Ancient customs be in force, The very form which S.
Ignatius uses concerning Apostolical customs which were to be solicitously
retained in the Church, and seems there particularly to refer to those orders,
which S. Mark had left in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, subjecting all the
Bishops there to the Patriarch by him constituted in Alexandria.

. 23. So in the 9th Canon of the Council of Antioch, where (...), the Bishop
presiding in the Metropolis, is appointed (...) to undertake the care of the
whole Province* (and all the inferior cities, and Bishops in them) and the
Bishops commanded (...), it is straight added (...), according to the ancient
Canon of the Fathers, which has continued in force (from the first times also
unto that Council) Where if it be demanded what is the importance of (...), I
conceive the word to be best explained by Hesychius, (...) (it should
doubtless be (...)) and so the meaning of the Canon to be, agreeably to the
express words of other Canons, that as any ordinary Bishop has full power in
his own Church, which he may in all things, wherein that alone is concerned,
exercise independently from the commands or directions of any, So in any thing
of a more foreign nature, wherein any other Church is concerned equally with
that, and so falls not under the sole cognizance or judgment of either, there
the Bishop of that Church is to do nothing without directions from the
Metropolitan, and that is the meaning of (...), as that is all one with (...)
-- that no Bishop must do any thing but what belongs particularly to him
ratione officii (any thing that another is concerned in, as well as he) without
the Metropolitan.

. 24. Act. 15 Can. 9.
So in the Council of Chalcedon the direction is given for appeals in this
order, from the Bishop to the Metropolitan, from the Metropolitan to the
(...) or Primate of the Diocese or Province, as where there are more
Metropolitanes then one (as was showed of Ephesus in Asia, (...). Ulp. Obser.
D. de Offic. Procons.
and elsewhere frequently) there some one is Primate or Patriarch among them,
and to him lies the appeal in the last resort, and from him to no other, see
Justinian Novel. 123. c. 22. and Cod. l. 1. tit. 4. leg. 29. who speaking of
this calls it an ancient decree.

. 25. That which we find in the eighth Canon of the Great Council of Ephesus,
shall conclude this matter, when upon some claim of the Patriarch of Antioch
for an interest in the ordaining of the Patriarch of Cyprus, the Bishops of
Cyprus deny his claim, and deduce their privilege of (...) or independence from
any foreign Bishop, from the very Apostles times, A sanctis Apostolis, say they,
nunquam possunt ostendere, quod adfuerit Antiochenus and ordinaverit, vel
communicaverit unquam insulae ordinationis gratiam, neque alius quisquam, From
the very Apostles times they can never show that the Patriarch of Antioch or
any other was present and ordained, or (being absent) sent the grace of
ordination to this Island, but that the Bishops of Constantia, the Metropolis
of that Island, by name Troilus, Sabinus, and Epiphanius, and all the orthodox
Bishops from the Apostles times, ab his qui in Cypro constituti sunt, have been
constituted and ordained by their own Bishops of the Island, and accordingly
they required that they might continue in the same manner, Sicut initio a
temporibus Apostolorum -- permansit Cypriorum Synodus, as they had done from
the times of the very Apostles, still appealing (...), to the ancient manner,
the ancient custom, the privileges, which from their first plantation they had
enjoyed, and that from the Apostles themselves: And accordingly that Council
condemned the pretension of the Patriarch of Antioch, as that which was (...),
an innovation against the Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons of the holy Fathers,
and orders not only in behalf of the Cypriots that the Bishops of their
Churches (...) -- shall continue to enjoy their right inviolate according to
the ancient custom, but extended their sentence to all other Dioceses in these
words, (...), The same shall be observed in all other Dioceses and Provinces
wheresoever, that no Bishop shall lay hold of another Province, which has not
been formerly and from the beginning under their or their Ancestors power. And
again (...). This holy and Ecumenical Synod has decreed, that the privileges
and rights of every Province shall be conserved pure and inviolate, as they
have enjoyed them from the beginning, according to the custom that has
anciently been in force. All deducing this power of Primates over their own
Bishops (and together excluding all foreign pretenders) from the Apostles and
first planters of the Churches, and requiring all to remain, as they were first
thus constituted. Wherein as there be many things of useful observation, which
will be more fitly appliable in the progress of this discourse, so that which
is alone pertinent to this place is only this, that there may be a
disobedience, and irregularity, and so a Schism, even in the Bishops in
respect of their Metropolitanes, and of the authority which they have by Canon
and Primitive custom over them, which was therefore to be added to the several
Species of Schism set down in the former chapters.

CHAP. IV. The pretended evidences of the Romanist against the Church of
England examined, and first that from the Bishop of Romes Supremacy by Christ's
donation to S. Peter.
. 1. THE Scene being thus prepared, and the nature and sorts of Schism defined
and summarily enumerated, our method now leads us to inquire impartially, what
evidences are producible against the Church of England, whereby it may be
thought liable to this guilt of Schism, And these pretended evidences may be
of several sorts, according to the several Species of this sort of Schism
described, and acknowledged by us.

. 2. The first charge against us, Our casting out the Popes Supremacy.
The first evidence that is offered against us is taken from a presumed
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, as Successor to S. Peter, over all Churches in
the world, which being in the days of Henry VIII. renounced, and disclaimed,
first by both Universities, and most of the greatest and famous Monasteries of
this kingdom (in their negative answer and determination of this question, An
aliquid Authoritatis in hoc Regno Angliae Pontifici Romano de jure competat
plusquam alii cuiquam Episcopo extero? Whether the Pope of Rome have of right
any authority in the Realm of England, more then any other foreign Bishop has)
and that determination of theirs testified under their hands and scales, and
after by Act of Convocation subscribed by the Bishops and Clergy, and confirmed
by their corporal oaths, and at last the like imposed by Act of Parliament, 35
Hen. VIII. c. 1. all this is looked on, and condemned, as an Act of Schism in
this Church and Nation, in renouncing that power of S. Peter's Successors placed
over all Christians by Christ.

. 3. This objection against us consisting of many branches, every of which must
be manifested or granted to have truth in it, or else the objection will be of
no force, 1. the matter of fact, that thus it was in England; 2. the
consequence of that fact, that it were Schism, supposing these Successors of
S. Peter were thus set over all Christians by Christ. 3. the matter of fact
again, that S. Peter's Successors were thus constituted Universal Pastors by
Christ; This again of two branches, 1. that S. Peter was so constituted, 2.
that the power instated on S. Peter devolved on the Bishops of Rome; I shall
endeavor to expedite this matter by granting, and not requiring the pretenders
farther to prove the two first branches, and leave the issue of the debate to
their manifesting the truth, or our manifesting the falsehood of (the last
mentioned, but indeed) the principal fundamental part of the contention, as it
consists of two branches, one as it respects S. Peter, the other as it respects
his Successor in the Sea of Rome; wherein if the Romanists pretensions shall
appear to have truth in them, we must be acknowledged by breaking off from our
submission to that See, to be formally Schismatics according to the grounds
already laid, and acknowledged by us; But on the other side, if their
pretensions herein shall appear to be false* or unsufficiently proved and
manifested, there is no other branch of the argument, be it never so true,
which can give the conclusion any authority with any pondering rational man, it
being in the power of any weak link to destroy the usefulness of the whole
chain, and consequent to the falsenesse, or inevidence of any one proposition,
that the conclusion shall not be inferred by that arguing.

. 4. The Supremacy of S. Peter examined.
And first for the pretension as far as it respects S. Peter, and must be
managed by evidences, and so concluded either on one side or the other, I shall
begin with offering my evidences for the Negative.

. 5 Evidences against it. First from his being Apostle of the Circumcision
peculiarly.
And first it is evident by Scripture, that this Apostle was the Apostle of the
circumcision, or Jews exclusively to the uncircumcision, or Gentiles, which
were generally another Province; By Apostle here I understand a Commissioner
of Christ's, endued with authority by him, and this Commission given to him, as
to all the other Apostles, indefinitely, and unlimitedly, not restrained by
Christ's words to any particular Province, but extending equally to the whole
world; what therefore is done in this kind is by Subsequent act of the Apostles
themselves, who are testified to have done that, which it had been very
unskilful, and improvident, and consequently unreasonable not to have done,
viz. distributed their Universal great Province inro several (...) Act. 1.25.
distributions, or Lots, or lesser Provinces, one or more to go one way, the
other another, which is there called by S. Peter (...), to go to his own, or
proper place, or assignation, for the witnessing the Resurrection, and
proclaiming the faith or Doctrine of Christ to the world.

. 6. Now if the circumcision, or Jewish Christians were peculiarly S. Peter's
Province, the lot, or division assigned unto him, (agreeable unto which it is,
that both his preaching in the Acts is to the Jews in Judaea and Samaria, and
his Epistles are both of them addressed to the Jews of the dispersion, and
none else) then it is not imaginable, how he should be the Universal, or
Supreme Pastor, or Bishop of the whole world: For the Christians of that age of
the world being either Jews or Gentiles, the Jews again either those that
remained in their country, or those that were dispersed in other regions,
there was but one portion of one of these, which can reasonably be placed under
S. Peter's Jurisdiction. The Jews that were in Judaea were all immediately
subject to the several Bishops in each city, and all they to their
Metropolitan, James the Bishop of Jerusalem; Of this James the brother (or
near kinsman) of Christ, many (...). Theoph. in 1 Cor 15.7. ex Sentententia
Chrysostomi. (...), Photius Epist. (...). So Nicephorus l. 2 c. 38.
of the Ancients affirm, that he was by Christ after his resurrection
constituted Bishop there; (...). Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. (...).
others that it was done by Christ and his Apostles; (...). Eusebius. ex Clement:
(...). l. 5* (...). Hegesippus (...). ap. Eusebius. l. 2. c. (...). Eusebius. l. 2.
c. (...). vide Athan. in Synops. Epiph. Haer. 78. Nyssen. de Resur. Or. 2.
Hieron. in Gal. 1. and in Catal. Eusebius. in Chron. p. 43.
others the more ancient, that the Apostles constituted him in that See, Peter,
James, and John, the three most honored by Christ, conferring this honor upon
him, whereupon in this his See he is named before Peter and John, Gal. 2.9. and
has the Principal place in the Council at Jerusalem, where S. Peter is
present, and accordingly gives the Sentence, Act. 15.19. upon which the
Rescript is grounded, v. 22. From all which as it appears, that the
Jurisdiction in that Metropolis (which had extended very far among the Jews,
not only to all Judaea, but even to Syria and Cilicia and other regions, says
Agrippa in (...) -- (...) --.
Philo, as has formerly been mentioned) belonged to James the Just, and not to
S. Peter, So it is as evident, that it was not by S. Peter alone entrusted to
him (which might conclude some peculiar transcendent power of S. Peter there)
but by S. James and S. John together with S. Peter, which quite takes off all
pretension of his to the singular Supremacy there.

. 7. The Gentiles were not S. Peter's Province.
So again for the uncircumcision or Gentile Christians, they were not S.
Peter's Province but peculiarly S. Paul's (by S. Peter's own confession and
acknowledgment Gal. 2.7.) who is therefore styled the Apostle of the Gentiles,
Romans 11.13. and that without any commission received, or consequently
dependence from S. Peter, as he declares and contests it, Gal. 1.12.17. having
his assignation immediately from Christ, v. 16. Accordingly whenever those
two great Apostles came to the same city, the one constantly applied himself to
the Jews, received disciples of such, formed them into a Church, left them,
when he departed that region, to be governed by some Bishop of his assignation:
and the other in like manner did the same to the Gentiles.

. 8. Thus we know it was at Antioch, where S. Peter converted the Jews, and S.
Paul the Gentiles (and certainly S. Paul no way Subordinate, or dependent on
him, as appears by his behavior toward him avowed, Gal. 2.11.) and acordingly
in Ignatius his Epistle to the Magnesians we read of the Church of Antioch,
that it was (...) founded by S. Peter and S. Paul, not by one, or other, but by
both, and in the ancient, if not Ignatian Epistle to the Antiochians, You,
says he, (...), have been the disciples of Peter and Paul, i. e. converted and
ruled by them, the Jewish part by one, and the Gentile by the other, and the
Church of the Gentiles at Antioch, and Syria (of which Antioch was the chief
city) and Cilicia, is it, to which peculiarly the decrees of the Council at
Jerusalem are sent, Act. 15.23. and inscribed [(...) -- (...), To the brethren
at Antioch -- those of the Gentiles] and that separately from the Jewish Church
in that city or region, as is evident both by the contents of that Rescript, or
Decretal Epistle, in which only the Gentiles were concerned, v. 28, 29. and
also by that which we read of S. Peter, and the Jewish proselytes, Gal. 2.11.
that they withdrew from all communion and Society with the Gentile Christians,
upon which S. Paul reproved him publicly v. 12. According to this condition of
disparate, not subordinate Churches at Antioch, it is, that the writer of the
Apostolical constitutions tells us, that Euodius and Ignatius at the same time
sat Bishops of Antioch, one succeeding S. Peter, the other S. Paul, one in the
Jewish, the other in the Gentile congregation, and so continued a while, till
both the Churches (the wall of Separation being by compliance and Christian
Charity removed) joined, and united together under Ignatius, who therefore as
by Hom. 4. in Luc.
Origin and l. 2. c. (...).
Eusebius he is called the Second, so by S. Hierome is called the third Bishop
of Antioch, and yet as truly by de Syn. Arim. and Seleuc.
Athanasius (...) said to be constituted Bishop after the Apostles, and by Ex
com. Ignat.
S. Chrysostom to the same purpose ((...) --) that the blessed Apostles hands
were laid upon him, whilst yet Theodoret ((...)) affirms him to have received
the Archisacerdotal honor from the hands of S. Peter.

. 9. The same is as evident at Rome where these two great Apostles met again,
and each of them erected and managed a Church, S. Peter of Jews, S. Paul of
Gentiles. So says l. 3. c. 3. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 6.
S. Irenaeus, (...) -- the blessed Apostles founded and built the Church there;
and l. 1. adv. Carpocrat.
Epiphanius more expressly, (...) (...), Peter and Paul were Apostles and
Bishops in Rome: So the Inscription on their Tombs, which, says l. 2. c.
(...).
Eusebius, continued to his time, mentions them both as founders of that
Church. So Gaius an Ecclesiastic writer of great antiquity, coaetaneous to
Pope Zephyrynus, speaking of the monuments of S. Peter and S. Paul, calls them
Eusebius. Ibid.
(...) the monuments of them that founded that Church.

. 10. So Dionysius the Bishop of Corinth, who lived about 20 years after their
death, affirms both of the Church of Rome and of Corinth, Eusebius. Ibid.
(...), that it was (each of them) the plantation of Peter and Paul; And De
Prom. and Praedict: implend: c. 5.
Prosper, Petrus and Paulus Apostoli in urbe Roma -- Peter and Paul the
Apostles consecrated or constituted a Church in the city of Rome. And the very
Seals of Popes are an irrefragable evidence of the same, as they are set down
by Matthew Paris in the year of our Lord 1237. In bulla Domini Papae, says he,
stat imago Pauli a dextris crucis in medio bullae figuratae, and Petri a
sinistris; In the Bull of the Pope stands the image of S. Paul on the right
hand of the Cross, which is graven in the midst of the Seal, and the image of
S. Peter on the left hand; and this only account given for S. Paul's having the
nobler place (Quia Paulus credidit in Christum quem non vidit, a dextris
figuratur) because he believed on Christ without seeing him (here on earth) And
all this very agreeable to the story of Scripture, which as (according to the
brevity of the relations there made) it only sets down S. Peter to be the
Apostle of the circumcision (and of his being so at Rome we make no question)
So it affirms of S. Paul, that he preached at Rome in his own hired house,
receiving them which came unto him, Act. 28.30. which will most fitly be
applied to the Gentiles of that city, the Jews having solemnly departed from
him v. 29.

. 11. Accordingly in Ignatius, Ep. ad Trall. we read of Linus and Clemens, that
one was S. Paul's, the other S. Peter's Deacon, both which afterward succeeded
them in the Episcopal chair, Linus being constituted Bishop of the Gentile,
Clemens of the Jewish Christians there; And hence grows (unquestionably) that
variety, or difference observed among writers, some making S. Peter, others S.
Paul the founder of that Church, but others (as has been showed) both of them;
some making Clemens, others Linus the first Bishop after the Apostles, both
affirmers speaking the truth, with this Scholion to interpret them: Linus was
the first Bishop of the Gentile Christians, after S. Paul; Clemens the first of
the Jewish after S. Peter; and after Linus his death, Cletus (or Anacletus)
succeeding him, and dying also, both congregations were at length joined in
one, under Clemens; by which one clew I suppose it easy to extricate the
Reader out of the mazes, into which the ancient writers may lead him, in
rehearsing the first Bishops of Rome so very diversely, but this is not a place
to insist on it.

. 12. By all which it appears that even in those Churches, whereof S. Peter is
acknowledged the founder, as that of Rome, and the like, yet he cannot be
deemed the sole founder, but coequal to him S. Paul of the Gentile, as he of
the Jewish Proselytes: and if the sole government of that Church be devolved to
the original, it will be found to have begun in Clemens, in whom the union of
the Jewish and Gentile congregations there was first made, and not in S. Peter.

. 13. But then for another great part of the Christian world, it is manifest
that S. Peter had never to do either mediately, or immediately in the
planting, or governing of it, and consequently that from him that power can
never descend to any other. Not to mention the travailes and labors, and
plantations of the other Apostles; which certainly had each their (...) and
(...), and consequently their Provinces by Apostolical joint consent assigned
them Act. 1. (though that short History written by S. Luke, S. Paul's
attendant, mention them not) I shall only insist on the beloved Disciple his
fellow-Apostle of the Circumcision, and that abundant Labourer S. Paul.

. 14. Nor all the Circumcision.
For S. John, who had the favor of Christ, and the dignity of place before all
others in Christ's life time, even before S. Peter himself (which is the plain
meaning of his style of the beloved Disciple, and of the (...) leaning on his
breast at supper Joh. 21.20. his having the (...), the first place next to
Christ, as being in Abraham's bosom plainly signifies being in dignity of place
next to the father of the faithful) it is evident that he is one of those that
by agreement went to the Circumcision, was assigned the Jews Not the Jews of
Asia,
for his Province, as well as S. Peter, and consequently he had the converting,
and then governing of all the converted Jews of that Lydian Asia, and placing
Bishops over them, as (...) -- (...). ap. Eusebius. l. 3. c. (...)
Clemens Alexandrinus, and (...) Ibid.
Eusebius, and Joannes apud Ephesum Ecclesia^ sacravit. De Prom. and Praed.
impl. c. 5.
Prosper, and others tell us; and the Phot. Bib. number. 254.
Author of the Martyrdom of Timothy says of him, that being returned from his
banishment by Nerva's decree, (...) -- he placed his seat of residence in
Ephesus, and having seven Bishops with him he undertook the care of that
Metropolis, that is in effect, or by interpretation, of all Asia, which was
under that prime Metropolis, as far as extended to the Jewish Christians there.

As neither the Gentiles there.
. 15. But then as before was said of the several Churches and Bishops in the
same place, one of the dispersed Jews, the other of Gentiles; so it is evident
that through all this Asia (the Lydian or Proconsular) the faith was by S. Paul
planted among the Gentile part, and by him S. Timothy constituted Bishop there:
and so says S. Chrysostom, Hom. 5. in 1 Timothy 5.19.
(...), a whole entire nation, that of Asia was entrusted to him.

. 16. Where I shall demand of any man of the Romish pretensions, or persuasion,
what can be said, in any degree probably, for S. Peter's Universal Pastorship,
whilst he lived, over this Asia, whose seven Metropoles (and sure there were
inferior Churches, or Episcopal Sees under them) are so early famous, being
honored with Christs-Epistle to them in the Revelation; was S. Peter the
supreme Pastor of these Churches? had he any, or did he ever exercise, or
pretend any Jurisdiction over them? was not all the Jewish part of that
Province ultimately under S. John? and the Gentile part under S. Paul, and S.
Timothy constituted, and commissionated by him? Does not S. Paul give him full
instructions (and such as no other Apostle could countermand, or interpose in
them) leaving no other appeal or place of application for farther directions,
save only to himself, when he shall come to him, 1 Timothy 3.14, 15. Did not S.
Paul by his own single power delegate that Province to him, and seat him there?
(as appears by the (...), I exhorted or appointed thee, when I went to
Macedonia, 1 Timothy 1.3.) and may it not as reasonably be said that S. Peter was
with him in his journey to Macedonia, as that he joined with him in giving that
Commission to Timothy?

. 17. Nor in Crete,
And so likewise of Titus in Crete, was he not by S. Paul peculiarly left in
Crete, and constituted Primate there? Is it imaginable that under Christ there
could be any head of that Church of that whole Island, save only S. Paul?

. 18. Nor in Britannie.
The same may certainly be said of all the Gentile Churches in all other
Islands, and parts of the world, and consequently in this of Britannie, wherein
our present debate is terminated: And therefore if that of de Petr: and Paul:
ad diem 29. Junii. (...).
Simeon Metaphrastes should be thought to have truth in it, that S. Peter was
in Britannie some time and baptized many into the faith of Christ, and
constituted Churches, ordaining Bishops and Presbyters and Deacons in the 12.
of Nero, in all reason it must be extended no farther then S. Peter's line, as
he was the Apostle of the Circumcision, i. e. to the Jews that might at that
time be dispersed here, and so not prejudge the other more authentic
relations, of Joseph of Arimathea or Simon Zelotes having planted the faith in
this Island.

. 19. This I suppose is one competent proof of the Negative, as it respects the
person of S. Peter, that he was not ( could not be, as things stood with him)
Universal Pastor of the whole Church, constituted by Christ. And accordingly we
see in Prosper disputing against heretics: which divide from the Church, he
expresses it by relicta pace communionis, Prospers testimony to this matter.
and panis unius Dei and Apostolorum, that they leave the Communion of Christ
and his Apostles in the plural, and adds cum in ipsa Jerusalem Jacobus --
Joannes apud Ephesum, Andreas and caeteri per totam Asiam, Petrus and Paulus
Apostoli in urbe Roma, Gentium Ecclesiam pacatam unamque posteris tradentes, ex
Dominica pactione sacrarunt, that James in Jerusalem, John at Ephesus, Andrew
and the rest through all Asia, Peter and Paul at Rome consecrated the Church of
the nations. Whereas the Church had the several Apostles for the founders (and
those independent one from the other) So the unity from which heretics, and
schismatics depart, is said to have been founded equally in each of them, in
John and James and Andrew and others, as well as in S. Peter, nay at Rome, not
in S. Peter alone, but in him and S. Paul, together.

. 20. A second evidence against S. Peter's supremacy from the donation of the
keys.
In the next place another evidence we may have of this (in reference again to
S. Peter's person) from that which is visible in the donation of the power of
the Keys set down in Scripture. This power Mat. 16.19. is promised to S.
Peter, [I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven -- ] But to him
that from hence pretends this Donative and consequent power, as a peculiarity
and enclosure of S. Peter's, these considerations will be of force to supersede
his conclusion, 1. That these words here set down by S. Matthew, c. 16. are not
the Instrument of Christ's conveyance, the words of his commission, but those
other Joh. 20.21. As my Father has sent me, Power of the keys given to all
and each.
so send I you, upon which words it is added, he breathed on them, and said,
Receive the holy Ghost, Whose sins you remit, they are remitted -- And these
(as also those Mat. 28.19. which are a repetition much to the same purpose) are
delivered in common, and equally to all, and every of the eleven Apostles, as
is evident by the plural style throughout that Commission.

. 21. Secondly, The words Mat. 16. are only a promise in the future, what
Christ will afterward do, and so the donation there set down only by way of
(...), or anticipation, and if the making this promise to him peculiarly, seem
to make any thing for him, then the repetition of that promise, Mat. 18.18.
which is made to all the Apostles indefinitely will take off that appearance,
where it is (...), and, (...), I say unto you (to all of them equally and
without any peculiarity of restriction) whatsoever ye shall bind etc. The
applying the words particularly to S. Peter has one special energie in it, and
concludes that the Ecclesiastical power of economy or stewardship in Christ's
house (of which the keys are the token Isa. 22.21.) belongs to single persons,
such as S. Peter was, and not only to Consistories, or assemblies, that
whatsoever S. Peter acted by virtue of Christ's power thus promised, he should
be fully able to act himself, without the conjunction of any other, and that
what he thus did ( clave non errante) no one (or more men) on earth could
rescind without him, which is a just ground of placing the power Ecclesiastical
in Single persons, and not in Communities, in the Prelate of each Church, and
not in the Presbytery. But still this is no confining of this power to S.
Peter, any more then to any other single Apostle, who had this power as
distinctly promised to each of them, as here S. Peter is pretended, and
acknowledged to have; To which purpose, as the words of Scripture are most
clear Mat. 18.18. (and accordingly Mat. 19. the promise is again made of twelve
thrones for each Apostle to sit on one, to judge, i. e. to rule, or preside in
the Church, and when that promise was finally performed in the descent of the
Spirit, Act. 2. the fire that represented that Spirit was divided, and (...)
sat upon every one of them, without any peculiar mark allowed S. Peter, and
they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and so this promise equally
performed, as it was made, to all) so is this exactly the notion, which the
ancient Fathers of the Church appear to have had of them; in Mat. 18.
Thus Theophylact according to S. Chrysostomes sense, (...), [(...)] (...),
Though the words [I will give thee] were delivered to S. Peter alone, yet the
power has been conferred on all the Apostles. Epist. 27.
S. Cyprian has an eminent place to this purpose, Dominus noster -- Episcopi
honorem and Ecclesiae suae rationem disponens in Evangelio loquitur, and dicit
Petro, Ego tibi dice, Quia tu es Petrus, and tibi dabo claves -- Inde per
temporum and successionum vices Episcoporum ordinatio and Ecclesiae ratio
decurrit, ut Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur, and omnis actus Ecclesiae
per eosdem gubernetur, Christ meaning to set down the way of ordering his
Church, says unto Peter, I will give thee the keys -- From this promise of
his, the ordination of Bishops and course of the Church has continued by all
successions and vicissitudes, So that the Church is built upon Bishops (in the
plural) and every Ecclesiastic act is governed by them. So S. Ambrose, De
Dign. Sacerd. c. 5. and 6.
Claves illas regni Coelorum in beato Petro cuncti suscepimus Sacerdotes, All
we Bishops have in S. Peter received those keys of the kingdom of heavens.
Ep. ad Dracont.
And accordingly S. Athanasius mentions the office of Bishop as one of those
things (...), which Christ effigiated or formed in or by the Apostles; And S.
Basil the great calls Episcopacy (...), the Presidency of the Apostles, the
very same, that Christ bestowed upon all, and not only on one of them.

. 23. By all which it is evident again, that the power which Christ's commission
instated on S. Peter, was in like manner entrusted to every other single
Apostle, as well as to him, and consequently that this of universal Pastor was
no personal privilege, or peculiarity of S. Peter's.

. 24. The Romanists argument from Tu es Petrus evacuated.
Thirdly, that argument which is taken by learned Romanists from the name of
Peter [(...) a Rock or foundation stone] bestowed on him by Christ, as if that
were sufficient to found this pretended Supremacy, is presently evacuated, and
retorted on the pretenders, when it is remembered 1. that (...), and (...),
directly the same, signifies vulgarly a stone ((...), in Homers Iliad. (...).)
and of it self denotes no more, but by the context, Mat. 16.18. being applied
to a building must needs signify a foundation stone; and then 2. that all the
12 Apostles are in like manner (and not he only, or above any other) styled
(...), twelve foundations Apoc. 21.14. each of which stones having the name of
an Apostle on it, in respect of the power, and dignity that belonged to every
one, is severally compared to a precious stone; And it being there in vision
apparent, that the wall of the city, i. e. of the Church, being measured
exactly, and found to be an hundred forty four, i. e. twelve times twelve
cubits, it is evident that that mensuration assigns an equal proportion whether
of power or province to all and every of the Apostles which is again a
prejudice to the Universal Pastorship of any one of them.

CHAP. V. The Evidences from the Bishop of Romes succeeding S. Peter examined.
. 1. No privilege by succession from S. Peter, but such as S. Peter is proved
to have himself.
FRom this argument of the pretenders as it respects S. Peter's person, and has
thus been manifested to be utterly incompetent to infer the designed
conclusion, It is now very easy, but withal very unnecessary to proceed to
the other part of it, as it concerns S. Peter's successors in his Episcopal, or
(which is all one as to this matter) his Apostolical seat, and power at Rome,
For certainly what he had not himself, he cannot devolve to any of his
successors upon that one skore of succeeding him, and therefore as this of S.
Peter's personal power, and eminence is the principal, So it is in effect the
only ground of the Romanists pretension, this other of derivative power in his
successor, being like water that flows from a spring, apt to ascend no higher,
then the fountain stood, and therefore I again think fit to remind the
Romanist, and peremptorily to insist on this exception, that if he cannot make
good S. Peter's Ecumenical power, and Pastorship over all the rest of the
Apostles, from the donation of Christ (which I suppose has been evidenced he
cannot do, and for any proofs made use of by any to that purpose, and drawn
either from Feed my sheep, and lambs, or from the mention of the two swords, or
from Thou art Peter -- they have so little appearance of strength in them, and
have so often been answered by those of our persuasion, that I cannot think it
useful, or seasonable to descend to any farther survey of them) his other
pretensions are at an end for the Universal Pastorship of the Pope his
successor, whose power, and authority over all other Bishops cannot farther be
extended (upon this account of succession) then S. Peter's was over all other
Apostles, the several Bishops of the world holding from (as succeeding) some
Apostle or other, as certainly as the Bishop of Rome can by any be supposed to
succeed S. Pe-Peter, according to that of De Praescript. c. 32.
Tertullian, Sicut Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia Polycarpum a Joanne collocatum refert,
Sicut Romanorum Clementem a Petro ordinatum edit, perinde utique and caeterae
exhibent quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutos Apostolici seminis
traduces habent, As the records of the Church of Smyrna deduce Polycarp their
Bishop from S. John, and as the Church of Rome relates that Clement (their
Bishop) was ordained by S. Peter, in like manner the rest of the Churches show
us the Bishops which they have had constituted by the Apostles, and who have
brought down and derived the Apostolic seed unto them.

. 2. What therefore I shall now add in return to the second branch of this
argument, concerning the power of S. Peter's successor, as such, will be
perfectly ex abundanti, more then needs, and so I desire it may be looked on by
the reader, whose curiosity perhaps may require farther satisfaction, when his
reason does not, and in compliance therewith I shall propose these few
considerations. The privileges attending S. Peter's successor belonging rather
to the Bishop of Antioch then of Rome.
First whether S. Peter did not as truly plant a Church of Jewish believers at
Antioch, and leave a successor Bishop there, as at Rome he is supposed to have
done? 2. Whether this were not done by him, before ever he came to Rome? 3.
Whether the Concession of these two unquestioned matters of fact* do not
devolve all power, and Jurisdiction on the Bishop of Antioch S. Peter's
successor there, which by that tenure and claim of succession from S. Peter can
be pretended to by the Bishop of Rome, S. Peter's successor also? Nay, Whether
the right of Primogeniture be not so much more considerable on this side, then
any circumstance on the other side, which can be offered to counterbalance it,
that he which succeeded him in his first seat (Antioch) is, if there be force
in the argument of succession, to be looked on as the chief of his strength,
partaker of more power by virtue of that succession, then he that afterward
succeeded him at Rome?

. 3. This we know, that anciently there were three Patriarchates, and Antioch
was one of them, as Rome was another; and though I, who lay not that weight on
the argument of succession from S. Peter, am not engaged to affirm that
Antioch was the chief of these, yet this I contend, that there is much less
reason, that any precedence, which is afforded Rome by the ancient Canons,
should be deemed imputable to this succession from S. Peter, when it is evident
that claim belongs to Antioch, as well as to Rome, and first to Antioch, and
afterward to Rome, and no otherwise to Rome, then as it was first competible
to Antioch.

. 4. The Primacy belonged to Rome upon another score.
Of Rome it is confessed that the primacy of dignity or order belonged to that,
the next place to Alexandria, the third to Antioch, which is an evidence that
the succession from S. Peter was not considered in this matter, for then
Alexandria, which held only from S. Mark, must needs have yielded to Antioch
which held from S. Peter. The original of this precedence, or dignity of the
Bishop of Rome is sure much more fitly deduced by the fourth General Council
holden at Chalcedon, Can. penult.
confirming the decree of the Council of Constantinople, that that See shall
have (...), equal privileges, and dignities, and advantages with Rome, upon
this account, that Constantinople was New Rome, and the seat of the Empire at
that time, which, say they, was the reason (and not any donation of Christ's to
S. Peter, or succession of that Bishop from him) that Rome enjoyed such
privileges ((...)) and therefore (...), The Fathers at Constantinople being
moved with the same reasons had rightly judged that now the same privileges
should belong to that Church or City, (...), and that this being next to Old
Rome should in all Ecclesiastical affairs have the same dignity, or greatness
that Old Rome had. Where, as the Original of the dignity of that See is duly
set down, and (which is observable) in the whole contest never so much as
quarelled at by the Legates, viz. the residence of the Imperial Majesty there (a
thing very remarkable in the several degrees of dignity in the Church, that of
Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, which generally observed their
proportions with the civil state, as has been showed) so is the nature of it
also, no supremacy of power over all the Bishops of the world (for that
monarchical power is not at once competible to two equals or rivals) and
withal the moveablenesse or communicablenesse of that dignity, as that which
may follow the Imperial seat, whithersoever it is removeable, and is not fixed
at Rome by any commission of Christ or succession from S. Peter.

. 5. The Canon of the Council of Chalcedon rejected by the Romanists.
But because I shall suppose that a Canon, though of an Universal Council, when
it is found thus derogatory to the height which Rome now pretends to, shall not
by the Romanist be acknowledged to be authentic, as wanting that which the
Romanist makes absolutely necessary to the validity of Councels or Canons, the
suffrage of the Bishop of Rome and consent of his Legates; and because I mean
not here to go out of my way to vindicate (which I could very readily do) the
authority of that Canon, or to show the strangeness of this dealing, not to
admit any testimony against them, but wherein they have given their own
suffrage (a method of security beyond all amulets, if no man shall be believed
against me, till I have joined with him to accuse and condemn my self) I shall
therefore lay no more weight on this, then will, without this support, be
otherwise upheld, and is in some measure evident by the Romanists rejecting
this Canon, and adding that the Church of Antioch rejected it also; which
argues that that which the Church of Constantinople was willing to acquire by
this decree, was as derogatory to the dignity of Antioch as of Rome. And as
that concludes that Antioch had professedly the (...), equal privileges with
Rome, the dignity of a Patriarchate, and the attendants and pompes of that, So
it proceeds on a concession, that all that Constantinople wanted, or in which
this New came short of the Old Rome, was only the dignity of a Patriarchate,
without any ordinary jurisdiction over other Churches. Which again shows us
what was the nature of the preeminence of the Roman See at that time; no
supreme authoritative power over other Primates, The dignity of Patriarchs
reconcilable with the independency of Primates.
but only a precedence, or priority of place in Councels, an eminence in
respect of dignity, which is perfectly reconcilable with the (...) and
independence, the no-subordination or subjection of other Primates.

. 6. The Canon of Ephesus against encroaching on any others Province.
This has formerly been manifested, when we discoursed of the original, and
power, and dignity of Primates, and Patriarchs, and is put beyond all control
by that Canon of the Council of Ephesus in the cause of the Archbishop of
Cyprus, over whom the Patriarch of Antioch, though Patriarch of all the Orient,
was adjudged to have no manner of power. And this independency of Cyprus, not
only from the Patriarch of Antioch, but from all others whomsoever, was
contested then, as from the Apostles times, and asserted, and vindicated by
that Council, and order given indefinitely against all invasions for time to
come, in whatever Diocese, that no Bishop shall encroach upon another
Province, or usurp a power, where from the Apostles times he had not enjoyed
it; which how directly it (is applicable to, and) prejudgeth the pretensions of
Rome, as well as of Antioch, is so manifest, that it cannot need farther
demonstrating.

. 7. Instances of Independent power in Archbishops.
Of the same kind, two farther instances I shall here add; first of the
Archbishop of Carthage, who being the chief Primate, or Metropolitan (for these
two words in the African style, different from the usage of other Churches, are
observeable to signify the same thing) in Africa, i. e. in one of the thirteen
Dioceses of the Empire, appears to have been independent from all other power,
an absolute Primate, subject to no superior, or Patriarch, whether of
Alexandria, or Rome. This is evident by Justinian in the 131 Novel, where the
Emperor gives the same privileges to the Archbishop of (...).
Carthage, which he had formerly given to the Bishop of Justiniana prima; which
being the second example I meant to mention, I shall briefly show what that
Prerogative was, which equally belonged to these two.

. 8. Justiniana Prima was the head of Caetera Provinciae sub ejus sint
authoritate, i. e. tam ipsa mediterranea Dacia, quam Dacia Ripensis, nec non
Mysia, Secunda Dardania, and Praevalitana Provincia and secunda Macedonia, and
pars secunda etiam Pannoniae, quae in Bacen^i est civitate. Justin: de
Privileg: Archiep: Just: Prim: ed: a Gothofred:
Dacia the new; a Diocese (as that signifies more then a Province, a Volumus ut
Primae Justinianae patriae nostrae pro tempore sacrosanctus Antistes, non solum
Metroplitanus, sed etiam Archiepiscopus fiat. Ibid.
Primat's, a Patriarch's dominion) erected by Justinian the Emperor; and that
city thus dignified, as the Multis and variis modis nostram patriam augere
cupientes, in qua Deus praestitit nobis ad hunc modum ( So Gothofred reads, but
certainly it should be ad, or in hunc mundum) quem ipse condidit, venire. Ibid.
Necessarium duximus ipsam gloriosissimam Praefecturam, quae in Pannonia erat,
in nostra foelicissima patriacollocare. Ib.
place where he had been born, and the Archbishop thereof made Primate of all
that Diocese. This is thus expressed in the Imperial Constitutions, Nov. 11.
that he shall have omnem censuram Ecclesiasticam, summum Sacerdotium, summum
fastigium, summam dignitatem, all power of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, the
supreme Priesthood, supreme honor and dignity; And in the Constitutions set
out by Gothofred out of an old MS. Copy, Tu and omnes Justinianae primae
Antistites, quicquid oriatur inter eos discrimen, ipsi hoc dirimant, and finem
eis imponant, and nec ad alium quendam eatur, sed suum agnoscant Archiepiscopum
omnes praedictae Provinciae -- that all the Provinces shall in the last resort
make their appeal to him for all controversies. And Nov. 131. c. 3. that in all
that Diocese he shall have locum Apostolicae sedis, the place or dignity of an
Apostolical seat; which gave Nicephorus occasion (in his relation of this
matter) to affirm that the Emperor made it a free city, and (...) an head
unto itself, with full power independent from all others: And though the first
Bishop thereof was consecrated by Vigilius Bishop of Rome, as by some Bishop it
is certain he must, yet that is of no force against the conclusion, to which I
design this instance, it being evident that being consecrated, he was
absolute, and depended not on any, and his Quando autem te ab ^ac* luce
decedere contigerit, pro tempore Archiepiscopum ejus a venerabili suo Concilio
Metropolitanorum ordinari sancimus, quem ad modum decet Archiepiscopum omnibus
honoratum Ecclesiis provehi. Ibid.
successors were to be ordained by his Council of Metropolitanes, and not by
the Pope.

. 9. Which as it makes a second instance of the point in hand, so when it is
remembered, that all this independent absolute power was conferred upon this
city (the Emperors favorite) only by his making it a Primate's, or chief
Metropolitane's See, and that Carthage's being the Prime Metropolis of Africa
is expressed by having the same privileges, that Justiniana Prima had, It will
follow (what is most certain, and might otherwise be testified by innumerable
evidences) that every Primate, or chief Metropolitan was absolute within his
own circuit, neither subject nor subordinate to any foreign Superior, whether
Pope, or Patriarch; And that was all which was useful (much more then was
necessary) to be here demonstrated. And being so, there remains to the Sea of
Rome no farther claim to the subjection of this Island, nor appearance of proof
of the charge of schism, in casting off that yoke, upon this first score of S.
Peter's, or his successors right to the Universal Pastorship.

. 10. The unreasonablenesse of confining the Catholic Church to the number of
those that live in the Roman subjection.
Upon this head of discourse depends also all that is, or can be said for the
confining the Catholic Church to the number of those, who live in obedience to
the Roman Church, or Bishop. For if there have been from the Apostles times, an
independent power vested in each Primate, or chief Metropolitan (as has been
evidently shown) then how can it be necessary to the being of a member of the
Catholic Church, to be subject to that one Primate? It Is certainly sufficient
to the conservation of the unity of the whole Church, that every one pay an
obedience, where an obedience is due, and no way useful toward that end, that
those that are born free, should resign up, divest themselves of that
privilege, and become (...) servants or subjects of their own making. But I
shall not enlarge on this matter, but conclude with that of our Bishops in
Convocation, Anno Chr: 1537. in their Book entitled, [ The Institution of a
Christian man:] that it was many hundred years before the Bishop of Rome could
acquire any power of a Primate over any other Bishops, which were not within
his Province in Italy, And that the Bishops of Rome do now transgress their
own profession made in their Creation, For all the Bishops of Rome always when
they be consecrated and made Bishops of that See, do make a solemn profession
and vow, that they shall inviolably observe all the Ordinances made in the
eight first General Councels, among which it is especially provided, that all
causes shall be determined within the Province, where they be begun, and that
by the Bishops of the same Province; which absolutely excludes all Papal, i. e.
foreign power out of these Realms.

CHAP. VI. Their third plea from the Bishop of Rome having planted Christianity
among us.
. 1. THE next part of the Romanist's arguing against us, is taken from a
peculiar right, or claim, that the Bishop or See of Rome has to our obedience,
upon the score of having planted Christianity among us.

. 2. The plea from Planting the Faith unreconcileable with the former.
But before I proceed to show the invalidity of this plea, I desire it may
first be observed, that the pleading of this, as the title by which the Bishop
of Rome has right to our subjection, is absolutely unreconcileable with his
former pretensions founded in his ecumenical Pastorship by succession to S.
Peter; For certainly he that is supposed (in gross) to have that original
title to all power over all Churches, cannot be imagined to acquire it
afterward (by way of retail) over any particular Church. He that claims a
reward, as of his own labor and travail, must be supposed to disclaim
Donation, which is antecedent to, and exclusive of the other, as the title of
descent is to that of Conquest, And it is a very great prejudice to the justice
of his pretensions, who finds it necessary to mix things that are so
incompetible.

. 3. A Dilemma to the Romanist.
And therefore I am obliged to offer this Dilemma to the Romanist in this
place, and to demand, Which is the Pope's true title to the subjection of this
Island? the Donation of Christ, or conversion wrought by Augustine the Monk? If
the latter be affirmed to be it, then it must be granted by him, both that this
Island before the time of Pope Gregory was no way subjected to the Romish See,
and withal that no Christian nation is at this day thus subject, but such as
does appear to have been converted by Rome, as the Saxons here are supposed to
have been; And then this concession will lose more subjects to the Apostolic
See, then the return of these Islands to the desired subjection would ever be
able to countervail, or recompense; and therefore it is reasonable to insist on
the terms of this bargain, and not to yield the one, till the other be yielded
to us, But if the former be affirmed to be it, and that indeed the commission
from Christ to S. Peter be still the fundamental hold, by which our subjection
is, and always has been due to his successors, then is that other of the
conversion by Augustine but a fallacious pretense, a non causa pro causa, to
amuze us, and need not farther be answered, or invalidated, then by this
confession.

. 4. The Faith planted here before Augustine the Monk.
But then passing by this advantage, and taking the objection, as it lies by it
self, these farther considerations will take off all force from it. 1. That
this Island was converted to the Faith of Christ, long before Augustine's
preaching to the Saxons, either in, or very near the Apostles times, in
Tiberius his reign, says Gildas, and long before Tertullian's, and Origen's
time, as by them appears, Tertull: in Apol: and Orig: in Ezech: Hom: 4. To this
I shall not need to add the testimony of Eleutherius the Bishop of Rome, in
the vulgar Epistle to our Lucius, the first Christian King of the world,
styling him vicarium Dei in regno suo, God's vicegerent in his own kingdom,
because, as there is some doubt of the authenthenticknesse of that Epistle, so
the Suscepistis nuper in Regno Britanniae legem and fidem Christi.
only thing that we have now need to conclude from it, is otherwise evident,
viz: that the Nation was in his time converted, and so long before Augustine's
coming. And though by Dioclesian's persecution, Christianity were here shrewdly
shaken, yet I suppose, that will not be thought argumentative, both because it
might be of ill example against other nations, where the faith was as bloodily
persecuted in that, or other times, and possibly at some point of time against
Rome it self, And not quite destroyed by Dioclesian.
where S. Peter's chair was not always amulet sufficient to avoid the like
destructions, and especially because it is evident, that the British Church
survived that calamity, three of our Bishops being ten years after that,
present (and their names subscribed, Eborius of York, Restitutus of London,
and Adelfius Coloniae Londinensium) at the Council of Arles, eleven years
before the first Council of Nice. So likewise at the time of that Nicene
Council it appears, that as Britain was one of the six Dioceses of the West
Empire (see Notitia Provinc: Occident:) so there were in it three
Metropolitanes, the Bishop of York (his Province Maxima Caesariensis) the
Bishop of London (his Province Britannia prima) the Bishop of Caeruske (his
Province Britannia secunda) in Monmouthshire, See S. Hen: Spelman, Council:
Anglic: page 26. out of the Annals of Gisburne.
which after in King Arthur's time was translated to S. David's, where it
continued an Archbishopric, till King Henry I. who subjected it to Canterbury,
and a Samsone usque tempus Henrici primi, sederunt Meneviae undecim Episcopi,
and usque ad hoc tempus Episcopi Meneviae a suis su^fraganeis Wallensibus
ibidem fuerunt consecrati, nulla penitus professione v^l subjectione facta
alteri Ecclesiae. Ibid.
all this space of about 500 years after Augustines coming, the Bishops
thereof, eleven in number, were all consecrated by the suffragan Bishops of
that Province, without any profession, or subjection to any other Church, as
the Annals there affirm.

. 5. To the same purpose is it, The Britains rejection of the Bishop of Rome.
that when Augustine required subjection to the Pope and Church of Rome, the
Abbat of Bangor is recorded to have returned him this answer, Notum sit vobis,
quod nos omnes sumus -- Be it known unto you, that we are all subject, and
obedient to the Church of God, and the Pope of Rome, but so as we are also to
every pious and good Christian, viz: to love every one in his degree and place,
in perfect charity, and to help every one by word and deed to attain to be the
sons of God; Council: Anglic: p. 188.
Et aliam obedientiam quam istam non scio debitam ei quem vos nominatis esse
Papam, nec esse Patrem Patrum vendicari and postulari, And for any other
obedience I know none due to him whom you call the Pope, and as little do I
know by what right he can challenge to be father of fathers, Bishop of Bishops,
or Universal Bishop. Praeterea nos sumus sub gubernatione Episcopi
Caerlegionensis super Osca -- As for us, we are under the rule of the Bishop of
Caerlegion upon Vsk, who is to overlook and govern us under God.

. 6. The invalidity of the argument from conversion, when the Britains were
certainly not converted by Augustine.
From hence the result is clear, that whatever is pretended from Augustine the
Monk, or supposed to have been then pressed by him, for the advancing of the
Popes interest in this Island, and concluding us guilty of Schism in casting
off that yoke, yet the British Bishops still holding out against this
pretension, and that with all reason on their side, if the title of conversion,
which the Romanist pleads for our subjection, may be of any validity with him,
it must needs follow, that the whole Island cannot upon this score of
Augustine's conversion, be now deemed schismatical, it being certain, that the
whole Island, and particularly the Dominion of Wales, was not thus converted by
Augustine, nor formerly by any sent from Rome, or that observed the Roman Order
(as appears by the observation of Easter, contrary to the usage received at
Rome) but either by Joseph of Arimathea, or Simon Zelotes, as our Annals tell
us most probably. And this in the first place must needs be yielded to by those
that expect to receive any advantage to their cause by this argument; And if
they will still extend their title equally, to those parts of Britannie, which
Augustine did not, as to those which he did convert, to Wales, as well as to
Kent, it is evident they must do it upon some other score (whatsoever the
pretense be) and not upon this of conversion.

. 7. But then 2dly, for as much of this Island, as was really converted to the
Faith by the coming of Augustine, No title from conversion for subjection.
there is no title for their subjection, and the perpetual subjection of their
posterity from this.

. 8. To examine this a while by other known practices of the Christian world,
S. Paul by himself or his Apostles, or Procurators, was the great Converter of
the Gentiles; Concerning him I shall demand, whether all those nations
converted by him and his ministers, are to all ages obliged to be subject to
that chair, where S. Paul sat (whether in the Church at Antioch, or Rome, or
the like) at the time of his sending out, or going himself to convert them; If
so, then 1. there cannot be a greater prejudice imaginable to S. Peter's
Universal Pastorship; And 2. it will in the story of the fact appear to have no
degree of truth in it; Timothy that was placed over Asia in Ephesus, and Titus
over Crete, being (as has formerly appeared) supreme in those Provinces, and
independent from any other See, And generally that is the nature of Primates or
Patriarchs, to have no superior either to ordain, or exercise jurisdiction over
them, but themselves to be absolute within their Province, and their successors
to be ordained by the suffragan Bishops under them; which could not be, if
every such Church, where such a Primate was placed, were subject to that
Church, from which they received the Faith.

. 9. The power of Kings to erect Patriarchates.
To put this whole matter out of controversy, It is, and has always been in
the power of Christian Emperors, and Princes within their Dominions to erect
Patriarchates, or to translate them from one city to another, and therefore
whatever title is supposeable to be acquired by the Pope in this Island upon
the first planting of the Gospel here, this cannot so oblige the Kings of
England ever since, but that they may freely remove that power from Rome to
Canterbury, and subject all the Christians of this Island to the spiritual
power of that Archbishop or Primate, independently from any foreign Bishop.

. 10. For the erection of Primacies or Patriarchates, that of Justiniana Prima
Examples in Justiniana Prima, c. 5.. 8.
forementioned, and set down at large, is an evident proof, Justinian erecting
that (long after the rest of the Primates seats in the Empire) to be an
Archiepiscopal See, absolute and independent, and subjecting all Dacia the new
to it* And though the Pope Vigilius was by the Emperor appointed to ordain the
first Bishop there, yet were his successors to be ordained by his own
Metropolitanes, and the Bishops under him not to appeal to any others, as has
in each particular formerly been evidenced.

. 11. Carthage.
The same also has in like manner been shown of Carthage, which was by the same
Justinian (not originally dignified, but) (...): 131.
after the rescuing it out of the Vandales hands, restored to a state of
Primacie, after the pattern or image of Justiniana Prima, and two Provinces
more annexed, then had anciently belonged to that Bishops jurisdiction.

. 12. Ravenna.
Before either of these the Emperor Valentinian the 3d, Anno Christi 432. by
his Rescript constituted Ravenna a Patriarchal seat; And from his time that
held the Patriarchate without any dependence on the Bishop of Rome to the time
of Constantinus Pogonatus, And though at that time the Greek Emperors Vicarii
or Exarchs being not able to support the Bishop of Ravenna against the
Longobards, he was fain to fly for support to the Bishop of Rome, and so
submitted himself unto him, and after Reparatus, the next Bishop Theodorus did
the like to Pope Agatho, whether upon the score of great friendship with him,
or in despite to his own Clergy (with whom he had variance) says Sabellicus,
yet the people of Ravenna thought themselves injured hereby, and joined with
their next Bishop Foelix to maintain their privilege, though Pope Constantine
stirring up Justinian (...) against them, they were worsted, and defeated in
their attempt.

. 13. Other examples there are of this kind, de privileg: Patriar:
Balsamon points at some, which from the (...).
Emperors charter had this privilege, not to be subject to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, calling them (...), which were Archbishops independent: So
under Phocas, the Patriarchate of Grado in Italy was erected, says l. 4. c.
34. Grado.
Warnefridus de gestis Longobard: Others, as Eginartus Chancellor to Charles
the Great, and who wrote his life, say it was done by Charles the Great. And so
does Rhegino who lived in the next age. And accordingly in Duarenus de Benef:
lib. 1. cap. 9. among the Minorum Gentium Patriarchatus, that of Grado is
reckoned for one, and joined with Aquileia, Canterbury and Bourges.

. 14. Frequent in the East.
And that it was a frequent usage in the East, may appear by the 12th Canon of
the Council of Chalcedon, where we find mention of (...), cities honored by
letters patents from the Kings or Emperors with the name and dignity of
Metropoles, and where the Council represses the ambition of Bishops, which
sought those privileges (...), by Rescripts from the Emperors, and censures
it, (in them that so sought it) as (...), not agreeable to the Ecclesiastical
Canons, repressing the ambition of the Bishops, but not cassating the
Rescripts, nor withdrawing the honor from the Metropolis so erected; Of this
Canon Balsamon says, that when it was made, many Emperors had erected many
Metropolitanes, and naming three, adds, (...), that other Bishoprics were thus
honored, and that the Emperors did it (...), according to the power that was
given them. Where it is farther to be observed, 1. that this Council was within
20 years after that grant of Valentinian, and consequently, if Balsamon say
right, (that at that time many Emperors had erected many) there must needs be
others before Valentinian. 2. That the 17th Canon of the Council of Chalcedon
does more expressly attribute this power to the Prince, (...), If a city be
built or restored by the Kings power, let the Ecclesiastical order follow the
Political. And the same power is acknowledged to belong to the Prince by the
Council in Trullo Can: 38. And then 3. that these two last Canons are
reconciled with that 12th of Chalcedon, by the law of Alexius Comnenus, and
assented to by the Synod under him, See Balsam: in Can: 38. Council: in Trullo,
who concludes that the King might do it (...), upon his own incitation or
motion, but it should not be lawful for any by base solicitation to seek or
obtain it, adding that in that case, upon any such Rescript of the Emperor for
such erection, it might be lawful for the Patriarch to suspend the confirmation
of the Charter, until he represented to the Emperor what the Canons were in
that case, and understood if the Emperor did it (...) from his own motion,
which appearing, the Patriarch was to admit thereof.

And accordingly the same Balsamon (on Council: Carthag: Can: 16.) does upon
that Canon professedly found the authority of Princes, (...) -- (...), to
advance an Episcopal See into a Metropolis, and anew to constitute Bishops and
Metropolitanes.

. 15. So also to translate.
As for the transplanting it also from one city to another, besides that the
power of doing that, is consequent to the former, the examples of this practice
are ancient, Examples in England. Council: Angl: p. 26.
and frequent in this kingdom; The passage set down out of the Annals of
Gisburne may be sufficient, From Caeruske the Metropolitan seat was translated
to S. David's by King Arthur, where it continued till Henry I. and then was
reduced to Canterbury.

. 16. In like manner it is evident that the Kings of England have divided
Bishoprics, and erected new ones; About the year 630. Kinigilsa King of the
West Saxons, and Oswald of the Northumbers, erected an Episcopal See at
Dorchester, and placed Birinus in it, so says Guil: Malmesb: de Gest: Pontif:
Angl: l. 2. About the year 660, Kenewalch King of the West Saxons divided this
Bishopric, and left part to Dorchester, and assigned the western part to be
the Diocese of the new Bishop, which he constituted at Winchester, so says
Hen: Huntingd: Hist: l. 3. Then Winchester was subdivided in the time of King
Ina, who also erected a new Bishopric at Sherburne, and gave it to Aldelme, so
Henr: Huntingd: l. 4. and Guil: Malm: de Reg: Angl: l. 1. c. 2. And after the
Norman conquest, Henry I. divided Cambridgeshire from the Sea of Lincoln, and
erected the Bishopric of Elie, so says Guiliel: Malm: de Gest: Pontif: Angl:
l. 4. and Florentius Wigorn: Anno 1109. who lived at that time. So also says
Eadmer with some variation, Regi, Archiepiscopo, caeterisque Principibus regni
visum fuit de ipsa Parochia (Lincolniae) sumendum, quo fieret alter
Episcopatus, cujus cathedra Principatus poneretur in Abbatia de Eli, It seemed
good to the King, the Archbishop, and the rest of the Princes of the kingdom
to take as much out of the Diocese of Lincoln, as would make another
Bishopric, the chair whereof should be set up in the Abbacie of Elie. Adding
indeed that Anselme (a zealous, promoter of the Papal authority, as the author
Eadmer was a disciple and admirer of Anselme) wrote to Pope Paschalis, desiring
his consent to it, as a thing fit to be done, and yet to which he assures him
he would not give his consent, but salva authoritate Papae, reserving the
rights of the Pope; Which though it does suppose the Popes pretensions to that
authority at that time, and Anselm's yiedling it to him, yet it proves also
this right of our Kings to have been even then adhered to, preserved, and
exercised by them, as the former authors had set it down.

. 17. So to exempt from Episcopal jurisdiction.
Of this nature also is the authority of Kings in exempting any Ecclesiastical
person from the Bishops Jurisdiction, and granting Episcopal Jurisdiction to
such person, which is largely asserted and exemplified in Cawdries case 5.
Report. 14. One instance of this will serve for all, that of William the
Conqueror, who exempted Battle Abbey in Sussex from the Jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Chichester, and gave the Abbat Episcopal Jurisdiction in his
Territory and the words of the Charter are produced by Mr* Seldom on Eadmer,
Hoc regali authoritate and Episcoporum ac Baronum meorum attestatione
constituo, I appoint this by my royal authority by the attestation of my
Bishops and Barons.

. 18. Kings Founders of Bishoprics and Patrons,
Add even unto this, that even the Western Princes (in those parts where the
Bishops of Rome have much hightned their power, ever since the Kings were
Christians) the German Emperors, the Kings of France and England, always
claimed to be founders of all Bishoprics in their Dominions, Patrons of them
to bestow them by investiture, that the Kings of France and England often
claimed and were acknowledged to have right, that no Legate from Rome might
come into the Land, and use jurisdiction without their leave; All which put
together are a foundation for this power of the Princes to erect or translate a
Patriarchate, It being withal acknowledged that our Kings have the same
authority in their Territories, that the Roman Emperor had in the Empire.

. 19. The Reason of all, supreme power of Kings,
And the reason of all this is clear, not only from the supreme authority of
Kings in all sorts of causes, even those of the (...), the King is as it were
the common directer and ruler of the Church, both in title and reality.
Demetrii Chomateni Resp: ad Constable: Cab: Jur. Graec: Rom: l. 5. (...), Ye are
Bishops of the Church for those things which are celebrated within it, but for
external things, I am constituted overseer or Bishop by God, says Constantine
the Great in an assembly of Bishops. (...), I am King and Priest, says Leo
Isaurus to Gregory the second, Nec tamen eo nomine a Pontifice reprehenditur,
and was not for this reprehended by the Pope, see J. C. de lib. Eccl: ap:
Goldast: Monarch: t. 1. p. 686. So Socrates the historian, of the Emperors in
general, after their receiving the faith of Christ, (...), the affairs of the
Church depended on them, in Prooem. l. 5. And by Optatus l. 2. it is noted, and
censured as a Schismatical piece of language in the Donatist^, Quid enim
Imperatori cum Ecclesia? And all this according to the principles of civil
policy acknowledged by Aristotle Pol. 3. (...), the King has power of those
things that belong to the Gods; and by Diotogenes in S^obaeus, that a perfect
King ought to be both a good Captain, and a Judge, (...) yea and a Priest also;
And accordingly among the ancient Roman regal Laws, this is one, Sacrorum
omniu^ potestas sub Regibus esto, Let the power of all sacred things be under
the Kings, and so in the practice, Caius Caesar in Suetonius c. 13. was both
Augur and Summus Pontifex* Galba tres Pontificatus gerebat, Ibid: Gal. c. 8.
Claudius is by Josephus called (...), the greatest High Priest, and Tacitus
makes it his observation, Deum nunc munere summum Pontificem summum hominum
esse. Annal: l. 3. The same appears among the Jewish Kings in Scripture, David
ordering the courses of the Priests, Solomon consecrating the temple, Hezekiah
2 Chronicles: 29. 2 Kin: 18. and Josiah 2 Kin: 22. ordering many things belonging to
it. And so S. Paul appealed from the judgment of the chief Priests to the
tribunal of Caesar, see G: de Heimberg: de usurp: Pap: so in the (...), the
whole third book is made up of Justinians, i. e. the Emperors constitutions,
de Episcopis, Clericis and Sacris, concerning Bishops, Clergy men, and sacred
offices. And the Canons of Councels have mostly been set out (and received
their authority) by the Emperors, and accordingly in the Theodosian Code we
shall find many of those which are now called Papal decrees.
Church, as well as Civil (as might be proved at large, if here it were
needful, and cannot be reasonably so confined, as not to belong to a matter of
this nature) but peculiarly from that which has been already noted (and
expressly, ordered, Can. 17. of the Council of Chalcedon even now cited) of
the Ecclesiastical division of Provinces etc: and Ecclesiastical division of
Provinces following the Civil.
following the civil, For 1. it being certainly in the power of the King to
place his Praetoria or courts of Assizes, where he please; and 2. it being the
known original of Metropoles, and divisions of Provinces (as Strabo says,
Geogr. l. 17. (...), Provinces are variously distributed, (...), because the
Romans divide them not by tribes or families, but after another manner in
relation to the cities, where they set up their courts of Assizes --) and again
it being most reasonable, that as any new accident raises one city to a greater
populousness, or depresses another, so for the convenience of the people one
should be made the seat of Judicature, the other cease to be so, (and no man so
fit to pass the judgment when this should be, as the King) and 3. the very
same reasons of convenience moving in the Church, as in the State, the Bishops,
and over them Metropolitanes and Primates having their judicatures, and
audiences, which in all reason must be so disposed of, as may be most for the
convenience of administration, that they and all under them may do their duties
with most facility, and to greatest advantage, and lastly there being no
obstacle imaginable from any contrary constitution either of Christ or his
Apostles, against which the Prince can be said to offend either directly or
interpretatively (as I suppose is already clear from the refutation of the plea
from S. Peter's universal Pastorship) whenever he shall think fit to make such
changes, the Conclusion is rational, as well as evident; just that it should be
so, as well as clear, that elsewhere it has often been so de facto, (and
appointed by the Canon of Chalcedon de jure) that the King may erect a Primacy
when he please (and so it is certain that King Ethelbert at the time of
Augustines planting the faith, did at Canterbury, the seat of his Kingdom,
Imperit sui totius Metropolis says Bid l. 1. c 25.) and conquently remove it
from any other place at his pleasure: Had it not been for this, there is no
reason assignable, why, this nation being in Constantines time under three
Metropolitans, the Archbishop of York (and the Primacy belonging to that city,
as being then the Emperors seat, where Septimius Severus, and Constantius
Chlorus died, and the Praetorium of the Diocese of Britannie) the Archbishop
of London, and the Archbishop of Caerusk in Monmouthshire, either 1. there
should be (as there was) an addition of two Provinces more, Valentia, and
Flavia Caesariensis, or 2. the Metropolitical power should be removed from
London to Canterbury (as also from Caerusk to S. David's, as has been said)
and the Primacie from York to Canterbury.

. 20. This Power of Kings if taken away by foreign laws etc. resumable.
Now what is thus vested in the Regal power, cannot be taken away by foreign
laws, or by prescription be so alienated, but that it remains perfectly lawful
for the Prince to resume it.

sect;. 21. That laws made at Rome do not take away the liberty of another
national Church to make contrary laws thereunto, and that by such obviation no
Schism is incurred, we find delivered in the Council of Carthage (Can: 71.
according to Balsamon's division) And though the Canon be not set down by
Binius, yet both he and Baronius acknowledge, that what was contained in that
particular Canon, was the main occasion of the Synod; And the Antiquity thereof
is considerable, those Canons being made, say Baronius and Binius, Anno 401.

. 22. So likewise that a Law (though made by a General Council and with the
consent of all Christian Princes, yet) if it have respect to a civil right,
may, in this or that nation, be repealed, is the judgment of Roger Widrington
(or Father Preston) in his last rejoinder to Fitzherbert c. 11.. 44. and c. 8.
he confirms it by the doctrine of Zuarez, l. 2. de leg: c. 19. and the reason
of Zuarez is, because such a law made at a general meeting of Princes, is
intrinsecally a civil law; and has not force by virtue of the law to bind the
subjects of any particular kingdom, or Commonwealth, any otherwise then as it
is enacted, or received by the Governors and subjects of that kingdom.

. 23. And this is affirmed, and extended by Balsamon to all Canons in general,
as the judgment of learned men, in his notes on that 16th Canon of the Council
of Carthage before cited.

. 24. So if alienated by prescription.
And for the matter of Prescription, the decision of Clav: Reg: l. 9. c. 12.
Sayr is worth observing, that in such cases as these, Cum Praescriptio sit
tantum de jure Civili and Canonico, When the Prescription is neither of the law
of Nature, nor the Divine law, nor the law of Nations, but only of the Civil
and Canon law, there non plus se extendit quam unusquisque supremus Princeps in
suo Regno eam suis legibus extensam esse velit, it extends no farther then
every supreme Prince in his Realm by his laws is supposed to will that it shall
be extended, which, says he, cannot be supposed, in matters of this nature, of
exempting subjects from making their appeal to their King, for says he, non
est de mente alicujus Principis ut quispiam subditorum possit praescribere quod
ad Principem ab eo non appelletur, aut quod eum coercere non potest, quando
ratio and justitia postulat. It is not imaginable to be the mind of any
Prince, that any of his subjects should be able to prescribe that he is not to
appeal to his Prince (but to some other) or that his Prince may not punish him
when reason and justice requires. It were easy to apply this distinctly to the
confirming of all, that I here pretend, but I shall not thus expatiate.

CHAP. VII. Their third Evidence from our casting off Obedience to the Bishop
of Rome at the Reformation.
. 1. UPon that one ground laid in the former Chapter, the power of Kings in
general, and particularly ad hunc actum to remove Patriarchates; whatsoever can
be pretended against the lawfulness of the Reformation in these kingdoms,
will easily be answered. And therefore supposing the third, and last objection
to lie against our Reformation, that it was founded in the casting off that
obedience to the Bishop of Rome, which was formerly paid him by our Bishops,
and people under them, I shall now briefly descend to that, first laying down
the matter of fact, as it lies visible in our records, and then vindicating it
from all blame of schism, which according to the premises can any way be
thought to adhere to it.

. 2. The history of what was done against the Bishop of Rome in the Reformation.
And first for the matter of fact, it is acknowledged, that in the reign of
King Henry VIII. the Papal (and with it all foreign) power in Ecclesiastical
affairs was both by acts of Convocation of the Clergy, and by statutes or acts
of Parliament, cast out of this kingdom. The first step or degree hereof was
the Clergie's synodical recognizing the King, singularem Ecclesiae Anglicanae
Protectorem, unicum and supremum Dominum -- the singular Protector, the only
and supreme Head of the Church of England, Upon this were built the statutes of
24 Hen: VIII. prohibiting all Appeals to Rome, and for the determining all
Ecclesiastical suits, and controversies within the kingdom; The statute of 25
Hen: VIII. for the manner of electing and consecrating of Archbishops and
Bishops, and another, in the same year, prohibiting the payment of all
impositions to the court of Rome, and for the obtaining all such dispensations
from the Sea of Canterbury, which were formerly procured from the Popes of
Rome, and that of 26 Hen: VIII. declaring the King to be the supreme head
(which in Queen Elizabeth's reign was, to avoid mistakes, changed into supreme
Governor) of the Church of England, and to have all honors and
praeeminencies, which were annexed to that title.

. 3. This was in the next place attended with the submission of the Clergy to
the King, agreed on, first in Convocation, and afterward in 25 Hen: VIII.
enacted by Parliament, to this purpose, that as it was by the Clergy
acknowledged that the Convocation of the Clergy then was, always had been,
and ought to be assembled by the Kings writ, and as they submitting themselves
to the King's Majesty had promised in verbo sacerdotis, that they would never
from thenceforth presume to attempt, allege, claim, or put in ure, enact,
promulge, or exercise any new Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances Provincial or
other -- unless the King's most royal assent may to them be had to make,
promulge, and execute the same -- so it was now enacted, that none of the
Clergy should enact, promulge, or execute any such Canons, Constitutions, and
Ordinances Provincial or Synodical, without assent and authority received from
the King, upon pain of imprisonment, and fine at the Kings pleasure.

. 4. The third and last step of this began with the debate of the Universities,
and most eminent Monasteries in the kingdom; An aliquid authoritatis in hoc
Regno Angliae Pontifici Romano de jure competat, plusquam alii cuiquam Episcopo
extero? Whether any authority did of right belong to the Bishop of Rome in the
Kingdom of England more then to any other foreign Bishop? and upon agitation,
it was generally defined in the negative, and so returned testified under their
hands and seals. The like was soon after concluded, and resolved by the
Convocation of the Bishops, and all the Clergy, and subscribed and confirmed
by their corporal oaths: And at that time was written and printed the Tract de
vera differentia Regiae et Ecclesiasticae potestatis, set out by the Prelates,
the chief composers of which were, John Stokesly, Bishop of London; Cutbert
Tunstall, Bishop of Durham; Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester; and Dr
Thirlby afterward Bishop; where from the practice of the Saxon, and first
Norman Kings they evidence the truth of that Negative out of story. And what
was thus concluded by the Clergy was soon turned into an Act of Parliament
also in 28 Hen: VIII. called An Act extinguishing the authority of the Bishop
of Rome, and prescribing an oath to all Officers Ecclesiastical, and lay, of
renouncing the said Bishop and his authority.

. 5. By these three degrees it is acknowledged that the Bishops and Clergy
first, then the King confirming the Acts of the Convocation, and after making
Acts of Parliament to the same purposes, renounced the authority of the Roman
See, and cast it out of this Island; The Praemunire.
and though the first Act of the Clergy in this were so induced, that it is
easy to believe that nothing but the apprehension of dangers which hung over
them (by a Praemunire incurred by them) could probably have inclined them to
it, and therefore I shall not pretend that it was perfectly an act of their
first will, and choice, but that which the necessity of affairs recommended to
them, yet the matter of right being upon that occasion taken into their most
serious debate in a synodical way, and at last a fit and commodious expression
uniformly pitched upon by joint consent of both houses of the Convocation,
there is no reason to doubt, but that they did believe what they did profess,
the fear being the occasion of their debates, but the reasons or arguments
offered in debate, the causes (as in all charity we are to judge) of their
decision.

. 6. But I shall not lay much weight on that judgment of charity, because if
that which was thus determined by King and Bishops were falsely determined, then
the voluntarinesse, or freeness of the determination will not be able to
justify it, and on the other side, if the determination were just, then was
there truth in it, antecedent to, and abstracted from the determination, and it
was their duty so to determine, and crime that they were unwilling to do it.
And therefore the whole difficulty devolves to this one enquiry, Whether at
that time of the reign of Henry VIII. the Bishop of Rome were supreme head, or
Governor of this Church of England, or had any real authority here, which the
King might not lawfully remove from him to some other, viz: to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, if he pleased.

. 7. The Right of the Bishop of Rome considered.
And this is presently determined upon the grounds which have been formerly
laid, and confirmed to have truth in them. For the pretensions for the Popes
supremacy of power among us being by the assertors thereof founded in one of
these three, either in his right (as S. Peter's successor) to the Universal
Pastorship, that including his power over England, as a member of the whole; or
2. by the paternal right which by Augustine's planting the Gospel among the
Saxons is thought to belong to the Pope (and his successors) that sent him; or
3. in the voluntary concession of some Kings; the two former of these have been
largely disproved already, Chap. 4, 5, and 6. in discourses purposely, and
distinctly applied to those pretensions. The concession of Kings.
And for the third, that will appear to have received its determination also,
I. by the absoluteness of the power of our Princes, (to which purpose I shall
mention but one passage, that of in Goldast: de Mon:
G. de Heimburg, some two hundred years since in the last words of his tract de
Injust: Vsurp: Pap: where speaking of the Emperors making oath to the Pope, he
says, that this is a submission in him, and a patience above what any other
suffers, and proves it by this argument, Nam eximius Rex Angliae, Franciae,
Dux, Marchio, non astringitur Papae quocunque juramento: factus Imperator
jurare tenetur secundum Decretales eorum fabulose fictas, ita ut supremus
Monarcha magis servilis conditionis, quam quilibet ejus inferior fieri
censeatur, The King of England and France, any Duke or Marquess of that
Kingdom is not bound to the Pope by any oath, yet the Emperor at his creation
is thus bound to swear according to the Popes Decretals fabulously invented, so
that the supreme Monarch is made to be of a more servile condition then any his
inferior Prince --.) And 2. by the rights of Kings to remove or erect
Patriarchates, and will be farther confirmed in the Negative, if answer be
first given to this Dilemma.

. 8. A Dilemma against the plea drawn from that.
The authority of the Pope in this Kingdom, which is pretended to be held by
the concession of our Kings, was either so originally vested in our Kings, that
they might lawfully grant it, to whom they pleased, pleased, and so did
lawfully grant it to the Pope; or it was not thus originally vested in our
Kings; If it were not, then was that grant an invalid, null grant, for such are
all concessions of that which is not ours to give, presumptions, invasions,
robberies in the giver, which devolve no right to the receiver, and then this
is a pitiful claim which is thus founded: But if that authority were so vested
in the Kings of England, that they might lawfully grant it to whom they
pleased, (which is the only way by which the Pope can pretend to hold any thing
by this title of regal concession) then certainly the same power remains still
vested in the King to dispose it from him to some other as freely, as the same
King may upon good causes remove his Chancellor, or any other of his officers
from his place, and commit it to another (this way of arguing is made use of by
the Bishops in Convocation, Anno Chr: 1537. in the Book by them entitled [ The
Institution of a Christian man]) Or if the same power do not still remain in
the King, then is the King's power diminished, and he consequently by this his
act, of which we treat, become less a King, then formerly he was, And then we
know that such acts which make him so, are invalid acts, it being acknowledged
to be above the power of the King himself, to divest himself and his successors
of any part of his regal power.

. 9. Two sorts of gifts.
To which purpose it must be observed, 1. that some things are so ours, that we
may freely use them, but cannot freely part with them, as all those things,
wherein our propriety is not confined to our persons, but intailed on our
posterity, and such the regal power is supposed to be; 2. That as some things
which are part of our personal proprieties, are so freely ours to give, that
when they are given, they are departed out of our selves, and cannot justly be
by us resumed again (in which case that Maxim of the civil law stands good,
data eo ipso qu^ dantur, fiunt accipientis, what is given, by the very act of
being given, becomes the goods of the receiver) so other things are given to
others, so as we do not part with them our selves, they are as truly, and
properly ours, after, as before the Concession.

. 10. Some revocable.
Thus the Sun communicates his beams, and with them his warmth and influences,
and yet retains all which it thus communicates, and accordingly withdraws
them again, And God the spring of all life, and grace, does so communicate each
of these, that he may, and does freely withdraw them again, and when he takes
away our breath we die -- And thus certainly the King, being the fountain of
all power and authority, as he is free to communicate this power to one, so is
he equally free to recall, and communicate it to another, And therefore may as
freely bestow the power of Primate, and chief Metropolitan of England, or
(which is all one) of a Patriarch, on the Bishop of Canterbury, having formerly
thought fit to grant it to the Bishop of Rome, as he or any of his Ancestors
can be deemed to have granted it to the Bishop of Rome; And then as this being
by this means evidenced to be no more then an act of regal power, (which the
King might lawfully exercise) takes off all obligation of obedience in the
Bishops to the Pope, at the first minute, that he is by the King divested of
that power, or declared not to have had it de jure, but only to have assumed it
formerly (which freedom from that obedience immediately clears the whole
business of schism, The reasonableness of revoking it.
as that is a departure from the obedience of the lawful superior) so will
there not want many weighty reasons, deducible from the ancient Canons, as well
as the maxims of civil government, why the King who may freely place the
Primacy, where he please, should choose to place it in a Bishop and subject of
his own nation, rather then in a foreign Bishop far removed, and him not only
independent from that King, but himself enjoying a Principality, or territory,
which it is too apparent how willing he is to enlarge unlimitedly, and to
improve the concessions, which are either acknowledged, or pretended to be made
him, to that purpose.

. 11. And here it is not amiss to observe, in the reign of Queen Mary, Title
and power of Supreme head of the Church retained by Queen Mary.
who was no way favorable to the Reformation in points of doctrine and
Liturgy, and made all speed to repeal what had been done in King Edward's time
in that matter, yet 1. that she left not the title of Supreme head, till the
third Parliament of her reign; and 2. that in the second Parliament authority
is granted her to make, and prescribe to all such Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, as were erected by Henry the VIII. such statutes and orders as should
seem good to her, and that statute never repealed but expired: 3. that in her
third Parliament it was with much difficulty obtained, that the supremacy of
the Pope should be acknowledged, the matter being urged by her, as that which
concerned the establishing the Matrimony of her Mother, and her legitimation,
which depended upon the absolute power of the Pope: 4. that in the 4th year of
her reign, when the Pope sent Cardinal Petow to be his Legate in England, and
to be Bishop of Sarisbury, she would not permit him to come into the Land,
neither could he have that Bishopric, which as it was some check to the Pope's
absolute supremacy, and an assertion and vindication of the Regal power, so
being added to the former it will be less strange, that this Supreme power of
the Popes should be by the Bishops in the reign of Henry VIII. disclaimed, and
ejected.

. 12. Upon this bottom the foundation of Reformation being laid in England,
the superstructure was accordingly erected by the King and Bishops and Clergy
in Convocation, but this not all at once, but by distinct steps and degrees.
Somewhat in the reign of this Henry the VIII. as in the number of the
Sacraments, the use of the Lords Prayer etc. in the English tongue, and the
translation of the Bible, all resolved on in Synod, the King which duly
assembled it, presiding in it by his Vicar General.

. 13. This was much farther advanced in the time of his son Edward the VI. who
being a child, The advance of the Reformation in Kng Edward's days.
and the Laws and Constitution of this Realm committing the exercise of the
Supreme power in that case, into the hands of a Protector, what was thus
regularly done by that Protector, cannot be doubted to be of the same force,
and validity, as if the King had been of age, and done it himself; Or if it
should, it would be an unanswerable objection against all hereditary,
successive Monarchy, a maim in that form of Government, which could no way be
repaired, there being no amulet in the Crown, which secures the life of each
King, till his successor be of age, nor promise from heaven that the children
of such Princes shall, by succeeding to the Crown, advance by miracle to the
years, and abilities of their Parents, So irrational is the scoff, and
exception of some, that what was done in King Edward's days being the Acts of
a child is as such to be vilified* and despised.

. 14. In the Reign of this Prince, many Changes were made in the Church, and
Recessions from the Doctrines, and practices of Rome; Beside that of Images,
the lawfulness of the marriage of the Clergy was asserted, a body of an
English Liturgy formed, and settled for public use, the Eucharist appointed to
be administered to the people in both kinds, etc. and though Bishop Gardner of
Winchester, and Bishop Bonner of London made opposition against these changes,
and for some misbehaviours herein, were imprisoned, (and two more moderate,
learned men, Bishop Tunstal of Durham, and Bishop Day of Chichester, upon
another score) yet Archbishop Cranmer, and the rest of the Bishops making up
the far greater number, joined with the Supreme power in the Reformation. And
as it is no great marvel, that there should be some (so few) dissenters, so
the punishment inflicted on them will not be deemed excessive by any, that
shall compare it with the far severer executions, the fire, and faggot, which
were soon after in Queen Mary's days inflicted on Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop
Ridley, and Bishop Latimer, as the reward of their disputing in the Synod
against Transubstantiation, (and the like cruelties on multitudes more) and the
Exiles, and deprivations, which befell so many others in her Reign; However
this can be no prejudice to the regularity of the Reformation in the reign of
King Edward, wrought, as has been said, by the Supreme power, with the consent
of the major part of Bishops.

. 15. In Queen Elizabeth's.
That which afterward followed in the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth's reign, may
be thought more distant, and less reconcilable to our pretensions, (not that
of her sex, her being a woman, for so was Qu. Mary before, which acted so
vigorously for the contrary way, and the constitution of our Monarchy invests
equally either sex in the plenitude of Regal power, in sacred, as well as civil
affairs, and it was but to raise envy against the Reformation that Queen
Elizabeth's sex, as before King Edward's nonage has by some been thought fit
to be mentioned, and cannot by any sober judgment be admitted to have any force
in it) but because, as it is from our histories more pertinently objected, most
of the Bishops were by her divested of their dignities, and new created in
their stead, To this therefore in the last place, I must apply my self to give
satisfaction. And 1.

. 16. In this matter, as much as concerns the Ordination of those new Bishops,
that it was performed regularly, according to the Ancient Canons, each by the
Imposition of the hands of three Bishops, has been evidently set down out of
the Records, and vindicated by Mr Mason in his Book de Minist: Anglic: and may
there be viewed at large, if the Reader want satisfaction in that point.

. 17. The Creation of new Bishops in Queen Elizabeth's time, vindicated.
As for the second remaining part of the objection which alone is pertinent to
this place, it will receive answer by these degrees, First that the death of
Cardinal Pool Archbishop of Canterbury, falling near upon the death of her
Predecessor Queen Mary, it was very regular for Queen Elizabeth to assign a
successor to that See, then vacant, Archbishop Parker; 2dly, that those
Bishops, which in Queen Mary's days had been exiled, and deprived, and had
survived that calamity, were with all justice restored to their dignities;
3dly, that the Bishops by her deprived, and divested of their dignities, were
so dealt with, for refusing to take the oath of Supremacy, formed and enjoined
in the days of Henry the VIII. and in the first Parliament of this Queen
revived, and the statutes concerning it restored to full force, before it was
thus imposed on them. So that for the justice of the cause of their
deprivation, it depends Immediately upon the Right and power of the Supreme
Magistrate to make laws, to impose oaths for the securing his Government, and
to inflict the punishments, prescribed by those laws, on the disobedient, but
Originally upon the truth of that decision of the Bishops, and Clergy, and
Universities, in the reign of Henry the VIII. that no authority belonged in
this Kingdom of England to the Bishop of Rome, more then to any other foreign
Bishop. The former of these I shall be confident to look on as an undoubted
truth, in the maintenance of which all Government is concerned, and has
nothing, peculiar to our pretensions, which should suggest a vindication of it
in this place, And the second has, I suppose, been sufficiently cleared in the
former chapters of this discourse, which have examined all the Bishop of Romes
claims to this Supremacy, And both these grounds being acknowledged (or, till
they be invalidated, or disproved, supposed) to have truth, and force in them,
the conclusion will be sufficiently induced, that there was no injustice in
that Act of the Queens, which divested those Bishops, which thus refused to
secure her Government, or to approve their fidelity to their lawful* Sovereign.

. 18. Fourthly, that those Bishops being thus deprived, it was most Regular,
and Necessary, and that against which no objection is imaginable, (that of
their due Ordination being formerly cleared) that other Bishops should be
nominated, and advanced to those vacant Sees, and that what should be for the
future acted by those new Bishops in Convocation was regular, Synodical, and
valid beyond all exception in respect of the formality of it.

. 19. Fifthly, that as by the Uniform and joint consent of these Bishops thus
constituted a Declaration of certain Principal Articles of Religion was agreed
on, and set out by Order of both Archbishops, Metropolitans, and the rest of
the Bishops, for the Unity of doctrine, to be taught, and holden of all
Parsons, Vicars, and Curates etc. and this not before the third year of that
Queens reign, So before this time there had not been, as far as appears, any
debate in any former Convocation of that Queens reign concerning Religion
(only an offer of a disputation betwixt eight Clergymen on each side, which
came to nothing) but all done by the Parliaments restoring what had been
debated, and concluded by former Synods, in the reigns of King Henry the eight,
and Edward the sixth, without any new deliberation in any present Synod. By this
means were revived the Statutes for the Regal Supremacy, as also of the book of
Common Prayer, as it was in the time of Edward the sixth, (with few alterations)
which included the abolition of the Romish Missalls. And so all this again, as
far as it concerned Queen Elizabeth's part in the Reformation, is regularly
superstructed on the forementioned foundation of Regal Supremacy (with the
concurrence, and advise of Synods) which has been in the former part of this
discourse (I hope, sufficiently) vindicated.

. 20. And that being granted, it cannot be here necessary, or pertinent to
descend to the consideration of each several matter of the Change thus wrought
in this Church, either as branches of the Reformation, or under the name, or
title of it. For our present inquiry being no farther extended, then this,
whether the true Church of England, as it stands by Laws established, have in
Reforming been guilty of Schism, as that signifies in the first place a
recession, and departure from the obedience of our lawful Superiors, and this
being cleared in the Negative, by this one evidence, that all was done by
those, to whom, and to whom only, the rightful power legally pertained, viz:
the King, and Bishops of this Nation, supposing (as now regularly we may,
having competently proved it, and answered all the colors, that have been
offered against it) that the Pope had no right to our obedience, and
consequently that our departure from him is not a departure from our obedience
to our superiors, it is presently visible, that all other matters will belong
to some other heads of Discourse, and consequently must be debated upon other
principles, All variation from the Church of Rome in point of Doctrine if it
should (as I believe it will never) be proved to be unjust, falling under the
head of Heresy, not of schism; and for acts of sacrilege, and the like
impieties (as certainly Henry the eighth, and some others, cannot be freed from
such) they are by us as freely charged upon the actors, as by any Romanist they
can be, But yet sacrilege is no more schism, then it is adultery, and the
Church, on which one sin has been committed, cannot be from thence proved to
be guilty of every other.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Second sort of Schism, as that is an Offense against
mutual Charity, This divided into three species, and the first here examined.
. 1. BUT beside that first species of schism, as it is an offense against the
subordination, which Christ has by himself and his Apostles settled in the
Church, (from the guilt of which I have hitherto indevoured to vindicate our
Church) another was taken notice of, as it signifies an offense against the
mutual unity, and peace, and charity, which Christ left among his Disciples;
And to that I must now proceed, as far as the Accusations of the Romanist
give us occasion to vindicate our innocence.

. 2. Three branches of the second sort of Schism.
And for method's sake, this branch of Schism may be subdivided into three
species. The first is a breach in the doctrines, or Traditions, a departure
from the unity of the Faith, which was once delivered to the saints; under that
head also comprehending the institutions of Christ, of his Apostles, and of the
Universal Church of the first and purest ages, whether in Government, or other
the like observances and practices: The second is an offense against external
peace and Communion Ecclesiastical: The third and last is the want of that
charity, which is due from every Christian to every Christian. Beside these I
cannot foresee any other species of schism, and therefore the vindicating our
Reformation from all grounds of charge of any of these three, will be the
absolving the whole task undertaken in these sheets.

. 3. 1. A departure from the Unity of Doctrines, or Traditions Apostolical.
For the first it may be considered either in the Bullion, or in the coin, in
the gross, or in the retail, either as it is a departure from those rules
appointed by Christ for the founding and upholding his truth in the Church,
this Unity of Doctrine etc. or else as it is the asserting any particular
branch of Doctrine, contrary to Christ's, and the ( Apostolical, pure) Churches
establishment.

. 4. Our Church vindicated from this, in two branches.
And here it is first suggested by the Romanist, that by casting out the
authority of the Bishop of Rome, we have cast off the head of all Christian
Unity, and so must needs be guilty of Schism in this first respect. To which
the answer is obvious, 1. In the first, Christ's Rules for upholding the truth.
that that Bishop of Rome was never appointed by Christ to be the head of all
Christian unity, or that Church to be the conservatory (for ever) of all
Christian truth, any more then any other Bishop, or Church of the Apostles
ordaining, or planting; and whatever can be pretended for the contrary will be
easily answered from the grounds already laid, and cleared in the former part
of this discourse concerning the Universal Pastorship of S. Peter's successors,
which must not be here so unnecessarily repeated.

. 5. 2dly, That the way provided by Christ, and his Apostles for the preserving
the unity of the faith, etc. in the Church, is fully acknowledged by us, and no
way supplanted by our Reformation. That way is made up of two acts of
Apostolical providence, First their resolving upon some few heads of special
force, and efficacy to the planting of Christian life through the world, and
preaching, and depositing them in every Church of their plantation. 2. Their
establishing an excellent subordination of all inferior officers of the Church
to the Bishop in every city, of the Bishops in every Province to their
Metropolitanes, of the Metropolitanes in every region or (...) to Patriarchs,
or Primates, allowing also among these such a Primacie of Order, or dignity, as
might be proportionable to the (...) in the scripture, and agreeable to what is
by the ancient Canons allowed to the Bishop of Rome; And this standing
subordination sufficient for all ordinary uses, and when there should be need
of extraordinary remedies, there was then a supply to be had by congregating
Councels, Provincial, Patriarchal, General, as has formerly been showed. And
all this, it is most certain, asserted, and acknowledged by every true son of
the Church of England, as zealously, as is pretended by any Romanist. And from
hence, by the way, that speech of the learned and excellent Hugo Grotius (which
I discern to be made use of by the Romanists, and looked on with jealousy by
others) will, I suppose, receive its due importance, and interpretation, in his
Rivet: Apologet: Discuss: p. 255. Restitutionem Christianorum in unum idemque
corpus etc.

. 6. As for the subjection (and dependence) of this Church to the Monarchick
power of the Bishop of Rome, this will never be likely to tend to the unity of
the whole body, unless first all other Churches of Christians paid that
subjection too, and were obliged, and so by duty morally ascertained always to
continue it (which it is evident the Eastern Churches had not done long before
the time of our pretended departure) and 2. unless the Bishop of Rome were in
probability able to administer that vast Province, so as would be most to the
advantage of the whole body, For which whether he be fitly qualified or no, as
it is not demonstrable in the causes, so is it to be looked on, as a Politic
Problem, the truth of which belongs to prudent persons, and and such as are by
God entrusted with the Flock to judge of, i. e. to the Princes, the nursing
Fathers of every Church, who are prudentially, and fatherly to determine for
themselves and those that are under them, what is most ordinable to that end,
and cannot be obliged to conclude, farther then the motives or premises will
bear, to decree what they do not reasonably, and cordially believe.

. 7. In the Second, Particular doctrines.
Lastly, for the particular doctrines wherein we are affirmed by the Romanists
to depart from the Unity of the Faith, and so by departing from the unity, to
be schismatical, as heretical by departing from the faith, this must be
contested by a strict survey of the particular doctrines, wherein as we make no
doubt to approve our selves to any that will judge of the Apostolical doctrine
and traditions by the Scriptures, and consent of the first 300 years, or the
four General Councels, The Church of Englands temper in respect of particular
doctrines.
(the most competent witnesses of Apostolical traditions) so we shall secure
our selves of our innocence in this behalf, by that principle acknowledged in
our Church, and owned, as the rule by which we are concluded in any debate, or
controversy: That whatever is contrary to the doctrine, or practices of those
first and purest ages, shall by us (as soon as it thus appears) be renounced,
and disclaimed also. Which resolution of rulinesse, and obedience, will, I
suppose, conserve us in the unity of the Faith, and render us approveable to
God, though our ignorance (thus unaffected) should betray us to some
misunderstandings of those first times, and be an instrument much more probable
to lead us into all truth, then the supposed infallibility of the Church of
Rome can be imagined to be, which as it leaves the proudest presumer really as
liable to error, as him that acknowledges himself most fallible, so it
ascertains him to persevere incorrigible whether in the least, or greatest
error, which by fault, or frailty he shall be guilty of.

. 8. This consideration of the humble, docible temper of our Church (together
with our professed appeal to those first and purest times, to stand or fall, as
by those evidences we shall be adjudged) as it necessarily renders it our
infelicity, not our crime, if in judging of Christ's truth we should be deemed
to err, so may it reasonably supersede that larger trouble of the Reader, in
this place, which the view and examination of the severals would cost him, it
being thus far evident, that it is our avowed wish and our care (should it be
denied to be our lot) a special mark of the Church of England's Reformation, to
preserve the Unity of the Apostolical Faith and Primitive practices, as entire,
as we would have done Christ's body or garment, and the probability being not
weak on our side, that the fact of the crucifying soldiers which has so much
of our abhorrence and detestation, shall never be our choice, our known, or
wilful guilt, or if it be, that we so far recede from our Profession.

CHAP. IX. The Second species of this Schism examined, as it is an offense
against external peace, or Communion Ecclesiastical.
. 1. This Church free from breach of Communion Ecclesiastical.
NOW for the second branch of this second sort of Schism, as it is an offense
against external peace or communion Ecclesiastical. This cannot with any color
be charged on us, As appears by six Considerations.
of whom these 6 things are manifest, and that by the tenure of our
Reformation, 1. The first.
that we have always retained the form of Government* in, and under which the
Apostles founded Ecclesiastical assemblies, or Communion, viz: that of the
Bishop, and his inferior officers in every Church, and so in that respect are,
in Ignatius his phrase (...), within the altar, have no part of that breach of
Ecclesiastical communion upon us, which consists in casting out that order. 2.
The second.
That as we maintain that Order, so we regularly submit to the exercise of it,
acknowledge the due authority of these Governors, profess Canonical obedience
to them, submit to their Censures, and Decrees, and give our selves up to be
ruled by them in all things that belong to their cognizance secundum Deum,
according to God. 3. The third.
That the circumstances which are necessary to the (...) the assembling our
selves together for the public worship, whether 1. that of place, (our
Churches consecrated to those offices) or 2. that of time, (the Lords day, and
other primitive festivals, and Fasts, and, in their degree, every day of the
week) or 3. that of forms of Prayer, and Praises, celebration of Sacraments,
and sacramentals, Preaching, Catechizing, etc. or 4. that of Ceremonies, such
as the practice of the Primitive Church has sent down recommended to us; or
lastly, that of Discipline to bind all these performances upon every member of
the Church in his office, or place, are all entered into our Confessions,
settled by Article, as part of our establishment, and so the want of either, or
all of those are not imputable to our Reformation.

. 2. The fourth.
Fourthly, That in every of these three, whatsoever the Romanist requires us to
add farther to that which we voluntarily, and professedly receive, (1. the
supreme, transcendent, monarchick power of the Pope, 2. the acknowledgment of,
and obedience to his supremacy, 3. the use of more ceremonies, festivals, etc.)
is usurpation, or imposition of the present Romanists, absolutely without
Authority, or Precedent from the ancient, Primitive Church, from whom we are so
unwilling to divide in any thing, that we choose a conformity with them, rather
then with any later model, and if by receding from the Ordo Romanus in any
particular, we do not approve our selves to come nearer to the first, and
purest times, it is the avowed Profession of our Church, the wish, and purpose
of it, which I may justly style part of our establishment, to reduce, and
restore that, (whatsover it is) which is most pure, and Primitive in stead of
it.

. 3. The fifth.
Fifthly, That as we exclude no Christian from our communion, that will either
filially, or fraternally embrace it with us, being ready to admit any to our
assemblies, that acknowledge the Foundation laid by Christ, and his Apostles,
so we as earnestly desire to be admitted to the like freedom of external
Communion with all the members of all other Christian Churches, as often as
occasion makes us capable of that blessing of the one heart, and one lip, and
would most willingly, by the use of the ancient method of literae
Communicatoriae, maintain this Communion with those, with whom we cannot
corporally assemble, and particularly with those which live in obedience to the
Church of Rome.

. 4. The sixth.
Sixthly, that the only hindrances that interpose and obstruct this desired
freedom of external Communion, are wholly imputable to the Romanists.

. 5. First, their excommunicating, and separating from their assemblies all
that maintain communion with the Church of England, which we know was done by
Bull from the Pope about the tenth year of Q. Elizabeth (before which time
those English, which had not joined in our Reformation, might, and did come to
our assemblies, and were never after rejected by us, but upon their avowed
contumacie against the orders of our Church, which consequently brought the
censures on them) and to that it is visibly consequent, that we that were cast
out, cannot be said to separate, as in the former part of this discourse has
been demonstrated.

. 6. Secondly, their imposing such conditions on their Communion (belief of
doctrines, and approbation of practices, which we neither believe, nor approve
of, and are ready to contest and maintain our Negatives, by grounds that all
good Christians ought to be concluded by) that we cannot without sinning, or
seeming to sin against conscience, without wilful falling on one side, or
dissembling and unsound confession on the other side, or at least the scandal
of one of these, accept of their communion upon such conditions, as has
formerly been demonstrated also.

. 7. A consideration concerning our Church.
And in this matter it were very well worthy our considering, how far the
Articles of our Church of England proceed in accord with the present Roman
doctrines and practices, and in what particulars (...), we cannot persuade our
selves to consent to them, and then to offer it to the Vmpirage of any rational
arbitrator, whether we that unfeignedly profess to believe so much and no
more, nor to be convinced by all the reasons, and authorities, proofs from
Scripture, or the first Christian writers, (those of the first three hundred
years) or the four General Councels) produced by them (being in full
inclination and desire of mind, ready to submit upon conviction) are in any
reason, or equity, or according to any example, or precept of Christ, or his
Apostles, or the ancient, Primitive Church, to be required to offer violence to
our minds, and to make an unsound profession, or else (for that one guilt of
not doing so) to be rejected as heretics, and denied the benefit of Christian
Communion, which we heartily desire to extend and propagate to them which deny
it to us. All this thus put together, and applied to this present matter will
certainly vindicate us from all appearance of guilt of this second branch of
the second sort of Schism.

CHAP. X. The third species of this Schism, as an offense against that charity
due from every Christian to every Christian, examined.
. 1. Contrary to charity due from all to all.
LAstly, as Schism is an offense against that charity which is due from every
Christian to every Christian, so it will be best distributed (according to what
we see noted by by the Apostle, Romans 14. in the Jewish, and Gentile Christians)
1. Judging* 2. Despising.
into the judging, and the despising of others, either of which was, if not
formally Schism, yet soon improveable into it, when it would not be repressed
by the Apostles admonitions, Separating the effect of both.
The Jewish Christians we know judged, and damned all that would not observe
the Mosaical law, and would not associate, or communicate with the Gentiles,
and the like height Diotrephes, and some of the Gentile believers, who began
with the other branch, that of vilifying the weak Jew, at last arrived to, not
receiving, forbidding to receive, and casting out the brethren, 3 John 10. And
whether the Romanists or we, are thus guilty, will soon be discernible.

. 2. Of Judging and separating the Romanists guilty ex Confesso
For the former, that of judging, and so separating from their brethren (if yet
we may be allowed that title) it is evident by their own acknowledgment, how
guilty they are, and how guiltless we.

. 3. It has been a special motive, and argument to gain proselytes to their
party for some years, that by our Confession there is salvation to be had among
them, but in their judgment no possible hope of it for us. This weapon of
their's used so studiously against us, to anticipate and prejudge, in general,
whatsoever can be particularly said to assert our doctrines, and practices,
will certainly be as useful in our hands, as Goliah's sword in David's to give
this wound (I wish it may not prove as fatal) to our vaunting enemies: For
certainly, if there be any truth in that motive, then are they professedly the
men, that judge their brethren, and as confessedly we the men, that do not
judge them. And if S. Cyprian's rule be true (who had as well considered the
nature of Schism, and as diligently armed the Christians of his age against it,
and given us as sure rules to judge by, in this matter, as any) that they that
maintain any difference in opinion against other Christians, must, if they will
avoid the evil of schism, manage it with this temper (neminem damnantes,
neminem a communione nostra arcentes) never condemn any, or forbid them our
communion, then is the schism (because the uncharitableness) on their parts,
not on ours. And it is not the saying, we are Heretics, and so certainly
excluded salvation, Schismatics, and so out of the Church, the way to
salvation, that can give this sanguinarie judgment any meeker a title; For that
we are such, being as much denied, as any thing, and that negative offered to
be proved, and vindicated by all those evidences, by which any matter of
doctrine, (from whence this question depends) can duly be cleared, this
unproved affirmation, that we are such, is certainly a petitio principii, a
begging of the question, a supposing that in the debate, which they know we are
as far from confessing, as they from having proved, and that is the most
certain proof, that such judging is uncharitable; I wish there were not many
other as pregnant indications of it.

. 4. And for that of despising or setting at naught the brother, which is the
Ap Of despising. We are guiltless of it.
ostles argument also that they walk not charitably, and the effect whereof is
evident, the casting them out of the Church, if the cause may be concluded by
the effect, the guilt lies on the Romanists side, not on ours (as has formerly
appeared) And truly we are so sensible of the many prepossessions, and strong
prejudices, which by the advantage of education, the prescribed credulity to
all that the Church shall propose, the doctrine of infallibility, the shutting
up the scriptures in an unknown language, the impossibility that the multitude
should search* or examine tradition with their own eyes, the prosperous
flourishing estate of the Roman Church (and the persecutions, and calamities*
and expressions of God's displeasure on the Church of England) the literal
sound of [ Hoc est corpus meum] for their principal (espoused) doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and some other the like means, are infused into the
multitude of men and women, that are brought up without any knowledge of ours,
in a firm belief of all their pretensions, that we are as far from setting
them at naught, or despising them, as from that (which by their doing it first
is made impossible for us to be guilty of) the casting them out of the Church.

. 5. I foresee not any objection, which may give me temptation, or excuse
farther to enlarge on this matter, And profess not to know any other branch of
Schism, or color of fastening that guilt upon our Church, made use of by any,
which has not been either prevented in the grounds of this discourse, or
distinctly taken notice of, and competently vindicated, as far as the
designed brevity would permit.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the present Persecution of the Church of England, and the
advantages sought from thence.
. 1. OUr Establishment being thus freed from Schism, I shall not now entertain
my self with any fear, that the Persecution, which we are under, will involve
us in it. The Romanists argument from our present condition of Persecution.
Yet can I not but take notice of the style, that some Romanists have in these
last years, on this occasion, chosen to make use of, calling us [ the late
Church of England] The interpretation whereof is to my understanding this, that
the calamities, under which now we suffer, have made us cease to be a Church:
And therefore having learned, and abundantly experimented, what scandal the
Cross has always carried along with it, how willing enemies are to take
advantage, and ground arguments on afflictions, and how ordinary it is for
friends, to take impressions from such sensible, carnal motives, and being
secured by the story of the Ancient Gnostics, that it is neither scandalous
excess of fear, nor want of charity, to think it possible, that this, as other
ancient heresies, may now as in a Platonic year (if not carefully warded)
return on us, as in a revolution, I shall therefore conclude this paper with an
attempt to remove this prejudice; The utmost whereof being formed into an
objection, is this, that it is absolutely necessary to communicate with some
one visible Church, that now the Church of England is not such, and
consequently that it must be cast off, and the Roman Church so illustriously
visible, be taken up in stead of it.

. 2. Answered.
To this reserve I shall make my returns by these degrees, First that by the
making this objection, or drawing any argument against any member of the Church
of England, from the present (...), or improsperous circumstances of affairs,
It must be supposed, that twenty years since, this person, the supposed subject
of discourse, living regularly in this Church, under his superiors, was not
then chargeable with this crime of not communicating with a visible Church.

. 3. This consequent I shall not be so much my own flatterer as to think it
will be allowed me* by the Romanist, who will, I know, at another time accuse
the whole Church of England (ever since the Reformation) of schism from the
Catholic Church, and make the communicating with it 20 years since, as
dangerous as now the not communicating with any: But the reason of my laying
this foundation is, to show the vanity of the present objection, For if the
Church of England 20 years since, were not a Church, but a society of
Schismatics, not a particular Church (which, if so, must be a part, or member
of the Universal, and such it is not, if it be truly separated from that body,
in the unity of which it is obliged to remain) but a separated, and torn off,
and so a livelesse, ejected branch, then whatsoever has now befallen us, and
the consequence of that, the supposed impossibility of communicating with the
Church of England, will but leave us where we were, the impossibility of
communicating with a schismatical society, being not chargeable on us, as a
crime, by them, who make the communicating with all such societies so damnable;
And therefore I say, to the making this any objection, it is necessary, that
that be supposed, which I have for that cause laid as my foundation, that 20
years since a member of the English Church was not under this guilt of not
communicating with some one visible Church; And if then he were not, (or, for
discourse sake, be by the objecter supposed not to have been) then it
infallibly, and irrefragably follows (which is the second proposition) that he
that 20 years since was not under this guilt of not communicating -- is either
not guilty of it now, or else has voluntarily committed or omitted somewhat,
which commission or omission has been the contracting of this guilt. For that
somewhat, which has not been his choice, shall become his crime, that what
has been his saddest part of infelicity, the evil against which he has most
industriously contended, should be accounted his offense* when it is his
punishment, I shall not fear will be affirmed by any.

. 4. Thirdly then, the business is brought to this issue, that that person,
which is the subject of our discourse (he that 20 years since, was a member of
the Church of England) be now proved by some commission or omission of his,
voluntarily to have contracted this guilt, or else be absolved, and freed from
it; If he have contracted it, it must be by some irregularity of actions,
contrary to the standing rule and Canons of this Church; or by disobedience to
some commands of his Ecclesiastical superiors; And as in neither of these I
shall excuse any that has been guilty, so if, being not fallen under the
actual Censures of the Church for it, he now timely and sincerely return with
contrition, and reformation, I shall hope it will not be imputed to him; But
however this cannot be insisted on by the objecter, because I speak, and so
must he, of him that has lived regularly (not of him that has not) And of him
it is apparent, that all that he has done, is, to adhere to his former
principles, when others have not, to have testified his constancy with (not
only venturing but) actually losing either possessions, or liberty (and the
benefit of Ecclesiastical assemblies) rather then he would join, or appear to
join with Schismatics, when others have made all worldly advantages by the
rupture; In a word, that he has been patient, and not fainted; and never
departed from his rule, though it have cost him dear to stick fast to it; And I
hope no body will be so uncharitable, as to grieve, and gall him, whom God has
thus suffered to be chastised, upon no other provocation, but this, his having
been thus afflicted and persecuted. This is too clear a truth to need
confirming, and yet this is the utmost, that it can be driven to, supposing the
most that the objection can be imagined to suppose, viz: that the Church of
England is now invisible.

. 5. But then in the fourth place, it must be added, that as yet, Blessed be
God, the Church of England is not invisible; It is still preserved in Bishops
and Presbyters rightly ordained, and multitudes rightly baptized, none of which
have fallen off from their profession; And the only thing imaginable to be
objected in this point, being this, that the schism has so far been extended
by the force, that many, if not most Churches parochial are filled by those,
who have set up a new, or a no-form of worship, and so that many men cannot any
otherwise* then in private families, serve God, after the Church Way, that sure
will be of little weight, when the Romanists are remembered to be the objecters,
who cannot but know, that this is the only way, that they have had of serving
God in this Kingdom, these many years, and that the night-meetings of the
Primitive Christians in dens and caves are as pertinent to the justifying of
our condition, as they can be of any, and when it is certain, that the (...),
the forsaking of the assemblies, Heb. 10.25. is not (...), our wilful fault v.
26. but only our unhappy lot* who are forced either not to frequent the
assemblies, or else to encourage (and incur the scandal of seeming to
approve) the practices of those that have departed from the Church. That we do
not decline order, or public communion* and consequently are not to be charged
for not enjoying those benefits of it, which we vehemently thirst after, is
evident by the extensive nature* of our persecution, the same tempest having
with us thrown out all order, and form, Bishops, and Liturgy together, and to
that curstness of theirs, and not to any obstinatenesse, or
unreconcileablenesse of ours (which alone were the guilt of non-communion) is
all that unhappiness of the constant sons of the present English Church to be
imputed, in which alone this whole objection is founded.

. 6. What this may come to in the future.
I cannot discern any farther appearance of difficulty in this matter, and
therefore shall no farther lengthen this Appendage, then by offering it to the
consideration of the indifferent Reader, whether this objection can ever in
future times be improveable into a charge against us, or our posterity, as long
as either Bishops stand, and continue to ordain among us, or it is not our
faults that they do not stand. To which purpose it may be remembered* what
befell the Jews whether under the Zelots fury, or the Romans yoke; The former
threw out the lawful successive High Priests, and Priests of the sons of
Aaron, and put into those sacred offices the most ignorant rusticks, some so
void of all degree of knowledge, says Josephus, that they knew not what the
very word [ Priest] signified. The Roman Conquerours by their Procurators put
in annually whom they pleased to choose (without consideration of the Aaronical
line) into the chief Priest's office; I shall here demand of any, Whether
(supposing and granting it as undeniable, that the Zelots were formally
Schismatics, or with some improvement, in Josephus his style (...), seditious)
there can be any ground of reason, or equity, to involve, or conclude under the
same guilt those that lived under those imposed, usurping High Priests,
supposing those inferiors to have been as far from consenting to the
continuance, as to the beginning of such usurpation, and that the circumstances
were such, that they lay not under the appearance of doing, what they did not,
and so had not the scandal, any more, then the reality of that guilt. The
Reader, I suppose, will be able to answer this Quaere to himself, and supersede
all necessity of making up the Parallel.

. 7. The Conclusion.
And then I have at this time no farther exercise for him, but that he will
join in ardent prayers with me, that God will restore that which is lost,
reduce that heavenly grace, and incomparable blessing of Christian peace and
holy communion among all, that have received the honor of being called by his
name, that we may all mind the same thing, fix the same common designs, love,
and aid, and promote one another good, unanimously glorify him here with one
tongue, and heart, that we may all be glorified with him, and sing joint
Hosannah's, and Hallelujah's to him to all eternity.

Amen.
ERRATA.
PAge 42. line 3. dele) p. 73. li. 9. lege S. Peter, so -- p. 81. marg: li. 12.
lege (...) p. 85. l. 24. lege Where as p. 91. li. 4. lege (...) p. 107. li. 2.
for third lege second p. 141. li. 25. for quae re: quo p. 157. li. 3. lege that
the
The Contents.
CHAP. I. AN Introduction, the danger, and sin of Schism. page 1 CHAP. II. What
Schism us, together with some general considerations thereon. 12 CHAP. III. The
several sorts of Schism. 31 CHAP. IV. The pretended evidences of the Romanist
against the Church of England examined, and first that from the Bishop of
Rome's Supremacy by Christ's donation to S. Peter. 66 CHAP. V. The evidences
from the Bishop of Romes succeeding S. Peter examined. 92 CHAP. VI. Their
second plea from the Bishop of Rome having planted Christianity among us. 107
CHAP. VII. Their third Evidence from our casting off Obedience to the Bishop of
Rome at the Reformation. 132 CHAP. VIII. Of the second sort of Schism, as that
is an offense against mutual Charity, This divided into three species, and the
first here examined. 155 CHAP. IX. The second species of this Schism examined,
as it is an offense against external peace, or Communion Ecclesiastical. 163
CHAP. X. The third species of this Schism, as an offense against that charity
due from every Christian to every Christian, examined. 169 CHAP. XI. Concerning
the present Persecution of the Church of England, and the advantages sought
from thence. 174
THE END.
A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivie-lane, London.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by Henry
Hammond D. D. in fol. The Practical Catechism, with all other English
Treatises of Henry Hammond D. D. in two volumes in 4o. Dissertationes quatuor,
quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primaeva Antiquitate adstruuntur,
contra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum. Authore Henrico Hammond. in 4o. A
Letter of Resolution of six Quaere's, in 12o. The names of several Treatises
and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor D. D. viz.
1. (...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundaies of the Year; Together with
a Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness, and Separation
of the Office Ministerial, in fol. 2. Episcopacy asserted, in 4o. 3. The
History of the Life and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, 2d Edit. in
fol. 4. The Liberty of Prophesying, in 4o. 5. An Apology for authorized and
Set-forms of Liturgy; in 4o. 6. A Discourse of Baptism, its institution and
efficacy upon all Beleivers, in 4o. 7. The Rule and Exercises of holy living,
in 12o. 8. The Rule and exercises of holy dying, in 12o. 9. A short Catechism
for institution of young persons in the Christian Religion, in 12o. 10. The
Real Presence and Spiritual of CHRIST in the Blessed Sacrament proved against
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in 8o.
Certamen Religiosum, or a Conference between the late King of England, and the
late Lord Marquis of Worcester concerning Religion, at Ragland Castle; Together
with a Vindication of the Protestant Cause, by Chr. Cartwright in 4o. The
Psalter of David, with Titles and Collects according to the matter of each
Psalm, by the Right honorable Chr. Hatton, in 12o. Boanerges and Barnabas, or
Judgment and Mercy for wounded and afflicted souls, in several Soliloquies, by
Francis Quarles, in 12o. The life of Faith in Dead Times, by Chr. Hudson in
12o. Motives for Prayer upon the seven days of the Week, by Sir Richard Baker
Knight, in 12o. The Guide unto True Blessedness, or a Body of the Doctrine of
the Scriptures, directing man to the saving knowledge of God, by Sam. Crook, in
12o. Six excellent Sermons upon several occasions, preached by Edward Willan
Vicar of Hoxne, in 4o. The Dipper dipped, or the Anabaptists duck'd and plunged
over head and ears, by Daniel Featly D. D. in 4o. Hermes Theologus, or a Divine
Mercury: new descants upon old Records, by Theoph. Wodnote, in 12o.
Philosophical Elements, concerning Government and Civil society: by Thomas
Hobbs of Malmesbury, in 12o. An Essay upon Statius, or the five first books of
Publ. Papinius Statius his Thebais, by Tho. Stephens Schoolmaster in S.
Edmonds-bury, in 8o. Nomenclatura Brevis Anglo-Latino Graeca in usum Scholae
Westmonasteriensis, per F. Gregory, in 8o. Grammatices Graecae Enchiridion in
usum Scholae Collegialis Wigorniae, in 8o. A Discourse of Holy Love, by Sir
Geo. Strode Knight, in 12o. The Saints Honeycomb full of Divine Truths, by
Rich. Gove Preacher of Henton S. Gorge in Somersetshire, in 8o. Devotion
digested, into several Discourses and Meditations upon the Lords most holy
Prayer: Together with additional Exercitations upon Baptism, The Lords Supper,
Heresies, Blasphemy, The Creatures, Sin, The souls pantings after God, The
Mercies of God, The souls complaint of its absence from God; by Peter Samwaies,
Fellow lately resident in Trinity College, Cambridge, in 12o. Of the Division
between the English and Romish Church upon Reformation, by Hen. Fern D. D. in
12o. Directions for the profitable reading of the Scriptures, by John White M.
A. in 8o. The Exemplary Lives and Memorable Acts of 9. the most worthy women of
the world, 3 Jews, 3 Gentiles, 3 Christians, by Tho. Heywood, in 4o. The Saints
Legacies, or a Collection of promises out of the Word of God, in 12o. Judicium
Universitatis Oxoniensis de Solemni Lega and Foedere, Juramento Negativo etc.
in 8o. Certain Sermons and Letters of Defense and Resolution to some of the
late Controversaries of our times by Jasper Main D. D. in 4o. Janua Linguarum
Reserata, sive omnium Scientiarum and Linguarum seminarium, Auctore Cl. Viro J.
A. Com^nio, in 8o. A Treatise concerning Divine providence, very seasonable for
all Ages, by Tho. Morton Bishop of Duresme, in 8o. Animadversions upon Mr.
Hobbs his Leviathan, with some Observations upon Sir Walter Rawleighs History
of the World, by Alex. Rosse, in 12o. Fifty Sermons preached by that learned
and reverend Divine John Done, in fol. Wits-Common-wealth, in 12o. The Banquet
of Jests new and old, in 12o. Balzac's Letters the fourth part, in 8o. Quarles
Virgin Widow a Play, in 4o. Solomon's Recantation, in 4o. by Francis Quarles.
Amesii antisynodalia, in 12o. Christ's Commination against Scandalizers, by
John Tombs in 12o. Dr. Stuart's Answer to Fountain's Letter, in 4o. A Tract of
Fortifications, with 22 brass cuts, in 4o. Dr. Griffiths Sermon preached at S.
Paul's, in 4o. Blessed birthday, printed at Oxford, in 8o. A Discourse of the
state Ecclesiastical, in 4o. An Account of the Church Catholic where it was
before the Reformation, by Edward Boughen D. D. in 4o. An Advertisement to the
Jurymen of England touching Witches, written by the Author of the Observations
up* Mr. Hobbs Leviathan, in 4o. Episcopacy and Presbytery considered, by Hen.
Fern D. D. in 4o. A Sermon preached at the Isle of Wight before His Majesty, by
Hen. Fern D. D. in 4o. The Commoners Liberty or the English-mans Birthright,
in 4o. An Expedient for composing Differences in Religion, in 4o. A Treatise of
Self-denial, in 4o. The holy Life and Death of the late Vi-countesse Falkland
in 12o. Certain Considerations of present Concernment: Touching this Reformed
Church of England, by Hen. Fern, in 12o. Englands Faithful Reprover and
Monitour, in 12o. Newly published,
The grand Conspiracy of the Members against the Mind, of Jews against their
King. As it has been delivered in four Sermons, by John Allington, B. D. in
12o. The Quakers Questions objected against the Ministers of the Gospel, and
many sacred acts and offices of Religion, with brief Answets thereunto:
Together with a Discourse of the holy Spirit his workings and impressions on
the souls of men, by R. Sherlock B. D. in 8o.
Now in the Press,
Of Fundamentals in a notion referring to Practice, by H. Hammond, D. D. in
12o.


