(...): OR, A VIEW OF Antiquity. PRESENTED IN A Short, but Sufficient Account
of some OF THE FATHERS; Men famous in their Generations, who lived within or
near the first three hundred years after CHRIST.

Serving as a Light to the Studious, that they may peruse with better Judgment,
and improve to greater Advantage, the Venerable Monuments of those Eminent
Worthies.

By J. H. M. A.

Perutile into necessarium est, ut ad lectionem Patrum accessurus, habeat anted
informatam in animo meth^dum, and sciat, quid sing^^lis sit praecipuum, and
quasi emineat, ac ubi cavendi sint Scopuli, etc. Chemnit. de lectione Patrum.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, and Jonathan Robinson; at the Bible and
three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, and at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1677.

Imprimatur,

G. Jane R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sacris Dom.
December. 9. 1676.
To the Studious, Especially such as are in the Ministry or intend it.
It Is our Blessed Savior's Encomium of John the Baptist, that he was a burning
and shining light, John 5. 35. in respect of purity of life, and perspicuity of
Doctrine, which eminently appeared in him: herein is he a Minister's pattern,
in whom both these are requisite: for light without life would make him little
better then an ignis fatuus, apt to mislead; or like a Candle in the socket,
not so pleasing by it is blaze, as offensive for it is ill savor; And life
without light will render him of little advantage, if not prejudicial; both in
conjunction make an happy mixture, and qualify the person in whom they are for
that weighty function. Reading is his proper work, 1 Timothy 4. 13. Which, with
pains about his heart, and watchfulness over his flock, may well take up his
whole time; there will be little overplus for the unworthy world or worse
employments. One of the great wants he will have cause to complain of, will be
of time, as too short for the dispatch of the grand affair personal and
functional incumbent upon him: and indeed he that has tasted the sweetness, or
duly weighed the importance of those two, I much marvel how he should be taken
off from, or neglective of either, for things comparatively so mean, and mostly
pernicious.

That which best deserves our pains in study is,

1. In the first place the sacred Scriptures, discovering to us things most
necessary and useful; without the knowledge whereof, all our other
accomplishments will prove but insignificant things, serving only for vain
ostentation, as no way furthering our own, or others chiefest good. These
therefore call for our diligent and daily perusal; which we should labor to
make familiar; so that they may as a choice treasure dwell richly in us in all
wisdom, that we may be as Scribes instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, able
upon all occasions to speak a word in season unto any that shall have recourse
unto us either for counsel and direction in their doubts or for comfort and
consolation in their distresses. To which we should never forget to join
fervent prayer for the obtaining of the Spirit, the only guide to the right
understanding of these deep things of God, without which they will remain as
riddles and a sealed book unto us; of the great advantage hereof to study,
Luther (who each day spent three hours in this duty) out of his experience,
thus speaks, been oravisse est pene studuisse, and again, haec tria faciunt
Theologum, precatio, meditatio, tentatio; Melch. Adam.

2. Unto these, the writings of such as in the Christian Church are most
Ancient, challenge the next place; who have obtained (as accounted worthy of
it) the Venerable title of Fathers; as nearest successors unto the Apostoles,
And therefore for some Centuries together wont to be styled Apostolici, even as
many as precedeed the first Council of Nice. Parker de dsc. Christ. l. 4. 10.
These well deserve our serious inspection, acquainting us not only with the
meaning of the Scripture, but the Doctrine also and discipline agreeable
thereto, preserved in, and maintained by the Church; who were ever held in
great esteem, and approved of by the Orthodox in the following Ages unto this
day; from whom the Learned and Judicious Zanchy did scruple to dissent,
comparing them to old Wine, which he preserred before new. Epist. ante confess.
fid. and in his observations upon that his confession (composed by him for his
family when he was seventy years old) we have him twice declaring his mind
herein, viz. in p. 47. his words are these. Hoc ego ingenuo profiteor talem
esse meam conscientiam, ut a ve^erum patrum sive dogmatibus, sive Scriptur arum
interpretationibus non facile, nisi vel manifestis sacr. literarum t^stimoniis,
vel necessariis consequentiis, apertisque demonstrationibus convictus atque
coactus discedere queam: sic enim acquiescit mea conscientia, and in hac mentis
quiet cupio etiam mori, and p. 39. -- A quibus, inquit, presertim ubi plerique
omnes consentiunt, me pro mea tenera conscientia deflectere non au^ere, toti
Ecclesiae Christi ingenue confiteor.

To reflect upon foregoing Ages, in a Landscape of them is a thing both pleasant
and profitable; for thus we seem to live in more ages then one, and in joy the
benefit of that experience which the narrow limits of our own cannot afford.
This may we be, in a sort said to do, in the view of those Ancient Worthies who
are the subject of the ensuing discourse; men living nearest the Apostles
times, and most perfectly resembling them in their excellencies; the due
contemplation whereof is like to produce the most notable effects in such as
are seriously this way exercised. For what can be of more force to fit us for,
and quicken us to our duty, then frequently to cast our eyes upon the
pourtraitures of such men, in whom is represented what is most worthy our
imitation; seeing that to learn by example is not only the most facil, but
effectual way; this being, as the surest, so the most affecting sense, and what
enters hereby, having the strongest influence. Who can look upon that burning
Light Ignatius, whose heart did so flame, and life spa^kle with love to Christ
and his Church; and not find himself at least warmed with the like holy
affection? Who take into consideration the indefatigable industry of Origin,
and not be thereby excited to mend his pace, and bewailing former slackness to
fall to his work with double diligence? Would we behold the sweet fruit of
uncessant study in the vast and various knowledge attainable thereby, making
men shine as stars of the first magnitude in their several spheres and to
communicate their streams of light to after generations; and would be awakened
to the like course in order to the like, or at least considerable seize?
Let us fix our eye upon those magazines of learning Clement, and Tertullian.
How eminently does the beauty of Christian zeal and courage in maintaining the
truth and opposing Heresy appear in those Heroic Champions Iustine, Irenaeus*
Hilary* and Athanasius? Bulwarks for the defense and security of the one,
against all the fierce assaults, and cunning underminings of its adversaries;
and mauls and engines for the battering and beating down of the other. In the
last of whom, together with it, was most conspicuous the grace of invincible
patience, making him Adamant-like unyieldable unto the most violent attempts of
restless persecutors. In diverse of them may be seen in it is luster that more
then conquering grace of Christian Constancy, not loving their lives unto the
death in the quarrel and for the Honor of their Lord and Master, obtaining
hereby the glorious Crown of Martyrdom, set upon their heads by that Captain of
our Salvation; Briefly, what a goodly Map (as it were) of the choicest
Christian Virtues have we meeting together, and shining forth in holy Cyprian,
as so many stars in a constellation; Piety and Prudence, Meekness and Humility,
Compassion and Charity, Patience and Constancy in suffering often, and the
utmost for the sake of Christ? Of what singular advantage must it needs be to
us, to have the endowments we should strive after, that may accomplish us for
our station, in such lively Colors represented and the things we should
practice so fairly exemplified and set before our eyes, as in these eminent men
we find them to be?

And for their writings they are a (...), a precious treasure, from whence*
being duly improved, we may be furnished with such things as may be of no small
advantage to our selves, and make us no less useful unto others. For therein
shall we meet with not a few apt interpretations and expositions of many Texts
of Scripture; such as will afford us more then ordinary light for the right
understanding of them: diverse grave and pithy passages which may well serve
upon several occasions both for illustration and confirmation of any suitable
subject; Also, nervous and weighty Arguments wherewith they have so pressed and
overborn the adversary, that the nakedness of error has been discovered to the
confusion of it is fautors that have endeavored to maintain it; and the beauty
and strength of Truth to the great exultation and establishment of all that
love it. Lastly, the best account of the face and state of the Church of
Christ, both as to the sound Doctrine professed, and wholesome Discipline
exercised in them; wherewith it may well be presumed they were better
acquainted then most others, and could give us the fullest and truest
information; it having been their special work to publish and defend the one,
and they having had the chiefest hand in the management of the other; To all
which add the necessity of a considerable insight into these Ancient Records,
that we may become no contemptible Antagonists to grapple with, and ((...),
Tit. 1. 11.) to stop the mouth of those of the Romish Synagogue, who, having
shamefully corrupted the Doctrines of Christianity, and shunning the trial and
determination of the Scripture, betake themselves for shelter unto the
monuments of these Worthies, audaciously pretending that they are theirs, and
with greatest, though groundless confidence of their patronage.

The improvement of the Ancients in these regards is the design and scope of
the following treatise, presenting the Reader with a Scheme both of their lives
and labors, as may beget in the mind a fair Idea of both, and so prove a good
step toward the attainment of the ends proposed; For herein a brief account is
given of each of the Fathers discoursed of in this Decade;

1. Of their lives and special employments in the places of their abode; and
the Dignities and Offices they were advanced unto; Together with their
diligence and continuance in them; and various accidents betiding them. 2. Of
their excellencies and accomplishments whether natural or acquired by their
industry, with their Elogies in this regard; which show in what singular esteem
they were held (as they well deserved) by the most pious and judicious in
succeding ages. 3. The admirable products of their parts and pains, which they
either left behind them, or intended so to do for the benefit of posterity;
whereof, 1. Some are lost through the injury of time, little remaining of them
besides their names and titles; which yet here you find recorded, as far as by
diligent search and inquiry after them, they could be found. 2. Some have been
happily preserved, and are extant at this day; and because in the Edition of
the works of these Worthies the Brats of others (which they would impudently
father upon them) are intermixed among their true and proper births, and of
some it is doubtful whose they are; (and hereof the Romish Champions make no
small use and advantage for the upholding of their tottering and desperate
cause) you have here as full a Catalogue as could be gotten of whatever bears
their names, with a hint of what kind they are, whether genuine, spurious, or
dubious; to the end the Reader may know (as much as may be) whom he has to do
withal, and so his abuse herein may be prevented; And of the genuine, the
augument and sum of each is briefly set down, together with the time and
occasion of their writing, which may give some light to the understanding of
them, help the Reader in his choice, and provoke to diligence and attention. 4.
The Style they used, which in some of them is such as that a perspicacious and
critical observer may be able thereby to make a judgment, whether the piece he
is perusing be indeed the Authors whose name it bears, or no; which in some of
them is so elegant, and adorned with the flowers of Rhetoric that it
entertains the Reader with singular contentment and delight; and in whom it is
otherwise, an intimation hereof is given, together with what may be apprehended
to be the reason hereof. 5. A taste of the choice and useful passages, wherewith
they do abound, which may serve for an invitation to the studious to bestow
their time and pains upon them as being well assured they will be neither lost
nor ill laid out, in case that care and judgment be not wanting; 6. And because
they were (though more then ordinary) yet but men, and so subject to slips and
faillings, these are, salvo honor, taken notice of, with the causes of, at
least, diverse of them, that as rocks and shelves they may be avoided; and the
unwary student, together with what is Orthodox, take not in that which is
unsound and noxious. 7. All is closed with the close of all, their deaths,
whether natural or violent, by whom, for what, and when and where procured.

All which he that would thoroughly inform himself of (as in some measure from
this Treatise he may do) shall find it, I doubt not, a notable clew to wind and
extricate him out of those Labyrinths and Difficulties, which otherwise he may
happily be involved in; and make his way and work by far more facil and pleasant;
which that it may be the issue of this undertaking is heartily desired by him
who is,

(...). I. H.

Each Chapter consists of all (or most) of these following particulars
concerning each Father.
1 A Brief account of his Life and Travels in the Church. 2 His Elogy and the
esteem he was held in. 3 His labors and writings: whereof, 1. Some are lost. 2.
Some remain: of which,
1. Some are dubious. 2. Some are spurious. 3. Some are genuine, and of these.
1. Their sum. 2. Their censure.
4. His language and style. 5. Some notable and select passages. 6. His slips
and errors: whereof 1. The Occasion and Ground. 2. The Apology and Plea that
may be made for some of them.
7. His end and death.
The FATHERS treated of in this Treatise, viz.
Page 1. Ignatius Antiochenus. 1 2. Justinius Martyr. 22 3. Irenaeus
Lugdunensis. 51 4. Clemens Alexandrinus. 79 5. Tertullianus. 111 6. Origenes
Adamantius. 171 7. Cyprianus Carthaginensis. 248 8. Lactantius Firmianus. 314
9. Athanasius Alexandrinus. 339 10. Hilarious Pictaviensis. 390
(...); OR, A VIEW of Antiquity.
1. Ignatius Antiochenus.
1.AS touching Ignatius, So is Luther called (...) qui divino motu fertur,
numine afflatus: by Urban Rhegius in loc. com. vid. Epist. Joan. Frederi in
ante Rhegit loc. com. Nicephor. l. 2. c. 35. Magd. cent* 2, c. 10.
(surnamed (...) and (...)) that Ancient and Eminent Bishop and Martyr, what
Countryman he was, how brought up and Educated, in what manner and by what
means converted unto the Christian Faith, and advanced unto the weightier
functions in the Church, is no where extant nor recorded in history. Ubi supr^.
The relation of Nicephorus seems fabulous, and inconsistent with what is to be
found in the Epistles attributed by some unto Ignatius himself, wherein it is
said, that he never saw Christ corporally or in the flesh. He therefore could
not be (as the abovenamed Author reports him to have been) that little Child
that Christ called unto him and set in the midst of his Disciples, commending
simplicity unto them, and saying, Mat. 18. 2, 3.
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven.

But though he so saw not the Lord Jesus, yet did he live, and familiarly
converse with them, Cent. ib.
that had so seen him; being (as is generally received) the Disciple of the
Apostle Iobn, as were also his contemporaries, Papias Bishop of Hierap^lis, and
Polycarp ordained by the said Apostle Bishop of Smyrna, as was our Ignatius
Bishop of Antioch by the Apostle Peter, Hieronym. Catalog. Scultet, in Medul.
of whose right hand (says Theodoret) he received (...); of which Church he
was the third Pastor or Bishop, Episcopus post Petrum Antiochi^ secundus.
Origin. hom. 6. cap. 1. in Lucam. in Synopss. Eccles hist. l. 3. c. 19. Merid.
Han^^^rs Chronol.
the Apostle Peter being the first, to whom next succeeded Evodius, one of the
seventy Disciples, as says Dorotheus. Eusebius makes Ev^dius the first, and
our Ignatius the second Pastor there; which is true indeed of the fixed Bishops
of that City: for Peter stayed but a while there, and then departed unto
Jerusalem and other Eastern Regions. If therefore the Apostle Peter begin the
Catalogue (as some make him to do) then is he the third; but if Evodint (as
others) then the second Bishop of that place.

His zeal toward the house of God was exceeding great, Cent. 2. c. 10.
even burning hot; for which he was had in as great esteem, and most acceptable
unto those of chiefest note, especially Polycarp and the rest of the Asian
Bishops: whereof they gave an ample testimony by their flocking to him as the
most famous man of all the East, Baron. annal. an. 109. ^.
when they heard that he was lead bound toward Rome. For in his way, being at
Smyrna, the neighboring Churches having notice thereof, sent each of them their
messengers to salute and visit him in their behalf; among whom were the Bishops
of some of those places, accompanied by the Elders and Deacons; the like also
was performed by the Bishop of Philadelphia, Ib. 1^.
upon his coming to Troas; An evident demonstration of the high and more then
ordinary respect which they bare unto him; and his answerable worth who (as
they deemed) deserved it from them.

2. He was accounted the first and chief of the Oriental Bishops, Baron. an.
109 5. Posseum. apparat.
as excelling them all, both in the holiness of his life, and his powerfulness
in Preaching the Gospel; as well as in the prerogative of his seat: yea among
the Fathers of the Primitive Church he holds the first place: Usher Ignat.
Epist.
A Doctor in every regard blessed; Theodoret. Dialog. 1. Sermon. 7. in Psalm. qui
habitat. Montac^te. apparat.
whom Bernard styles by the name of the great Ignatius, our Martyr, with whose
precious relics (says he) our poverty is enriched: a most holy Man, and
altogether the most Ancient of all now extant; one truly Divine, and even unto
our memory famous and in the mouths of many: Euagr. hist. l. 1. c. 16. Eus. l.
3. c. 32. Scultet. Medul. Trithem. de Script.
a clear evidence of his admirable worth, and that variety of the gifts of the
holy Ghost wherewith he was choicely adorned, a man of eminent Sanctity, as
also a singular and ^ervent lover of our Lord Jesus Christ; in publishing the
word of God very zealous and no less Learned; in so much as his Learning, as
well as his virtues were celebrated of old; ^ivet. Crit. Sac.
amongst which, the magnanimity of his spirit in the cause of Christ, happily
conjoined with sweet humility and holy simplicity, did add not the least luster
to this accomplished Martyr. Baron. an. 109. 12.


3. The remains of his Learning and labors are only some few Epistles, written
by him unto several Churches and Persons not long before his death; Ibid 5.
which as a certain well drawn picture do excellently represent and give us a
lively image of him: for therein are notably discovered his vigorous and
singular love to Christ, his fervent zeal for God and his glory, his admirable
and undaunted courage and magnanimity in his cause, accompanied with such sweet
humility and exemplary meekness of Spirit, that as in all he showed himself to
be a true Disciple and follower of Christ, so may he well serve as a pattern
for the imitation of succeeding generation. Ibid. 11.
Talis erat sublimis illius animi submissio, and e contra, ejusdem submissi
animi sublimitas, ut mira quadam connexione summis ima conjungat, quae
admiratione and delectatione animum simul afficiant. Such was the submission of
that sublime soul, and on the other side, such the sublimity of that submisse
soul, that with a certain admirable connection he joined together the lowest
with the highest, both which may well affect the mind with wonderment and
delight.

These Epistles do amount (as now extant) unto the number of fifteen, and may
be divided or ranked in three sorts. 1. Such as are Genuine, and for the main
and bulk of them by most apprehended and granted to be his; Exercitat, 15.
of which Casaubon thus* For the Epistles of Ignatius, to deny them to be
(those) of that most ancient Martyr, and Bishop of Antioch, would be Heresy at
this day; and verily as for some of them, we shall else where (if it shall
please the Lord) defend their antiquity by new reasons.

These are six in number, though commonly thought to be seven, because so many
are said to have been collected by Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, and so many are
contained in the catalogues both of Eusebius and Ierom. Hist. 3. cap. 32. in
catalog. Script. Ignat. Epist. cap. 2.
But that skillful Antiquary the Reverend Usher conceives, that the Epistle to
Polycarp (which is reckoned among, and makes up the seven) is none of his;
Ignatius writing no peculiar Epistle unto him, but that unto the Church of
Smyrna only, directed both unto them, and also unto him jointly, as their
Bishop or Pastor: And this (says that learned Author) I do not at all doubt
to have been in the mind of Ierom; whose words, ( Et proprie ad Polycarpum
commendans illi Antiochensem Ecclesiam) are to be read as in a Parenthesis, In
catalog.
not as denoting a distinct Epistle from that to those of Smyrna, but as
relating to the same. For (as the quick eyed Casanbon observes) those words of
Ignatius mentioned by Ierom immediately after, Exercitat. 16. cap. 426.
( in qua art) are not taken out of the Epistle to Polycarp, (as Baronius
imagined) but out of that unto the Church of Smyrna, where only to this day
they are to be read, Hist. lib. 3. cap. 33.
and not in the other. And Eusebius produces the same words out of the Epistle
to the Smyrncans: Thus, Hic Ignatius cum Smyrnaeis scriberet, etc. Hence
Honorius Augustodunensis, in his Book de luminaribus Ecclesiae, (being an
Epitome of Jerome, Bennadius, Cap. 17.
Isodore Hispalensis, Beda and others) enumerating the Epistles of Ignatius,
altogether omits that unto Polycarpus, which therefore ought to be (and is by
Usher accordingly) ranked among the second sort of his Epistles.

The six Genuine Epistles then are these, His Epistle 1. To the Ephesians,
wherein he mentions Onesimus their Pastor. 2. To the Church of Magnesia, lying
on the River Meander, whose Bishop was Dama. 3. To the Church of Trallis, whose
Overseer was Polybius. 4. To the Church of Rome. All these were written at
Smyrna in his journey from Syria to Rome.


His Epistle 5. To the Church of Philadelphia. 6. To the Church of Smyrna.
Written from Troas.




Which yet the Centurists leave to the consideration of the diligent Reader,
Cent. 2. cap. 10.
how unlikely it is that they who conducted him should go so much out of the
direct way and Road leading to Rome, and fetch so great a compass about in
their journey.

Though these (and these only) are judged to be genuine, yet have they not
escaped the hands of those who have offered no small injury unto them; having
most unworthily corrupted these ancient Relics, partly by addition and
interpolation of what never fell from the pen of Ignatius, and partly by
diminution and substraction of that which they saw would prove of disadvantage
and prejudicial unto them. These Epistles (says Chemnitius) have in them many
sentences not to be contemned, Examen pat. 1. page 198.
especially as they are read in the Greek, but withal there are mingled other
things, not a few, which verily have not in them Apostolical Gravity: It Is most
certain therefore (says Cook) that his Epistles are either supposititious, In
censur.
or at least filthily corrupted; Crit. (...)
so mangled and changed by insertion or resection. That (says Rivet) they are
of little or no credit, but only in those things wherein they do agree with the
writings of the Apostles, from whose Doctrine that Ignatius did not recede,
both his Piety and Learning do persuade us. So that even those six Genuine
Epistles, through the foul abuse that has been offered unto them, have clearly
lost much of that authority which they they had of old.

For the discovery of this fraud, take a few instances: (...)
In Epist. ad Philadelph. mention is made of this Heresy; that there was in
Christ no humane Soul: yet was Apollinarius Laodicenus the first author
thereof, who lived about the year 370, a long time after Ignatius. And as this
is foysted in, so are those words left out, which are cited by Theodoret, in
Dialog. 3. being taken by him out of the Epistle to the Smyrneans: Scultet. in
medull.
(...), etc. i. e, They, says he, (speaking of those Heretics that denied the
truth of Christ's flesh) admit not of Eucharists and oblations, but reject
them, because from the Eucharist is proved the truth of Christ's flesh. For
thus does Tertullian learnedly argue, lib. 4. contra Marcionem.

Quod est phantasma, figuram capere non potest: Atqui Corpus Christi capit
figuram, scil. panem: Igitur Corpus Christi non est phantasma. I wonder
therefore (says Scultetus) what judgment they have, who bring this place of
Ignatius to establish trans and consubstantiation. Lib. 3. advers. Pelagi.
That passage also mentioned by Ierom, (Ignatius that Apostolical man boldly
writes, that the Lord chose Apostles who were sinners above all men) is not now
to be found, which yet Ierom had out of one of the seven, Rivet. crit. sac.
(if not rather six) Epistles contained in his catalogue, for he speaks of (and
therefore it is probable he had seen) no more.

The second sort of Epistles are such as are dubious, and concerning which it
is very questionable whether they be his or no: of these there be also six in
number, Ignat. Epist. cap. 6. and 18.
being the second collection, made (as the reverend Usher conjectures) by one
Stephanus Gobarus Tritheita about the year 580: by Anastasius Patriarch of
Antioch, about the year 595: and by the Publisher of the Constantinopolitan
Chronicle, about the year 630. Idem ibid. cap. 6.
So that in the sixth Century after Christ, they grew up to the number of 12,
coming out of the same Shop that vented the Canons of the Apostles, augmented
by the addition of 35 to the former; as also the Apostolical Constitutions
variously trimmed and altered. So that these are of a much later date than the
former, the only Genuine Birth of this famous Martyr.

These latter six are

1. Epistola ad Mariam Cassabolitam, Coci Censur. Usher Ignat.
or (as some call her) Zarbensem. In two ancient Manuscripts she is styled
Maria Proselyta Chassabolorum, or Castabolorum. It seems to be derived from the
place of her Birth or Abode, or both, which may be a City in Cilicia, in the
lesser Asia, not far from Tarsus, famous for the Birth of the Apostle Paul
there. Geograph. lib. 12. Hist. lib. 5. c. 25.
For so I find Strabo making Castabala to be a Town of Cilicia, situate
somewhat near unto the Mountain Taurus. Pliny also reckons it for one of the
inland Towns of this Country, Cesarea Augusta Plinio, quae prius Anazarba.
Ptolem.
near unto which are the Anazarbeni, now called Caesar-Augustani: the
Inhabitants of the City Anazarbus (fruitful in Olives, Geograph. lib. 5. c. 8.
Lect. antiq. lib. 12. cap. 19.
says Rhodignie) the Birth place of the Renowned Dioscorides, as also of
Oppian the Poet: so Stephanus Bizantii, (...)^ To whom add Niger, Vadian. Epit.
thus speaking, Lib. (...).
The City Cesarea was aforetime called Anazarbeum, In Geograph* Asi^.
situate near the Mountain Anazarbeum: Ibid.
Again, Castabala also is another Town beside the Mountain Taurus. So also
Castabala, oppidum Ciliciae. Ptolem. Geograph. lib. 5. c. 8.
So that with a little alteration (which might happen through time and the
error of Transcribers) she might have the name of Cassobolita from the one,
and of Zarbensis from the other of those Towns. Accordingly I find in one of
the Latin Versions, Usher Ignat. ep. cap. 19.
this Epistle inscribed thus, Ad Mariam Cassobolitam, sive Castabalitam: And so
does the Reverend Primate choose to name her in the same Chapter.

The Scholiast upon this Epistle, thinks this to be that Mary whom, Biblioth.
patr.
among others, the Apostle Paul salutes, Romans 16. 6. a woman of singular piety,
In Epist.
and styled by our Author, (...), most accomplished for wisdom and learning,
and his most learned Daughter. Epist. ad Heronem.


2. To Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna.

3. To the Church of Tarsis.

4. To the Church of Antioch.

5. To Hero Deacon of Antioch.

6. To the Church at Philippi.

Baronius is very confident, that these as well as the former are Ignatii
germanas easdemque sincerissimas, Ad an. 109. 19.
The true and unfeigned Epistles of Ignatius: supposing that none can
rationally doubt thereof, who will compare them together; seeing that in the
judgment of all the Learned, their agreement in style, character and many other
notes of words, sentences and things does plainly speak out and evidence so
much; Than which (says he) a better proof cannot be brought or desired* so
that there is no ground for the least suspicion of imposture. But these big
words of his upon examination will appear to be of little or no force, Ignat.
Epist.
as the Reverend Usher shows: for as touching the likeness of style, etc.
between these Epistles, it is not such or so great, but he that would
counterfeit Ignatius, might easily imitate him so far. The Forger observed some
forms of speech and composition, frequently occurring and familiar to him,
which he conceived was for his purpose carefully to retain. He considered that
Ignatius delighted in compounding words with (...) in the end, and (...) in the
beginning: for as he himself was surnamed (...); so are the Ephesians praised
by him as (...) which words and the like he uses also in other of his
Epistles. Hence the same words are taken up by the framer of these Epistles. So
likewise in the true Ignatius we meet with (...), etc. wherein he is imitated
by his counterfeit, as also in diverse other expressions and sentences, which
the Impostor might do without any great difficulty: so that it ought not to
seem strange, if there be in some sort an uniformity of styles found in them.

Besides, the deceit may be discerned by some passages contained in these,
which cannot be imagined ever to have fallen from the pen of Ignatius, e. g.
This is reckoned among the Heresies sown by the Ministers of Satan, Coci
censur. Epist. ad Tarsens.
that Christ is he who is God over all. Again, Epist. ad Philip.
if any one shall fast on the Lord's day, or Sabbath (one only excepted) he is
a murderer of Christ: Ibid.
Also, if any one celebrate the Pascha with the Jews, or receive the symbol of
the Festivity, he is partaker with those who slew the Lord and his Apostles:
wherein he condemns the Romans, who used to fast on the Sabbath: and Polycarp,
whom he calls most blessed, together with the Asian or Eastern Churches, who
kept the Pascha or Easter after the manner of the Jews. viz. as to the day
whereon they observed it: which plainly show the Author of these Epistles to
have been some latter, obscure and absurd fellow, Epist. ad Antioch.
altogether unlike Ignatius. Moreover, in these Epistles there is some mention
of some styled Laborantes, who are ranked among the orders of the Clergy: And
Diaconissae, Epist. ad Polycarp.
and cujusdam Divini cursoris, or Lettercarrier, of which Functions or Offices
Ecclesiastical, there is a deep silence among the Ancients; which, how could it
have been, had Ignatius written so plainly of them? Lastly, writing to
Polycarp, he thus speaks, Attend unto your Bishop, that God may to you: what
had he forgot, that he wrote to a Bishop? Almost throughout this whole Epistle,
I find, In medull. in notis in Epist.
says Scultetus, the genuine Ignatius wanting. And well might he say so, had
he only taken notice of those two words, which argues the Author to have been
but a mean Grecian, and very unskillful in that language, viz. (...), and (...)
as if the copious Greek were destitute of words, by which to express the Latin
deposita and accepta.

Upon such considerations as these, the famous Whitaker thus concludes
concerning five of these latter Epistles: Lib. de Script. quaest. 6.
(for he accounts the Genuine to be seven, because that to Palycarp is reckoned
as distinct from that unto the Church of Smyrna, both by Eusebius and Ierom)
It Is apparent (says he) that five of these are without doubt adulterate and
spurious: Again, it is certain these are suppositious, and foisted in by others.
And therefore though Baronius do affirm, that four of these should be added by
the Philippians, Ad an. 109. 19.
unto the former, collected by Polycarp, and sent unto them; and that they were
afterward commonly known both to the Greeks and Latins (which yet neither
Eusebius among the Greeks, nor Ierom among the Latins (both of them curious
enough in their enquiries) came to the sight and knowledge of) who can imagine,
and would give credit thereunto upon the bare report of the Cardinal? -- Credat
Iudaeus Apella, Non ego.

Besides these, there are three more of a later date added to the former by
Antiocbus the Monk, Usher. Ignat. Epist. ^ cap. 18.
who lived under the Emperor Heraclius, and so seems to be coetaneous with the
Constantinopolitan Chronicler, one of those formerly mentioned, who collected
the second rank of Epistles, between which two collections there could
therefore be no great distance of time. Thus now at last they are grown up to
the number of fifteen: the three last added are,

1. One unto the Virgin Mary, together with her answer.

2. Two unto the Apostle John. Which, Descript. Eccles.
says Bellarmine, are not to be found among the Greek Copies of his Epistles,
Ad an. 109. 34.
nor do they at all savor of the Gravity of Ignatius his style. And Baronius
leaves it to the prudence of the pious Reader, whether he will allow them any
credit or no: Only (says he) we know that they are cited by Bernard, Apparat.
and some later^ Authors make mention of them: But (says Possevine) they are
of no such certain credit as the other; yea, seeing they are not found written
in Greek, nor mentioned by any of the ancient Fathers, ad Bernardum usque, unto
the obscure age of Bernard: It Is the safer course in my judgment (says
Mastraeus) to rank them among the number of Apocryphal Writings, Coci censur.
or at least to account them not altogether certain and genuine. So faintly and
dubiously do even the Romanists themselves speak of the authority of these
three last Epistles.

Hence may we observe with what caution the Epistles of Ignatius, even the most
received and undoubted (since so corrupted) are to be made use of; and upon how
weak and sandy a foundation ( viz. the pretended authority of Ignatius) the
Papists build their unsound Doctrines, Praefat. ad Epist. Ignat. in Biblioth.
patrum. edit. Paris. 1586. per Magarinum la Bigne.
of superstitious honoring the Virgin Mary, of the name of Pope given to the
Bishops of Rome, of the real presence, of collegiate and cloystered Virgins, of
the virtue of the Sign of the Cross to terrify the Devil, of their Feasts and
lenten Fast, of the authority of Traditions and of the Church of Rome. And well
may they be driven to such shifts, who shun the Scripture^ as insufficient:
yea, justly are they given up to these delusions, who not contenting themselves
with the Sacred Oracles alone, and the Doctrines contained in them, (which are
able to make perfect, Nihil naeniis illis, quae sub Ignatii nomine editae sunt,
putidius. Calvin. Institut. l. 1. c. 13. 29.
and wise unto salvation) do fancy and devise new ones in their own brains,
and then Coin and impose authorities pretendedly Ancient for the maintaining of
them.

Frivolous therefore and vain is the flourish of Baronius; Ad an. 109. 20.
that it came to pass by the admirable Counsel and providence of God, that
these Epistles should all of them be written by Ignatius, and notwithstanding
the shipwreck which so many writings have suffered, yet that these should be
preserved entire and incorrupt: whereas it is very evident that the greater part
of them now extant are counterfeit, and not his, and the genuine miserably
corrupted and altered. So that it may upon better ground be said, that herein
the good providence of God has been eminently seen, that he has been pleased
to stir up and assist some of his servants in vindicating the writings of this,
and other of the Ancients from the injury that has been offered them by base
and disingenuous spirits, who have preferred their own interest before the
honor and truth of God; and in plucking off the vizar, and discovering the
fraud and Leger-demain of those that would abuse and cheat the world, by the
obtrusion of Novelty instead of Antiquity thereupon.

4. His style savours of a certain holy simplicity, Scultet in Medull.
Vedelius. ex Usher. Igna. Epist.
as did the State of the Church at that time, full of gravity, suitable unto a
primitive Bishop; lively, fiery and solid, becoming so glorious a Martyr.

5. That which is chiefly remarkable in these Epistles, are those passages
which are mentiond by Eusebius and Ierom, as being most unquestionably such as
fell from the penof this blessed Martyr: wherein are in a lively manner drawn
and deciphered the purtraiture of his most excellent spirit, his singular and
vigorous love to the Lord Jesus, (whose name is said to have been engraven upon
his heart in letters of gold) as also his undaunted courage and Magnanimity in
his cause accompanied with unconquerable constancy and sweet humility.

1. His earnest desire of Martyrdom, he thus expresses: Jerome. in Catalog. ex
Epist. ad Roman Ex editione Usheri.
From Syria even unto Rome I fight with beasts, by land and sea, night and day;
bound with ten Leopards, i.e. with a guard of Soldiers, who are the worse for
favors: But I am the more instructed by their injustice, yet neither hereby am
I justified: Would to God I might enjoy the beasts which are prepared for me;
who, I wish may make quick dispatch with me; and whom I will allure to devour
me speedily (lest, as they have been terrified at others, and did not touch
them, so they would not dare to touch my body) and if they will not, I will
even force them thereunto; (...).
Pardon me, I know what is best for me: Now I begin to be a Disciple (of
Christ:) desiring nothing of these things which are seen, so I may win Jesus
Christ. (...).
Let fire, cross, and troops of violent beasts, breaking of bones, dissipation
of members, contrition of the whole body, and all the torments of the Devil,
let them all come upon me, that I may enjoy Jesus Christ.

2. When he was now condemned to the wild beasts, Ieron. ib. ex Epist. eade^^.
and with an ardent desire of suffering, heard the Lions roaring; says he, I
am the wheat of God, whom the teeth of wild beasts shall grind, that I may be
found the pure or fine bread of God. Immediately before which, go these words.
I write to all the Churches, and enjoin them all; because I willingly die for
God, if ye hinder not: I beseech you therefore that your love toward me be not
unseasonable. Suffer me to become the meat of wild beasts, by whom I may obtain
God.

3. His care of the Churches was very great, whom he earnestly presses to
holiness and a conversation becoming the Gospel: And commends unto Polycarp,
Eusebius. lib. ^. cap. 33.
(whom he well knew to be an Apostolical Man), the Flock or Congregation of
Antioch; praying him to be careful of the business there, about the election of
a Bishop or Pastor in his room: manifesting herein his zeal for God and his
glory, as also his cordial affection and fidelity to the brethren.

Besides these, there are in the Epistles other things worthy of notice, though
not so undoubtedly his, as the abovementioned; They are such as these.

4. His Creed or brief sum of Christian Doctrine, Epist. ad Magnesian. (...).
wherein he accords with the Apostles Creed. His words are, Beloved, I would
have you to be fully instructed in (the Doctrine of) Christ who before all ages
was begotten of the Father, afterward made of the Virgin Mary without the
company of man; and conversing holily, and without blame, he healed all manner
of infirmities and sicknesses among the people, and did signs and wonders for
the benefit of men, and revealed his Father, one and the only true God; and did
undergo his passion, and by his murderers the Jews, suffered on the Cross
under Pontius Pilate President, and Herod the King, and was dead, and rose
again, and ascended into heaven unto him that sent him, and fitteth at his
right hand, and shall come in the end of the world in his Fathers Glory to
judge the quick and the dead, and to render unto every one according to his
works. He that shall fully know and believe these things is blessed.

5. Though he were one of the most eminent men of his time both for Piety and
Learning, yet out of the depth of his humility he thus speaks of himself, when
bound for Christ and his truth and lead toward his Martyrdom; In epist. ad
Ephesians.
stiling his chains (...): spiritual pearls: although I be bound (says he) yet
am I not to be compared unto any one of you that be at liberty. Again, In
Epist. ad Magnesian.
speaking of the Pastors of the Church; says he, I blush to be named and
accounted in the number of them; for I am not worthy, being the last, lowest or
meanest of them, and an abortive thing: he also diverse times styles himself,
(...). Epist. ad Ephesians. etc.
(...), the least.

6. Speaking of the Lords day; Epist. ad Magnesian. (...).
let every Christian, says he, Celebrate as a Festival, the day of the Lords
resurrection, which is the most eminent of all days.

7. A Pious and Religious Man is money Coined and stamped of God; but a wicked
and irreligious Man is false and counterfeit Coin of the Devils making, Ibidem.
Matthew. 22. 20.

8. As touching Antiquity, Epist. ad Philadelph. (...).
thus: I have heard, says he, some to say; I will not believe if I find not
the Gospel among the Ancient Records. But to such I say, that JESUS CHRIST is
to me Antiquity; whom not to obey is manifest and irremissible ruin.

9. The spirit of error preaches Self, Epist. ad Ephesians.
speaking it is own proper things, or notions, for it is self-pleasing, and
glorifies it self: it is bitter, full of falsehood, seducing, slippery, proud,
arrogant, talkative, dissonant, immensurate, pertinacious, streperous.

10. He warns the Ephesians to avoid and beware of Heretics, Epist. ad Ephesians.
of whom many were sprung up in his time; and for so doing he commends that
Church as most pure, renowned, and to be praised of all ages* because they
denied them passage, who wandered up and down to spread their errors, and shut
their ears against them. These Heretics in his Epistle to the Trallensians he
particularly names, viz. Those who held the Heresy of Simon, as did Menander
and Basilides, and their followers, the Nicholaitans, Theodotus, and Cleobulus:
giving them this Character, Epist. ad Trallens.
that they are vain speakers and seducers, not Christians, but (...), such as
set Christ to sale, and made a gain of him, fraudulently pretending the name of
Christ, and corrupting the word of the Gospel; mingling the venom of their
error with sugared words, as those that infuse poison into sweet wine, that by
the delicious savor and relish thereof he that drinks it being deceived and
taken, may unawares be destroyed.

11. To the Romans he thus writes: Epist. ad Roman.
Request this only for me, that I may be supplied with strength, both within
and without not only to say but to will, not only to be called, but also to be
found a Christian. A Christian when he is hated of the world, is beloved of
God. It is better to die for Christ, then reign to the ends of the earth. Life
without Christ is death. My love was Crucified.

6. As touching the cause of his Martyrdom, Scultet. in Medull.
it is thus related. When the Emperor Trajan returned from the Parthian war,
and every where in the Cities commanded Heathenish Sacrifices to be offered;
which were sharply and justly reprehended by Ignatius even in the presence of
Trajan; He was delivered bound with chains unto a band of Soldiers to be
carried to Rome; whither being come, he was not long after brought into the
Theater, Baron. ad an. 110. 2.
and there had two fierce Lions let loose upon him, and forthwith rent and
devoured him leaving only the harder bones; and so according to his desire, the
wild beasts became his Sepulcher: In Epist. ad Roman. Baron. ad an. 110.
which betided him in the Eleventh year of Trajan; and of Christ, One hundred
and ten; After he had been Bishop or Pastor of the Church of Antioch the space
of forty years: Baron. ad an. 71. 11.
for he succeeded Evodius in that Office, An. Seventy one, and continued
therein unto the year, One hundred and ten. Shortly after, viz. Anno One
hundred and eleven, Id. ad an. 11^
followed a mighty and terrible Earthquake, wherein many perished in diverse
places, Zonaras. Tom. 2.
by the fall of houses which overwhelmed them; among other in the City of
Antioch, quam pene totam subruit, which was almost ruined by it; At what time
the Emperor being there was in great danger, P. Orosius. l. 7. c. 12.
and like to have perished by the fall of the house in which he lived, In vita
Trajani.
being drawn out of it through a window and so preserved; this terrible
Earthquake is particularly described by Dion Cassius.

Justin Martyr.
1. JVstinus surnamed first the Philosopher, afterward the Martyr, he was the
Son of Priscus Bacchius, Apolog. 2. John 4. 5. Adrichom in Theatro Ptolem.
Geograph. lib. 7. cap. 16. Jos. 20. 7. Plin. lib. 5. cap. 13. Magnin. Geograph.
Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 3. in colloq. cum Triphon.
of the City of Flavia Neapolis, of Syria Palestina; for so he styles himself:
which City was before called Sichem, and corruptly in the time of Christ,
Sichar, the Metropolis of Samaria, situate in Mount Ephraim, a City of Refuge:
the Natives called it Mabortha: Pliny M^mortha; now it has the name of
Napolosa, or Napolitza and Naplos. Hence he is said to be a Samaritan, and he
himself affirms so much, thus speaking, Neither did I fear to offend mine own
Nation, the Samaritans, when I gave my Libel or Apology unto Caesar.

Being a Philosopher greatly delighted with the Doctrine of Plato, he was
afterward converted to Christianity by the courage and constancy of Christians
in their Sufferings and Martyrdom: Apolog. 1.
for hearing that they were led Captives, neither fearing death nor any
torments which are accounted terrible: I thought (says he) it could not be,
that this kind of men should be subject unto vice, and set on pleasures; for
what voluptuous or intemperate man can so embrace death? He also elsewhere
relates how he was brought to the knowledge of the Christian Religion by a
divine hand guiding him thereunto, In colloq. cum Triphon.
after this manner.

Being enflamed with a vehement desire after true Philosophy, he joined himself
to almost all the several Sects of Philosophers, in order to his attaining of
it: In the first place, unto that of the Stoics; from whom after a while he
departed, because among them he could learn but little of God: leaving them, he
next applied himself unto one of the Peripateticks, who demanding a reward of
him, he forsook him thereupon, as not esteeming such a one (a mere mercenary)
to be at all a Philosopher: from him he went to one of great fame among the
Pythagoreans, who asked him if he were skilled in Music, Astronomy, Geometry,
etc. to whom he replied, That he was altogether unacquainted with those
Sciences. Hereupon understanding that it would be but lost labor, to endeavor
after the knowledge of those things that conduce unto true happiness, till he
had gotten somewhat that way; he was much grieved that he should fail and be
disappointed of his hopes. Therefore bidding him farewell, he betakes him unto
the Platonicks, under one of whom he profited very much, and was greatly
delighted in those Studies, deeming that in a short time he should this way
attain unto the knowledge of God. Being much taken up, and eager in the pursuit
of what he sought for, he gets him into a desert from the society of men, where
he was followed by (as he thought) a grave old man, who (when Justin turning
about had espied him) asked him, if he knew him: he answered no. After much
discourse with him, he told him it was a vain thing for him to imagine, that he
should find the knowledge of the truth among the Philosophers, who themselves
knew not God, nor were assisted by the Holy Ghost, and having for some time had
communication together about the immortality of the Soul, about rewards and
punishments: Justin assented unto what he had said, and demanded of him by what
means he might arrive unto the true knowledge of God. He willed him to read and
search the Prophets, and to join prayer thereunto: Asking him again what Master
he should make use of? Above all (quoth the old man) do thou pray that the door
of light or illumination may be opened unto thee: for those things (which are
contained in the Prophets) cannot be apprehended by any, but by him alone to
whom God and his Christ will give understanding. And having so said, he
suddenly vanished, neither did Justin from that time see him any more. Hereupon
forsaking the Philosophers whom formerly he had followed, he forthwith fell
upon this course, and so became a Christian.

As touching the former of these Relations, it is nothing improbable, that the
admirable and extraordinary constancy of Christians in their greatest
Sufferings for Christ might be an inducement unto him to enquire after the
Doctrine and Religion which they professed, the truth whereof they could so
willingly and cheerfully seal with their blood: a notable demonstration of the
excellency and divine original thereof, and so might it make way to his
conversion. Many instances might be given of the strange effects that such
Spectacles have produced in the hearts of those that have been the Spectators:
Trajan himself (who moved the persecution against the Christians) hearing good
Ignatius (at that time when the Lions were ready to be let loose upon him) to
utter those words, Antonin. Chronic.
I am the wheat of Christ, whom the teeth of wild Beasts must grind, to make me
pure Bread for God: With admiration breaks out into these words, Grandis est
tolerantia Christianorum, Great is the patience of the Christians: Who of the
Greeks would suffer so much for his God? To whom Ignatius meekly replied; Not
by mine own, but by the strength of Christ do I undergo all this.

But as for the latter, whether he had such an apparition or no, and directions
given him by his old man, what course he should take that he might come to the
knowledge of the truth; Penes lectorem esto, I leave unto the prudent Reader to
judge; yet was not Augustin's toll, lege, altogether unlike it; neither are
Histories wholly barren and silent in relations of the like kind. The gravity
and piety of the Author may justly challenge from us a suspension at least of
our censure, and stir us up to take notice of the variety of ways that God has
(who can, if in his infinite wisdom he see it meet) go out of the way of his
ordinary providence to bring his great counsels to pass, and the things he has
purposed to his chosen from eternity,

After that he had once given up his name to Christ, Cent. 2. cap. 10.
he became a most notable Champion and Defender of the Christian Faith against
the Enemies thereof in every kind, especially the Heathen Philosophers, the
bitter opposers of it, with whom he maintained with a great spirit many sharp
conflicts and disputes for the vindication of it from their calumnies: for
which work he was singularly furnished and instructed, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 8.
being well studied and exercised in the Doctrine of the Gentiles, and
eminently skilled in Philosophy, as the very addition to his name more than
intimates, being commonly styled Justin the Philosopher. Moreover, he was very
ready and expert in the Scriptures, as may be eminently seen in his Colloquies
with Triphon the Jew, whom (as another Apollos, Acts 18. 24.
and eloquent man and mighty in the Scriptures) he mightily convinced that
Jesus was the Christ, and had undoubtedly won him to embrace the Faith, had he
not rather chosen to imitate the inbred obstinacy of his Nation, than yield to
manifest and invincible truth: as says the publisher and perfecter of that
Latin Translation and Edition which Gelenius had began and enterprised, In
Epist. ad Lect. ante opera justin.
but could not finish, being prevented by death.

2. He was an holy man, Epiphan. Haeres. 46.
and a Friend of God, leading a life very much exercised in virtue; Trithem. de
Script.
an eminent lover and worshipper of Christ, which he abundantly manifested in
being one of the first that in those times of hot persecution (wherein the very
name of Christian was accounted a crime sufficient for them to be proceeded
against with utmost rigor) took unto him the boldness to be the Christians
Advocate, (a Title peculiarly given to one Vetius Epagathus, Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 1.
who being moved with indignation at the unjust proceedings used against the
Christians, desired that he might be heard in their behalf, undertaking to
prove that no impiety was to be found in them; for which cause, he was
afterward styled (...), the Advocate of the Christians) publicly to plead
their cause, to clear their innocence, and to vindicate them from the
groundless calumnies wherewith they were aspersed by their Adversaries, in his
Learned Apologies; Hieronym. Epist. 84.
which he tendered unto the Emperors and Senate of Rome: As did also about the
same time, Aristides and Quadratus, who all three presented their Apologies
unto the Emperor Adrian; the like did Athenagoras unto Aurelius Antoninus and
Commodus the next succeeding Emperors. Wherein (having with singular zeal
broken the Ice) they were afterward followed by diverse: amongst the rest,
Apollinaris Bishop of Hierapolis, Eusebius. lib. 4. ca. 13. and 25. and lib. 5.
cap. 19.
Apollonius a Nobleman and Senator of Rome, Melito Bishop of Sardis,
Tertullian, etc.

He was one that had attained the height and top of Philosophy, Photius in
Biblioth. number. 125.
both Christian and profane, abounding in the riches of Learning and History;
but little studious to set out the native beauty of his Philosophy with the
borrowed colors of the Art of Oratory: and therefore, though his Books be
otherwise full of strength and stuffed with knowledge; yet have they but little
relish or savor of the sauce of Art, nor do they with winning inticements, and
cunning insinuations allure vulgar Auditors: So much he himself freely
confesses; I shall (says he) deal with you out of the Scriptures, In Colloq.
cum Tryph.
not showing much Art in the choice and quaintness of words; for I am not
endewed with such a faculty; only God has given me grace to understand the
Scriptures. So that there is to be found in him more solidity and strength of
argument, than of the flowers and flourishes of Rhetoric. And yet is not this
later altogether wanting in his writings in the judgment of the Author of the
Parisian Edition: Epist. ad lect.
For that he was an Orator (says he) is apparent from hence, Imperatorem
benignum erga Christianos homines fecit. O^os. lib. 7. ca. 14.
that his Apologies for the Christians prevailed so far with the Emperors,
that the rigor and cruelty that was formerly exercised toward them, was much
mitigated and abated; which to effect, no small piece of Rhetoric was
requisite.

The success whereof Eusebius gives us an account of, to this purpose.

The Emperor upon the receipt of his Apology became more mild, Eusebius. lib. 4.
cap. 13.
setting forth his decree at Ephesus, wherein among other, these words
concerning the Christians are to be read. Concerning these Men, many of the
Presidents of the Provinces have heretofore written to my Father Adrian: to
whom he wrote back again; that such should not be molested, unless they were
found to have attempted something against the Roman Empire. And many have
informed me also concerning them; to whom I returned a like answer as my Father
had done. If therefore hereafter any one shall persist to occasion trouble unto
such, as such; Let him that is accused be freed from the accusation: and let
the accuser undergo punishment.

3. Of the Books which he wrote; lib. 4. ca. 18. In the knowledge of the h^ly
Scriptures are very diligently exercised therein. Bellarm. de Script.
in the general Eusebius thus speaks: Justin has left behind him unto
Posterity many Monuments of a mind accurately instructed, and full fraught with
profit in every kind: which seem to be the first after the Apostolical times
that have come to our hands.

Of these, some are lost and perished, only we find the names or titles of them
recorded by himself and others; of this sort are, as Ierom has them.

1. A Volume against the Gentiles, In catalog.
wherein he disputes of the nature of Devils: (...): de exilio daemonum: of
the Exile of Devils, says Suidas.

2. A fourth Volume against the Gentiles, Quae ad no^ pervenit. inquit Eusebius.
lib. 4. ca. 18. de Script.
which he entitled (...), a refutation; Trithemius calls it, castigationum,
lib. 1.

3. Of the Monarchy of God: of which more anon.

4. A Book which he called, Psaltes.

5. Of the Soul: (...): a Scholastical discourse, wherein various questions
being propounded, he annexed the opinions of the heathen Philosophers, which he
promised to answer, and to give his own judgment concerning them in a certain
other Commentary.

6. Against Marcion the Heretic, Eusebius. ibid.
lib. 1. says Trithemius: how many for number, it is uncertain. de Script.
Cent. 2. c. 10.
Books says Photius, necessary to be read; styled by Ierom insignia Volumina,
famous and excellent Volumes.

7. Against all Heresies; Biblioth. number. 125.
or Sects as Suidas, a profitable work, says Photius.

8. A Commentary upon Genesis. Cent. ibib.


9. A Commentary upon the Apocalypse: In catalog.
so Ierom in the life of the Apostle John. Being banished, (says he) into the
Isle of Patmos, he wrote the Apocalypse, which Justin Martyr and Irenaeus do
interpret.

10. Possevine says, In appa^at.
that in the Catalogues of Greek Manuscript Books which came to his hands, is
to be seen such an Inscription as this. Iustini Philosophi and Martyris,
Explicatio in St. Dionysii Areopagitae Episcopi Atheniensis Hierarchiam
Ecclesiasticam, and mysticam Theologiam.

11. An Epistle ad Papam: mentioned by himself in his Epistle to Zena and
Sirenus.

The Books now extant under his name are of two sorts.

1. Some genuine and by all granted to be his, Omnium consensu ipsi tribuuntur
Scultet. in Medull. Edit. Parisiens. 1636. gr. and lat. Scultet. Medulla.
viz.

1. Paraenesis, his exhortation to the Grecians: wherein he exhorts them to
embrace the Christian Religion as being of greater Authority, and of more
antiquity than the Heathenish: and in the end, shows them the way how they may
attain it.

2. An Oration unto the Greeks: Ibid.
wherein he lays down the reasons, why he forsook their Rites; and invites
them, to embrace the Christian Religion.

Yet is neither of these mentioned by Ei^sebius or Ierom.

3. His first Apology, unto the Senate of Rome; which Bellarmine conceives to
be the later, De Script. Eccles. and Baron. ad an 164. 14.
and not given up unto the Senate (as our Books have it) but unto Marcus and
Lucius the Successors of Pius, and that this common deceit was hence
occasioned, because the first Apology (as they are usually placed) wants the
beginning, and therefore it could not be known unto whom it was directed.

Herein 1. He complains of their most unjust proceedings in punishing the
Christians merely for the name.

2. He makes answer unto those things which were objected to them by the
Gentiles.

3. He requests them, that to their decree, if they should publish any thing
concerning this thing, they would publicly annex this Apology, that the
innocence of the Christians might be known unto all.

4. His second Apology which he tendered unto Antoninus Pius, Aelius, Adrianus.
to his Sons, and to the whole Senate and people of Rome; which Baronius calls,
fortem and gravem Apologiam, a strong and grave Apology, first named both by
Eusebius and Ierom, and therefore likely to be the first of the two. The sum
whereof Baronius gives us in these words: Multa exprobrat de iniquissimis in
Christianos judiciis, etc, i. e. He much upbraids them for their most unjust
proceedings against the Christians, Baron. ad an. 150. 2.
viz. for that without any inquiry into cause or matter, they were adjudged to
death as the most impious and flagitious of all Men; and that for no other
reason, but because they were Christians; the very name being accounted crime
enough. Wherefore he does notably clear them from the several calumnies cast
upon them, and fully demonstrates their innocence by many arguments:
particularly that they were not such as they were commonly famed to be, viz.
Atheists, because though they worshipped not the gods of the heathen, yet they
knew the true God, and performed that service that was agreeable unto him: Also
that they looked not for an earthly kingdom (as was suspected of them, for
which cause the Romans stood in fear of a Rebellion and their defection from
them) but a Divine and Heavenly, that made them most willing to run the hazard,
and suffer the loss of this present life; which they never could do, were they
possessed with any desires of reigning in the World. Moreover, he wipes off
those blasphemies wherewith the Christians were loaded, for their worshipping
of a crucified Man, by such as were altogether ignorant of the mystery of the
Cross of Christ. Showing, that the Religion of such as worshipped the gods was
but a vain and sordid superstition. He likewise Learnedly and copiously
discourses of the Divinity of Christ, and of his incarnation or assuming our
Nature: and unfolds many things of the mystery of the Cross: and by many clear
and convincing arguments proves the verity of the Christian Faith: withal
insinuating their harmless Life, exact observance of chastity, patience,
obedience, peaceableness, gentleness, and love, even to their very enemies.
Lastly, he lays before them the Rites or manner observed by the Christians in
their sacred Mysteries, viz. Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, etc. because of
the slanders that were raised and scattered abroad concerning them, as if
horrible and abominable things were practiced by them (such indeed as are not
to be once named among them) in their secret meetings upon such occasions. All
which he performed with such admirable liberty and boldness, as became so
zealous and Advocate in so good a cause: wherein the magnanimity of his Spirit
moved with an holy indignation, may evidently be discerned by the seriousness
of the matter contained in it, and the solidity of the arguments by which, what
he undertook is fully proved.

5. A Dialogue or Colloquy with Tryphon a Jew: In praefat^ad opera Justini.
which Morel calls, Illustris disputatio; a notable disputation in Ephesus a
most famous City of Asia, with Tryphon the chief of the Jewish Synagogue,
continued by the space of two whole days, Cont. 2. c. 10*
for the truth of the Christian Religion: wherein he proves the Jews to be
incredulous, contumacious blasphemers of Christ and Christians; Infidels and
corrupters of the Scriptures, falsely interpreting the words of the Prophets:
Possevin. in apparat.
and most clearly demonstrates by innumerable testimonies, fetched from the old
Law, that Jesus our Savior, is the true Messiah, whom the Prophets foretold
should come.

6. An Epistle to Zena and Serenus; which comprehends the whole life of a
Christian man, whom he instructs in all the duties belonging to him: of which
yet Bellarmine makes some doubt whether it be his or no. De Script. Eccles.


7. An Epistle unto Diognetus; wherein he shows why the Christians have left
the Jews and Greeks; Scultet. in Medul.
what their life and doctrine is, and why they contemn death. As not the two
first, so neither are these two last mentioned by Eusebius or Ierom: yet are
all these seven conceived to be the proper works of Iustine.

Besides these there are other extant under his name, which yet are either
questioned, or conceived to be none of his; but supposititious, and falsely
ascribed to him: They may be discerned from those that are genuine, either by
the diversity of the Style, or some other evident Notes distinguished the one
from the other. And they are these that follow.

1. His Book de Monarchia: Scultet. in Medul. Rivet. crit. sac.
the Style whereof is not unlike that of Iustine: yet is it doubtful, whether
he were the Author of it: 1. Because the Title differs from that mentioned by
Eusebius, Ierom, Photius and Suidas, who entitle the Book written by him, de
Monarchia Dei: whereas this is only de Monarchia. 2. In that he tells, that he
fetches Testimonies not only from our own Authors, i. e. the sacred
Scriptures; but also Writings of the Heathens: whereas in this now extant, the
later sort of Testimonies only are to be found.

Gelenius also in his Latin Edition of the Works of Justin, (which he says
comprehended all those then extant) leaves this out altogether. In observat. Ri
et. crit. sat.
Perionius therefore concludes, that either this, that we now have is not
perfect, but wants many pages; or else for certain Justin wrote another Book
upon this Subject. Note in Hieronym. Catalog. in Bibloth. Eccles.
Miraeus is of this judgment, that half of the other Book de Monarchia
remains; and that half of one Book de Monarchia Dei is lost.

The sum of it is to exhort the Greeks, Scultet. in Medull.
to leave their idolatry, and to worship the true God; whom their Poets did
acknowledge to be the only Creator and Governor of all things; but made no
reckoning at all of their feigned gods.

2. An exposition of the true Faith, or of a right Confession of the holy and
coessential Trinity. Which by diverse Arguments may evidently be proved to be
none of his; especially.

1. By the Style, Cent. ^. cap. 10. Scultet. in Medul.
which seems to differ from that of Justin, being more curt and neat than his.

2. Because he speaks much more apertly and distinctly of the Mysteries of the
Trinity, Bellarm. de Scrip.
and Incarnation, than the Writers of that age are wont to do.

3. None of the Ancients make mention of it.

4. The words, (...), etc. were not then so usual in the Church: nor are they
any where to be found in the Writings of Justin, when as yet he sometimes
professedly handles the Doctrine of the Trinity.

Bellarmine himself therefore is doubtful of it: Ibid.
Ambigo, says he, ^n ejus sit: and well he might, Scultet. ibid.
there being so much cause. But whoever were the Author of it, it is an
excellent and profitable discourse, and worthy of such an Author as Justin.

Herein he shows, that there is indeed but one God, who is known in the Father,
Son, and holy Spirit; and that these three have but one and the same Essence,
as also discourses of the Incarnation of the Word; who is Mediator according
to both Natures, the manner of the Union whereof in Christ is ineffable.

3. A confutation of certain Opinions of Aristotle: In apparat. ad an. 165. 8.
which (says Possevine) Justin did not write; neither will Baronius undertake
to determine whether it be his or no. Eusebins, Ierom and Suidas mention it
not; for which cause it is justly rejected, as not written by Justin; though
Photius speak of it as his, and it have no evident note of falsehood, De Script.
Eccles.
in the judgment of Bellarmine; Therefore, says he, I have nothing to say one
way or other.

4. Certain Questions propounded by the Christians to the Gentiles, and their
Answers to them, together with a confutation of those Answers. Which piece, as
the Style bewrays it to be none of Iustins; so may it easily be discerned also
from the often mention of the Manichees in the confutation of the answer to the
first question: Bellar. ibid. and Possevin. in apparat.
who arose above an hundred years after Justin.

5. Certain questions propounded by the Greeks or Gentiles, with the answers of
the Christians unto them. Cent. 2. cap. 10.
Which are ranked with the former by the Centurists.

6. This answers to 146 questions, In apparat. de Scrip.
unto the Orthodoxes: it seem not to Iustins, says Possevine; the same thinks
Bellarmine: yea, that this is certain, Scultet. in Medull. and Coci censur. and
Cent. 2. cap. 10.
many things contained in them do plainly evince. As 1. Some words, which were
not in use in the Church, till a long time after Justin. e. g. (...), etc. 2.
In them is cited Irenaeus. Quest. 115. whom he styles a Martyr: yet did Justin
die some forty years before: viz. An. 165. where Irenaeus suffered Martyrdom,
an. 205. according to the account of Baronius. Also Origin is quoted, Quest.
82. and 86. who yet was long after Justin. 3. Diverse passages are here to be
found, which are cross to what is contained in the genuine Writings of Justin.
e. g. That the Witch of Endor did but delude the eye; In Dialog. cum Tryphon.
that they seemed to see Samuel, when 'twas not he. Quest. 52. whereas Justin
asserteth that 'twas the true Samuel that was raised. Also, Quest. 112. the
Angel that spoke with Jacob and Moses, and other of the Patriarchs, is said to
be a created Angel; and that for his office committed to him, he was honored
with the name of God. Whereas Justin earnestly contends and affirms, that that
Angel was Christ the Son of God.

Add hereto, that the style shows them to be counterfeit; Bibliotia. lib. 4.
which seems (says Sixtus Senensis) not unlike unto that of Theodoret in his
questions upon the Octoteuch: and it is conceived that they were written by
some one who lived about that time. Besides all this, there are among them so
many questions and answers, Sylburg. in Annotat. Scultet. in Medull.
unworthy of the Piety, Candor and Learning of Justin, that if they be
compared with his true Writings, they will be found to differ no less than Gold
and Lead, the one from the other.

Upon how frail a foundation then are those unsound Doctrines of the Papists
built (for the proof whereof these spurious Writings are often alleged) viz.
Dr. James corruption of the Futhers. Coci. censur.
the lawful use of the Cross, the Virgin Mary without sin, keeping and
worshipping of Relics, religious Vows, Baptism necessary unto Salvation, the
use of Chrism, Ceremonies of the Mass, Free Will and that Confirmation is a
Sacrament.

4. The style that Justin used, was vehement and worthy of one that handled
serious matters: Cent. 2. Cap. 10.
but it came nearer to that of the Philosopher, than to that of the Orator;
which is the reason why he is sometimes obscure.

2. Many things of special Note, and very observable are to be met withal in
this ancient Author: among the rest are such as these.

1. He acquaints us with the manner of the Christians performance of the duties
of worship in their public Assemblies; Apolog. 2.
which was thus: Upon the day which is called Sunday (says he) or the first
day of the Week, are the Meetings or public Assemblies of those inhabiting
both the City and Country: where are read, as time will permit, the Writings of
the Prophets and Apostles: (...) President.
the Reader having ended, the Pastor or President makes an exhortation
instructing and stirring them up to imitation of things that are honest:
Afterward, we all rise up together, and offer up Prayers; which concluded,
there is brought forth Bread, and Wine, and Water: then the Pastor, according
to his ability, offers up Prayers and Thanksgivings, (...): with all his might
or earnestly: Thorndike of religious assembl. and service, cap. 7. rendered,
Langus, quamtum pro virili sua potest. by Gelenius; quantum potest.
the people saying Amen. Then being consecrated, they are distributed unto
every one, and sent to such as are absent by the Deacon. The wealthier sort, if
they please, contribute somewhat, as they will: and what is gathered, is
deposited with the Pastor; who therewith relieves Orphans, Widows, and such as
through sickness, or any other necessity are in want; as also such as are in
bonds and strangers; briefly he takes care of all that are poor. And therefore
do we meet upon Sunday, because upon it God dispelling the darkness, and
informing the first matter, created the World, and also because upon that day
Jesus Christ our Savior rose again from the dead.

And a little before he thus speaks of the same Matter. (...).
After Baptism we bring him that believes and is added to us, to the place
where the Brethren, as they are called, are congregated, making their joint
Prayers for themselves, or he that is Illuminated or Baptized, and for all
others every where, with all their might. Prayers being ended, we mutually
salute one another with a kiss: then is there offered unto the Pastor (or
President) Bread and a Cup of Water and Wine: he receiving them, (...)
returns or sends up Praise and Glory unto the Father of all things, through
the name of the Son and holy Spirit; and largely gives thanks, for that he
accounted us worthy of these gifts: when he has finished the Prayers and
Thanksgiving, all the people that are present, follow him with their
well-wishing acclamations, (...).
saying, Amen, And, Amen, in the Hebrew Tongue, signifies, be it so. Then,
after that the President has ended the Thanksgiving, and all the people have
given their acclamations and approbations, they that with us are called Deacons
distribute to every one of those that are present, (...).
that each may partake of that Bread, Wine and Water, that has been blessed,
and carry it unto those that are absent. And this nourishment or food among us
is called the Eucharist: Whereof it is not lawful for any to partake, but only
such a one as believes our Doctrine to be true, and has been washed in the
laver for remission of sins, and unto regeneration, and lives so as Christ has
delivered or taught.

In this plain and simple manner were the Ordinances according to Christ's
institution then administered; without all those pompous Observations,
Ceremonies and superstitious Additions, which in after times by degrees were
brought in, practiced and prevailed to the great dishonor of God, detriment of
Souls, disturbance of the Church, and despoiling of the Ordinances themselves
of much of their beauty and luster, which then shines forth most, when they are
preserved in their native purity, and kept most free from all debasing mixtures
of men's devices and adventitious supposed Ornament, which rather deform than
deck and adorn them.

2. O^ the sufferings of the Christians, their joy in them with (...) ground
thereof, and the (...) thus speaks. (...) we are (...)
slain, we rejoice, having this persuasion that God will raise us up by his
Christ. There is none that can terrify or bring us into bondage, who by
believing have given up our names to Jesus; this is manifested through all the
earth: For when we are slain with the sword, crucified, and punished with
bonds, fire, and all kind of torments, it is sufficiently known that we forsake
not our profession: and the more we are tormented, the more is the number of
Believers, and such as embrace the true Religion, through the name of Jesus
increased. For as by pruning, the Vine spreads and becomes more fruitful; so
fares it with us: for his people are a Vine or Vineyard planted by God and our
Savior.

3. He shows that the gift of casting out Devils, of Prophecy, and other
extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, continued unto this time. Whereof he
thus speaks.

We call Jesus Christ our Helper and Redeemer, Dialog. cu^ Triphon.
the virtue of whose Name the Devils tremble at and fear; and even at this day
being adjured by the Name of Jesus Christ, who was crucified under Pontius
Pilate, the Governor of Judea, they obey us: that thence also it may appear
unto all that the Father has given him so great power, that even the Devils
are subject to his Name, and to the Oecomony, (...).
or dispensation of his Passion. Now if the Economy of his Passion be shown to
have obtained, and to obtain so great power, how great will it be at his
glorious appearing?

Concerning this we have another passage to the same purpose, Apolog. 1. page
31. gr. lat. Edit.
in his first (as its ordinarily accounted) Apology: as also no less than twice
more does he make report thereof in his Dialogue with Tryphon. In the last of
which places (which I therefore set down as his Creed, Dialog. cum Tryphon.
page 312.
because it contains the sum of the Articles of the Apostles Creed, that
respect Jesus Christ) he thus says: By the Name of this very Son of God, and
first born of every Creature, born of the Virgin, and made a Man subject to
sufferings, crucified under Ponti^^ Pilate by your Nation, who died and rose
again from the dead, and ascended into Heaven; every Devil adjured is overcome
and brought into subjection. But if ye should adjure them by any name of the
Kings, or just Men, or Prophets, or Patriarchs that have been among you, not
one of them should yield obedience. Again, mentioning that Prophecy: Ibid.
page 315.
I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and upon my Servants, and upon mine
Handmaids, and they shall prophecy: Among us (says he) you may see both women
and men, having gifts from the Spirit of God. Lastly, among us even unto this
day there are prophetical gifts: Page 308.
from whence you ought to understand, that those (gifts) which of old time were
in your Nation, are now translated unto us.

Of such places of Scripture as do seem to contradict one another, Dialog. cum
Tryphon. page 289.
he declares what he himself does, and others should think of them. I shall
never dare to think or say that the Scriptures are contrary one unto another:
but, if any Scripture be propounded, which seems to be such, and to have a show
of being contrary to some other; I being thoroughly persuaded, that no one
Scripture is contrary unto another, will rather confess that I do not
understand the things that are spoken; and will endeavor that those who
suspect the Scriptures to be contrary, would rather be of the same mind with
me. So great was the reverence and respect that he bare unto the sacred
Scriptures.

5. Unto what persons, and in what manner Baptism, was then administered, he
acquaints us, saying:

As many as are persuaded and do believe those things that are taught and
spoken by us to be true, and promise to live accordingly, they are taught to
pray fasting, Apolog. 2. p. 93. 94.
and to beg of God the pardon of their former sins, we praying and fasting
together with them: Then are they brought by us unto the place where the water
is, and are regenerated after the same manner of Regeneration wherewith we were
regenerated. For in the name of the Father and Lord God of all, and of our
Savior Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit they are then washed in Water. --
And through the Water we obtain remission of those sins which we had before
committed. And this washing is called illumination, (...)*
because the minds of those that learn these things are enlightened.

6. We make account that we cannot suffer any harm from any one, unless we be
convicted to be evildoers, ibid. p. 54*
or discovered to be wicked persons. You may indeed put us to death, but you
cannot hurt us.

7. Such was the innocence and tenderness of Christians; that, whereas (says
he) before we believed, we did murder one another, now we not only do not
oppugn or War against our enemies, Apolog. 2. p. 78.
but, (that we may not lie nor deceive the Inquisitors) confessing Christ we
die willingly.

8. So great was the courage and resolution of Christians: ibid. p. 83.
that although, says he, it were decreed to be a capital crime for any to
teach or even to profess the name of Christ; we notwithstanding both embrace
and teach it.

9. Concerning the Translation of the Septuagint, he gives this account: That
Ptolemy King of Egypt, erecting a Library at Alexandria, and understanding that
the Jews had ancient Books which they diligently kept, Exhortat. ad Graecos. p.
13.
he sent for seventy wise men from Jerusalem, who were skilled both in the
Greek and Hebrew Tongues, and committed unto them the care of translating those
Books. And that being free from all disturbance they might make the quicker
dispatch of the translation, he commanded a like number of Cells, or little
Rooms to be made, not in the City it self, but about seven furlongs from it,
where the Pharos was built, that each one should finish his interpretation by
himself alone, requiring the servants attending them, to be in every regard
serviceable to them; only to hinder them from conversing together, to the end
that the exact truth of the Interpretation might be known by their consent. And
coming to know that these seventy men used not only the same sense, but also
the same words in the translation, and that they differed no not so much as in
one word one from another, but had written in the same words of the same
things; being hereat astonished, and believing the Interpretation to be
accomplished by divine assistance, he judged the men worthy of all honor as
loving, and beloved of God, and with many gifts commanded them to return again
into their own Country: And having the books in admiration (as there was cause)
and consecrating them unto God, he laid them up there in the Library: These
things we relate unto you, O ye Greeks, not as fables and feigned stories, but
as those who have been at Alexandria, and have seen the footsteps of those
Cells yet remaining in Pharos: This we report as having heard it from the
Inhabitants, who have received the memorable things of their Country by
tradition from their Ancestors: Which also you may understand from others, and
chiefly from those wise and approved Men who have recorded these things, namely
Philo and Josephus.

10. Concerning the Sibyls, thus, O ye Greeks, Exhortat. ad Graecos page 34.
If you have not greater regard unto the fond or false imagination of them that
are no gods, then unto your own salvation give credit unto the most ancient
Sibyls, whose Books happen to be preserved in the whole World, teaching you
from a certain powerful Inspiration by Oracles, concerning those who are
called, (...).
but are not gods: and plainly and manifestly foretelling the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and of all things that were to be done by him. For the
knowledge of these things will be a necessary Praeludium or preparation unto
the Prophecies, (...).
or to the reading of the Prophecies of holy Men.

6. Though his excellencies were great, yet were they accompanied with many
imperfections, viz. his slips and errors that he had, which we shall briefly
point at and give notice of, and they were such as these.

1. He was an express Chiliast or Millenary, Victor. Schol. in Hieronym.
catalog. Hieronym. in catalog.
and a most earnest maintainer of that opinion, as were many of the Ancients
beside him, viz. Irenaeus, Apollinarius Bishop of Hierapolis, Nepos an Egyptian
Bishop, Tertullian, Lacta^tius, Hieronym. ibid. Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 36.
Victorinus, etc. The first broacher of this error was Papias, the Auditor or
Disciple of John, not the Apostle, but he who was called Presbyter or Senior,
and whose the two latter Epistles of John are by some conceived to be. This man
was passing eloquent* but of a weak and slender judgment, as by his Books
appears; yet did he occasion very many Ecclesiastical Men to fall into this
error, who had respect unto his Antiquity: and among the rest, Justin, as
appears in diverse places of his Books: particularly in his Dialogue with
Tryphon the Jew; page, 30^. Edit. Gr. and Lat. Paris.
who pressing him after this manner. Tell me truly says he, do you acknowledge
that the City Jerusalem shall be built again, and that your people shall be
there gathered together, and live in pleasures with Christ, etc. To whom I thus
replied, says he, I am not such a wretch, O Tryphon, as to speak otherwise
then I think; I have confessed unto thee before, that my self and many others
are of the same mind, as ye fully know, it shall be even so: but withal I have
signified unto thee, that some Christians of a pure and pious judgment, do not
acknowledge this: -- But as for me, and those Christians who are of a right
judgment in all things, we do know that there shall be a Resurrection of the
Flesh, and a thousand years in Jerusalem rebuilt, beautified and enlarged, as
the Prophets Ezekiel, Esaias and others have published. -- And afterward that
there shall be an Universal and Everlasting Resurrection of all together and a
Judgment, as a certain Man of our own, whose name was John, one of the Twelve
Apostles of Christ, in that Revelation which he had, has foretold.

2. He entertained a gross Judaical conceit, Apolog. 1. page 44.
concerning some of the Angels: of whom he has these words: That God having
made the World, and put the Earth in subjection unto Man: -- He committed the
care of Men themselves and of the things under the Heavens unto certain Angels
whom he had appointed hereunto: but the Angels transgressing the Ordinance of
God, were overcome with the company of Women, on whom they begat those Children
which are called Demons: and moreover they brought the rest of mankind into
servitude unto themselves, -- and sowed Murders, Adulteries, Wars, and all
kind of wickedness among Men, This error took its rise from an ancient Edition
of the Septuagint, Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. lib. 5. annot. 70.
which Philo Iudaeus, and Eusebius followed: they finding, Genesis 6. 1. (...)
filii Dei, the Sons of God, rendered those words (...). and hence it came to
pass, that many of the Ancients both Greek and Latin, did so expound that
place, whence sprung the error above mentioned.

3. He attributes too much to the writings of Plato. and other Philosophers,
saying, that the Doctrines of Plato differ not from Christ, (...). Apolog. 1.
p. 51.
but that they are not altogether like: also, whosoever live according to
reason, (...)
. although they have been accounted without God, worshippers of no deity, yet
are they Christians: Such among the Greeks were Socrates, Heraclitus and the
like to them. This it seems he delivered, Epit. Hist. Eccles. Cent. 2. lib. 4.
c. 4.
that he might the more easily draw the Gentiles unto the Faith of Christ;
says Osiander.

4. He too highly advances the power and freedom of Man's Will: whereof he
thus speaks. Apolog. 2. interpret Gelenio.
Caeterum, nequis nostra dicta sic accipiat, quasi fati necessitatem asseramus,
and que fiunt ideo fieri, quia praedicta sunt; explicabimus hoc quoque. Poenas
ac praemia pro dignitate operum cuique reddi verum est, and compertum ex
Prophetarum oraculis. Alioquin si fato regerentur omnia, nihil omnino relictum
esset in nostra potestate: nam si fatali lege alius bonus esset, alius malus:
nec laudeni ille, nee hic mereretur vituperium: Et nisi homines arbitratu suo
possunt turpia fugere, honesta sectari, extra culpam erunt, quicquid agant.
Caeterum quod libera voluntate vel peccent vel officium faciant, sic
demonstrabimus, etc.

These things I mention not to discover the nakedness of this venerable Father,
but that it may from hence appear that the writings of the holy Prophets and
Apostles only are exempt from error and defects, and that those of the most
eminent men are to be read with caution, to be examined by that Touch stone,
and so far only to be approved of, as they shall be found agreeing with that
unerring and perfect word, and no further: for by it must we try the Spirits
whether they be of God, and proving all things, hold fast that only which it
shows to be good.

7. As for his Death or Martyrdom, he was brought unto it by the procurement of
one Crescens a Cynick Philosopher, with whom he had much contended: Which he
himself did before apprehend and expect, Apolog. 1. page 46.
as appears from his own words: I look (says he) by some one of them who are
called Philosophers, (...).
to be betrayed, or brought to the Stake or Tree: (...).
it may be by Crescens himself the Philosopher, a lover of popular applause,
and of insolent Arrogance: (...).
a Man unworthy to be called a Philosopher, because he publicly witnesses,
the things which he knows not, as if the Christians were Atheistical, and
Impious: which he does to curry favor with, and to pleasure the multitudes
whom he has deceived.

This Crescens, Cent. 2. c. 10.
he had provoked, and stirred up his implacable malice against him, for that he
had in a disputation publicly before the Senate reprehended him not only of
being ignorant of those things which it became a Philosopher to know, but also
for his foul and debaucht manners: wherefore he accused him to be a Christian,
and never left, till by his restless solicitations he had brought him to his
end.

So at Rome he joyfully suffered Martyrdom for the Name of Christ, Baron.
under the Emperors Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus, Anno Christi, 165.

Irenaeus Lugdunensis Episcopus.
1. COncerning his birth, where and of what Parents he was born, Cent. 2. c.
10. Graecus Asianus and forte Smyrnaeus fuit. Possev. apparat.
we have nothing certain; Only probable it is that for Country he was an Asian,
and that he came of honest and pious parents not far from, if not in the City
of Smyrna: for there in his youth was he trained up in the School of blessed
Polycarp a Disciple of the Apostle John; Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15. in Ep, Smynens.
and Bishop of Smyrna; Of whom it is reported, that being brought before the
Proconsul, and by him urged to blaspheme and revile Christ, he thus answered
him, Fourscore and six years, says he, have I served him, neither has he in
any thing ever wronged me; and how can I then revile my King, that has
hitherto preserved me? Also in the same Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, it
follows concerning him; that being in the fire, which in the form of a vault or
sail of a ship, encompassed him about as a wall, his body seemed as gold or
silver tried in the furnace; and that from it there proceeded a sweet and
fragrant smell, as of frankincense or some such like precious perfume: and that
at length, the persecutors perceiving that the fire consumed not his body,
commanded the tormentour to lance him in the side with a spear; which done,
there forthwith issued such a stream of blood out of his body, as quenched the
fire to the great admiration of the multitude.

Upon this Reverend Father did Irenae^^ with so great diligence attend, that
the Doctrine which he learned from him was deeply engraven in his breast; so
that even to his ol^ age he firmly retained the remembrance of i^ yea his very
gestures: so much he himself testifies in his Epistle unto Florinus, sometime
his fellow Scholar, but tainted with that opinion that God was the Author of
evil, an^ afterward with the error of Valentinus: remember, says he, the
things of old, bett^^ then those of later times: for the things (...) learn in
our childhood, sink farther into (...) minds, and grow up together with us;
(...) that I do well remember, Eus. l. 4. c. 18.
the place whe^^ Polycarp sat when he taught, his going o^ and coming in, his
manner and course (...) life, the figure and proportion of his body the Sermons
which he made unto the mult^tude the relation he gave of his converse wit^ the
Apostle John and others which saw t^^ Lord; how he remembered their sayings,
(...) what he heard from their mouths touchin^ the Lord, (...). haeres 24.
Hie^^^mym. in Ca^^log.
his power, Doctrine, etc. Hen^^ is he not unjustly styled a man of the
Apost^lical times, very near unto them, and the su^cessor of them.

By Polycarp he was s^nt unto the City (...) Lions in France, Greg. Tu^onens.
l. 1. hist. c. 27.
whereby his admirable v^^tue he soon became famous; in so much that in a small
space of time by his preaching he had made almost the whole City Christian. Of
this Church he was at first a Presbyter of Pothinus (as Ierom, In catalog. l.
hist. 5. c. ^.
Eusebius and Nicephorus call him) or Photinus, (as the Centurists, Baronius
and Gregory of Turon) who was the first Bishop of that place.

At this time the Churches of Asia being much infested with the New prophesies
and delusions of Montanus, Cent. 2. c. 10.
Alcibiades and Theodotus; the Gallicane Churches (either of their own accord
out of their brotherly love to and care of them, or else at their request
craving assistance from them against these corrupters of the Gospel) sent
Irenaeus unto them as the meetest man for such a work, with their letters; that
he might comfort those afflicted Churches, confirm them in the truth, and
confute those heretical adversaries: He took Rome in his way, happily to confer
with and crave the advice and help of Eleutherius Bishop there, about this
affair, unto whom he had letters recommendatory from the Churches making
Honorable mention of him.

During his absence upon this weighty occasion, Eus. l. 5. c. ^*
in the great persecution under Antoninus Verus (which much raged in the
Churches of France) the good Bishop Photinus aged ninety years, is imprisoned:
and being brought before the tribunal, and by the President asked this
question; who is the God of the Christians; he perceiving this demand to be
made rather in way of scorn, then out of a serious desire to be informed;
because h^ would not cast pearls before swine, vouchsafed him no other answer
but this; si dignus fueris, cognosces: when thou shall become worthy, thou
shall know. With which answer, as contumelious, the President being highly
provoked, commanded the Officers to beat him; which accordingly they did,
handling him in a most barbarous and cruel manner, and afterward, almost
breathless, cas^ him into a filthy prison; wherein about two days after by a
glorious death he obtained the crown of Martyrdom.

The Church of Lions by this means being destitute of a Bishop, none was
thought mo^^ worthy to suceed the aged Martyr, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 5.
then his Presbyter Irenaeus, who not long after returning, Baron. ad a^. 180.
1.
was accordingly chosen an^ took upon him the Government of tha^ Church.

He entered upon the administration thereon in a very unquiet and turbulent
time; the sta^^ of affairs being much distracted, Fevard. in vita Irenaei.
not only b^ reason of that grievous storm of persecution they had lately been
under, yea which (...) yet scarcely calmed and blown over; (...) also through
the busy attempts of dive^^ impostours cunningly seeking to undermin^ the
Doctrine of Christ. Cent. 2. c. 10.
For now had the Valentinian Heretics prevailed and spread (...) far as
France, and among others bewitch^^ sundry eminent women with their sott^^ and
absurd opinions, by means of one M^^cus a wretched sorcerer, and a wicked
deceiver and abuser of the weaker Sex; But (...) such a manner did this
vigilant watchma^ and painful Pastor bestir himself, that he notably prevented
the farther spreading of this Pest, and recovered many of those who had been
therewith infected: And having happily secured his own charge, he rested not
here, but proceeded farther, affording his help by his excellent letters unto
other Churches also; particularly unto that of Rome; out of which he
endeavored to weed those tares, which the envious man had there sown; their
careless Bishop (how unfit to be an universal overseer!) it seems securely
sleeping the while, and leaving the work, that properly belonged to himself
unto another. The chief instruments that Satan here employed in sowing those
tares; were Florinus and Blastus Presbyters of this Church, Theodoret. h^ret.
f^bul. lib. 1.
but by the Bishop degraded for their impiety; in commiseration of whose sad
condition infected with so soul Heresies, he wrote (as is reported) those five
learned books now extant.

In such kind of laborious employments did he spend much of his time, Baron.
ad* an. 180.
under the Emperors Antoninus, the whole of Commodus, and a good part of
Severus Reigns: being very serviceable unto the Church of God in his
generation, not only by his preaching and disputations, but also by his
writings which he left behind him, as singular monuments unto posterity of his
zeal for the glory of God, and love to his truth: as a bright shining lamp
lighted and set up by the Lord, he diffused his Rays for the good of many,
till the oil was wholly spent and consumed.

In his time fell out that sharp and lasting contention between the Eastern and
Western Churches, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 21. 23.
about the observation of the Feast of Easter, as also about the kind and
manne^ of fasting. The Churches of Asia, as from an ancient Tradition, and
herein following the examples of Philip and John Apostles, as also of Polycarp
with others their Successors, observed this Feast on the fourteenth Moon, upon
what day of the week soever it fell out, on which day the Jews were to offer
their Paschal Lamb. But the Church of Rome, together with others in the West,
did celebrate it always upon the Lord's day; and hence grew a great rent
between them: for those of the East refusing to leave their former usage and
custom (for which they had so good ^ warrant) and to conform themselves herei^
unto the other: Victor, who was the Bishop of Rome (possessing that Chair that
would afterward usurp authority over all Churches, Cent. 2.
and acting accordingly) in the height of his pride, and the heat of his
passion begins to threaten and thunder out his excommunication against them.
Hereupon Irenaeus (brooking his name, as a lover of peace) with the Brethren of
the Gallican Churches, being grieved at such insolent and harsh proceedings,
and foreseeing the sad effects they might produce, thought it their duty not to
stand still as idle Spectators, but to interpose at least by their Letters, and
to endeavor a prevention (if it might be) of those evils that were like to
ensue, Gallic^ Sanctaque liberate objurgat. Feuard. in vita ejus.
and follow upon so rigorous and sharp a censure: which they did accordingly,
dealing plainly and roundly with the proud Prelate, tartly reprehending him for
handling his Brethren in so unchristian a manner; and that for things
indifferent (which he made necessary) he would fall upon so extreme a course,
the cutting off of so considerable a part from the Body; showing withal, that
his excommunication was void, and of no force. Now, so great was the authority
of the man with the Bishop of Rome (who had not as yet exalted himself so high,
that it should not be lawful for any of his Fellow Bishops to take the boldness
to admonish him, or to say, what do thou, though he should lead thousands to
Hell) and such the strength of the arguments alleged, that the issue was (as
Feuardentius relates) the asswaging of his fury, In vita Irenaei.
and the deterring of him from that rash attempt of cutting off so many famous
Churches from the Body of Christ: whence followed a more serene face of things,
and a great tranquillity to the Churches of Christ.

2. He was a man exceeding eminent, Vir Apostolicorum temporum, and Papiae,
auditoris Egelistae Joannis discipulus. Hieronym. Epist. 29.
and of chief note among those of his time, very ancient, and not far from the
days of the Apostles. Honorable mention is made of him by those of the
following ages: for Eusebius, Inter omnes coaetaneos ei palmam tribuit, gives
him the pre-eminence above all his contemporaries: Theodoret. dialog. 1. and
haeret. fab. lib. 1.
Others style him an Apostolical man, admirable, and the light of the Western
Churches, August. lib. 1. contra Julian. tom. 7.
an ancient man of God; highly commended he is as one in whom the resplendent
Beams and brightness of Apostolical Doctrine did gloriously shine forth: Baron.
ad an. 205. ^ 30.
for what he had learned and received from Polycarp, and Polycarp from the
Apostle John, he retaining it in its purity, communicated i^ unto the Church;
so that in all things he resembled the face of the Apostles.

He excelled both in piety and learning, Sixth. Sen^ns. Biblioth. lib. lib. 4
Haeres. 32.
being so admirably endued with both, that he was no less famous for the one
than for the other: styled therefore by Epiphanius a sacer Irenaeus, holy man,
so singularly accomplished and fitted for the work he was designed and called
unto, as that he became praeclarum organum, Cent. 2. cap. 10. ^
a choice instrument for the good of the Churches of Christ.

Admirably well skilled he was in all sorts of Learning, Trithem. de Script.
both sacred and secular; very studious and ready in the Holy Scriptures,
having by this means attained unto a more than ordinary measure of
understanding and insight into them. And how notably instructed and furnished
with knowledge in the Arts and Sciences, F^uard. in vita Iren.
is abundantly manifested, by his subtle investigation of abstruse Heresies
which, though wonderfully obscure and confused, he represents and sets forth
to public view with very great perspicuity and order: as also by his most
acute and quick disputations, wherein he thoroughly discovers their vanity, and
as soundly confuteth them: So that it is most evident (says Erasmus) that he
was very exact in all the liberal Science^. Epist. ante Iren.
Yea, how diligently he had read over the Books both of the ancient
Philosophers, Thales, Anaximander, Anaxagoras, Democritus* Empedocles* Plato,
Aristotle, etc. As also of the Poets, Cent. 1. ibid.
Tragic, Comic and Lyrick, may be gathered from hence, in that he clearly
evinceth those Heresies which he impugned, to have been taken and to have had
their original from those profane Authors, the names only being changed.
Tertull. advers. Valentin.
So that he was not without cause styled by Tertullian, Omnium doctrinarum
curiosissimum exploratorem; a most curious inquirer or searcher into all sorts
of Doctrines: very large is Epiphanius his Encomium of him (who held him in
high esteem, as appears by the great use he made of him) Old Irenaeus (says
he) every way adorned by the Holy Ghost, Epiphan. Haeres. 31.
brought into the Field by the Lord as a valiant and expert Soldier and
Champion, and anointed with Heavenly Gifts and Graces, according to the true
faith and knowledge, contended against all the arguments of sottish Heretics,
and most exactly confuted them.

Add hereunto (which put a luster upon all the rest) that he was of a very meek
and modest spirit, Illyric. in catalog.
a great lover, and as studious a preserver of peace among Brethren; but withal
no less earnest and zealous in the cause of God, and a bitter adversary of the
wretched Heretics of his time: Epist. Nuncupat. ante Iren.
Magnus (to give you Erasmus his words to this purpose) Ecclesiae propu^nator,
ac pro sui nominis ^ugurio, pacis Ecclesiasticae vindex.

3. He wrote diverse learned Books upon several subjects and occasions; the
greater part whereof (indeed all to one) through the injury and neglect of
foregoing ages are quite lost, not any of them remaining and extant at this
day: and they are (such as we find mention of.)

1. A brief Volume against the Gentiles: Hieronym. in catalog. Miaeus. Schol.
in catalog. Hieronym.
And, says Ierom, another of discipline; but herein is he mistaken, and those
that follow him, as Honorius Augustodunensis, Trithemi^^, etc. who supposed
that they were two distinct Books; whereas by Eusebius it appears 'twas but one
and the same Volume; Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. ^4.
for thus he speaks of it: Extat adhuc liber illius adversus Gentes
compendiosissimus and summopere necessarius, de scientia inscriptus.

2. A declaration of the (manner and way, (...). Hieronym. ibid.
Possevin) of the Apostles preaching unto a certain Brother, one Marcianus.

3. A Book entitled (...), variorum tractatuum, Ibid.
says Ierom, variarum dictionum inquiunt centuriatores, or a disquisition of
sundry things. Possevin.

4. A Book or an Epistle de schismate, unto Blastus.

5. A Book de Monarchia, Possevin. apparat.
or, that God is not the author of Sin, unto Florinus, whose Doctrine (he being
of this opinion) he proves to be both impious and blasphemous.

6. A Book entitled Ogdoas, Cent. 2. cap. 10. in catalog*
or (...), written also for Florinus, who was bewitched with the errors of
Valentinus, which Ierom calls commentarium egregium, an excellent commentary:
in the close whereof we have these words, containing a solemn obtestation,
which both Eusebius and Ierom thought worthy of special notice: Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 18. Hieronym. in catalog.
Adjur^ te, etc. I adjure thee (whosoever thou art that copyest out or
transcribest this Book) by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by his glorious coming,
wherein he shall judge the quick and the dead, that thou compare what thou have
written, and correct it diligently by the exemplar from whence it is
transcribed: and also that thou do likewise write out this adjuration, and
insert it into the copy so taken. The like hereunto is that of Ruffinus in his
preface in his Translation of Origin, Tom. 2. Epis. 63.
(...), which is found among the Epistles of Ierom, charging both the
Transcriber and Reader not to add or diminish, to insert or alter any thing
therein, but to be exact even to a Letter, etc.

7. Diverse Epistles unto Victor, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 18. and 22.
and many other Pastors of Churches about the Controversies of Easter; as also
against those who at Rome did corrupt the sincerity of the Churches.

8. Volateran says, Anthropolog. lib. 16.
that he wrote an Ecclesiastical History, quam mutuatus est Euse^ius testemque
citat.

9. A Commentary upon the Apocalypse, Biblioth. lib. 4.
as says Sixtus Senensis. But these two latter are very questionable, seeing
that neither Eusebius, nor Ierom in his Catalogues, not Honorius
A^gustudonensis, nor Trithemius make mention of any such.

That of his which to this day the World injoys, Liber doctissimo and
eloquentissimo sermon compositus. Hieronym. Epist. 29.
is only a Volume containing five Books against the Heresies of the Gnostics
and Valentinians, which was thus entitled, as both Eusebius and Photius have
it; Lib. 5. cap. 7. Biblioth. 120*
(...). of redargution and the eversion of knowledge falsely so called: Rivet.
crit. sac.
a learned and most famous piece, Bellarm. catalog. Script.
full fraught with Learning and Piety. This too, it seems, was almost lost, at
least as to the Western Churches; Registr. lib. 9. Epist. 5^.
For, (says Gregory) we have long and diligently made inquiry after the
Writings of Irenaeus, but hitherto not any of them could be found.

Erasmus therefore tells us, he that might well call him his, Epist. nuncupat.
ante Iren.
as being by his industry brought to light (after it had been almost buried)
and recovered from the dust, being moldy and moth-eaten. Ibid.
And should they have remained in perpetual oblivion: the loss had been
exceeding great: for (says he) his writings do breath forth the ancient vigor
of the Gospel; yea his very phrase came from a breast prepared for Martyrdom;
for the Martyrs have a certain serious, bold and masculine kind of speech.

It has been a question, Bellarm. in Catalog. Scrip.
and doubted by some learned men, whether he wrote these Books in the Greek, or
Latin Tongue: because they are now not to be found but in the Latin only: In
Epist. nuncupat. ante Iren.
yet was he a Greek by Nation, and his phrase savours of that Language, having
many Grecisms in it. Erasmus, a man of more than ordinary perspicacity and
judgment this way, rather inclined to think it written by him in Latin, yet
would not peremptorily conclude it: For, says he, it is not clear to me,
whether of the two he wrote in; though I rather soppose that he wrote in Latin,
but was more expert in the Greek, and therefore speaking Latin he is bold to
make use of Greek figures and forms of speech. But most are of another mind,
judging the Greek to have been the Original Language, werein his Books were
written; And that they were afterward translated by himself, In vita Iren.
Rivat. crit. ^ac.
says Feuardentius, (to cover over the faults of the Translator, which are not
a few, or lest the Testimonies alleged from the translation should lose of
their Authority and Weight) or (which is most likely) by some other. Ad An.
180. 5. Biblioth. lib. 4.
All consent in this (says Baronius) that he wrote In Greek; he wrote many
excellent Volumes in the Greek Tongue, In Annotat. in lib. Ter. tull. advers.
Valent. also our learned Fulke. Ireneus wrote in Greek, and is translated into
Latin by one that followed very much the vulgar Latin Text in his Preface to
the Epist. dedicat. ante Tertull.
says Sixtus Senensis: and, says Rhenanus, proculdubio, without doubt he
wrote in Greek; for else would not Ierom have ranked him among the Greek
Fathers, nor have made Tertullian (as he does) the third, but the fourth, (as
he should) among the Latins. Pamelius also thinks that both he and those first
Roman Bishops unto his time wrote rather in Greek than Latin, which things
considered, it is a wonder that Erasmus should herein be of the mind he was: The
Latin Copy of Irenaeus (says Cornatius) is an exceeding faulty Translation,
and may better be restored out of Epiphanius, than afford any help in the
translating of Epiphanius: In Praefat. ad Epiphan.
so that marvailous it is that Erasmus, a man otherwise endued with a piercing
judgment in things of this Nature, should think that Irenaeus did wr^tein
Latin. In Epist. ad. Thomsonum number. 239.
To the same purpose speaks the great Scaliger: I do admire (says he) that
from such a feverish Latin Interpreter, as he is whom now we have, Erasmus
should imagine, both that it is the true Irenaeus, and that he imitates the
Greeks: That Latin Interpreter was most foolish, and either omitted or depraved
many things, which he understood not. The fragments which are extant in
Epiphanius; also the History of the things done by Irenaeus in Eusebius, do
sufficiently prove both that the man was a Grecian, and wrote in Greek: neither
is it to be doubted of, etc.

The Greek Copy therefore written by himself is long since perished; Rivet.
crit. sac.
only there are some remains of it to be found scattered in several Authors,
who saw and made use thereof: Thus we have seven and twenty Chapters of of his
first Book by Epiphanius inserted into his Panarium; (who took a good part of
his second and third Books word for word out of Iuneus) and some few fragments
in Eusebiu^ and Theodoret: Chitraeus. in Orat. de stud. Theolog.
by comparing of which wit^ the Translation we now have, Feuard. commonit. in
5. ab. Irenaei.
it will easily appear how great a loss the Church sustains in the want of it:
For instead of elegan^ Greek, Rivet. crit. ^ac.
we have nothing else (in the Ire^e^^ now extant) but rude and ill-favored
Latin^ Nor indeed can a Translation, especially (...) of Greek into Latin,
equal the Original, seeing that (as Ierom speaks) the Latin Tongue r^ceives not
the propriety of the Greek.

The Contents of the five Books of this excellent Volume (to give you a brief
accou^^ of them from Grynaeus) are these. In praefat. ante Iren.
1. In the first he at large sets down the dismal and diabolical Errors of the
Valentinians; together with a narration of the discords and impieties of those
wretched Heretics: In Argument. lib. 2.
Wh^^^ opinions (says Erasmus) are so horrid, th^^ the very bringing of them
to light, is confutation sufficient: yea the very terms, as w^^ as the
opinions, are so monstrous (says the sa^^ Author) that it would even turn the
stomach and tire the patience of any one, In Epist. ante Iren.
but to peru^^ them over.

2. In the second, he treats of the one Eternal, True, Omnipotent and
Omniscient God, besides whom there is none other: And that not any feigned
Demiurgus or Angels, but this eternal God alone, Father, Son and holy Ghost,
did out of nothing produce this whole Fabric, both of Heaven and Earth; and
gave being to Angels, Men and all inferior Creatures; and refuses the Errors
of the Gnostics concerning the same; showing what they stole from the
Philosophers to deceive the simple withal, and wounding, yea overcoming them
with Weapons or Arguments fetched out of their own Magazines and Armory.

3. In the third, which is partly polemical, and partly exegetical, he
discovers and proves the Heretics to be foully guilty of that heinous crime of
corrupting and curtailing the sacred Scriptures: and evidently demonstrates the
perpetual consent of the Prophets and Apostles concerning our Lord Jesus
Christ, God and Man.

4. In the fourth he clearly, and by solid Arguments proves, that one and the
same God was the Author of both the Testaments, the Old and the New; and that
therein he has revealed himself and his Will concerning the Restitution and
Salvation by Jesus Christ, of all men that do repent; largely discoursing of
the power of the Will, and of our imperfection; and being gotten out of the
craggy and intricate places, he enters into a large field, explaining many
Scriptures depraved by the Heretics.

5. In the fifth and last Book having made a repetition of diverse things
formerly handled, he comes to confute the vain conceits of the Gnostics
concerning the utter perishing of the bodies of men; and proves that our bodies
shall not only be raised by Christ at the last day, but also that the very
bodies of the Saints shall enjoy eternal life, and be saved together with their
Souls. In the handling whereof he gives a notable experiment (as the diligent
Reader may observe) of a clear head, and as of a choice a spirit; whence his
weighty arguments sharpened with holy Zeal, do pierce deeply into the very
hearts of the Enemies of the Truth, to their shameful prostration, and utter
overthrow: for great is the Truth, and will prevail.

He is one of the Ancients, and the only one among those contained in this
Decade, that had the good hap not to have his name abused by being prefixed to
the Books he never wrote, nor the bastard-brats of others to be fathered upon
him.

4. As for his Style it is somewhat obscure and intricate, Cent. 2. cap. 10.
yea he is oftentimes neglectin^ of his words, and speaks improperly: ye such
is the subject he discourses of, that ^ will hardly admit of clear and plain
expressions: In Prooem. lib. 1.
He himself disclaims Eloquence, a^ dwelling among the Celtae, a people of a
barbarous speech; Look not, says he, for the art of Oratory, which we have not
learned: but what simply, truly and (...) in ^ vulgar manner we have written in
Love, i^ Love receive. Yet understand him of affected Rhetoric, and not that
he was altogether ignorant of that art: which could not be, seeing that in a
subject so thorny and perplex, his style is perspicuous, Erasm. in Epist.
nuncupat.
digested and coherent. So that considering the matter he handles, it is no
wonder he is so obscure, and that so little art appears, but rather a wonder he
is no more so: which proceeded not so much from want of skill in himself, as
from the incapacity of the Subject whereof he treats. Erasm. Praefat. ante
Hilarium.
A most difficult thing it is (says the same Author) for him that discusseth
things of a subtle Nature, to join with perspicuity, the care of polishing his
Language.

5. Among many wherewith this Learned Piece is righly fraught and stored, I
shall cull out and present you with a few memorable passages.

1. His Symbol or Creed, containing a brief sum, and confession of the Faith of
the Churches of Christ (at least in the West) at that day: his words are these.

The Church, Lib. 1. cap. 2.
although dispersed through the whole World, even unto the ends of the Earth,
received the Faith from the Apostles, and their Disciples; which is, to believe,

In one omnipotent God, which made Heaven and earth and the Seas, and all
things that are in them; and in one Jesus Christ the Son of God, incarnate for
our Salvation; and in the Holy Ghost, who by the Prophets preached the
mysteries of the dispensation and coming of Christ, (...). Dispositiones Dei.
So does the Centurists render it.
and his Birth of a Virgin, and his Passion, and Resurrection from the dead,
and the Assumption of the Beloved Christ Jesus our Lord in his flesh into
Heaven, (...).
and his coming from Heaven in the Glory of the Father to restore (or
recapitulate and gather into one) all things, and to raise the flesh (or
bodies) of all mankind, that unto Jesus our Lord, and God and Savior, and
King, (...).
according to the good pleasure of the Father invisible, every knee should bow,
both of things in Heaven, and in the earth, and under the earth, and that every
tongue should confess to him, and that he should pass a righteous sentence or
judgment upon all, and send the spiritual wickednesses and the Angels that fell
and became apostate, and also ungodly, unrighteous, lawless and blasphemous men
into eternal fire: but for the righteous and holy, (...).
and such as did keep his commandments, and abide in his love, some from the
beginning, and some by repentance gratifying them with life, might bestow on
them incorruptibility, and give unto them eternal Glory.

Where observe by the way, that though it may be wondered at, that Irenaeus
should no where expressly call the Holy Ghost God, yet that he held him to be
God equal with the Father and the Son, is manifest, in that he makes in his
Creed the object of faith to be all the three persons of the Trinity alike: In
prooem. lib. 4.
As also from hence, that elsewhere he ascribes the creation of man unto the
Holy Ghost, as well as to the Father and the Son.

2. He gives the reason why the Mediator between God and man, ought to be both
God and man: Lib. ^. cap. 20.
For, says he, if man had not overcome the enemy of man, he had not been
justly overcome: again, unless God had given salvation, we should not have had
it firmly; and unless man had been joined unto our God, he ( viz. Man) could
not have been made partaker of incorruptibility. For it became the Mediator of
God and Men, Domesticitatem.
by his nearness unto both, to reduce both into friendship and concord; and to
procure that God should assume Man (or take him into communion) and that man
should give up himself unto God.

3. The whole Scriptures, Lib. 2. cap. 46.
both Prophetical and Evangelical (are) open or manifest, and without
ambiguity; and may likewise be heard of all. Lib. 2. cap. 47.
Again, we ought to believe God, who also has made us; most assuredly knowing,
that the Scriptures are indeed perfect, as being spoken (or dictated) by the
word of God and his Spirit.

4. Fides, quae est ad deum, justificat hominem, Lib. 4. cap. 13.
Faith toward God ((...), Heb. 6. 2.) justifies a man.

5. Concerning the marks of the true Church, Lib. 3. 11.
and that it is not tied to one place or succession; he thus speaks, When once
the Gospel was spread throughout the world, and the Church gathered out of all
Nations, then was the Church no where tied to one place, or to any certain and
ordinary succession; but there was the true Church wheresoever the uncorrupted
voice of the Gospel did sound, and the Sacraments were rightly administered
according to the Institution of Christ. Also, that the pillar and ground of the
Church is the Gospel and Spirit of Life.

5. Of the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, Lib. 2. cap. 58.
continuing unto his time, thus, Some (says he) cast out Devils soundly and
truly; so that oftentimes even they who were cleansed from wicked Spirits do
believe, and are in the Church: others have the foreknowledge of things to
come, Dictiones.
and also prophetical Visions and Sayings: others do cure and restore to health
such as labor of some infirmity by the laying on of their hands. Moreover, as
we have said, the dead also have been raised and continued with us many years:
(...).
And what shall I say? the Graces are not to be numbered, which throughout the
whole world the Church receiving from God, does dispose in the name of Christ
Jesus (crucified under Pontius Pilate) every day for the help of the Nations,
neither seducing any one, nor taking money from him. For as it has freely
received from God, so also does it freely administer: nor does it accomplish
any thing by Angelical Invocations, nor incantations, nor any wicked curiosity,
but purely and manifestly directing their prayers unto the Lord, who has made
all things.

6. He plainly asserts that the world shall continue but six thousand years:
For, says he, Lib. 5. page 613. cap. 28. Feuardent. edit.
look in how many days this world was made, in so many thousand years it shall
be consummate. Therefore it is said in Genesis 2. 2. On the sixth day God finished
all his works, and rested the seventh day. Estenim dies Dominl.
Now this is both a narration of what was done before, and also a prophecy of
things to come: for one day with the Lord is as a thousand years: in six days
the things were finished that were made; and it is manifest that the six
thousandth year is the consumma^ion of them.

7. He finds the number of the Beasts name, Irenaeus antiquissimus theologus
hoc nomen tanquam valde consentaneum huic mysterio divina sagacitate indagavit.
Paraeus Comment. in Apoc. 13. 18 lib. 5. ca. 30. Edit. Feuardent.
viz. 666. i^ the word (...): whence he concludes it as very probable that the
seat of that beast is the Latin or Roman Kingdom. Take his own words. Sed and
Lateinos nomen (habet) sexcentorum sexaginta sex numerum; and valde verisimile
est quoniam novissimum (verissimum. Erasm. edit.) Regnum hoc habet vo^abulum.
Latini enim sunt qui nunc regnant: Sed non in hoc nos gloriabimur.

8. Of the four Evangelists he thus writes: Matthew (says he) delivered unto
the Hebrews the History of the Gospel in their own Tongue. lib. 3. cap. 1.
When Peter and Paul preached at Rome, and planted that Church, after their
departure. Mark the Disciple and also Interpreter of Peter, delivered unto us
in writing such things as he had heard Peter preach. And Luke the companion of
Paul comprised in one Volume the Gospel preached of him. After these John the
Disciple of our Lord, who also leaned on his breast, published a Gospel,
remaining at Ephesus in Asia.

9. When the Heretics, says he, are convinced from the Scriptures, they
betake them to the accusation of the Scriptures themselves, lib. ^. cap. 2.
as if they were not right, nor of any Authority, (...) sunt dictae.
and because they are variously spoken, and because from them the truth cannot
be found out, by them that know not Tradition.

1. We ought to obey them that are Presbyters in the Church, even those who
have succession from the Apostles, as we have shown, who together with the
succession of their Bishopric, lib. 4. ca. 43.
have received the certain gift of truth, Ch^risma.
according to the pleasure of the Father. -- Succession of Doctrine is the
principal, and without that certain gift of truth, it is vain yea impious to
boast of personal succession.

11. Of the Translation of the Septuagint, thus. lib. 3. ca 25.
Ptolemy willing to have an experiment of them, and fearing le^t perhaps by
consent they should through their interpretation hide that truth which was in
the Scriptures: he separating them one from another, commanded them all to
interpret the same Scripture, and this he did in all the Books: when therefore
they come together into one place with Ptolemy, and compared their
Interpretations* God was glorified, and the Scriptures were believed to be
truly divine, all of them reciting the same, both in the same phrases and in
the same words from the beginning to the end: (...).
So that even the Gentiles that were present did acknowledge that the
Scriptures were Interpreted by the Inspiration of God.

12. Very memorable is that passage of his in an Epistle unto Victor Bishop of
Rome, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23. (...). Divini senis verba no^anda. Casaub.
exercitat. 13. p. ^35.
recorded by Eusebius. Although says he, Christians differed in their
Judgments about the manner of Fasting, yet notwithstanding were they at unity
one with another, for this variety of fasting commends the unity of Faith.

They that were Presbyters before Soter of that Church, whereof now thou art
President, Anicetus, I mean, and Pius, and Hyginus, and Telesphorus, and
Xystus, neither did so observe it themselves, nor left any such Commandment to
their posterity, and yet nevertheless they (not observing it) were at unity
with them, who resorted unto them, from those Churches that did observe the
same, when yet their observance was contrary to those who observe it not.
Neither was any one at any time rejected, (or excommunicated) for such kind of
fasting: but those very Presbyters who were thy predecessors, have sent the
Eucharist to the Brethren of those Churches who kept it after their own manner.
And when Polycarp was at Rome in the time of Anicetus, and they were at
variance among themselves about some certain small and trifling matters, they
were soon reconciled; but about this particular they had no contention at all.
Neither was Anice^us able to persuade Polycarp (mark, the Roman Bishops used
not, it seems, to command them as now) that he should not retain that which he
had always observed with John the Disciple of our Lord, and the rest of the
Apostles with whom he had been conversant: neither did Polycarp persuade
Anicetus so to observe it, but told him he ought to observe the Ancient Custom
of the Elders, whom he succeeded? And things being at this pass, they held
communion one with another: and in the Church Anicetus granted the Eucharist
unto Polycarp for the reverence which he bare him; and so they parted from each
other in peace, and in the Universal Church, both those that did observe it and
those that did not observe it, were at peace one with another.

These and many other the like worthy sayings are to be found in the Books of
this Ancient Father, but let it suffice to have given you this taste of them.

6. Yet are there some things observed in him as his blemishes and failings,
wherein he is not to be followed, because therein he swerves from that
un-erring Rule the word of Truth. Even the most eminent Men in the Church,
(after the Apostles) have built some hay and stubble upon the foundation they
held, which will not endure the trial of the Fire: Those of this Father are as
follows.

1. Somewhat harsh and to be corrected, iib. 2. ca. 49.
is that concerning Christ. Si quis exquirat causam propter quam in omnibus
Pater communicans Filio solus scire and horam and diem Domino manifestatus est,
neque aptabilem magis neque decentiorem, nec sine periculo alteram quam hanc
inveniat in praesenti: quoniam cum solus verax Magister est Dominus, ut
discamus per ipsum, super omnia esse Patrem. Etenim Pater, ait major me est,
and secundem agnitionem itaqu^ praepositus esse Pater annunciatus est a Domino
Nostro, ad hoc, ut and nos, in quantum figura hujus mundi-sumus, perfectam
Scientiam and tales quaestiones concedamus Deo: Et ne forte querentes
altitudinem Patris investigare, in tantum periculum incidamus, uti quaeramus,
an super Deum alter sit Deus.

2. He has some passages concerning free will, not to be admitted, though
again in other places he has somewhat directly opposite thereunto. E.g. Dedit
deus bonum, and qui operantur quidem illud, and gloriam and honore^ percipient,
quoniam operati sunt bonum, cum possint non operari illud. lib. 4. ca. 71.
Hi autem qui illud non operantur, judicium justum recipient Dei, quoniam non
sunt operati bonum, lib. 4. ca. 72.
cum possint operari illud. Item. Quoniam omnes sunt ejusdem naturae, and
potentes retinere and operari bonum and potentes rursum amittere id, and non
facere; just etiam apud homines sensatos, quanto magis apud Deum, alii quidem
laudantur, and dignum percipiunt testimonium electionis bonae and
perseverantiae: alii vero accusantur, and dignum percipiunt damnum, eo quod
justum and bonum reprobaverint. Adhuc: Quoniam liberae sententiae est Deus,
Ibid.
eujus ad similitudinem factus est, semper consilium datur ei, continere bonum,
quod proficiscitur ex ea quae est ad Deum obedientia: Et non tantum in
operibus, sed etiam in fide liberum and suae potestatis arbitrium homini
servavit Dominus.

Contra Dominus pollicitus est mittere se paracletum, lib. 3. ca. 19.
qui nos aptaret Deo. Sicut enim de arido tritico massa una fieri non potest
sine humore, neque unus panis: Ita nec nos multi unum fieri in Christo Jesus
poteramus, sine aqua, quae de caelo est. Et sicut arida terra, si non percipiat
humorem, non fructificat: sic and no^ lignum aridum existentes primum nunquam
fructificaremus vitam, sine superna voluntaria pluvia i. e. Spiritu Sancto.

3. His opinion concerning the Age of Christ, is evidently contrary to what may
be collected from the History of the Evangelists, for thus says he: Omnes
venit per seipsum salvare, lib. 2. ca. 39.
omnes, inquam, qui per ^um rena scuntur in Deum, infantes, and parvulos, and
pueros, and juvenes and Seniores. Ideo per omnem venit aetatem, and infantibus
infans factus, sanctificans infantes: in parvulis parvulus, sanctificans hanc
ipsam habentes aetatem, sim^^ and exemplum illis pietatis effectus, and
justitie and subjectionis. Iuvenibus juvenis, exemplu^ juvenibus fiens, and
sanctificans Domino. Sic and senior in senioribus, ut sit perfectus Magister i^
omnibus, non solum secundum exposition^^ veritatis, sed secundum aetatem
sanctificans simul and seniores, exemplum ipsis quoque fiens, etc. -- Quia
autem triginta annorum (...) primae indolis est juvenis, Ibid.
and extenditur usque ad quadragesimum annum, omnis quilibet confitebitur, a
quadragesimo aut quinquagesimo ann^ declinat jam in aetatem senior^m, quam
b^bens Dominus noster docebat, sicut Evangeliu^ and omnes seniores testantur,
qui in Asia apud Ioannem Discipulum Domini convenerunt, id ipsum tradidisse eis
Ioannem: permansit autem cum eis usque ad Trajani tempora. Quidem autem eorum
non solum Ioannem, sed and alios Apostolos viderunt, and haec eadem ab ipsis
audierunt, and testantur de hujus modi relation^. Non multum aberat a
quinquaginta annis, and ideo dicebaut ei, lib. 2. ca. 40.
quinquagi^ta annorum nondum es, and Abraham vidisti? Io. 8. 57.

4. Ierom and others ascribe unto him the error of the Chiliasts or
Millenaries, In catalog. Papias.
though it be not to be found so expressly in his writings now extant.

All which the impudent Friar Feuardentius (glad to take, yea to make an
occasion, that he might fall foul upon the Lutheran and Calvinian Heretics, as
he calls them) labors after a sort to defend him in, as if they were mere
calumnies and causless criminations: Although some chief ones of his own
Catholic faction; In argum. in lib. Irenaei.
to wit, Baronius and Possevine, as also Erasmus, charge him, with the same as
well as others: and who so lists to peruse his books shall find they had just
cause so to do. But the Antidotes (as he calls his defense prefixed to his
Edition of Irenaeus) of such Mountebanks are no better then poison; Crit. sac.
and, says the learned Rivet, I would admonish young Students to beware of the
Edition of this shameless and faithless Monk, as being in many things
corrupted, and defiled with his impious and lying Annotations.

Besides these there are some other things and expressions which fell from the
Pen of this worthy Man, that do need the friendly and favorable construction
of his Reader: among the rest, is that passage. lib. 3. cap. 21. Propter hoc
verbum Dei homo, and qui filius Dei est, filius hominis factus est, Commixtus
verbo Dei, ut adoptionem percipiens fiat filius Dei. Also that, lib. 5. cap.
26. Be^e Justinius dixit, quoniam ante Domini adventum, nunquam a^sus est
Satanas blasphemore Deum, quippe nondum sciens suam damnationem. Also that,
lib. 4. cap. 30. Henoch sine circumcisione placens Deo, cum esset homo, Dei
legatione ad Angelos fungebatur, and translatus est, and conservatur usque nunc
testis justi judicii Dei, quoniam Angeli transgressi deciderunt in judicium,
homo autem, placens, translatus est in salutem. Lastly that, lib. 5.
Discipulorum animae abibunt in invisibilem locum, definitum eis a Deo, and ibi
usque ad resurrectionem commorabuntur, susti^entes resurrectionem; post
recipientes corpora and perfect resurgentes, hoc est, corporaliter,
qu^madmodum and Dominus resurrexit, sic venient ad conspectum Dei. These and
such like, do crave the candor and indulgence of the judicious Reader.

7. As touching his Death and Martyrdom; Commentar. atas. 6. c. 11. Hist. lib.
1. c. 27. ad an. 205. 28.
Ado Bishop of Vienna, Gregory Bishop of Turon, and Baronius do report, that in
the persecution under the Emperor Severus, which raged especially about Lions,
by the command of the Emperor, the said City was environed with Soldiers, who
slew with the Sword all the Christians that were found therein, the chief of
whom was this Irenaeu^ their Bishop, who with the rest received the glorious
Crown of Martyrdom: At what time the slaughter was so great, (says Gregory
Turonens.) that the very streets ran with blood. In what year this happened
Historians record, Ad an. 196. 22.
not only Baronius conjectures that the persecution of the Christians under
Severus began not until the tenth year of his Reign; and that one of the first
places wherein he exercised his cruelty, was this City; of whose constancy he
had had such experience; that he knew neither threats nor flatteries would make
the Church there under such a Prelate to bend or yield, and therefore
determined to destroy them by the Sword. He therefore refers the Martyrdom of
Irenaeus Ad. an. D^m. 205. Severi. 11. Baron. ad an. 205. 28.


Clemens Alexendrinus.
1. HE Styles himself Titus Flavius Clemens: for with this inscription were his
books of Stromes extant in Eusebius his time: Lib. 6. c. 12. Biblioth. number. 111.
and so also had Photius found in a very old Copy, as he says, those books of
his Entitled.

What country man he was by birth is somewhat uncertain: Cent. 2. c. 10. Patria
^uit Atheniensis. Baro. ad an. 196. 22. Communis quaedam Institutionis and
eruditionis officina. Diodor. Sicul. biblioth. lib. 13. Lib. de Academ. c. 1.
haeres. 32. Nobilissimum orbiterrarum gymnasium. Cicero. in epist. famil. l. 4.
Ep. 12.
only it is conjectured that he was born in Athens, that City so much famed for
Learning throughout the world; where was the first Academy, or Schools of
Learning known by that name, which since is become the common appellation of
places of that nature. Academiae nomen Athenis primum inclaruisse apud omnes*
ferme authors convenit, inquit Iunius. Epiphonius therefore speaking of him:
some, says he, call him Clemens of Alexandria, others of Athens; this latter
being the place of his birth, as the former of his breeding and most abode: and
as in the one he drew his first breath, so in the other having spent the most
of it, he breathed out his last.

Being exceedingly desirous of learning and knowledge, he spent his first time
of study in Greece; from whence going Eastward, he came into Palestine, Cent.
2. c. 10.
and lastly from thence into Egypt, settling in the famous School of Alexandria,
wherein he continued the remainder of his time, either as a Scholar in
learning, or as a Doctor in teaching: Whence he got that name by which to this
day he is commonly called and known, viz. Baron. ad. an. 169. 23.
of Clemens, not the Athenian, but the Alexandrian.

In this place he was first an Auditour of Pantaenus, (when or how he was
converted to Christianity is uncertain,) a man very eminent both for his life
and learning and this both Sacred and Secular; who being at first a Philosopher
of the Sect of the Stoics, Hieronym. in Catalog. Rhenan. in Tertul. lib. De
poenitent. ex Eusebius. l. 6. c. 5.
and afterward converted unto Christianity, was the first after the Apostles
who there exercised the Office of Magister (...), or instructour of the
Catechumens, and Governor of the School or Academy, Epist. 24.
Doctor Audientium (as Cyprian calls this Officer) the Catechist; unto which
function he was called by Demetrius, the then Bishop of that place: whose work
it was to open and Interpret the Scriptures, to instruct the Catechumens or
young believers in the grounds and principles of Christianity, Cent. 2. c. 10.
and to refute Ethnic and heretical opinions; which they used to do not in
Sermons and Homelies, but in a Scholastical manner: their Auditors being not
only such as were newly converted from heathenism, but also the children of
believers grown up to years of understanding, Of these Schools. see Hospin. de
orig. templor. cap. 5.
specially such as were intended for Ecclesiastical employments:

Accordingly not only were the principles of Religion taught, and the Sacred
Scriptures expounded in these Christian Schools, Cent. 2. c. 7. Hospin. ibid.
Cent. 1. l. 2. cap. 2.
(whereof this at Alexandria is conceived to have been the first and most
famous: being founded by Mark the Evangelist, who planted the first Church in
that City) but those who were trained up in them did also apply themselves to
the study of the liberal arts and languages: in which regard Alexandria is by
Gregory Nazianzen in his Oration in the praise of Caesarius, Orat. 24.
called (...) the shop of all kind of learning. De benefic. lib. 1. c. 15.
Of these Schools Duarenus gives us this account: Fuerunt, inquit, antiquitus
Ecclesiasticae scholae, ad clericorum and aliorum egentium eruditionem
institutae: quibus scholis praeficiebantur magistri qui non literas modo
sacras, sed Grammaticam etiam and liberales disciplinas docerent. Erat igitur
hoc munus a pastoris officio distinctum and separatum. Hence it is conceived
our Universities took their Original in this Town ( viz. Alexandria) Gautenus,
Geograph.
(says Heylin) (he should have said, Pantenus) read Divinity and Philosophy,
An. 180. from whom it is thought, that the Orders of instituting Universities
first began in Christendom. Thus did the Ancients deem the liberal Arts to be
of great use, and very requisite to the preservation of the purity of Religion;
Cent. 3. c. 10
for which end Origin exhorted his Scholars to the diligent study of them,
affirming them to be very needful both for disputations, and also the
explication of the Sacred Scriptures: And it is evident that the most famous
Fathers of the Church did much excel therein, being richly furnished with the
knowledge of them.

Clemens having here spent some time in these kind of studies with great
proficiency, was at length made Presbyter of this Church; Hieronym. in Catalog.
Magister illius Ecclesi. Ruffin. in Apolog. pro Origin. Baron. ad an. 196. 23.
and after a while; Pantenus dying, he was esteemed worthy to succeed him in
the Office of Doctor or Moderator of that School; in which employment he
continued long, even unto the end of his days, managing it with much industry
and prudence to the great benefit and advantage of those that attended upon
him, and gaining general applause and approbation.

2. He was a man of admirable and choice endowments of nature, Cent. 2. c 10.
of an acute wit, and most tenacious memory, which he employed and improved to
the uttermost, sparing neither industry nor travail for the attaining of
learning and knowledge, which he was very greatly desirous, yea greedy of; for
which cause he betook him to the Schools of those men in diverse provinces and
countries, Baron. ib.
who were most eminent and famous, drawing from them what he found to be best,
and might most advantage him in that which he sought for. Nor did he attend
only upon the living, but also applied himself unto and consulted with the
dead, diligently and judiciously perusing the Monuments of men learned in every
kind that went before him: as well Heathen (Poets, Philosophers, Historians,
whether Greeks or Barbarians) as Christian; as his works full stuffed with
multiplicity of Authors and variety of reading do amply testify. Hieronym. in
Catalog.
By this means did he attain unto a great height and more then Ordinary measure
of learning, Chemnit. examen. par. 1. Baron ad. an. 196. 22. Ep. 84. Mag. Idem.
in Catalog. Trithem. de script. Bergoma. supplem. chron. Nicet. Coniat.
Orthodox. l. 3. cap. 10.
both Divine and Humane; so that in all Antiquity he was accounted Vir
celeberrimus, most renowned; Clarissimus horum temporum Ecclesiasticus
tractator; and in the judgment of Ierom (than which what more accurate?) the
most Learned of all the Ancients: in whose books, says he, what is there to be
found unlearned? yea, what not extracted out of the very bowels of Philosophy?
they are full fraught with Learning and Eloquence. Hence he is adorned by
others with the titles of an egregious, most Learned and most eloquent man; an
holy man, and who exceeds all others in his skill and cunning in many things,
Casaub. exercitat. 1. In praefat. ad annotat. in Clem. Contra Julian. l. 10.
of notable and almost incredible knowledge (says Gentian Hervet. in Epist.
ante Paedagogum) in whom it so abounds, that he cannot be drawn dry, briefly he
is, says Heinsius, penu eruditionis and scientiae, a full storehouse and
plentiful magazine of Learning and knowledge; so that Cyril (who was afterward
Bishop of the same City, where our Clement was Presbyter and Professor) calls
him, (...), an eloquent man, endued with multiplicity of knowledge, one that
dived so far into the writings of the Greeks, as few of those had done, who
went before him.

His piety and zeal for the honor of God and the advancement of Christian
Religion, Cent. 2. c. 10* Trithem. descript. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 13.
were no less than his Learning; being a devout, and holy Man: For he was
serviceable not only to the Church of Alexandria (whereunto he stood in special
relation) but went from thence unto the Churches of Jerusalem and Antioch, who,
by his preaching among them, were not a little advantaged, some being edified
and confirmed in the Faith of Christ, and others recovered from their errors,
who had been seduced by false teachers. Somewhat this way sounds the testimony
concerning him of Alexander at that time Bishop of Jerusalem, in his
congratulatory Epistle unto the Church of Antioch: Hieronym. in Catalog.
These lines, says he, I send unto you by Clement the blessed Presbyter, whom
ye also know, and shall now more fully recognize; who coming hither by the
providence and visitation of God, has confirmed and increased the Church of
the Lord. Thus as a faithful servant and steward, did he diligently lay out,
and employ the talents that he had received, for the advantage of his Lord and
Master, who had entrusted him with them.

He likewise greatly improved both the Learning and Life of his Master
Pantenus, (who was a pious and a prudent man) receiving from him not only
instructions as a Doctor, for his information, but also an example and pattern,
as a president, for his imitation, Lib. 4. c. 33.
for (says Nicephorus) as he succeeded him in his place and employment, so did
he also tread in his steps, and observed the same manner and method both in his
life and lectures.

. 3. He was exceeding useful unto the Church of Christ as well by his pen, as
by his preaching: for being a man of singular and more than ordinary abilities
he wrote diverse books, wherein he transmitted unto posterity the doctrines
which he had received and taught, and vigorously asserted and maintained the
truth against the adversaries and opposers of it. Of which writings many are
lost through the injury of time and neglect of succeeding ages; and some are
remaining unto this day.

Of the first sort, are such as these, by Ierom and Eusebius;

1. A Commentary de Paschate: In Catalog. Lib. 6. c. 12.
which, says Eusebius, he composed at the instance of some friends who
earnestly desired that he would commit to writing for the benefit of posterity,
those things which he had heard and received from the Ancient Presbyters. In
which book he remembers Melito, Irenaeus, and certain others whose expositions
he inserts and makes use of.

2. A book thus entitled, Quis dives salvetur. So Eusebius; or as Ierom;
Quisnam dives ille sit, Lib. 4. c. 33. Apparat.
qui salvetur. A Treatise Learnedly composed, says Nicephorus, and worthy to
be perused: whence, says Possevine, Eusebius took that famous story of the
Young man, by the Apostle John recommended to the care of a certain Bishop; who
afterward became very debaucht and gave himself to all kind of vice, but was
again by the same Apostle in an admirable manner recalled and recovered: who so
list may read this story at large in Eusebius, li^. 3. cap. 21.

3. His disputations of Fasting: Ibid.
which (as also the following) Nicephorus calls Homilies. Honorius Augusto
dunensis divides the title; but amiss: setting down as two distinct Books,
Honor. August. de Script. Eccles. cap. 39.
De Iojunio unus: De Disceptatione unus: contrary to Jerome, whose catalogue
(with some others he epitomized:) Trithemius also is guilty of the same error.

4. De Obtrectatione, or of slander.

5. An exhortatory unto patience, composed for such as were newly baptized.

6. Of the Canons of the Church, or an Ecclesiastical Canon, and against those
who follow the error of the Jews; which Book, (...), De Script. Eccles. Cent.
2. cap. 10.
he peculiarly dedicated it unto Alexander, Bishop of Jerusalem: Trithemius and
the Centurists make these two distinct Books, wherein they may be presumed to
be mistaken, seeing herein they differ from Eusebius and Ierom: the latter of
the two the Centurists entitle thus: Of those who in the Scriptures follow the
sense of the Jews.

7. (...), Eight Books of Dispositions, Informations or Institutions: (fetching
the name happily from 2 Timothy 1. 13. Cent. ibid. Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
(...)) wherein he goes over the whole body of the Scriptures in a brief
Commentary or compendious explanation of them, P^otius in Biblioth. Numb. 111.
if not rather some special places of both Testaments, the scope of the whole
work seeming to be an interpretation of Genesis, Exodus, the Psalms, the
Epistles of Paul, and those called Catholical, and lastly of the Book called
Ecclesiasticus: yea, he omits not some of those that are Ap^cryphal, altogether
and generally rejected, Cent. ibid. Nicephor. lib. 4. cap. 33. (...) it. in
Clement.
viz. the Revelation under the name of Peter, and the Epistle of Barnabas.
Heinsius gives us this account of them: These Books (says he) as the
Inscription teaches us, did contain an institution or delineation of the
Doctrine of Christianity; not so much methodical, dogmatical and artificial, as
free and bound up or restrained by no rules; for he interpreted diverse places
of the Sacred Scriptures, out of which without doubt he gathered a Body of
Doctrine. In Biblioth. number. 19.
The want of these Books cannot be accounted any great loss, if the report of
Photius concerning them be a truth: For (says he) although in some things he
seems to be Orthodox and sound in his judgment, yet in others he discourses
altogether fabulously and impiously: as in asserting the matter whereof the
world was made to be eternal, in ranking Christ among the number of things
created, in mentioning with allowance and approbation the Pythagorean (...), or
transmigration of Souls; and that many worlds were before Adam, that the word
was not truly made flesh, but only seemed so to be, together with very many
such like passages, withal adding (as admiring and amazed that such an one as
Clement should be the author of them) all which, either he himself, or else
some other under his name blasphemously utters, In edit. Clement. in not. ad
mar. in apparat.
which latter (says Andrew Scho^tus and Possevine) is the more likely; for the
Arrians had corrupted his writings, as Ruffine reports in his Apology for
Origin; and the Doctrine contained in his other Books is more sound and
orthodox. Photius. Biblioth. numb. 110. Cent. cap. 10.


Besides these, there is elsewhere mention of the following Treatises.

8. Of the Resurrection.

9. Of Continence.

10. Of Marriage: of these three he himself speaks in his Books of Stromes; and
particularly of the last in his Paedagogus, lib. 3. cap. 8. where we have a
summary of the contents of it, viz. how the Wife ought to live with her
Husband, of the Administration of the Government of the Family, the use of
Servants, and what things ought to be done by her apart, of the time of
Marriage, and of those things which appertain to women.

11. Sozomen says that he compiled an History: Lib. 1. cap. 1.
and indeed Suidas makes mention of one Clemens (...), the Historian, who wrote
of the Roman Kings and Emperors: but Baronius supposes they meant not this
but another Clement; and the truth is they both speak of a Clement
indefinitely, without any addition of the Alexandrian, or otherwise.

12. Many Epistles. Trithem. de Script. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 12.


13. He also promised a Commentary upon Genesis, which accordingly he clearly
and entirely performed upon the whole Book, as some do affirm, whom herein
(says Sixtus Senensis) I will neither give credit unto, Biblioth. lib. ^.
nor gainsay.

Of the second sort of his Books, viz. those remaining and commonly received at
this day, are only the three following.

1. (...), his admonition or exhortation unto the Gentiles, In catalog.
adversus Gentes, liber unus, says Ierom.

2. (...), his Schoolmaster, comprised in three Books.

3. (...), Eight Books of Stromes, a work variously woven after the manner of
Tapestry, mixed with testimonies taken out of the Sacred Scriptures, as also
Poets, Philosophers and Historians, Nicephor. l^b. 4. cap. 33.
whence he got the name of (...), contextor, or the Weaver. He himself gives
the reason of the name, and why these Books were so entitled by him: Strom.
lib. 4.
Est in exiguo quidem spacio (inquit) multa genitalis copia semine eorum
dogmotum quae comprehenduntur in hoc opere, tanquam ager omnibus herbis plenus.
Vnde etiam propriam habent inscriptionem stromata commentariorum, etc. Again,
Permixtim nobis instar prati variata est stromatum descriptio: Strom. lib. 6.
(...) Of its proper and primitive signification the most learned Casaubon
gives us this account; In Animadvers. in Athenaeum. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Solitos veteres stragulam vestem pellibus involvere, and loris constringere,
etiam Iurisconsulti testes sunt -- Constat autem ex-veterum lectione, and
stragula superiora, and involucrum istud, quod antiquiores (...), recentiores
(...) vocarunt, var^^s coloribus distincta fere fuisse. Inde translatae eae
dictiones ad res significandas varietate insignes: cujusmodi fuit piscis (...)
dictus ob coloris aurei virgas per totum illius corpus productas, inquit
Athenaeus, lib. 7. Similiter and viri docti excerpta sua ex variis auctoribus,
aut propria etiam scripta, sed veterum referta testimoniis, soliti (...) vel
(...) appellare, ut Clemens Alexandrinus, etc. Those Books and Commentaries
(says Martianus Victorinus) men call Stromata, Schol. in Hieronym. Epist. 65.
which contain in them variety of matter, because Carpets and Garments of this,
compounded of diverse colors and Histories, were so interwoven. In vita Origin.
biblioth. lib 3.
The name (...) (says Eras^^ns) is taken from pictured Carpets or Tapestry.
Also Sixtus Senensis thus; a Rapsody, which some call Stroma, or a stromatical
exposition, is an exposition made up of a composition out of diverse Authors.
And in very deed such are Clemens his Commentaries or Stromes, which contain so
great and innumerable riches of all kind of Learning (says Gentian Heroet)
that there is no one who is endued with any Arts and Sciences, In Epist. ante
Strom.
but may receive from him exceeding great profit. Yea (says the learned
Daille) what can you name more mixed and fuller of variety than Clemens his
Stromata, Treat. of the right use of the Fathers. lib. 1.
as he calls them, and his other works; which are throughout interlaced with
Historical Allusions, Opinions, Sentences and Proverbs out of all sorts of
Writers, both sacred and profane, being here heightened with rich lightsome
colors, there shaded with darkness, in such sort as that it is a vain thing
for an ignorant person to hope ever to reach his meaning? For which cause
Casaubon quoting a passage of these Books, does it after this manner:
Exercitat. 1. ad apparat. Annal. Baron.
Sic ait Clemens Alexandrinus, lib. 7. (...), centonum, which we may well call
varias lectiones.

The excellency and usefulness of all three, In Epist. ante opera Clem.
is thus fully and at large set forth by Gentian Heroet, who among others
translated them into Latin. Of how great utility (says he) this ancient
Father may be, does from hence evidently appear: Are there some that are
delighted with the most ancient Histories? Let them read Clement, who retained
them all so exactly, that none of these things which were done throughout the
world, seem to have escaped his knowledge. Are there who reverence the Verses
of the old Poets, and certain divine answers of the Oracles? These must needs
have Clement in very high esteem, who cites the testimonies of very many
Poets, whose works are at this day utterly lost and perished. Are there, who
would fain know and acquaint themselves with the ancient Rites and Ceremonies
observed in or about the sacrifices of the Gods? Let such betake them unto
Clement, who so unfolds all those abominable mysteries, that if any one among
Christians do yet praise and admire those old Heathenish Ordinances and Customs
(and would to God there were none that did so) he will forthwith (unless he be
more stupid than a stone) upon the reading of Clement cast away every fond
opinion of those false Gods, and must needs be ashamed of the madness of those
who aforetime did worship them. Would any know the decrees or opinions of the
old Philosophers? Let them view Clement, who so delivers and describes the
original of all Philosophy, together with the several Sects, Successions and
Maxims of all Philosophers; that seeing a man so singularly learned has
preferred Christian Philosophy (or Religion) before all other; they will be
forced (though unwilling) to confess that this is plainly divine, and in very
deed inspired and published from God. Have any a mind to understand what were
the Doctrines of those Heretics, who in its infancy and first rise disquieted
the Church of God? They may hear them by Clement explicated and confuted. Are
any willing to have evil and corrupt manners corrected and amended? There is
none that inveighs against vice more sharply, none that better exhorts unto
virtue, none that shows the way how men should order and lead their lives more
exactly then Clement does. An encomium large enough to invite the most curious
Reader, seeing there is such choice fare, and variety of dishes for his
entertainment.

There is observable in these works of his forenamed, an admirable order and
method, purposely intended by himself; which shows the mutual aspect and close
connection of the one unto the other; Heinsius in annotat. in Clement.
So that even herein he is mysterious, and Pythagorical. For,

1. In the first, he sets forth the vanity of Heathenish Idolatry; Scultet. in
Maedull.
by arguments drawn from the original and matter of their gods, and the
judgment of the more sound Ethnicks; who, though unwillingly, yet acknowledged
their error: Also from the vanity of their Temples and Images: and in the end
exhorts unto the profession of Christianity and Worship of the one only God,
Heinsius in annotat.
which may not unfitly be called (...), or a purgation of such as would become
Christians from Heathenish superstitions.

2. In the second, viz. his Paedagogus; he teaches, that the Son of God is our
Schoolmaster, Ibid.
and what the manners of Christians ought to be. This is (...): the initiation
or catechizing of the new Convert to Christianity, wherein he omits no part of
a Christian life, which he does not adorn with wonderful Wisdom and Learning.
Possevin. in apparat.


3. In the third, Libri stromateon octo sunt, adversus Paganos atque haereses
pugnath instituentes. Photius. number. 3. Heb. 5. 14.
viz. his Stromes, there is great variety and plenty of matter, fetched both
from the sacred Scriptures and profane Authors; for the more perfect
instruction of those who had been initiated; as setting strong meat before such
as were of perfect or riper age, and had their senses exercised to discern both
good and evil. And it may be called, (...), sive (...) ad sacra maxima,
supremam dei notionem and aeternam contemplationem admissio: H^i^s. ibid.
an admission unto the high and hidden Mysteries of Christianity.

Concerning this last, take a hint of these two things:

1. That herein he tyeth not himself unto any exact method or order, but is
somewhat confused and abstruse: for so he himself confesses, rendering the
Reason why he did so, viz. Strom. lib. 7.
he therefore dispersed the Doctrines that excite unto true knowledge here and
there, that they might not easily be found out by any that are not initiated
into these mysteries: therefore, says he, neque ordinem neque dictionem
spectant libri Stromaton; Strom. lib. 1.
the Books of Stromes respect neither order, nor words: So that here, it seems
he was curious in neither. Again, (...). Strom. lib. 6.
these Books being as a body composed of variety of Learning, will artificially
conceal the seeds of knowledge: Wherein things as they occasionally offered
themselves and came into his mind, are scattered up and down, as a Meadow is
variously decked and adorned. And this seems to have been the manner of the
Ancients: in so doing (says Peter Halliox) Clemens imitated Dyonisius
Areopagita, Quest. 2. de vita and opibus Dionys. Areopagit.
viz. in that he voluntarily and on purpose wrote his Books somewhat obscurely,
and would hide the seeds of knowledge, and sometimes makes use of new words: to
the end that, (as in hunting) the truth being found with much pains, might be
the more sweet and acceptable, as also that it might be the more remote and
secure from the scorn and cavils of petulant men, who apprehend not holy
things. Contra Celsni. page 774.
Yea, (says Origin) using such obscurity, he did herein as the Prophets were
wont to do. To which let me only add the account which he himself gives of his
end in compiling these Books; his words are, as rendered in the Parisian
Edition; Non est hoc opus Scriptura artificiose comparata ad ostentationem,
Strom. lib. 1.
sed mihi ad senectutem reconduntur monimenta, oblivionis medicamentum vere
image and adumbratio evidentium and anim^tarum illarum orationum, quas dignus
hahitus sum qui audirem, and virorum beatorum quique revera erant maximi precii
and aestimationis.

2. The eighth Book of Stromes is different from the rest.

1. In the bulk of it: Heins. in Annotat.
being shorter then the foregoing; whence it appears not to be an entire book.

2. In the Inscription thereof: for in some copies it has this Title, In
Biblioth.
says Photius, Quis dives salveter: (of which before) and begins with these
words, Qui laudatorias or ationes: in other Copies it is thus inscribed,
Stromat^n Octavus, as the other seven, and begins with the same words, which
the now extant eighth book does; Sed neque antiquissimi Philosophi.

3. In the subject thereof, or matter contained and handled in it: for the
seven preceding books are altogether Theological, but this wholly Logical; In
Medul.
nihil continet (inquit Scultetus) Theologicum, sed de syllogismis
argumentisque logicis quasdam praeceptiunculas) wherein there are some things
unsound, though not so many as in his (...) or institutions: In Annotat.
so far Photius. Heinsius supposes that this may be a fragment, taken out of
his Institutions, to which some things contained in them that were not sound
did stick: so that he conceives this book was long lost, and that now a part of
the institutions has invaded the place thereof: Which happily may be the reason,
Chron. tom. 2. lib. 2. cap. 27.
wherefore Freculphus reckons the books of Stromes to be but seven. This I
thought good to intimate, and so to leave it unto the discreet Reader, to judge
and make what use of it he can.

That small Commentary set forth by Bigne, which he calls adumbrationes or
shadowings ( Baronius gives them the name of breves notae, Biblioth. patrum,
tom. 1. Ad an. 196.. 24.
short notes) upon some of the Catholical Epistles, viz. The Epistle of Peter,
the Epistle of Jude, and the first and second of John (and the truth is, they
give but little light into those Scriptures) though they bear the Title of this
ancient Father, yet in all likelihood are they none of his; Rivet. Crit. Sac.
for neither Eusebius nor Ierom make any mention of them; only Cassiodorus
affirms it, and that it is done in an Attick or Elegant style; wherein many
things are spoken subtily indeed, but not so warily as they should have been.
Probable it is that these notes also were by some one taken out of his
Institutions. For these are said to contain in them an explanation of a great
part of the sacred Scriptures, and particularly of the Catholical Epistles.

4. For the style that he uses it is elegant and full of gravity: both Ierom
and Cyril commend in him his eloquence; and Trithemius styles him
Eloquentissimus, a most eloquent Man: It Is conceived that he was born in
Athens, and consequently it is likely that there also he had his first
Education, and the Language of the place, which was of all other the best and
finest. Lib. de An^ma.
Athenis (inquit Tertullianus) sapiendi dicendique acutissimos nasci relatum
est: In Athens are born the most acute men, for Wisdom and Speech: Athens being
famous for Eloquence, Rhodig. Iect. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 1.
as was Sparta for Arms. His Books of the Schoolmaster (says Photius) are
nothing like unto his Institutions or (...): Biblioth. number. 110.
for besides that they have not in them any of those sottish and blasphemous
opinions, which were to be found in the other; the very phrase is more florid
and rhetorical, rising to a certain well tempered gravity mixed with sweetness.
Such was the Attick Dialect: Ibid. cap. 25.
Atticorum aures teretes ad quas qui se accommodat is existimandus est Attice
dicere (inquit Rhodiginus. Erasm. adag.
) ut nil sentiatur insolens, nil ineptum; omnia ornata, gravia, copiosa: Whence
grew that adage; (...), pr^venusta lepidaque oratione.

5. Those excellent Monuments of his own extant, may not unfitly be compared
unto a pleasant Garden, richly furnished with great variety of the choicest
herbs and flowers: wherein the judicious Reader may with much contentment
recreate himself, and be thence abundantly stored both for his profit and
delight. I shall gather and present you with a view for an invitation.

1. Concerning the Holy Scriptures he speaks very venerably, plainly asserting
the Divine authority, perspicuity and perfection of them thus:

We make use (says he) of the Scriptures for the finding out and judging of
the truth of things: Strom. lib. ^. (...).
Now whatsoever is judged, is not believed before it be judged; wherefore
neither is that a principle, that needs to be judged. If it be not enough to
affirm what seems to be a truth, but that a proof of what is spoken be
requisite, we expect not the Testimony of men, but we prove what is inquired
after by the Voice of the Lord, which is more worthy to be believed than any
demonstration, or rather is the only demonstration. Again, as in war, that
order is not to be foresaken, which the Commander has given to the Soldier: So
neither is that order to be forsaken, that the word has prescribed to us,
(...).
which we have received as the Prince or Moderator both of knowledge and
practice.

2. To believe in Christ, Strom. lib. 4.
is to be made one with him and inseparably united to him: Not to believe is to
doubt, and to be divided and at distance from him.

Faith is a voluntary anticipation (or aforehand taking hold of what is
promised) a pious assent: (...), Hesychius.
the substance of things hoped for, and argument of things not seen. Others; an
uniting assent unto things not apparent; Strom. lib. 2.
a demonstration, or manifest assent unto a thing not known.

3. The whole life of a godly man is, Strom. lib. 7.
as it were, a certain holy and solemn festival day: his Sacrifices are Prayers
and Praises, and the reading of the Scriptures before his repast; as also
Psalms and Hymns while he is at meat: likewise before he goes to rest, yea,
and in the night to Prayers again. By these he unites and joins himself unto
the Quire of Heaven. But does he know no other Sacrifices? Yes; namely, the
largess of instruction, and relief of the poor. (...).


4. The Sacred Scriptures are they, In protreptico.
which make men holy like unto God. (...).

5. This is to drink the Blood of Jesus, Paedagog. lib. 2. cap. 4.
viz. to be made partaker of the incorruption of the Lord.

6. It Is the greatest argument of Divine Providence, Strom. lib. 1.
that the Lord permits not sin and vice, which had its rise from man's voluntary
defection, to remain unprofitable, nor yet altogether hurtful: for it is the
office of the divine wisdom, virtue and power, not only to do good (for this is
(to say it once for all) the nature of God, as it is of fire to burn, and of
light to illuminate) but also, and that chiefly, to bring that unto some good
and profitable end and issue, that has been devised by wicked men, and to use
those things profitably, which seem to be evil. Again, nothing comes to pass
without the will of the Lord of all: It remains therefore that we briefly say,
Strom. lib. 4.
that things of this Nature, ( viz. persecutions, etc.) do come to pass, the
Lord not letting or hindering them; (...).
for this only salves both the Divine Providence and Goodness: for we ought not
to imagine that he does effectually cause afflictions; far be it from us so to
think; but we ought to persuade our selves, that he does not hinder those who
are the authors of them, but make use of the bold attempts of adversaries unto
a good end.

7. God, Strom. lib. 6.
who is good and gracious, chastises for three causes. 1. That he who is
chastised may become better than he was. 2. That such as may or shall be saved,
being admonished by Examples, may be prepared. 3. That he who is injured, may
not be contemned, and apt (or exposed) to more injury.

8. Speaking of the several sorts of Officers in the Church, Strom. lib. 6.
he makes mention only of those three commonly received, viz. Bishops, Elders
and Deacons.

9. Reprehension is, (...).
as it were, a kind of Surgery of the affections of the Soul: and admonition
is, (...).
as it were, a kind of diet for the sick soul: Paedgog. lib. 1. cap. 8.
which counsels and advises unto those things that are to be taken; and
forbids such as are to be forborne.

10. He calls pleasure (...), Strom. lib. 6.
the Metropolis, or principal seat of Vice.

11. As touching the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews (because I find it
recorded by Eusebius, Eusebius. lib, 6. cap. 13.
Nicephorus and others, Niceph. lib. 4. cap. 33.
I thought good not to omit it) he affirms it to be Paul's undoubtly (whom he
calls (...): the divine Apostle) and therefore written in the Hebrew Tongue,
Strom. lib. 2.
for the Hebrews sakes, but faithfully translated by Luke (who was the Disciple
of Paul) and published unto the Gentiles or Greeks: and therefore we find in it
the like phrase or manner of speech, as is used in the Acts of the Apostles.
And that we have not the wonted superscription prefixed in this Epistle, viz.
Paul an Apostle, etc. he gives this reason of it; For, says he, writing unto
the Hebrews, because of the ill opinion they had conceived of him, he very
wisely concealed his name, left upon the sight thereof they should be dismayed,
and refuse to read the Epistle: And also, (even as Macarius the Elder said) for
as much as the Lord himself was the Messenger of the Almighty, and sent unto
the Hebrews; Paul for modesties sake, or out of his humility being the Apostle
of the Gentiles, wrote not himself the Apostle of the Hebrews, partly for the
honor due to Christ, and partly also for that he being the Apostle of the
Gentiles, did freely and boldly write unto the Hebrews,

12. Of the Order of the Evangelists according unto the tradition of the
Elders, Eusebius. Nic^ph. ibid.
he thus writes.

The Gospels which contain the Genealogies are placed and accounted the first,
( viz. Matthew and Luke) The Gospel according to Mark was written upon this
occasion; when Peter preached openly at Rome, and published the Gospel by
lively voice; many of his Auditors entreated Mark (having been a hearer and
follower of that Apostle a long time, and one that well remembered his words) to
deliver unto them in writing such things as he had heard Peter Preach before;
which thing, when Peter afterward understood to be done, though he had not
given command that it should be done; yet being done, he forbad it not. John
last of all seeing in the other Evangelists the Humanity of Christ set forth at
large, being entreated by the Disciples, and filled with the holy Ghost, he
wrote chiefly of his Divinity.

13. By the Gnostick in our Author (in whom this term is freequently used) we
are to understand the complete and perfect Christian; Scultet. in Medull.
whom he so styles in opposition unto those foul Heretics and false
Christians, who for the excellency of knowledge, which they vainly boasted of,
Augustine. de Here Is. Heins. annotat.
proudly assumed and appropriated unto themselves this name and title of
Gnostics or knowing men; by which they are commonly known: Against these he
opposes the true Gnostick, for the information and description of whom, he
wrote his Books of Stromes; Lib. 6. ca. 12. in Biblioth.
as the inscription set down by Eusebius, and more at large by Photius, does
more than intimate: though especially and particularly he discourses upon this
subject, in the sixth and seventh Books: wherein he treats of the Affections,
Science, Speech, Prayers, Love both to God and to the Truth, of the benignity,
Sacrifices, and Contemplation of the true Gnostick. In which description he is
so exact, that he therein shows rather what a one a Christian should be, than
what any one is: there being no such example to be found; such as was the
pourtraict of a wise man by the Stoics, and of a commonwealth by Plato, whom
herein our Author imitated.

14. He shows whence several Heresies have their several names. Strom. lib. 7.
Some (says he) take their names from the Authors of them; as from Valentinus,
Marcion and Basilides; although they boast that they bring the opinion of
Mathias: for both the Doctrine and Tradition of all the Apostles was one and
the same: Some are named from the place; as the Peratici: Others from the
Nation; as the Heresy of the Phrygians: Some from their profession; as the
Encratitae, (because they abstained from Marriage, Wine, and the eating of
Flesh) others from their proper opinions as the Docitae and Haematitae: (...).
Some from their hypotheses, (...).
and the things which they honored; as those which are called Cainists and
Ophiani: Others from those things which they nefariously perpetrated and dared;
as those of the Simoniani, who are called Entychitae. Of which last Danaeus
thus speaks: Canistae (qui ab amoribus turpissimis ita sunt appellati) fuerunt
tetriores: Comment. in Augustine. de Haeres. cap. 1. 2.
quanquam Clement, strom. lib. 7. putat fuisse Eutychitas; sed errorem subesse
in condicibus impressis, nemo qui aliorum de eisdem rebus scripta legerit,
dubitabit.

15. In the first Book of Stromes, undertaking to demonstrate the antiquity of
the Christian Religion; and that it was before the Philosophy of the Heathen;
he proves that Moses (who flourished in the time of Inachus the King of the
Argives) was more ancient than any of the Greek Poets, Philosophers, or Wise
men, yea, most of their gods: to which end he sets down and reckons the times
of the Kingdoms of the Jews, Persians, Macedonians and Romans: and so presents
us with an exact and accurate Chronology from the time of Moses, unto the death
of Emperor Commodus; in whose Successors reigns, viz. Lib. 6. cap. 5.
Severus, (for Pertinax, who came between them, held the Empire but a few
Months) he wrote these Books as Eusebius concludes: for thus he: Clemens
writing his Books of Stromes, comprised in the first Volume a Chronicle,
containing the times unto the death of Commodus; so that it is evident, (says
he) that he finished his Books under Severus.

16. He thus descants upon those words of Christ: Strom. lib. 4.
Matthew. 10. 23. When they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: he
does not here persuade to fly, as if to suffer persecution were evil; nor does
he command us, fearing death to decline it by flight; but he wills us, that we
be to none the authors or abettors of evil; he requires us to use caution: but
he that obeys not, is audacious and rash, unadvisedly casting himself into
manifest perils. Now if he that kills a man of God, does sin against God; he
also is guilty of that Murder, who offers himself to Judgment. And such a one
shall he be accounted, that avoids not persecution, presumptuously offering
himself to be taken. He it is, that as much as in him lies, helps forward the
impiety of him that persecutes. Much like to this is that of Athanasius, Numb.
11. vid.

17. Behold, In protreptico.
O man (says he) for how small a matter the Lord does give thee Land to till,
Water to drink, another Water whereby to send forth, or export, and to return
or import thy Commodities, Air wherein to breath, a House to cover thee from
the injury of the weather, Fire wherewith to warm thee, and whereat to employ
thee, a World wherein to dwell: all these things so great, so many, thy Lord
has, as it were, rented out unto thee, at a very easy rate; a little Faith, a
little Thanks, so it be true, so they be hearty: And most unkind thou, if thou
denyest him that rent; the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: if then
thou do not acknowledge thy Lord being compassed round with his blessings; he
will then say unto thee; Get thee out of my Land, and from out of my House;
touch not my Water, partake not of my Fruits. If I have rented these out unto
thee for so small a matter, a little thanks, and thou do deny me that little;
thou have, in so doing, forfeited the whole, and I will require the forfeiture
at thy hands.

6. These and many such like excellent passages do his Writings abound with;
but yet there are intermixed and scattered up and down, Gratian. part. 1.
distinct. 15. (...) 19^. 26.
such things as are neither sound, nor sav^^ry, which are therefore carefully
to be heeded and avoided. In so much as for this cause Pope Gelas^us did
providently require, (says Baro^ius) that the works of this Clement should be
branded with the note of Apocryphal: Because Lactantius deny^d the substance of
the holy Ghost; quis mihi interdicere potest, ne legem institutionum ejus
libros, quibus contra gentes scripsit fortissime, quia superior sententia
dete^tanda est. Hieronym. Epist. ad Pammach. and Oceanum, de errorib. Origin.
wherein notwithstanding he may justly be accounted more wary than wise; for
were this ground sufficient to reject the labors of the ancients, because
among much good grain there is some chaff to be found, none of them would be
remaining, or of any credit at this day. Let us rather sever the Gold from the
Dross, than dam up the Mine, and let what is bad be suffered to continue for the
sake of what is good and useful in them, rather than what is good be rejected
for the bads sake. Nevertheless, it may not be amiss to give notice of what
will not endure the test and trial; lest through inadvertency, and because of
the antiquity and authority of the Author, that should be esteemed and taken up
for sound and current, which upon examination will prove adulterate and
unpassable. Of which sort are these that follow.

10. It is a ridiculous thing (says be) to imagine, Strom. lib. 6. (...)
that the Body of our Savior, as a body, did stand in need of necessary aids
and Ministries that it might continue: for he did eat not for his bodies sake,
which was upheld by an holy Power; but lest it might occasion those with whom
he conversed to think otherwise of him; as indeed afterward some were of
opinion, that he appeared only in a Vision and Phantasm: For, to say it once
for all, he was void of passion, being one whom no motion of affection could
take hold of, neither pleasure nor grief. A strange and gross conceit* and
directly contrary to clear Texts of Scripture.

2. That Christ ought to preach but one year only, Strom. lib. 1.
he fondly gathered from, Luke 4. 19. he has sent me, To preach the acceptable
year of the Lord: and supposes that he suffered in the thirtieth year of his
age. Both which, Exercitat. 1. 26.
as his errors, Casaubo^ makes mention of; and how manifestly repugnant they
both are to the History of the Evangelists, is obvious to every observing eye.

3. He is of the mind, that Jesus Christ descended into Hell for this cause,
that he might preach the Gospel unto the dead, Strom. lib. 6.
and that these are the bodies spoken of, Matthew. 27. 53. 53. that arose at the
time of Christ's passion, that they might be translated unto ^ better place.
Yea, that the Apostles, as well as the Lord himself, Ibid.
did preach the Gospel unto those that were dead. Chemnitius thus reports it:
In examine. part 1. detradit.
Clemens Alexandrinus (inquit) multa citat ex apocryphis, quibus peregri^s
dogmata stabilire conatur: Vt ex libro Pastoris Hermae probat Apostolos post
mortem praedicasse illis qui antea in infidelitate mortui fuer^nt, and illos
conversos vivificasse. He thought that no man was saved before the coming of
Christ, but that those who lived piously and righteously by the Law, or by
philosophy were accounted righteous, (...).
yet wanted Faith: wherefore in Hell they expected the coming of Christ, and
the Apostles, and that by their preaching they were converted to the Faith, and
so saved.

4. He frequently asserteth the freedom of man's will in spirituals. In
protreptico.
e.g. Yours is the Kingdom of Heaven, if directing or turning your free will
unto God, you will believe only, and follow that short way that is preached
unto. (...).
Again, neither praises nor dispraises, neither honors or rewards, nor
punishments are just, if the soul have not free power to desire, and to
abstain. Also, because it is in our power to obey or not to obey; (...).
that none may pretend ignorance, the divine word gives a just call unto all;
Strom. lib. 2.
and requires what every one is enabled to perform. Lastly, defection, going
back, and disobedience are in our power as is also obedience. Ibid.
And in this particular he erred not alone, the two immediately preceding, and
diverse other of the Ancients being of the same judgment; the ground whereof
may be conceived to be this, because many of them had been in their first years
brought up in the study of Philosophy, Ce^t. 2. cap. 4.
and of Philosophers being converted, became Christians; this made them
attribute so much, even too much unto Philosophy, which proved the occasion of
many errors in them: Lib. advers. H^rmogen.
Hence it is that Tertullian calls Philosophers Patriarchas haereticorum: and
Rhen^nus having shown of how great advantage the Philosophy of Platonicks was
unto Valentinus (who had been of that Sect) in the hatching of his wild and
sottish Heresies; In argumen. lib. Tertull. advers. Valentinian.
breaks out into these words; See (says he) how great mischief Philosophy has
always done unto Christianity, well therefore might the Apostle so caution the
Colossians; Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit.
Coloss. 2. 8.
Ierom also exercising some errors of his, Epist. ad Pammac^. and Oceanu^ de
orrorib. Orig.
wherein he had followed Origin, thus pleads for himself; Fae me, inquit,
errasse in adolescentia and philosophorum, i.e. gentilium studiis eruditum,
Patrum nonnulli sunt, qui pro ea qua imbuti fuerunt adolescentes in Scholis
ethnicorum Philosophia naturae viribus plus aequo tribu^^t. Arrowsm. Tactic.
lib. 2. cap. 2. 2.
in principio fidei d^^mata ignorasse Christiana, and hoc putasse in Apostolis,
quod in Pythagora and Platone, (...) Empedocle legeram. Cur parvuli in Christo,
(...) lactentis errorem sequimini? Cur ab eo imputatem discitis, qui necdum
pietatem noverat^ Secunda post naufragium tabula est, culp^^ simpliciter
confiteri. Imitati estis errantem, imitamini and correctum. Erravimus juven^^,
emendemur senes, etc. Now among other things Philosophy does beyond measure
advance the power of man's will and nature abilities: Cent. 2. cap. 10.
and this opinion drew on within the extenuation of Original sin, and the
depravation of the Doctrine of the Merit of Christ; into both which this Father
among the rest was but meanly insighted. And this may be the reason why the
Reverend Cal^^ styles that Doctrine of Free Will, Comment. in Romans 8. 7.
Heatheni^ Philosophy: Procul sit (inquit) a Christi^^ pectore illa de arbitrii
liberate Gentilis Phil^sophia.

5. He affirms, that because the (...) has Free Will, Strom. lib. 1.
he may repent: which saying of his seems to have been the occasion (...) that
error in Origin his Scholar, that the Devils might be saved; Cent. 2. cap. 5.
as both the Cent^rists, and also Gentian Heroet conceive; who in his Education
has this Note in the M^^gin upon these words of Clement; hinc (...) Origenis.

7. He also phansied, Strom. lib. 3. and 5.
that some of the A^gels were incontinent, and being overcome with lust, they
descended and disclose^ many secrets unto those woman with whom they fell in
love, and whatsoever things came to their knowledge, which the other Angels
concealed, and reserved unto the coming of the Lord.

Besides these there are some other things wherein he is judged to be both
unsound and uncertain; sometimes affirming one thing, sometimes another; as
concerning the Baptism of Heretics, which he seems altogether to condemn:
Also, that second Marriages have imperfection in them, and are not without sin,
yea, are little better than fornication; contrary to that express Text. 1
Timoth. 5. 14. I will that the younger women (viz. Cent. 2. cap. 4.
Widows, verse 11.) marry. Likewise, concerning good works, perfection and
repentance, he seems sometimes to contradict himself, and vents very dangerous
opinions: adeo in multis articulis lubricus est, ac saepenumero sibi
contradicit, ut quid constanti sententia affirmet, vix interdum agnoseas.

7. How long this Father lived, as also when, where and how he ended his days
is very uncertain: Histories being silent herein: only probable it is that he
attained unto many years, and continued long after the death of his Master
Pantaenus: For it seems that he compiled his Book, Cent. 2. cap. 10.
both of Stromes and Informations or Institutions (if not all the rest) after
that time, seeing he mentions him as dead, and some good while before: as also
that he had through length of time forgotten many of those things, which he ha^
heard from him. He flourished (says I^rom) under the Emperor Severus and
Autoninus Caracalla: and (as some report) (...) ended his Pilgrimage by a
natural death (...) Alexandria, In Catalog.
where he had long taught; dying* In a good old age, and full of days, em^annum
195.

Tertullianus.
HE styles himself in the Titles prefixed to his Books by the name of Quintus
Septimius Florens Tertullianus; Pamel. in vita Tertull.
perhaps to distinguish himself from some others, whose names did in part agree
with his own. For his Country, he was an African, and had for the place of his
Birth there the famous City of Carthage, (...) (as it is called by Strabo)
Rome's Corrival, Geograph. lib. 10. Hist. natural. lib. 15. cap. 18.
de terrarum orb aemula (says Pliny) that contended with it for the Empire of
the world. And it is observed as memorable, that in his time two of his
Countrymen held the places of highest Dignity both Civil and Ecclesiastical,
Pamel. ibi^^
viz. Septimius Severus and Victor, both Africans, the one being Emperor, and
the other Bishop of Rome.

His Father was a Centurion, Hieron. in catalog. ^
one of eminent Rank, as bearing the office of a Proconsul, who took care to
have his Son from his tender years to be well educated, and trained up in the
Schools; Baron. ad an. 197.. 18.
where, having a pregnant wit and excellent parts, he proved a notable
proficient, and soon attained unto such a measure of knowledge in Philosophy
and all kind of Learning, that he was by all esteemed for one of the most
exquisite and best accomplished Scholars of his time.

He for some years professed and taught the art of Rhetoric in Carthage with
approbation and applause; Sixth. Senens. lib. 3.
from which, after a while he proceeded to the practice of the Law (to the
study whereof he had formerly applied himself, and became well skilled therein,
as Eusebius testifies, stiling him a man well experienced in the Roman Laws)
accurata legum (inquit Nicephorus) and actorum Rom^norum peritia clarus)
performing the office of an Advocate, Lib. 2. cap. 2.
in pleading the causes of such Clients as entertained him, Lib. 2. cap. 8.
with much dexterity. But he is designed unto a more high and honorable
employment, viz. to plead the cause of God, and to publish the glorious
mysteries of the Gospel: in order whereunto the divine goodness finds out a way
for the translating of him from the School of the world into the Shool of
Christ, by his conversion from Gentilism to Christianity.

As touching the time and manner thereof, though nothing be lef^ upon Record,
either by himself, or others directly pointing it out, and acquainting us
therewith; yet are then some things to be found from whence it may be probably
conjectured, that it fell out while he was yet but young, and in the prime of
his years. For

1. He wrote a Treatise of the troubles attending Marriage, cum adhuc esset
adoleseens, when (says Ierom) he was but a young man: yet Baronius conceives
it most likely to have been done by him after his conversion; Advers. Jovinian.
lib. 1. Ad an. 197. 19.
for (says he) I cannot think that Ierom would have directed Eustochium (whom
he wished to read that Book of his) unto the writing^ of an Heathen for her
instruction in that particular.

2. Ierom and others report concerning him, In catalog. Nicephor. lib. 4. c. 34.
that he continued an orthodox Presbyter in the Church, usque ad statam
mediamque aetatatem, unto his middle age; and afterward fell away unto the
Heresy of the Montanists: but now evident it is, that he wrote the most of his
Books before that time, to the doing whereof, and furnishing for such a work, a
great deal of time must needs be requisite. In the judgment of Pamelius, In
vita Ter-Tertull.
and according to his computation, he became a Christian in the third year of
the Reign of Severus, in which also he is of opinion, that he wrote his Book de
P^llio, or of the Cloak; and so continued year after year to put forth some or
other of his Labors unto the time of his defection, which fell out in the
eighteenth year of that Emperor's Reign: so that he remained in the Church
after his conversion about fifteen years before he arrived unto his middle age,
and therefore could be of no great age when first he gave up his name to Christ.

That which gave the occasion of his relinquishing the Heathenish, In Apolog.
and embracing the Christian Religion, some conceive (taking a hint hereof from
a passage of his own) to have been this, Pamel. in vita Tertull.
viz. that the Devils being sometimes adjured, did, though unwillingly, confess
that they were the Gods of the Gentiles. This put him upon the search and study
of the Scriptures, whose great antiquity (as transcending all other writings in
this regard) asserted their authority, and the truth of the predictions
contained in them (testified by answerable events) was a sufficient argument of
their Divinity: which two, duly considered, could not but prove strong
inducements to persuade him, that the Doctrine and Religion therein taught and
discoursed, must needs be the truest, and above any other most worthiest to be
believed and embraced: To which he added, as no small help hereunto, the
diligent perusal of those writings of his Predecessors, wherein they had
testified against the Gentiles their profane practices and abominable
Idolatries.

Having after his conversion spent some time in Carthage (where he was promoted
unto the degree and office of a Presbyter) he afterward came to Rome, Eusebius.
lib. 2. cap. 2.
in which City he was had in great estimation, Clericorum nominatissimis
Romanae urbis. Opus detemporib. mundi.
being famous among those learned men who flourished there at that time. Upon
what occasion he came to Rome, and how long he made his abode there is
uncertain: In vita Tertull.
Pamelius conceives th^^ his Book de corona militis was there written in the
sixteenth year of Severus, in the eighteenth year of whose Reign he made his
defection from the Church, upon which he was excommunicated, and consequently
in al^ likelihood then left that place, returning again unto Carthage. But how
long or short soever his continuance was there, it prove^ too long for him, in
regard of the mischi^^ that there betided him; for in this place (...) was,
that he split and dashed himself upon the Rock of Montanism, either through
(...) overlargeness of the Sails of self-conceit, (...) the impetuous gusts of
his own passions.

Ierom and diverse other Historians do agree in this, In catalog. cent. Rhenan
Platina. Nicephor, etc.
that his defection took beginning from the envy conceived against, and
contumelies cast upon him by the Romish Clergy; moved hereunto, either by his
Learning and Virtue (wherein happily he might go beyond and outshine them, Cent.
3. cap. 10.
and so seem to detract from their worth, and eclipse their Glory) or for that
being extremely studious of continence and chastity, Pa^el. in vita.
they thought him to lean toward, and too much favor (though closely) the
Heresy of Montanus: or lastly, because in some of his Books he had too sharply
reprehended the vices which he had observed among them: hereupon, being a man
of a choleric and violent spirit, impatient and unable to brook and bear such
injuries ( Cum ingenio and calamo omnia vinceret, Scultet (...) Medull.
impatientiam vincere non potuit, inquit Scultet. Miserrimus ego (inquit
Tertullianus ipse) semper aeger caloribus impatientiae, Lib. de patient.
patientiae sanitatem suspicem necesse est) he openly joined himself unto that
Sect, which being once fallen to, he as zealously labored to defend and plead
for, as he had formerly opposed it; proving as vehement an adversary of the
Orthodox, as he had been of the Heretics. Some conceive the occasion of his
fall might be, Pamel. in vit^. council. tom. 1 Binnii notae invit. Victor.
because that after the death of Agrippinus he suffered a repulse, and was put
by the Bishopric of Carthage: Rhenan. in argument. lib. Tertull. advers.
Valentinian.
( Sic Valentinus, cum cujusdam Ecclesiae Episcopatum ambiret, and ipsius non
fuisset habita ratio, offensus hac re, veteris cujusdom opinionis praestigias
adversus orthodoxos docere caepit, hoc videlicet pacto sui contemptum ulturus)
whereunto may be added as a step to his fall, that he was a man of an easy
belief, and of no great judgment, Baron. ad an. 201. controvers. Tract. 2. q.
23. 23.
(says Rivet) insomuch as he was apt to give credit unto the feigned Relations
of every silly woman, and to prefer them before the most certain and Catholic
Doctrines.

These things thus making way for it, the work became the more facile and
easy; Baron. ad an. 201. 10. 11.
whereof one Proclus was the unhappy instrument, reputed a most eloquent man
and one of the more moderate followers of Montanus: with this Man being then at
Rome Tertullian grew familiar, having him in admiration for his eloquence and
Virgin old age: ut, Proculus (inquit) nostrae Virginis senectae and Christians
eloquentiae dignitas: loqui autem eum de P^culo seu Proclo Montanista apparet,
Lib. advers. Valentinian
inquit P^melius, de quo supra auctor lib. de praescri^^. advers. haeretic.
Proclus making his advantage hereof, In annotat. in loc.
soon deceived him, telling him that the Doctrine which he professed, he had
received not from Man, but from the Paracle^ that descended first upon
Montanus: Baron. ^ibid.
he highly commended chastity, enjoined fasting to be observed in the strictest
manner, as by the instinct of the spirit, multiplied watchings and prayers, and
so much extolled martyrdom that he held it unlawful to fly, or use a^ means for
the preservation of life. What (...) thus confidently taught and delivered, was
^^greedily taken in by Tertullian, in so much ^ he quickly became giddy, yea
even drunk^ with his Fanatical opinions; which as he entertained with facility,
so did he retain the^^ with pertinacy: in whom we find this verified; that
eminent gifts may occasion a (...) fall, but cannot keep him from falling: it
being Grace alone that makes the soul steady, and secures it against all the
impetuous blasts of temptation.

Great par^s expose men to hazard.

1. Through pride, which is too often the companion of them, and begotten by
them: hence they soar aloft, prying into things secret, not content to walk in
the common and safe road: they would (as he, Acts 8. 9.) be some body more than
ordinary; and so transcending the limits of sobriety, they do (...): upon which
precipice being once gotten, they soon fall into the snare of the Devil.

2. Through envy, which for the most part follows them, as the shadow the
substance: this blasting their reputation, and being as a dead fly in the pot
of their precious ointment; they betake them unto factions: choosing rather to
side with the erroneus in esteem, then with the orthodox in disgrace.

3. Through ambition, they would fain be as eminent in place as in parts:
accounting themselves injured when others are preferred before them: hence it
comes to pass, that sometime in way of discontent and by way of revenge, they
have deserted, yea set themselves against the truth, because they would make
opposition against those that have stood in their way, and crossed them in their
expectations.

By this means he lost both his repute, and also his place in the Church, which
excommunicated and owned him no longer. Hence also it came to pass, Hilar. in
Math. ^.
that having erred so foully, his writings were of little authority and lost
much of their esteem: being prohibited to be read by Gelasius: Gratian. par. 1.
distinct. 15.
and because absurd opinions were in them, Cent. 3. c. 10.
mingled with other things, they were by the orthodox condemned and reckoned in
the number of Apocryphal books. Rivet. crit. sac.
He was (says Bellarmine) an arch Heretic, and in matters dogmatical of very
small account: Ierom therefore being by Helvidius pressed with the authority of
Tertulian: Tom. 2. Epist. 1.
in his heat thus ^oundly replies; I say no more of him but that he was no man
of the Church. Nevertheless, that especially for which he was adjudged and
proceeded against as an Heretic, was this, that betaking him to the
Cataphrygians or Montanists, Augustine. de haeres. c. 86.
(whom before he had opposed) he began to condemn second marriages (contrary to
the Doctrine of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 14.) as no better then fornication:
Praefat. ant. opera Tert.
which opinion he was the rather moved to embrace, (says Rhenanus) because he
thought that the last day (which elegantly he calls diem expeditionis lib. 1.
ad uxorem.) was near at hand, Rhenan. in argument. in Tertul. exhort. ad
castitat.
as also did Ierom and other of the Ancients grounding upon that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 29. (...) time is short, Hoc tum Apostolis, tum ^ypriano (in
exhortat.
it remains that they that (...) wives, be as though they had none. (...)
hereto he added (which completed his fault) that being divided from the
Cataphrygians, Martyri^ quoniam inquit, in fine (...)
he ^ length gathered conventicles of his own, and became the Author of that
s^ct, which from him are called and known by the name of Tertullianists.
August. de haeres. c. 86.


Doubtless the fall of this worthy Man struck a very great fear with admiration
into the hearts of the faithful, Baron ad an. 216. 17.
when they saw one so eminent, and learned, such a lover of truth, and in every
regard so accomplished, to miscarry.

In this sad condition did he remain unto the end of his life, for ought that
appears in History to the contrary: which mentions his fall, but not his rise
and recovery: herein greatly to be pitied, that having with so much zeal and
strength maintained the Doctrine of Christianity against the adversaries
thereof, he should at length unworthily desert the truth, and become a champion
of the grossest errors. Gal. 2. 1^.
It is iniquity, and makes a Man a transgressor, to build again the things
which he had destroyed, Gal. 3. 3.
and a point of greatest folly to begin in the spirit, 1 Cor. 10. 12.
but to end in the flesh; let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he
fall.

Yet I shall not omit to give you the judgment and charitable thoughts of the
learned Daille concerning him; Treatise of the use of the Fath^rs lib. 2. cap.
4.
We are to take notice (says he) that his Montanism put no separation at all
betwixt him and other Christians, save only in point of Discipline, which he,
according to the severity of his nature, would have to be most harsh and
rigorous: Vid. lib. de Mon. cap. 2. Et li. contr. Psych. cap. ^. S^ also Meri^
Casaubon, it is true he bacame a M^nt^nist or was (...) so at least; though in
very deed he never was of his Congre^ation or Belief, generally: but in matter
of private Revelations only. Treatise of Enthusias^^.
for as for his Doctrine, it is very evident, that he constantly kept to the
very same rule, and the same Faith that the Catholics did. And this is evident
enough, out of all those books which were written by him, during the time of
his being a Montanist: wherein he never disputes or contendeth about any
thing, save only about Discipline.

2. He is a very ancient Author, nea^ neighbor unto the Apostles times,
Rhenan. in praefat. and in annotat. in lib. de cor. milit. item in arg^m. in
li. de carne Christi. primus Latinorum qui quidem extet.
the very first among all the Latin Fathers, and Ecclesiastical Writers, whose
works are come to our hands, then whom the Christian World scarce has an
Elder: who preceeded all the Councils, (those in the Acts only excepted) and
the first that strenuously asserted and vindicated the Doctrines of the Gospel
against all the cunning cavils and bold attempts of profane Heretics.
Theologus Aventi^ annal. Rhenan. in praefat.


He was a Man of a sharp wit, and vehement spirit, Hieronym. in catalog.
very bold and undaunted, which he notably discovered in his plea and Apology
for the Christians, wherein he budgeth not a jot from that constancy that
became him, Zeph. in argum in apogoletic.
not caring and little curious to curry favor, as knowing well he had a just
and honest cause in hand. Vehementi ardore magnoque affectu pro orthodoxa
religione scribit, Rhenan. in argu^. in lide patient.
disputa^, pugnat, ut liqueat, eum nihil fingere, verae pietatis atque Martyrii
amantibus semper gratissimus. (...) institut. lib. 5. (...) 1.
So accomplished was he and exactly skilful in all kind of Learning, (...). Mag^^
as no Man more in the judgment of Ierom; in so much as he accounted that what
himself had, was but very little in comparison: Epist. 128.
also I pray (says he to Fabiola) ne meam (...) comparetis: compare not my
drop to his stream: Rhenan. in praefat.
vir undecunque doctissimus: being excellently insighted into Philosophy, Cent.
3. c. 10.
a most accurate disputant, thoroughly exercised in the Art of Rhetoric, and
most completely furnished with the knowledge of all Antiquity. He had
diligently perused all sorts of Authors (a large Catalogue whereof is set down
by Pamelius) Grammarians, Pamel. in vita.
Poets, Historians, Philosophers, Mathematicians, Orators, Civilians, etc. from
whence this industrious and busy Be, as from so many flowers, gathered that
honey wherewith his Hive was so replenished. He was no less acquainted with the
Greek, then with the Latin Tongue, as appears from his being conversant in
Authors as well Greek as Latin (the most of Ecclesiastics that had gone before
him, having written in Greek.) Shortly, In praefat. in Hilarium.
in the judgment of Erasmus, he was inter Latinos Theologus multo omnium
doctissimus.

After his conversion he bent his studies to Divinity, and spent night and day
in reading not only Ecclesiastical Writers, but chiefly the sacred Scriptures,
Pamel. in vita.
wherein his books show him to be more than ordinarily versed: in citing
whereof he follows the Interpretation of the Septuagint in the old Testament,
and the Greek Text in the new: in translating whereof in a peculiar manner and
different from all others, it is very manifest that he was no mean Grecian but
familiarly acquainted with that Tongue. He had a notably faculty in teaching,
and could do much that way wherein as also in writing, Cent. 3. c. 10.
he excelled both in fullness and gravity: yet would he sometimes have such
sprinklings of the salt of his wit among; Erasm. in prolegom. a^te Grigen.
Cent. 3. c. 10.
as that he would move laughter in his Auditors with his merry conceits: whom
herein Ierom too often imitates.

He was as eminent and as exemplary in his life as other ways, non loquitur
solum magna, Rhenan. argum. in lib. de patient.
verum etiam indubie vixit, not only speaking great things, but without doubt
acting and living accordingly: as Minutius Felix his contemporary; in his
Octavio: speaks of the Christians of that time, Danzus. in Aug. de haeres. cap.
86.
non eloquimur magn^, sed vivimus. Of a comely behavior, innocent and
harmless, ubique, mirum, magnumque animi Zelum in Deum spirat: full of zeal
toward God and of great austerity, insomuch as his over-valuing of continence,
watchings, fastings, Baro. ad an. ^01.. 8.
etc. gave Proclus his Seducer no small advantage, and became one of those
baits whereby he was at length ensnared. These things had made his name and
memory sweet and precious amongst Men unto this day, had not the dead fly
corrupted and marred the savor of the fragrant ointment.

Let Vincentius Lyrniensis be heard, (an ancient Father too) and if any thing
be wanting above, Contra haeres. c. 24.
he will supply it, and make his encomium full. He is (says he) accounted the
chief among the Latins, for who more learned then this Man? who more exercised
in things both divine and humane? In the wonderful vastness and capacity of his
mind, he comprehended all Philosophy, and all the sects of Philosophers, the
authors and assertors of those sects, together with all their Discipline: all
variety of History, yea of all kinds of study. Was not his Wit so weighty and
vehement, that he propounded almost nothing to himself, to be overcome and
mastered by him, which he either brake not through with the sharpness, or else
dash^ in pieces with the ponderousness of it? Moreover, who can set forth the
praises of his speech, which is so environed with I know not what strength of
reason, that whom he could not persuade, he does even force to yield to his
consent: in whom there are as many sentences as words, and as many victories as
reasons: as Marcion, Apelles, Praxeas, Herm^genes, the Jews, the Gentiles,
Gnostics and others knew full well, whose blasphemies he overthrew, with the
many and mighty mounts and batteries of his Volumes, as it were with certain
thunderbolts. And yet even this man, by much more eloquent than happy, not
holding the ancient Faith, even he also became in Ecclesia magna tentatio, a
great temptation in the Church of God.

3. As he was a Man of great abilities, s^ was he of no less industry: as
appears by those lasting monuments of his learned and elaborate Volumes; Acutus
Scriptor and gravis (inquit Danaeus) and qui totum hominem desideret, imo etiam
saepe ingenii communem captum superet, In Aug. in here is. c. 86.
who was had in great estimation, especially by holy Cyprian; so that he
suffered no day to pass, without the diligent reading and perusal of some part
of him: testifying the extraordinary respect which he bare toward him by the
words he was wont to use, Hieronym^ in catal.
when he called for him, saying, Da Magistrum, reach hither my Master: whom
also in many things he imitated, borrowing even his words and expressions from
him, Pamel. in vita.
and transcribing many passages out of him, which he inserted into his own
books: many other also of the Ancients that followed him made use of him, viz.
Ierom, Ambrose, Fortunatus, Basil, Isidore, etc, which plainly shows that they
had him in great veneration. As the ancient Ethnicks honored Homer the Prince
of Poets, Diogen. Laert. in vita ejus.
and particularly Arcesilaus the Academick, who was so delighted with, and
studious of him, that he would always read somewhat of him before he went to
sleep, as also in the morning when he arose, saying that he went, ad Amasium,
to his beloved.

Of his works some are wanting, Fertur multa, quae non extant opuscula
condididi^le. Hieron. in cata. Hieronym. advers. Jovinian. lib. 1. In vita
Tertul. annal. ad an* 197. 20.
but the most remaining unto this day. Of the first sort are.

1. His Treatise of the troubles attending marriage, unto a Philosopher his
friend: which he wrote when he was but young, ( ^um adhuc esset adolescens
lusit in hac materia) before, as Pamelius thinks, but in the judgment of
Baronius, after his conversion.

2. His book of the Garments of Aaron, which Ierom mentions in his Epistle to
Fabiola. Epist. 128.


3. Of the hope of the faithful: wherein he declares himself to be a Millenary:
Hieronym. in catal. de Papia.
himself mentions it, advers. Marcionem, lib. 3.

4. Of Paradise, which he thus speaks of himself, lib. de A^ima. cap. 55.
habes etiam de Paradiso a nobis libellum, quo constituimus omnem animum apud
inferos sequestrari in die Domini. Tertul. lib. de carne Christi c. 8. Epiphan.
haeres. 44.


5. Against Apelles; who (with Lucian the Heretic) having been the Disciple of
Marcion; and falling upon errors of his own, differing from his Master, became
the author of a Sect, that from him have the name of Apelletiani, (as
Tertullian styles them) or Apelleiani (as Epiphanius) or Apellitae (as
Augustine) or Apelliaci (as Rhenanus) alluding unto them, De heraes. c. 23. In
annot. in li. de carne Christi. Ter.
as the denyers of the Flesh of Christ (which was their error) Quasi sine
pelle, sive cute, hoc est, carne; ut Horatius Iudaeum vocat Apellam, Pamel.
fragment. Tert.
quod sine pelle sit, nempe quod praeputium non habeat. Against these Heretics
did Tertullian write this Book, inscribed adversus Apelletianos.

6. Six Books (...), Of Rapture; which (says Pamelius) seem rather to have
been written in Greek than Latin; Hieronym. in cat.
and a seventh, which he wrote particularly against Appollonius; (who with
Victor are the only two Latin Fathers that preceded Tertullian, who has the
third place among them in Ieroms Catalogue) wherein he endeavors to defend
whatever the other reproved him for. These were written after his defection
against the Church, containing in them diverse of his wild, Montanistical
conceits; which therefore may well be wanting without any detriment, the bad by
much over-weighing the good that was in them; they might happily be suppressed by
some, who wished well unto the peace of the Church; Rhenan. praefat. in opera
Tertu.
and surely the loss of them would have proved a gain, had the errors
contained in them, been with them buried in everlasting oblivion. It Is a
mistake of Platina to say, In vita Calisti.
that he wrote six Books of Ecstacy against Apollonius; whereas 'twas only a
seventh: So it is also of Honorius Augustodunensis, De Script. Eccles. cap. 54.
who reckons but five of Ecstasie, and six against Apollonius: and of
Trithemius, who records but one of each, which he says he had seen; De Script.
Eccles.
so that they seem to have been extant, even unto his time.

7. A Book against Marcion, Contra Marcion. lib. 1.
as he himself intimates; written by him in his younger years, somewhat
overhastily: as Ierom speaks of an Allegorical exposition of the Prophet
Obadiab composed by himself in his youth; libere profiteor illud fuisse
puerilis ingenii; Abdiam Prophet.
in libris quoque contra Marcionem Septimius Tertullianus hoc idem passus est.

8. Of the submission of the Soul. Inproleg. ante lib. Tertul. ad Nationes.


9. Of the superstition of that age, these two, says Gothfredus, among the
rest were in the Index of the Books of Tertullian, which was prefixed unto that
Ancient Manuscript, out of which he took those two Books of his ad Nationes
which he published.

10. That the Soul is corporeal, In argumen. lib. Trrtul. de resurrect. ^arn.
volumen hoc suppressum putamus, inquit Rhenanus. To which added.

11. De Fato.

12. De Nuptiarum angustiis ad Amicum philosophum.

13. De mundis and immundis animalibus.

14. De circumcisione.

15. De Trinitate.

16. De censu animae adversus Hermogenem: which Pamelius has in his Catalogue
also.

17. Trithemius sets down in his Catalogue a Book of his Contra omnes Haereses;
which begins with Divorum Haereticorum.

18. The Book of English Homilies, tom. 2. part. 2. against the peril of
idolatry, mentions his Book, Contra coronandi morem; which I find no where else
spoken off: unless it be the same with his Book, De corona Militis.

19. Bishop Andrews in his Speech against Mr. Traske, mentions a Book of
Tertullian's De Sabbato Iudaico, which (says he) we have lost.

His Works that are extant follow here in their order, as Rhenanus, and others
have set them down.

1. Of Patience, Hyper. de rat. stud. Theolog.
wherein he ingeniously describes that grace, presenting us with a lively
draught of it, pressing with diverse notable arguments to it, and proving that
neither losses in Estate, Scultet. Medull.
nor provocations, reproaches, nor the death of friends, the desire of revenge,
nor divine castigations are just causes of impatience.

2. Of the Flesh of Christ; Rhenan. argument. in l^b.
that it was true and real Humane Flesh which he took: against Marcion,
affirming him to be clothed only with imaginary flesh, and not born, also
against Apelles, who granted him to have a solid body, but withal held that he
took it not of the Virgin Mary, but borrowed it of the Stars and Celestial
Substances, August de here is. cap. 23.
which he restored again, when he ascended.

3. Of the Resurrection of the Flesh: In Apolog. pro Zuingl. Cent. 3. cap. 4.
Liber vere aure us; a truly golden Book, says Gu^lther: wherein he proves it,
luculentismis and firmissimis argumentis, most clearly and strongly: Scultet.
in Medull.
1. Because the dignity of the flesh is such, that it ought to be raised. 2.
The Power of God is such, that it may be raised. 3. The Justice of God requires
that it should be raised up. 4. The Testimonies of Scripture are clear, that it
shall be raised.

4. Of Prescriptions against Heretics: an expression borrowed from the Civil
Law: Mynfinger. Schol. in mistitut. Just. lib. 2. In vocabulario.
used by Civilians, pro exceptione perpetua: Pr^escriptio (inquit Altenstaig)
est jus ex tempore capiens firmitatem. In what sense it is here to be
understood, take Scultetus his words. Cum (inquit) vindicanti rem suam domino
possessio longi temporis objicitur, In Medull.
praescribi ei dicitur; eaque See also Chamier. tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 8.
praescriptio longi temporis praecisa locuti^^ pro Praescriptio ex longi
temporis possessione appellatur. Sic Praescriptionem haereticorum and Ecclesiae
vocat Tertullianus illud omne, quod j^ri^ cujusdam specie, haeretici Ecclesiae,
and contra haereticis Orthodoxi opponebant. A most excellent, eloquent and
convincing Commentary; a choice and truly golden piece (says Zanchy) wherein
being willing to put a stop, Baron. ad an. 201. 8. Epist. de discer. Spi^itib.
if possible, to that spreading gangrene, he delivers unto the Faithful certain
Rules, by which they might be enabled to discern, who are Heretics; and the
better know how to deal with them.

5. Against the Jews: wherein he convinces them of their errors, Rhenan. in
argument. Pamel. in arg^ment.
in denying the Gentiles admittance unto the Gospel (as 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16.) in
ascribing too much unto the Law of Moses, and urging the Ceremonies as
necessary unto Salvation, which he proves to be temporary and mutable; and that
they were accordingly changed by the coming of Christ, as was fore-prophesied;
whom they deny to come; therefore does he from the Scriptures largely discourse
of, and prove the Nativity, Kingdom and Passion of Christ; as also the calling
of the Gentiles, rejection of the Jews, destruction of Jerusalem, and the
second coming of Christ.

6. Five Books against Marcion; of whom Eusebius reports, lib. 4. cap. 14.
that meeting Polycarp, and asking him; Do thou know us? Polycarp, replied, I
know thee to be first born of Satan: Among other his wicked errors, this was
one: That there were two Gods: one who was the Father of Christ, whom he called
good, clement and merciful: the other the Creator of the World, whom he called
not only just, (as Cerdon his Master had done from whom he sprung) but also
cruel and evil; for which cause he is justly branded by Clement of Alexandria
with this Note, Epiphan. haeres. 42. Augustine. de haeres. cap. 22.
(...); an ungrateful wretch toward his Creator, the God of Nature. This our
Author strongly confutes, proving the the Creator of the World to be the only
true God, and the Father of Christ.

7. Against Hermogenes; Rhenan. in annotat.
who was an African, our Authors Countryman; and by Profession a Painter. The
Error he held, (which here Tertullian confutes) was, that the matter whereof
all things were made, was coeternal with God; which error he therefore
embraced, Rhenan. in argument.
because he hoped by this means to excuse God from being the author of evil,
Which (says he) proceeded not from the Creator, but from the matte^ whereof
things were created: Idem. in annotat.
Vix alibi (...) est argumentis: Scarce any where does he arg^^ more strongly
than in dealing with this Heretic, whom he follows closely, and press^^
hardly every where.

8. Against the Valentinians; who brought in and mixed their strange Platonical
Fable^^ ( crimina potius quam numina inquit Tertullianus) with the Doctrines of
Christianity^ fancying no less than thirty Aeones, Dan^us in August. de haeres.
cap. 11.
( crimi^^ potius, etc.) Gods, Male and Female, Born, Ma^^rying and begotten;
Nicet. Choniat. Thesaur. Orth. ^id. lib. 4. cap. 4.
not unlike the Heath^^ Poet Hesiod. Errors so gross and sott^^^ that they are
altogether unworthy of a gra^^ discussion; the bare narration of them ^^ing a
sufficient confutation; etiam sol^^ modo demonstrare, Pamel. and Rhenan. in
argument.
destruere est: which th^^fore our Author for the most part cont^^ himself
withal, as deserving rather scorn ^^derision, Rhenan. Ibid. Pamel. in vita.
than a serious consideration. (...) in this Book makes mention of Irenaeus,
(...) before him had written on this Subject quem pene ad verbum est imitatus;
for its apparent he took his relation from th^^ adding little thereto, beside
quips and jests*

9. Against Praxeas; Rhenan. in argument.
who denied the (...) of persons in the Godhead: affir^^ that there was no God,
but the Father (...) that he was born of the Virgin Mary, (...) upon the Cross,
and was Jesus Christ: (...) Heretics who held this opinion, as they (...) the
name of Praxeani from their Author, (...) also of Patripassiani from their
Error, Augustine. de haeres. cap. 41. Danaeus in hunc lib. ^ap. 36.
(...) they said it was God the Father that suffe^^ Which Heresy Tertullian
re^els, proving (...) sundry arguments the Doctrine of the Trinity. This Book
he wrote after his middle age, and when he was tainted with Montanism: for
herein we have him speaking of the Paraclete and new Prophecy: Pamel. in
paradox. Tertull.
its therefore warily to be read; In nullo libro c^ntius legi debit (inquit
Rhenanus) quam in eo quem adversus Praxeam scripsit, In admonit. de Tertull.
dogmat.
unde periculum esse possit imprudenti lectori.

10. Of the Soldiers crown or garland, Tertull. principio lib. Rhenan. in
argumen^*
which was written upon this occasion. A Christian Soldier coming to the
Tribune to receive the Emperous donative, brought his Crown or Garland of
Flowers in his hand; which the rest (as the manner was) wore on their heads:
for which being questioned, he boldly alleged this reason, that he was a
Christian, and therefore that it was not lawful for him to observe that Ethnic
Custom: hereupon he was haled unto the prison to be punished. This act of his
being censured by many as unadvised and needless, Scultet. in Medull.
Tertullian in this Book undertakes the defense of it, proving it to be
unlawful for Christians to comply with the Heathens therein: Rhenan. ibid.
1. From Custom and Tradition (instancing in many particulars observed by
Tradition, and showing the force of it.) 2. From Nature. 3. From the Original
of wearing those Crowns, in honor of the Heathen Gods. Wherein he with much
zeal opposes whatsoever becomes not the profession of Christianity; earnestly
pressing Christians unto constancy in that way, which they have entered into
without ^^rgiversation. He in this tract also discovers his Montanism; for,
answering the censurers of the Soldier; plane superest, (inquit) (...) etiam
martyria recusare meditentur, ^e kins. problemat.
qui prophetias ejusdem Spiritus Sancti respuerunt: it (...) therefore written
after he was a Montani^^: from whom he received all those idle Ceremonies which
here he makes mention of, (...) the Centurists very profitably conjecture;
though Pamelius would fain have it otherwise. In Annotat. numb 30.


11. To the Martyrs: Rhenan. in argument.
which Book he (...) unto those that were in prison, whom h^ styles Designatos,
destined unto suffering for the Testimony of Jesus; comforting, confirming, and
exhorting them to constancy; showing the commodity or benefit of a prison; that
the Spirit is ready, though the (...) be weak; and that even Heathens for (...)
glory have endured the utmost.

12. Of the vailing of Virgins; Rhenan. in annotat. Pamel. in annotat.
this (...) wrote as well in Greek as in Latin; whi^^ may be collected from
those his first wor^^ Proprium jam negocium passus meae opini^^^ Latin quoque
ostendam, virgins nostras (...) oportere. Wherein he proves that Virg^^ ought
to wear a veil upon their heads: (...) he was moved to do by a contrary custom
(...) those of Carthage, whose Virgins used (...) come into the Congregations
unveiled, (...) so they might the more easily get them Husbands. And whereas
some objected that (...) Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 10. Spoke of married Women only,
our Author shows that he meant (...) of Virgins also. He concludes this Bo^^
with these words, which plainly show it (...) be his: Haec cum bona pace
legentibus, etc. (...) those who with good and peaceable (...) read these
things, preferring profit before custom, peace and grace from our Lord Jesus be
multiplied upon them, with Septimius Tertullian, whose work this is.

13. Of the habit of Women: wherein he exhorts, Rhenan. in argum.
unto Christian modesty, wishing them to avoid excess in their apparel, and for
this end to remember the condition that Eve has brought them into; that evil
Angels were the first inventers of strange fashions, and that gold and silver
were not ordained of God for such an use.

14. Of the decking or adorning of women, Pamel. in argum.
a Book of a much like subject with the foregoing; only herein he particularly
blames curiosity about their hair and skin, exhorting them not to addict
themselves unto paintings, and what might set off their Beauty.

15. Unto his Wife, two Books; wherein 1. He advises her, Rhenan. in argum.
in case he should die before her, not to marry again. 2. He exhorts Christian
Women to abstain from marrying with Heathens, setting down the inconveniences
of such Marriages, viz. that they cannot so freely attend the Duties of
Christianity; and commends those of one Christian with another, because such
may have full liberty in their whole Duty, which he thus particularly sets
down, Tertul. ad uxor. lib. 2* sub finem.
Libere aeger visitatur, indigens sustentatur, eleemosynae sine tormento,
sacrificia sine scrupulo, quotidiana diligentia sine impedimento; non furtiva
signatio, non trepida gratulatio, non mutae benedictio, sonant inter duos
Psalmi and Hymni, and mutuo provocant, quis Deo melius ^anat; talia Christus
videns and audiens gaudet.

16. Of flight in time of persecution; being consulted by one Fabius a
Presbyter, Rhenan. in argum*
whether it were lawful to fly at such a time; (...) wrote this Treatise by
way of answer, whe^^ in he holds that in such cases a Christi^^ ought not to
fly, but rather valiantly to (...) for the name of Christ: and that that
Precept, Matthew. 10. 23. When they shall persecute you in one City, flee ye into
another, (...) temporal, and concerned that time and stated the Church only.
But (says Peter Money) who will so diligently weigh his reasons, (...) find
that they have in them much more ele^gancy than strength. ^pist. de fu^^ in
persecut.
This Book was (...) written against the Church after his defect^^^ the error
herein maintained being one (...) those he had learned from Montanus; of (...)
Baronius taxes him somewhat tartly; (...) Montanistarum (inquit) de non (...)
nec securitatem redimendo, Tertullianus in p^^ceps semel infeliciter actus, ^d
an. 205. 15.
edito ea de (...) mentario validissime tutari conatus est, and (...) admodum.

17. Unto Scapula the President of C^thage, whom (because he threatened the
C^^stians with utmost punishment, Rhenan. in argum.
unless (...) would abjure and deny Christ) he depre^^ and admonishes not to
persist in his (...) lest he should bring the wrath of God (...) himself and
the whole City, as it had (...) others, whereof he gives diverse instances*

18. An exhortation to Chastity, wh^^ he persuades his Friend, Rhenan. ^n
argum.
who had lost (...) wife, to abstain from marrying again; c^^cluding from those
words, 1 Cor. 7. 29. (...) time is short: That the last day was not (...) off,
and therefore he should forbear, as (...) because of the impediment arising
from marriage. Here in his heat he condemns second marriage, accounting it (as
Montanus had done) but little better than adultery. This Book is another of
those which he wrote against the Church.

1. Of once marrying, or single marriage, wherein he shows this discipline not
to be new, Scultet. in M^dull.
but ancient, and peculiar unto Christians. What in the former Treatise he only
persuaded, Rhenan. in argum.
in this he magisterially enjoins, more openly condemning second marriage: they
are both of the same subject, Pamel. in vita. Hieronym. in catalog.
and in diverse places agreeing even in the same words. This is the fifth of
those Books which he wrote against the Church after his defection.

20. Of the Cloak; Rhenan. in argum.
written upon this occasion, when Tertullian had laid aside his Gown (the Roman
Weed) and taken on a Cloak, as more becoming Christian Simplicity, he was by
one branded with the note of inconstancy: hereupon (in vindication of himself)
he writes this Book, therein showing the antiquity and commodious use of the
Cloak. This being the Garment of the Greeks, which they were wont to cast over
their other Garments: hence it came to pass, that by way of reproach, the
Christians using it, were called Grecians; and when they went abroad, they
commonly heard this nickname or taunt, (...) alluding unto their Garment. Also
because of the simplicity or meanness both of it and those that used it, it
grew into contempt; and it became a Proverb among the Carthaginians, a toga ad
pallium, from the Gown to the Cloak, noting the change from a more eminent to a
meaner estate and condition, from riches to poverty.

21. Of the testimony of the Soul: wherein by a prosopopoea he fetches
arguments from the Soul it self, Pamel. in argum.
even of Ethnicks, whereby he convinces them of their Atheism and abominable
Idolatries: among the rest, from those speeches frequent in the mouths of such
as are not Christians, e. g. Si Deus voluerit, Deus bonus est, Tertul. de (...)
animae.
benedicat te Deus, Deus videt omnia, Deo commendo, Deus reddet, Deus inter nos
judicabit, etc. His last words in this Treatise are remarkable, which are
these, M^rito igitur omnis anima rea and testis est, in tantum and rea erroris,
in quantum testis veritati^* and stabit ante aulas Dei die judicii nihil habens
dicere: Deum praedicabas and non requirebas; Daemonia abominabaris, and il^a
adorabas; judicium Dei appellabas, nec esse credebas; inferna supplicia
praesumebas, and non praecavebas; Christianum nomen sapiebas, and Christianum
pers^quebaris.

22. Of the Soul: wherein he handles diverse questions* Scultet. in Medull.
and discusseth many controversies with the Philosophers about the essence,
operations, adjuncts and various state of the Soul: which he would have to be
corporeal, endued with form and figure, and to be propagated and derived from
the substance of the Father to the body of the Son, and engendered with the
body, increasing and extending it self together with it; and many other the
like dreams he has, in the maintaining whereof, he uses so much subtilty,
strength of reason and eloquence, as that (they are the words of the learned
Daille) you will hardly meet with, Treatise of the right use of the Fathers,
lib. 2. cap. 4.
throughout the whole stock of Antiquity, a more excellent and more elegant
piece than this Book of his: yet was it composed by him when he was turned
Cataphrygian. Lord Digby's second Letter.
Hence Bellarmine having made use of a passage taken from hence for the proof
of Purgatory, the most Reverend Usher thus replies, In his answer to the
Jesuits challenge.
he must give us leave (says he) to put him in mind with what spirit
Tertullian was lead when he wrote that Book de anima, and with what authority
he strengt^e^eth that conceit of men's paying in Hell for their small faults
before the Resurrection; namely, of the Paraclete, cap. ult. d^ anima.
by whom, if he mean Montanus the Arch-Heretick (as there is small cause to
doubt that he does) we need not much envy the Cardinal for raising up so
worshipful a Patron of his Purgatory.

23. Of Spectacles or Plays, Pamel. in vita Tertul.
written (as Pamelius conceives) in the twelfth year of Severus the Emperor,
in which were exhibited unto the people those plays that were called Ludi
seculares, because they were presented only once in an age or an hundred years,
unto which therefore the people were solemnly invited by a public cry made in
these words, Brisson. de formul. li. 8.
Convenite ad ludos spectandos, quos neque spectavit quisquam, neque
spectaturus est: Come ye unto those Spectacles which no man now beheld, or
shall behold again. Hereupon Tertullian in this Book (which he wrote both in
Greek and Latin) makes it evident that these plays had their original from
idolatry, and were full of all kind of cruelty and obscenity, and that
therefore it was utterly unlawful for Christians to behold them, and that they
should provoke the truth of God against them, Baron. ad an. 206. 4.
should they not fear to be present at them. Pamel. in annotat. number. 1.
Therefore Constantine the Great did by a law prohibit the setting forth and
frequenting of such kind of plays. And herein our Author does so largely treat
of the several sorts of play which then were wont to be made use of, that a
curious Reader needs no other commentary fully to acquaint himself with those
Antiquities.

24. Of Baptism, against Quintilla one of the Disciples of Montanus, who denied
or took away Baptism by water; of whom he scoffingly thus speaks, Tertul. de
baptism.
Optime novit pisciculo^ necare, de aqua auferens. He therefore proves, that it
is not an empty or idle Ceremony, Pamel. in argum.
but of great force and virtue, Scultet. in Medul.
setting down the form and manner, together with the Rites observed by the
Ancients in the administration thereof, and resolves diverse questions about it.
This also was written both in Greek and Latin.

25. Scorpiacum, In annot. in hunc lib.
a Book against the Gnostics; so called from one Scorpianus an Heretic,
against whom particularly it was intended, says Pamelius: but more probably
from the nature of it, being an antidote against the bite and sting of the
Scorpion, to which purpose Ierom thus speaks, Advers. Vigilant.
Scribit adversum haer^sim tuam, quae olim erupit contra Ecclesiam (ne and in
hoc quasi repertor novi sceleris glorieris) Tertullianus vir eruditissimus,
insigne volumen, quod Scorpiacum vocat rectissimo nomine, quia arcuato vulnere
in Ecclesiae corpu^ v^nena diffudit, quae olim appellabatur Cain^ Haeresis, and
multo tempore dormiens, vel sepult^, nunc a dormitantio suscitata est. These
Heretics vilified Martyrdom, Baron. ad an^ 205. 19. This was also the Doctrine
of Basilides the Heretic* See Origin. Tom. 2. in Math. Tract. 28.
teaching that it was not to be undergone, because God would not the death of a
Sinner, and Christ had died that we might not die. By this Doctrine they did
much harm to many weak ones in the Church, who, to save themselves, would deny
Christ and offer incense. Against these Tertullian herein opposes himself,
proving Martyrdom to be good, and setting forth the excellency thereof by many
examples. And in thus doing he deserved well, had he not (unhappy man) ran
afterward into the other extreme of the Montanists, who magnified Martyrdom
too much (denying the lawfulness of flight to avoid danger in that case) as
these did too much undervalue it.

26. Of Idolatry, Pamel. in vita Tertul.
written about the same time, with his Book de spectaculis; wherein, being
desirous to take away all kind of idolatry, Pamel. in argum.
lest Christians should longer labor under gross ignorance herein; Scultet. in
Medul.
he shows the original of it, and how many ways (and not only in the
worshipping of Idols) they may be guilty of it, all which they ought to beware
of and avoid, and not to comply with Idolaters in their Festivals, Solemnities
and such like observations.

27. Of Chastity, Baron. ad an. 216. ^. In hoc libr^ est vehementior.
which was written upon this occasion; Zephyrinus Bishop of Rome having
published an Edict, in which he gave notice unto all the faithful, that the
Catholic Church receives such as repent, though they had fallen into the sins
of Fornication and Adultery: Lib. de pudicit. paulo post initium*
Tertullian herein opposes him, as may be gathered from his own words: I do
hear, says he, that there is an Edict published, and that a p^remptory one:
Pontifex scilicet maximus Episcopus Episcoporum, Veteres boni ominis causa^
Bonu^ factu^ praefari solebant in edictis. Tu^neb. adversa. l. 3. c. 22.
dicit* ego and moechiae and fornicationis delicta paenitentiae functis
dimitto. O edictum, cui adscribi non poterit Bonum factum. -- Erit ergo and hic
adversus Psychicos: so he used to call the Orthodox after he became a
Montanist. Scultet. in Medull.
And herein he undertakes to answer all the arguments brought for this
practice; denying that such ought to be received. Ierom says that he wrote
this book against repentance, Epist. Damaso. number. 146.
and wonders at the man that he should think those publicans and sinners with
whom Christ did eat, Math. 9. 6.
to be Gentiles and not Jews, the better to defend his error, weakly grounding
his opinion upon that in Deuteronomy. 23. non erit pende^s vectigal ex filiis Israel.
This book he wrote against the Church.

28. Of Fasting, against the Psychiici: So, as we have said, ^ame. in adnotat.
he contumeliously calls the Orthodox; See Rhenan. annot. in lib. Tertul.
advers. Praxe^ Scultet. in Medul.
accounting those to be carnal, who rejected the prophecy of Montanus, and
those only spiritual (alluding unto, 1 Cor. 2.) who received and embraced it.
Herein he defends the set Fasts and stations observed by the Montanists. Of the
name Psychicus, Baronius gives us this account. Ignominiae caus^ Orthodoxos
Psychicos nominare, fuit (ut author est Irenaeus. lib. 1. cap. 1.) Valentini
haeresiarchae inventum, Baron. ad an. 201. 14.
qui Psychicos nominabat homines qui non essent, sicut ipse, ut aiebat,
spirituales. Transiit vox eadem ad Cataphrygas, qui aeque omnes non
suscipientes Paracletum, Psychicos appellabant.

29. Of prayer; Comment. in Math. Scult^t. in Medul.
which Hilary calls, volumen aptissimum; wherein he commends and commenteth
upon the Lords Prayer, adding somewhat of the adjuncts of prayer. The title and
subject hereof seem to intimate that it was a mistake in Sixtus Senensis, to
imagine that he wrote two books upon this subject, Biblioth. sanct. l. 4.
one whereof he intitles in orationem dominicam, the other de oratione.

30. An Apology against the Gentiles in the behalf of the Christians; This was
written by him in the Latin Tongue, says Nicephorus, l. 2. c. 8. but
translated into Greek.
wherein he notably and at large defends their innocence, clearing them of the
crimes falsely charged upon them, and fully evincing the groundlesness of the
adversaries hatred to, and unjust proceedings against them; imitating herein
Justin and Aristides who had undertaken the same task before him, who yet he
far transcends, both in sharpness of wit and soundness of Learning: Pamel. in
argument.
how boldly does he stand up against the Gentiles? how constantly maintain the
purity of our faith? what Authors does he not read? which of their disciplines
does he not touch? so that this book alone is abundantly sufficient to convince
the pertinacy of the Gentiles? In Epist. ad Magnum. 84 Zephyr. in argument.
It contains in it (says Ierom) cunctam saeculi disciplinam: wherein he is
more elegant than ordinary: the strength whereof was such, that in likelihood
it was the thing that prevaii'd to the mitigation of the enemies fury, and, in
some measure, Panel. in vita Tertul.
the cessation of the persecution then raised against the Christians. It was
written by him, Ibid.
as both Pamelius and Baronius conj^ct^^^, in the seventh year of the Emperor
Severus, Baro. ad an. 201. 37.
An. Christi 201. Of the excellency hereof Prateolus thus speaks; proculdubio,
De haeres. lib. 18.
inquit, verum est; quum acris and ardentis ingenii non ferens gentilium
insolentiam atque saevitiam qua in Christianos ferebantur omnes ingenii sui
nervos in borum defensionem intendit, incomparabiles interim eruditionis and
eloquentiae suae opes isthic oftentans.

31. Ad nationes; In prolego. ante notas in l. Tertul. ad nationes.
libri duo: set forth and published singly, by Iacobus Cothofr^dus, I.C. which
by diverse arguments he would prove to be Tertullians; also that they were
written before his Apologetick, as a Prodrome or preparatory to it; as his book
de testimonio anim^ followed after and was added as a third way whereby he
attempted the Gentiles, viz. by testimonies drawn from the soul, and by those
forms of speech, wherein they named God in common use among them. He also shows
it to differ from his Apologetick, because in these books he directs himself
unto the Nations in general; but in that, only unto the Governors and
Presidents of the Roman Empire: besides, these are purely Elenctical, wherein
he undertakes not to defend the cause of the Christians (as in the other he
does) but reproves the iniquity of the Nations against the Christians, Epist.
ad Magnu^. 84. Novatianus scripsit de cibis Judaicis. Honor. Augusto dunens.
descrip. Eccles. also, Hieronym. in catalog. Scultet. in Medul.
and shows the vanity of the Gentile Gods. Ierom mentions these books contra
gentes, as distinct from his Apology: quid, inquit, Tertulliano eruditius? quid
acutius? Apologeticus ejus, and contra gentes libri cunctam saeculi continent
Disciplinam.

Of these following, it is doubted whether they be his or no.

1. An Epistle, concerning Judaical meats: wherein he shows that the difference
between clean and unclean meats enjoined unto the Jews, is taken away and
abolished under the Gospel. Pamel. edit. Tertull.
Pamelius thinks this Epistle to be none of his, but rather Novatians, whose
name therefore he prefixeth to it, thus, Novatiani Romanae Ecclesiae presbyteri
de cibis Iud^icis epistola. In catalog. script.
It seems (says Bellarmine) to have been sent by some Bishop unto his own
people; but Tertullian was no Bishop: yet I determine nothing. Ctitic. Sac.
Both the Style (says Rivet) and the Texts of Scripture otherwise Translated
then in Tertullian; as also that the Author remembers his withdrawing in the
time of persecution; (which Tertullian is every where against) plainly show it
to be none of his.

2. Of the Trinity: Ruffin. in apolog. pro Origin. Pamel. in argument. Sixth.
Seneus. Bibloth. Sanct. l. 4.
concerning which Ruffin and others do report that certain of the Macedonian
Heretics, who were (...), finding somewhat in Tertullians book of the Trinity
which was for their advantage inserted it among the Epistles of Cyprian,
causing them to be dispersed about Constantinople and sold at a low rate, that
so being the more bought up and read, what was unsound therein might be the
sooner embraced for the Authority of so great an Author, by which means, as
they supposed, their cause would be credited and promoted. But (says Ierom)
there is no such matter; In Apolog. advers. Ruff.
for that book of the Trinity is neither Tertullians nor Cyprians, but
Novatians; as both by the title and propriety of the style does evidently
appear; characterem alium and genus dieendi nitidius in eo notat Laurentius.
Hence Ierom speaking of Novatian: Rivet. Crit. Sac. In Catalog. Parker. de
descens. l. 4. 10.
He wrote, says he, grande volumen, a great volum of the Trinity, making as it
were, an Epitome of Tertullians work upon this subject, which many ignorantly
think to be Cyprians: this piece of Novatians exceeding in bulk that of
Tertullians now extant, Pamel. in frag. Tertul.
it must needs refer unto some book of his on that subject, now wanting; unless
we will make (which is absurd) the Epitome to be larger then the book it self,
whose compend it is. Bellarmine supposes it to be beyond all doubt, In
Catalog. script. and controvers. de Christo. l. 1. c. 10.
that this book is none of Tertullians, because the heresy of Sabellius (which
began almost an hundred years after Tertullians time) is therein by name
refuted, Pamel. in argument.
with whom Pamelius accords, adding this as another reason of his confidence,
that the Author in the sixth Chapter denies Corporeal Lineaments in God, which
Tertullian more then once affirms. How ever it be; it is a learned and elegant
book; Cent. 3. l. 10.
(though yet there are some things to be found in it, In Medul.
not agreeable to the Christian Faith) and I conclude, says Sculteius, that
whoever was the Author, it is written according to the genius of Tertullian,
and therefore deservedly set forth under his name; seeing it agrees so well
with that Noble work of his against Praxeas. Ba^on ad an. 116. 19
Baronius tells us, that those of the Eastern Church did receive it as the
legitimate writing of Tertullian.

3. Of Repentance: Rhenar. in argument.
wherein he discourses of the excellency and utility thereof: persuading to
beware of recidivation and returning unto sin again after repentance:
particularly directing himself unto the Catechumens, who for that they believed
their sins would be all blotted out and washed away in Baptism, were not so
careful, as they should have been, to abstain from it. Est autem hic
commentarius ejusmodi, Ibid.
ut theologi eum debeant ad unguem ediscere: nam egregium monumentum est
antiquitatis; tam sancte docet, tam pie suadet, tam instanter urget rem
ecclesiasticae disciplinae summopere necessariam. Scultet. in Medull.
In the argument of this book Rhenanu^ that expert Antiquary and solertiss^nus
Tertulliani interpres, has spoken so much and so freely against the Auricular
Confession of the Romish Synagogue, Index expurgat. pe^ Francise. Junium.
( crudelis illa conscientiarum carnificina, that cruel rack of consciences)
that the Council, or rather that politic and packed Conventicle of Trent, took
order that the most part of it should be expunged, as unskilful, rash, false,
heretical, and otherways scandalous: as, they did also, by somewhat contained
in the argument of his book de carne Christi; because it suited not with their
Doctrine of the perfection of the Virgin Mary; a short way, were it as safe
and honest, to make all sure. But this book also, in the judgment of the
quick-sighted Erasmus, grounded upon the difference of the style from that of
Tertullian, Cent. 3. c. ^ Rivet. Crit. Sac.
is none of his but of some other, very studious in our Author, and living
about the same time: to whom Rhenanus subscribes, In argumen^.
though the author use many words and figures, agreeable to and borrowed from
Tertullian. I am of opition, says Daille, that both the birth and fortune of
that piece de paenitentia has been, Treat. of the use of the Fathers part. 1.
cap 3.
if not the very same, yet at least not much unlike that of the Trinity; though
Pamelius and Baronius be of another mind, In argum. ad an. 216. 18.
and would fain it should be his.

4. His Poems; which are diverse according to Pamelius, Pamel. Edit. Tom 4.
viz.

1. Against Marcion 5. books.

2. Of the Judgment of the Lord.

3. Genesis.

4. Sodom.

5. His Poem to a Senator that turned from the Christian Religion to the
service of Idols. But should we reject them all as Apocryphal (seeing neither
Ierom nor Eusebius make any mention of them) together with Iuret's, Biblioth.
Patr. Tom. 8.
Ionab and Nineveh (notwithstanding the Authority of his old Manuscript) I
suppose that neither our Author nor the Commonwealth of Learning would at all
be injured hereby. Praefat. in Tom. 4.
Pamelius tells us, that in his Edition of Cyprian's works he had entitled
them unto him as the composer of them; but thinks it not amiss to follow the
censure of Sixtus Senensis who ascribes the Poem of Sodom unto Tertullian,
induced hereunto by the fidelity (as he supposes) of some Manuscripts: and
because the style is the same with that of the other, he concludes that all
three were his, viz. Genesis, Sodoma and ad Senatorem. A weak ground for him to
change his mind, and build such confident conclusions upon, as well may we deny
them to be either Tertullians or Cyprians, and so leave him to seek a Father
for them.

4. For his style and manner of writing, he has a peculiar way of his own,
s^us quidam est character, says Erasmus: sufficiently elegant; In Epist. ante
^ilar. de ^eres. ca. 86. Nicephor. Hieronym. Epist. 13. Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
ejus opuscula eloquentissime scripta, inquit Augustinus; eloquentia admodum
pollens est: full of gravity, and becoming a Learned man; creber est in
sententiis, sed difficilis in loquendo: very sententious, and of much strength
and vehemence, but hard, difficult and too elaborate: In vita Ter.
varius est (inquit Rhenanus) in phrasi; in disputationibus dilucidior and
simplicior, in locis communibus, velut de pallio, Lactant. inst. lib. 5. cap. 1.
etc. est durior and affectatior, Not so smooth and fluent as many others, and
therefore not in so much esteem as otherwise he might have been. Instit. lib.
^* cap. 13. 28.
His expressions, (says Calvin) are somewhat rough and thorny, and therefore
dark and obscure, In argum. in Apologetic.
certe magis stridet quam loquitur, idem in Epist. 339. Phraseos Character
(inquit Zephyrus) minus semper c^mptus, multumque brevis and obscurus fuisse
videtur. Commata enim potius habet quam ^ol^, and frequentes periodos, qualia
decent gravi vehementique stilo, quo semper ipse usus est. Casau^. exercitat.
facundia ejus fe^rea.
So that, dure and Tertullianice loqui, to speak harshly, and like Tertullian
are equivalent phrases. And the causes whence this proceeded might be chiefly
these four.

1. His Country, being an African, of the City of Carthage, which was a
Province of the Roman Empire: Now those that were Provincials, Erasm. E^* ante
Hilar.
scarce any of them could attain unto the purity of the Latin Tongue, except
such only as were brought up at Rome from their childhood: as was Terence, our
Author's Country^man, Romam perductus, cum in tenera aetate foret, comoedias
sex composuit, easque ab Apollodoro and Menandro Poetis Graecis in Sermonem
Latinum convertit, Pet Crinitus. lib* 1. de poetis Lat.
tanta Sermonis elegantia and proprietate, ut eruditorum judicio nihil
perfectius aut absolutius in eo scribendi genere habitum sit apud Latimos:
Cicero in Epist. ad A^^icum refert Terentium esse optimum autorem Latinitatis.
De honest. discipline. li. 8. cap 3.
The same Author elsewhere speaking of the difference in this language among
those living in several Countries, thus observes: Romani omnes (inquit) in suo
genere, pressi, elegantes and proprii: Hispani autem florentes, acuti and qui
ad peregrinum inclinent: Punici and Carthagiuenses, duri, audaces, improbi:
palam aberrantes vitium virtuti praetulerunt: ut Tertullianus, Apuleius, and
Cyprianus. It Is also the observation of Loys le Roy, Lib. 2.
in his discourse of the variety of things: Every thing, says he, by how much
the farther it is from its original spring, is the less pure, as the Gauls,
Spaniards, and Africans, did not speak Latin so purely as the Romans, for
although their words were Latin, yet they retained the phrase of their own
Country: insomuch, that speaking Latin they were always known for Strangers.
Lib. de tradend. discip.
Perturbatissime loquitur Tertullianus (inquit Ludovicus Vives) ut Afer. Epist.
ante Hilar.
And in the decrees of the Africans (many whereof Augustine relates) you may
perceive (says Erasmus) an anxious affectation of eloquence, Epist. 3. ad
He^iodor.
yet so as that you may know them to be Africans. It Is no wonder then Ierom
should say, Pamel. in vit^ Tertul. Brerewoods Inquiries cap* 4.
that the style of Tertul^ian and also of other Africans, was easily discerned
by Nepotian: and it appears by Augustine in sundry places, that the Roman
Tongue was imperfect among the Africans, even in the Colonies.

2. His calling and profession: Pamel. Inadnot. in lib. de praescript. number. 1.
for before his conversion he had studied and practiced the Law: wherein he was
very skilful: hence it comes to pass, Pamel. in vita Tertul. In Aug. do haeres.
c. 8^.
that using many Law terms ( and juris verborum erat retinentissimus) and
phrases borrowed from thence, his Language comes to be more perplex and
obscure. It Is apparent (says Danaeus) from his continual style and manner of
speaking, that he was a most expert Lawyer, and by reason of the unusual
novelty of his words, Biblioth. sanct. lib. 4.
his style is very obscure, says Sixtus Senesis.

3. His constitution and natural temper, Novator vocabulorum Tertullianus
Pamel. in adnot. in lib. de prescript. number. 125. and Rhenan. in annot. in lib.
eundem. Epist. ante Hilar.
for words are the mind's Interpreters, and the clothing of its conceptions,
wherein they go abroad, which therefore are in a great measure fashioned by it
and receives a tincture from it. Hence it is that most Men's styles do differ as
well as their faces: suus cuique stilus est (inquit Erasmus) and quisque suum
quendam habet gustum peculiarem: every one has somewhat peculiar to him in
this partic^lar. Accordingly our Author, Hieronym. in ^atal. duri in genil.
being a Man, ^cris and vehementis Ingenii, of a rough, sharp, and vehement
spirit, Baron ad ^n. 197. 19.
makes use of a style answerable, viz. quick and crabbed, and consequently
harsh and obscure: which he did of purpose, Pamel. in ^pist. dedicat. Rhenan.
in argum. lib. ad ers. Valentin.
affecting it as most agreeable to his Genius; so that his expressions are such
even in things that are plain and easy. This Rhenanus* renders, as the reason
why his writings had so many faults, In praefat. ante Tertul*
or Errataes in them, viz. ^eglectus aut^ris, quo multis annis non est lectotum
manibus tritus, and ips^m dicendi g^nus affectatum and Africanum (and affectati
stili durities molestiam addit) quod etiam magis effecit, Bond. in Ep^st. ad
lectorem.
ut minus leg^retur, quam quidvis aliud. Which betided the Poet Persius, qui
consul^o est obscurus, suisque scriptis caliginem and tenebras exindustria
objecit: for being by one taken in hand, and perceived to be so dark and
cloudy, he was fairly laid aside with such like words as these: Si nol^t
intelligi, non legetur.

4. His converse in the Greek Authors whom he diligently read, being very
skilful in that Tongue, idenim temporis nihil extaba^ (inquit Rhenanus) apud
Latinos in sacris, In annot. in lib. Tertul. advers. Valentin.
praeter testamentum utrumque, tantum Victor and Apollonius scripserant
opuscula: hence it is, that transcribing much from them, he retains their
phrases: (though he quote not his Authors; Hoc erat illius aetatis praeter S.
Scripturas neminem nominatim citare Eras. Epist. ante Hilar. In vita Tertul.
which was the manner of the first ages, viz. to cite none by name, but the
sacred Scriptures only; especially if they had drawn the Water out of the Wells
of the Greeks) and imitates their manner of speaking. By his assiduous perusal
of their Books, (says Pamelius) adeo Graecas loquendi formulas imbiberit, ut
etiam Latin seribens illarum oblivisci nequiret: he so drank in their forms of
speech, that when he comes to write in Latin, he cannot forget them: Rhenan. in
annot. in lib. a^vers. Valentin.
and both himself and Rhenanus have taken notice of many phrases in him, which
he borrows from the Greeks, and wherein he conforms unto them.

Most of these, I find observed by that Learned Frenchman Mr. John Daille,
lib. 1. cap. 5.
in his choice Treatise concerning the right use of the Fathers. What shall I
say (says he) of Tertullian, who besides his natural harshness and roughness
which you meet with in him throughout, and that Carthagmian spirit and genius,
which is common to him with the rest of the African writers, has yet shadowed
and over-cast his conceptions with so much learning, and with so many new terms
and passages out of the Law, and with such variety of all visions, subtilties
and nice points, as that the greatest stock both of learning and attention that
you can bring with you, will be all little enough to fit you for a perfect
understanding of him.

5. This father is full fraught with and abounds in grave and excellent
sentences; some few whereof I shall here insert; which may serve a little to
acquaint us with the state of those times in reference unto both the Doctrine
and Discipline then professed and practiced in the Chuches of Christ.

1. Take a view of his Symbol or Creed, containing a summary of the faith which
was generally received and maintained in his time: Lib. de veland. virg. l. de
praes^rip. ad^er. h^res. pri^oomniu^ emissu^.
Altogether one, the only immovable and irreformable rule, as he styles it:
which is this. To believe that there is but one God, nor he any other beside
the Creator of the world, who made all things of naught, by his word, first of
all sent forth: Colos. 1. 16, 17. That word to be called his Son; in the name
of God variously seen by the Patriarchs: Delatum.
always heard by the Prophets; last of all brought down, by the Spirit of God
the Father, and Power, into the Virgin Mary, made flesh in her womb, and of her
born a man, and that he is Jesus Christ; moreover that he preached a new law,
and a new promise of the Kingdom of Heaven: that he wrought or did wonders, was
fastened to the Cross, arose the third day; that being taken up into heaven, he
sat down on the right of the Father; Vicaria^ vim Sp Sancti. qui agat.
sent the power of the Ghost in his stead, that he might guide or act
believers: that he shall come in glory to take the Saints into the fruition of
eternal life, Facta utrius^; partis resuscitatione.
and heavenly promises, and to adjudge the wicked unto perpetual fire; a
resurrection of each part being made with the restitution of the flesh. This
rule instituted by Christ, as shall be proved, has no question made of it
among us, but which Heresies bring in, and which makes Heretics.

A compend or brief hereof is to be seen in the beginning of his book of the
veiling of Virgins, as also in that against Praxeas the Heretic: unto which he
subjoyns these words. This Law of Faith remaining, other things that concern
discipline and conversation, do admit of a newness of Correction; the grace of
God working and making a proficiency unto the end. So that where there is a
consent in the fundamental and substantial truths of the Gospel, differences in
things of less moment may be born with, nor should they cause divisions among
Christians. (...). B.
That rule holding here, that Opinionum varietas, and opinantium unitas non
sunt (...). He adds, that this rule has ran down from the beginning of the
Gospel, even before any heresy sprung up; Lib. advers. (...)
insomuch as from hence this appears to be a firm Truth; id esse verum
quodcunque primum; id esse adulterum, quodcunque posterius.

Again, The Church acknowledges one God, Creator of the universe: and Jesus
Christ, of the Virgin Mary, the Son of God the Creator; and the resurrection
of the flesh: it mingleth the Law and the Prophets, with the Evangelical and
Apostolical writings; and from thence drinks in that faith. It signs with
water, De praescrippotat.
clotheth with the holy Ghost (which Pamelius understands of confirmation)
feeds with the Eucharist, Pamel. in notis.
exhorts with Martyrdom; Martyrio exhortatnr.
and so receives none against this institution.

2. He prescribes and lays down this for a sure rule, Lib. de praescript.
by which the truth may be known, viz. If the Lord Jesus Christ did send out
the Apostles to Preach, other Preachers are not to be received then those whom
Christ did institute: because neither does any other know the Father but the
Son, and he to whom the Son has revealed him; neither does the Son seem to
have revealed him unto any others, save to the Apostles whom he sent to Preach.
Now what they have preached, ( i.e. what, Christ revealed to them) ought no
other way to be proved, then by the same Churches which the Apostles themselves
founded; preaching unto them as well by a lively voice, as they say, as
afterward by Epistles. If these things be so, it is then evident, that every
Doctrine which agrees with the faith of those Apostolical, Mother and Original
Churches, is to be accounted the truth ^ undoubtedly holding that which the
Churches received from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, Christ from God:
but all other Doctrine to be adjudged false, which savoureth contrary unto the
truth of the Churches, and of the Apostles, and of Christ, and of God.

3. As touching their Church Meetings at that time, and the exercises about
which in them they were employed, he gives us this account. In Apolog. quasi
manu facta ambiamus.
We come together, says he, into the congregation, that we may as it were with
an Army; besiege God without prayers; which violence is pleasing unto God. We
pray for the Emperors and for their Ministers and inferior powers, Pro^statu
sculi. pro mora finis.
for the state of the world for the peaceable condition of affairs, and for the
delay of the end. We are assembled for the rehearsal of the Divine Scriptures,
if the quality of the present times does need any thing by way of Premonition
or recognition. Surely with the holy Word do we feed our faith, Densamus.
raise up our hope, settle our affiance, nevertheless we do strengthen the
discipline with inculcation of precepts: There are also exhortations,
castigations, and the Divine censure: and judgment is past with a great deal of
weight and authority; as among those who are certain of the presence, or
inspection, of God: and it is the highest prognostic of the judgment to come
for one so to offend, as to be cast out or removed from Communion of Prayer,
and our assemblies, and all holy Commerce. Approved Elders are Presidents who
have attained this honor not by price but testimony. Every one brings some
small piece of money to the chest if he can, one day in a month, or when he
will: for no man is compelled, but gives freely. This is, as it were a pious
depositum; for it is not laid out in feasts, or gluttony or gormundizing; but
for the feeding and interring of the poor; and for Boys and Girls that are
destitute of Estate and Parents; also for such as are aged, and for such as
have suffered shipwreck: and for any who are condemned unto the Mines, are
banished into Islands, or are in Prison, etc.

4. Of their Love feasts, thus; Of how great cost soever they be it is ^gain to
be at ex^ence for pieties sake; In Apolog.
seeing that the needy are helped by this refreshing. Praegustetur
No baseness or immodesty is admitted; they sit not down (...) prayer to God be
first made: they eat as much as hungry ones use to take, to satisfy their
hunger only: they drink as much as is meet for sober men to do: they are so
filled, as who remember, they must even in the night worship God: they so
discourse as those who know that God hears. After water for the hands is
brought, as any one is able from the holy Scriptures, or of his own invention,
he is invited to sing unto God in the midst of all: hence it appears how has
he drank: likewise prayer concludes the feast.

5. We pray with our hands stretched out, In Apolog.
because innocent; with our heads uncovered, because we blush not; lastly,
without a Monitor, because from our breast or heart.

6. The power of casting out Devils continued unto his time; In Apolog. and
lib. ad Scapulam.
for hereof he thus speaks. The Devils by our touch and breathing do
unwillingly grieving and blushing (because you Gentiles are present) depart out
of the bodies, which they possessed.

7. Afflict, In Apolog.
torment, condemn, break us in pieces; your iniquity is the trial of our
innocence: therefore does God permit that we should suffer these things. --
Your exquisite cruelty, speaking to the persecutors of the Christians, will
avail nothing at all: it is rather an allurement unto our Sect: we become the
more, the oftener we are cut down by you; the blood of Christians is seed; that
very obstinacy which you upbraid us withal is a mystery; for who is not moved
by beholding it, to inquire, what is in the matter? who having inquired, comes
not unto us? and coming, desires not to suffer? etc.

8. Take away from Heretics those things which they hold with Ethnicks, Lib.
de resurrect. carn.
that they may ground their questions upon the Scriptures only; and they are
not able to stand. -- Again; we need no curiosity after Jesus Christ, nor
inquisition after the Gospel; when once we believe it, we desire to believe
nothing else; for this is the first thing that we believe, that there is
nothing more which we ought to believe.

9. The greatest Antiquity challenges the chiefest Authority unto the Sacred
Scriptures or Instruments: In Apolog.
the Cabinet of one Prophet, viz. Moses, for age surpasses all your Originals;
the veins of your ancient style, the most Nations, your famous Cities, the very
effigies of your Letters, yea even your very Gods themselves, their Temples,
Oracles and Sacred Rites.

10. Of the sufficiency and perfection of the Scriptures; Lib. advers. Hermogen.
adoro scripture plenitudi^em; I do adore, says he, the fullness of the
Scripture.

11. He has a most elegant resemblance of man's body unto the earth out of
which it was taken: Lib. de carn. Christ.
what is the blood, Glebae, saxa. calculi.
says he, but a red humor? what is the flesh; but earth turned into its
figures? consider the several qualities; the muscles as clods; the bones as
rocks or stones; also about the Paps, certain pebbles? Behold, the firm
connection of the nerves, as the traductions of roots; and the branchy running
about of the veins as the windings of the rivers: the down, as moss; the hair
as grass; and the hidden treasures of the marrow, as the metals of the flesh.

12. He gives us a lively draught or pourtraicture of the grace of Patience,
Lib. de patient.
together with a large encomium of it from the admirable sorce and excellent
fruits thereof: in these words: It fenceth faith, helps love, armeth or
instructs humility, governs the flesh, secures the spirit, bridles the
tongue, binds the hand, tramples upon temptations, drives away scandals,
consummates Martyrdom. It comforts the poor, moderates the rich, it delights
the believer, and invites the Gentile; it commends the servant unto the Master,
and the Master unto God; it adorns the wife, and approves the husband, it is
lovely in a child, laudable in a youth, and admired in the aged; it is amiable
in every sex and age. The patient man he thus describes; he has a serene and
pleasant countenance, a smooth forehead, not furrowed with any wrinkle of grief
or anger: his eyebrows alike remiss in a cheerful manner: Remissa.
his eyes cast down through humility, not adversity; his mouth sealed up with
the honor of silence; his color such as is that of secure and harmless ones;
the motion of his head frequent against the Devil, and a threatening laughter;
the attire about his breast candid and close to his body; as of one who is
neither puffed up, nor disquieted.

13. The Flesh shall rise again, Lib. de resurrect.
even all, the same, and the whole: For it is every where deposited with God,
Fidelissimum sequestrem dei and hominum.
by the most faithful Mediator between God and Men, Jesus Christ, who shall
restore both God to Man, and Man to God, the Spirit to the Flesh, and the Flesh
to the Spirit. For that which thou supposest to be the destruction thereof,
know it is but a departure. Not only the soul is separated or laid aside;
Seponitur.
the Flesh also in the interim has its receptacles in the Waters, Fires,
Fowls, Beasts. When it seems to be dissolved into these, it is, as it were,
poured into Vessels; if also the Vessels themselves shall fail, when it flits
out of them, it is, as it were, by certain windings swallowed up again into its
Mother Earth.

14. If thou would spend the time of thy life in pleasures, Lib. de
spectacul.
why art thou so ungrateful, as not to acknowledge and account sufficient, so
many and such pleasures as art afforded thee of God? For what is more than
reconciliation with God the Father, than the Revelation of the Truth, than ^
calling to remembrance of our Error, than the pardon of so many sins past?
What greater pleasure than the loathing of pleasure it self? than the contempt
of the whole World? than true Liberty, than a sound or good Conscience, Vita
sufficiens.
than a sufficient Life, then no fear of death? that thou tramplest upon the
Gods of the Nations, that thou castest out Devils, that thou do Cures, that
thou coverest Revelations, that thou live unto God?

15. How shall I be able to declare the happiness of that Marriage, Of Marriage.
which the Church knits together, Lib. 2. ad uxorem.
the oblation confirms, the Angels reports it sealed, the Father ratifies? For
neither on Earth do Children rightly marry without the consent of their
Parents. Angeli renunciant obsignatum.
What a match is that of two Believers, of one hope, one vow, one discipline,
the same service? Both Brethren, both Fellow Servants, no difference of Spirit
or Flesh; but truly two in one Flesh: Volutantur.
where the Flesh is one, and the Spirit one: they pray together, they are
humbled and fast together, leading and exhorting one another: in distresses and
refreshments neither concealeth, avoideth, or is grievous unto the other: the
sick is freely visited, the poor sustained; alms are without torment, So
Albaspin. in notis.
sacrifices without scruple, ( i.e. offerings for Ministers and the Poor)
signing ( viz. with the cross) is not by stealth, greeting not with trembling,
nor benediction mute: Psalms and Hymns sound forth from two, and they mutally
provoke one another, who shall sing best unto their God: Christ rejoices to
behold and hear such things. Which words (says Rhenanus) are worthy to be
written in Letters of Gold. In annotat. in loc.


16. He would have these to be the Ornaments of Christian Women. Woman's
ornaments.
They should (says he) take whiteness from simplicity, Lib. de cult. foeminar.
redness from modesty; their eyes should be painted with bashfulness, their
spirits with silence, hanging in their ears the Word of God, tying about their
necks the Yoke of Christ. Submit unto your Husbands (says he) and you shall be
sufficiently adorned: employ your hands in wool; let your feet keep at home;
and you shall more please, than if decked with Gold. Cloth you with the Silk
and Purple of Virtue, Holiness and Chastity; being thus beautified, you shall
have God for your Lover.

17. A woman going unto the Theater, Lib. de spectacul.
returned from thence possessed of the Devil: wherefore in the Exorcism, being
pressed how he durst adventure upon a Believer, he constantly replied: I do it
most justly: In meo eam inveni. For I found her upon mine own ground.

18. As touching the carriage and course of Heretics, Lib. de praescript.
he thus describes it: First of all, it is uncertain who among them is a
Catechumen, Of Heretics.
and who a Believer: they congregate together, and hear together, pray
together: if even heathens come in among them, they give that which is holy
unto dogs, and cast pearls (though not true ones) before swine: they will have
simplicity to be the prostration of Discipline; the care whereof among us they
call an inticement: they also make peace every where with all: For it matters
not with them, though they hold different opinions; so that they agree together
for the overthrow of the Truth: they are all puffed up, they all promise
knowledge; even heretical women how malepe^t, who dare teach, contend,
ex^rcise, promise cures, and perhaps baptize too: Their ordinations are rash,
light and inconstant; sometimes they place in novices, sometimes such as are
addicted unto the World; sometimes our Apostates, that they may oblige them by
Glory (or Preferment) whom they cannot by Truth: Proficiency is no where more
facile, Ipsum esse illic pro. meter^ est.
than in the Camps of Rebels; where even to be a desertor is a stepped to
promotion; therefore one is a Bishop to day, to morrow another: to day he is a
Presbyter, who to morrow is a Layman; he is to day a Deacon, who to morrow is
a Reader: For even unto Laics do they commit Pastoral Charges, or the Priestly
Office. What should I speak of the Administration of the Word? Seeing their
business is not to convert the Heathens, but to subvert ours: This glory they
rather covet, if they may ruin those that stand, than raise up those that are
fallen: Because their work proceeds not of their own proper building, but of
the destruction of the Truth. Besides, they know not to respect or reverence
those that are over them; and hence it is that there are scarce any Schisms
amongst Heretics; for when there be, they obey not. Finally, if we look
narrowly into Heresies, we shall find them all in many things differing from
their Authors: many of them have no Churches; they wander up and down, without
a Mother, without a seat, destitute of the faith, like banished ones: it is
also observed, that Heretics have much acquaintance with Magicians, Juglers,
Astrologers, Philosophers, being given to curiosity: every where minding that;
Seek and ye shall find. So that the quality of their Faith, may be estimated
from their manner of conversation. Doctrine is the Index of Discipline. They
deny that God is to be feared: therefore all things are free and loose among
them. etc.

6. Though these and many such like excellent passages are to be found in his
works throughout; yet is there a great deal of caution and judgment to be made
use of in the perusal of them: For,

1. He has many inconvenient and dangerous expressions, which without a
favorable interpretation are not to be allowed of, Osiand. Epit. Hist. cent.
3. lib. 1. cap. 5.
for although in some of them he happily thought more commodiously than he wrote:
yet his absurd phrases are no way to be approved of, August. de Haeres. cap. 86.
nor can some of them by any means well be excused: As, where he says, that
God is corporeal, Lib. advers. Praxeam.
and has a body, though not fashioned or figured: who (says he) can deny that
God has a body, although God be a Spirit? which expression of his is very
inconvenient, and unsuitable unto the most simple Nature of God. Yet has the
great Augustine herein pleaded his excuse: Aug. ibid.
He might perhaps (says he) by a body, mean the very Divine Nature, Substance
or Essence: which term he therefore uses, lest he should seem to make God an
empty Phantasm, and mere nothing. And indeed, comparing this expression with
diverse passages in the works of our Author, we shall find there was cause why
he should conceive this to have been his meaning, and that he had ground
sufficient for so friendly a construction of his words. As, where he says, the
very substance is the body of every thing: Lib. advers. Hermog.
Also, every thing that is, is a body in its kind; nihil est incorporale, nis^
quod non est: Lib. de carne Christi.
Nothing is incorporeal, but what is not. Again, who will deny God to be a
body, though he be a Spirit? For a Spirit is a body of its kinds in its shape
and fashion: Lib. advers. Praxeam.
The less reason had Alphonsus de Castro, Lib. 5. advers. haeres.
to make Tertullian the first Author of the Heresy of the Anthropomorphites:
(though they might abuse these expressions of his, and by them be confirmed in
their opinion) confidering withal, that those Scriptures upon which they built
their gross conceits of God, art otherwise understood by him, than they were by
them, e. g. where the Scriptures do speak of the eye, ear, hand and feet of
God, they understood them literally; but he metaphorically, and as spoken after
the manner of men to our capacity: For (faith he) by those expressions the
Divine operations are declared, Lib. de Trinitat.
but not corporeal lineaments given or ascribed unto God: For by the eye is
signified that he sees all things; August. de* h^res. c. 86.
by the ear, that be hears all things, etc. this therefore made him not an
Heretic.

Another such expression is this; that the father was before the Son; Lib. de
Trinitat.
and that the son had his original or beginning, when the Father would that he
should proceed from him. Yet does he in the same Book assert the Eternity of
the Son; saying, That he was always in the Father, nor can time be assigned
unto him, who was before all time.

Again, ^ib. advers. Praxeam.
the Father is the whole Substance; but the Son a derivation or portion of the
whole. Controvers. de Christo. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Of which words Bellarmine gives this favorable interpretation; Haec verba,
inquit, intelligi debent de sola distinctione personali, quem iu toto libro
intendit: vocat autem Filium portionem, and Patrem totam substantiam; quia
Pater est fons and principium aliarum personarum, and in ea ratione majoritatem
quand^m habet. These and other the like dangerous expressions are scattered up
and down his Books; in regard whereof Rhenanus saw cause, why he should in the
Margin against the last mentioned passage, warn the Reader, that here and
elsewhere Tertullian is to be read with caution: Again, Here and elsewhere
(says he) let the Reader remember that he is perusing Tertullian. In argum.
lib. de carue Christi.
Yet again, Divines, says he, are to be admonished, that they do interpret
some things more commodiously, In argum. lib. advers. Praxeam.
or aptly then they sound, and indulge something to antiquity.

2. He delivers and labors to maintain many unsound Opinions and gross
Errors, which are carefully to be avoided and rejected, as what is sound and
Orthodox in him to be embraced: the good is not to be neglected for the bad,
nor the bad to be received for the sake of that in him which is good. I think
(says Ierom) that Origin for his Learning is sometime to be read in the same
manner, Epist. 76. Tranquillino.
as Tertullian, Novatus, Arnobius, Apollinarius, and some other Ecclesiastical
Writers, both Greek and Latin, viz. So that we choose the good in them, and
refuse the contrary: according to the Apostles saying; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
Prove all things; hold fast that which is good. We are to make use of him as
Cyprian did, who honored him with the Title of Master: Hieronym. Epist.
Pammach. and Oceano. N. 65.
though he took a great deal of delight in the wit of that learned and zealous
man, yet did he not follow Montanus and Maximillia with him. And this gives a
hint of his foulest Error, which I shall mention in the first place.

1. He became a follower of Montanus; whose gross and sottish Errors having
once entertained, he (for ought that appears to the contrary) persisted in unto
the end of his days; stiling and owning the blasphemous Heretic, Lib. de
resurrect. carnis. and saepius alibi. lib. advers* Praxeam. initio.
(together with his Female consorts Priscilla and Maximilla) sor the Paraclete
or Comforter, whom Christ promised to send, distinguishing him from the holy
Ghost: contrary to that clear Text, Ioh. 14. 26. The Comforter, which is the
holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, etc. This say his followers,
descended upon the Apostles, but the Paraclete upon Montanus and his Minions;
Hieronym. advers. Vigilant. Rhenan. in annotat in lib. ad^ers. Praxeam.
whose Prophesies, or rather idle Dreams, and Fancies they much magnified:
wherein second Marriages are condemned, and Fastings and Martyrdoms are
exacted: which things Tertullian being overmuch taken with, and approving of,
he thereupon embraced that new Prophecy. A strange thing that so learned and
eminent a man should give credit unto such foolish and frantic conceits:
Especially considering that, not long before, himself had ranked the followers
of Montanus, viz. Proclus and Aeschines amonst the most notorious Heretics;
Lib. de praescript.
whom he charge with this blasphemy, as he call it, that they say the holy
Ghost was in the Apostles, but not the Paraclete; and that the Paraclete had
spoken more in Montanus, than Christ had delivered in the Gospel; and not only
more, but better and greater things. Sculte^ in Medul. lib. lib. 7 cap. 42.
Erasm. in vita Origin.
Erasmus conceives that he did this contra mentis suae sententiam, appellans
Montanum omnis veritatis deductorem: For he could not be persuaded that a man
of so piercing a judgment, and so exercised and versed in the Sacred
Scriptures, did ever believe that Montanus was the holy Ghost or Paraclete,
whom Christ promised unto the Apostles.

2. He advances the freedom of man's will after the fall so highly, that even
Pelagius himself would scarce dare to do it with the like Liberty, e. g. The
Law (says he) would not have been given to him, that had not the obedience to
the Law, in his own power. And, Lib. 2. advers. Marci^n.
a little after, thus: So we find the Creator propounding unto man, or setting
before him good and evil, life and death; exhorting and threatening; which he
would not have done, unless man had been free, and voluntary to obey or
contemn. Again, Behold, (says he) the Kingdom of God is within you: L^k 17.
21. Lib. 4 advers. Marcion.
Who will not so interpret it? within you i. e. in your own hand and power; if
you hear, and do the command of God? Also, that the Patriarchs, Lib. advers.
Judaeos.
Noah and Abraham were just by the righteousness of the Law of Nature.

3. He condemns second Marriages, Exhortat. ad castitat. lib. develand.
Virginib.
accounting them no better than Adultery, and worthy of Excommunication: May we
not say, (says he) that second Marriage is a kind of Adultery? etc. Also, he
calls the lawful company of Man and Wife, contumelia communis: A common
contumely or reproach.

4. He denis that it is lawful for a Christian to flee in time of persecution;
Lib. de fug. in persecut.
being immoderate in the praise of Martyrdom; as if it merited pardon of sin.
Who (says he) does not wish to suffer that he may purchase the whole favor of
God, and all pardon from him by the compensation of his Blood? Omnia enim huic
operi delicta donantur.

5. He was of the opinion (as was also Clemens Alexandrinus and Cyprian, Lib.
de idololatr.
lib. De discipline. and babit. Virgin.) that the Angels fell in love, and
accompanied with Women (misunderstanding that passage of Moses, Genesis 6. 1.) and
that they discovered many secrets and hidden Arts, Lib. de habit. muliebr.
and especially diverse curiosities for the adorning and setting forth of Women;
for which they were condemned.

6. He held also the Error of the Chiliasts or Millenaries: Lib. 3. advers.
Marcion.
We confess (says he) that a Kingdom is promised unto us in the Earth, before
Heaven; but in another state; namely, after the Resurrection for a thousand
years in a City of a Divine Work or Building. Jerusalem coming down from
Heaven, etc. this we say is provided of God for the Saints, to be there
refreshed with all spiritual good things, in recompen^e of those things which
in the World we have either despised or lost. For it is a righteous thing, and
worthy of God, that his Servants should exult and rejoice there, where they
have been afflicted for his name.

7. He thought that both Angels, Lib. de anim^.
and also the Souls of men, were corporeal; and the latter derived from the
Parent unto the Child by way of propagation. ^x traduce.
Anima in utero seminata pariter cum carne, pariter cum ipsa sortitur and
sexum, Lib. de haeres. cap. 86.
etc. Augustine tell us, his opinion was, that the worst Souls of men are after
death converted, or turned into Devils; which absurd conceit Pamelius thinks
ought rather to be imputed unto those Heretics, In vita Tertull.
that took their name from him, than unto Tertullian himself, because it is not
to be found in any of his Writings: In lib. August. de haeres. cap. 86.
nor could Danaeus easily be induced to believe, that Augustine should charge
him herewith, seeing he is more equal toward him.

8. He approves of and labors to defend the superstitious facts and stations;
Cent. 3. cap. 10.
as also other ridiculous Ceremonies of the Montanists, viz. the superstitious
use of the sign of the Cross, Oblations for the Dead, and annual upon
Birth-days, Processions, etc. (Antiquae observationes (inquit Chemnitius)
quorum apud* Tertullianum fit mentio, (...). part. 1.
non sunt omnes Apostolicae traditiones; sed multae ex Montani Paracleto
profectae sunt) these and such like, which he borrowed from those Heretics,
did he practice and augment: though he himself confess that there is no warrant
for them in the Scriptures, nor were they instituted by the Apostles. Lib. de
coron. m^lit.
Who list, may there see a large Catalogue of such Observations and Practices;
which are built upon none other, than the sandy foundation of uncertain
Tradition. The materials of the Anti christian Synagogue were preparing betimes.

7. As touching his Exit, Trithem. de Script.
or the close of his life, I find this only recorded; that he lived long,
Hieronym. in Catalog.
even to old age, yea, usque ad deerepitam aetatem: unto decrepit old age;
which yet Pamelius would have to be but unto sixty three years: In vita Tertull.
At what time (says he) decrepit old begins: So that according to his account,
he, (as many other eminent men have done) ended his pilgrimage in his
Climacterical year: Or rather, then ceased to write any more; for he is loath
to affirm that he lived beyond this time, considering what Ierom had delivered
concerning him. Some do rank him among the Martyrs that suffered for the name
of Christ; Cent. 3. cap. 10.
and Rhenaenus makes Regino the reporter of his Martyrdom; In vita Tertull.
though, after diligent perusal, I do not find him so much as named by that
Historian: This therefore seems to be a mere and groundless conjecture, and
very unlikely, seeing that neither Eusebius, nor Ierom do make any mention of
it. True it is, that he was very desirous of Martyrdom; but it might be a
righteous thing with God, not to vouchsafe that honor unto him, who had so
unworthily deserted the Truth, and esteemed Martyrdom meritorions. But what
kind of death soever put a period unto his life, he is herein much to be
lamented, that having as a Star of the first Magnitude, shined in the Church of
Christ so brightly the most part of his time; he should at last, by forsaking
it, be so much obscured, and go out so ingloriously.

Origenes Adamantius.
5. HE is commonly known by the name of Origenes Adamantius; so called of the
Adamant; a stone of such hardness, that it yields not to the stroke of the
hammer: not unlike whereunto was the spirit and temper of Origin, indefatigably
labourious, both in reading and writing; Scriptoribus aliquot propter
indefatigatam studii tolerantiam Admantini cognomen inditum fuit; Erasm. adag.
Didymus Scripsisse super ter mill and quingentos libros perhibetur. Meurs. in
notis in Hesych. de illust. Epist. 18. Marcello. Victor. Schol. in Hieronym.
ut Didymo grammatico and Origeni Theologo: For which cause also Ierom gives
him the name of Chalcenterus and vere Adamantinus, or brazen sides; for so may
the greek word (...) be rendered: of (...), and (...), intestina. Photius
renders this, as the reason of his name, quod rations, quas colligaret,
adamantinis quibusdam quasi vinculis non absimiles viderentur. He was one whom
neither austerity of life, nor perpetual pains taking, Biblioth. cap. 118.
nor the hardship of poverty, nor the unworthy carriage of such as envyed him,
Erasm. in vita Orig.
nor fear of punishment, nor any face of death, could in the least remove from
his holy course and purpose.

His Country was Egypt, and the place of his birth therein (as is conjectured)
the famous City of Alexandria; he descended of Christian Parents, both Father,
Grandfather, and great Grandfather, and pious from his childhood, trained up
like another young Timothy, in the Christian Religion and Knowledge of the
Scriptures. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 1.
His Father's name was Leonides, a pious and learned man, and according to
some, In verb. Origin.
a Bishop: for so Suidas; (...): who in the cruel persecution under Severus was
crowned with Martyrdom, being beheaded for the name of Christ, Origin was then
but young, yet so fervently affected toward Christian Religion, that being
hindered by his Mother (who hid his apparel from him to prevent the danger he
would have exposed himself unto) from going unto, and visiting his Father in
prison, he could not rest, but wrote unto him a Letter, wherein he thus exhorts
him; Faint not, O Father (says he) nor think of any thing (because of us) but
suffering constantly.

His Father in his life time had carefully instructed him in the holy
Scriptures in the first place, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 1.
and after that in the Liberal Arts, and profane Literature, in both which he
profited exceedingly, and above his years: His manner was to demand of the
child a daily task of some certain sentences, which he enjoined him to learn by
heart; by which means he grew unto such promptness and acquaintance with the
Scriptures; that he contented not himself with the bare and usual reading of
them, but proceeded farther, searching into the hidden and profound meaning of
them; so that many times he would even gravel his Father, questioning him what
was meant* by this and that place, insomuch as his Father would check him
sometimes in outward appearance, admonishing him not to enquire curiously above
the capacity of his years, and more than the plain Letter gave him to
understand; yet inwardly did he rejoice greatly hereat, and would oftentimes
uncover the Breast of his child while asleep, solemnly kissing it as the Shrine
or Closet of the Holy Ghost, giving hearty thanks unto God that he had made him
the Father of such a Son.

From this domestical Discipline he was delivered over unto other Masters,
Cent. 3. cap. 10.
whereof the famous Clement of Alexandria was one, Erasm. in vita Origin.
and the learned Philosopher Ammonius another, whom he heard for the space of
seven years.

When his Father was martyred, he was left an Orphan of the age of seventeen
years, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 2.
with his Mother and six Children in great want, Hieronym. in catalog.
his Father's Substance and Estate being all confiscated into the Emperor's
Treasury: Origin therefore casting himself upon the providence of God, Cent. 3.
cap. 10.
he stirred up the heart of a Matron in Alexandria, Gabriel Powel in his
discourse of the unlawfulness of toleration, speaking of this Paulus, and this
very passage, adds (as I think, says he, Samosatenus) who was Bishop of
Antioch: as Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 26.
very rich, and also religious, to compassionate him in his necessities, who
received him into her House, and not only maintained him, but also liberally
helped and promoted him in his studies at her own cost. There was in the house
at the same time a certain man of Antioch, named Paulus, accounted a profound
and wise man, but a notable Heretic, whom she had adopted for her Son; to him
resorted a very great number, not only of Heretics, but also of the Orthodox
as unto their Master. Origin then of necessity using his company, and having
made so good a progress in Learning, that he could discern between true and
false Doctrine, would by no means be drawn either to discourse, or to be
present with him at prayers; nor would he give him any respect at all; so much
did he detest his heretical opinions.

About the eighteenth year of his age* he^ publicly at Alexandria began to
profess and teach the art of Granmar, wherewith he maintained himself, that he
might not be burdensome to any one; Olim senile and arduum fuit negotium
Grammaticam profiteri: A work of great difficulty in former time (says
Erasmus) to the due performance whereof much labor and no less skill was
requisite. Erasm. in vita Origin.
And because by reason of the heat of persecution, those who had formerly
catechized and taught in that School were forced to fly, so that none of them
were lest; he under the person of a Grammarian acted the part of a Catechist,
Hieronym. in catalog.
Sub occasion secularis literaturae in fide Christi eos instituens, together
with Grammatical Rules, scattering some seeds of piety and Christian Doctrine
in the minds of his hearers; which may be the ground of Zonaras his words
concerning him, Annos, Tom. 2. in Severo.
inquit, octodecim natus institu^ndis Christianae Religionis tyronibus
praefuit. The Seed thus sown grew and prospered so well, that diverse of his
Scholars profited exceedingly, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 2.
sucking from his lips the juice of Christian Religion and Heavenly Philosophy;
among whom one Plutarch was the first, who at length was crowned with
Martyrdom; the second, Heraclas the Brother of Plutarch, who afterward
succeeded Demetri^s in the Bishopprick of Alexandria.

Having for a while continu^d in this exercise with good success, Eusebius. lib.
6. cap. 7.
the charge of the School or Office of Catechist at Alexandri^ (wherein he
succeeded Clement his Master) was committed unto him by Demetrius the Bishop of
that City: Cent. 3. cap. 10.
Origin perceiving that many Scholars did resort unto him, Hieronym. in
catalog. and Epist. ad Pammach. and Ocean.
and frequent his Lectures, he laid aside the reading of humanity, and applied
himself to a more profitable course, viz. the exercise of godly Discipline, and
in the instructing of his Auditors in the Sacred Scriptures, in which
employment he continued and flourished for diverse years. Eusebius. 6. cap. 14.
But at length the number of those who in companies flocked unto him, and that
even from morning to night, growing so great, that he had scarce a breathing
time afforded him; and perceiving that by himself alone he was not able to
undergo the burden of so great a work, nor could enjoy that leisure which he
much desired, to search into the profound mysteries of the Scriptures, which
his mind was chiefly carried out after, he made choice of Heraclas, a man
expert in the Scripture, most eloquent, and not unskilful in Philosophy, to be
his assistant in the work of catechizing, committing unto him the instruction
of those who were newly come to the faith, reserving unto himself the care of
such as had made a farther progress therein, having attained unto more
perfection.

While he was thus employed in preaching the word, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 7.
and instructing not only men, but also women resorting unto him, that he might
cut off all occasion of suspicion and slander from the Infidels, literally
understanding those words of Christ, Matthew. 19. 12. There be some who have made
themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake: He practiced upon himself,
either by abscission, or else by exsiccation, and deading of those parts by
certain herbs or medicaments which he made use of for that purpose. ^rasm. in
vita Origin.
A thing it seems commonly practiced by the Heathen Priests: for so Servius
affirms, Sacerdotes, inquit, qui maximae sacra accipiebant, renunciabant
omnibus rebus, nec ulla in his nisi numinum cura remanebat, In Virgil. Aeneld.
lib. 6.
herbis etiam quibusdam emasculabantur, unde etiam coire non poterant. Ierom
gives us an instance hereof in the Hierophantae, a sort of Priests among the
Athenians, (...), Suidas in verbo. (...).
sacrorum interpres, mysteriorum praeses) (qui enim sacris praesunt ceremoniis
praedictionibusque Deorum multiplici nomine censentur, namque Hierophantas
aliquos, Genial. dier. dier. lib. 5. cap. 17.
alios Hierodidascalos, nonnullos Hieronomos, plerosque Hi^rophylaces aut
Nomophylaces, Advers. Jovinian. lib. 1. and in Epist. ad Ageruchiam viduam de
Monogamia. n. 11.
qui frequentes erant, appellarunt Graeci, inquit Alexander ab Alexandro) Of
these (says he) Legant Hierophantas Atheniensium usque hodie cicutae
sorbitione castrari, and postquam in Pointificatum f^erint electi (surrecti
fuerint, Lect. antiq. lib. 31* cap. 6.
inquit Rhodiginus) viros esse desinere, ut castissime sanctissimeque sacrum
facerent. Alex. ab. Alex. ibid. lib. 4. cap. 17.
Of the virtue of which herb Pliny thus speaks, Certum est, quod lac
puerperarum mammis imposita extinguat, Hist. Natural. lib. 25. cap. 13.
ven^remque testibus circa pubertatem illita. In exam. part* 3.


Chemnitius makes the reason of his so doing to be his too great admiration of
single life, which example of his many others followed, Adeo ut Ecclesia coacta
fuerit severiter (...) prohibere. Can. 1. Bin. Council.
So does the Council of Nice provide, that whoever was found guilty of g^lding
himself, if he were already in orders, he should be deposed, if not, he was not
to be ordained: Can 21. 22.
agreeable to what we find in the Canons of the Apostles (as they are called)
concerning this thing.

This unadvised act of his Origin desired to conceal, yet could not carry the
matter so closely, but that it came to the knowledge of De^eirius the Bishop,
whereof what use he made, we shall hereafter declare.

Leaving Alexandria he went unto Rome in the time when Zephyrinus was Bishop
there, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 13. Ad an. 220. 6.
a little before his death, as Baronius conjectures: the cause why he undertook
this journey, was the great desire that he had to see the most ancient Church
of the Romans; Erasm. in vita Origin.
where, having made but a little stay, he returned un^^ Alexandria again, and
there diligently attended his charge, the success of his pains being the
gaining of many to the embracing of the truth, and the recovering of others
from error, In catalog. Epiphan. Haeres. 64.
among whom one Ambrose (addicted unto the Valentinian Heresy, or (as Ierom
reports) unto that of Marcion, or (as others) partly a Marcionist, and partly a
Sabellian) was brought to see and forsake his error, and afterward called to
the Office of a Deacon in the Church of Alexandria, Hieronym. in catalog. and
Schol. Miraei in loc.
famous for his confession of the name of Christ, a man noble* rich and learned.

The same of Origin was now spread abroad even unto other Countries; Eusebius.
lib. ^. cap. 1^.
for a certain Soldier sent from the Governor of Arabia, comes to Alexandria,
bringing with him Letters unto Demetrius the Bishop there, and also unto him
who was then Lieutenant of Egypt, Cent. 3. cap. 10.
requesting them with all speed to dispatch Origin unto him, that he might
instruct him and his people in the Doctrine of Christianity: Osiand. Epit.
hist. cent. 3. lib. 1. cap. 7.
for although there had before been a Church of Christ in Arabia, yet it is
credible, that the Duke or Governor with his Court had persisted in his
Heathenish Impiety even unto the time of Origin, it being observed that for the
most part the propagation of the Christian Religion begins with the lowest of
the people, and gradually by little and little ascends unto the Governors of
Common wealths. Cent. 3. cap. 10.
Origin accordingly goes thither, and having happily accomplished the end of
his journey, he not long after returns again unto Alexandria, where, through
a sedition, finding all in a combustion and tumult, and his Scholars scattered,
so that there was no abiding for him there, no nor in any other place of Egypt
in safety, he left his Country, and betook himself unto Caesarea, a City of
Palestina, where he was earnestly entreated by the Bishops of that Province to
expound the Scriptures, though he were not as yet called to the Ministry (
Legatione ad eum missa Episcopi permisere, Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 14.
ut dissereret de sacris literis: so Nicephorus reports it.) This act of his
(condescending to their request) was much distasted by Demetrius, who in a
Letter which he wrote unto those Bishops, thus speaks of it, that such a
practice was never heard of, nor could there any where the like Precedent be
found, that Laymen in the presence of Bishops have taught in the Church.
Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 19.
But they in defense of what had been done, returning an answer unto him, have
therein such words as these, we know not for what cause you report a manifest
untruth, since there have been such sound as in open assemblies have taught the
people, yea, when as there were present learned men that could profit the
people, and moreover holy Bishops at that time also exhorting them to preach:
for example, at Laranda Euelpis was requested of Neon, at Icouium Paulinus was
requested by Celsus, at Synada Theodorus by Atticus, who were godly Brethren.
It is like also that this was practiced in other places, though unknown to us.
Thus was Origin, being a young man, honored of Bishops that were strangers
unto him. But the storm of civil dissentions being blown over, and both
Demetrius and the Deacons of the Church by Letters earnestly soliciting him to
return, he leaves Palestine, and comes back again unto Alexandria, and there
applies himself to his accustomed manner of teaching.

Not long after Mammaea the Mother of the Emperor Alexander Severus, Eusebius.
lib. 6. cap. 20.
a most pious and religious woman ( Christianissima, De Script. Eccles.
inquit Trithemius, quae a Christianissimo non abhor^^it, Hist. Eccles. Epit.
inquit Osiander) hearing of the Eloquence and Apostolical Life of Origin, and
^iving then at Antioch with her Son, sent for him by some Soldiers to come unto
her, accounting it no small happiness if she might see him, and hear his wisdom
in the holy Scriptures, which all men admired. To whom he accordingly repaired,
and staying a while with her, he instructed her in the Doctrine of
Christianity, N^^cler. Zonoras.
which found so good acceptance with her, that she became both a lover of it,
and a favourer of those who professed it; (not that she was now first brought
to the knowledge and embracing of it, as some conceive; ( audito Origene
Christian^ facta est) but rather further confirmed therein) who so far
prevailed with her Son, Chronic. Urspergens. Osiander. Hist. Eccles. Epit.
that not only the persecution against the Christians ceased, but they also had
a place granted them for the exercise of Religion, and were had in high esteem
with him. Having here detained him a while, she at length dismissed him with
honor, who again betook him to his School at Alexandria.

And now did he begin to comment upon the holy Scriptures, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap.
21.
being much instigated thereunto by Ambrose whom he had reduced from error, as
has been before said; who, for his encouragement, furnished him with
necessaries for that purpose, allowing parchments, and no less than seven
Notaries, Erasm. in vita Origin.
who by turns took from his mouth, and wrote what he dictated unto them; and as
many Libraries (maintained all at the charge of Ambrose) who transcribed or
copied out more fairly what the other had formerly taken; and that this was the
difference between the Notarii and the Librarii, Ibid.
may be gathered from Erasmus his calling the one (...), or swift, the other
(...), or fair writers. Notariorum, Ad an. 220.. 11.
inquit Baronius, erat scribere; Librariorum exscribere. In notis in Hieronym.
catalog. in Hyppolyto.
Ierom (says Miraeus) calls those Notaries, who with a swift hand took the
words of him that did dictate, and sometimes they wrote by notes or characters:
but those Librarii, or Scriveners; who afterward more accurately committed the
things so taken unto Books. Of this Turuebus thus speaks, Adversar. lib. 14. c.
24.
Scribere notis non est compendio quodam literarum verba complecti ad
celeritatem, sed quibusdam fictis signis comprehendere, idque docebantur pueri,
non tantum scribere; Cassianus enim Martyr, qui puerorum s^ilis confossus
Christo animam reddit, notis scribere docuit: Prudentias (...), Him. 9. --
Magister literarum sederat,
Verba notis brevibus comprendere cuncta pertius,
Raptimque punctis dicta praepetibus sequi.
Aliud enim esse notis, aliud literis scribere, ostendit Manilius, lib. 4. cap.
1, his verbis.
Hic and scriptor erit felix, cui litera verbum est:
Quique notis linguam superet cursumque loquentis.


Martial also the Epigrammatist, of the Notary thus: Current verba licet, manus
est v^locior illis:
Nondum lingua suum, Lib. 14. Ep^gr. 176.
dextra peregit opus.


So thirsty after the knowledge of the Scriptures, So Jerome calls Nepotian.
Epist. ad Helio d^rum. number. ^.
and so pressing upon Origin, unto this work was Ambrose (whom he therefore
calls (...)) that he would scarce afford him sufficient time to eat, Hieronym.
in catalog.
sleep or walk for his recreation, or to read and review what the Notaries had
written, as himself complains in a certain Epistle to his Friend. Cent. 3. cap.
^0.


About this time the Churches of Achaia being much pest^red and vexed with
diverse Heresies, Eras^. in vita Origin. Hieronym. in catalog.
Origin is sent thither with Letters testimonial for the suppressing of them,
who was now in his middle age, or about forty and three years old, Ad an. 230.
7.
as Baronius conjectures: he supposes that the cause of his going into Greece,
was his great desire to get the sixth Edition of the Bible, which was this year
found at Nicopolis, that he might adjoyn it unto the other five Versions, which
with unwearied pains and diligence he had formerly found out; and so compose
that laborious work of his, which he called Hexopl^. Now, Eras^. ibid. Cent. 3.
cap. 10.
passing through Palestine toward Athens, he was (by Alexander and Theoctistus
(who greatly admired: Origin) two Bishops of great authority, Osiand. cent. ^.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
the one of Jerusalem, the other of Cesarea) by imposition of hands made or
ordained Minister at Cesares; Niceph. lib. 5. cap. 18.
which office gained him much more respect, so that he was had in great esteem.
This begat envy in Dem^trius, who was highly offended with those Bishops for
what they had done, ^^eronym. in catalog.
and by aspersions endeavored to darken and eclipse the Glory of Origin in his
Letters unto all the Bishops throughout the world: Eusebius. lib 6. cap. 7. and 2^.
and having nothing else to charge him withal that might tend to his
disparagement, he published his unadvised act of castration, as a mo^^ foul and
absurd fact of his, though when he first came to the knowledge thereof, Ut rem
Piam and fortem approbaverat. cent. 3. cap. 10.
he had admired and praised him for it, encouraging him still to go on in the
office of catechizing.

Origin therefore perceiving how much the mind of Demetrius was alienated from
and in censed against him (forbearing to make use of any bitterness against his
detractors) chose rather to pass by the injury in silence, Erasm. in vita
Origin.
and to give place to their passion, than further to exasperate them: he
therefore after his return and abode there for some small time, lest
Alexandria, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 29.
having committed the office of a Catechist there unto Heraclas formerly his
assistant in that work, and went again into Palestine, remaining at Cesarea,
where he applied himself unto the preaching of the word, many not only of that
Country, but also strangers from other places resorting thither and attending
upon his Ministry: among whom were diverse eminent men, and of special note,
viz. Firmilian Bishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia, Ad reformationem Ecclesi^ su^
Osiander. in Epitom. Fra^m. in vita Origin. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 26.
who one while invited him into his Province, to edify or reform the Churches
there; another while under pretense of visiting the holy places, he made a
voyage into Palestine, and for a good space continued there, that by Origin he
might be brought to the further understanding of the Scriptures. Also
Theodorus, Hieronym. in catalog.
called afterward Gregorius, Bishop of Neocaesarea in Pontus, a man most
renowned, and for the miracles which he wrought, Baron. adan. 266. 23.
surnamed Thaumaturgus, together with his Brother Athenodorus, whom (continuing
with him about the space of five years) he converted from Heathenism to
Christianity; for which cause this Theodorus a while after penned a Panegyric
or Enco^miastick Oration in the praise of Origin, to testify his thankfulness
for what he had received from him.

After this, Eusebius. l. 6. cap. 32.
Beril, Bishop of Bostra in Arabia falling into Heresy, and maintaining that
Christ before his Incarnation had no being: Hieronym. In Catalog. Angelocrat.
in epit. Con.
he was dealt and disputed with by diverse Bishops assembled together: Origin
also was sent for who by strength of Argument so convinced him of his error,
that he restored him again to his former sound opinion: for which he returned
him solemn thanks in diverse letters written unto him: Also certain others arose
in Arabia, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 36.
who broached this pernicious Doctrine that the soul died and perished together
with the body, and that in the general resurrection, they arose together and
were restored unto life again. These Heretics are by Augustine called Arabiei,
De h^res. cap. 83. and Dan^us in com. in loc.
by Damaseen (...), Animimortales; about which a great Synod was assembled,
wherein Origin so discoursed of this matter, that the erroneous did soon
renounce their absurd opinion, and were reduced to a better judgment. He also
suppressed the Heresy of the Helcesaits, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 37.
which sprung up about the same time (called of Epiphanius Sampsaei; in the
region of Per^^, whose first Author was one Elxaeus) who rejected part of the
Old Testament: Epip. her. 53.
denied the Apostle Paul wholly: counted it an indifferent thing to deny or not
to deny with the mouth in time of persecution, so that thou persist faithful in
thine heart; and used a certain book, which (as they say) came down from
heaven, the which whosoever hears and believes (say they) shall obtain
another kind of remission of sins then that which Christ purchased for us.

Growing now old (above sixty years of age) and much worn out and wasted with
long study and painful exercise, Eusebius. l. 6. cap. 35.
he at length was prevaild with and permitted, that those things which he
publicly preached and disputed, should by Notaries be taken and Copied out;
which before he would not suffer to be done; Eras. in vita Origin. Jam scil.
quando in eo erat vitae gravitas and maturitas ^tatis and mult^ experienti^
authoritas. Haymo. eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 3.
This Erasmus understands of his Sermons or Homilies: tantae erat modestiae,
(inquit ille) ut sero p^ssus sit excipi quae disserebat. And thus was his time
and strength laid out and spent in the work of the Lord, even from his
Childhood unto his old age, not hiding his talent, but as a good servant
improving it for the advantage of his Master, who had entrusted him therewith.

2. He was man of extraordinary parts and endowments of Nature, T^^ihem. de
script.
vir magnus and excellentis ingenii: which began to appear in him even from his
very childhood, Hieronym. epist. ad Pammach. n. 63.
vir magnus ^b infantia: being a man in understanding, when but a child in
years; styled therefore by Erosmus, In vita Orig. In epist. ante opera Orig.
senilis puer; of a notable strong and piercing wit, perspicacississimo
ingenio, says Rhenanus; for which nothing was too hard (and so truly
Adamantine^) nor nothing too high (and so truly Origenical, Eras in vita Origin.
(...). Montigena:) such a one as Learned Greece, the fruitful mother of the
most happy wits, scarce ever bred the like; Hieronym. in catalog.
immortale inge nium: so comprehensive, as not to be bounded within the limits
of ordinary capacities; there being nothing within the Encyclopedy of Arts that
could escape his knowledge: for he exactly perused all kind of Authors: wherein
he had this advantage above many others, In vita Orig.
that he lost no time; ei (inquit Erasmus) nulla pars aetatis periit a studiis:
his tenderest years being improved this way by his pious and careful father, By
which means, the fair field of his great abilities being so well cultured and
manured, Optimis disciplinis omnifariam excultus. Rhenan. In epist. ante opera
Orig.
began in his very spring to flourish and abound with the fruit of excellent
skill in all the Liberal Sciences: whereof he gave a large proof and testimony,
undertaking at the age of eighteen years the public profession of the art of
Grammar in the famous City of Alexandria; A task of no small difficulty, to the
dispatch whereof was requisite, besides elegancy of Speech, insight into most
authors, Eras. in vita Origin. See Polydor. Virg. de^ inventor. rec. lib. 1.
cap. 7.
and acquaintance with history and antiquity; together with a competent measure
of knowledge in Poetry, Rhetoric, Logic, Arithmetic, Cosmography and Music;
all which, being so young he had attained unto with wonderful celerity, as
Ierom testifies: In Catalog.
He had diligently studied the writings of the several Sects of Philophers,
Eusebius. l. 6. cap. 18.
viz. Pythagoreans, Stoics, etc. but was specially conversant in Plato: in
which kind of Learning he grew to such an height, that he became famous even
among the Heathenish Philosophers; in so much as many, and those of chiefest
rank among them, resorted unto him and attended upon his Lectures: in what
esteem they had him, may be gathered from the words of Porphyrius in (...)
Plotim: Cum, inquit, Origenes aliquando Romae venisset in Scholas, Plotinns
(qui tum public ibidem profitebatur) statim genas rubore suffusus, Baron. ad
an. 248. 3.
assurgere volu^t: Sermiones vero ab Origene continuare rogatus, respondit:
studium loquendi cessare, quando qui loquitur, ^uimadvertit se ad illos, qui
idem ipsi noverint, verba facturum: atq^e ita, cum pauca quaedam disseruisset,
In praefat. ad lib. 19. lect. antiq.
inde surrexit. These bitter enemies of Christian Religion; Porphyrius, Proclus
and alii, (inquit Rhodiginas) fatentur eum exactissimam omnium disciplinarum
liberalium ^^gni^^onem tenere. Eras. in vita Origin.
Yea, they frequently make honorable mention of him in the books written by
them; and would sometimes refer unto him the resolution of perplex doubts and
questions. Some of them also have dedicated their books unto him; and others
have delivered to him what they had written, as unto the censure of a Master:
so great was the Reverence they bare him, Opus de temp-mundi.
and in such account was he had amongst them. He was Philosophorum omnium sui
temporis princeps; tan^^ ingenii, ut nulla eum lingua, (...) latuerit:
Socrates. l. 6. cap. 12.
And is styled by the great At^^nasius, Admirabilis and summae (...) vir.

But these philosophical studies did he addict himself unto, Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 17. 19.
only as a step unto a higher form; he prized the Arts as things that might be
of great use for the confutation of the Heathens; as also a help to the
contemplation of Divine Mysteries, and a meet handmaid to serve and wait upon
her Mistress Theology: and in this regard, as he judged them profitable and
necessary for himself, so did he exhort and persuade others unto the study of
them. Nor indeed are they of small advantage, as they do fit the vessel for the
receipt of more precious liquor, sublimating the understanding, and so disposing
it to apprehend those higher things contained in the Scriptures: Bacon. Essay.
29.
for thus do Histories make men wise, Poets witty, the Mathematics subtle,
natural Philosophy deep, Moral grave, Logic and Rhetoric able to contend; as
that Noble Scholar has observed.

To the study of the Scriptures therefore did he chiefly apply himself;
Hieronym. Epist. 18.
wherein he found such sweetness, and took so much delight, that he thought
nothing worthy of his time or pains in comparison of them: Epist. 65.
quis ardentem (inquit Hieronymus) in Scripturis animum non miretur? both day
and night was he thus exercised, Trithem. de script. Eras. in vit^ Origin.
neither did he account his meat or sleep sweet unto him, if not seasoned with
reading somewhat of those Sacred Oracles: judging it an unworthy thing that the
meaner part of man should be refreshed, and the better and more Noble
neglected: To which he joined fervent prayer as the best key to unlock that
Cabinet, that so he might come to and enjoy the precious jewel contained
therein: Epist. Pammach. n. 65.
lectio orationem (inquit Hi^ronymus) excepit, and oration lectionem. By this
means the holy Scriptures became so familiar unto him, Ibid.
through continual use and his being daily conversant in them; that, by the
help of a most strong and happy memory, Eras. in vit^ Origin.
he had gotten them by heart, ad unguem ^bsolutus in divinis literis, and as it
were at his fingers end; herein even another Esdras: and for that he was of a
searching and soaring wit, he confined not himself to the low and obvious sense
of the words, but would mount aloft into the sublime and mysterious meaning of
them; yet herein is he blamed by many, Ibid.
and not without cause, as being too studious of allegories: in allegoriis,
inquit Erasmus, superstitiosior est interim and violentior, nimium in hoc
intentus, ut destruat historicum sensum; Grinaeus in (...) ante Origin. in
Genes.
quasi locus non sit allegoriae, illo incolumi: In these he was to excessive
and immoderate; though in the framing of them he took much pains, and is very
happy in many of them. But the truth is, had he followed the Counsel given to
Iearus: -- Medio tutissimus ibis:

He might have avoided his fate, and not, by singeing his wings, have fallen
into such a gulf of errors as he did, through his audaciousness this way. And
because he saw that he wanted one principal help to the more accurate finding
out of the meaning of the Scriptures, Trithem de script. Hieronym. in catalog.
he (contrary to his age being somewhat old, and also to the custom of his
country) fell upon the study of the Hebrew Tongue, the difficulties whereof he
easily overcame; Hieronym. epist. 25. (...) Paulam.
and (to the wonder of Greece) attained unto a competent measure of skill in
that language in a few (not to say months, but) days. Being thus furnished he
diligently improved his talent, affording the help not only of his frequent
lectures to his contemporaries, but also of his learned Commentaries to
posterity for the better understanding of the Scriptures; Hieronym. Epist. 65.
Pamach. and Oceano.
sweating night and day in the study of the explanation of them.

Nor is this the meanest flower in the Garland of his praise, that he was the
first among the Fathers that undertook a work of this nature; an enterprise of
no small difficulty seeing he was to go in an untrodden path, none of those
that lived before him, affording him any help or direction herein: Primus
(inquit Rhenanus) quasi glaciem scidit, In Epist. ante opera Origin.
jux^^ proverbium, in enarrandis Scripturis Divinis -- divinae rei primus
inventor. Homo pen^ (...) (inquit Sixtus Senensis) and qu^ primus aggressus est
explanationem omnium divinarum Scripturarum, Biblioth. l. 4.
nondum ob ingentem earum difficultatem ab aliquo attentatam. Erasmus therefore
setting him in the front of all the ancient Commentators both Greek and Latin,
Ratio verae Theologiae.
adds these words, Origenes, inquit, inter Commentatores sic est primus, ut
nemo cu^ illo conferri possit. And indeed who among them all can say, that he
is not beholding to him? All that followed, took from him (...), their hints
both of Teaching and Writing, so that they were not a little helped by him;
Basil and Gregory Nazianzen who collected the Philocalia, Tarinus in Epist.
ante Philocal.
call him omni^^ Theologorum cotem and maximum secundum Apostolos Ecclesiarum
Magistrum. And as all the Latin Poets followed Ennins, so (says Ranulphus
Cestrensis) all Expositors followed Origin. In Polycronic.
Ierom highly commends and ascribes much to his Interpretations, though he
disliked many of his opinions; Epist. 62. and 65.
he styles him the Master of the Churches next after the Apostles (as Basil and
Nazianzen did) wishing the envy of his name, In praefat. ante li. Heb. nom.
with his knowledge in the Scriptures. In prooem. quaest. in Genes.
Hilary and Victorinus so much approved of him, ut ejus tractatus non ut
interpretes, Hieronym. Epist. 65.
sed ut Auctores proprii operis transtu lerunt. Pamphilus the Martyr had his
expositions in so high esteem, that with his own hands he copied out (as the
greatest part of the Volumes written by him so particularly) five and twenty
volumes of his expositions upon the twelve Prophets, Hieronym. in catalog.
which Ierom happily light on, kept and embraced, with as much joy, as if he
had found the treasures of Craesus. Atque (ut pancis dicam) hortus quidam
revera nobis erat (inquit Gregorius Thaumaturgus) magni illins paradisi Dei
similitudinem referens. In Orat. panegyric. ad Origenem.
He beautified his learning with piety, being very eminent in this regard:
sanctitate vitae incomparabilis: Fascicul. temp.
a true Evangelical Doctor, that practiced in his Life, what he Preached with
his Lips: there being a notable agreement between his words and his works,
prescribing rules with the one, and giving a pattern of them in the other.
Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 2.
Whence it was said of him, that as he taught so he lived, and as he lived so
he taught: a sweet harmony. Trithem. de Script.
Iejuniis, vigiliis, orationibus and continuis divinarum Scripturarum studiis
Deo devote serviens, intentus fuit. His abstinence and austerity was admirable,
he often fasted and watched, always used a spare and mean diet, only for
necessity, forbearing altogether the use of flesh and wine; except through
infirmity forced thereunto: insomuch, as that having sold the profane Authors
(which he had diligently perused) he enjoined the buyer to pay him four half
pence a day, Eusebius. ibid. Erasm. invita Origin.
which for the space of many years sufficed him for Meat, Drink, and Apparel.
Abstinentia corporis vigorem ade o domuit, ut omnino contabuisse sceletumque
factum esse videretur. Suidas.
He took his rest (which was but little) not on a soft bed, but on the bare
ground; and supposing that our Savior ought especially to be observed, Mat. 6.
34. etc 10. 10. he would not wear two coats, nor shoes, nor take care or
thought for the morrow. Such also was his love to, and zeal for the truth, and
constant professors of it, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 2.
that in times of persecution he frequently exposed himself to so great and
eminent dangers, as he could not have escaped, had not the divine power in a
mavelous manner preserved him; he was sometimes so narrowly watched, and
closely pursued by his persecutors, that he could no way pass safely through
Alexandria, being forced oftentimes to change his Lodgings, that so he might
avoid them; yet would he not forbear to visit those that were imprisoned, yea
and accompany such as were condemned, unto the places of execution, boldly
embracing, kissing, and saluting them to his no small hazard, so that once the
multitude in their rage had stoned him to death, had he not been even
miraculously defended from them and preserved.

It shall suffice concerning his worth every way, to add but a testimony or two
more to what has been already said, Lib. 2. annal. ^^ior^m.
Origenes ille (in* quit Aventinus) maximus omnium secundum legat^s Christi,
veritatis divine assertor, magn^ fama majori gloria caelestes literas
interpretatus est; and Philosophiam Christianam magna auditorum frequentia
public docuit. Cultoribus quoque deorum venerabilis, ad Imperatores Romanos,
Caesares Augustos matresque eorum in ^ulam vocatus accessit, ad eosdem literas
dedit. Omnibus ejus vita, mores, studium, doctrina, admirationi fuerunt.
Vincentius Lyrinensis more largely thus speaks of him. In him, says he, so
many excellent, Contra haeres. cap. 2^.
singular, and wonderf^l things are to be found, that at first a Man would
easily judge all his assertions were to be assented unto: for if the life give
any Authority, his industry, purity, patience, and sufferings were great, if
his stock and learning, what more noble? springing from a Family made
Illustrious by Martyrdom. Moreover, for Christ was he deprived not only of his
Father, but also of all his substance, he proceeded so far in the straits of
poverty, that he was oftentimes afflicted for the confession of the name of
Christ: such also was the strength of his Wit, profound, sharp, and elegant,
that by much and far he excelled well nigh all others; so great was his
knowledge and learning that they were but few things in divine, and almost none
in humane Philosophy that he thoroughly attained not unto? What was there so
difficult to be persuaded, that by the force of disputation he cleared not up?
What so hard to be done, that he made not to seem easy? His speech being so
pleasant, delightful and sweet, that to me their seemed to flow from his mouth,
not so much words, as honey. But perhaps, his assertions were woven only with
knotty arguments? Nay verily, never any of the Masters did use more examples of
the divine Law. But (you will say) I believe he wrote but little; no mortal Man
more: so that I have not only not read all his Books, but it seems even
impossible to find them all: and lest any thing should be wanting in him
requisite unto the attaining of knowledge, fullness of Age also abounded. But
perhaps he was not happy in his Scholars? who ever more happy? since innumerable
Doctors, Priests, Confessors, and Martyrs came from his bosom. Besides, who can
express how great admiration, glory, and favor, he had amongst all men? Who
any way religious did not fly unto him from the utmost parts of the World? Who
among Christians did not reverence him as almost a Prophet; among Philosophers,
as a Master? How much he was respected, not only by those of a private
condition, but also the Empire it self, Histories do declare, that report him
to have been sent for by the Mother of Alexander the Emperor, for the worth of
his Heavenly Wisdom. His Epistles also testify the same, which in the
authority of a Christian Master, he wrote unto Philip, the first among the
Roman Emperors that was a Christian, concerning whose incredible knowledge, if
any one will not receive the testimony of us Christians reporting it, yet at
least let him believe the confession of the Heathen Philosophers affirming it.
For that impious Porphyri^s says, that he was by the same of him, stirred up,
(when almost but a child) to go unto Alexandria, and that there he saw him
being now aged; but surely such a one, and so great, as that he had gotten unto
the very top of all knowledge. Time would fail me to speak even but a little of
the things, which were in that Man, which notwithstanding appertain not only
unto the glory of Religion, but the greatness of temptation: for who would not
use that sentence, ( viz. of Cicero, concerning Plato) that he had rather err
with Origin, than be of a right judgment with others? Thus far Vincentius.

Origin thus every way excellent was withal a wonderfully industrious and
laborious Man, In Math. 12. 32. and in decret. Nicen. Synod.
(...): inquit Athanasius, wholly spending his time and improving his vast
abilities in the work of the Lord and for the behoof of the Church: and this he
did; partly by Preaching: for which employment he was completely furnished,
being so familiarly acquainted with, Erasm. in vit^ Origin.
and ready in the holy Scriptures, which he abundantly made use of, beautifying
and adorning therewith (as with so many precious gems) his discourses
throughout: Gentium Testimonia ^usquam adhibet, nisi quoties id res ipsa
postulat, quum nullum autorum genus non exact tenuerit: sed totus hujus Sermo
(inquit Erasmus) S^crorum Voluminum sententiis undique seu gemmeis emblematibus
distinctus est, sed adeo commode and in loco insertis, ut nihilo secius cur^^t
oration: dicas esse non ascita, sed ibi nata; (...) aliunde quaesita, sed sua
sponte praesto esse. And this he did the rather, (and I therefore add it
because it is a notable testimony, that the Scriptures at that time were read
by all sorts of persons, Eras^. ibi^.
in the vulgar Tongue, or that in use among them) because in that Age the
common people did understand the words of the Scripture, being frequently
exercised in the reading of the sacred Volumes. For then even Weavers and
Spinsters had those Books at home, which as often as they had leisure, they
carefully perused: neither to the understanding of them was their need of any
other Language, than that which the illiterate vulgar did make use of: and
certainly that reading brought this profit with it, that they sat in the
Church more docil or teachable before him that expounded the mysteries of the
Scriptures unto them. He had an admirable faculty of speaking ex tempore, as he
did many of those Homilies which were thought worthy of the public view,
Ruffin. in (...). ad Chromatium
such were his six and twenty Homilies upon Joshua: Oratiuncul^s viginti sex in
Iesum Nave, quas ex tempare in Ecclesia peroravit Adamantius senex ex Graeco
Latin tibi pro virium me^rum parvitate disserui: In perorat. Translator. Sixth.
Senens. Bibl. lib. 4.
inquit Ruffinus. Also his explanation of the Epistle to the Romans. His
sixteen Homilies upon Leviticus, etc. quotidi^ and quasi ex tempore Scripturas
ad populum ena^rabat. Of which kind of speaking Meri^ Casaubon thus reports in
his Treatise of Enthusiasm. Chap. 4. of Rhetorical Enthusiasm.
For that faculty of the Sophists (says he) of extemporary speaking upon any
subject, it was their common profession, that is most certain: Such a one was
Boethus cujus facilitas apud Tarsenses maxima videbatur, adeo ut ex tem^ore meo
magno, impetu ad -- omnem datam materiam (...) ret. Strab. Geo-graph. lib. 14.
and it was accordingly performed by many of them, with singular dexterity, to
the great amazement of all their Auditors: such was Callisthenes the Sophist or
Philosopher: The Tarsenses of Asia, are by the Ancients noted, as for their
love to Learning in general, so particularly to have excelled in this faculty:
-- And Quintilian a sober solid Man, makes this a chief end and fruit of long
pains and exercises in the Art of Rhetoric, to attain to such a faculty as to
be able upon any sudden occasion, to speak pertinently without any
premeditation: thus he. Origin was also very zealous and lively in his
delivery: Erasm. in vita Origin.
for he loved the things which he spoke, and of such we use to speak with
affection and delight. His Sermons were commonly short, for he would never
exceed an hour, lest he should cloy his Auditors, judging it better to preach
often than long. In reproving he always remembered Christian moderation; sharp
he would be, yet never bitter; but for nothing he would more blame them, then
for seldom and slack coming to the hearing of the Word, and for oscitancy when
they came, accounting diligence or negligence this way one principal note of
proficiency or deficiency in Piety. He observed this method: First, plainly and
bri^fly to expound the History; Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
then would he stir them up to observe the Mystical and All^gorical sense; and
lastly, handle some moral places, Erasm. in vita Origin.
making application of what he had delivered and unfolded.

Partly also by writing did he improve his abilities; Frasm. ibid. Eusebius. lib.
6. cap 21.
and dictating unto those that wrote: whereunto of himself he was backward, but
set upon it by the inst gation of Ambr^se, (Christianae fidei conf^ssor
i^signis, inquit Trithemius, De (...)
qui etiam ad off^cium diacon^ tus meruit promoveri, Vir nobilis and non
inelegantis ingenii. Hieronym. in Catalog.
vir certe doctissimus, and librorum studiosus amator.) who pressed him
hereunto above measure, giving him no rest, and exacted from him a continual or
daily task.

His works were innumerable, written by himself, Apolog. advers. Ruffin. lib. 2.
and others from his mouth; many whereof Ierom says, he had gotten together
and perused: but not all; For who of us, says he, Epist. 65. Pammach.
can read so much as he wrote? Some affirm, as from Ierom, that he composed six
thousand Volumes; Is^dor. Hispal. in Orig. lib. 6. cap. 7.
though yet Ierom himself deny it; For, says he, look over the Catalogue of
his Books contained in the third Volume of the life of Pamphilus written by
Eusebius, Apolog. advers. Ruffin. lib. 2.
and you shall not find the third part of that number; yet did he utter above a
thousand Tracts in the Church, Hieronym. Epist. 65. Vincent. Lyrineus.
and besides set forth Commentaries innumerable: in a word, no man ever wrote
more: for which cause Suidas styles him (...), or the Composer. Ierom in his
Epistle unto Paula, the Mother of Eustocbiu^^, (now not extant) reckons up all
the Monuments of Origens Wit, comparing him unto that learned, Aul. Gell. ^oct.
Attic. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Varro, who by that time he had arrived unto the age of eighty four years:
(which yet it seems, he exceeded; Hist. Not. lib. 29. c. 4.
for Pliny mentions the eighty and eighth of his age) had written four hundred
and ninety Books; of whom Terentianus a Carthaginian Poet thus speaks. August.
de Civit. dei. lib. 6. cap. 2.
Vir doc^^^^mus undecunque Varro, qui tam multa legit, ut aliquando scribere
vacasse miremur; (...) multa scripsit, quam multa vix quemquam legere potuisse
credamus. Such another was Didymus of Alexandria, surnamed also Chalcenterus,
(Nobilis grammaticus, qui Iulii Caesaris evo floruit) quod indefesso labor
libris assideret, Mir^us in not. in Hieronym. catalog.
who is reported to have written above three thousand and five hundred Books,
as Meursius, In notis in Hesych. de viris illustrib.
and Suidas: four thousand (says Seneca) but withal handling such trivial
things, ( quae (inquit) erant ded^scenda, si scires) that it cannot be said of
him, Epist. 88.
as Erasmus of Origin; In Origene nihil ineptum aut redundans. In censur. Orig.
in lib. Job. Treat. of the use of the Fathers: lib. 1. cap. 1.
Briefly, his Works were such and so many, That (says the learned Daille) had
we them all entire, they would perhaps be able to give us more light and
satisfaction about the present Controversies in Religion, than all the rest of
the Fathers.

His Works on the Scriptures are by Iero^ distinguished into three sorts or
classes; In Prolog. ante homil. Origin. in Ezech.
( and nullam scripturae partem ille praetermisit, in qua non scripserit,
inquit Erasmus.) the first sort he calls (...); In censur. in lib. Origin. Vid.
Sixth. Senens. lib. 3. vacationes. p. 167. cent. 3. cap. 10.
ociosa; i. e. brief Annotations upon obscure and difficult places, when he had
not leisure to frame a full and just Commentary: The second sort, (...), or
homilies, that he preached unto the people publicly. Homilia est familiaris
and domestica divinae Scripturae ad plebem elucidati^; Sixth. Senens. biblioth.
lib. 3.
cujus seopus est explicare and hortari sen applicare: The third sort, (...),
(which says Erasmus, he wrote himself) Books or Volumes, In vita Origin.
majoris disputationis, wherein he disputes at large, spreading the sail of his
wit to the full, Isido. Hispa. Orig. lib. ^. c. 8.
and lanching out into the deep: which title he himself, says Ierom, gave unto
his Commentaries. Epist. 65. Pam^ach.
To which three, Eusebius adds two other, viz. (...), i. e. Epistolare, in quo
questiones ex divina scriptura, Sixth Senens^ibl. lib. 4.
amicor^m literis ad se missas, rescriptis explicavit Epistolis. E^ (...),
interpretivum, in quo genere demum ponendae sunt omnes Scripturae divinae
translationes, quas ipse, in Hexaplis, Octaplis, and Palaestinae editionis
codicibus complexus est.

Of these his Labors, but few are now extant, and they in Latin; and of those
that are lost, the names of few are remaining at this day: So great were the
endeavors of those, Erasm. in censur. lib. Origin.
who (because of his errors) sought to suppress his Writings, that they would
not suffer so much as the very Titles to remain; wherein they showed more Zeal
than Discretion and Wisdom; Scultet in Medull.
for surely, might we have been so happy as to have enjoyed all that he wrote,
the errors found in them might the better have been born with, being
countervail'd, and by much over-ballanced by what in them was sound and
Orthodox. Of how great esteem his Works were among the Ancients, may be
gathered from hence, that diverse of them thought it well worth their time and
pains to translate much of what he wrote; In Apolog. ^. advers. Ruffin.
Ierom tells us, that he himself translated seventy Books of his: Ruffine not a
few, though not so faithfully; Hilary translated almost forty thousand Verses,
Quadraginta ferme millia versuum; of Origin upon Job, and the Psalms: and
Victorinus many things, non ut interpretes, sed ut auctores porprii operis,
Hieromyn. (...) 65. and Apolog. 1. ad^ers. Ruffin. (...)
and the Books of Ambrose, almost all of them are full of the sayings of this
man.

3. Of the almost innumerable number of those that are lost, we find recorded
in di^ers Authors these following.

1. His Collections and Collations of the Translations of the Old Testament:
Baron. ad an. 231.
a Work of huge bulk, Hieronym. in praefat. in Josuam.
collected with great pains, and composed with no less diligence; requiring no
small cost to procure, nor less labor to pe^use it. Field of the Church. lib.
4. c. 26.
An excellent piece, and of admirable use and advantage; which filled all the
^amous Libraries in those times: highly commended even by Epiphanius himself,
no friend to Origin; Lib. de Mensur.
Herein (says he) he did well and profitably; I would he had done others
things as well. These were of three sorts.

1. He compiled that work which he named Tetrapla, or his fourfold
interpretation; consisting of the Translations;

1. Of the Septuagint.

2. Of Aquila of Pontus; Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 16. Epiphan. lib. de mensur.
Miraeus. in notis in Catalog. Hieronym.
who was first a Gentile, then a Christian; but being for his obstinacy in the
practice of Astrology, and calculating Nativities, excommunicated, he became a
Jewish Proselite, and was accordingly circumcised, being semi-Iudaeus,
semi-Chri^^^nus, Buxtorf. Epist. dedicat. ante lex Hebr.
and having learned the Hebrew tongue, he translated the Old Testament into
Greek; about the year of Christ 129. which he did, Miraeus in auctar. de
S^ript. Eccles.
to the end, that as much as in him lay, he might subvert the Prophesies of
Christ, for which cause Epip^anius call him Iudaizantem heraeticum.

3. Of Theodotion, De Script. Eccles.
of Pontus also: Or, as Trithemius, an Ephesian: who being first a Christian;
(but then a follower of those arch-Hereticks, Sixth. Senens. bibl. lib. 4.
Tatianus, Marcion and Ebion) afterward turned Jew; Buxtorf. Ibid.
and having been among them well instructed in the Hebrew Tongue, he also
translated the Old Testament into Greek: Praefat. in lib. Job.
In the year of Christ 180. whom Ierom reckons among the Judaizing Heretics:
Bellarm. de verb. dei. lib. 2. cap. 5
he was more faithful in his Translation than the former; and therefore did the
Churches of Christ always use to read the Prophet Daniel, Hieronym. praefat. in
Dan.
not according to the Septuagint, but Theodotions Interpretation or Edition.

4. Of Symmachus: Sixth. Senens. bibl. lib. 4.
he was a Samaritan, ranked among their wise men; but not having that honor
from them which he expected, he fell to the Jews, Bellarm. Ibid.
and was circumcised the second time; Si quidem art medica and certis
instrumentis (spatisterem appellant) Iudaei solebant resectum praeputium iterum
super inducere, sive attrahere; and hoc est quod Apostolus ait, 1 Cor. 7. 18.
Qui circumcisus vocatus est, non adducat praeputium: vel, ut clarius sonant
verba Graeca, (...), i.e. non attrabatur. But living ingloriously among these
also, he became a Christian, embracing the Heresy of the Ebionites, Eusebius.
lib. 6. cap. 16.
who held that Christ was a mere man, and born of Joseph and Mary. He
translated the Old Testament into Greek, not word for word, as Aquila had done,
but according to the sense thereof: non verbum ex verbo, sed sententias ex
sententiis reddidit: about the year of Christ 200. This Translation, Buxtorf.
ibid.
Origin says, he found at Caesarea with a certain woman named Iuliana, which
says, Eusebius. ibid.
that Symmachus delivered it her to keep.

2. To the four above named, he added two more, viz. the Hebrew Text in Hebrew
Letters ^. Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
And again, the same Text in the Greek Characters, for the help of those that
could not read the Hebrew: These Texts with the former four interpretations
were set one beside another; each page being divided into six distinct columns
for that purpose; for which cause he entitled the work Hexapla, as the former
Tetrapla, and the following Octopla, for the like reason; each page having in
the one four, as in the other eight columns. Erasmus rather approves of the
writing of it without an aspiration, In censur. in lib. Origin.
viz. Exapla; ab (...): to explain; as conceiving it to take the name not from
the number of columns, but from the nature of the Work: but were it so, then
might the same title have been given as well unto the foregoing and following,
as unto this; the Etymology agreeing to them all alike.

3. To these six he added two more: Sixth. Senens. Ibid.
which because he had found without the names of their Authors affixed to them,
he called the one Quinta, or the fifth; and the other Sexta, or the sixth; the
former whereof he had found in the City of Hiericho; the later at Nicopolis.
These two, with the above named six made up his Octopla, or eight fold
interpretation: wherein they were disposed or set in this order. 1. The Hebrew
Text in the Hebrew Letters. Epiphan. de Mensur. Baron. 231. 8.
2. The Hebrew words in Greek Characters. Field of the Church, lib. 4. cap. 26.
3. The Translation of Aquila. 4. That of Symmachus. 5. The Septuagint. 6. The
Translation of Theodotion. 7. That Edition called the fifth. 8. That called the
sixth. Of which Alsted thus speaks: Encyclopaed. Hist.
Octopla (inquit) opus laboriosum and insigne magno Ecclesiae malo amissum, and
not much unlike, Controv. de Scriptur. cap. 4.
our Learned Whitaker: His labor (says he) was incredible in gathering
together all these Editions: which being all thus brought into one body, proved
a most Divine Work, the loss whereof is a great detriment to the Church, and
well might Ambrose say of him; Multorum interpretationes diligenti discussit
indagine. In Psalm. 118. Sermon. 4.


4. He also set forth another Translation for daily use; Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
composed of the Septuagint, and that of Theodotion: being a third from them
both; Dever. Dei. 2. cap. 5.
it a ut nova videretur, inquit Bellarminus: which may be said to be, not so
much a Translation, Fiel. lib. 4. cap. 26.
as an Emendation of the Septuagint: Wherein he added some things out of
Theodotions Translation, Baron. adan. 251. 37.
which he found wanting in the Septuagint: and these additions he noted with an
Asterisk or shining Star Masius in Epist. dedicante Josuam.:
but those passages, quae Hebraice nou erant dicta, which were not to be found
in the Hebrew, he pierced through with a Spit or Spear --. Epist. August. Numb.
89.
Of which Ierom thus speaks: Vbicunque virgulae, i.e. obeli sunt, significatur
quod Septuaginta plus dixerint, quam habetur in Hebraew: ubi autem asterisci,
i.e. stellulae praelucentes, ex Theodotionis editione ab Origin additum est.
Again: Sed quod majoris est andaciae, Praefat. in lib. Paralip.
in editione Septuaginta, Theodotionis editionem miscuit Origines; asteriscis
videlicet designans quae minus fuerant; and virgulis, quae ex superfiuo
videbantur apposita. Isidore gives us this account of the notes; Asteriscus,
inquit, apponitur in iis quae omissa sunt, De Origin. lib. 1. cap. 20.
ut illucescant per eam notam quae de esse videntur. Obelus apponitur in verbis
vel sententiis superflue iteratis, five in iis locis ubi lectio aliqua
falsitate notata est. This work he undertook, because the Septuagint had been,
Baron. ad an. 231. 36. 37.
through the carelessness of Notaries and Transcribers, not a little corrupted
and depraved. In Epist. dedicat. ante Josuam.
Cum manum (inquit Masius) Septuaginta interpretationi admovere ausus est
Origenes, erat etiam tum perverfissima. Hieronym. advers. Ruffin.
And though some have judged it rather a corruption, than a correction of the
Septuagint; yet was it indeed a diligent collation of those two
interpretations, and a Work very profitable unto all; it being a most accurate
restitution of the Septuagint to its purity. Concerning which Emendation
Andreas Masius (a man, Treat. of the Fathers: lib. 1.
says Daille, of singular and profound Learning, yet of such candor and
integrity, as renders him more admired than his Knowledge does) thus speaks:
Epist. dedicat. ante Josuam.
In correcting and conserving that interpretation of the Septuagint, Hesychius
Aegypti Episcopus Marian. Schol. in Hieronym. Ep^st. Lucianu^ Ecclesiae
Antiochenae Prebyter Hieronym. in Catalog.
to their no small praise did Helychius take great pains, Lucianus more, Origin
most of all: by whose industry (he says) he was provoked to deliver unto the
age wherein he lived the Septuagint Translation, sound and entire in that one
History of Iosuah, as Adamantius had done the whole throughout. This Edition
was afterward so far approved of, that it quickly filled all Libraries, Sixth.
Senens. lib. 4.
and was received and made use of in their daily readings, by all the Churches
of of Palestine and Syria; Hieronym. advers. Ruffin.
so that it was accounted as the vulgar Translation.

2. He wrote ten Books of Stromes; Hieronym. Epist. ad Magnum, Numb. 84.
(in imitation of Clemens his Master, whose Work so entitled, consists of
eight Books) wherein comparing the Scriptures and Philosophers together, he
confirms the Doctrine of Christianity by the sayings of those Heathens: Sixth.
Senens. lib. 4.
but the two last of these Books were spent in the exposition of the Prophecy
of Daniel, and the Epistle to the Galatians.

3. His Books of the Interpretion of Hebrew names contained in the Scriptures:
Eusebius. lib. 6. 23.
mentioned by the Author of the answers unto certain questions propounded by
the Orthodox, Respons. 86.
falsely ascribed unto Justin Martyr: Hieronym. in praefat. in lib. Heb. nom.
which Ierom (who herein imitated him) reckons among the excellent Monuments of
his Wit, wherein he took pains as a Christian, to supply, what Philo, as a Jew,
had omitted.

4. Of the Resurrection, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 23.
two Books.

5. Of Prayer. Cent. 3. cap. 10.


6. A Dialogue between him and one Candidus a Defender of the Valentinian
Heresy; In whom (says Ierom) I confess I have beheld (as it were) two
Andabatae, Hieronym. advers. Ruffin.
or blind-folded Champions encountering each other. Ad an. 23. 7.
Of Baronius thus: Non (inquit) (...)* tantum pluribus scatebat erroribus, sed
and blasphemiis refertissimus dialogus ille erat, quocum Candido haeretico de
dogmatibus fusius desputavit.

7. Of Martyrdom, Eusebius. l. 6. cap. 27.
or a Book of Martyrs: which he dedicated unto Ambrose and Protoctaetus
Ministers of C^sarea; for that they both suffered no small affliction, enduring
most constantly examination and confession, in the time of Maximinus the
Emperor, a cruel persecutor: An. 237.
who (out of spite that he bare unto the house of Alexander his Predecessor,
which harbored many of the faithful) gave commandment that the Governors only
of the Churches, In specul. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 11. and Haymo hist. Eccles.
lib. 6. cap. 3.
as principal Authors of the Doctrine of our Savior, should be put to death.
Of which Book, says Vincentius Bellovacensis: scribit tanta dictricta spiritus
virtute, ut ejus sententiis tanquam validissimis nervis multos ad martyrium
stabiliret.

8. Above an hundred Epistles, Lib. 6. cap. 35.
which being scattered here and there, were collected and comprised by Eusebius
in several volumes, to the end they should be no more dispersed.

9. Five Books against Heretics. Trithem. de Script.


10. An Epitome of the History of Susanna. Bellarm. de Script.


Moreover, he commented upon most of the Books of the Old and New Testament: of
which Works of his, besides those now extant, these are recorded in several
Authors, viz.

I. Upon the Old Testament.
1. A continued explanation of the four first Chapters of Genesis, Sixth.
Senens. lib. 4.
in thirteen Tomes; but twelve says Eusebius.

2. One Book of Annotations upon Exodus; Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 23.
also the like upon Leviticus.

3. One Homily upon the Song of Hannah, Sixth. Senens. Ibid.
1 King. 2.

4. One Homily upon Solomon's judgment between the two Harlots 2 King. 3.

5. Many Homilies or Tracts upon the Books of Job.

6. A brief exposition, Ibid.
or an Enchiridion upon the whole Book of Psalms: also larger explanations
thereupon at the request of Ambrose. He was the first (says Ierom) that
commented upon the whole Psalter. Trithemius says that he wrote one hundred
and fifty Tracts upon the Psalms; De Script. Eccles.
which equals the number of them.

7. A Commentary upon the Proverbs of Solomon. Sixth. Senens. Ibid.


8. Explanations upon the Book Ecclesiastes. Deverb. dei. lib. 1. cap 4.
Kimedoncius cites a Testimony out of Origin Homil. 1. in Ecclesiasten.

9. Ten Books of Commentaries upon the Canticles: Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 31.
five whereof he wrote at Athens; the other five returning from Cesarea.
Prolog. in Cantic.
A worthy Work requiring much time, labor and cost to translate, for which
cause Ierom omitted it, and would not attempt or adventure upon it. In this
Work, containing well nigh twenty thousand Verses, he discourses so
magnificently and clearly, Ibid.
(says Ierom) that as in the rest he overcame all others, so in this he
overcame himself.

10. Annotations upon the whole Prophecy of Esaias: Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
also continued explanations from the first Chapter unto the thirtieth; of
which, thirty Tomes came to our hands, says Eusebius: together with two Books
upon the thirtieth Chapter.

11. A huge number of Homilies upon Jeremy, Lib. 6. cap. 31.
the most whereof are lost.

12. Upon the Lamentations nine Tomes: Lib. 6. cap. 23.
Of which (says Eusebius) we have seen five.

13. Upon Ezekiel twenty and five Tomes, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 31.
the which he wrote being at Athens: Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
besides many Homilies.

14. Upon the twelve Minor Prophets many Tracts, Lib. 6. cap. 35.
Whereof (says Eusebius) we have found twenty and five in the whole, In
Catalog. Pamphilus.
which Ierom says, he found copied out by Pamphilius among these were: one
upon Hosea; of which Ierom thus: In praefat, in Osee.
Origenes parvum de hoc Propheta scripsit Libellum, cui hunc titulum imposuit,
(...), i.e. quare in Osee appellatur Ephraim, volens ostendere, quaecunque
contra eum dicuntur, ad haereticorum referenda personam, etc.

II. Upon the New Testament.
1. Upon Matthew, Sixth. Senens. Lib. 4.
one Book containing his Scholia, or brief Annotations upon obscure places:
Also, twenty five Homilies upon diverse places of the Gospel. Descript. Eccles.
Six and twenty, Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 19.
says Trithemius; and Nicephorus speaks of five Books of his upon Matthew.

2. Upon Luke five Tomes; Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
and many Homilies.

3. Upon the Epistle to the Galatians five Tomes; Ibid.
also one Book (...), or of choice passages: besides not a few Homllies.

4. Upon the Epistle to the Ephesians three Volumes or Commentaries; Apolog. 1.
advers. Ruffin. and in prooem. ant^ comment. in Ephesians.
of which Ierom makes mention in these words. Illud quoque (...) praefatione
commoneo, ut sciatis Origenem tria ^^lumina in hanc Epistolam conseripsissc;
quem and nos ex part secuti sumus.

5. Upon the Epistle to the Colossians three books.

6. Upon the first Epistle of the Thessalonians diverse books: Sixth. Senens.
lib. 4.
for Ierom makes mention of the third volumn upon this Epistle; Epist. 152.
Alexand. and Minerio.
wherein, says he, he discourses with much variety and prudence.

7. Upon the Epistle to Titus, one book.

8. Upon the Epistle to the Hebrews many books: Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
all which through the injury of time, and violence of his adversaries, are
lost, and now not to be found.

The books that are extant at this day under his name, are these following;

1. Seventeen Homilies upon the book of Genesis; which are said to be
interpreted by Ierom whose name is prefixed to them, but falsely, Eras. in lib.
Orig. cens.
as Crynaeus supposes: for indeed it was done by Ruffinus, as appears by the
liberty that he takes, to add detract and change what he pleased: which it
seems was his manner: In epist. ante Hilar.
sed haec non est, inquit Erasmus, libertas interpretis sed licentia potius
contaminantis scripta aliena. Again, Ruffino peculiaris est ista temeritas,
Eras. cens. de comment. in ep. ad Romans
( viz. ea quae verti^, truncare, augere, immutare, and ex alieno opere suum
facere) cujus unicum studium fuisse videtur, omnes illustrium autorum libros,
attrectando contaminare. Ha^ a^rte vir glory cupidus, Id. in cens. in hom. in
Levi.
putavit se reperisse viam, qua vel invitis omnibus tereretur manibus hominum.
Certainly, Treat. of the Fath. l. 1. c. 4.
says the Learned Daille, he has so filthily mangled and so licentiously
confounded the writings of Origin, which he has translated into Latin; See an
addition In hom. 15. de verbo (...).
that you will hardly find a page where he has not either cut off, or added,
or at least altered something. A soul fault in a translator, in whom fidelity,
as the chief virtue is required and most commendable. Such is his dealing in
this kind, that the Reader is often uncertain whether he read Origin or
Ruffine. Scultet. in medull. Apol. adver. Ruffin.
Which thing Ierom often and tartly taxes him for: and particularly for his
unworthy translation of his book of principles, or (...), Epist. 16. ad
Principiam Virginem.
which he calls, and that fitly enough, and not without ^est cause, an infamous
interpretation: Let it suffice once for all to have given this hint of the
manner of Ruffine in his translation of diverse books of Origin. And that this
translation of these Homilies upon Genesis is his, appears from what Ruffine
himself has said in his Peroration added unto the Commentary upon the Epistle
to the Romans, wherein he professes that he translated Origin upon Genesis:
And probable it is, that the transcribers prefixed Ieroms name as the more
gracious and acceptable. Grynaeus has taken pains for the benefit of the
Reader to set down, Ante hom. in Genesis
as he has done before all the rest of the works of Origin in his Edition of
them, the several Theological Common places handled in these homilies: adding
moreover that by them the diligent Reader will confess, that he has light upon
a rich storehouse of Christian Philosophy, replenished with all kind of
Spiritual treasures.

2. Upon Exodus thirteen Homilies; translated also by Ruffinus; Eras. in cens.
hom. in Genesis
though for the gaining of the more credit unto them, the name of Ierom be here
also prefixed as the interpretor of them.

3. Upon Leviticus sixteen Homilies; eighteen say some: Suppl. Berg.
where the same craft is made use of in the alteration of the name of the
translator as in the former. Eras. n. ib.
By some overbold impostor, Grynaeus. ante libr.
these are ascribed unto Cyril of Alexandria, Sixth. Senens. l. 4.
under the title of so many books, or a Commentary: whereas it is manifest,
they are not Commentaries, but Homilies: for the Author excuses his brevity to
his auditors, by reason of the straits of time; and that he intended not a
large exposition of the words, but to touch some few things briefly for their
edification: The style, says Bellarmine, De Script. Eccles.
and similitude of the Doctrines contained in them, show them plainly to be
Origens.

4. Upon Numbers, Trithem. de script.
twenty eight Homilies: (some say, but twenty six. Grynaeus. and Merlin.
Cent. 3. cap. 10. Sixth. Senens. lib. 4. and Scultetus in Medula) which its
likely was translated by Ierom; In perorat. in ad Roman.
because Ruffine speaking of his translation of Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Iosuah, and Judges, makes no mention of Numbers: and, In cens. in libr. Origin.
says Erasmus out of Gennadius, Ruffine translated all of Origin, except what
was done by Ierom. Yet that there are some additions of the interpretor in this
piece is apparent, says Grynaeus, In loc. Rivet. Cri^. Sac.
in homil. 2. in cap. 2. Yea these Homilies by their phrase seem to be the work
of some Latin Author; for in Chap. 12. he expounds the difference between
excudere and excidere: which could have no place in a Greek.

5. Upon Iosuah, Eras in cens. Spuriae sunt, ut quae abundant soloecismis.
Perk. in problemat.
twenty and six Homilies; where we have also the name of Ierom as the
interpretor, instead of Ruffine: as also a Preface pretended to be his; but so
frigid and and foolish, that a more certain argument cannot be desired to
persuade us, that neither the one, nor other is Ieroms: and Er^smus gives
instance in diverse particulars.

6. Upon Judges nine Homilies: Erasm. ib.
where we have the same mistake of the interpretor; liber inquit Grynaeus satis
bonus. Here also the Etymology of rex a regendo, gives cause to suspect, that
these came out of the same shop, with those upon Numbers.

7. Upon the book of the Kings, Questionable Riv. Cri. Sac.
or one Homily upon the first and second Chapters of the first of Samuel.

8. Upon the book of Job, Sixth. Sen. l. 4.
a large explation, divided into three books; from the beginning of the History
unto the middle of the third Chapter. A Learned piece it is; and worth the
reading: but both the style and method show it to be none of Origens, both
being far different from his. Ans. to Jesuits Chall*
Those Commentaries, says Usher, upon Job are wrongly ascribed unto Origin.
Also the Author is full of Battologies or repetitions of the same sentence,
which certainly is not the manner of Origin. Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
For my part, says ^rasmus, I suppose him to be a Latinist, and to have
written in Latin: In censur.
for he speaks of the Greek as not his own Language, Coci censur.
and interprets the word Adamantius to signify in Greek, indomabilis,
iuflexibilis: and says he, Eras. in cens.
Lucianus, cognominatus est tanquam lucidus. He was one of free speech fit to
teach the vulgar, but withal an Arian, as is clear from diverse passages; and
therefore it cannot be Origens work; for Arius arose many years after him.
Besides, he brings in the exposition of Lucianus the Martyr in the third
Chapter, who suffered under Maximinus, refutes the Manichees in the seventh and
eighth Chapter, and makes mention of the Homousianists; none of which were
known till after the time of Origin; Locutulei.
The Preface, says Erasmus, Eras. in cens.
or Prologue set before it, is of some prating fellow, that had neither
learning nor modesty in him, unless the concealing of his name may be so
interpreted: Surely he had little skill in the Latin (yet, says Possevine,
commentarii hi sunt pervetusti and pereruditi viri.) In apparent.
The whole being nothing else but mere and miserable stammering. Praefatio, In
Epist. ante Hilar.
inquit Erasmus, testatur hoc opus ab aliis nonnullis fuisse versum sed neque
bona fide neque docte, dum ex been Graecis, reddunt male Latina: quum ipse qui
haec praefatur, reipsa declaret, se fuisse hominem, qui nec Latin sciret, nec
ingenio aut eruditione valeret; sed qui tanto plus haberet arrogantiae, quanto
minus habebat peritiae. Dr. Jam. of the corrupt. of the Fathers.
Yet are these Commentaries made use of as Origens, by the Po^tificians to
prove their Doctrines, of the Invocation of Saints, oblations for the dead,
abstinence from flesh in Lent and for giving of alms upon funeral days for the
salvation of souls. Coci Censur.
Erasmus conjectureth the Author to have been one Maximinus a Bishop, In ceasur.
whose disputations with Augustine are extant.

9. Certain Homilies upon three of the Psalms, viz. Five upon the six and
thirtieth; two upon the seven and thirtieth, and two upon the eight and
thirtieth; in all nine: (...), sunt optima, inquit Gynaeus, allegoriae
frigidae. In Censur.
Erasmus is doubtful, whether they be his or no; for they do scarce express his
wit and phrase, Coci Censur.
but come nearer unto that of Chrysostom: he thinks it was some Latin, that
wrote them: which may be guessed from hence, that in explicating diverse texts;
he tells us how they are in Latin, how in Greek: which was not the manner of
the Greeks to do; for they little, or not at all cared for the Latin Tongue.
But if Ruffine translated it, he according to his custom, made that his own by
defiling it, which was another man's: Eras. in cens.
Yet having observed the weakness of the Preface, I can hardly think, says
Erasmus, that Ruffine was so very a Child: who, if not so much by Art, yet
certainly by nature was eloquent enough: but if any contend, that Ruffine is
sometime foolish this way, I will not much oppose, so it be confessed that the
genius of this work, does not resemble the happiness of Origin. De script.
Eccles.
Bellarmine gives this hint of them, that some do doubt whether they be his or
no: In Medull.
And Scultetus reckons this and the immediately preceding, to have crept in
among the works of Origin, Dr. Jam. of the corrupt. of the Fathers.
but to belong indeed unto others. Yet from hence also do those of Rome fetch
authorities, Coci Censur.
as from Origin, for the proof of their tenets concerning purgatory, auricular
confession, the virtues of the Cross, that wicked men do eat the body of Christ
in the Sacrament, and that the Book of Judith is authentic.

10. Upon the Canticles. 1. Cent. 3. c. 10.
Two Homilies; explanationis prioris.

2. Four Homilies, upon the two first Chapters of the Book; explanatienis
posteriovis: or rather a continued imperfect Commentary. Erasm. in Censur.
But they are indeed neither Origens nor Ieroms, but a work of some Latin
Author, well learned and sufficiently eloquent: for, he quotes the Greeks in
his Prologue as Strangers, and interprets some Latin words. Verbum dei, inquit,
apud Graecos masculino genere: In censur.
ex hoc (inquit Cocus) evidenter perspicitur, non Graecum, sed Latinum fuisse
autorem. Erasmus suspects them to be his, who wrote the Books de vocatione
gentium, and certain Commentaries upon the Psalms, In cens. in lib. Origin.
which go under the name of Ambrose. Merlin on the other side, Post. homil. in
Cantic.
is very confident that they are Origens, as (says he) the sagacious Reader
will easily perceive; though his reason be weak enough to ground even a
conjecture upon: yea himself confesses that the style differs from Origens;
for which cause some deny it to be his. B^^^ioth. San^^. lib. 4.
It is (says Sixtus Senensis) a pious, learned, and eloquent work; or rather a
fragment, in which the two first Chapters are excellently expounded, having in
some ancient Copies Ierom's name prefixed to it: who indeed m^^tions four
Homilies written by himself upon the Canticles. In catalogo.


Ierom^* (...) of these; Epist. Damaso. (...)
(...) tractatus, quos i^ morem quotidiani eloquii parvulis abhuc lactentibus
composuit, fideliter magis quam ornate interpretatus sum, gustum tibi sensuum
ejus, non cibum offerens. Tu (Damase Papa) animadvertas quanti sint illa
estimanda quae magna sunt, quum si^ possunt placere quae parva sunt.

11. Nine Homilies upon diverse places of the Prophecy of Esaias, especially upon
the sixth Chapter, Erasm. in censur.
which fragment was by Ierom (as himself confesses) turned into Latin. It
wants a Preface, which (because it was Ierom's manner to set a Preface before
what he translated) Erasmus supposes to be taken away by those to whom he
wrote, after that the name of Origin became odious or envyed at Rome: For very
likely it is, that therein he spoke highly in commendation of his Wit, as he
does in his Prologue before the Commentaries upon Ezekiel. Yet notwithstanding
the Historical errors (says Grynaeus) the Doctrines so weak and waterish,
Ante homil. in Esai.
and the frigid Allegories ( indignissamae Origin and Hieronymo) together with
the Barbarism of the Translation, do, I think abundantly show, that neither
Origin was the Author, nor Ierom the Translator of them.

12. Upon Jeremiah fourteen Homilies, Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
whereof Ierom was the Translator; which are the only remaining of a huge
number upon this Prophecy. These and the following are (says Grynaeus) Origene
and Hieronymo dignae.

13. Upon Ezekiel fourteen Homilies, translated also by Ierom, Erasm. in censur.
as appears both by his own Testimony ( in Hieremiam and Ezekielem Homilias
Origenis viginti octo e Graeco in Latinum verti) and also by the Preface which
is undoubtedly his, In catalog.
because Ruffine out of it objects a passage against him.

14. Upon Matthew, Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
his Commentaries: which are to be ranked among his Tomes as the Greek Titles
declare; Eras. lectori ante hunc commentar.
though some have imprudently divided them into Tracts or Homilies: whereas
there is not the least footstep of that kind of writing to be found in them:
for his Homilies always end in a Doxology, having sometimes a short Prayer
joined therewith. It contains thirty eight Homilies say some; Cent. 3. c. 10.
Sixth. Senens. Bellarm.
but thirty five say others: Grynaeus. and Merlin.
wherein we have an exposition of a great part of this Gospel, viz. from the
thirteenth unto the seven and twentyeth Chapter. It is a piece (says Erasmus)
most worthy to be read: Lectori Epist. ante comment.
Origin is ardent every where, but no where more, than when he handles the
sayings and doings of Christ, and in my judgment (says he) no one of the
Evangelists does more fully comprehend the Life and Doctrine of Christ, then
Matthew. Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
Yet Ambrose conceives our Author to be far meaner in the new Testament, than
in the Old. The Translator, in all probability was Ruffine, Erasm. ibid. In lib.
as may be gathered (though the Preface be wanting) from the liberty which he
takes in translating: It seems (says GryneuS) to be the writing of some Latin:
demptis iis quae vertit Erasmu^: who translated a good part of this work, viz.
from the thirteenth Chapter unto the twentyeth verse of the sixteenth Chapter.
Docti dubitant, Usher. de Brit. Eccles. primord. cap. 7.
an tractatus in Matthaeum tribui debeant Origeni.

15. Upon Luke thirty and nine Homilies: of which without doubt Ierom was the
Translator, Erasm. in censur.
seeing he professes so much in his Preface: And because they are not so
elaborate, and are sprinkled with some errors that were condemned, Sixth.
Senens. lib. 4.
he excuses them as written by Origin when but young (as those upon Matthew
when he was old.) Casaub. exercitat. 14. 11.
He is no where in his Homilies so short and concise, as in these. Three and
thirty of them are a continued exposition of this Gospel, from the beginning
thereof unto the midst of the fourth Chapter. The six latter of them are an
enarration of diverse places scattered here and there. In lib.
Est liber optimus (inquit Grynaeus) habet tamen aliquas salebras. In fine.
It Is an Interpretation (says Merlin) which those that envyed him have
profaned with sundry errors so that many think it not to be his, Merlin. in
praefat.
because of the many errors inserted therein.

16. Upon John thirty and two Tomes: Ierom speaks of thirty and nine, which he
durst not undertake to translate for the Bulk of them. Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
They all lay hid, till of late Perionius a Monk of Cassinas found nine Tomes
of them in an old Greek Copy which he light on in the King of France his
Library, and turned into Latin, yet were they in many places maimed and
inconsequent. These were afterward by some obscure Grecian, divided into thirty
and two Tomes, that they might be the more desired and sell the dearer: by whom
Ambrose of Millain, a Monk of Cassina, was deluded, though a Man sagacious
enough, and of a quick Wit, who translated and published them in thirty and two
Tomes as now they are: which (says he) in his Postscript, let the Reader know
I have done with utmost diligence and fidelity, Gryneus: ad calcem commentar.
so that it is not at all changed from what it was as written by the Author.

17. Certain Homilies upon diverse places of the Evangelists: Bellarm. de Script.
which without doubt are not all Origens: some of them (says Erasmus) it is
apparent, are not his, In censur.
but of some Latin Author, and the rest impudently corrupted by Ruffine. They
are ten in number, whereof seven are upon certain places of Matthew: two upon
John, viz* upon part of the first, and part of the twentyeth Chapters: and one
upon the Epiphany without a certain Text. Bellarm. de Script.
The fifth upon Matthew, seems to be of some Latin Author; for, says he,
Spiritu^ Sanctus is of the Neuter Gender, not of the Masculine, as with us:
where he plainly discovers himself to be a Latin. For the eighth (says Merlin)
many think it to be Origens, though it be not fully his style. Ante hanc homil.
The ninth is a mere Cento patch't up, the former part thereof with somewhat
taken out of Origens thirty fourth tract upon Matthew: Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
the latter part, with two fragments, the one taken out of Gregory's Morals,
Bellarm. de Script.
chap. 14. and some others later then Origin: Nullius est ponderis Holloix: in
quaest. 2. devita Dionys. Areopag.
yea the style of these fragments show that they are none of his. The Homily
upon the first of John is apparently none of his, there being mention made of
the Manichees and Arians, Sixth. Senens. lib. 4.
both which arose long after Origin: and withal the Author says, that (...)
and (...), Nec cujus sunt authoris nec quant^ antiquitatis facile sciri potest.
Holl^i^. ibid.
apud Graecos sunt Masculini Generis. The Homily upon the twentyeth of John
cannot be his, for it is clearly of a Latin style; And if some be of Latin
Authors, Bellarm. ibid.
the rest may justly be suspected to be so too: Coci censur.
Yet are these cited by those of Rome as Origens, to prove the real presence of
Christ in the Eucharist, that Dionysius the Areopagite is the Author of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and what is the use and benefit of making the sign of
the Cross with the fingers.

18. Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Romans, in ten Books, as we have them
divided by Merlin and Grynaeus; though Sixtus Senensis, Trithemius and some
others make them fifteen. Ierom is supposed to be the interpreter, Lib. 4.
biblioth. sanct.
though it do appear both from the preface, Erasm. in censur.
and especially from the peroration, that Ruffine was the translatour of them;
who says that he had contracted the whole work almost one half: how great an
injury to deprive the Church of such a treasure? In prolog. antelib.
Yet is Salmeron of a contrary judgment upon the same grounds: In comment. in
Epist.
Ex Epistola ad Heraclium, inquit, quae loco prooemii praefigitur libris
Origenis in Epist. ad Romanos, Paul. disputat. 19.
and ex peroratione, in qua se Hieronymus interpretem illorum, non tantum
verbis, sed etiam stylo satis prodit, constat Hieronymum, eos Latinos
reddidisse.

19. Four Books, In prologo
(...), quod vel de principiis vel de potestatibus dici potest, inquit
Ruffinus, of principles, or of powers, which he wrote in emulation of one
Longinus a Philosopher, well known unto him (as Baronius conceives) who in
those times had set forth a Commentary almost of the same argument. Ad an. 252.
3.
This is the Book, the interpretation whereof occasioned so hot a contest
between Ierom and Ruffine (who both performed that task) wherein especially
Ierom charge him with false dealing, Hieronym. in apolog. 2. advers. Ruffin.
for that he added some things, subtracted others, and took liberty to change
what he pleased: whereas for his part he desired faithfully to discharge the
duty of an interpreter. Lib. 1. advers. Ruffin. Epist. Paulino. number. 153.
I, says he, simply expressed what I found in the Greek; my care was to change
nothing. Again, I leave it to your judgment, what pains I did undergo in
translating the Books (...) seeing that to change any thing that was in the
Greek, would not have been the part vertentis, sed evertentis, of a turner or
translatour, but of (...) overturner; Epist. Ocea^o. number. 65.
and to express the same word for word, would not become him that desires to
keep the elegancy of speech. My end, says he, was to discover an Heretic,
that I might vindicate the Church from Heresy. And the truth is, Hieronym.
Epist. 153.
Origin is no where more foully erroneous than in this Book, wherein there is
more bad than good, it being full stuffed with gross errors: Toti (inquit
Scultetus) scatent erroribus: so that it can hardly be believed how much in
that work he betrayed the Christian Faith, Baron. ad an. 232. 3.
which he had received from his Predecessors. And as Plotinus said of the
forenamed Longinus, that he was studious of Learning, yet not at all a
Philosopher: so may it be truly affirmed of Origin, as touching this Book, that
therein he meant to seem a Philosopher rather than a Christian; the truth is,
it is most obscure and full of difficulties: Scias (inquit Hieronymus)
detestanda tibi in eis (lib^is (...)) esse quam plurima, and juxta sermonem
Domini inter scorpiones and colubros incedendum. Praefat. Ruffin. in lib.
Epist. A^itonum. 59.
In the close of which Epistle he shows with what caution these Books are to be
read, withal making an enumeration of the errors contained in them, Council.
tom^ 1.
it being intended by Ierom as an antidote against them, Binnius calls this
piece Multarum Heresium promptuarium. The translation of these Books which we
now have (as Grynaeus conceives) is Ruffine's; for in his Marginal Notes we
sometimes meet with these words, loquitur Ruffinus.

20. Eight Books against Celsus the Philosopher, Opus elencticum and dogmaticum
Haeschel. in Epist. ante libr.
of the Sect of Epicurus, who had most bitterly inveighed against and traduced
the Christian Religion. This is the only work of Origin, Rhenan. in Epist. ante
opera Origin.
upon which the incomparably judicious Erasmus past not his censure, being
prevented by death; the want whereof (as also of his Coronis) is much to be
bewailed, considering that by reason of his singular learning, and long
exercise in the study of the Ancients, it cannot but be presumed, he would have
gone through and performed it in a most excellent manner. Origin undertook this
work by the instigation of Ambrose, who was much grieved to see that the
Christian Religion should be so reproached. Celsus styled his Book the word of
truth, though little were contained in it, Origin. contr. Cel. cells. prooem.
and sub ^inem.
but what was foolish, weak and false, and unworthy of a prudent man; whose
objections and slanders, (as also those of all other both Gentiles and Jews)
Origin in his answer (which Baronius calls celeberrimum commentarium) most
notably wipes off and refuteth. Ad an. 243. 3. Scultet. in Medull. Miraeus in
Scl^ol. in catalog. Hieronym.
A piece it is of much use, especially unto the History of those times, which
by it self is set forth in Greek and Latin by D^vid Haeschelius, who gives
this commendation of it, In Epist. dedicat. ante edit. Gr. Lat.
Celso argumentis and rationibus Origenes ita respondit, ut haud sciam an
quicquam in hoc genere solidius atque eruditius existet. He set upon this work
after that he had arrived unto maturity of age, viz. being then more than sixty
years old.

21. Of the right faith in one God, or three Dialogues against the Marcionists,
De Script. Eccles.
which are mentioned by Bellarmine as two distinct pieces of Origin, though
indeed they be but one and the same. For so the learned Doctor Humphries,
Humph. in praefat. ante libr. Rivet. crit. sac.
that translated it into Latin out of a Greek Manuscript that he obtained of
Frobenius, and set forth anno 1557. (as Perionius had done the year before out
of a Greek Copy which he found in the King's Library) entitles it, Of the right
Faith in one God, against the three principles of Megethius the Marcionite.
These two interpreters made use of two very different Copies; but it is
evident, that that which Dr. Humphries followed was the more distinct and full.
It is questionable whether this is Origen's or no: 1. Because the Author speaks
of Kings and Princes that piously believe: now there were none such in Origen's
time. 2. No ancient Author of Note has recorded this disputation, wherein an
Ethnic ( viz. Eutropius, a Greek Philosopher) being made the Judge, the Church
by Origin should get the victory; for the issue was (as is affirmed) the
conversion of Eutropius unto Christianity, In argument. operis per Doct.
Humphred.
together with many others, who in the close of the disputation, celebrated the
praise of Origin with this acclamation; Coronis tertii dialogi.
David has slain the Tyrant Goliath, and Adamantius has cut the throat of that
opinion which fought against God. 3. Besides, it is strange that this should
not come to the notice of Eusebius, or in case it did, that he should be silent
herein, who so diligently sought out whatsoever might make for the commendation
of Origin. The Dialogues against the Marcio^ites (says Usher) were collected
for the most part out of the writings of Maximus, Answ. to the Jesuits chal.
who lived in the time of the Emperors Commodus and Severus. In catalogo.
Of which Maximus, Ierom tells us, Quod famosam quaestionem insigni volumine
ventilavit, Vnde malum, and, Quod materia a Deo facta sit.

22. The lamentation of Origin, which he himself wrote with his own hand in the
Greek Tongue, when after his fall and denial of his Master Christ Jesus, he
wandered to and fro with great grief and torment of conscience, the which Ierom
translated into Latin: these are the words of Doctor Meredith Han^er, prefixed
to this Lamentation, set down in his English Translation and Edition of
Eusebius, between the first and second Chapters of the seventh Book; having
immediately before given us out of Suidas the story of his fall. As touching
his fall, viz. that he should choose rather to offer incense unto Idol, than to
have his Body defiled by an Ethiopian: though Epiphanius (who was no friend to
our Author) and Suidas also deliver it for a truth; Haeres. 69. Ad an. 25^,
120, etc.
yet does Baronius upon weighty grounds conceive it to be rather a mere fiction
and slander of those that were his enemies, who envying, Treat of the Fathers.
lib. 2.
endeavored this way to dark^^ the same of Origin: and (says D^ille) that I
may not dissemble, I profess my self much inclined to be of the Cardinal's
opinion, who thinks this story to be an arrant fable; and that it was foisted
into Epiphanius, or else (as I rather believe) was taken upon trust by himself;
for this Father has showed himself in this as in many other things, a little
overcredulous. Now the story it self being questionable, and so sandy a
foundation, the superstructure must needs be weak; nor, is the censure of
Erasmus without cause, G^ynaeus ante lamentum.
that these Lamentations were neither written by Origin, nor translated by
Ierom, but the figment of some idle and unlearned brain, who studied by this
means to cast a blemish upon this excellent wit. It is therefore by Gelasius
ranked among the Apocrypha. Gratian. distinct. 15. Bellarmin. de Script.


23. There is another piece, which, because it is inserted in the catalogue of
the works of Origin, I thought good not to pass it over altogether unmentioned;
it is styled by the name of Philocalia, Ibid. In Medull.
or (as Bellarmine renders it) De amore honesti, of the love of that which is
good. Scultetus calls it Quaestiones illustriores, or famous questions; they
were collected out of all the works of Origin by those two eminent Fathers
Basil and Nazianzen: so that though Origin supplied them with the matter, yet
they gave the form to this work, who therefore may as well be entitled to it
as he. Hanc non Origenis magis quam Basilii and Gregorii (...) esse dixerim, In
notis in Philocal.
inquit Tarnius; by whom in his Edition it is divided into twenty and six
Chapters, or so many common places, Tarnius ante opus.
who gives us this account of it; Delectum hic liber continet quaestionum
Scripture it solutionum, ex variis Origenis commentariis, ab illis Divinarum
rerum consultissimis Gregorio and Basilio, quem horum alter, Gregorius
Theologus (...) Theodorum Tyaneum id Temporis Episcopum, i^ tabellis misit: In
his Letter he thus styles it, Electorum Origenis Libellum.

4. As touching his style, it was familiar, plain and free from Rhetorical
pomp, Sixth. Senens* lib. 4.
brief and succinct especially in his Homilies, and Sermons to the people, in
whom (says Merlin) under a choice stream of words flows forth, Merlin. in
Epist. ante. apolog. Origin.
I know not what secret divinity and breath of life; by which the minds of Men,
do easily receive the knowledge of good and evil, his speech being pure and
perspicuous: yea and withal very eloquent, which made it so pleasant,
delightful, and sweet, that not so much words as honey seemed to drop from his
lips: Vin^ent. Lyrinens. contra haeres. cap. 23.
nor was it without a certain kind of Majesty, in which regard Ruffine styles
him, a magnificent Trumpet: and Pierius a Presbyter of Alexandria was honored
with the Title of Origin Junior, In prolog. ante Roman.
as well for the elegancy of his Language, Hieronym. in catalog.
as the multiplicity of his writings. But Erasmus has spoken so fully of this
particular, that it would be superfluous to add any thing more, having once
given you an account of what he has said concerning the phrase of Origin. He
had, says he, Erasm. de phras. Origin.
an admirable faculty of speaking ex tempore, and even in obscure matters his
speech is very perspicuous; Origenis sermo mire perspicous. Erasm. in Epist.
ante Hila^.
nor is brevity wanting as often as the matter requires it: the sentence runs
every where certainly, neither does he hinder himself with words that do
^^rthen wearisome ears: ( Graecis peculiaris est inquit Erasmus) erudita
simplicitas, and orati^ venusta, Ibid.
dilucidaque magis arridet, quam grandis and operosa:) he is no where too
lofty, which Ierom attributes unto Hilary: nor does he with borrowed and far
fetched Ornaments extend and lengthen out his Books, as sometimes Ierom does: (
Origenes vix unquam assurgit, De ration. stud. Theolog. lib 4.
inquit Hyperius, sed totus est in docendo, nihil attingens affectuum, nisi
quos ipsa move^res, quod est Atticorum:) he studieth not to move laughter in
his Auditors with quips and jests, as Tertullian oftentimes, and Ierom too much
imitated him: but with a certain continual hilarity, he suffers not drowsiness
to creep upon his Auditors, nor does affect the flowers of Rhetoriek, quaint
sentences and Epiphonemaes, as Ambrose and Ierom, nor delight to retard and
stop the Reader with unusual words, as Tertullian; nor does he spend away the
time in frequent digressions, as is the manner of Augustine in his Treatises to
the people, nor is he superstitious in the structure of his speech, shutting up
each sentence with short pointed members, and periods, which Gregory is not
altogether free from, here you shall never meet with the like cadencies and
endings wherewith Augustine was delighted.

5. Of the useful and remarkable passages whereof not a few are to be found in
the writings of this eminent Ancient, I shall content my self with the
rehearsal of these following.

1. His Symbol or rule of Faith, the particulars whereof (says he) are
delivered manifestly by the preaching of the Apostles, lib. (...) in prooem.
which are these.

1. Quod unus Deus est, qui omnia creavit, atque composuit, quique ex nullis
fecit esse Vniversa, Deus a prima creatura and condition mundi omnium
justarum, Adam, Abel, Seth, Henos, etc. and quod hic Deus in novissimis diebus,
sicut per Prophetas suos ante promiserat, misit Dominum Nostrum Iesum Christum
primo quidem vocaturum Israel, secundo vero etiam gentes post perfidiam populi
Israel. Hic Deus justus and bonus Pater Domini Nostri Jesus Christi, legem, and
Prophetas, and Evangelia ipse dedit, qui and Apostolorum Deus est, and veteris
and novi Testamenti.

2. Tum Deinde quia Jesus Christus ipse qui venit, ante omnem creaturam natus
ex Patre est: Qui cum in omnium condition Patri ministrasset (per ipsum enim
omnia facta sunt) novissimis temporibus se ipsum exinaniens (...) est:
incarnatus est, cum Deus esset. (...) quod Deus erat. Corpus assumpsit corpori
(...) simile, eo solo differens, quod na^um ex V^rgi^e and Spiritu Sancto est.
Et quoniam hi^ Jesus Christus natus and passus est inveritate and non per
imaginem, communem hanc mortem ve^e m^rtuus est: vere (...) a morte resurrexit,
and post Resurrectionem conversatus cum Discipulis s^is, assumptus est.

3. Tum deinde honor ac dignitate Patri ac Filio sociatum tradiderunt Spiritum
Sanctum. In hoc non jam manifesto discernitur, utrum natus aut innatus. Sed
inquirenda jam ista pro viribus sunt de sacra Scriptura, and sagaci
perquisition^ in^estiganda. San^ quod iste Spiritus Sanctus unumquemque
Sanctorum vel Prophetarum, vel Apostolorum inspiravit; and non ali^^ Spiritus
in veteribus, alius vero in his qui in adventu Christi inspirati sunt,
manifestissime in Ecclesius praedicatur.

4. Post haec jam, quod anima substantiam vitamque habens propriam, cum ex hoc
mund^ discesserit, and pro suis meritis dispensabit, siv^ vitae aeternae, ac
beatitudinis haereditate potitura, si hoc ei sua gesta praestiterint; sive igne
aetern^ ac suppliciis mancipanda, si in hoc eam scelerum culpa detorserit. Sed
and quia erit tempus Resurrectionis mortuorum, cum corpus hoc quod in
corruptione seminatur surget in incorruptione and quod seminatur in ignominia,
surget in gloria.

2. Of the authority of the Scriptures: we ought, Tract. in Math. 23. 17.
(says he) for the testimony or proof of all the words which we utter in
Doctrine or Teaching, to bring forth or allege the sense of Scripture, as
confirming the sense or meaning which we expound or give: For as all that Gold
which was without the Temple was not sanctified; so every sense (or
interpretation) which is without the divine Scripture, though to some it may
seem admirable, is not Holy, because it is not contained in the sense of
Scripture.

3. Of the Divinity of the Scriptures, and how they may be known of God:
(...)(...) 4. cap. 1.
thus, If any one with all diligence, and with that reverence which is meet, do
consider the sayings of the Prophets, even then when he reads and carefully
looks into them, it is certain that having his mind and sense strick^n or moved
by some more Divine inspiration, he shall know and acknowledge, that those
words, which he reads, are of God, and not uttered by Man, and of himself he
shall perceive that those Books were written not by humane Art, Divino Cothurno.
nor mortal eloquence, but in a divine and lofty style.

4. Of the fullness of the Scriptures, thus: It becomes us to believe the sacred
Scriptures not to have one Apex or Tittle void of the Wisdom of God. Homil. 2.
in Jerem.
The Prophets receiving of his fullness sung or spoke those things which they
took of his fullness. Therefore the sacred Scriptures do breath the fullness of
the Spirit: and there is nothing either in the Prophecy, or the Law, or Gospel,
or in the Apostle, which descends not from the fullness of the Divine Majesty.

5. Of the great efficacy and utility of the Scriptures, Homil. 2. in Joshuah.
thus: Because all Scripture is given by Divine Inspiration and is profitable:
( in Scripturis sanctis est vis quaedam, quae legenti etiam fine explanatione
sufficit.) we ought to believe it to be so, though we feel not the benefit
thereof: As Physicians are wont sometimes to give some meat or drink for the
clearing of the sight, yet in taking of it we perceive not any benefit, but
afterward when its virtue reaches it, it by little and little purges the
sight; after this manner we ought to believe the holy Scriptures to be
profitable unto the Soul; although for the present, our sense or reason reach
not, nor attain unto the understanding of it.

6. That Children ought to be baptized, thus: the Church has received from the
Apostles this tradition to give or administer Baptism even unto Infants, In
Epist. ad* Roman. c. ^. ver. 6. item. in Levit. cap. 12. ver. 13. Homil. ^.
item. in Lue, cap 7. Homil. 14.
for they to whom the secrets of divine Mysteries were committed, knew that
there is in all the inbred filth of sin, that ought to be washed away by Water
and the Spirit.

7. Of the Sabbath; In lib. Numeror. cap. 28.
thus: Let us see how a Christian ought to observe and keep the Sabbath: Upon
the Sabbath, none of the businesses of the World ought to be done, if therefore
thou cease from all worldly labors, and do no such work, but attend spiritual
employments, come to the Assembles, apply thine ear unto the holy Scriptures
read, and Sermons; think of heavenly things, be sollicitous about the future
hope, have before thine eyes the judgment to come, look not unto things
visible, and that are present, but unto invisible and that shall be: This is
the observation of a Christian Sabbath.

8. Concerning excommunication, and that it ought to be performed by the
Church* In Josuah. cap. 7.
thus: If any one having been admonished and rebuked for a fault, once, again,
and the third time, shall show no amendment; there remains no remedy but
cutting off: Matthew. 5. 20.
For so says the Lord, If thy right offend thee, cut it off, i. e. If I that
seem to thee to be a right hand, and am called a Presbyter, and seem to preach
the Word of God, if I shall do any contrary unto Ecclesiastical Discipline, and
the Rule of the Gospel so that I give a scandal or offense unto the Church; let
the whole Church conspiring with one consent, cut me off, their right hand.

Again, In Josuah. cap. 15.
those whose sins are manifest, we ought to cast off; but where the sin is not
evident, we ought not to eject.

9. Out of those Prophesies or Books of the Scripture, (...). lib. 4.
which contains Histories, we may receive benefit not only, or so much from the
narration of the things, as from what is figuratively signified by them; seeing
that with greatest Wisdom, they are so written and dispensed, that they do
agree or suit with either the simple and vulgar among Believers, or with the
excellent that are willing and able to search them more thoroughly.

10. He recites the Canonical Books of the Old Testament, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap.
24.
as they are now reckoned, viz. twenty and two in number, after the number of
the Hebrew Letters; And besides these, says he, there are Books of the
Machabees. Of the Epistle to the Hebrews, he thus speaks; Ibid.
The character of the Epistle to the Hebrews (says he) sets not forth the
style of Paul, 2 Cor. 10. 10.
who confesses himself to be rude in speech; for the phrase of that Epistle
savoureth very much of the Greek Tongue; whosoever he be that has any
judgment or discerning of phrases, will confess the same. I truly for mine own
part, that I may speak as I think, do say, that the Doctrine of this Epistle is
the Apostles for undoubted; but the phrase and order another man's, who noted
the sayings of the Apostle, and contrived such things as he had heard of his
Master, into short and compendious notes.

11. That Christ comes and goes, In Cant. Homil. 1.
and is not always enjoyed, nor alike present with his people; thus: God is my
witness, that I have often times beheld the Bride groom coming unto me, and to
be very much with me; who suddenly withdrawing, I could not find what I sought
for. I therefore again desire his coming, and sometimes he comes again; and
when he appears, and was held in my hands, he again slips away: and being
gone, he is again sought for by me: and this he does often, till I truly hold
him fast.

12. Against the Observations of ones Birthday, In Job lib. 3. item in Matthew.
cap. 14.
as an annual Festival; thus: It is no where recorded in the Scripture that any
of the Saints did keep a Festival, or hold a great Feast upon the day of his
Birth; only sinners rejoice for such a Nativity, as did Pharaoh and Herod.

6. But as his worth was great, Hieronym. ^p. ad Pammach.
(being great from his infancy) and his excellencies many; (his deeds even from
the Cradle deserving, in the judgment of Eusebius, to be recorded and
transmitted unto Posterity) so were they equalled by his defects and blemishes;
Merlin. in Apolog. Origin.
and as for the one he was justly had in high esteem; so did the other no less
detract from his reputation; which occasioned that speech so commonly made use
of concerning him; that, where he did well, no man did better; and where he did
ill, no man did worse. Vid. Baron. ad an. 256. 46.
Cui (inquit Cassiodorus) and illud convenienter aptari potest, quod Virgilius,
dum Ennium legeret, a quodam, quid faceret inquifitus, respondit, Aurum ex
stercore quaero. Hence it came to pass that diverse of the Ancients were so
divided in their judgments, and had such hot contests about him: Some
vilifying and opposing him, as did Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, and
Epiphanius, Bishop of Salamis, a City of Cyprus; who speaking of the multitude
of Books, which he wrote, cries out: Haeres. 64.
O inanis operarie; O empty scribler! He was also persuaded by Letters, Gennad.
de Script.
which he received from the said Theophilus (qui scripsit adversum Originem
unum and grande volumen, in quo omnia pene ejus dicta, and ipsum pariter
damnat, etc.) to summon a Council at Cyprus, wherein by the Bishops of the
Island assembled, Socrates, lib. 6. cap. 9.
it was decreed that none should read the works of Origin: The like was also
done shortly after, in a Synod convened by Theophilus himself in his own
Province: Upon which diverse of Origens followers fled from thence unto
Constantinople, imploring the aid of Chrysostom; Binnius. Council. tom. 4.
who admitted them to communicate with him: and this was it that occasioned the
great contention between Chrysostom and Epiphanius upon his coming thither;
Ibid.
so that they parted in great heat. He was also anathematized, together with
those that adhered unto him, and held his errors, by the fifth general
Council* which was held at Constantinople under Justinian the Emperor, wherein
they style him the abomination of desolation, Male sanum, impium Deoque
repugnantem; and his opinions, deliramenta and insanias; exclaming thus against
them; O dementiam and inscientiam hominis insani and Paganorum disciplinae
explicatoris; mente caecutientis, studentisque, Christianorum fidei miscere
fabulas, In Epist. ad Johan. Hierosolymitan. in Biblioth. Numb. 8.
etc. Epiphanius calls him Dei and Ecclesiae hostem; as also, the Father of
Arius and root of other Heresies. He utters many things (says Photius)
blasphemously, and other very absurd, and full of impiety. Ierom also is very
sharp against him; Advers. Vigilant. ep. 75.
(though one that admired his wit and parts) in plerisq, inquit, haereticum non
nego: and tells us, that with a sacrilegious Tongue, Advers. Ruffin. lib. 2.
Epist. 65. Pammach.
he blasphemeth; that his Opinions were venomous, dissonant from the holy
Scriptures, and offer violence unto them: professing that he was always an
adversary to his Doctrines. Yet withal he thus adds; I am not wont, says he,
to insult over the errors of those whose wit I admire, and if any one shall
object or oppose to us his errors; let him hear this freely: that sometime
even great Homer himself may nod or slumber; let us not imitate his Vices whose
Virtues we cannot follow. Caesarii. Dialog 3. inter opera Nazianzen.
Caesarius the brother of Nazianzen, styles him that impious Origin; and his
Doctrines pestiferous; yea ^ugae, trifles and toys. And among the later
Writters, Beza says of him, that he was a select instrument of Satan, In Romans
8. 3.
and styles him, Impurissimus ille Scriptor, quem exoptem velex lectorum
manibus excu^i, aut summo cum judicio a studiosis tractari.

On the other side, some did no less magnify and admire him; Grynaeus. in
(...) in Genes.
pleading and apologizing in his behalf, Basil, Chrysostom, Nazianzen and Ierom
did most highly esteem the Doctrine, Allegories and Tropologies of Origin,
extolling him unto heaven with their praises; those that did apologize for him
were among other, Pamphilus the Martyr, and Eusehius commonly surnamed
Pamphili; for the singular friendship that was between them: by whom were
written six Books in defense of Origin (which Ierom calls latissimum and
elaboratum opus) five whereof were the (...) labor of them both, In Apolog. 1
advers. Ruffin.
and the sixth of Eusebius alone after the death of Pamphilus: as appears from
the word of Eusebius himself, lib. 6. cap. 20. Baron. ad an. 256. 40. Ipse
quidem (Pamphilus) proprii operis nihil omnino scripsit (inquit Ruffinus invita
Pamphili) exceptis Epistolis. Hieronym. Apolog. 1. advers. Ruffin.
Quae (inquit) de ejus gestis sunt ad cognoscendum necessaria ea ex Apologia
quae a nobis Pamphili sancti nostri temporis martyris opera adjutis elucubrata
est (illam enim ego and Pamphilus, quo ora malevolorum obtrectatorum, ^amae
Origenis detrahentium obturaremus, mutuis vigiliis accurate eleboravimus) licet
facile colligere* Photius gives us this account here of, (...), etc. i. e.
Lecti sunt Pamphili martyris and Eusebii pro Origene libri sex, quorum quinque
sunt a Pamphilo in carcere, Biblioth. number. 118.
praesente etiam Eusebio, elaborati: Sextus vero, postquam jam Martyr ferro
privatus vita, ad unice desideratum Deum migrarat, ab Eusebio est absolutus.
These were seconded by Ruffine who undertook the same task; setting forth an
Apology for Origin; or rather, Bellarm. de script. horum tu primum librum
vertis sub nomine Martyris, inquit, Hienym. Apolog. 1. advers. Ruffin.
Possevin. apparat.
the Apology of Eusebius (for so its commonly called) by him translated into
Latin; unto which he added a Volume of his own, bearing this title; of the
adulteration of the Books of Origin; These were followed by some learned men of
the latter times, viz. Johannes Picus, the noble Earl of Mirandula, and Phaenix
of his time; Vir ingenii pene prodigiosi, and in omni artium, scientiarum and
linguarum varietate usque ad miraculum exculti. Sixth. Senens. lib. 1.
Also; Gilbert Genebrard, a Parisian Divine, and Professor there of the Hebrew
Tongue; And Iacobus Merlinus, Victurniensis Sacrae Theologiae Professor, who
endeavors to vindicate both the holiness of his life, Merlin. Apolog. ante
opera Origin.
and the soundness of his Doctrine. Moreover, such an equipoise was there in
him of good and evil, that with Sampson, Solomon, and Trajan (though I conceive
the medley is as Monkish as the scruple) he is put into the number of those
concerning whom it is equally difficult to determine whether they were saved or
not. Fascicul. temp.
But surely that bold Shaveling went too far beyond his bounds, who in his Book
entitled Pratum Spirituale (which is supposed to be written by Abbot John
Moschus) reports that a certain brother (doubting whether Nestorius were in an
error or no) was, Biblioth. Patr. tom. 7. cap. 36. Prati spiritual. Possevin.
apparat. and Aloys. Lipoman. in Epist. ad lect. ante libr.
by one appearing unto him for his satisfaction, conducted to Hell, where among
other Heretics he saw Origin tormented in those flames: (the Earl of Mirandula
is of a contrary judgment.) But the Jesuit Possevine plainly tells us, In
Apalog. pro Origin.
that whosoever was the Author, many of the relations in that Book deserve but
small credit, Possevin. apparat. in Sophronio.
being indeed little better than down right lies; among which he gives an
instance in this (not unlike that of Origin) that in a Vision Chrysostom should
be seen placed in heaven above all the Doctors and Martyrs: But enough of such
stuff. However, evident it is, that he was very erroneous, yea, scarce any one
of the Ancients, more; whether we respect the multiplicity, or quality of his
errors: So that, as the Orthodox that came after him, were much beholding unto
him, as of great advantage to them in the interpretation of the Scriptu^es:
Contra Socrates hist. lib. 4. cap. 21.
So did the Heretics take from him the hints of many of their foulest
Heresies: Epist. 61. inter Hieronym. Epist.
for which cause as Epiphanius calls him the fountain and Father of Arius, so
did the Error of Pelagius (says Ierom) spring from him; (...) ad ^tesiphontem.
Doctrina tu^ Origenis ramusculus est: Yea, there is scarce any sect that had
not its rise and beginning from him. Zonaras. Tom. 2. Libr. advers. Haeres. c.
23.
The grounds whereof (as Vincentius Lyrinensis conceives) were such as these;
His abusing the grace of God too insolently his overmuch indulging his own wit,
and trusting to himself; his undervalueing the simplicity of the Christian
Religion, his presuming himself wiser then others, and his interpreting some
Scriptures after a new manner; contemning Ecclesiastical traditions, and the
Authority of the Ancients: Epiphanius imputes it unto this, because he would
suffer no part of the holy Scriptures to pass, without his interpretation;
Haeres. 64.
therefore he fell into error.

Yet do his Apologisers labor to free him; laying the fault of the errors
fathered upon him unto the charge of others; De adulter. lib. Orig.
Ruffine pleads in his behalf, that he was abused by Heretics, who adulterated
his writings, as they dealt with diverse others; Sixth. Senes. lib. 4.
that so they might gain credit to their errors, by the names of those famous
men, as if they were of the same mind with them; Dicet aliquis corruptos esse
Origenis libros: no resisto; quin potius and malo. Vincent. contra haere. c. 23.
he adds withal, that the Epistle of Origin unto certain friends of his in
Alexandria intimates so much wherein he complains of wrong done unto him in
this kind, while he was yet alive. Merlin mentions two ways more beside this,
by which Origin might be made to speak that which he never thought; In Apolog.
First, by the unskilfulness of the Scribes, who might easily omit or alter
what he uttered and dictated. 2. Through the envy of those, who might think
their own luster Eclipsed by the glory and fame of Origin. Hist. Eccles. lib.
6. c. 3.
Ego sane, inquit Haymo, de eo dixerim, vel quod haec omnino non scripserit,
sed ab haereticis ob praedarum nomen ejus obsuscan. dum malign conficta sint,
and conscripta, and nomine suo praetitulata; vel si scripsit, non statuit ex
sententia, sed disser^it ex opinione; and fortasse, cum in aliquibus locis
scribendo atting^ haereticorum errores, calumniatus est, hoc a semetipso
dixisse. Mirandul. in apolog. pro Orig.
Much to the same purpose speaks the Noble Italian, in his excellent and sinewy
Apology in his behalf; wherein he proves that Origin in his younger years
delivered many things, as one that rather inquired after, than positively
asserted them; as is apparent from diverse expressions of his own: e. g. These
things, says he, speaking of the reparation of the Devils, Lib. (...)
are said by us with great fear and caution, rather discussing and handling,
than for certain and definitively determining them. These and diverse other ways
do they endeavor to excuse him: wherein yet they do but wash a blackmore: for
notwithstanding all that has been said for him; many soul spots and blemishes
do and will stick fast unto him: for we have himself (in a Letter unto Fabian
Bishop of Rome) confessing and repenting that he wrote such things; Hieroym.
epist. 65. Pammach. and Oceano.
imputing it to the unadvisedness of Ambrose, who made that public, which he
delivered privately: secret edita and minime correcta (inquit supplementum
Bergomense) in publicum protulit. Hoc mihi, inquit, praestiterunt amici mei: si
tacuero, re^^ censear; Supple. Bergomens.
and si respondero, inimicus judicabor. Dura utraque conditio; sed a duobus
eliga^ quod melius est. Severus Sulpitius reports that in his time it was
decreed by a Synod held at Alexandria, Gennad. de script.
that Origin was by wise men cautiously to be read for the good that was in
him; but, by those, who were less capable, to be rejected, because of the evil
that was in him: his words are, respuendam esse penitus lectionem, quae plus
esset nocitura insipientibus, In vit^ Martini. l. 3.
quam profutura sapientibus: After which it follows; I do wonder, says he,
that one and the same man could so much differ from himself; ut in ea part qua
probatur, neminem post Apostolos habeat aequalem; in eu vero qua jure
reprehenditur, nemo deformius doceatur errasse. Ibid.
I shall content my self with the brief mention of some of the most notorious
errors that have been observed in him, as I find them set down by Os^^ander in
his Epitome of the Centuries: and they are these following. Cent. 3. lib. 1.
cap. 6.


1. Quod Filius Dei Patrem non videat: quod sit creatura; factus, non natus.
Quod Pater sit perfect bonus, filius vero non absolute bonus, sed tantum cum
additamento, ut, Pastor bonus. Filium non esse adorandum, neque cum Filio
Patrem. Omnia, quae a Salvatore (...) juxta historiam referuntur, putative
tantum (...) per allegoriam, accipienda esse. Christum pro Diabolorum salute
etiam in aere and supernis (...) passurum.

2. Spiritum Sanctum dixit, inferiorem esse (...) majorem enim esse
fortitudinem filii; quam Spiritus Sancti. Epist. 65. Pammach.
Of whom he spoke so meanly, that says Jerome, his opinions of the Son were
bad, but those of the holy Ghost, were worse.

3. Mundos esse innumerabiles, non quidem simul, sed ita, ut semper mundi unius
finis fit initium alterius mundi.

4. Mundum per angelos ita gubernare, ut alii prompte, alii inviti mundum
regant; and propter Angelorum negligentiam and peccata (quod res terrenas non
recte administrent) sterilitates incidere.

5. Diabolos, Cent. 3. l. 10
sicut and impios, adhuc salvandos; and post longa supplicia, angelis bonis
denuo associandos esse.

6. Animas hominum fuisse ante corpora, and egisse aliquid; ideoque crassis
corporibus aligatas; and animas postquam salutem consecutae fuerint, non
amplius futuras animas. Most of these, Ierom mentions together thus. Origenem,
inqnit, in plerisq, haereticum non nego: Erravit de resurrectione corporis,
Epist. adver. Vigilant. number. 75.
erravit de animarum sta^^, de diaboli poenitentia, and, quod his majus est,
Filium Dei and Spiritum Sanctum, in commentariis Esaiae, Seraphim esse testatus
est.

7. Providentiam Dei non demitt^re se (...) omnes creaturas, and inferiora
mundi: sed tantum in coelorum regionibns commorari.

8. Homini, etiam post lapsum talem perfectionom concedit, qualem Adam habuit
ante lapsum. Liberum itaque arhitrium, etiam in spiritualibus, homini tribuit.

9. Hominem operibus justificari credidit.

10. Purgatorium post hanc vitam esse opinotus est. Graviora delicta semel
tantum per p^nitentiam condonari putavit.

11. Baptismum post resurrectionem necessarium futurum.

12. Nuptiis seeundis parum aequus fuit.

13. Sensit etiam, animas post mortem in coelum ascendere: and nunc proficere,
nunc ad inferiora delabi: ita ut per innumerabiles ruinas anima saepe moriatur.

14. Resurrectionem corporum nostrorum s^c futuram, ut eadem membra non
habeant: imo in altera vita fore nos sine corporibus; aut certe corpora nostra
id futurum, quod nunc est ether, aut coelum, aut si quod est aliud and
syncerius corpus.

15. Post resurrectionem Angelos, diabolos and animas omnium hominum, etiam
gentilium, fore unius conditionis: deinde alium subsecuturum mundum, in quo
animae de coelo delabentes ali^s corporibus vestiantur.

16. Denique sacras literas intempestivis and immodicis al^egoriis multo magis
obscuravit, quam explicuit; and aliis scriptoribus ecclesiasticis occasionem
dedit, ut and ipsi sacram Scripturam per ineptas allegorias depravarent.
Origenis audacia (inquit Chamierus) in affectandis allegoriis semper fuit
suspecta, Tom. 3. l 24. c. 10.
nec long distans a temeri ^ate.

To these many more might be added, which if the Reader desire to acquaint
himself withal; let him peruse the Epistles of Ierom ad Avitum, ad Pammachium
and Occanum, together with his Apologies against Ruffine: Epiphanius his
Panarium. Haeres: 64. and in his Epistle ad Iohannem Hierosolymitanum; the
Centurists in Cent. 3. cap. 10. Dan^us in his Commentary upon the 43. Chapter
of Augustine de haeresibus; and Nicelas Choniates in his treasury of the
Orthodox faith. Lib. 4. Haeres. 31. who there thus speaks of him; that for
natural and moral philosophy he was a Doctor acceptable unto all; but for
matters Dogmatical or of Faith, and of Theological speculation, he showed
himself the most absurd of all that went before or followed after him. Which
also those frequent passages of Ierom, Epist. Pammach. n. 65.
do show; where he says; I commended him as an interpretor, but not as a
Dogmatist: Again; I call Origin ours for his learning and wit, not for the
truth of his opinions and Doctrine. Lastly, Apolog. adv. Ruffin. l. 2. Epist.
ad Theop. n. 62.
as I ever attributed unto Origin the Interpretation and idioms or proprieties
of Scripture; So I most constantly took from him truth in his opinions. For
this cause also having at his request sent unto Avitus, his Translation of
Origens books (...): Ep. ad Avita. number. 59.
in the close of his Epistle he prescribes this as an antidote against the
errors therein contained: Whosoever, says he, will read these books, and go
toward the land of promise with his feet shod, lest he be bitten of Serpents,
and smitten with the forked wound of the Scorpion; let him read this book or
Epistle wherein are declared the dangerous passages contained in those books,
that so he may know before he begin his journey, what things he must shun and
avoid. Hence Beza gives this censure of him; certainly, Epist. 28.
says he, this writer is every way so impure whether he wrote so himself, or
whether his writings were afterward depraved, that in matters controversial, he
deserves no authority in the Church. Yet notwithstanding in the judgment of
some, the good that was in him, exceeded the evil; so that although he were
guilty of the errors imputed unto him, yet being a man of so much learning, he
deserves to be pitied; whose faults, Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. c. 3.
says Haymo, if there be any in his books, may be overcome by the Celestial
splendour of those things, which are faithfully written by him: In Medull.
And, says Scultetus, this age might well bear the precipitate publication of
his works by Ambrose, or the malevolent depravation of them, if withal, they
had all come to our hands.

Many of his errors began first to be entertained by the Monks and
Disciplinarians in Egypt, Epiphan. haeres. 64. Dan^us. in Aug. de haeres. c. 43.
from whose Cells being vented they spread abroad, and were embraced and
maintained by very many: unto whom (as a Sect or swarm of Heretics, deriving
their errors from Origin) was given the name of Origenists or Adamantians; who
continued long, even unto the time of Gregory the great; for he testifies that
some of them were remaining in his days. Ad an. 256. 47.
Adversus Origenistas (inquit Baronius) longa admodum and periculosa fuit
Ecclesiae concertatio.

7. Now as touching the last scene of his life, his going off the Theater of
this world; I find no large mention made of it. That his sufferings for Christ
were neither few nor small, (though he suffered not martyrdom) is abundantly
testified; So that in the judgment of Merline, In Apolog.
as also of Mirandula, he came but little short of it, In Apolog.
and deserves the palm: In vita Cypriani.
semper Deo (inquit Pontius Diaconus) mancipata devotio, dicatis hominibus pro
martyrio deputatur. Hist. Eccles* l. 6. c. 13.
And, says Haymo, voluntate Martyr fuit: though he laid not down his life, yet
he lost not the Honor of Martyrdom: For they were many and sore things which he
did undergo, even in his old age, (besides what in former time had be^ided him)
at what time the persecution against the Church raged under the Emperor Decius:
whereof Eusebius makes report in these words: (drawing toward the close of
Origin, Lib. 6. c. 38.
about which the most part of the sixth book is spent) what things they were,
says he, and how great, which happened to Origin in that persecution, and how he
died; the spiteful Devil pursuing him with his whole troop; striving against
him with all might and every kind of slight that possibly could be invented;
and especially against him above all the rest which then were persecuted to
death; and what and how great things he sustained for the Doctrine of Christ;
imprisonments and torments of body; scourging at Iron stakes, stench of close
prison; and how for the space of many days, his feet lay stretched four paces
asunder in the stocks; and how that constantly he endured the threats of fire
and all that the enemy could terrify him with; and what end he made after the
judge had wrought by all means possible to save his life; and what speeches he
uttered very profitable for such as need consolation; sundry of his Epistles
truly; faithfully and curiously penned, do declare. He lived the space of sixty
nine years: Eusebius. hist. l. 7. c. 1. Hieronym. in Catalog. (...). 3. c. 10.
of which (reckoning from the time that he was by Demetrius made Catechist in
the School of Alexandria) he spent above fifty most laboriously, in teaching
and writing; in the affairs and care of the Church, in refuting Heresies, and
in the exercise of Piety, and many notable virtues. But notwithstanding all his
labors and worth, his age and end (as well as the former part of his life)
were accompanied with poverty; so small recompense and reward had he from men,
who happily could be well contented freely to afford him their praises, but kept
fast their purses; Horace.
sic, virtus laudatur and alget. And for this, rich Ambrose above all other
deserves most blame, Eras. in vita Origin.
that at his death was not more mindful of his old and indigent friend Origin.
Hence it came to pass, that he ended his days in a mean and miserable condition
( miserabiliter, Hist. l. 5 c. 33 Eusebius. l. 7. cap. 1. Baron. ad an. 256.
inquit Nicephorus, infoelix obiit) dying in the famous City of Tire, where
also he was buried in the reign of the Emperors Gallus and Volusian, and in the
year of Christ. 256.

Cyprianus.
1. CYprianus, Epist. 69. Pamel. in vita
called also Thascius, was born at Carthage, one of the chief Cities of Africa,
he was very rich, Nazianz. orat. 29.
and of great note and power there, being one of the Senatorian Order, and
among them held the first or chief place: his breeding was liberal and
ingenuous from his tender years, Pontius in vita.
being trained up in, and seasoned with the knowledge of the Arts wherein his
proficiency was such, that (among the rest) he became an excellent Rhetorician,
Lactant. de institut. lib. 5. cap. 1.
and publicly professed and taught that art at Carhage, being had in very
great esteem among them; but all this while an Ethnic, without the knowledge
of Christ, yea, a most bitter persecutor of the Christians, withal a Magician,
Nazianz. ibid. Epist. 2. 1. edit. Goula^t.
and skilled in those curious arts, though this last be very improbable in the
judgment both of Baronius and Pamelius.

How long he continued in this condition is uncertain, yet that he was well
stricken in years before converted unto Christianity, may be conjectured, 1.
Partly from his own words: for (while being a Gentile, he thought of receiving
the Christian Faith) he conflicted with such reasonings as these; he conceived
it a hard and difficult thing (as sometime did Nicodemus) for a man to be born
again, that he should by the washing of water put off what he was before, and
have his mind changed: How (says he) can such a conversion be possible, that
so suddenly that should be put off which was genuine and natural, and through
length of time and old age had taken such deep rooting? Ad an. 25^. 7.
Hence it appears (says Baronius) that he was senescens, near unto and upon
the verge of old age when he was about to give up his name to Christ. 2. Partly
also from the time that he sat Bishop of Carthage, which is generally
conceived to be about the space of ten years, Pamel. in vita.
and not above; for he was chosen unto the office about the year 249, and
suffered martyrdom, an. 259. Now both Baronius and Pamelius, as also before
them, Pontius his Deacon and companion in his exile, who wrote the story of his
life, do all affirm, that he was made Bishop shortly after his conversion, and
while but Neophytus and Novellus, a Novice in Christianity, and newly come to
the Faith.

The instrumens by whom he was converted, Pontius in vita Cypr.
was one Caecilius a Presbyter, who partly by his pious conversation (which was
very exemplary, he being a just man, and in honor, as well as age, a true
Presbyter) and partly by his persuasions (upon which his eloquence did set such
an edge, Cent. 3. cap. 10.
that they were of great force and pierced deeply) prevailed with him, Baron.
ad an. 250. 6.
and brought him unto the knowledge and profession of Christianity. It seems
the special portion of Scripture that wrought upon him, was the prophecy of
Ionab, In Jonan cap. 3.
which happily Caecilius was unfolding and preaching upon at that time; for so
much Ierom intimates, where he says, Blessed Cyprian having been before an
assertour of Idolatry, at length hearing the Sermon of Ionab, was converted and
brought unto repentance. It is not unlikely that he had been before prepared
and somewhat inclined unto the Christian Religion, by reading the Books of
Christians, and particularly of Tertullian his Countryman, unto whom he was
much addicted, and greatly admired him; for had it not been so, Ad an. 250.. 11.
Baronius sees not how (unless you will ascribe it to a miracle) he could in
so short a time attain unto such a height of knowledge both in Doctrine and
Discipline, as should furnish him for so high a function in the Church.

His love and affection unto his Caeeilius ever after was so great, Pontius in
vita.
that he respected and and reverenced him not as a friend and equal only, but
as a spiritual Father, and one by whom he had received a new life, which he
gave clear testimony of unto the world, by prefixing his name unto his own: so
that unto this day he is called and commonly known by the name of Caecilius
Cyprianus, as did Eusebius in after times annex the name of Pamphylus unto his
own, Post non multum temporis electus in Presbyterum etiam Episcopus
Carthagi^iensis con^titutus est. Hieronym. in catalog. Pontius in vita.
for the love that he bare unto that Martyr.

But a very little time did intervene between his conversion and advancement
unto the chief Dignity in the Church; so great was his growth in the faith,
that in a short space he attained unto such maturity as few perhaps do arrive
at. Herein he was singular, there having been scarce the like example before,
which Pontius speaks of as a thing almost incredible: Nemo (inquit) metit,
statim ut s^vit: Nemo vindemiam de novellis scrobibus expressit: Nemo adhuc
unquam de noviter plant^tis arbusculis matura poma quaesivit: In illo omnia
incredibilia occurrerunt. Praevenit, si potest dici, (res enim fidem non capit)
praevenit, inquam, tritura sementem, vindemia palmit^m, Ad an. 250
poma radicem. Baronius sets down the story of his addition unto the Church,
and ascending unto the Episcopal Chair, as the occurrents of the same year.

Unto this Dignity of sitting at the Helm, Baron. ad an. 250. 1.
in the first and principal of the African Churches was he elected by the
unanimous consent of the whole Clergy and people, none contradicting, but the
unhappy Presbyter Felieissimus, with a few of his Associates, the seat being
being vacant by the decease of Donatus, Cent 3. cap. 10.
Agrippinus or some other; for it is uncertain who was his immediate
predecessor.

Being called unto, Pamel. in vita.
and having undertaken so weighty a charge, as a careful Pastor he bestirs
himself accordingly: and in the first place, and while as yet the peace of the
Church lasted, he applied himself with all his might to restore the Discipline
delivered by the Lord (whereof he was a great lover and advancer, and which
long tranquillity had corrupted) unto its ancient purity.

But this continued not long; Baron. ad an. 25^*. 30.
for a very sore porsecution ensued very shortly after under the Emperor
Decius, which mightily wasted the Church of Christ: the violence whereof
reaching as far as Carthage, Cyprian felt amongst the rest, In vita Cypr.
attaining not long after he was made Bishop (as Pamelius gathers from the
words of Pontius, who says it sell out, statim, eftsoon after) the Glory of
Proscription, unto which was added (that not satisfying the people) their
violent clamor often repeated in the Theater, requiring him to be cast unto
the Lions.

To avoid the violence of this storm, Pontius in vita.
he withdrew not so much out of fear, Baron. ad an. 253. 30. Pamel. in vita.
as for diverse other weighty reasons: as

1. In obedience to God, whose providence spoke out no less than his command
what he should do, Epist. 10. 4.
as he himself speaks: You shall (says he in an Epistle to the Clergy) hear
all things, when the Lord shall bring me back again unto you, who commanded me
to withdraw. Of which Pontius gives us a larger account: In vita Cypr.
'Twas fear indeed (says he) moved him so to do, but it was that just fear
lest he should offend God, that fear which would rather obey God than be so
crowned; for his heart being in all things devoted unto God, and his faith
subject unto divine admonitions, he believes that if he had not obeyed the
Lord, requiring him then to hide, he should have sinned in his very suffering.

2. Lest by his presence he should stir up envy of the people, Pamel. in vita.
who could less away with him than any other of the Presbyters; Cypr Epist. 15.
1. and Epist. 6. 1. and Epist. 36.
and so the sedition already begun among them, should grow unto a greater
height.

3. The Church could not have been deprived of him but to her exceeding great
detriment, Pontius in vita.
especially at that time, there being none so able to afford that comfort,
encouragement, direction, correction and restoring, which multitudes in the
Church did then stand in need of: Well, well, therefore, (says Pontius) and
truly by divine providence, it came to pass that a man so necessary in many
regards, should be delayed the consummation of Martyrdom. Yet it seems that
some were unsatisfied with, and calumniated this his action, Pamel. in vita.
which he therefore took occasion to clear and vindicate in diverse of his
Epistles; Baron. ad an. 253. 32.
whereby he gave satisfaction unto the Clergy of Rome, who took it well, and
judged what he did to be war^antable.

During the time of this his secession (which was about the space of two years)
he was not wanting (though absent in body, Pamel. in vita.
yet very vigilant as present in spirit) by his admonitions, and otherwise to
provide for and promote the welfare of the Brethren as much as he could,
constituting diverse Presbyters to execute his office in his room. But that
which did occasion no small grief unto him, was the schism and disorders that
happened in the Church, Baron. ad an. 254. 39. Pamel in vita.
whereof his former adversary Felicissimus was the principal author, with whom
joined five other Presbyters, who granted rashly and promiscuously peace and
communion to the Lapsi, or such as through fear had fallen in that time of
persecution. Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 42.
These were set on and abetted by Novatus a Presbyter of Carthage (from whom
afterward sprung Donatus and his Sect) with whom sided Fortunatus, Baron. ad
an. 255. 10, 11.
set up by his party as a Mock-Bishop in opposition unto Cyprian, who yet were
of a contray opinion to the former; H^nce Cyprian calls Novatus interfector
poenitentiae.
denying all hope of peace to the Lapsi: but though they were opposite in
judgment unto each other, yet did they all at length conspire together, and
made up one faction against Cyprian; who had given order, that as the Lapsi
should not be altogether excluded* so neither should they be admitted unto
communion, but upon their repentance and satisfaction given unto the Church.

This Felicissimus with his accomplices proceeded so far, Baron. ad an. 254. 35.
as that of those who adhered unto him (who in number increased daily) he
constituted a Church of his own, which he congregated in a certain Mountain;
from whence the name of the Montenses took its Original, Ibid. 38.
given afterward unto the party of the Donatists, who in imitation of these,
lived in the Mountains. Ibid. 39.
But though Felicissi^us were the first in the Schism, yet was he the less
famous; August. de haeres. cap. and Danaeus in comment.
for his name growing more obscure, Novatus gave the title unto the whole Sect,
who from him were called Novations; as also Cathari or pure; because they
refused to communicate with the Lapsi, Pamel. in vita.
though repenting, accounting them unclean.

These Schismatics growing unto this height, the careful Cyprian, though in
exile, is very sollicitous how to suppress them; and to prevent further
mischie^s, that hereupon might ensue: Baron. ad an. 254. 35.
He falls upon the last remedy, writing unto Caldonius and Herculanu^ his
Colleagues, Pamel. in vita.
as also unto Rogatian and Numidicus, Compresbyters, that they excommunicate
Felicissimus and his followers, Epist. 38.
which accordingly they performed, Epist. Cypr. 39.
as appears by their Letters unto the Clergy of Carthage. After two years he
returned from his banishment, Pamel. in vita.
Decius that cruel Persecutor being slain by the Gotbs, and so peace restored
unto the Church. Immediately after his return he uses his utmost endeavors to
close up the rent that had been made in the Church during his absence; for
which end he convenes a Synod, wherein after due debate, this moderate
temperament was agreed upon concerning the Lapsi; that the causes and
necessities of their fall being examined, the Libellatici (who were such as by
their friends did offer or give in their Libels unto the Magistrate, wherein
they did deny Christ, but withal desire that they might not be compelled to
sacrifice) as the less Delinquents should be admitted unto communion upon their
repentance; Go^lat. in notis in Cypr. Epist. 52. n. 39.
but the Sacrificati (who were such, Angelocrat* Epit. Council.
as to preserve their Estates, or being by others persuaded thereunto, did
offer unto the Idols) should have a longer time of repentance set and assigned
unto them; Gesner. Hist. Council.
and in case in^irmity urged, they should receive peace, or be reconciled at
the time of their death. In which Decree Cornelius Bishop of Rome agreed with
them, Pamel. in vita.
a little after calling a Council at Rome, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 42.
which consisted of sixty Bishops, so many Presbyters, Gesner. Hist. Council.
and many Deacons, wherein the business of the Lapsi was thoroughly scanned, and
Novotian (set up as Bishop of Rome by his party against Cornelius) together
with Novatus and Felicissimus, were excommunicated; the sum of which decree was
this, that Novatus together with such as consented unto his opinion, which was
repugnant unto brotherly love, should be banished the Church, and that the
Brethren, fallen through infirmity in the troublesome time of persecution,
should be received, after that the salve of repentance and confession had been
applied unto the Maladies. Baron. ad an. 256. 34.
By these Schisms was the Church much vexed for sometime, and Cyprian loaded
with calumnies by the Authors and Maintainers of them; which he bare and
overcame with invincible courage and patience. Many Councils were celebrated at
Carthage, Pamel. in vita.
and in other Provinces, both of the Eastern and Western Churches, for the
suppressing of them. What afterward became of these Schismatics is not found;
Baron. ad an. 255. 28.
but persecution being renewed, seems for the present to have put an end unto
these Controversies.

After this arose the question about the rebaptization of Heretics returning
again unto the Church: Baron. ad an. 258.
which had been in use in the African Churches, Pamel. in vita Cypr.
in the time of Agrippinus, the Predecessor of Cyprian, and before him in the
time of Tertullian. Baron. ad an. 258. 11. 12.
This was occasioned by the practice of the Novatians, who were wont to baptize
again, as unclean, such as they had drawn from the Church unto their faction;
which provoked diverse African Bishops to emulation, among whom Cyprian was the
chief. Ibid. 27. 42.
Three Councils were by him called about this thing, in the last whereof were
assembled at Carthage, Bin. d^ Council. tom. 1.
out of Africa, Numidia and Mauritania, eighty and seven Bishops; by whom it
was concluded, that such as had been by Heretics baptized, were upon their
return unto the Church to be admitted again, by rebaptization: and that,
because there is but one Baptism, which is no where to be found, but in the
true Church. The sentence of Cyprian is in the last place set down in these
words. Binnius ibid.
My sentence (or judgment herein) (says he) the Epistle written unto our
Colleague Iubaianus has most fully expressed, viz. that according to the
Evangelical and Apostolical contestation, the Adversaries of Christ, and called
Antichrists, when they come unto the Church, are to be baptized with the only
Baptism of the Church; that they may be made friends of foes, and of
Antichrists Christians. Which Opinion was rejected by Stephen Bishop of Rome,
Baron. ad an. 258. 42.
and the Council by him there assembled. Yet did many of the Eastern Bishops,
and of Egypt, as well as of Africa consent with Cyprian in this his opinion;
Ibid. 49.
which having for a while, to their utmost defended, Daille of the Fathers,
lib. 2.
they at last relinquished it, subscribing to Stephen, and the rest of the
Church of Rome; Baron. ad an. 259. 1. 3. 4.
and that Cyprian did so among the rest is very probable, of which more
hereafter.

Shortly after followed another grievous persecution under the Emperor
Valerian and Galienus, Ibid. 6.
which lasted three years and an half; Baron. ad an. 260. 33.
and extending very far, Africa as well as other Provinces felt the violence
thereof; Pamel. in vita.
where the first that was aimed at and vexed, Plin. Hist. not. lib. 5. cap. 3.
was Cyprian, who by Paternus the Proconsul was banished unto Curubis (or
Curobis, as Ptolemy) a Town environed with the Lybian Ocean, In Geograph. lib.
4.
almost in the manner of an Island, standing on the Promontory of Mercury,
Baron. ad an. 260* 39.
over against Sicily, distant from Carthage about fifty miles. In this place,
of a pleasant situation, Pontius In in vita Cypr.
was he fitted with a convenient lodging, and visited by many of the brethren:
Continuing here the most part of a year, Pamel. in vita.
he was not idle, as his Letters, not a few, written from hence do testify;
wherein he ceased not to exhort those, unto whom he wrote, to constancy in
suffering, even unto the laying down of their lives for Christ; in which
employment let us a while leave him, till we shall come to speak of his
Matyrdom.

2. He was a man of excellent natural parts (the elaborate piece of Nature, In
orat. in laudem Cypr. ingenio faceto, copioso, suavi and aperto. Lactant. lib.
5. cap. 1.
says Nazianzen, the Flower of Youth) and these to the utmost improved by
Education and industry; so that he attained unto a great height of secular
Learning in all kinds, before his conversion. For besides his exactness in the
art of Rhetoric, (whereof he was public Professor in the famous City of
Carthage, Pamel. in vita.
and he so far excelled, that he went beyond other men in Eloquence, Nazianz.
in orat. in laud. Cypr.
as much as we exceed the brute Creatures) he was accurately skilled in all
other Arts; One (says Nazianzen) that had gotten unto the top of Learning,
Ibid.
not only of Philosophy, but other Sciences, in every kind, take him where you
will: so that, in variety of knowledge, and in absolute insight into the Arts,
yea, in every regard, he excelled all others. To which was added, his through
knowledge in the Tongues, viz. the Greek and Latin, (the two learned Languages)
wherein he was most skilful. Possevin. in apparat.
The most Eloquent Preacher, Danie^ Tossanus, In Rhetoric. Eccles. lib. 2. cap.
3. 9.
did persuade both my self (says Keckerman) and other candidates of the
Ministry, that among all the Fathers, we would in the next place after the
holy Scriptures, and most diligently, read Cyprian: and certainly I know not
what spirit of Eloquence breaths upon us, when we have read this Author. These
things did afterward prove of great advantage unto him, as did unto the Jews
the Gold and Silver whereof they spoiled the Egyptians; It Is Augustine's
allusion, De doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 40.
whose words for their weight and worth do deserve perusal, which I shall here
insert. As the Egyptians (says he) had Gold and Silver, and Raiment, which the
people of Israel departing out of Egypt, did clancularly challenge for a better
use, not by their own Authority, but by the command of God; the Egyptians
ignorantly lending them those things, which they used not well: So the
Doctrines of the Gentiles do contain the Liberal Arts, very useful to the
Truth, and some most profitable moral precepts; as also some Truths concerning
the worship of that one God; Which Gold and Silver, as it were, of theirs (that
they themselves instituted not, but did dig out certain Mines of the Divine
Providence, extending it self every where, and which they perversely and
injuriously abused to the worshipping of Devils) (...) Christian, when he
departs from them, and in heart separates himself from their miserable society,
ought to take or bring away for the just use of preaching the Gospel; and what
else did many of our good and faithful men? Do we not see with how great a
burden of Gold, Silver and Raiment, the Most sweet Doctor and blessed Matyr,
Cyprian departed out of Egypt? So also did Victorinus, Optatus, Hilarious, and
innumerable of the Greeks, etc. thus he: And not much unlike is that passage of
Ierom ((...) alluding unto those words of Moses, Epist. 84.
Deuteronomy, 21. 10, etc). who being demanded by Magnus a Roman Orator, Cur in
opusculis suis saecularium literarum interdum poneret exempla and caudorem
Ecclesiae ethnicorum sordibus pollueret? responsum, (inquit) breviter habeto:
Quis nesciat and in Moyse and in Prophetarum voluminibus quaedam assumpta de
gentilium libris? Tit. 1. 12.
Sed and Paulus Apostolus P^etarum Epimenidis, 1 Cor. 1^. 33. act. 17. ^8.
Menandri, and Arati versiculis abusus est. Quid ergo mirum, si and ego
sapientiam saecularem propter eloquii venustatem and membrorum pulchritudinem,
de aneilla and captiva Israelitidem facere cupio? and si quicquid in ea mortuum
est idololatriae, voluptatis, erroris, libidinum, vel praecido vel rado; and
mixtos purissimo corpori vernaculo, ex ea genero Domino Sabbath? labor meus in
familiam Christi profecit.

But the most splendid Jewels, that were his principal Ornaments, Christianity
only furnished him withal; which made him exceeding amiable in the eyes both of
God and Men* so that nothing was more illustrious or famous in the whole world:
In notis in Nazianz. orat* 42.
(says Billi^s quoting the words of Ierom) accounted by the Church as a Star
of the greatest Manitude: Non solum malos Catholicos (inquit Augustinus) nullo
modo comparamus, De baptis^. contr^ Do ratist. lib. 6. cap. 2.
sed nec bonos facile coaequamus beato Cypriano, quem inter r^ros and and
paucos excellentissimae gratiae viros numer^^ pia matter Ecclesia. In orat. in
laud Cyprian.
He was (says Nazianzen) sometime ( viz. before his conversion) the singular
honor of Carthage; but now, viz. since his becoming a Christian, of the whole
world. His natural disposition was very sweet and lovely; but being polished by
Religion, it became much more so: Pontius in vita Cypr.
in whom was to be found such an equal composition of gravity and cheerfulness,
severity and mildness, that it might be doubtful whether he deserved to be more
feared or loved, but that indeed he equally deserved both.

His knowledge in the Mysteries of the Gospel was such, that for it he was
renowned every where, his writings that were dispersed f^r and near, did spread
his fame and made him of great note not only in the African and Western,
Augustine. contr. dnas Epist. Pelagianor. lib. 4. cap. 8.
but also in the Churches of the East. In comparison of whom the great Augustine
does so far undervalue himself, that (says he) I am very much* Contra Crescon.
prammatic. lib.
yea incomparably inferior unto the desert of Cyprian. And he was not only a
shining, but also a burning light, Pontius in vita.
so exemplary in his conversation, that the Rays of Grace and Holiness
streaming forth therein, did even confound the minds of the beholders. In
praefat. ante opera Cypriani
Talis ubique Sermonis habitus et (inquit Erasmus) ut loqui sentias vere
Christianum Episcopum, ac Martyrio destinatum. Pectus ardet Evangelica pietate,
and pectori respondet oration: loquitur diserta, sed magis fortia quam diserta:
neque tam loquitur fortia, quam vivit. Insomuch that in the sentence pronounced
upon him, Pontius in vit^ ejus.
he is styled the Standard Bearer of his Sect, and enemy of the gods qui
futurus esset ipse documento, and cujus sa^guine inciperet Disciplina sanciri*
Among the rest, those graces, whose luster and brightness, the place he held,
the employments he managed, and the condition of the times that he lived in,
did more especially discover, were such as these.

1. His humility, that sweet grace, peculiar to Christianity, this added a
beauty unto all the rest, De baptism. contr. Donatist. lib. 2.
tanto erat excelientior, quanto humilior, inquit Augustinus; who was so much
the higher in the account of others, by how much the lower he was in his own.
Being to deliberate about weighty affairs, his manner was to decree nothing
without his colleagues, neither would he pertinaciously love and adhere unto
his own apprehensions, Cent. 3 c. 10. Scultet. in Medull.
but rather embrace what was by others profitably and wholesomely suggested.

2. His Charity and compassion to those in want and durance: Pontius in vita
ejus.
for immediately upon his conversion he parted with what he had, and gave it
for the relief of the Poor. He was (as Job speaks of himself) eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame; Job 29. 15, 16, 17.
a Father unto the Put, and the cause which he knew not, he searched out; he
brake the jaws of the Wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his Teeth. And when
many had been taken Captives by the barbarous Goths, Pamel. in vita ejus and in
notis in Epist. 60.
or Scythians, he sent an hundred thousand Sestertia from the Church, for the
redeeming of them: so himself speaks: misimus (inquit) Sestertia centum millia
nummu^, quae isthic in Ecclesia, Epist. 60. 4.
cui de Domini indulgentia praesumus, Cleri and plebis apud nos consistentia
collatione collecta sunt. The sum being so vast, Pamelius conjectures it ought
to be only Sestertia centum, In notis. number. 5.
and that millia nummum, added for explications sake, See Brerewood de pretiis
vet. nummorum.
is from the Margin crept into the Text: or else, he thinks it should be thus
read: Sestertium centum millia nummum. Yea while he was in exile, he not only
wrote, but also sent relief unto those poor Christians who were condemned unto
the Mines. Pamel. in vita ejus. Cypr. Ep. 77.
He manifested also this Grace in his Indulgence to forgive and receive those
offenders, who repenting returned unto the Church: Epist. 55. 18.
Hear his own words -- Remitto omnia, inquit, multa dissimulo, studio and voto
colligendae fraternitatis, etiam quae in Deum commissa sunt, non pleno judicio
Religionis examino, delictis plusquam oportet remittendo pene ipse delinquo:
amplector promp^a and plena dilectione cum paenitentia revertentes, peccatum
suum satisfactione humili and simplici const^entes.

3. His patience in bearing injuries and wrongs: whereof he gave an ample
testimony in his behavior toward those who opposed him, Pontius in vita ejus.
when he was chosen Bishop; Oh how patiently did he bear with them, and with
what a deal of clemency did he forgive them; reckoning them among his friends
to the admiration of many.

4. His equanimity and peaceableness; being a very great lover and maintainer
of unity among Brethren, which he was studious to preserve and hold, even with
those that dissented from him: August. contra Donatist. lib. 1. and contra
Crescqu. lib. 2.
as appears in the grand difference between him and Stephen Bishop of Rome, and
others about the rebaptization of Heretics: for, as himself did not break
Communion by separating from them, so neither did he cease to persuade others
also, that they should bear with one another in love, Epist. 76. 12.
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: his words
that he used in the Council of Carthage, speaks out this sweet temper of his
Spirit. Super est (inquit) Collegae dilectissimi, ut de hac ipsa re quid
singuli sentiamus, proferamus, neminem judicantes, (...). Council. Tom. 1.
aut a jure Communionis, aliquem, si diversum senserit, amoventes.

To these many more might be added, as his contempt of riches, Nazianz in Orat.
in Laud. Cypr.
keeping under of his body, purity of Life, diametrically opposite to the lusts
of his former conversation, gravity joined with humanity, equi-distant both,
from arrogance and baseness: fidelity, prudence, industry, watchings and the
like, which more at large are commemorated and recorded by Pontius and
Nazianzen, in all which regards he was very eminent: Lyrinens. contr. haeres.
cap. 10.
Hence Vincentius styles him, illud Sanctorum omnium and Episcoporum and
Martyrum lumen, beatissimum Cyprianum: In praefat. ante opera Cypr.
He may be instead of many (says Erasmus) whether you respect eloquence or
Doctrine, or the dignity of a Pastor, or a breast every where breathing forth
the vigor of an Apostolical Spirit, or the glory of Martyrdom. Whose writings
(says Scultetus) have in them so happy a genius, In medull.
that, although they were interwoven with diverse errors, yet they found some
Doctors of the Church, not only admirers of the more sound Doctrine, but candid
Interpreters even of the errors contained in them. How transcendent a Man he
was in the judgment of the great Augustine is evident, and may be collected
from the Titles he gives him, wherein the Epithets which for the most part he
makes use of, such as are Doctor Suavissimus, lucidissimus, pacis amantissimus,
excellentissimae gratiae, also Martyr beatissimus, fortissimus, gloriosissimus,
etc. Contra Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 32.
A Man (says he) whose praise I cannot reach, to whose many Letters I compare
not my writings, whose Wit I love, with whose mouth I am delighted, whose
Charity I admire, and whose Martyrdom I reverence. Add hereto the Encomium of
Prudentius, whose words are: -- Tenet ille Regna coeli, (...)

Nec minus involitat terris, nec ab hoc recedit orb;
Disserit, eloquitur, tractat, docet, instruit, prophetat.
Nec Lybiae populos tantum regit exitusque in ortum.
Solis, and usque obitum, Gallos fovet, imbuit Britanuos,
Praesidet Hesperiae, Christum serit ultimis Hiberis.


Let me shut up all with the words of Pontius: In vita Cypr.
I pass by (says he) many other and great things, which the Volume, lest it
swell too big, suffers me not more largely to relate, of which let it suffice
to have said this only, that if the Gentiles might have heard them at their
Bars, they would perhaps forthwith have believed and become Christians.

3. The monuments of this excellent and choice spirit were many, Hieronym. in
catal.
Sole clariora, lively representing as in a glass his great worth, and wherein
though dead, he yet lives and speaks: Strigel. cited in criseis Melancthon.
Of which Augustine had so venerable an esteem, that he accounted all his own
works not equal unto one of Cyprian's Epistles: And Ierom giving directions
unto the noble Widow Laeta for the pious education of her Daughter Paula,
recommends the works of Cyprian to her continual perusal: Cypriani (inquit)
opuscula semper in manu teneat. Ad Laetam Epist. 7. Bucholcer Chronolog.
Cujus singula prope verba spirant Martyrium. They are but fragments as it
were, that remain, and the loss of what is wanting is much bewailed by Erasmus.

Of those many that are lost, I find but few mentioned in any Authors: so that
it seems, not only the Books themselves, but even their very Names and Titles
are exstinct with them. In passione Cyprian. apud Pamel.
Paulus Diaconus reckons among the innumerable Volumes (as he has it) which
he wrote, a very profitable Chronicle compiled by him: Also that he discoursed
most excellently upon the Evangelists and other Books of the Scripture. But how
little credit this report deserves, will appear from the words of Ierom (a Man
as well as most acquainted with the writings of those that went before him) who
tells us, Epist. ad Paulinum. n. 13.
that he never commented upon the sacred Scriptures, Marian Victor. in Schol.
Erasm. in praefat. ante opera Cyprian.
being wholly taken up with the exercise of virtue ( totus in exereitatione,
alias, exhortatione virtutum) and occupied or hindered by the straits of
persecution: Unless his three books of testimonies unto Quirinus (which are as
it were common places out of the Scriptures) might be looked on by him as
Commentaries, Pamel. in vita ejus.
wherein indeed he briefly glosseth upon and gives some light unto many Texts,
though this were not the thing that he intended in those Tables.

Among the works of Cyprian that remain unto this day, his excellent Epistles
are deservedly ranked in the first place; In Orat. de lect patr ante loc.
commun.
as having a notable vein of piety running through them; ( Epistolae Cypriani,
inquit Chemnitius, referunt pectus ardens Pietate, ita ut lectorem accendere
possint) and wherein is discovered abundance of that prudence, candor,
meekness, modesty, gravity, and holy severity, wherewith his rare spirit was so
much adorned. These are the most genuine births of our Author, though yet they
have not continued altogether untouched, nor have escaped the injury of those,
whose fingers have been itching to tamper with and corrupt them, Rivet. Crit.
Sac. For they have been bold to add not only sundry Epistles, but have blotted
and blurred diverse of them, which were most evidently written by that blessed
Martyr, Dr. James, of the mysteries of the Indic^^ Expurgat.
for the support of their tottering cause, which truth will never patronize.

There are at this day eighty three of them in number, Cent. 3. c. 10.
whereof some few were from others unto himself, the rest written by him unto
the Bishops, Presbyters, and Churches or Brethren. They are by Pamelius
digested and cast into this order, two were written shortly after his Baptism,
Index ante opera Cypr. edit. Goulart.
thirty and eight in his first Exile, which lasted the space of two years;
eighteen during the time wherein Cornelius and Lucius sat Bishops of Rome;
eight miscellany Epistles, written in the times of the peace of the Church; ten
in the time of Stephen Bishop of Rome, concerning the Rebaptization of
Heretics; and seven in his last secession a little before his Martyrdom. The
same Author has taken good pains in his more exact Chronological account of
the particular years, wherein these Epistles (as also his other Treatises) were
written, Pamel. praefat. ad lectorem.
which affords not a little light for the better understanding of them: for he
had found them to have such a mutual dependence one upon another, that many of
them without the help of others could not well be understood. This Chronology
is prefixed by Pamelius in his Edition of these Epistles, together with the
rest of Cyprian's works, in whose diligence in his emendations and annotations
(which contain many Ecclesiastical Antiquities for the illustration of them)
deserves commendation; Yet in this was he unhappy, that being a sworn Vassal
of the Romish Synagogue, he strains his Wit and skill, ^oulart. in Epist. ante
opera Cypria.
to reconcile (which cannot be) the opinions and judgment of Cyprian and other
Ancients, with Pontifician Traditions and the Anathematisms of the Tridentine
Conventicle: which filth cast upon the famous Cyprian and Orthodox antiquity,
Simon Goulart has with good success endeavored to wipe off in his Learned
notes, Coci censur.
as an antidote subjoyned unto those of Pamelius: by which means this Edition
comes to be more exact than any that were before it, Bilson' s difference.
though there were diverse. In Epist. ante opera Cypr.
Of which Pamelius a Lovain Divine, the said Goulart gives this approbation,
that he was an ingenious Man, of much reading, most diligent, of very accurate
and quick expression, and one that had merited much of those studious in
Theology in his Edition of Cyprian: if contenting himself to have pointed at
the various readings, he had, either not touched, or more sincerely explicated,
those Antiquities.

As touching these Epistles, In medall^ Pat^um.
I shall refer the Reader for the Analysis and contents of them unto Scultetus,
who has taken laudable pains in surveying the works of our Author, together
with diverse other of the Ancients. It shall suffice me to reflect upon them in
a more general way, and what is remarkable in them; and to hint somewhat that
may be of use in reference unto them: And herein I shall observe that order
wherein they are ranked and set down by Pamelius.

The second Epistle contains a flourishing and eloquent Narration of his
conversion and Baptism, savouring much for its quaintness, of the Rhetoric
Schools from whence he was newly come. Cent. 3. c. 10. In annotatiuncul.
The phrase of this Epistle (says Erasmus) is more neat and florid, then that
of the rest, retaining still the scent of Scholastical eloquence. Erasm. in
praefat. ante opera Cypr.
In Secunda Epistola nonnihil lusit apparatu pompaque Sermonis; unde and
Augustinus, (Lib. 4. cap. 14. de Doctr. Christian) comptae, jucundae
splendidaeque dictionis depromit exemplum. De Script. Eccles.
It is entitled by Trithemius, Chronic. ad an. 263.
lib. de gratia Dei. And by Antoninus, De Gratia and abundantia malitiae
saeculi. But this accurate Eloquence of his gotten with so much sweat, Baron.
ad an. 250. 11.
and augmented with continual exercise, and for which he was famous every
where, he laid aside as of little profit and necessity, preferring before it
Christian simplicity. Yet, that in this Epistle he wrote in so high a strain, I
suppose it therefore so fell out (says Augustine) or rather was advisedly
done, De doct. Christ. lib. 4. cap. 14.
that posterity might know, what a tongue the soundness of Christian Doctrine
had recalled from such redundance or superfluity, and restrained to a more
grave and modest eloquence: such as in his following writings is securely
loved, religiously desired, but most difficulty performed. Wherefore this holy
Man did show, that he could so speak, because some where he spoke so; but
withal that he would not, because he afterward no where does so. In praefat.
ante opera Cypr.
Nihil (inquit Erasmus) reperies in Cypriaeno, quod ad ostentationem inge^^
videri possit ascitum, aut quod ullo pacto vafrieiem sapiat.

In the twelfth Epistle, Ad plebem.
ad plebem, wherein he desires them to wait for his return, that we (says he)
and our fellow Bishops being assembled together, may examine the Letters and
desires of the blessed Martyrs, according to the Doctrine of our Lord, and in
the presence of the Confessors, and secundum vestr^^ quoque sententiam, and
according as you shall think convenient. Those last words are maliciously left
out; because (says Daille) they would not have us to know, Treatise of the
Fathers.
that the faithful people had ever any thing to do with, or had any vote in the
affairs of the Church.

In the thirty first Epistle, there remained for a long time a foul fault
uncorrected, Cypriano Papae, Presbyteri and Diaconi Romae consistentes, salutem.
by which the place was so depraved, that no perfect sense could be made of it:
which was at length happily amended by the dexterity of that Phoenix of her Sex
for Learning, M. S. the Life of Sir Thomas Moor.
Margaret the Daughter of Sir Thomas Moor: one unto whom Erasmus wrote many
Epistles and dedicated his Commentaries on certain Hymns of Prudentius, calling
her the flower of all the Learned Matrons of England. She was of a quick and
sharp Wit, and composed in Greek and Latin both Verse and Prose; and that most
eloquently, to the admiration of those that perused her writings. This
Gentlewoman reading this Epistle, and being come to the place corrupted, (which
was this; Absit enim ab Ecclesia Romana vigorem suum tam profana facilitate
dimittere, and NISI VOS severitatis eversa fidei Majestate dissolvere)
presently without help of other example or instruction, quoth she, those words
Nisi Vos, must be, Nervos: and so the sentence by that word is made plain and
perspicuous. In annotat. number. 15.
With this emendation is this Epistle set forth in the Edition of Pamelius, who
making honorable mention of the Author thereof, In Schol. in Vincent. Lyrinens.
reports it from Costerus, that tells us he had it from Doctor Clement a
Learned Physician, one familiarly acquainted with Sir Thomas his Family, as
having married Mrs. Margaret Gage another rare proficient in that famous Female
Academy. Rhenanus styles it a very notable Epistle; In annotat. in lib. Tert.
de (...)
Habemus (inquit) de Disciplina Romanae Ecclesiae valde insignem Epistolam
Presbyterorum and Diaconorum urbis Romae.

In the general there are three things especially observable in the Epistles of
our Author.

1. There are to be found in them diverse evident footsteps of the ancient
Discipline of the Churches of Christ. As concerning Officers and the manner of
electing them: of the power of those Officers, and how it was made use of by
them; of the excommunication of offenders, and the restoring of them unto
Communion again, upon their repentance and satisfaction given unto the Church:
of the care that ought to be had of the poor, imprisoned, etc. of which see
Epist. 6. 11, 12, 13 31, 34, 37, 52, 54, 64* 65.

2. Many notable cases propounded unto, and resolved by him; particularly,
these following among the rest.

1. Whether Novatian the Schismatic could or might baptize or no? Ad Magnum
Epist. 76.
he denies that he could (though herein he erred) which he endeavors to
maintain and make good by diverse arguments: but the good Bishop (as Goulart
observes in his notes) undertook a bad cause, in defending whereof he
discovered much weakness, though withal no less modesty, in the close of his
discourse.

2. Whether a Stage Player, persevering in the exercise of that unseemly Art,
Ad Eucratium Epist. 62.
ought to communicate? To which his answer is in the Negative, that he ought
not. Puto, inquit, nec Majestati Divinae, nec Evangelicae Discipline congruere,
ut pudor and honor Ecclesiae tam turpi and infami contagione foedetur, which
place (says Goulart) meets with those who admit unto the Communion without
distinction, In Notis.
such as are impious and impure.

3. Whether those who had been baptized by Heretics, upon their return unto
the Catholic Church, ought again to be baptized? His answer is Affirmative,
(wherein joined with him many other Bishops) and as the ground of it, he
labors to prove the Baptism of Heretics to be a nullity; wherein he does
humanum aliquid pati. And this is the chief subject of diverse Epistles, viz.
from the seventieth unto the seventy seventh, among which in the seventy sixth
Epistle, the first Quaere, viz. that about the Baptism of Novatian, is answered.

4. Whether the Clinici (i. e. those who were baptized upon their sick Beds)
are to be accounted legitimate or rightful Christians, Epist. 76.
because they are not washed, but only sprinkled with baptismal water? Unto
which his answer is affirmative: Nos, inquit, aestimamus in nullo mutilari and
debilitari posse beneficia divina, nec minus aliquid illic posse contingere,
ubi plena and tota fide and dantis and sumenlis accipitur, quod de divinis
muneribus hauritur, etc. This by Pamelius is made to be the latter part of the
seventy sixth Epistle, and not an entire one by it self: In annotat* ante opera
Cyprian.
and so thinks Erasmus of it also, though in some Editions it be disjoined from
it: It Is plain, says Erasmus, from the first words, that it is no entire
Epistle; for who would begin an Epistle after this manner, Quaesisti etiam: yet
in his Edition are these made two distinct Epistles, viz. one the sixth of the
first Book: the other the seventh of the fourth.

5. Whether Fortunatianus (sometime a Bishop) who had sacrificed unto Idols,
Epist. 64.
might challenge or take unto himself his office again? He answers negatively,
rendering diverse reasons why he so judges.

3. Many excellent and pressing exhortations un^o constancy in suffering for
the name of Christ; as also sundry choice documents and directions for Holiness
and Christian Conversation; for which work he was so completely furnished, that
Pontius would conclude from thence, his flight in the time of persecution, and
reservation from Martyrdom for a while, to be from the special providence of
God, because of the need the Church then had of him: For, says he, who should
teach the Lapsi Repentance, In vita Cyprian.
Heretics Truth, Schismatics Unity, the Sons of God peace and the Law of
Evangelical Prayer? Who should comfort Christians tenderly affected with their
losses, or rather those of little faith, with the hope of future things? Whence
should we so learn mercy or patience? Who should raise up so many Martyrs with
divine exhortations? Well then it happened, that a man so many ways so
necessary, should be for a while respited from Martyrdom. In vita ejus.
He was therefore, says Pamelius, saved by the Lord, that being destined unto
Martyrdom afterward, he might by his exhortations send before many Martyrs unto
the Lord, who, had they wanted the incentive of this celestial Trumpet, might
else have fallen from the faith. Hear the words of the Presbyters and Deacons
at Rome, Epist. 31*
to this purpose, say they in an Epistle unto him, Maximas tibi atque uberes
gratias refer debtmus and reddimus, quod -- victores (...) viribus tui
sermonis animasti, ut quanquam h^e totum de fide confitentium and de divina
indulgentia venire videatur, tamen in martyrio (...) tibi ex aliquo debitores
facti esse videantur. Of this kind among the rest are Epist. 6. 8, 9. 16.
wherein in an eloquent and plainly divine style, Pamel. in argument.
he confirms the confessors: also Epist. 25. 56. 77. and 81. In Epistola 77.
(inquit Baronius) elucet mirifice Christiani nominis excellentia quae eo
gloriosior redditur, atque praeclarior, quo magis fuerit afflictata molestiis,
ac rebus fatigata contrariis, praestat eas literas audire, utpote novissimos
cygnaeos viri sanctissimi cantus, qui mirificum quendam reddunt flagrantis
spiritus cum suavitate concentum.

For his other works, Pamelius conceives, that in the last recited words of
Pontius, In praefat. in Tom. 2.
is hinted the order in which they were written; for who can think, says he,
that merely by accident, and not rather purposely and with mature deliberation,
he should observe such an order in his words, which he therefore observes in
his Edition, and so shall I in the recital of them. His Treatises then are
these following.

1. Of the discipline and habit of Virgins, entitled by Erasmus, Epist. ad
Demetriad. n. 8. de Script. Pamel. in vita.
only De habitu Virginum: and by Ierom and Trithemius, de virginitate. It was
written by him while he was yet a Presbyter, or at least shortly after he was
made Bishop, viz. in the first year: of which Rhenanus thus speaks, Cyprianus
scripsit de habitu Virginum, In argument. lib. Tertull. de patient. Epist.
nitidior aliquanto f^ciliorque hoc nostro authore, viz. Tertulliano. Ierom
styles it an egregious Volume, wherein he exhorts Virgins to a conversation
suitable to their profession, to contemn the world, and to shun the abuses and
corruptions of it, which in a lofty strain he stirs them up unto: for so
Augustine, De doct. Christ. lib. 4. cap 21. Erasm. in Margin.
ad virginitatem magno accendit eloquio Cyprianus: In this Tract, (as in others
also) he much imitates his Master, as he calls him, Tertullian upon the like
subject.

2. De Lapsis. Pamel. in praefat. ante tom. 2.
1. Of such as fell in time of persecution, which Erasmus calls by the name of
Sermo: this with the two following was written shortly after his return from
exile, peace being restored unto the Church: Pamol. in annotat.
wherein congratulating the Confessors, and blessing God for their invincible
constancy under the Cross, he greatly bewails the fall of such, as by the
threatenings of the adversary were drawn to sacrifice, and did not rather
withdraw according unto the counsel of Christ, blaming them, that before their
repentance they would even extort communion and peace from some Presbyters
without the consent of the Bishop: and lastly, by diverse arguments he exhorts
them unto a public acknowledgment of their sin, and to give satisfaction unto
the Church. Herein also he imitates Tertulian in his Book of repentance.

3. Of the unity of the Church; Antonin. chron. part. 1. tit. 7. in annotat. in
Epist. 5^. and in annotat. in lib. de unitat. Eccles.
some do add the word Catholic: and this Pamelius (as himself more than once
boastingly tells us) from the fifty first Epistle, first found out to be the
true Title of this Book, which Erasmus and some others do style, A Treatise of
the Simplicity of Prelates: and Augustine an Epistle touching unity. Co^tra
Creseon. lib. 2. c. 33.
A golden Book, written by occasion of the Novatian Rent or Schism, Pamel. in
vita.
that he might deter his Carthaginians from siding with Novatus, Pamel. in
notis.
who were too much inclining unto, and not so averse from him as they should
have been. Wherein he earnestly presses the Pastors carefully to preserve
unity in the Church, by many weighty arguments; showing the original and sourse
of Heresies to be the contempt of the truth and celestial Doctrine of Christ,
commending unity in the Church; and in the close he discourses of the Duty of
those who stand firm in the unity of the Church, viz. to shun the society of
Schismatics. This excellent piece of Cyprian the Vassals of the Romish See
have been most busily tampering with, and as palpably corrupting for their
advantage in point of the Popes Supremacy; having boldly foysted in here and
there, Daille lib. 1. cap. 4.
as they thought fit, whole periods and sentences against the faith of the best
and most uncorrupted Manuscripts: Treatise of the Fathers.
the additions are these following,

1. He built his Church on him alone ( viz. Peter) and commanded him to feed
his Sheep.

2. He established one Chair.

3. The Primacy was given unto Peter, to show that there was but (one Church of
Christ) and but one Chair.

4. He that forsakes the Chair of Peter, on which the Church was founded, does
he hope himself to be in the Church? Of these last words, says Philander
(after Theophilus had named six Editions of Cyprian, Bilson's difference, part.
1.
in which they are not) indeed I confess the words were wanting, till Pamelius
a Canon of Bruges found them in an old written Copy lying in the Abbey of
Cambron. All these additions will evidently appear unto any one, who (without
having recourse unto other copies) will but compare Erasmus and Pamelius their
Editions together. He that desires to be farther satisfied in the foul fraud
of these shameless forgers in this particular, let him please to peruse the
learned Doctor Reynolds in his conference with Heart, chap. 5. division. 2.
Bilson in his difference, etc. part 1. page 89. and Doctor James, of the
Corruption of the Fathers, part 2.

So many have been the mutations, additions, detractions and variations of this
small Book, that the laborious abovenamed Doctor James (in a little Treatise
written by him, which he entitled Cyprian restored or revived) has observed
no less than two hundred and eighty eight of them, Rivet. crit. sac.
by a diligent collation of four manuscript Copies: this the bold Jesuit
Possevine in his Apparatus, James of the corrups. of of the Fathers. part. 2.
page 10. 20. 22.
inserts as his own, which the Doctor thus charge him with: It has pleased
him, says he, in his first Tome, at the word Cyprian, to steal a Treatise of
mine, and concealing my name, mutatis mutandis, chopping and changing some few
words at his pleasure, to publish it unto the world: Sic no^ non nobis
mellificamus apes. A most unworthy act, and at least deserving the brand of
base ingenuity: a fault that Crinitus blames in Macrobius, De honest. discipl.
lib. 20. cap. 7.
who having been much beholding unto A. Gellius, makes no acknowledgment
thereof: Cum sit, inquit, obnoxiae mentis and ingenii maxim infaelicis,
uunquam fateri, pe^ quos authors profeceris.

4. Of the Lord's Prayer, which Treatise Augustine thus commends, Lib. de great.
and lib. arbit. cap. 13.
I admonish, says he, and much exhort you to read diligently that Book of
Blessed Cyprian, which he wrote of the Lord's Prayer; and as the Lord shall
help you, to understand and commit it to memory: he writes it unto one
Valentinus and the Monks that were with him. In this piece commending this
prayer; Schultet. in Medull.
he shows how we ought to draw near unto God; then explains the several parts
and petitions of it: unto which he subjoyns somewhat of the necessity of
prayer, how the mind ought to be composed in this duty; and when it should be
performed. Herein also he imitates Tertullian de Oratione. Bibl. Sanct. lib. 4.
Est, inquit Sixtui Senensis sanctae and venustae brevitatis expla^^tio.

5. Unto Demetrianus, the Proconsul of Africa; an Apologetical or invective
Oration; In Annotat. Erasm. in Margin.
Erasmus wonders why any should rather call it a Treatise, then an Epistle.
Wherein, using a more elaborate style, he clears the Christians of those
calumnies that were cast upon them by Demetrian and other Ethnicks; who imputed
it unto the Christians not worshipping the Gods, that those grievous judgments
of famine, pestilence and war, did so rage in the Roman Empire: the true cause
whereof he shows to be their contempt of Christianity, which he proves by
diverse ^^guments; and closes with an exhortation unto the Gentiles to come
unto God, and to believe on Jesus Christ. In this likewise he imitates his
Master Tertullian in his Apology, Pamel. in Annotat. De Justit. lib. 6, cap. 4.
and in his book against Scapula; but is blamed by Lactantius for not handling
the matter as he ought; because he dealt with an Heathen by Scripture
testimonies, which Demetrian esteemed as fained and vain; who should have been
refuted by reason and arguments grounded thereupon; Hieronym. in epist. ad Mag.
n. 84. Ad an. 256. 30.
yet herein is he defended by Baronius who labors to excuse him.

6. Of the vanity of idols; or, that idols are not gods: wherein he proves that
they were men, and consequently that the worshipping of them can be no way
profitable: And that there is but one true God and Lord of all, whom the
Christians worship. Erasmus suspects it to be a fragment of a larger work, In
Annotat.
because it begins so abruptly. Of which piece Ierom thus speaks, Ad Magnu^.
epist. 84.
commending his wit and skill: with what brevity, with what knowledge of all
Histories, with what splendour of words and sense has Cyprian discussed that
idols are not Gods? Herein also as he imitated Tertullian in his Apology, so
likewise does he Minutius Foelix in his Octavius; Pamel. in vita ejus.
or Minutius him: for they lived near about the same time.

7. Of Mortality; written by him in a time wherein the pestilence invaded and
raged in diverse provinces, Ens. in Chro. refers it ad An. 255. Ans. to the Jes.
chall.
and chiefly Alexandria and the rest of Egypt. Usher calls it a famous
Treatise: wherein by diverse arguments, he armeth Christians against the fear of
death; and admonishes them not to grieve immoderately for those that die,
showing what are the fruits of death, and of how great advantage it is unto
them that die in Lord. De praedest. l. 1. c. 14.
A book, says Augustine, laudably known to many, yea almost to all that love
Ecclesiastical writings; in quo dicit mortem fidelibus utilem reperiri, quoniam
peccandi periculis hominem subtrahit, and in non peccandi securitatem
constituit.

8. Of works and almsdeeds: Contr. ^. Epist. Pelag. ^. 4. c. 8. Epi. ad
Pammach. 26.
Augustine calls it an Epistle: and Ierom grande volumen, a great volum wherein
he exhorts those that were able, to contribute toward the relieving of the
poor, who by pestilence, famine and other calamities had been reduced unto
great exigencies.

9. Of the good of Patience, wherein, virtutem hanc per effecta magnifice
amplificat: Keck. rheto. Eccles.
commending the practice of it from the example of God, Christ and the Saints:
proving also both by Scripture and reason, that it is not only profitable, but
also necessary for a Christian. Baronius shows us the occasion of the writing
hereof. Veritus, inquit, magnopere Cyprianus, ne inter Episcopos obortis
contentionibus, Ad An. 258. 35.
magno aliquo sebismate Catholica scinderetur Ecclesia, ad ^ntevertenda futura
mala, egregium illud prop^ylacticon praeparavit antidotum, libellum illum de
bono Patientiae scribens, quo demonstraret absque, patientia impossible esse
servari inter fratres mutuam charitatem. And Cyprian himself in his Epistle to
Iubaianus concerning the rebaptization of heretics, having said in the last
paragraph, Id Jubaian. Epist. 73.
that he would not for Heretics contend with his fellow Bishops; he shuts up
all with these words: servatur a nobis patienter and firmiter charitas ^nimi,
collegii honor, vinculum fidei, and concordia sacerdotii. Propter hoc etiam
libellum de bono patientiae, quantum valuit nostra medi^critas, permittente
Domino and inspirante, conscripsimus quem ad te pro mutua dilectione
transmisimus. In this book also he much imitates Tertullian upon the same
subject, with a pious and commendable emulation: Rhenan. in Annotat. in
Tertull. de patient.
for he feared lest (as it afterward fell out) the writings of so eminent a man
should be lost or laid aside: Id. in arg. in 1. Tertul. de patient.
many even then abstaining from the reading of him, because he had so unhappily
separated from the Church.

10. Of zeal (he takes this word here in the worse sense) and envy: which by
many arguments he dehorteth from; showing whence it proceeds, and how much evil
it produces. Rhetor. Eccles. lib. 1. lib. de bapt. cont. Donat. l. 4. c. 8.
Sermo praeclarus, inquit Keckerman^us, and egregia coneio. Augustine calls
this Tract also an Epistle; and Ierom, librum valde optimum. In Epist. ad
Galat. cap. 5. Pamel. in praefat. ante tom. 2. opera Cypr.
The occasion of the writing of this, as of the former Treatise also, was the
controversy and great contest that arose between Stephen Bishop of Rome and
the African Bishops about the Baptizing of Heretics.

11. An exhortation to Martyrdom; written unto Fortunatus; distinguished into
twelve Chapters containing so many arguments, whereby he presses unto
Martyrdom: which are collected almost verbatim out of the Scriptures. Pamel. in
arg. and Baro. ad an. 255.. 45.
Baronius and Pamelius are very confident, that it is Cyprians, and much wonder
that any should ascribe it unto Hilary; In Annotat. in Hierony. Epist. 50. ad
Pammach. Cens. Patr.
which yet Marianus Victorinus does as confidently, induced hereunto by the
style, and authority of Ierom. For which cause the industrious Mr. Cook doubts
not to rank it among the works falsely ascribed unto this Father.

12. Three books of Testimonies unto Quirinus, being none other then a rapsody
or collection of several places of Scripture. The two first, against the Jews:
In the one he shows that the Jews have departed from God, In praefat. Cypr.
and so have lost that grace and indulgence which formerly was afforded unto
them; and that the Gentiles from among all nations have succeeded them, and
come into their place. The other contains the mystery of Christ, that he came
according as the Scriptures had foretold, and has done and performed all
things by which he might be known. In the third, Cent. 3. c. 10. praefa. Cypr.
in lib. 3.
which the Centurists style, de disciplina Christianorum, he instructs Quirinus
in a Christian life; it being a Collection of Divine Precepts and Commands,
which may be the more easy and profitable for the Readers, for that, being but
a few and digested into a Breviary, they are the sooner Read over, and more
frequently repeated. In argu. in l. Eras. in Annot. ante opera Cypr. In Medull.
Pamelius cannot wonder enough at the censure of Erasmus, that it should seem
more probable unto him, that these books are not Cyprians: Yet is this
sagacious censor seconded by Scultetus, who renders some reasons why he should
make question of it, viz. that some Greek forms of speech, are used in the
third book, which are not to be sound in the other works of Cyprian: withal he
adds, that many things do offer themselves unto the diligent Reader, by which
without any great ado they may be distinguished from what of this Father is
genuine.

13. The sentences or suffrages of the Council of Carthage concerning the
baptizing of Heretics: Eras. in Annotat.
which is none other than a rehearsal of what was done and said in that
Council; as things were taken by the public Notaries, whereof he gives an
account unto Quirinus. This piece shuts up the second Tome in Pamelius his
Edition.

His third Tome contains those books that are doubted of or falsely ascribed
unto Cyprian: (...) tom. 3.
though in his preface Pamelius makes them to be of three sorts. First, Some,
that by the style and Scriptures cited, do certainly appear to be his genuine
works: but how true this is, we shall hereafter examine. Secondly, Others, of
which there is some doubt; yet are there many things to persuade us that they
are his, or at least, of some Author, no less Ancient then he. 3. Some that are
certainly found to be none of his. But though diverse pieces have his name
affixed unto them, that he was never the Author of; yet, says Erasmus, herein
was he more happy then some others, In praefat. ante opera Cypr.
that nothing is ascribed unto him but what is Learned, and proceeded from
great men.

These are, first, his book of Spectacles; which, he shows it is unlawful for
Christians to be present at and behold. A book, which neither Trithemius nor
the Centurists nor Erasmus take notice of: Bellar. de script. Eccle. Rivet.
Crit. ^ae.
and therefore not without cause suspected; which also the style gives
sufficient ground for. Herein the Author much imitates Tertullian upon the same
subject.

2. Of Discipline, or the good of chastity; wherein many passages are almost
verbatim taken out of Tertullian. Pamel. in Annotat. De script. Eccles.
Bellarmine and Pamelius conceive it to be Cyprians: It Is a work of an
uncertain but Learned Author, so that 'twere pity it should be lost; In
Annotat.
(says Erasmus) yet in his judgment, the style plainly shows it to be none of
Cyprians.

3. Of the praise of Martyrdom, Baron. ad an 255. 38. Erasm. in Annotat.
unto Moses and Maximus; wherein, pennis eloquentiae se mirifice extulit. But
the style is so elaborate and unequal, that Erasmus supposes no man is of so
dull a scent, but he must needs perceive it to be far different from that of
Cyprian. He thinks it therefore to be an Essay of some one that would exercise
his pen; wherein he showed more care then, wit, and more affectation then
ability. Cardinal Baronius is very angry with him for this his censure, Ad an.
255. 37, 38.
calling him Mome; telling us that he that will prudently compare it with the
Apologetick unto Demetrian, or his Epistle unto Donatus, will easily perceive
by the same lineaments of their faces, that they proceeded from the same
Author. But the wit and wisdom of Erasmus (dictator ille rei literariae) and
his ingenuity in this kind are sufficiently known and approved of by the
Learned. Sphinx. c. 25.
And as he was able, so was he no less diligent in comparing one thing with
another, that he might the better give a right judgment: So that the cavil
might well have been spared and deserves little to be regarded, as issuing
rather from heat and interest, then from candid and impartial animadversion.
The truth is, both the Cardinal and the Canon Pamelius looked on it as
advantageous and making somewhat for their market; Coci censu^^.
affording them a considerable authority for the Doctrines of Purgatory and the
Invocation of Saints* who therefore strain hard and would fain persuade us that
it is Cyprians; Rivet. Crit. Sac.
though they be levissima argumenta, very trivial and slender arguments,
whereby they endeavor to make it appear so to be.

4. Unto Novatian the Heretic: that hope of pardon ought not to be denied unto
the Lapsi, such as fell in time of persecution: which, In Annotat.
says Erasmus, the style will not suffer us to believe that it is Cyprians:
But withal, it is so Eloquent and Learned, that he judges it not altogether
unworthy of Cyprian; In Margin.
yet rather thinks, that Cornelius Bishop of Rome wrote it: which conjecture he
grounds upon the words of Ierom; In Catalog. Cornelius.
whom herein Honorius Augustodunensis follows and explains: De script. Eccles.
saying, Cornelius wrote a very large Epistle unto Novatian and Fabius.

5. Of the Cardinal or Principal works of Christ, unto his ascension unto the
Father: which, besides the Preface, consists of twelve Chapters or Sermons:

1. Of the Nativity of Christ.

2. Of his Circumcision.

3. Of the Star and Wisemen.

4. Of the Baptism of Christ, and manifestation of the Trinity.

5. Of his Fasting and Temptations.

6. Of the Lords Supper, and first institution of the (Sacrament) consummating
all Sacraments; Goulart. in animadvers.
wherein is comprehended the sense and consent of Orthodox Antiquity, and the
Catholic Church concerning the Lords Supper.

7. Of washing the Disciples feet.

8. Of Anointing with Oil and other Sacraments.

9. Of the passion of Christ.

10. Of his Resurrection.

11. Of his Ascension.

12. Of the Holy Ghost.

All these are urged as the authority of Cyprian by diverse Romish Champions for
the maintenance of many of their unsound Doctrines; Coci Censur. James Bastardy
of the Fathers.
though it be doubted of by themselves for sundry weighty reasons; among the
rest these following,

1. The style is lower than Cyprian's uses to be. Bellar. de script. Eccl.
Possevin. in apparat.


2. The Author ( in sermon. de tentatione) s^ith that the Devil fell from Heaven
before the creation of man, Pamel. in apparat. Pamel. in annotat. in praefat.
contrary unto the opinion of Cyprian, in his Treatise de telo and invidia.

3. In the Preface he gives unto Cornelius Bishop of Rome, the Title of
sublimitas ve^ra, your Highness: whereas Cyprian always styles him brother and
Colleague.

The style, says Erasmus, argues it to be none of Cyprian's, though it be the
work of some learned man, whereof that age had store. Exercitat. 16. 29. De
amiss. great. lib. 6. cap. 2.
Non Cypriani quidem (inquit Casaubonus) sed non indignus Cypriano. And
Bellarmin himself elsewhere affirms, that the author of these Sermons, without
doubt, lived long since Cyprian, yea, after the time of Augustine; and taxes
the boldness of him that first put Cornelius his name in the fore front of this
Book. But in a very ancient Manuscript in the Library of All Souls College in
Oxford, James B^stardy^ of the Fathers.
the Author is called Arnaldus B^na^illacensis, who lived in the time of
Bernard, unto whom he has written one or two Epistles; and the Book is
dedicated, not unto Cornelius, who lived about the year of Christ, 220. but
unto Adrian the Fourth, who lived about the year, 1154. and succeeded Eugenius
the Third, unto whom Bernard wrote his Book of Consideration. Answ. to the
Jesuits challenge.
Also that Learned Antiquary the Reverend Usher says, he has seen besides the
abovenamed, another Manuscript in the public Library at Oxford, Arnald^s
Carnotensis Abbas bonae vallis.
wherein this Book bears the name of the said Arnaldus, as the author thereof.
Taking it then for granted, that it is none of Cyprian's, let us give it its
due in the words of Scultetus, It is a Book full of Religious Piety, In Medull.
and of great use to Preachers: for they are popular declamations which do
breath affections stirred up by the spirit of God.

6. Of Dicers, which Game he proves by many arguments to be unworthy of a
Christian, especially an Ecclesiastical man. Rivet. crit. sac.
But it certainly appears to be none of his by the style, and seems to be
written in the corrupter times of the Church. De script. Eccles. in annotat.
Bellarmin and Pamelius speak doubtfully of it; the former supposing it rather
to be written by some one of the Bishops of Rome, as plainly appears from the
Author's assuming unto himself the Presidentship of the universal Church, and
to be Christ's Vicar, which indeed none ever dared to do, but that proud
Prelate of Rome.

7. Of the Mountains Sina and Sion, against the Jews, being a mystical
interpretation of them; De script. Eccles. in annotat.
the style shows it to be none of his, Pamel. in argument.
as both Bellarmin and Pamelius confess, yea, it is altogether different both
from the style, and also the Genius of Cyprian, and is stuffed with such
allegories and expositions of Scripture as are far from the Learning, Piety and
Simplicity of this Blessed Martyr.

8. As for those Poems, viz. Genesis, Sodo^^, and ad Senatorem, Pamelius has
adjudged them rather unto Tertullian, because of the style, Pamel. in Tertull.
and because Cyprian was never ranked among the Christian Poets, but only by
Fabricius (he might have added Gyraldus) so that he leaves the matter doubtful:
And, says Bellarmin, De script. Eccles.
we have no certain ground whence to conclude it. So also for the Hymn de
Pascha, in many Manuscripts it is ascribed unto Victorinus Pictaviensis: Rivet.
crit. ^ic. De script. Eccles. De Poet. Hist.
But, says Bellar^in of them, Opera sunt gravia and docta, and S. Cyprian^
digna. To which I add the Verses de Sanctae Crucis ligno, which Lilius Gyrald^s
ascribes unto Cyprian, being sixty nine Heroicks in number, Quos, inquit, ego
legi: and si semel legatis, iterum and saepe legetis. But as I find them no
where else mentioned as Cyprian's; so I conceive Pamelius would not have failed
to rank them among the rest, had he seen but the least probability why he might
have eutituled them unto Cyprian.

9. Those two Prayers, one for the Martyrs, the other made use of by himself
(as is pretended) on the day of his suffering, have the like censure from
Bellarmine that the Po^^s had, De script. Eccles.
who leaves them altogether uncertain.

10. Of the single life of the Clergy, and that they ought to abstain from the
company of women. In annotat. In praefat. ante Tom. 3. operum Cypr. and in
annotat.
The work is not Cyprian's (as the many barbarous words to be found in it, and
the phrase do plainly show) as Erasmus conceives, to whose censure Pamelius
subscribes, who thinks it rather to be Origen's, being induced hereunto by some
authorities, ( Vincentius Bellovacensis in speculo Hist. lib. 11. cap. 15.
mentions a Book of Origen's, which he calls Liber pulcherrimus de singularitate
clerieorum. Also Laziardus Caelestinus in Epitom. Hist. universal. ^aec babet:
fertur Originem codicem de singularitate clericorum composuisse) by his
mentioning without dislike those who make themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of
God, and by diverse Grecisms here and there to be found in it. Ad an. 253. 45.
crit. sac. Prideaux. in orat. de Pseudepigraph. In annotat.
But, says Bellarmine the style is against this, which shows it to be the work
not of a Greek but some Latin Author. Baronius supposes it to be Cyprian's,
though upon weak and slender grounds, as Rivet shows. Liber de singularitate
Clericorum, Originem, Cyprianum, De script. Eccles.
Augustinum praefert autores. It is therefore very uncertain whose it is; But,
says Erasmus, whoever were the author of it, it cannot be denied that he was a
learned and eloquent man: And without doubt, says Bellarmine, very ancient.

11. An exposition of the Apostles Creed, which (though it be inserted among
the works of Cyprian) yet is it generally conceived to belong unto Ruffinus a
Presbyter of Aquileia, Bellarm. de script. In catalog.
as appears both by the phrase, and also by the authority of Gennadius, who
styles him not the least part of the Doctors of the Church, and of an elegant
wit to translate out of Greek into Latin: And, says he, in this exposition,
he through the Grace of God so far excelled, (...)
that others in comparison of of him can scarce be said to have expounded it.
Pam^lius therefore entitles it unto Ruffine, as the true author thereof, and
not Cyprian; whose, that it is not, it is evident from the mention therein made
of the Heresies of Arius, the Manichees, Samosatenus, Eunomius, who all lived
after the time of Cyprian. Yet by the consent of all it is a learned piece, In
annotat.
and most worthy to be read; but herein blamed by Pamelius, because it denies
the Books of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Tobit, Judith and the Maccabees to be of
authority for the confirmation of the faith; but for what cause is obvious
enough. Pamel. in argument. Bellar. de. script. Eccles.


12. Of the incredulity of the Jews, unto Vigilius: it is none of Cyprians, but
rather the preface of one Celsus upon the altercation between one Jason a
Christian, and Paviscus a Jew of Alexandria: Goulart. in annotat.
and indeed in the close of it, the author so styles himself: In mente, inquit,
(...) habe puerum tuum Celsum. A confused piece it is, Pamel. in a^ment.
Bellar. de script.
no way suitable unto the piety or learning of Cyprian.

13. Against the Jews who persecuted our Lord Jesus Christ, written by an
uncertain author, the style discovering it not to be Cyprian's. Pamel. in
argument. Erasm. in annotat.


14. Of the Revelation of the head of John the Baptist, Helvic. chron.
and the translation of it into France under Pipin the Son of Charles Mar^ell.
who lived about the year 750. by which it appears as clear as the Sun to be
none of Cyprian's, Scultet. in Medull. Ri^t. crit. sac.
who was some hundreds of years before this time: and they are mere fables that
are contained in it, it might well come but of the Cell of some superstitious
Monk, Bellar. de script. Eccles. Rivet. crit. sac. Coci censur.
being fabulous, superstitious and ridiculous.

15. Of a twofold Martyrdom unto Fortunatus; it is to seek of a Father; for
Cyprian's it is not, as the mention of Dioclesian, and of the Emperor's war
against the Turk, do fully evidence. In argumen.
Pamelius thinks it to be the work of some Neoterick, and not unlikely (as
Henry Grave conjectures) of Erasmus: But this is very improbable, considering
how sharp Erasmus is against those, who by counterfeiting their writings,
Rivet. crit. sac.
have so abused the Fathers: and if he would in this kind have imposed upon the
world, surely he was not so weak to let fall such passages as should so
palpably discover it to be an imposture and supposititious; we leave it
therefore as an exposed Birth. Trithem. de script.


16. Of the twelve abuses of the world: the phrase is not Cyprian's, and the
quotation of the Scriptures according to Ierom's Translation speaks it of a
later date. Coci censur.
Erasmus is of the mind that it came from some honest Laick: and Pamelius
guesseth it to have been written by one Ebrardus, or Johannes Climacus.

17. A small Tract entitled Coena: Goulart. in annotat.
so unworthy the name of Cyprian, Pamel. in argument.
that it deserves rather to bear that of a Turk than a Christian, it is so
impure and ridiculous; the author seems to have been an Italian, some profane
knave, being so well acquainted with all sorts of that Country Wine.

4. His style is such as has a certain proper and peculiar face whereby it may
be known: Epist. 48. Nec omuino nihil habet Africum Cyprianus. Eras^. in Epist.
ante opera Hilarii. In praefat. ante opera Cypr.
says Augustine, It tangs of his Country, but yet is he more plain and candid
than the rest of the Africans: And I wish, says Erasmus, that as Augustine did
exceed him in the number of the Volumes which he wrote, so that he had attained
unto, and equalled him in the elegancy of his language: Oh would he had as
happily emulated his tongue, as he ingenuously admires it! Tertulliano, inquit
Ludovicns Vives, De* trad. discipl. lib. 3. Ibid.
loquitur clarius, sed and ipse nonnunquam Afre. Time was, says Erasmus, when
I accounted Ierom for the chief among the Orthodox Writers; but when I looked a
little more narrowly into Cyprian, I was doubtful whether of the two to prefer,
they both seemed to excel: but if a true and natural kind of speaking, and that
which is more remote from a declamatory shadow, deserve the precedence; herein
Cyprian went as far beyond Ierom, as Demosthe^^s beyond Cicero; he is every
where more serious, and has less of affectation; his habit or form of speech
is such that you may perceive him to be a true Christian Bishop, and destined
unto Martyrdom: his heart burns with Evangelical Piety, and his words are
answerable; Erasm. in Epist. ante opera Chrysostom.
( Non minus fortiter quam diserte loquens) he speaks no less strongly than
eloquently; for worthyness became him more than neatness: yet is he quick
enough sometimes; as where he derides a certain Heretic that denied him to be
a Bishop: and likewise when he refutes those who deemed such not meet to be
called Christians, but Clinicks, that in perilous diseases were baptized not
only by immersion, but aspersion or sprinkling of water. For here besides that
perpetual sweetness, which as blood runs through the whole Body, he uses quips
and jests. Again, Africa sent forth many men famous for eloquence and learning;
among whom Tertul^ian and Augustine were chief; but scarcely unto any one
happened the genuine purity of the Roman Language, but only unto Cyprian. Thus
Erasmus, Like a pure fountain he flows sweetly and smoothly; Hieronym. Epist.
^3. ad Pa^linum.
and withal he is so plain and open (which is the chief virtue of speech) that
you cannot discern, Lib. 5. cap. 1. institut.
says Lactantius, whether any one were more comely in speaking, or more facil
in explicating, In Hymn. de pass. Cypr.
or more powerful in persuading. Prudentius also in this regard thus extols
him: O nive candidius linguae genus! O novum saporem!
Vt liquor Ambrosius cor mitigat, imbuit palatum,
Sedem animae penetrat, mentem fovet, and pererrat artus?


His phrase is most elegant (says Sixtus Senensis) and next unto Ciceronian
Candor. Biblioth. sanct. lib. 4. E^cyclop. Hist.
And in the judgment of Alsted, as Lactantius may be truly accounted the
Christian's Cicero; so may Cyprian their Caesar; for these two among the
Latins added ornament unto Christian Doctrine. Now Caesar, says Vives, De
trad. discipline. lib. 3.
is egregiously useful for daily speech, unto whom Tully gives the praise of a
pure and uncorrupted dialect: Quintilian of elegancy, whom he peculiarly
studied: and Mr. Ascham in that learned and grave discourse which he calls his
Schoolmaster, judges that in Caesar's Commentaries (which are to be read with
all curiosity) without all exception to be made either by friend or foe, is
seen the unspotted propriety of the Latin Tongue, even when it was in (...),
at the highest pitch of all perfectness: yet is his phrase various: sometimes
he soars aloft, and is very copious with abundance of words: Baron. adan. 255.
37. August. de doct. Christ. lib. 4. cap. 21.
as in his Epistle unto Donatus: another time he falls as low, as in his
Epistle unto Caecilius, of the Sacrament of the Lord's Cup: but most commonly
he is temperate, and keeps the middle way between these extremes, as in his
Treatise of the Habit of Virgins. De stud. Theolog.
In a word, he was, says Hyperius, plain, vehement, serious, and not unhappily
fluent; his words breathing a venerable elegancy, Scultet. in Medull.
as the things which he wrote did piety and martyrdom: whereof I now proceed to
give a taste.

5. In his Treatise of the vanity of Idols, 6, 7, 8.
we have a sum of his Faith, which Froben in his Index affixed unto the edition
of Erasmus, styles the most elegant Creed or Symbol of Cyprian: containing the
Doctrines of Christ, his Deity, Incarnation, Miracles, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension and second coming. His words are these,

Indulgentiae Dei, gratiae, disciplinaeque arbiter and magister sermo and
filius Dei mittitur, qui per Prophetas omnes retro illuminator and doctor
humani generis praedicabatur. Hic est virtus Dei, hic ratio, hic sapientia ejus
and gloria, hic in Virginem illabitur: carnem, Spiritu Sancto cooperante,
induitur; Deus cum homine miscetur; hic Deus noster, hic Christus est, qui
mediator duorum, hominem induit, quem perducat ad Patrem; quod homo est,
Christus esse voluit, ut and homo possit esse quod Christus est -- Cum Christus
Jesus secundum a Prophetis ante praedicta, verbo and vocis imperio daemonia de
hominibus excuteret, leprosos purgaret, illuminaret caecos, claudis gressum
daret, mortuos rursus animaret, cogeret sibi element a famulari, servire
ventos, maria obedire, inferos cedere; Iud^ei qui illum crediderant hominem
tontum, de humilitate carnis and corporis; existimabant magum de licentia
potestatis. Hunc Magistri eorum atque primores, hoc est, quos and doctrina illa
ille and sapientia revincebat, accensi ira and indignatione provocati, postremo
detentum Pontio Pilato, qui tunc ex part Romana Syriam procura^at,
tradiderunt, crucem ejus and mortem suffragiis violentis ac pertinacibus
flagitantes -- Crucifix^s, prevento carnis officio, spiritum sponte dimisit,
and die tertio rursus a mortuis sponte surrexit. Apparuit discipulis talis ut
fuerat, agnoscendum se videntibus praebuit, simul junctus and substantiae
corporalis firmitate conspicuus ad dies quadraginta remoratus est, ut d^ vel ab
eo ad praecepta vitalia instrui possent, and discerent que docerent. Tunc in
Coelum circumfusa nube sublatus est, ut hominem quem dilexit, quem induit, quem
a morte protexit, ad patrem victor imponeret; jam venturos and e Coelo ad
poenam Diaboli, and ad censuram generis humani, ultoris vigore, and judicis
potestate.

2. Concerning the Article of Christ's descent into Hell, 2^.
the Author of the Exposition of the Apostles Creed, thus speaks, We are, says
he, verily to know that it is not to be found in the Creed of the Roman Church,
neither in the Oriental Churches; yet the force of the words seems to be the
same with those wherein he is said to be buried.

3. Of the Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, the same Author of the
Exposition of the Apostles Creed, having enumerated the same Books that we do:
These, says he, are they which the Fathers concluded within the Canon, out of
which they would have the assertions of our Faith to consist: But we are to
know further, that there are other Books which our Predecessors called not
Canonical, but Ecclesiastical, as the Books of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Toby,
Judith and Maccabees, all which they would indeed have to be read in the
Churches, but yet not to be produced for the confirmation of the Faith.

4. Of how little esteem custom ought to be, 12. Epist. 74. Pompeio.
if not founded upon truth, he pithily shows in that short sentence; Consuetudo
sine veritate, vetustas erroris est: Custom without truth is but moldy error.
In vain therefore, says he, Epist. 53. 11 ad Jubaianum.
do some that are overcome by reason, oppose or object custom unto us, as if
custom were greater than truth; or that in Spirituals were not to be followed,
which for the better has been revealed by the Holy Ghost. Again, if Christ
alone must be heard, as Matthew. 17. 5. we ought not to heed what another before
us thought fit to be done, Epist. 63. 11. Caecilio.
but what Christ, who is before all, first did. Neither ought we to follow the
custom of man, but the truth of God.

5. He understands by Tradition, nothing but that which is delivered in the
Scripture: Let nothing be innovated, says Stephen unto him, Epist. 74. 2.
Pompeio.
but what is delivered. He replyeth, whence is this Tradition? whether does it
descend from the authority of the Lord, and the Gospel, or does it come from
the Apostles Commands and Epistles: for those things are to be done, that are
Written: -- If therefore this (speaking of the Rebaptization of Heretics, or
receiving them into the Church only by imposition of hands, which later was
Stephens opinion against Cyprian) be either commanded in the Evangelists, or
contained in the Epistles or Acts of the Apostles, let it be observed as a
Divine and Holy Tradition.

6. That the Baptism of children was then received and practiced in the Church;
and that performed by aspersion, as valid as that by immersion. This, says he,
was our sentence in the Council, Epist. 59. 4. ad Fidum.
that none ought by us to be kept back from baptism, and the grace of God, who
is merciful unto all. Now seeing this ought to be retained and observed toward
all, then we think it is much more to be observed about even Infants and such
as are newly born. -- Neither ought it to move any one that the sick are
sprinkled or have water poured on them, seeing they obtain grace of the Lord.
-- it appears therefore that sprinkling also obtains even as the Salutary
Laver: and when these things are done in the Church, where the faith both of
the giver and receiver is sound, all things may stand, be consummated and
perfected, with or by the Majesty of the Lord and truth of Faith. Concerning
which opinion of his Augustine thus speaks; Epist. 28. Hieronymo.
Beatus Cyprianus non aliquod decretum condens novum, sed Ecclesiae fidem
firmis^imam servans, ad corrigendum eos qui putabant ante octavum diem
nativitatis non esse parvulum baptizandum, non carnem, fed ^^imam dixit non
esse perdendam, and mox natum ^ite baptizari posse, cum suis quibusdam
coepiscopis censuit.

7. That Devils were cast out in his time. 12. ite^. de vanit. idol.
Be ashamed (says he unto Demetrian) to worship those Gods, 4.
whom thou thy self must defend. -- Oh, that thou would but hear and see
them, when they are adjured by us, and tortured with Spiritual scourges, and by
the torments of words are cast out of possessed bodies, when wailing and
groaning with humane voice and by Divine Power feeling whips and stripes, they
confess the judgment to come. Come and know the things we say to be true --
thou shall see us to be entreated by them whom thou intreatest, to be feared by
those whom thou adorest: thou shall see them stand bound under our hand, and
being captives to tremble whom thou do honor and reverence as Lords.
Certainly even thus may thou be confounded in these thine errors, when thou
shall behold and hear thy gods at our demand forthwith to bewray what they are,
and although you be present, not to be able to conceal their sleights and
fallacies.

8. The various operations of the three persons in the Trinity, Tract. de bapt.
Christi. 6.
are thus elegantly described in the book of the Cardinal works of Christ. In
this School of Divine Mastership, it is the Father that does teach and
instruct; the Son that does reveal and open the hidden things of God; the holy
Spirit that does replenish and endue us. From the Father we receive Power from
the Son Wisdom, from the holy Spirit Innocence. By the Father is given us
eternity, by the Son conformity unto his image; by the holy Spirit integrity
and liberty; In the Father we are, in the Son we live, in the holy Spirit we
move and go forward.

9. Of inadvertency in Prayer; Tract. de orat. Dom. 22.
what slothfulness is it, says he, to be alienated and drawn away with foolish
and profane thoughts, when thou art praying unto the Lord? as if there were
some other things that thou ought to think on, then that thou art speaking
with God. How do thou desire to be heard of God, when thou hear not thy
self? will thou have the Lord to be mindful of thee when thou prayest seeing
thou art not mindful of thy self? this is, not wholly to beware of the enemy;
this is, when thou prayest unto God, to offend with the negligence of prayer
the Majesty of God; this is, to watch with the eyes, and sleep with the heart;
whereas a Christian ought, even when he sleeps with his eyes, to have his heart
waking.

10. He does most Rhetorically upbraid the slothfulness and sterility of the
Lords people, Tract. de eleemosyn. 19, 20.
by bringing in Satan with his sons of perdition, thus speaking; I, for those,
O Christ whom thou see with me, have neither received blows, nor sustained
stripes, nor born the cross, nor redeemed my family with the price of my
passion and death; neither do I promise them the Kingdom of heaven, nor
restoring unto them immortality do I call them back again to Paradise: And yet
they prepare me gifts very precious, great and gotten with too much and long
labor, etc. Show me, O Christ, any of thine, admonished by thy precepts, and
that shall receive for earthly heavenly things, who bring thee such gifts: --
By these My terrene and fading gifts (he means the Ethnic Spectacles) no man
is fed, none clothed, none sustained by the comfort of any meat or drink; all
perish in the prodigal and foolish vanity of deceiving pleasures, between the
madness of him that sets them forth, and the error of the beholders, -- thou
promisest eternal life to those that work, and yet unto mine that perish, thine
are scarce equal, who are honored by thee with Divine and Celestial rewards.
Oh; my dear brethren, what shall we answer unto these things?

11. Of Admission into the Church, thus. We (says he) that must render an
account unto the Lord, Epist. ad Cornel. 55. 17.
do anxiously weigh and sollicitously examine; those who are to be received and
admitted into the Church: For some there are, whose crimes do so stand in the
way, or whom the brethren do so stiffly and firmly oppose, that they cannot at
all be received without the scandal and danger of many. For neither are some
rotten shells so to be gathered, as that those who are whole and sound should
be wounded; nor is he a profitable and advised Pastor who so mingles diseased
and infected sheep with the flock, as to contaminate the whole flock by the
afflictation ( afflictatione) of evil cohering: Oh, if you could (dear brother)
be present here with us when these crooked and perverse ones return from
schism, you should see what ado I have to persuade our brethren to patience,
that laying asleep or suppressing the grief of their mind, they would consent
unto the receiving and curing of those evil ones. For as they rejoice and are
glad, when such as are tolerable and less culpable do return; so on the other
side they murmur and strive, as often as such as are incorrigible and froward,
and defiled either with adulteries or sacrifices (and after these things yet
over and above proved) do so return unto the Church, that they corrupt good
dispositions within: I scarce persuade, yet extort from the common sort, to
suffer such to be admitted: and the grief of the fraternity is made the more
just, because that one or other of those (who though the people did withstand
and contradict, yet were through my facility received) became worse then they
were before, nor could keep the promise of repentance, because they came not
with true repentance.

12. That the people had at that time a voice in the election of their Bishop
or Pastor, even in Rome it self plainly appears in the case of Cornelius so
chosen; yea that it was the use every where, is evident, by these words of his:
Epist. 68. 6
That (says he) is to be held and observed diligently from Divine Tradition
and Apostolical observation, which is held with us also, and almost through all
provinces; that to the right celebrating of ordinations, the Bishops of the
same province next unto that people over whom the Chief Officer is ordained, do
convene or meet together; and that the Bishop be chosen in the presence of the
people, who most fully know the life and conversation of every one. Again, 4.
the people obeying the Lords Commands and fearing God, ought to separate
themselves from a sinful overseer, nor to mingle themselves with the sacrifices
of a sacrilegious Priest; seeing they chiefly have the power either of choosing
such as are worthy, or refusing the unworthy. Which very thing we see to
descend from Divine Authority. And else where, speaking of Cornelius, and of
his great modesty and humility when called unto the Office of a Bishop; he has
these words worth our notice; Epist. 52. Anton.. 4.
Non, inquit, ut quidam vim fecit ut Episcopus fieret; sed ipse vim passus est,
ut Episcopatum coactus ^^ciperet. Et factus est Episcopus a plurimis (...)
nostris, qui tunc in urbe Roma aderant, (...) ad nos literas honorificas, and
laudabiles, and testimonio suae praedicationis illustres, de ejus ordinatione
miserunt. Factus est autem Cornelius Episcopus de Dei and Christi ejus judicio,
de Clericorum pene omnium testimonio, (...) plebis, quae tunc affuit,
suffragio, and de sacerdotum antiquorum and bonorum virorum c^llegi^.

13. Of the interest of the people in the management of the affairs of the
Church, Epist. 6. 5. ad Presbyteros and Diaco^os.
thus he. I determined, says he, from the very beginning of my Bishopric, to
do nothing by my private sentence, without your counsel, and the consent of my
people: but when, by the grace of God, I shall come unto you, we will then
handle in common those things which either have been done, or are to be done,
as mutual honor requires. Again, to the same purpose: This agrees with the
modesty, and discipline, and the very life of us all, Ep. 14. 2.
that (many Bishops meeting together in one, the people also being present,
unto whom even unto them honor is to be given for their faith and fear.) We
should dispose of all things with the Religious care of Common Counsel.

14. Of the Original and rise of Heresies, Epist. ad Pupianu^. 69. 4.
thus; Thence Schisms and Heresies have, and do arise, when the Bishop (who is
one and set over the Church) is by the proud presumption of some contemned,
and, a man honored with the dignity of God, is by men judged unworthy. An
Exposition hereof, See in the hist. of the Council of Trent. l. 2.
By one Bishop, that he means one Bishoply Office ( unus Episcopatus)
appertaining alike unto all rightly called thereunto, appears from. Epist. ad
Antonianum. 55. 16. and tract. de unitate Ecclesiae. 4.

6. These and many the like excellent passages are to be found in the writings
of this eminent Father; Yet was not the beautiful face even of this man without
its blemishes; though they were fewer then are to be observed in most of the
Ancients; and, those that were, for the most part so small, that they may not
unfitly be called rather freckles and morphew that do detract but little from
his great worth. Such as were some hard expressions that fell from his pen;
either through in advertency and want of caution; or because they were in those
times commonly made use of, perhaps harmlesly then, but abused in after ages by
those, who (to palliate their errors with a show and pretense of Antiquity)
strained them higher, and wrested them to another sense, then the innocent
Authors intended in them.

Of this kind are the following instances.

1. Concerning free will; Ep. ad Corneliu^. 55. ^ Test. ad Quirin. l. 3. 5^.
Ep. 7^. 5.
which in diverse places he seems to assert: he some other where seemingly
crossing himself, speaks the contrary. e. g. God, says he, remunerates with
the reward of paternal piety, whatsoever he himself has performed, and honors
that which he himself has wrought in us. Ep. 2. 2.
Again, it is of God, I say, it is of God, (says he) all that we can: thence we
live, thence we have our strength.

2. He ascribes too much unto good works, Tract. de Eleemosyn. 1.
particularly unto alms; by which, he says, the defilement contracted after
baptism, is washed away; but that the sins preceding conversion are purged by
the blood of Christ. Which yet he may be conceived to have uttered in a
declamatory way: Goulart. in notis. n. 3.
and is to be understood here (and throughout this whole treatise) of works as
conjoined with or accompanying Faith.

3. He attributes remession of sins to our satisfaction, Tract. de lapsis. 1^*
wherewith, says he, God is to be appeased: but of this a tolerable
interpretation may be made; the word satisfaction being* Catachrestically
taken, for the repentance and confession of the Lapsi, wherewith the Church was
satisfied, Goulart. in n^tis. n. 6^.
whereupon they were again admitted unto communion. And that they might the
more commend unto men those Ecclesiastical Rites; Chemnit. examen. part.
secund. cap. 10.
the Ancients by little and little in their exhortations unto the people, began
to speak hyperbolically of them, as, that pardon of sin and reconciliation were
this way obtained: upon which ground, those passages of satisfaction and alms,
fell inconsiderately (says Chemnitius) from the pen of Cyprian.

4. He too eagerly and even superstitiously urges the mixture of water with
wine in the Eucharist, Epist. 63.
because water and blood came out of the side of Christ; Chem^i^. in exam.
part. secund. c. 9.
True it is, that in the primitive times, the custom was in many Churches (that
they might Celebrate the Lords Supper with the greater sobriety) to temper the
wine with water: at length some went so far (so did the Aquarii, who had thence
their name, quod aquam offerunt in poculo Sacramenti) as to make use of water
only, August. de haeres. c. 64.
whom here Cyprian justly reprehends; though yet he urges the mixture of both
too vehemently and upon too slender grounds. Had he left it as a thing
indifferent and not pressed it as necessary (for which Chemnitius justly blames
the Council of Trent) it needed not to have been ranked among his errors. Ubi
supra.


5. He seems to allow of the admission of Infants or those not come to years of
discretion, Tract. de ^apsis 20.
unto the Lords Supper; (its like to have been the common error of that time)
as appears by the story he relates of a young Girl, who had been partaker of
the Idol Sacrifices: Afterward coming with her mother unto the Christian
Assembly, puella mixta cum sanctis ( to give you his own words) precis nostrae
and orationis impatiens, nunc ploratu concuti, nunc mentis astu coepit
fluctuabunda jactari, and velut tortore cogente, quibus poterat indi^iis,
conscientiam facti in simplicibus adhuc anuis (facinus enim commissum tam loqui
and indicare non potuit, quam nec intelligere prius potuit, nec arcere) rudis
anima fatebatur. Vbi vero solennibus adimpletis, cali^em diaconus offerre
praesentibus coepit, and accipientibus caeteris locus ejus advenit; faciem suam
parvula instinctu Divinae Majestatis avertere, os labiis obturautibus premere,
calicem recusare. Perstitit ^^men Diaconus, and reluctanti licet, de Sacramento
calicis infudit. Tunc sequitur singul^^^ and vomitus. In corpore and ore
violato Eucharistia permanere non potuit. Sanctificatus in domini sanguine
potus, and de polutis visceribus erupit; tanta est potestas Domini, tanta
Majest^s. The necessity of this and the other Sacrament he seems to conclude
from. John 3. 5. Except a man be ^orn of water and the spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God; And, Ad Q^irin. l. 3. 25.
John 6. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son if man and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you.

6. But the greatest error to be noted in him, (which yet, oh how small, in
comparison of some in many other of the ancients) was that about rebaptization,
In orat. de lect. pa^ru^ ante loc. com.
by Chemnitius too harshly called a fundamental error: Ha (...), inquit,
errorem in fundamento. His judgment was this, that those who having been
baptized by Heretics, did forsake their Heresies, and return unto the Church,
were to be received by Baptism. In this opinion many Bishops, Bin. Tom. 1.
council.
not of Africa only, but of Asia also, consented with him: about which, there
having been three Councils convened at Carthage; in the third (wherein Cyprian
was President) it was agreed in the affirmative, upon this ground chiefly,
because they thought the Baptism of Heretics to be a nullity.

Great was the contest between the African and Western Churches about this
controversy: Epist. ad Pompeium contra Steph. Epist. 74. 1.
these latter holding with the Bishop of Rome, that Heretics returning unto
the Church, were to be received only by prayer and imposition of hands: wherein
they are to be conceived no less erroneous than the former; for that they
allowed the Baptism of all sorts of Heretics, Bin. council. tom. 1. ca^. 19.
without making any distinction between them: whereas, not long after in the
Council of Nice, if any one fly unto the Catholic Church from the Paulianists
(meaning the Samosatenians, Hieronym. advers. Lucifer. dialog. August. de
Haeres. cap. 44.
called by either name from the Author Paulus Samosatenus) and Cataphrygians,
it is ordained or decreed that they ought altogether to be rebaptized. The
reason was, because these Heretics holding Christ to be none other than a mere
man, they baptized not in the name of Christ; and so the substance and true
form of Baptism not being retained by them, it was adjudged to be no Baptism.
And indeed whoever is baptized by such an Heretic as openly denies the Holy
Trinity, ought to be rebaptized: Osian. Epist. cent. 3. l. b. 2. cap. 13.
so that it was the error of Stephen, and those who joined with him, that they
excepted not such Heretics as these; as Cyprian erred in excepting none.

But Stephen, though he were little less erroneous than Cyprian herein, yet did
he differ much in his disposition and carriage: Epist Firmil. ad Cypr. 75. 21.
for according unto his hot and choleric temper, he declared publicly against
Firmilian Bishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia (of Cyprian's opinion) and
excommunicated all those that dissented from himself. Contrariwise, Cyprian
discovering herein the mildness of his spirit, thus bespeaks his colleagues in
the Council of Carthage: (Ierom in commendation of him, Advers. Luciferian.
cites two passages of his to the same purpose, the one ex Epistola ad
Stephanum Episcopum Romanum: the other ex Epistola ad Iubaianum: In the former
his words are these, Qua in re, inquit, nec nos vim cuiquam facimus aut legem
damus; cum habeat in Ecclesiae administratione voluntatis suae liberum
arbitrium unusquisque praepositus, rationem actus sui Domino redditurus.) Bin.
Tom. 1. council.
It remains, says he, that we produce what each of us thinks concerning this
thing, judging no man, or removing any of another judgment from the right of
Communion: for none of us makes himself a Bishop of Bishops, or with tyrannical
terror drives his colleagues to a necessity of obeying: seeing every Bishop
has a proper judgment, according unto his own liberty and power; as, who
cannot be judged by another, seeing that he himself cannot judge another. But
we all expect the judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who only and alone has
power of preferring us in the Government of his Church, and of judging our
actions. See de (...) contra Donatist. lib. 5. cap. 17.
Oh how much is Augustine taken and delighted with the peaceableness, charity
and moderation of Cyprian herein, for which he greatly admires and commends
him. Ibid. lib. cap. 18.
And, says he, the Lord therefore did not discover this truth unto him, that
his pious humility and charity in wholsomly keeping the peace of the Church,
might be the more open and manifest, and taken notice of as a remedy, not only
by the Christians of that time, but also by posterity, etc.

Moreover, let me add (as making much to his praise) that he was not obstinate
in his error; for as he was learned and skilful to teach others, so was he
also docil and pat^ent to learn of others: Ibid lib. 2. (...). 4 (...). 4. cap.
5.
which I doubt not, says Augustine, he would have demonstrated, had he
discussed this question with holy and learned men. Yea, says he, perhaps he
did correct his error, but we know it not: for neither could all things, which
at that time were done among the Bishops, be committed to memory and writing;
nor do we know all things that were so committed. Epist. 48.
Again, we do not find, says he, that he corrected his error; yet may we
imagine not incongruously of such a man, that he did correct it, and that it
was perhaps suppressed by those who were too much delighted with this error,
and were unwilling to want so great a patronage. And this has been by some so
far charitably believed, that they have plainly affirmed so much, that he did,
being convinced by the Orthodox, renounce his error herein: so Bid, In vita
Cyprian.
quoted by Pamelius, Supplement, Bergomens. Platina in vita Lucii: Scaliger in
Elench. Ad an. 258. 51.
Trihaeres^i Nicolai Serari, cap. 31. And Baronius, who tells us that none can
justly doubt of it, seeing both the Eastern and Western Churches have always
used to celebrate the Birth Day of the Martyr Cyprian. Briefly, either he was
not, Epist. 48.
says Augustine, of the opinion that you the (Donatists) report him to have
been of, or he afterward corrected it by the rule of truth, or else he covered
this ( quasi naevum) spot as it were of his white Breast, Ubere: velo says
Doctor Gaude^. in his Suspiria Eccles. Anglican. lib. 3. c 13.
with the pap or veil of charity; while he most copiously defended the unity of
the Church increasing through the whole world, and most perseveringly detained
the bond of peace.

7. As touching his Martyrdom, Pontius in vita Cypr.
it is recorded, that upon his first entrance into Cu^ubis (the place of his
banishment) it was revealed unto him in a Vision (whereof he had diverse, Epist.
69. 8.
and attributed much unto them) that upon that same day in the year following
he should be consummate and crowned; Pamel. in vita ejus.
which accordingly fell out: For being by Galerius Maximus (who succeeded
Paternus in the Proconsulship) recalled from his banishment, Paul. Diacon. in
pass. Cyprian^. Pamel. (...) ejus
he according unto the Imperial Edict, abode a while in his own Garden; from
whence, being certified that certain Officers were sent to bring him unto Vtica
(a famous Town not far from Carthage) he withdrew for certain days, Epist. 83.
1.
by the persuasion of his dearest Friends, unto whom herein he consented, and,
as himself says, not without just cause; for that it is meet a Bishop should
in that City wherein he is set over the Lord's Church, there confess the Lord,
and so make the whole people famous by the confession of their present
Overseer: for whatsoever in that moment of Confession, the Confessor Bishop
speaks, God inspiring him, he speaks with the mouth of all. If it should be
otherwise, the honor of our so glorious a Church shall be maimed, etc. Here
therefore lying hid, we expect the coming of the Proconsul, says he, returning
unto Carthage, that we may hear what the Emperor shall command, and speak what
the Lord shall give in that hour. Accordingly there came suddenly (upon the
Ides of September) two Apparitours to bring him before the new Proconsul
Galerius; Pamel. in vi^a.
but being put off till the next day (the Lord so willing that he might dispose
of the affairs of the Church) he was brought then into the Court of Judgment,
where he received this sentence, that having been the Standard bearer of his
Sect, Pontius in vita ejus. Paul. Discon. in passion. Cypr.
and an Enemy of the gods, and one that would still be an example unto his own,
refusing to offer sacrifice, It is my pleasure, says Galerius, that he be
beheaded. Which Sentence being passed, he was led away unto a certain place
called Sexti, about four miles (six says Baronius) from the City, Ad an. 261.
22.
a great multitude following him, and crying, Let us die together with the Holy
Bishop. Being come unto the place, he submitted himself unto the stroke of the
Sword, by which his Head being severed from his Body, he changed this frail for
an eternal life, being the first of the Bishops of Carthage that sealed the
truth with his blood. Pamel. in vita.
He suffered under the Emperors Valerian and Galerius, anno Christi, 259.

The Carthaginians did so highly honor, Niceph. lib. 17. cap. 12.
and had him in such veneration, that they erected unto him a most magnificent
Temple, and kept a yearly Festival in memory of him, which from his name they
call Cypriana: as Mariners do also a certain storm that usually falls out about
the same time.

Lactantius.
1. LVcius Caelius was his name, Scultet. in Medull. cent. 4. cap. 10.
unto which his eloquence gained him the addition of Lactantius, from his milky
and smooth kind of speaking: as his Country that of Firmianus, being an Italian
by Birth, Ad an. 302. 61. in apparat. Magnin. in Geograph. in Ital. number. 15.
(not an African, as Baronius and Posseviue imagine, because he was the Scholar
of Arnobius that was so) of the Province called Picenum of old, but afterward
by the Lombards, Marchia Anconitana, from the chief Town therein, Heylin.
Geograph.
Ancona: as also Marchia Firmiana, from the strong Town Firmium, heretofore the
Head City of the Piceni, which Country is a part of the Land of the Church
under the Government of the Popes of Rome. Some do contend that he was of the
German Race; Winpeling. in Epitom. rer. German. cap. 10.
and that at this day there is a Family not obscure among the Germans, which,
bearing the name of the Firmiani, do boast themselves to be the posterity of
Lactantius: but the general consent of Authors shows this to be but a vain
conceit.

He was at first the Scholar of Arnobius, Hieronym. in catalog.
Professor of Rhetoric at Sicca in Africa; as also some time at Rome, where
Lactantius heard him, and profited much in the study of eloquence; who also
instructed him in the Christian Religion, which it seems, he had embraced
before he came into Bythinia; whither, under Di^olesian the Emperor, he was
called, unto the City of Nicomedia, wherein for some while he professed the Art
of Rhetoric, whereof he had been a learner before. But being a Latin in a
Greek City, Hieronym, in catalog.
his auditory grew thin, so that he was destitute of hearers: hereupon laying
aside the work of teaching he betook him unto his pen and fell to writing;
being provoked unto, and put upon it by a couple of impure and foul-mouthed
Philosophers, Lib. Institut. 5. c. 4.
who either of them had belched out their books, against both the Religion and
name of Christians.

He was at length in France made Tutor unto Crispus, Hieronym. in catalog.
Trithem. de script.
the son of Constantine the great (and his great friend) who committed him for
his breeding unto the c^re of Lactantius; an evident argument both of his fame
and faithfulness.

2. He was a man of great Learning, Osiand. epito. cent. (...) script. eccles.
de temp. c. 9.
(...) eruditione clarus; abundanter (...), inqui^ Trithemius: a very grave
Author, says Hospinian; one notably skilled (...) the Art of Rhetoric, and in
all Philosophy; having diligently perused the writings of all sorts of Humane
Authors, Cent. 4. c. 10.
as his books do sufficiently testify in which he omitted almost ^one of any
science, or Profession, whose testimony he made not use of: and so excelled in
^loquence of speech, Scultet. in medull.
that therein he was judged to be superior even unto his Master Arnolius, who
yet was of chief note among Orators. He is for this cause often styled Orat^^
disertissimus, Chron. Ber^om.
the most eloquent and elegant Lactantius, who among the Latins especially
added Ornament unto Christian Doctrine; the very top, and most eminent of the
Latin Rhetoricians: and in Divinis Scripturis nobiliter institutus. Trithem,
de script.


His great abilities he notably improved for the public good; Possevin. in
apparat.
for though he were somewhat defective in the inward knowledge of Divine
Mysteries, and far inferior unto many others for his skill in delivering and
confirming the Doctrine of Christianity; yet was he a stout Champion for the
truth and gave good testimony of his zeal thereunto in opposing with all his
might the adversaries thereof; for which work he was excellently furnished,
having such a dexterity herein, that he easily refuted and overcame them.
Vtinam, Ep. ad Paulinum. 13.
inquit Hieronymus, tam nostra confirmare potuisset, quam facile aliena
destruxit. For observing the Christian Religion to be destitute of those that
should eloquently defend it, the opposers of it being such, I, says he,
undertook this task; being grieved with the sacrilegious writings which they
published; Instit. l. c. 4
and stirred up hereunto with their proud impiety, and conscience of the truth
it self: that so with all the strength of my wit, I might reprove the accusers
of righteousness: not that I might write against them, who might have been
confounded in few words; but that I might at once, by one assault, put to
flight all those, who every where do, or have undertaken the same work. A most
laudable enterprise, wherein as he manifested no small love unto the truth in
attempting it, so did he manage it with no less dexterity; for which he has
been deservedly famous in the Church of Christ unto this day: His challenge
that he makes of all the Heathen is remarkable. Instit. l. 5. cap. 20.
Si qua, inquit, (...) fiducia est vel in philosophia, vel in eloquentia,
arment se, ac refellant haec nostra; si possunt, congrediantur comminus, and
singul^ quaeque; discutiant. Decet cos suscipere defen^^onem Deorum suorum, ne
si nostra invaluerint, ut quotidie invalescunt, cum delubris (...), ac
ludibriis deserantur. -- Procedant in medium Pontifices, seu minores, seu
maximi flemines, augures, item reges, sacrificuli, quique; sunt sacerdotes and
antistites religionum. Convocent nos ad concionem, cohortentur nos ad
suscipiendos cultus Deorum, persuadeant multos esse, quorum numine ac
providentia regantur ^^nia, ostendant origines, and initia sacrorum, ac deorum,
quomodo sint mortalibus tradita, qui sons, quae ratio sit, explicent,
proferant, quae ^^rces in cultu, quae poena in contempta maneat, quare ab
hominibus se coli velint, quid illis, si beati sunt, humana pietas conferat.
Quae ^mnia, non asseveratione propria, (nec enim ^^let quicquam mortalis
hominis authoritas) sed divinis aliquibus testimoniis confirment, ficuti nos
facimus. -- Doccant isti hoc modo, si qua illis fiducia veritatis est,
loquantur, audeant, inquam, disputare nobiscum aliquid ejusmodi, jam profecto
ab aniculis, quas^ con^emnunt, and a pueris nostratibus error illorum ac
sultitia irridebitur, etc.

3. Of the books that he wrote, many have been devoured by time, which has
left scarce any thing of them remaining besides the names, of which I find
mentioned,

1. His Symposium or banquet, which he wrote in Africa, Hieronym. in catalog.
Cent. 4. c. 10. de script. Eccles.
while he was but a youth in the Schools; or (say the Centurists) unto the
youths of Africa: and (as Trithemius has it) in Hexameter verse.

2. (...), or his journey from Africa unto Nicomedia, Hieronym. in Catalog.
in Hexameter verse: (this shows him to have been also an excellent Poet) of
which I conceive Damasus is to be understood, Ep. 124. inter Hierony. Epist.
(if not rather of his Epistles or of both) who gives us an account of the
number and nature of them; thus: I confess unto you that those books of
Lactantius which you sent me of late, I therefore willingly do not read,
because in them many Epistles are extended unto the space of a thousand verses
or lines, See Riccard. Vincent. in notis in Cantacuzen. in Cantic.
and they do rarely dispute of our Doctrine: whence it comes to pass, both that
their length begets a loathing in the Reader, and, if any be short, they are
more fit for the Schools then for us, disputing of verse or meeter, of the
Situation of Regions or Countries, and Philosophers.

3. His book, which he Entitled Grammaticus.

4. Ad Asclepiadem, lib. 2. apud Trithemium, l. 1. Hieronym. in Catalog.


5. Of Persecution.

6. Four books of Epistles unto Probus.

7. Two books of Epistles unto Severus.

8. Two books of Epistles unto Demetrian his Auditor or Scholar.

All these Ierom reckons up in his Catalogue. In Ep. ad Gal. c. 4.
He also make mentions of the eighth book of his Epistles unto Demetrian: so
that it seems he wrote so many unto him: Unless we may suppose, that all his
Epistles were gathered into one volume, which make up the number of eight
books; whereof the two last (and so one of them, the eight) were unto Demetrian.

9. His book of Paradise, in Hexameter verse; Trith. de Script.
All these are lost and perished, none of them being now to be found.

Those that at this day are extant under his name, are these that follow, viz.

1. Seven books of Institutions, In institut. libris contra gentes scrip.
fortissime. Hierony. Ep. Par^m. 65. Cent. 4. cap. 10. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Ad an. 302. 60.
against the Gentiles, which with an high and Heroic Spirit he wrote under
Constantine the Great; for so he himself speaks; Hoc opus, inquit, nunc nominis
tui auspicio inchoabimus Constantine Imperator maxim. Baronius calls them
luculentissimos libros.

That which occasioned the writing of them was the cunning and calumniating
books, especially of two great enemies of Christianity: the one whereof,
professing himself a man of chief note among the Philosophers, wrote three
books against the Christian Name and Religion; whom Baronius supposes to be
Porphyrius, an Apostate, who at this time excelled among the Platonicks, and
set forth bitter Commentaries against the Christians; (which then no other
Philosopher did.) And therefore by Cyril not unjustly styled, the father of
Calumnies.

The other, (being of the number of the judges, and one that was the principal
Author of the persecution then raised against the Christians, in the City of
Nicomedia and whole province of Bithynia) wrote two books not against the
Christians, lest he should seem enviously to inveigh against them; but unto the
Christians, that he might be thought gently and with humanity to advise them:
which books he entitled, (...): Baronius thinks his name to be Hierocles, a
crafty fellow, concealing the wolf under the sheeps skin, that by his
fallacious title he might ensnare the Reader. To confute these, and to render
the truth oppressed with reproaches, more illustrious and shining with her own
beauty, Lactantius undertook this Noble task of Writing his seven most
excellent books of Institutions. Thus Baronius. in annal. ad an. 302. 43. ad
61. Of which in general Lactantius himself thus speaks. Quanquam, inquit,
Tertullianus candem causam plene peroraverit, in co libro, cui Apologetico
nomen est, tamen quoniam aliud est accusantibus respondere, quod in defensione
aut negatione sola positum est; aliud instituere, quod nos facimus, in quo
necesse est totius doctrine substantiam contineri; non defugi hunc laborem, ut
implerem materiam, quam Cyprian^s non executus est in ea oratione, qua
Demetrianum, sicut ipse ait, oblatrantem atque; obstrepentem veritati
redarguere conatur. Loctant. Institut. Lib. 5. cap. 4.

The several books are Entitled by these several Names:
1. Of False Religion; Scultet. ^ Medull. Lactantii institutionum libri apud
catholicos and optimos quosque; viros, praesertim sex priores, optime audierunt
semper. Bulling. de orig. error.
wherein he shows the Religion of the gods to be false: After the proem,
asserting providence, and that there is but one God, which he proves by the
testimonies and Authorities of the Prophets, Poets, Philosophers, Sibyls, and
of Apollo: also (refuting the Gentile gods and their Religion in the general,
and of the Romans in particular) he proves that they were born at a certain
time, lived most wickedly, and at length did undergo the Law of all Mortals. Of
this, and his book de opificio dei, Chytraeus thus speaks; Prima pars operis,
inquit, quae Ethnicas idolomanias and Philosophicas de deo and summo bono
opiniones taxat, De rat. stud. Theolog.
and liber de opifieio Dei in structura corporis and animo humano, eruditus and
lectu utilissimus est.

2. Of the Original of error, and that the Religion of the Gods is vain which
he evinceth by diverse arguments, showing that the causes of all errors in this
kind are these two. First, The defection of Cham and the posterity of pious
Noah, from God. Secondly, The cunning and craft of the Devil. Thirdly, Of false
Wisdom; wherein he demonstrate; the vanity of Philosophy and Philosophers,
instancing in the Epicures, Stoics, Pythagoreans and the rest, showing how
false their chief tenets and opinions be, and lastly that Philosophy is not
true wisdom.

4. Of true Wisdom; which comprehends the Doctrine of Christ, his Person, Name,
Nativity, two Natures, Miracles and Passion; and afterward he declares the
causes of Heresies to be Avarice, Pride, Ignorance of the Scripture, and
admiration of false Prophets.

5. Of Justice: that it is not to be found among the Gentiles; and that they are
deceived, who think Christians to be fools; and that their sin is great and
inexcusable; who persecute the Church pretending it to be for their good, viz.
That they may bring them unto a right mind.

6. Of true Worship: which consists in this, that the mind of the worshipper be
presented blameless unto God, discoursing at large of virtue and vice, as the
ways leading unto heaven and hell; and con^luding, that the best Sacrifices
which we can offer unto God are these two, integrity of mind, and the praise of
his name.

7. Of the Divine Reward, Lib. 7. c. 6.
and the last Judgment, the sum whereof he himself thus sets down; the world,
says he, was made, that we might be born; we are born that we may acknowledge
God the Creator of the world, and our selves; we acknowledge him, that we may
worship him; we worship him, that we may obtain immortality, as the reward of
our labors; we receive the reward of immortality, that we may for ever serve,
and be an eternal Kingdom unto the most High God our Father.

2. Of the Anger of God; some Philosophers denying it, he proves by nine
several arguments that God is angry, and answers the objections to the
contrary. In Catalog. and in comm. in Ep. ad Ephesians. c. 4.
He wrote this book unto Donatus, and it is highly commended by Ierom, who
calls it a most fair or elegant book, which he wrote in a learned and and
eloquent style.

3. Of the Workmanship of God; Scultet. in Medull.
unto Demetrian his Auditor: a learned piece and most profitable to be read. It
was written by him to this end, that by the wonderful structure of man, he
might prove the Providence of God: He therefore takes a view of, and looks into
the several members of the body, and in them shows how great the power of
Divine Providence is: withal removing the cavils of the Epicures against it:
And toward the end, discourses of the Soul for the same purpose.

4. An Epitome of his Institutions, which wants the beginning; In Ep. ante
edit. Vene^. Lact. opera.
and is clearly, says Baptista Ignatius, but a fragment: being a repetition of
the chief heads of doctrine contained in that larger work. All these, says
Bellarmine, are without controversy the works of Lactantius.

There are besides these; certain Poems that appear, and have been published
unto the world under his name; concerning which it is very questionable whether
they be his or no: seeing, that neither Ierom nor Trithemius take any notice of
them, nor did Thomasius is he tells us, find them in any Ancient* Copies. In
Schol. in Lactant.
The Titles of them are these following.

1. Of the Phoenix: they are not, says Thomasius, In Schol. in Biblioth. patr.
tom. 9.
the verses of Lactantius, but written by some most elegant Poet, who yet, I
believe, says he, was not a Christian: for he calls his Phoenix the Priest of
the Sun, and speaks of Phoebus, as if he were in very deed a god.

2. Of the day of the Resurrection of the Lord; which for elegancy, is no way
comparable unto the former; Ibid.
whence it evidently appears that they are not of the same Author and
Authority. Thomasius says, that he found them in the Vaticane Library among
the works of the Christian Poet Venantius Fortunatus Bishop of Poictiers. And
whereas in the Ordinary Editions the Poem begins with this Distich, Salve festa
dies. --

By the Authority of the Vaticane copy, he places it twenty Distichs off,
immediately before that. Mobilitas anni. --

Which from his copy he amends thus, Nobilitas anni. -- and in the Pentameter,
for Stridula cuncta, he puts Stridula puncta. And out of the same copy, he adds
unto the Poem, ten verses more then are usually found, both because they very
well agree with it, and also because in the end of the Poem be these Numeral
Letters, CX. to make up which, those ten were to be added; yea, I find an
hundred and twelve verses of this Poem, in the Parisian Edition of the Poems of
Venantius. Biblio. Patr.


3. Of the Passion of the Lord; of which Poem Thomasius tells us he could no
where find any footsteps at all: Ibid.
and therefore unlikely to have Lactantius for the Author. Yea the Author both
of this and the former is very doubtful, says Bellarmine, because some do deny
them to be his; De script. Eccles.
though hereof we have no certain Argument. His verses of Christ's Passion,
says Mr. Perkins, are counterfeit, for they contradict all his true writings
in these words, Flecte genu lignumque crucis venerabile adora.

Perkins problem. For (says Illiricus, in Catalog. test. veritat. lib. 4.) He
vehemently inveigheth against Images.

4. As for the Arguments upon the several Fables of Ovids Metamorphosis,
Possevin. in appar. Chro. Bergomens.
and the Annotations upon Statius his Thebais, by Gesner and Glareanus
attributed unto Lactantius, (which they account most worthy to be read) the
diversity of the Style speaks them not to be his: Ibid.
they rather belong, says Po^sevine, unto Luctatius Placidus a Grammarian. The
Commentaries upon Thebais, De Poet. hist.
says Gregorius Gyraldus, are not of Lactantius; for in them many things
almost word for word are taken out of Servius the Grammarian, who lived more
then an age after Firmianus: they are the work of one Placidus Lactantius, or
(as some Learned men call him) Placidus Lutatius: thus he.

4. His style is so accurate and polite, that he excelled all those of his
time, In Chron. ad an. 322.
( vit omnium, inquit Eusebius, suo tempore eloquentissimus) and has justly
merited the name of the Christian Cicero; Alsted. encyclop. hist. Trithem.
descript.
coming nearest of any unto that Prince of Orators, in whom chiefly, the Latin
Tongue was fully ripe and grown unto the highest pitch of all perfection. Ierom
therefore styles him a certain River as it were of Tullian, Ascham. Schoolmr.
l. ^ In Ep. ad Paulin. 13. Ep. ad Magnum. 84. In elect. in l. 2. Arnob. in
praefat.
eloquence: and he that shall Read his works, says he, will find in them an
Epitome of Cicero's Dialogues. And as he followed his Master Arnobius, so did
he, says Goddeschalcus Stewchius, almost overtake him: for however Arnobius
might go before him in the strength of his arguments, and weight of things; yet
does Lactantius so recompense that in elegancy of speech, and gravity of
sentences, that it is a hard matter to know which to prefer before other: the
clearness and neatness of his Language was wonderful; Ant. Sab^lli. Ennead.
Lud. Vives. de trad. discipline. l. 3. Ante Nazianz. opera. de poet. hist.
being the most eloquent of all the Christians; his sound is plainly
Ciceronian; to whom Erasmus ascribes, faelicem facilitatem: fuit eloquentiae
Ciceronianae, inquit Gyraldus, inter Christianos praecipuus aemulator.

5. There are to be found in his writings many grave sentences and excellent
passages, that may be of great use unto the Reader; though in the Doctrine of
Christianity he come short of many others; his principal scope being the
discovery and confutation of heathenish idolatry and superstition; which he
happily performed. Non multum potest juvare lectorem, In orat. de lect. patr.
ante loc. ^6.
inquit Chemnitius, tautum enim fer^ contra Paganismum disputat. Amongst diverse
things in him not unworthy of serious observation, take these that follow.

1. Speaking unto those, who, having been accustomed unto polite Orations or
Poems, Instit. l. 6. cap. 21.
pleasing and delightful to the ear, do therefore despise, as sordid, the plain
and common language of the Scripture: says he, Cannot God the former of the
heart, speech and tongue, speak eloquently? Yea, but in his most wise
providence he would have those things to want varnish, which are Divine: that
all might understand the things which he spoke unto all.

2. Again, to the same purpose; the Sacred Scriptures, Instit. l. 3. c. 1
says he, deliver things briefly and nakedly, neither indeed was it meet to be
otherwise, as if when God would speak to men, he should assert his words with
arguments, as if he were not to be believed; but, as it became him, he spoke as
God himself, as the great judge of all things; for whom, it is not to argue, but
to pronounce what is true.

3. Of the mighty force and efficacy of the Scriptures and Christian Religion,
beyond all the Rules of Moral Philosophy, to expel vice and plant in men all
kind of virtue, he thus speaks. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 2^.
Da mihi virum, qui sit iracundus: -- Give me, says he, a man that is
wrathful, foulmouthed, unruly, with a few words of Gods book I will make him as
gentle as a Lamb; Give me one that is close fisted, covetous, greedy of money;
I will send him back unto thee liberal, bountifully distributing his money with
his own hands. Give me one that is fearful of torment and death; He shall soon
despise crosses, and fires, and Phalaris his Bull. Give me a le^her, an
adulterer, a haunter of brothel-houses; you shall see him sober, continent.
Give me one that is cruelly disposed and blood-thirsty; that fury of his shall
be changed into true clemency. Give me one who is unjust, unwise, a sinner, he
quickly shall be just, wise, upright. So great is the power of Divine Wisdom,
that being infused into the breast of a man, does at one assault expel folly,
the mother of vices. -- Has any one of the Philosophers either performed these
things, or can he, if he will? Who when they have worn out all their time in
the study of Philosophy, can make neither any other, nor themselves better, if
nature a little withstand. Therefore their wisdom when it has done its utmost,
Non excindit vitia sed ^bscondit.
does not abolish, but hide vices. Whereas a^ few precepts of God do change the
whole man, and, the old being put off, do make him new, that you cannot know
him to be the same.

4. Of the Church: thus. The Church, says he* Instit. 4. c. 13
is the true Temple of God, which consists not in walls, but in the hearts
and faith of men, who believe on him, and are called faithful or believers.

5. Again, That only is the Catholic Church, which retains the true Worship of
God. Inst. l. 4. c. 30 (...)
This is the fountain of verity, this is household of faith, this is the temple
of God, into which who so shall not enter, or from which, who so shall depart,
he is an alien from the hope of eternal life and salvation. -- And because
every company of Heretics, do think that they chiefly are Christians, and
theirs to be the Catholic Church; we are to know, that that is the true;
wherein is Religion, Confession and Repentance, which wholsomly cures the sins
and wounds unto which the frailty of the flesh is subject.

6. Of Repentance thus; He that repents of his deed, Inst. l. 6. c. 24
understands his former error: wherefore, the Greeks do better and more
significantly call it (...), then we Latins can call it Resipiscentiam. For he
repents, and, as it were, recovers his mind from madness, who grieveth for his
error, and corrects himself for his folly, and confirms his mind to live more
uprightly, being most wary of this, that he be not again drawn into the same
snares.

7. Again, The conscience of sin and fear of punishment, Inst. l. 5. c. 13
makes a man the more Religious: and always faith is by much more firm, which
repentance resettles or puts again in its place.

8. He sets down the sum of the Law, referring it unto two heads, after this
manner. The first head or chief point of the Law is to know God and to obey and
worship him alone: Or, the first duty or point of righteousness is to be in
conjunction or communion with God: the second with man: the former is called
Religion: the other is named, mercy or humanity. -- Wherefore the principal
bond of men among themselves, is humanity, the which, whosoever shall break
asunder, is to be accounted a wretch and a parricide. For if we all have our
Original from one man, whom God formed, surely, we are of kin and of the same
blood; Consangu. Act. 17. 26.
and therefore is it the greatest crime to hate a man, even an enemy: for which
cause God has commanded that we should never bear enmity toward any, but
always take it away, to wit, that we should pacify those who are enemies unto
us, Genesis 13. 8.
by admonishing them of the alliance that is between us.

9. God, says he, is not to be worshipped with offerings and much blood; Inst.
l. 6. c. 25
but with a pure mind and honest purpose. Temples are not to be builded unto
him with stones heaped together on high; but to be hallowed by every one in his
own breast. If any one think that garments and gems and other things which are
had in esteem, are dear to God, he plainly knows not what God is; who thinks
that he takes pleasure in those things, which, if even a man contemn, he shall
be justly praised. What therefore is pure, what worthy of God? but that which
he himself in his Divine Law requires. Two things there are which ought to be
offered; a gift and a sacrifice: the gift is integrity of mind; the sacrifice,
praise and thanksgiving.

10. There is no man so rude and of such barbarous manners, Inst. l. 1. c. 2.
but, when he lifts up his eyes unto heaven, albeit he know not by the
providence of what God this universe, which he beholds, is governed, yet does
he understand that there is one, by the very vastness, motion, order,
constancy, utility, beauty and temperament of thing: and that it cannot be, but
that that which consists in such an admirable manner, is guided by some
greater Counsel.

6. These and many other the like useful passages are to be found in his
writings: though yet for the chief points of Religion he handles them but very
slenderly, and not so plainly as he should: for there is not a clear sentence
concerning faith, the benefits of the Son of God, or of any other necessary
part of the Doctrine of Christianity to be met with in Lactantius throughout:
Cent. 4. c. 10
he being for the most part employed in refuting the false opinions of the
Gentiles; which is the ground of that speech of Chemnitius, In Orat. de lect.
patr. Scultet. in Medull.
that Lactantius cannot much advantage his Reader. Many points of Religion he
but touches only, and the most he understood not: so likewise speaks Chytraeus
of him; De stud. Theolog.
Doctrinam Evangelii propriam, de beneficiis Christi, and de fide parum
intellexit. Whence it comes to pass that his errors were neither few nor small;
speaking of the weightiest doctrines very unfitly and improperly; though
perhaps in some of them (as Osiander charitably conceives) he thought better,
Epitom. hist. Eccles. cent. 4. l. 1. c. 31.
and was more sound in his judgment.

His Errors were such as these.

1. Concerning God, Inst. l. 1. c. 7.
his expression is very unmeet and dangerous, viz. That God made himself, Yet
may his meaning be that God had his being of himself; for so: lib. 2. 9. it is
God alone who is not made; -- he is of himself, as we said: lib. 1. and
therefore is such as he would himself to be, viz. impassible, immutable,
incorrupt, blessed, eternal.

2. He so speaks of Christ, Cent. 4. c. 10.
say the Centuturists, that a man may well say, he never rightly understood
either the person or Office of the Son of Son of God. As where he says;

That God did produce a Spirit like himself, Inst. l. 2. c. 9.
who should be endued with the virtues of God his Father. Also, The Commands of
his Father he faithfully observed: Ibid. l. 4. 14.
for he taught, that God is one, and that he alone ought to be worshipped;
neither did he ever say that himself was God; for he should not have been
faithful, if, being sent to take away the gods, and to assert one, should have
brought in another beside (that) one. These and such like words he has, that
do not a little smell of Arianism. Indeed, he in this particular does not
express himself so warily as he ought; which has occasioned such suspicions of
him; but yet however, that in his judgment he neither denied nor doubted of the
Deity or Eternity of Christ, seems clear from diverse other places, where in so
many words he acknowledges both; as, where he calls him the word of God; and,
(inquit) merito sermo and verbum dei dicitur, Inst. l. 4. c. 8.
qui procedentem de ore suo vocalem Spiritum, quem non utero sed mente
conceperat, inexcogitabili quadam majestatis suae virtute, ad effigiem, quae
proprio sensu, ac sapientia vigeat, comprehendit, and alios item Spiritus in
angelos ^^guraverit. Also, Ibid.
if any wonder that God should be generated of God, prolatione vocis (...)
Spiritus; when once he shall know the sacred voices of the Prophet, he will
certainly cease to wonder. Again, he says, that the Jews condemned their God.
Lib. 4. c. 18.
Lastly, Sicut ^ater, Lib. 2. c. 9.
inquit, sine exemplo genuit Authorem suum; sic ineffabiliter Pater genuisse
credendus est Coaeternum. De matre natus est, qui ante jam fuit; de Patre, qui
aliquando non fuit. Hoc fides credat, intelligentia non requirat, ne ^ut non
inventum putet incredibile, aut reper^um non credat singular. If therefore in
some places he seem to deliver that which savors too much of Arius, or speak
not so clearly of Christ as he should; In Scholiis. in l. 4. c. 16. etc. 22. in
Bibli. Patr.
Thomasius, that diligent peruser of him, who compared diverse Copies together,
is of the mind, that there his books are by some Arian corrupted; giving sundry
instances herein.

3. He unadvisedly says, that Christ after his resurrection went into Galilee,
Inst. l. 4. c. 20
because he would not show himself unto the Jews, lest he should bring them
unto repentance, and save those wicked men.

4. He is silent concerning the Priestly Office of Christ, Cent. 4. c. 10.
Scult. c. 12. Chytr. de stud. Theol.
mentioning no other ends of his Incarnation or coming, and passion, but only
to reveal and make known unto men the Mysteries of Religion, and to give them
an example of virtue.

5. He knew nothing at all of the Holy Ghost; Cent. ibid.
and makes little or no mention of him in his books now extant. Or, Ep. 65. Pam.
if he knew any thing, Ierom acquaints us what his apprehensions of him were;
In his books, says he, and especially in his Epistles unto Demetrian, he
denies the substance of the holy Ghost, saying, according to the error of the
Jews, that he is referred either unto the Father, or the Son; and that the
sanctification of either person, is demonstrated under his name. So that, what
Ierom spoke of Origin, may not unfitly be applied unto him also, Ibid.
viz. that his opinion of the Son was bad, but concerning the holy Ghost was
worse.

6. He conceited, that the Angels were given unto men to be their guardians,
Inst. l. 2. c. 15
lest they should be destroyed by the Devil, unto whom at first the power of
the earth was given. And that those guardian Angel, being allured to accompany
with women were for this their sin cast down from heaven; and so of the Angels
of God, became the Ministers of the Devil.

7. Also, Inst. l. 7. c. 5.
That God created an infinite number of souls, which he afterward put into
frail and weak bodies that being in the midst between good and evil, and virtue
being propounded unto man consisting of both natures, he might not with ease
and delicacy obtain immortality, but with great difficulty and labor get the
reward of eternal life.

8. He speaks nothing of the righteousness of faith; Inst. l. 7. c. 27
but that salvation is merited by good works; Lib. de opisi. dei. c. 20.
and that if a man serve not the earth, which he ought to tread underfoot, he
shall merit everlasting life. De stud. Theolog.
Cum lib. 5. and 6. (inquit Chytraeus) orationem de justitia Christiana ex
professo instituerit, tamen de philosophies tantum sen legis justitia disputat
and justitiae ^^dei, quae Evangelii propria est, nullam fere mentionem facit.

9. Of Prayer, says he, As often as a man asks, he is to believe that he is
tempted of God, Institut. lib. 6. c. 13.
whether he be worthy to be heard: Of pardon of sin thus, that God vouchsafes
it unto them that sin ignorantly, but not unto them that sin of knowledge and
wittingly. Also that a man may be without sin, which yet he contradicts within
a few lines after.

10. He has many superstitious things concerning the virtue of the sign of the
Cross, viz. That it is terrible unto the Devils, qui adjurati per Christum, de
corporibus quae obsederint, Institut. lib. 4. c. 27.
fugiunt. Nam sicut Christus ipse Daemonas verbo fugabas, ita nunc sectatores
ejus eosdem, spiritus inquinatos de hominibus et nomine Magistri sui et signo
passionis excludunt. Cujus rei non difficilis est probatio, nam ^um diis s^is
immolant, si assistat aliquis signatam front gereus, sacra nullo modo litant,
nec responsa potest consultus reddere vates.

11. He thinks it unlawful for a righteous man to go to war, Institut. lib. 6.
c. 20.
or to accuse any one of a capital crime, because Murder is forbidden.

12. He denied that there were any Antipodes, Institut. lib. 3. c. 24.
and that with much earnestness and confidence, bestowing a whole Chapter upon
the maintenance of so evident a mistake, in showing the Original, and (as he
conceived) the absurdity of the Antipodian opinion, and confuting it: wondering
at the folly of those that held it. What shall we think, says he, of them who
give out that there are Antipodes walking opposite unto us? Do they speak any
thing to the purpose? or are there any so stupid as to believe, that there are
men whose feet are higher than their heads, or that those things there do hang
which with us do lie on the ground? That the Plants and Trees spring downward,
that the snow and rain and hail fall upward upon the earth? And need any man
marvel that hanging Gardens are accounted in the number of the seven wonders of
the world, since the Philosophers have made both Fields and Seas, Cities and
Mountains all hanging? -- What to say of these I know not, who having once
erred do constantly persist in their folly, and with vain defend vain things,
only sometimes I think that they play the Philosophers in jest, or wittingly
and knowingly undertake to defend falsehood, to exercise, as it were, and show
their wit in things that are evil. Strange ignorance that accounts so palpable
a truth so gross an error, yet herein was Lactantius outgone by Zachary Bishop
of Rome, Hakewel. Apolog. lib. 3. cap. 8. 1.
(oh the infallibility of that Chair!) who condemned one Vigilius Bishop of
Saltzburg as an heretic, only for holding that there were Antipodes.

13. That the Souls of all men are detained in one common prison, Institut.
lib. 7. c. 21.
until the coming of the great Judge.

14. He has fond conceits of the coming of a great Prophet immediately before
the end of the world, Institut. lib. 7. c. 17.
who shall convert men unto God, and work strange miracles; unto whom he
applies those passages concerning the two witnesses, mentioned in Revel. cap.
11.

15. He is a millenary, asserteth two resurrections, Institut. lib. 7. cap. 14.
and largely discourses of the reign of the Saints upon earth after the first,
for the space of a thousand years, and what should fall out during that time.
After this (says he) shall be the last judgment, in which not all shall be
judged, (the wicked being condemned already) but only those who know God, at
what time their good works shall be weighed with their bad, and if the good do
over balance the bad they shall go into life, if otherwise they shall be
condemned. A gross error and cross to plain Scriptures.

16. He thus speaks of the last judgment, Institut lib. 7. c. 21.
when (says he) the Lord shall judge the righteous, he shall prove or try them
by fire, (he seems to allude unto, 1 Cor. 3. 13.) Then they whose sins shall
prevail either in weight or number shall be burnt, but those whom righteousness
and maturity of virtue shall have fully concocted, shall not feel that fire:
For they have somewhat that repels the force of the flame, etc.

These and other the like unsound passages are scattered up and down in the
Writings of Lactantius, who is therefore to be read with much caution, ( apud
Lactantium inquit Hyperius, De rat. stud. Theolog. lib. 4.
invenies plura quae sapientem lectorem desiderant.) He made too much of
Philosophy, (as did also other of the Ancients) chiefly that of Plato, Thomas.
in Schol. in lib. 7. cap. 15. institut.
and too closely followed Origin, which was the cause why in so many things, he
swerved and wandered from the truth, and was so great a stranger unto it:
Retinuit tamen hactenus (inquit Bullingerus) suam gloriam in Ecclesia Christi.
de Orig. error. c. 29.


7. As concerning his death, I find no mention at all in History, where, or
after what manner he ended his life. That he lived unto a great Age, may be
gathered from what Ierom writes of him, In catalog.
that in his extreme old Age, he was in France, Schoolmaster unto Crispus the
Son of Constantine the Great, where therefore it is most likely he might end
his days: But withal he was reduced to such poverty and want, (which is
somewhat strange being a man of such worth and so greatly favored by that good
Emperor) that for the most part he lacked even necessaries for his
subsistence. Eusebius. chron. ad an. ^ 12.


Athanasius.
1. HE was born at Alexandria, of vetuous and godly Parents, Athanasii omnino
vita praelegenda est ab eo qui ejus scripta cum fructu cupit evolvere. Possev.
in apparat.
and their only Son: From his very Childhood he gave good evidences of his
towardliness and inclination unto piety and spiritual things. One thing
especially as very remarkable, and presaging his future dignity and employment,
is recorded by most Historians concerning him, and it is this: Socrat. lib. 1.
cap. 11.
He with his play fellows in their childish sports, imitating those things that
were done in the Church, Ruffi^. hist. lib. c. 14.
was chosen by the rest for their Bishop: Who acting his part accordingly,
baptized some of the boys, that had not been baptized before, according unto
the due form of interrogatories and answers usually preceding Baptism; giving
them afterward diverse exhortations and admonitions. All which, Alexander, then
Bishop of that place, passing by at a distance beheld, and understanding by
examining them how he had proceeded, concluded with his Presbyters, that what
was done, though in childish simplicity, was valid, and that those Children
ought not again to be baptized.

Alexander being moved herewith, and having sent for his Parents, earnestly
besought and charged them that he should be carefully trained up in piety and
learning for the service of the Church: which accordingly they diligently
performed, delivering him unto a certain Notary, Ruffin. hist. lib. 1. c. 14.
who instructed him in the Grammar: After which he spent some small time in the
study of the liberal Arts; lest he should seem to be altogether ignorant in
this regard; which having lightly tasted and passed through, he is, as another
Samuel, by his Parents according to their promise presented unto the Bishop:
With him, being taken into his care and tuition, he applies himself wholly unto
the study of divinity, most diligently perusing and meditating in the holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, by which means he became deeply
insighted into them: hereunto he added also the study of the Law, wherein he
attained unto so much skill, that Sulpitius Severus speaking of him, Sac. hist.
l. 2.
gives him the Title of Iurisconsultus or a Lawyer.

For a while he lived with the Bishop as his Amanuensis or Scribe, In Epist. ad
Epictet^^.
who afterward promoted him unto the Office of a Deacon, and from thence unto
the rest of the sacred orders; all which he passed through, behaving himself in
an admirable manner.

The Council of Nice, (so famous even unto this day, of which Athanasius thus
speaks; Nulla (inquit) est in Catholica Ecclesia synodus existimanda preter
unicam Nicaenam, quae omnium haersi^v profligatarum ac imprinius Arianae
trophaeum habenda est. In praesat. a^t. council. Sardicens.
And Binnius thus: Patrum hujus consilii autoritas erat orthodoxae fidei
clypeus, impiorum terror ac luctus, ecclesiarum nexus and quies.) This Council,
I say, being called by the Emperor Constantine the Great, Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria going thither, takes along with him young Athanasius, who was
present not only as a spectator, Ruffin, hist. lib. 1. c. 14.
but an assistant unto the Bishop, now grown aged, helping him much in refuting
the subtle Sophisms of the adversaries: wherein he gave a notable experiment
of his Learning and Piety, which much endeared him unto the Orthodox, but made
him from that time no less envyed and hated by the Arian Heretics.

Alexander survived this Council but a little while, not above the space of
five months: when he was upon his death bed, he would often call for
Athanasius, who purposely absented himself, being unwilling to undertake the
charge of that Church, which yet the old Bishop had designed him unto, using
such like words as these; Athanasius, thou think to escape, but thou shall
not: meaning hereby both the Bishopric, and also the many and great conflicts
that he should undergo: Ruffin. hist. lib. 1. c. 14.
which were such, that an Historian applies unto him those words of Christ unto
Paul; I will show him how great things be must suffer for my names sake. Act.
9. 16.


Alexander dying, Athanasius is by the general vote chosen Bishop in his room;
Possev. in apparat.
being then about four and twenty years of age, so great was his proficiency in
whatever qualifications were requisite for that Office. This his Election by an
Universal consent, is testified by the Church of Alexandria in these words. We
with the whole City and Province do testify, that the whole multitude and
people of the Catholic Church, being met together, and, as but of one body and
soul, did with clamors and cries require that Athanasius might be given us for
the Bishop of this Church; and that with public prayers they desired this of
Christ; which that we the Clergy would do, they earnestly besought us night and
day, themselves in the mean time not departing from the Church, nor permitting
us to depart. Whence it evidently appears how great the inclination of them all
was unto him, and how honorable an opinion they had of him.

He no sooner undertook this weighty charge, but forthwith he applied himself
diligently, (and made it his main work) to illustrate the truth, to assert and
vindicate the Doctrine of the Eternal Deity of the Son of God, and to reduce
those into the right way again, Nihil sibi prius a^endum rati sunt Ariani, quam
ut Athanasium Ecclesi^ submoverent, qui semper eis velut murus obstiterat, quo
re noto, reliquos in suam libidinem cessuros (...) Sever. lib. 2.
who had been led astray, In 1 Ti^. digre^^. l. 1. c. 17.
being infected with the Arian Heresy: for which reason, that faction
(conceiving that their cause could not thrive and prosper, while it had such an
adversary in so eminent a place and dignity) became his implacable enemies,
still contriving mischief against him, and endeavoring his disturbance by
multiplied calumnies, and false accusations: So that, Ejus annorum quadraginta
sex Episcopatus perpetua fuit persecutio, (inquit Espencaeus) exilium prope
irremissum, fuga frequens, and latitatio diuturna. The truth here of may be
seen in the following passages of his life.

His chief adversary was Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, who with his accomplices
many ways assailed him, as,

1. They cavilled at, and found fault with his Election, as undue; but that
came to naught.

2. They traduced him unto the Emperor Constantine the Great, as one that
caused divisions and distractions in the Church, and hindered concord: the
ground whereof was, his refusing to receive the Heretic Arius (a Presbyter of
Alexandriae) into Communion, whose return from banishment had been procured by
a certain Presbyter about the Emperor, upon his fained submission and consent
unto the Nicene faith. Hereupon the Emperor, (giving too much credit unto the
party of Eusebius) wrote menacing letters unto Athanasius, threatening to remove
him from his place in case he should persist to refuse Arius: But he by his
Letters, gave full satisfaction unto the Emperor; showing that such an Heretic
having been proscribed and justly excommunicated by so famous a Council, ought
not to be received again, but upon his repentance manifested, and by the
public consent of the pious. This not succeeding, his adversaries.

3. Proceeded to accuse him as a fomenter of sedition aiding with money one
Philumenus, who enterprised somewhat against the Emperor. But he, coming unto
Constantinople, cleared himself, and made his innocence so to appear, that the
Emperor not only acquitted him from all suspicion of the crime objected unto
him, but also honorably sent him back unto Alexandria, with letters of high
commendation. Being thus disappointed, his restless enemies ceased not to
charge him with more heinous crimes, unto which he made his answer in the Synod
of Tire consisting of sixty Bishops, who were convened for the consecration of
a Magnificent temple which the Emperor had built at Jerusalem: In notis in
conc. tom. 1.
of which Binnius thus speaks: conciliabulum (inquit) and malignantium
conventus; ad quod convocati sunt Episcopi duntaxat illi, quos Eusebius and
Eusebiani nefarii haeresiarchae advocandos persuaserunt. The Bishops being
assembled, Athanasius is

4. Accused before them, by an impudent Harlot (whom the Arians had suborned)
to have vitiated and abused her. But Timotheus, a worthy Presbyter, speaking
unto her, as if he had been Athanasius; did I ever, says he, enter into thine
house, or had any thing to do with thee? Unto whom she pointing at Timotheus
with her finger, thus replyeth with much eagerness; Thou, thou art he that have
abused me, and dispoiled me of my chastity; By which means the fraud being thus
discovered, those of the conspiracy were surprised with shame, yet not
desisting;

5. They proceed to charg him with the Murder of one Arsenius, (whom they had
conveyed away and hidden) sometime a Reader, or, as some, a Deacon in the
Church of Alexandria; producing and showing forth the arm of a man, which they
pretended to be his, and to have been cut off and kept by Athanasius for some
Magic uses. Upon the sight whereof there was a great cry among them against
Athanasius for so abominable a fact. But silence being made Athanasius
demanded, whether any one there present had known Arsenius? Unto which some
answering affirmatively he hereupon brings forth Arsenius (who had the day
before come voluntarily unto Tire, and showed himself unto Athanasius) and
presents him before the Council sound and having both his Arms: whereat the
Conspirators were so abashed and consounded, that they knew not what to say,
only they cried out, that he was a Magician, and deluded the eyes of the
beholders. Unto all which they yet add,

6. That Macarius a Presbyter of Alexandria being sent unto Mareotis to forbid
one Isehyras or Ischarion, (who usurped the Office of a Minister) to Officiate
or Administer the holy things: He by the command of Athanasius (as they
suggested) had overturned the holy Table broken the Chalice, and burned certain
Books; but the falsehood hereof was soon made apparent; for Ischyras repenting,
Bin. in notis in council. tom. 1. Socrat. hist. l. 1. c. 3.
publicly confessed that he had slandered him, being suborned by the
Meletions, and enforced so to do: (these Meleti^^s, so called from Meletius a
certain Egyptian Bishop were in this conspiracy confederates with the Arians.)
Hereat being greatly enraged, they would have offered violence unto Athanasius,
which to avoid, he went out of the Synod, and betook him unto the Emperor.
Being gone, they sentenced him, ^s guilty of the crimes laid to his charge, to
be deposed from his Bishopric; writing Letters unto the Bishops every where
not to Communicate or have any Commerce with him. The famous Confessor
Paphnutius Bishop of the upper Thebais, being now present in this Synod, and
perceiving that they purposed to proceed against Athanasius, taking Maximus
Bishop of Jerusalem by the hand; Arise, says he unto him, and let us depart
hence, for it is not meet that we who have had our eyes put out for the word of
truth, should partake with these wicked men, in their violent proceeding
against the defenders of true piety.

The Emperor understanding what had passed, was much incensed against those
Bishops, and by his Letters sharply reprehended them for what they had done,
requiring them to appear before him at Constantinople: whither being come, they
waving all former accusations, instill into the Emperors ears, another foul
slander against Athanasius, viz. That he had threatened to hinder the
transportation of corn (as was wont) from Egypt unto Constantinople: which
begat in the Emperor such indignation against the Bishop, that without hearing
he banished him into France unto the City of Triers (Galliarum metropolis,
Banished the first time.
inquit Athanasius; Treviris, ad Mosel^ae r^ipam, olim (inquie Victorius)
insignis Galliae, In Ep. ad solit. vitam agentes.
nunc Germaniae imperialis urbs) then belonging unto that Kingdom, In Schol. in
Hieronym. epist. 6.
but since unto Germany being now the seat of one of the Ecclesiastical
Electors: Hist. tripart. l. 4. c. 2. and ^than. in Ep. ad vitam solit. agent.
although some conceive, that the Emperor did this for the safety of
Athanasius, and in hope, that hereupon peace and unity among the Bishops would
ensue.

Arius upon the banishment of Athanasius, Athan. de morte Arii.
entering again into Alexandria, occasions new tumults there, which when the
Emperor understood, he sends for him unto Constantinople, requiring him by
subscription to testify his ^onsent unto the Nicen faith: this he does
^ignedly. Hereupon the Emperor requires Alexander Bishop of Constantinople, to
receive ^im into communion: Who all night long by ^arnest prayer beseeches the
Lord either to ^ake him out of this life, or else to take away (...), lest by
him this Church should be in^icted with his heresy. Arius, the next day ^oming
with a great company toward the Church, in the way turns aside to ease himself,
which while he was doing he burst asunder in the midst like another Judas, so
that ^is bowels came out, and dyed ignominiously ^n the place, whom the
Eusebians with shame enough took thence and buried him. So pre^^lent were the
prayers of the good Bishop Alexander.

Shortly after this dies the Emperor Con^^nti^e the great, leaving the Empire
unto his three Sons, viz. unto Constantius the East, and the West unto the
other two, Constans and Constantine. Before his death he had a purpose to recall
Athanasius from his banishment, Hist. tripart. lib. 4. cap. 2.
(...) being prevented he commits the doing ^ereof unto his Son Constantine,
which he accordingly performed, sending him back with Letters recommendatory
unto the Church of Alexandria, unto which he returned after he had been about
two years and four Months in exile. But he held not his government quietly
above three years, for (returning without out common consent, and the decree of
the Bishops) he was by the Arians accused unto Constantius (infected with,
Entitled by Binnius. Concilium Antiochenum primum sub Julio Papa primo,
celebratum, in quo Ariani Athanasium de posuerunt, atque Gregorium Cappadocem
substitue^nnt. council. tom. 1. anno 341.
and a great favourer of that Heresy) and thereupon by the Synod of Antioch,
(wherein the Arian faction prevailed) consisting of ninety Bishops, again
deposed and one Gregory set up in his Room.

Athanasius now finding it not safe for him to continue in Alexandria, fled
unto Julius Bishop of Rome; who assembling the Western Bishops, sends him back
with Letters testimonial, and pressing his restitution: But upon his return
unto Alexandria, He flies a second time.
a great tumult being raised by the Arians wherein some were slain, the blame
hereof is cast upon Athanasius, and this seconded with other calumnies: which
so enraged the Emperor Constantius against him, that he sent one Cyrianus a
Captain with many Soldiers to apprehend him: Withal, by his Edicts he required
all his Officers to make diligent search for him, promising rewards unto any
that should bring him alive, or else his head unto the Emperor.

Hereupon he is for^ed to hide himself; Hides the third time.
which for sometime he did in a certain Well or Cave which was known unto none,
save only to one of his familar friends, who sent him necessaries by a Servant
who at length discovered him: But Athanasius having timely notice hereof, the
same night wherein he should have been apprehended, betook him unto another
place. And flies.
Yet finding it not safe for him to remain in the dominions of Constantius, he
fled into the West unto the Emperor Constance, Quia concilium Sardicense
Nicaenae tantum fidei tutelam suscepit et quia Patrum utriusque una suit
sententia, una men's unus spiritus, semper appendix tanquam Nicaeni concilii
fuit habita.
who very honorably received him. Unto whom he makes a very sad complaint of
the injuries offered him by the Arians, earnestly desiring him that a Synod
might be called for the discussing of his cause. The Emperor harkening unto
him, obtains of his Brother that an universal Council both of the East and
Western Bishops, should be convened at Sardica in Illiricum: Of which, Binuius
thus; Concilium Sardicense, (inquit) (...) Nicaeni appendix, Binnius ib.
Praefat. antconcil. Sard.
et a multis Nicaeni nomine umprehenditur. Sculte^us styles it, pa^em Ni^enae
Synodo. Where being assembled, the Eastern Bishops required, In Medul.
that Athanasius and his sautors should he removed from the Council: Which
being denied as unjust, the Eastern Bishops withdrew, and instituted an
An^^synod at Philopolis in Thrace, wherein the decrees of the Council of Tire
against Athanasius were confirmed, the doctrine (...) concluded and agreed on,
and Julius Bishop of Rome, Hosius of Corduba, Maximinus of ^riers, and diverse
others for receiving Atha^asius unto communion, were deprived of their
Bishoprics. What was the issue of these cross Councils, appears in the
following words. Ex contrariis decretis harum Synodorum ortum est ^tron et
diuturnum Schisma inter Orientales et Occidentales Ecclesias, Angeloc^at. in
Ep. consi^.
quod ante Gratianum et Theodosium Imperatores non desiit, ita ut invicem ^^n
communicarent.

For on the contrary, the Council of Sardica, having heard Athanasius clearing
his innocence, received him unto communion, condemning his accusers: Withal
they confirmed the (...) Council, and decreed, that such as defended the
contrary thereunto, should not only be deprived of their Bishoprics, but also
excluded from the society and communion of the faithful.

Constantius, notwithstanding the decree of this Council of Sardica, for the
restitution of Athanasius unto his Bishopric, refuses to admit of him:
hereupon his Brother; the Emperor Constans writes him a short, but sharp
Letter, threatening that if he should still persist to oppose and hinder the
return of Athanasius, he himself would come with an Army, and whether he would
or no, restore him again unto his place. This so far prevailed, that
Constantius yields, and again and again invites doubtful and delaying
Athanasius to return, by diverse letters written unto him, who at length
hearkens and returns accordingly.

The Emperor meeting with him at Antioch, gently entreats and confers with
him, permitting him with safety to go unto Alexandria; withal promising to
admit of no more accusations against him, and by his Letters ^ommended him unto
the Church of Alexandria for his singular piety, Osiand. in Ep. hist. Eccles.
exhorting them with all respect to receive him: But before his departure from
him, he told him, that the Bishops desired one thing of him, namely, that he
would grant one Church in Alexandria unto those that dissented from, and could
not join in communion with him. I am content (quoth he) so to do upon this
condition, that the Arians will vouchsafe one Church unto the Orthodox in the
City of Antioch, which the Emperor inclined unto as reasonable, but the Arians
were altogether averse from it.

Athanasius, in his way to Alexandria, coming unto Jerusalem, prevails with
Maxi^^s then Bishop of that place, to call a Synod of the Bishops of the
neighboring Countries; wherein they approved of his restitution, and also by
their letters signified unto the Bishops of Egypt and Africa, their joining in
communion with him.

Coming unto Alexandria, he is received with exceeding great joy and festivity,
as it were in a kind of triumph, where he continued about the space of five
years; viz. unto the death of Constance the defender of the Orthodox.

Upon his decease, (the inconstant Constan^^us being sole Emperor) the Arians
again with might and main fall upon Athanasius; persuading the Emperor that he
made continual stirs throughout Egypt and Lybia, that in his journey he had
ordained Bishops and Presbyters without his jurisdiction, and that he had been
the Author of dissension, between the Emperor and his Brother.

The ciedulous Emperor so far hearkens unto these accusations, that he
abolisheth the decrees of the Council of Sardica, and commands that those
Bishops should be deprived and removed from their Churches, whom that Synod had
restored: Amongst these, Athanasius was the chief, who by an order obtained
from the Emperor was to be dispatched and slain: Athan. in apolog. pro fuga
sua.
For which end a Captain that was sent with five thousand Soldiers, begirts and
enters the Church, where by night Athanasius and the people were assembled
together. A fourth time he flie^h.
But he in a wonderful manner escapes, passing out among the rest undiscerned
by the Soldiers, and flying into the desert of Lybia, he abode there until the
death of Constantius, being about ten years; yet sometimes coming unto
Alexandria to confirm the Church: Though as some report, he lay hid all this
time in Alexandria, Sozomen. hist. Eccles. 1. 5. c. 6.
in the house of a sacred Virgin.

During the reign of Constantius, diverse Councils of the Eastern and Western
Bishops were convened; as at Antioch, Sardica, Sirmium, Millain, Ariminum, and
Seleucia: chiefly intended for the promoting of the Arian heresy, and against
the faith of the Nicene Council: which yet succeeded not accordingly, the
Eastern being still stoutly opposed by the Western Bishops. In which time also
nine several forms or confessions of faith were framed, all differing from that
of Nice: An evident argument of the distracted condition and state that then
the Churches were in.

Upon the departure or withdrawing of Athanasius, George of Cappadacia, a
violent Arian enters, and like a wolf in a furious madness makes havoc of the
Church, exercising great cruelties and inflicting grievous tortures upon the
Orthodox: In Sholiis. in Nazianz. orat. 31.
who yet (says Billius) was by the Arians removed, because he showed not
himself so diligent in maintaining and propagating their doctrine, as they
expected.

But Julian the Apostate succeeding Constantius in the Empire, (who upon his
deathbed bewailed these three things especially: 1. That he had a hand in
murdering his kindred. Nazianz. orat. 31.
2. That he had changed the form of the Nicene Faith. 3. That he had named
Julian for his Successor.) In the beginning of his Reign restores those
Bishops unto their places again, whom Constantius had removed: which he did not
out of any love unto Religion, but to impair the fame of Constantius, and out
of a hope he had, that by their dissentions Christianity would suffer and be
shaken: Amongst the rest Athanasius returns again unto Alexandria.

Not long after this, the Magicians and Sorceters urging and crying out, that
nothing could be done by their arts, until Athanasius, the great obstacle, were
taken out of the way, Julian not only banished but also commanded that he
should be slain: Hereupon, being about to take ship to shun the danger, and the
people of Alexandria standing weeping about him; 5. Time (...) flies.
says he unto them, Be not troubled my Children, nubecula est cito transitura:
it is but a little Cloud, and it will soon pass away: which fell out accordingly.

Flying up the River Nilus and being closely pursued by some that were sent to
apprehend him, those that were with him being greatly afraid, persuaded him in
this exigent speedily to get into the desert for his safety: Why are you so
much troubled, quoth he: Let us rather go to meet them, that they may know he
is greater that defends us, than they that do pursue us. Hereupon they direct
their course accordingly, and coming near them (little suspecting any such
matter) the pursuers asked them if they had heard where Athanasius was? who
answered, that they had lately seen him passing not far from thence. They
followed him therefore as they thought with all the speed they could make, but
all in vain, for by this means Athanasius escaped their hands and came safe
unto Alexandria, where he lay hid until the death of Julian, who was shortly
after slain in a battle against the Persians, having reigned only one year and
eight months.

In his Room Iovinianus is by the Army chosen Emperor, a most pious, Prince,
who reduced from banishment the orthodox Bishops: Among whom for his singular
virtues he much admired Athanasius, and had him in great esteem, conferring and
advising with him about matters of faith, and the right ordering of the
Churches: under whom they were like to have been in a very flourishing and
happy condition, had not the shortness of his government prevented it, which
the space of eight months put a period unto.

After him followed Valentinian, who associated with him in the government of
the Empire, his Brother Valens: these dividing it between them, Valentinian had
the West, and Valens the East for his dominion. This Valens did greatly favor
the Arian faction, in so much as he began to persecute the Orthodox, especially
Athanasius, (their great eyefore) sending an Officer by force to expel him out
of Alexandria: Athanasius fearing what might ensue hereof, and that stirs and
tumults might be raised by the common people, 6. Time be hide^h.
hid himself for about the space of four months in his Fathers monument: The
Citizens nevertheless grew so seditious, that to appease and satisfy them,
Valens, though unwilling, was fain to permit Athanasius quietly to enjoy his
Bishopric: which he did (and the Church of Alexandria peace) unto the end of
his days. The Narration of whose life and sufferings, let me conclude in the
words of Osiander. Hist. Eccles. cent. 4. lib. ^. cap. 16.
Non volui in recitanda tanti viri* plusquam martyris historia esse brevior,
quia nihil vidi, quod recte omitti posset.

2. He was a man of such transcendent worth and every way so excelled, that he
was had in very high esteem and much admired by all the lovers of piety and
sound doctrine: as appears by the honorable titles given unto him by diverse
eminent persons among the Ancients. Theodoret, hi^^. Eccl. l. 1. c. 26.
I saw (says the Emperor Constantine the great, in an Epistle unto the
Alexandriaus,) your Bishop Athanasius with delight, and so spoke unto him as
one whom I believed to be a man of God. Orat. 31.
Nazianzen styles him the great Trumpet of truth, a principal Pillar of the
Church, the eye of the world, that second light, Orar. 33.
and (if we may use the word) forerunner of Christ, whom praising I shall
praise virtue it self, for in him all virtues meet. Basil has recourse unto
him, Epist. 52.
v^lut ad universorum apicem, quo consultore ac duce actionum ^^eretur. A most
faithful Master (says Vincentius Lyrinensis) and a most eminent confessor. L.
contra h^^res. c. 42.
An illustrious and famous man (says Cyril of Alexandria) and in the Council
of Nice, Epist. 1.
one that was had in admiration of all: (though then but young.) In dialog. 1.
Theodoret calls him the most shining light of the Church of Alexandria, who
was among the Bishops thereof, as an Orient pearl, most conspicuous, Contra Eu
tychen. l. 2.
One most approved in the judgment of all Ecclesiastical men, says Vigilius: A
profound, and every way absolute Divine; in so much as he acquired, Nannius in
ep ante opera Athanas.
and accordingly is commonly known by the name of Athanasius the Great.

He was for his natural parts more then ordinary, Orat. de vita e^us a viro
docto script.
being of a strong and excellent wit, as also of a sharp and piercing judgment;
which he cultured and improved by the study of the Liberal Arts, and other
Humane Learning; Hyper. de stud. theol. l. 1. c. 7.
wherein he attained unto a competent measure of skill, although he spent but a
small time in them: for he chiefly intended things of an higher nature,
applying himself unto diligent Meditation in the Scriptures, Nazianz. Orat. 31.
viz. all the Books both of the Old and New Testament; by which means he so
increased in the riches, not only of knowledge and Divine Contemplation, but
also of an egregious and shining conversation, (both which he happily joined
together; Sixth. Senens. lib 4.
being vir sanctitatis and eruditionis eximiae) as no man more: so that in
Learning he went beyond those that were famous for their Learning, and in
action the most apt for action: his life and manners were a rule for Bishops,
and his Doctrines were accounted as the Law of the Orthodox Faith: Nazianz ib.
a man of great ability to oppose error and to defend the truth. He was adorned
with all sorts of virtues; of such gentleness, that the way was open and easy
for all to converse with him; free from anger and passion; and very propense
unto pity and commiseration; withal of most Heroic magnanimity (inkindled in
his breast by the holy Ghost) to bear any adversity, and of such invincible
courage, that he could not be broken with any blows of persecution: his speech
was pleasant, but his manners more; of an Angelical face; yet in his mind more
Angelical; he was indeed an exact picture of virtue, and pattern for Bishops;
His skill was great in the Management of the affairs of the Church, and an
admirable dexterity he had in the composing of differences and distempers, Ep.
49. and 51
(unto which his Authority conduced much, and was of great advantage) as
appears by the addresses that Basil made unto him, earnestly imploring his aid:
who styles him their only comfort against those evils, and one ordained by God
in the Churches to be the Physician for the curing of their maladies; for which
work he was abundantly furnished. In a word, he was as a Maul or Hammer unto
the Heretics ( semper Arianis velut murus obstitit (inquit Sulpitius Severus)
hereticorum nugis (inquit Cyrillus Alexandrinus) inexpugnabili quadam and
Apostolica prudentia restitit.) Hist. sac. 1. 2.
as an Adamant unto his persecutors, Epist. 1.
and as a loadstone unto such as dissented from him, drawing them unto the
truth.

3. His works declare him to have been indefatigably industrious, being very
many, pene infinita, almost infinite, (says Trithemius:) some whereof are
generally held to be his, De Script. Eccles. Scul^e^* in Medul^.
and by the style are discovered so to be: for they are destitute of those
Rhetorical flourishes, so frequently to be found in Nazianzen, as also of those
Philosophical Speculations in the works of Basil: Nannius in ep. ante op.
Athanas.
which yet (had he made use of them) would have rendered his writings more sweet
and succulent: but some of these Arts he shunned as diligently, as he did
Heretical opinions; and others of them he uses very sparingly. Netheless his
labors were had in very great esteem, Epist. 1.
as may be gathered from the words of Cyril who thus speaks of them; quasi
fragrantissimo (inquit) quodam ungnento, ipsum coelum scriptis suis
exhil^ravit. And the Abbot Cosmas intimates his apprehensions of their worth in
these words; when, says he, Pratum spiritu^l. c. 40.
thou lightest on any of the works of Athanasius, and have not paper to write
on, write it on thy garments. But, as many are genuine, so some under his name
are dubious and questionable; and others forged and supposititious. An injury
which the best Authors have not escaped, unto whom many books have been
ascribed, which were not theirs; but to none more then unto Athanasius; Vt,
inquit Nannius, fertilissimis agris multa Zizania una cum optimis frugibus
nascuntur; I^ ^p. nuncu. pat^ante op. Athanas.
ita optimb cuique autori plurimi falsi and notbi libri adscribuntur; nulli
au^em plures quam Athanasio. Indeed as they are now extant, scarce the one half
do belong unto him; which Erasmus meeting with, he cast them away with
indignation, and being full of them, Cont. 4. c. 10.
cried out, (...): having his fill, and unwilling to meddle more with such
stuff. Among other that offered him this wrong were the Nestorian and Entychian
Heretics (says Evagrius) who set forth diverse books of Apollinarius, Hist.
Eccles. lib. 3. c. 31.
under the name of Athanasius.

The books extant under his name both of one sort and other, I shall briefly
set down in the same order that I find them in the Parisian Edition; Ann. One
thousand six hundred twenty seven, contained in two Tomes. And they are these
following.

1. An Oration against the Gentiles.

2. Of the Incarnation of the word of God; De script. Eccles.
(which Bellarmine thinks to be those two books against the Gentiles, whereof
Ierom makes mention:) In Catalog.
by himself truly styled the Rudiments or Character of the Faith of Christ;
Sculter. in Medull.
for it contains in it an Epitome of Christian Doctrine most necessary to be
known, and not unpleasant to be read.

3. An Exposition of the faith; wherein the Orthodox Doctrine of the Trinity is
asserted, De script. Eccles.
and the Heretical refuted. Of this Bellarmine makes question whether it be his
or no.

4. His answer unto an Epistle of Liberius Bishop of Rome: Bellarm. ib.
being a Confession of the Faith; Perk. prob.
but expressed in words very improper; it is also foolish in the allegations of
Scripture, and therefore not to be attributed unto him.

5. An Epistle unto the Emperor Iovianus; Theod. hist Eccle. l. 4. c. 3
yet written not by him alone, but by the Synod then assembled at Alexandria.

6. His disputation against Arius in the Council of Nice: which plainly appears
to be supposititious, by the very inscription; making it to be held. Ri^et.
crit. (...) Scul^et. in Medull.
Ann. 310. whereas that council was celebrated. Ann. Three hundred twenty five.
Also the disputation it self says, that it was held not against Arius, but
against an Arian. Again, it is said in the lose of the disputation that Arius
was hereby converted of him in Ecclesiastical History. Lastly Arius herein is
made to impugn the Divinity of the holy Ghost, calling him a mere creature:
which Heresy he is not charged withal nor was it broached or maintained by
him, but brought in by some of his followers. Bellarmine knows not whether to
style it a disputation or a Dialogue between Athanasius and some Arian: De
script. E^cles.
nor whether it were written by Athanasius or some other.

7. An enarration of those words of Christ: Matt. 11. 27. All things are
delivered unto me of my father, etc. against Eusebius and his followers. I find
this,

Enarration to be much larger in the Latin Parisian Edition by Articus
Albulei: Sixth. Senens. lib. 4. Possevin. in apparat.
Printed An. One thousand five hundred eighty one, then in the Greek and Latin
Edition: Ann. One thousand six hundred twenty seven, and the former to have
annexed unto it a Compendium, taken out of the above written, against those who
say that the holy Ghost is a creature: which Compend is mentioned by the
Centurists, Bellarmine and Possevine.

8. An Epistle, or, as others, an Oration against the Arians; unto Adelphius a
Brother and Confessor.

9. An Epistle, or Oration unto Maximus a Philosopher, of the Divinity of
Christ: of this the Centurists make some question whether it be his or no.
Cent. 4. c. 10


10. An Oration or Epistle unto Serapion Bishop of Thmuis a City of Egypt,
Possev. in ap.
ordained by Athanasius, and his familiar friend; who for the elegancy of his
wit was surnamed Scholasti^ns.

11. A second Epistle unto the same Serapion; Scul. in med.
both against those that make the holy Ghost to be a creature.

12. A third Epistle unto the same Person, In medul.
upon the same subject: which Scultetus (with Erasmus) conceives to be the work
of some idle and witless man, who would fain imitate Athanasius his book unto
Serapion. It contains a strange heap of places and confusion of reasons,
together with a irksom repetition of things before spoken of: Rivet. crit. sac.
Besides the Author cites a place out of the Prophet Micah which is no where to
be found: it is therefore ranked, and justly; among the suspected works of
Athanasius by the Centurists and Mr. Perkins.

13. Certain testimonies out of the Sacred Scriptures, concerning the natural
Communion of the (Divine) essence between the Father, Scult. in medul. ^
the Son, and the holy Ghost: Collected not by Athanasius, but some other, as
appears in that the compiler has transcribed diverse things verbatim out of the
questions unto Antiochus, whereof Athanasius is not the Author.

14. An Epistle, showing that the Council of Nice, well perceiving the
craftiness of Eusebius, did in congruous and pious words, expound their decrees
against the Arian Heresy.

15. Five Orations against the Arians' wherein he uses great strength of
Argument, fortifyed with clear testimonies and demonstrations from the Sacred
Scripture. So that these alone may abundantly suffice for the confutation of
all Arianism: Photius in Biblioth.
yea he that shall say, that Gregory the Divine, and Basil the Great did from
this fountain derive those egregious and pure streams of their books against
the same Heresy, verily he shall not say amiss.

16. An Epistle, concerning the Opinion of Dionysius sometime Bishop of
Alexandria; wherein he proves the Arians did belie him, in affirming that he
was an assertor of their opinion.

17. An Epistle unto all the brethren every where throughout Egypt, Syria,
Phoenicia, and Arabia: ranked among those that are suspected.

18. A refutation of the Hypocrisy of Meletius, Cent. 4. c. 10. Perk. prob.
Eusebius, and Paulus Samosatenus, concerning the consubstantiality of the
Father and the Son: it is suspected.

19. An Epistle unto the Antiochians, Ibid.
which seems to be a fragment of some entire book.

20. An epistle unto Epictetus Bishop of Corinth, Scult. in Medull.
against the Apollinarists, it is the most famous among all his Epistles.

The Orthodox in the time of Cyril of Alexlexandria made much use of it, in
confuting the heresy of Nestorius, to avoid the dint and force thereof those
heretics did boldly adulterate it, substracting some things and putting in
other, that it might seem to favor of the doctrine of Nestorius. So much Cyril
gives us to understand, his words are these. Cognovimus quod celeberrimi patris
nostri Athanasii ad beatum Epictetum epistolam, orthodoxe loquentem, nonnulli a
se corruptam ediderunt, ita ut hinc multi laedantur. Epist. 28. Again, speaking
of this Epistle: Quia ex ea (inquit) Nestorius arguebatur, cum legentes eam
defensores rectae fidei cohiberent, etiam eos qui probantur similia sentire
Nestorio, correptionem suae confutationis ex ea impii formidantes, machinati
sunt ^cerbissimum quiddam, et haeretica pravitate dig^issimum. Praefatam namque
adulterant epistolam, sublatis ex ea quibusdam, aliis suppositis ediderunt, ita
ut putaretur ille similia Nestorio sapuisse, in* Epist. ad successum Episcopum
posteriori.

21. A Sermon of the incarnation of the Word of God against Paulus Samosatenus,
Cent. 4. c. 10.
it is doubted of whether it be his or no.

22. A Sermon or Tome of the humane nature, assumed by the only begotten Word,
against the Arians and Apollinarius.

23. An Epistle or Treatise of the incarnation of Christ against Apollinarians.

24. An oration or treatise of the healthful coming of Christ, against
Apollinarius; it is perplex, Scultet. in Medull. censur. patr.
intricate, and obscure: and by Cook it is thought to be supposititious. The
Sermons against Apollinarins do excel in grace and ornament, say the Centurists.

25. An oration of the eternal substance of the Son and holy Spirit of God,
against the company or followers of Sabellius.

26. An oration that Christ is one,

27. An Epistle unto Serapion concerning the death of Arius.

28. An Apology unto the Emperor Constantius, wherein he freeth himself from
diverse imputations, and defends his flight into the Wilderness.

29. An Apology for his flight.

30. Another Apology for his flight, wherein he professes his innocence.

31. An Epistle unto the Africans, which is Apologetical.

32. A Catholic Epistle unto the Bishops of Egypt, Syria, Phaenicia and
Arabia, exhorting them to leave the Arians, Scultet. in Medull.
and to join with the Orthodox.

33. An Epistle unto all those, who any where do profess or lead a solitary
life. Scultet. in Medull.
The former part whereof only ( viz. from the beginning unto those words, The
Grace of our Lord Jesus Crist be with you, Amen.) is the Epistle unto the
Monks; and ought to be placed before the five orations against the Arians, as a
dedicatory Epistle unto those Books. The following part thereof is without
doubt a fragment (suspected whether his or no) of some other work, Perkins.
problem.
wanting a beginning; to make up which defect, that Epistle was added unto it.
Herein he recounts his own and the Church's calamities. In apparat.
Athanasius ipse (inquit Possevinus) labores and persecutiones suas ubere
epistola ad solitariam vitam agentes ob oculos ponit, quamobrem et illam
perlegisse neminem penitebit.

34. The protestation of the people of Alexandria, Scultet. in Medull.
fere nihil continet (...).

35. An epistle concerning the Synods held at Ariminum in Italy and Seleucia in
Isauria; wherein is set forth the levity and inconstancy of the Arians there
present, in the matter of the faith. De script. Eccles.
This Bellarmine supposes may well be taken for his book against Valens and
Vrsatius (mentioned by Ierom) two Arian Bishops, In catalog. In Schol. in
Hieronym. catalog.
who (says Marianus) deceived the Fathers in those Synods, faining themselves
Orthodox.

An Epistle of Athanasius and ninety Bishops of Egypt and Lybia, unto the
Bishops in Africa against the Arians: wherein the decrees of the Council of
Nice are defended, and the Synod of Ariminum is shown to be superfluous, that
of Nice being sufficient.

37. An Epistle unto all the Orthodox wherever, when persecution was by the
Arians raised against them.

38. An Epistle unto John and Antiochus two Presbyters; also another unto
Palladius, Scultet. in Medull.
nihil continent (...)

39. An Epistle unto Dracontius, whom flying away, Scultet. ibid.
he by diverse arguments persuades to return unto the Church of Alexandria,
whereof he was Bishop elect, and that he would not hearken unto those that
would deter him from so doing: In 1 Timoth. digress. l. ^. c. 4.
It is (says Espencaeus) a learned Epistle.

40. An Epistle unto Marcellinus, concerning the interpretation of the Psalms,
Bellar. de script. Eccl.
which seems to be the same that Ierom calls; of the Titles of the Psalms:
styled by Sixtus Senensis thus: In Biblioth. lib. 4.
In Psalterium Davidis ad Marcellinum de titulis et vi psalmorum, Isagogicus
libellus. Of which Cassiodorus thus: Testis est (inquit) Athanasii, episcopi
sermo magnificus, qui virtutes psalmorum indagabili veritate discutiens, omnia
illic esse probat, quaecunque sanctae scripturae ambitu continentur. It is by
Mr. Perkins put among the suspected works. In conclus. comment. in Psalm.
Perutilem sane libellum dedit Athanasius in quo usum et finem quorumcunque
psalmor^m compendiose monstravit. Hyper. deratjon. stud. Theol. in praeparat.
ad demonstrat. problem.


41, A treatise of the Sabbath and Circumcision, in the Latin Parisian
Edition, Anno, 1581. It is joined as his enarration upon those words, Matthew.
11. 27. All things are delivered unto me of my Father, etc. being the seventh
in this Catalogue. Unto which is added in the same Latin Edition, a Compendium
of what had been formerly written against those who affirm the Holy Ghost to be
a creature.

42. Upon those words, Matthew. 12. 32. Whosoever speaks against the Son of
man, etc. suspected. Perkins. ib. cent. 4. c. 10. et Coci cens.


43. A Sermon upon the passion and cross of the Lord: the phrase (says
Erasmus) savoureth not of Athanasius: Scultet. in Medull.
Also it altogether forbids oaths which Athanasius does not: It is therefore
supposititious. Perkins problem.
Herein also the questions unto Antiochus are cited, which are not of this
Author. Besides the Author foolishly makes Christ to feign words of humane
frailty, Rivet. crit. sac.
when hanging upon the Cross he so cried out, Eli, Eli, Lama Sabachthani: which
yet, the true Athanasius says, were truly spoken of him according to his
humane nature. Sixtus Senensis calls it eloquentissimam concionem. In biblioth.
lib. 4.


44. A Sermon upon Matthew. 21. 2. Go into the village over against you, etc. It
seems to be a fragment taken out of some other work or commentary: Scultet. in
Medull.
wherein the Author (as playing with them) wresteth the Scriptures, says
Erasmus, Coci censur.
it is forged.

45. A Sermon of the most holy Virgin, the Mother of God or of the
Annunciation: it is evidently spurious: Bellarm. de script. Eccles. Scultet. in
Medull. et Rivet. in crit. sac.
for the Author is large in refuting the error of Nestorius, and presses the
Monothelites, both which errors were unknown, as not sprung up in the time of
Athanasius. The Author also lightly and almost childishly derives the word
(...) from the word (...): and moreover says, that the attributes of God are
not the very substance of God, sed circa substantiam versari, which is
discrepant from the manner of Athanasius, who is wont to speak very
considerately. It appears by many passages that the Author hereof lived after
the sixth general Council.

46. Of Virginity, Perkins. problem.
a Sermon or Meditation it is dubious: Scultet. in Medull.
If it be of Athanasius's penning, he did (says Erasmus) strangely let fall
his style, and I may add (says Seultetus) that he also laid aside his
Theological gravity, if he prescribed those childish rules unto a Virgin, which
(says the Author) whosoever observes shall be found among the third order of
Angels, and also teaches that no man can be assured of his salvation before
his death.

47. An homily of the sower; Perkins problem. Scult. in Medull.
it is suspected as being found only in an English book.

48. A Sermon against all heresies, Scultet. in Medull. Coci censur. Rivet.
crit. Sac.
it is none of his but some doting fellow, est vilis et confusus ut plurimum.

49. An oration of the ascension of Christ, which because of the flourishing
style thereof, Scultetus is scrupulous to ascribe it unto Athanasius^. In
Medull.


50. An oration or history of Melchisedech, Ibid.
in the end whereof, the Author speaks of the fathers of the Nicene Council, as
dead long before; it is therefore spurious.

51. A brief oration against the Arians. I find no where mentioned, but in the
Parisian edition by Nannius.

52. The declaration of Leviticus, Perkins problem.
it is suspected.

53. Short colloquies between Iovianus and certain Arians against Athanasius.
Also.

54. Of the incarnation of the Word of God both which are no where to be found,
Symbolum hoe vulgo tribui solet Athanasio: certe cum Athanasii scriptis,
imprimis vero sacris literis per omnia conveniens est* Pelarg. in Symbol.
Athan. in Medull.
but in the last Parisian edition.

55. The Symbol or Creed of Athanasius, by Scultetus judged to be dubious, he
having met with it in no book among the works of Athanasius, only in one it is
read without the name of the Author. It has been a great dispute among the
learned (says Pelargus) whose it should be: Some ascribing it unto Athanasius,
In symbol. Athanas. Athanasii doctrina et scriptorum omnium summa in symbola
comprehensa est. Chytraeus. ^de stud. Theol.
and others unto some later Author as yet unknown.

56. An Epistle of Iovianus the Emperor unto Athanasius, and Athanasius his
answer ther^unto.

57. An Epistle unto Ammun a Monk, it is dubious.

58. A fragment of a festival Epistle, containing a catalogue of the canonical
books of the old and new Testament, Scultet. in Medull.
it is dubious, I believe it (says Scultetus) to have been taken out of his
Synopsis. Ibid.


59. An Epistle unto Ruffinianus.

60. Theological definitions, said to be collected by Clement and other holy
men: Ibid. cent. 4. c. 10.
It is supposititious and by Scultetus ranked among those which seem to be
written with no judgment. Bellar. de script. Eccl.
It seems not to have been of Athanasius his writing, because therein Gregory
Nyssene is cited, who (in all likelihood) had not begun to write, till after
the death of Athanasius. Besides the Author speaks so distinctly of the two
Natures of Christ in one Hypostasis, that it seems to be altogether of a later
date then the Council of Chalcedon.

61. A brief Synopsis or Compendium of the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament; Wherein, first, he sets down a Catalogue of the Canonical and
Non-canonical books. Scult. in Medul.
Secondly, he shows by whom each was written, whence it had its name, and what
it does contain. Thirdly, he names the books of both Testaments that are
contradicted or accounted Apocryphal.

62. Five Dialogues of the Trinity. Also,

63. Twenty Sermons against diverse Hesies; Scult. in Medul.
which are Pious and Learned, and therefore most worthy to be read. The phrase
shows them to have been both written by the same Author; not Athanasius, but
one Maximus a very Learned Man, many years after the death of Athanasius.
Scultetus tells us that he has seen the name of Maximus upon a certain old
Parchment, Rivet. Crit. Sac.
in which these Dialogues were wrapped up. This Maximus was a Constantinopolitane
Monk, who lived in the time of Pope Honorius a Monothelite, and died, Ann. Six
hundred fifty seven. The Catalogue of whose book mentioned by Photius, or which
are in the Vaticane Library, contains diverse that have the very same title,
with those which are inserted among the works of Athanasius.

64. A book of diverse questions of the Sacred Scripture, unto King Antiochus:
which appears to be supposititious, Bellar de scrip. Eccles.
because: first, Athanasius himself is therein cited, quaest. 23. and that
under the name of Athanasius the Great, which would have argued too much
arrogance: Secondly, Many things are to be found therein which are dissonant
from the judgment of Athanasius. Cent. 4 c. 10.
Thirdly, The Mystical Theology of Dionysius Areopagita is alleged therein,
which I suppose (says Sixtus Senensis) was altogether unknown in the time of
Athanasius: In bibli. l. 4.
he conjectures it to have been collected out of the writings of the Fathers by
some studious man. Possevin. in apparat.
Fourthly, The questions are variously reckoned; in some Copies there being
only forty and six; in others one hundred sixty and two. Fifthly, Gregory
Nazianzen is twice named in it: Also, there are cited Gregory Nyssen and
Epiphanius as ancient authors: yet was Athanasius before them: also Chrysostom,
Scala Iohannis, Maximus, Nicephorus, etc. all of them juniors unto Athanasius.
Sixthly, Yea, quaest. 108. the Romans are said to be a kind of Franks; Bellar.
de scrip. Eccles.
whence he evidently appears to be a late author: for all those of the West are
called Franks in the Turks Dominions. Luce ergo clarius est (inquit Cocus)
libellum hunc filium esse populi, In censur.
nec novisse parentem suum. Yet is the authority hereof urged by many of the
Romanists to prove, that there are nine orders of Angels, that the Saints
departed do know all things, Jam. of the corrupt ^f the Fathers.
images lawful, distinction of sins, orders of Monks, necessity of baptism,
Sacrament of penance, prayer for the dead, Antichrist to be a certain person,
the sacrifice of the Altar, etc.

65. Questions of the words and interpretations of the Evangelical parables:
they are supposititious; Rivet. Crit. Sac.
for they are gathered out of Chrysostom, Cyril of Alexandria and Gregory
Nyssen; their very names being expressed.

66. Certain other Anonymous questions which appear to be spurious: Ibid.
in all likelihood the work of some late Greek; for in them the procession of
the holy Ghost from the Son is denied.

67. The life of Antony the Monk: In vita Athanas* in Catalog.
That such a narration was written by Athanasius both Nazianzen and Jerome do
affirm: But that this now extant should be the same, believe it who will; In
Medull.
I doubt not, says Scultelus, but that it is the figment of some foolish man;
for endeavoring to show how in the whole course of his life, Antony imitated
Christ, he talks childishly and ridiculously: and there are many things in it,
In Synopsi.
says Tossanus, that are fabulous, and savor not of the gravity and
simplicity of Athanasius. Besides, some report Antony to have been a Lawyer and
very learned; but this Author makes him altogether illiterate. But that this is
an Ancient Legend, appears from hence, that Damaseen cites a place out of it:
Yet is it but a Fable and no more, De script. Eccles.
notwithstanding all Bellarmines vain confidence to the contrary.

68. A Sermon in Parasceuen, or the preparation, which I find no where
mentioned, but in the Parisian Edition by Nannius: only Possevine says, that
it was first set forth in Greek and Latin in the Antwerp Edition.

69. Certain fragments of Athanasius upon the Psalms taken out of Nicetas his
Catena: with some other, out of other Authors.

70. Eleven books of the united Deity of the Trinity: Possevin. in apparat.
Scul. in med. Riv. crit. sac. Bellar. de scrip. Eccles.
others reckon but seven: they are found only in Latin; and seem to have been
written in that Language, and not Translated out of the Greek; as appears
partly from the Style; and partly because the Author tells us how those things
are expressed by the Greeks, which he wrote in Latin; he also confutes one
Vrbicus Potentinus, Bellar. de scrip. Eccles. Riv. crit. sac.
a disciple or follower of Eunomius; which Athanasius could not do.

71. A disputation concerning the Faith held at Laodicea, between Athanasius
and Arius: it is clearly Commentitious and Counterfeit; nor can it be a true
disputation between those two; for Athanasius is here brought in as a Deacon
disputing in the second year of Constantius: whereas it appears that Athanasius
was made Bishop long before, viz. In the one and twentieth year of Constantine
the Great: and Arius infamously died in the one and thirtieth year of the same
Emperor who therefore could not dispute in the Reign of Constantius. 2. Herein
is mention made of Photinus, the Heretic, as if from him Arius had Learned his
Heresy; whereas Photinus was after Arius: It seems rather to be that Dialogue
which was written by Vigilius Bishop of Trent, against Sabellius, Photinus and
Arius; which he therefore set forth under the name of Athanasius, Vigil. l. 5.
ad^er. Euty. Raynolds de libris Apoc. praelect. 22. Perk. prob.
that, says he, persons present might seem to deal with those that were
present.

72. An exhortation unto the Monks; It is forged.

73. An Epistle unto Pope Mark, Cent. 4 c. 10.
for the exemplars of the Nicene Council; with the answer of Mark thereunto;
Possev. in ap. Bennius in notis in has ep. tom. 1. council.
both which without doubt are supposititious: for this Mark was dead at that
time, when, as it is pretended, this answer was written: also, at this time was
Athanasius in banishment in France; and so could not write from Alexandria: So
that both these Epistles, and also the seventy pretended Canons of the Council
of Nice contained in them, Cent. 4. c. 9.
are none other then a mere forgery.

74. A Sermon upon the passion of our Savior; which is a mere patch, taken
almost verbatim, out of the Sermon upon the same subject; being the forth in
this Catalogue.

75. Of the passion of the image of Christ Crucified at Beryth in Syria: C^ci
censur.
It savors of the Golden Legend; And that it cannot be the work of Athanasius,
may evidently appear from the title that Anciently was wont to be prefixed
hereunto: which was this: D. Athanasii Archiepiscopi Alexandrini, de passione
imaginis Domini nostri Jesus Christi, qualiter crucifixa est in Syria, in urbe
quae Berythus dicitur temporibus Constantini senioris and Irenae uxoris ejus.
Now it is known unto all, that Athanasius was dead some Centuries of years,
before the reign of those two abovementioned. This Fable is by Sigebert
referred unto the year, In Chronico.
Seven hundred sixty five, about which time the question about worshipping of
images was agitated. It must needs therefore be the work of some later Author,
(says the Learned Daille) so tastless a piece, Treat. of the Fathers. c. 3.
and so unworthy the gallantry and clearness of that great wit, that he must be
thought, not to have common sense that can find in his heart to attribute it
unto him.

76. A fragment taken out of Athanasius, concerning the Observation of Sabbaths.

Unto these there are added seven homilies more (never before extant) by Lucas
Holsteinius, out of the French Kings, the Vatican, and Oxford Libraries; and
they are these following.

1. Of the taxing of the Virgin Mary; upon Luke 2. 1.

2. Upon Matthew. 21. 2. Upon which text we had an Homily before, viz. the 41. in
this Catalogue.

3. Upon Luke 19. 36. which with the former Holstein verily believes to be of
Athanasius. Lect. ante vol. ^. edit. Paris.


4. Upon the Treason of Judas: Ibid.
which, as also the following, has the Character of Athanasius by Photius.

5. Upon the holy Pascha; which, of all, is the best and most Elegant.

6. Upon the man that was born blind, John 9. 1. which, Ibid.
together with the following has nothing of Athanasius in it; ( nec vola nec
vestigium) but the title only.

7. Upon the Fathers and Patriarchs: a most foolish, rustic and barbarous
piece. They may all well be conceived to be of very small credit, having lain
so long dormant.

Also certain Commentaries upon the Epistles of Paul, Trithem. de scrip.
Eccles. Bellar. de scrip. Eccles.
are by some ascribed unto Athanasius; which yet are not his, but Theophylacts.

Some of his works are lost, of which the Names or Titles are these that follow.

1. Commentaries upon the whole book of Psalms; Sixth. Senens. ^ 4. ib. ubi.
supra.
which I think (says Holstein) to be Palmarium Athanasii opus; the chief of
Athanasius his works.

2. Upon Ecclesiastes. Phot. in biblioth.


3. Upon the Canticles.

4. A Volum upon John. Sixth Senens. lib. 4.


4. Athanasius has a peculiar style or manner of speech; Nannius in ep. ante
op. Athanas.
making use of words which were known only unto the age wherein he lived, and
neither before nor after: The subject, whereof he for the most part treats,
being very high, viz. of the Trinity: of the Son begotten of the Father before
all time, equal unto him, but distinct in person from him, etc. Yet making use
of terms very apt to express those hidden and mysterious things by, which
cannot well be rendered in the Latin or other Tongue, without loss or lessning
the grace of them, such are, (...), etc. He shunneth all flourishes, and
expresses the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God in Evangelical words. In his
speech he uses much simplicity, Anonym. in vit^ ejus. Photius, in blblioth.
gravity and energy; and (says Erasmus) he is wonderful in teaching. He is
most plain in his Commentaries, yet in all his writings perspicuous, sober and
candid: in his five books against Arius vehement and profound, managing his
arguments very strongly: moreover so fruitful is he and abundant, as is indeed
very admirable. But his Epistles (especially those, wherein by way of Apology
he excuses his flight) are both elegant and splendid, and composed with much
clearness, flourishing with such neatness and force of persuasion, that it is
pleasant to hear how he pleads for himself.

5. Many are the memorable and worthy passages that are to be found in his
works; for a taste I shall present you with these that follow,

1. His Symbol or Creed: every where received and recited in the Churches, both
of the East and West: it was so famous and generally approved of, that it was
embraced with an unanimous consent as the distinguishing Character between the
Orthodox and Heretics. Nazianzen calls it a magnificent and princely gift.
Anonym. in vit^ ejus.
Imperatori, inquit, donum vere regium and magnificum offert, In Orat. 31.
Scriptam nimirum fidei confessionem adversus novum dogma nusquam in Scriptura
expressum: ut sic and Imperatorem Imperator, and doctrinam doctrina, and
libellum libellus frangeret atque opprimeret. It is as it were an
interpretation of those words of Christ, John 17. 3. This is life eternal,
Pelarg. in Symbol. Athanas.
to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: And may
be divided into these two parts: 1. (...). 2. (...). Athanasius (says Doctor
Andrews in his speech against Mr. Trask) was great for his Learning, for his
Virtue, for his Labors, for his sufferings, but above all Great for his Creed.

The words whereof are these.
Whosoever will be saved; before all things it is necessary that he hold the
Catholic Faith: which Faith except every one do keep whole and undefiled,
without doubt he shall perish everlastingly.

And the Catholic faith is this;
That we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity. Neither confounding
the Persons, nor dividing the Substance. For there is one Person of the Father,
another of the Son, and another of the holy Ghost. But the Godhead of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost is all one; the glory equal, the
Majesty Coeternal. Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the holy
Ghost. The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate, and the holy Ghost uncreate. The
Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible, and the holy Ghost
incomprehensible. The Father eternal, the Son eternal, and the holy Ghost
eternal. And yet they are not three eternals, but one eternal. As also, there
are not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated; but one uncreated, and
one incomprehensible. So likewise, the Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty,
and the holy Ghost Almighty; and yet they are not three Almighties, but one
Almighty. So, the Father is God, the Son is God, and the holy Ghost is God; and
yet they are not three Gods, but one God. So likewise, the Father is Lord, the
Son Lord, and the holy Ghost Lord; and yet not three Lords, but one Lord. For
like as we be compelled by the Christian verity, to acknowledge every Person by
himself to be God and Lord: so are we forbidden by the Catholic Religion, to
say there be three Gods, or three Lords.

The Father is made of none, neither created, nor begotten. The Son is of the
Father alone; not made, nor created, but begotten. The holy Ghost is of the
Father and of the Son; neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding.
So there is one Father, not three Fathers; one Son, not three Sons; one holy
Ghost, not three holy Ghosts. And in this Trinity, none is before, or after
other, none is greater, or less then another. But the whole three Persons be
coeternal together, and coequal. So that in all things as is aforesaid the
Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity in Unity is to be worshipped. He therefore
that will be saved, must thus think of the Trinity.

Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting salvation; that he also believe
rightly in the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ. For the right faith is,
that we believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is God
and Man. God of the substance of the Father begotten before the worlds: and Man
of the substance of his Mother, born in the world. Perfect God, and perfect
Man, of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh subsisting. Equal to the Father as
touching his Godhead: and inferior to the Father, touching his manhood. Who
though he be God and Man, yet is he not two but one Christ. One, not by
conversion of the Godhead into flesh; but by taking the manhood into God. One
altogether; not by confusion of substance; but by unity of Person. For as the
reasonable soul and flesh is one Man; so God and Man is one Christ.

Who suffered for our salvation; descended into hell; rose again the third day
from the dead: He ascended into heaven; he fifteth on the right hand of the
Father, God Almighty: from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead. At whose coming all men shall rise again with their bodies; and shall
give account for their own works; And they that have done good, shall go into
life everlasting; and they that have done evil into everlasting fire. This is
the Catholic Faith, which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved.

As for the censures annexed hereunto, viz. 1. In the beginning (except a man
keep the Catholic faith.) 2. In the middle (he that will be saved must thus
think.) and 3. In the end (this is the Catholic faith, which except a man
believe faithfully he cannot be saved.) I thought good to give you Dr.
Hammond's apprehensions of them, how they ought to be understood: His words are
these. I suppose (says he) they must be interpreted by their opposition to
those heresies that had invaded the Church, In his treatise of Fundamentals.
and which were acts of carnality in them that broached and maintained them
against the apostolic doctrine, and contradictory to that foundation which had
been resolved on as necessary to bring the world to the obedience of Christ,
and were therefore to be anathematized after this manner, and with detestation
branded, and banished out of the Church. Not that it was hereby defined to be a
damnable sin to fail in the understanding or believing the full matter of any
of those explications before they were propounded, and when it might more
reasonably be deemed not to be any fault of the will, to which this were
imputable. Thus he.

2. The canonical books of the old and new Testament owned by him, are the same
with those which the reformed Churches acknowledge for such, of which he thus
speaks. All scripture of us who are Christians was divinely inspired. In
Synopsi.
The books thereof are not infinite but finite, and comprehended in a certain
Canon, which having set down of the Old Testament, (as they are now with us) he
adds, the Canonical books therefore of the Old Testament are twenty and two,
equal for number unto the Hebrew Letters or alphabet, for so many elements of
Letters there are among the Hebrews. But (says he) besides these there are
other books of the Old Testament not Canonical, which are read only unto the
Catechumens, and of these he names, the Wisdom of Solomon, the Wisdom of Jesus
the Son of Syrach, the fragment of Esther, Judith, and Tobith, Whitak. de
script. Apocryph. q. 1. c. 6.
for the books of the Maccabees he made no account of them, yet he afterward
mentions four books of the Maccabees with some others. He also reckons the
Canonical Books of the New Testament, which (says he) are as it were certain
sure anchors and supporters or pillars of our Faith, as having been written by
the Apostles of Christ themselves, who both conversed with him, and were
instructed by him.

3. The sacred and divinely inspired Scriptures (says he) are of themselves
sufficient for the discovery of the truth: Orat. contra idola, et or. 2. contra
Arian.
In the reading whereof this is faithfully to be observed, viz. unto what times
they are directed, to what person, and for what cause they are written: lest
things be severed from their reasons, and so the unskilful, reading any thing
different from them, should deviate from the right understanding of them.

4. As touching the way whereby the knowledge of the Scriptures may be
attained, Lib. de in. carnat. verb. Dei.
he thus speaks. To the searching and true understanding of the Scriptures,
there is need of a holy life, a pure mind, and virtue which is according to
Christ, that the mind running through that path, may attain unto those things
which it does desire, as far as humane nature may understand things divine.

5. The holy Scripture (says he) does not contradict it self, for unto a
hearer desirous of truth, it does interpret it self.

6. Concerning the worshipping of Christ* we adore (says he) not the Creature,
God forbid. Epist. ad Ad^lphium.
Such madness belongs unto Ethuicks and Arians, but we adore the Lord of things
created, the incarnate Word of God, for although the Flesh be in it self a part
of things created, yet is it made the Body of God: Neither yet do we give
adoration unto such a body by it self severed from the word, neither adoring
the Word do we put the Word far from the Flesh, but knowing that it is said,
the Word was made Flesh, we acknowledge it even now in the Flesh to be God.

7. He gives this interpretation of those words of Christ, Mark. 13. 32. But of
that day and that hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven,
neither the Son but the Father. The Son (says he) knew it as God but not as
man: Orat. 4. contra A^ian.
wherefore he said not, neither the Son of God, lest the divinity should seem
to be ignorant, but simply, neither the Son: that this might be the ignorance
of the Son as man. And for this cause when he speaks of the Angels, he added
not a higher degree saying, neither the Holy Spirit, but was silent here, by a
double reason affirming the truth of the thing: for admit that the Spirit
knows, then much more the Word as the Word (from whom even the Spirit receives)
was not ignorant of it.

8. Speaking of the mystery of the two natures in Christ; In orat. Christum
esse unum.
What need is there (says he) of dispute and strife about words? it is more
profitable to believe, and reverence: and silently to adore. I acknowledge him
to be true God from heaven imp^ssible: I acknowledge the same of the seed of
David as touching the Flesh, a man of the earth passible. I do not curiousty
inquire why the same is passible and impassible, or why God and man: lest being
curiously inquisitive why and how, I should miss of the good propounded unto
us. For we ought first to believe and adore, and in the second place to seek
from above a reason of these things: not from beneath to inquire of Flesh and
Blood, but from divine and heavenly revelation.

9. What the faith of the Church was concerning the Trinity, Ep. ad Serap. Sp.
S. non esse creaturam.
he thus delivers. Let us see that very tradition from the beginning, and that
Doctrine and Faith of the Catholic Church which Christ indeed gave, but the
Apostles preached and kept: For in this Church are we founded, and whosoever falls
from thence cannot be said to be a Christian. The holy and perfect Trinity
therefore in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, receives the reason of the Deity,
possesses nothing foreign or superinduced from without, nor consists of the
Creator and Creature, but the whole is of the Creator and Maker of all things,
like it self and indivisible, and the operation thereof one. For the Father by
the Word in the holy Spirit does all things, and so the unity of the Trinity is
kept or preserved, and so one God in the Church is preached, who is above all
and through all and in all: viz. above all as the Father, as the beginning and
fountain, but through all by the Word, moreover in all in or by the holy
Spirit. But the Trinity is not in name only, or an empty form of speech: but in
truth and reason of subsisting, the Trinity: For as the Father is that very
thing that he is, so also the Word God over all, is that very thing that he is;
so also the Holy Ghost is not any inessential thing, but truly existeth and
subsisteth.

10. According to the Ecclesiastical Canons (says he) as the Apostle
commanded, Ep. ad Orthodox. in persecut.
the people being gathered together with the Holy Ghost, who constitute a
Bishop, publicly and in the presence of the Clergy, craving a Bishop,
inquisition ought to be made, and so all things canonically performed.

11. Concerning the lawfulness of flight in time of persecution, Apol. ad
Impe^at. Constantium.
he thus speaks. I betook me to flight not for fear of death, lest any should
accuse me of timidity, but that I might obey the precept of our Savior whose
command it is that we should make use of flight against persecutors, of hiding
places against those that search for us, lest if we should offer our selves
unto open danger, we should more sharply provoke the fury of our persecutors.
Verily it is all one both for a man to kill himself, and to proffer himself
unto the enemies to be slain: but he that flees as the Lord commands, knows the
Articles of the time, and truly provides for his persecutors: lest being
carried out even to the shedding of blood, they should become guilty of that
precept that forbids murder. Again concerning the same thing;

12. That law (says he) is propounded unto all in general, De fuga^ sua^.
to flee when they are pursued in time of persecution, and to hide themselves
when they are sought: for neither should they be precipitate and rash in
tempting the Lord, but must wait until the time appointed of dying do come, or
that the Judge do determine something concerning them, as shall seem good unto
him: But yet would he have us always ready, when either the time calls for it,
or we are apprehended to contend for the Church even unto death. These things
did the blessed Martyrs observe, who while they lay hid did harden themselves,
but being found out they did undergo Martyrdom. Now if some of them did render
themselves unto their persecutors, they were not thorough rashness moved so to
do, but every where professed unto all men, that this promptness and offering
of themselves did proceed from the Holy Ghost.

13. He gives this character of an heretic, Epist. ad* ^o^litar. vit. agentes.
Heresy (says he) or an heretic may thus be known and evinced, that
whosoever is dear unto them and a companion with them in the same impiety,
although he be guilty of sundry crimes and infinite vices, and they have
arguments against him of his heinous acts; yet is he approved and had in great
esteem among them, yea, and is forthwith made the Emperor's friend, etc. But
those that reprove their wickedness, and sincerely teach the things which are
of Christ, though pure in all things, upon any feigned Crime laid to their
charge, they are prefently hurried into Banishment.

6. The defects and blemishes of this eminent Father and Champion of Jesus
Christ, were neither so many nor so gross, as are to be found in most of the
Ancients that were before him: yet was he not altogether free but liable to
error as well as others, as appears from somewhat of this kind that dropped from
his pen, which were especially such passages as these in his genuine works, for
as for the apparently supposititious, I shall forbear to meddle with them,
having in them so much hay and stubble as we cannot imagine should pass through
the hands of so skilful a Master Builder.

1. He affirms the local descent of Christ into Hell. Epist. de incarnat.
Chr^sti advers. Apollina^.
He accomplished (says he) the condemnation of sin in the earth, the abolition
of the curse upon the Cross, the redemption from corruption in the Grave, the
condemnation of death in Hell: Going through all places that he might every
where perfect the salvation of the whole man, showing himself in the form of
our image which he took upon him.

Again. The body descended not beyond the grave, Ibid.
the Soul pierced into Hell, places severed by a vast distance, the Grave
receiving that which was corporeal, because the body was there, but Hell, that
which was incorporeal. Hence it came to pass that though the Lord were present
there incorporeally, yet was he by death acknowledged to be a man: that his
Soul, not liable unto the bands of death but yet made as it were liable, might
break asunder the bands of those Souls which Hell detained, etc.

2. Concerning the state of the Fathers before Christ, Tractat. d^ Salut.
Advent. Christi.
that they were in Hell; he thus speaks. The Soul of Adam detained in or under
the condemnation of death, did perpetually cry unto the Lord, and the rest who
by the law of nature pleased God, were detained together with Adam, and were
and did cry with him in grief. In which passage we have also a third error of
his, viz.

3. That men by the law of nature may please God, contrary unto what we find in
Heb. 11. 6.

4. He makes circumcision a note or sign of Baptism. In E^ar. in Mat. 11. 27
Abraham (says he) when he had believed God, received circumcision for a note
or sign of that regeneration which is obtained by Baptism: wherefore, when the
thing was come which was signified by the figure, the sign and figure it self
perished and ceased. For circumcision was a sign, but the laver of regeneration
the very thing that was signified.

Besides these there are in him some other passages, not so aptly nor warily
delivered as they ought to have been, viz.

1. Concerning the freedom of man's will, Orat contra idola.
he thus speaks. The mind (says he) is free and at it is own dispose, for it
can, as incline it self unto that which is good, so also turn from it, which
beholding its free right and power over it self, it perceives that it can use
the members of the Body either way, both unto the things that are, i.e. good
things, and also unto the things that are not, i.e. evil.

2. He is too excessive and hyperbolical in In Apolog. ad Constan^*
the praise of Virginity. The Son of God (says he) our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, among other his gifts bestowed upon us in virginity, an example of
angelical holiness. Certainly Virgins endowed with that virtue, the Catholic
Church is wont to call the Spouses of Christ; whom being beheld by them the
very heathen do prosecute with admiration, as the Temple of Christ.

There is a large encomium hereof, in the end of the treatise of Virginity,
which being but a vain rhetorical flourish, and because the Treatise it self is
justly suspected not to belong unto Athanasius, I shall forbear to set it down
as being unworthy to be ascribed unto so grave and found an Author.

3. He seems to assert the worshipping or adoration of the Saints, Lib. de
incarnat. verb. Dei. contra P. Samosat.
thus: If (says he) thou adore the man Christ, because there dwells the Word
of God, upon the same ground adore the Saints also, because God has his
habitation in them. It is strange (say the Centurists) that so great a Doctor
should so write, Gent. 4. c. 4. in med. part. ^. c. 16.
but they do err, (says Scultetus) not considering that he there speaks upon
the suppositition of Samosatenus, who thought that Christ as man was to be
adored, because of the Word dwelling in him, which is the thing that Athanasius
denies, convincing Samosatenus of falsehood from an absurdity that would
follow: For seeing the Word dwells also in the Saints, it would thence follow
that they are to be worshipped, which Athanasius in the same place affirms to
be extreme impiety. And indeed he expressly elsewhere says, Orat. 3. contra
Arian.
that adoration belongs unto God only.

7. As touching his death, it was very remarkable in this regard: that in the
midst of a most vehement storm and tempest (the cruel persecution under the
Emperor Valens) he should so quietly arrive at the haven. For being forced to
hide himself (as has been said) in his Fathers monument about the space of
four months, the people that greatly loved him, and had him in very high
esteem, grew so impatient of his absence from them, that they began to be
tumultuous, threatening to burn the ships and public edifices, unless
Athanasius were permitted to return unto them again. Socrat. lib. 4. c. 16.
The Emperor hereupon fearing what the issue might be, gave way to their fury
(being a hot and hasty kind of people) and suffered him to enjoy his Bishopric
again, from that time tempering himself from troubling Alexandria and the
Country of Egypt. By this means it came to pass, In vita ejus ab incerto
Authore.
that after so long labor and sweat for Christ, so many encounters for the
Orthodox faith, so frequent and famous flights and banishments, having given
many things in charge unto Peter his successor, he did at Alexandria in peace
and a good old age, Osiard. ep. hist. Eccles.
pass from this vale of trouble unto the rest above, after he had governed that
Church by the space (though not without intermissions) of forty and six years,
Socrat. lib 4. c. 16. Baron. Annal.
in the seventh year of the Emperor Valens, and of Christ, about 371.

Hilarious Pictaviensis.
1. HE was born in France, and yet not Gallus; Antonin. hist. part. 2. cap. 3.
as himself answered Leo Bishop of Rome in a certain Council, asking him at his
entrance in a proud insulting manner: Tune es Hilarious Gallus? At ille. Non
sum, inquit, Gallus, sed de Gallia: ac si diceret: non sum natione Gallus, sed
de Gallia praesul. Erat enim gente Aquitanicus; pontificali autem dignitate
praeminebat Gallis: for he was Bishop of Po^ctiers the chief City of the Celtae
or Galli. Nomenclat. Geograph. ad Caesar. comment.
For France of old was divided into three parts or Provinces, viz. Belgicam,
Aquitanicam, (body Guienne vocatur) and Celticam. Now the inhabitants of this
later were properly those called Galli; ipsorum lingua Celtae, nostra (inquit
Caesar) Galli appellantur. In commen. de bello Gallic. l. 1. Plin. l. 4. c. 17
S^rab. l. 4. Pomp. Mela. l ^ c. 2. Mag. in Geog l. 4.
So does Sulpitius Severus distinguish his Country men into these three sorts,
Aquitanes, Galli and Britains: the two former are so far differing the one
from the other (says Strabo) both in habit and Language, that the Aquitanes
are more like unto the Spaniards, then unto the Galli.

It is reported of him, that in his younger years applying himself unto study,
Antonin. (...). ^art 2. cap. 3.
and not profiting as he desired, (which made him to doubt whether he should
ever attain unto that which he aimed at) he left the Schools, purposing to fall
upon some other course: and passing along by a certain well in the way, walled
up with great stone, he observed that those stones were much worn and hollowed
in some places, by the often rubbing of the Rope upon them, wherewith they used
to draw the water: Hereupon he fell into this consideration with himself: if
this Cord, that is much softer, has by frequency of fretting made this hard
stone hollow; then surely may I also, by continuance of time, both profit and
perfect or accomplish my desire: Accordingly, he betook him again unto the
Schools, where by assiduity and constancy in study he at length became a most
Learned and accurate Scholar.

He seems to have been at first an Ethnic, Cent. 4. c. 10
at what time perceiving and considering with himself how vain the opinions and
conceits were which the Philosophers had of the gods, musing much hereupon, he
at length light upon the books of Moses, Hilar. de Trinit. l. 1.
the Prophets, and the Apostles, by the diligent perusal whereof he came to the
knowledge of the truth, and to embrace the Christian Religion; being now well
stricken in years: yet in a short time did he so much profit in the Doctrine of
Christianity, Bellar. de scrip. Eccles.
that he was deservedly esteemed a chief Doctor and pillar of the Catholic
Church.

His Country men, coming to understand of his great worth, soon advanced him
unto a high degree of dignity; though a married man, he being by them chosen to
be Bishop of Poictiers, chief City of the Province of Poictou. About this time,
the persecution under the Emperor Constantius, Bin council. tom. 1.
grew very hot; in so much that many eminent Bishops for holding fast and
sticking close unto the Catholic Faith, were exiled and driven into
banishment. Hereupon Hilary with diverse other Gallicane Bishops, convening
together, with mutual consent did by a Decree separate Saturninus, Valens and
Vrsatius (who were violent Arians) from their Communion: adding withal, that if
any, being admonished to shun their society, did not herein obey the sentence
of the Catholic Bishops, they should be excommunicated. Saturninus who was
Bishop of Arles (a factious and mischievous man) took this very grievously,
Sulp. Sever. hist. l. 2. vir sane pessimus, and ingenio malo pravoque verum
etiam praeter h^resis infamiam multis atque infandis criminibus convictus,
Ecclesia e^ectus est. Angelocrator. ep. conc.
that he should be Anathematized and excluded from Communion with the rest of
the Bishops; (yet after this was he sor heinous crimes cast out of the Church)
wherefore by the favor of Constantius he procured Synods to be congregatted at
Byterris, and at Arles Cities of France, unto which the Catholic Bishops
should be forced to come: Hilary, being one of those who were present in these
Synods, fearing least by the subtilty of the Arians (as was their manner) the
Orthodox through simplicity might be circumvented, offers a libel to be read,
wherein the close conveyances, crafty fetches, and blasphemous Heresies of the
Arians were laid open and discovered unto all. But the adversaries withstanding
the Reading thereof, prevailed so far, that Hilary refusing to subscribe unto
their ambiguous and captious contessions and decrees (for he was very
circumspect and quick sighted to discern and avoid their cunning devices and
impostures) was banished into Phrygia in the East, where he continued for the
space of three whole years and upward.

In the fourth year of his banishment, Sulp. Sever. lib. 2.
the Emperor commands a Synod of the Eastern Bishops to assemble, Bin. Tom. 1.
Council.
at Seleucia a City of Isauria, (about the time that those of the West met at
Ariminum) at the which Hilary was compelled by the Emperors deputy, to be
present among the rest: this the Officers did by virtue of a General Command
that they had received, for the convening of all the Bishops, having no
particular order concerning Hilary: which yet came to pass, not without the
special hand of God so disposing it, that a man so well instructed in the
knowledge of Divine Truth, should be present, when matters of faith were to be
disputed of. Being come, and received with a great deal of respect by the
Orthodox the minds of all being toward him; they first demanded of him, what
was the Faith of the Gallicane Churches, (for by the false reports of the
Arians, they were suspected by the Eastern Bishops to be tained with the
Heresy of Sabellius:) wherein having given them good satisfaction, and showed
them that in the Faith they agreed with the Council of Nice, he was taken into
their society, and added unto the Council: in the which, the Arians after much
debate, were condemned by those that were but little better, being Half- Arians.

Some are sent unto the Emperor, to give him an account of what had passed in
the Synod. Ibid. Sulpit. Sever.
Whither being come (those, who had been condemned, going thither also,
presuming upon the strength of their party, and the Emperors favor, who was of
their faction) they there found the delegates of the Orthodox partly that had
met at Ariminum: who, partly through fear of the Emperor, and partly through
the fallacy of the Arians, were compelled to join in Communion with the
Heretics, there having been delivered unto them a specious form of the Faith,
wrapt-up in fallacious terms and expressions, which indeed seemed to be
Catholic, but had the contrary doctrine closely couched under them.

Unto this, the Emperor required those of the Council of Seleucia to subscribe,
threatening banishment unto them that refused so to do: in so much as the
greater part were drawn to yield hereunto, some by one means, and some by
another. Hilary being present with the Emperor, waiting upon him to know his
mind whether he should again return into exile or no; and seeing the Faith in
so much danger, the Western Bishops deceived and the Eastern deterred, and both
overcome: he did most importunately by three petitions crave audience, and that
he might be permitted to dispute the matter in controversy with the
adversaries: which the Arians shunned and altogether refused. At length Hilary
is commanded (as being the seminary of discord and disturber of the East) to
return into France again.

Whither being come, Sulp. Sever. ib. c. 4. c. 10.
he out of a mind burning with holy zeal, applied himself with greatest care
and industry unto this work chiefly, viz. To reduce into the right way again
the Western Bishops that had been miserably deceived by the Arians. For which
end diverse Synods were assembled in France, wherein by his means the thing he
intended, and so much desired, was at length happily effected: for the seduced
were brought to see, acknowledge and amend their error, condemning what had
been done and decreed at the Council of Ariminum, and so was that Church
reformed and the says therein restored unto its ancient state again. Eusebius.
Vercel. est vir omni vita Deo serviens Hill. ad Constantium. l. 2.
For which great benefit the Gallicane Churches were (as is evident unto all)
beholding chiefly unto Hilary to whom they owe their freedom: By the brightness
of whose beams (as also of Eusebius Bishop of Vercellis) the thick mists of
error that had so much darkened those Countries, Sozom. l. 15. c. 10.
( viz. of Iuyricum, Anton. part. 2. c. 5.
Italy and France) were dispelled and scattered. Ruffin. hist. lib. 1. c. 21.


2. He was a very learned man, Trithem. de script.
and of wonderful eloquence, Erasm. epist. ant. Hilar.
wherein he so far excelled, that Ierom calls him a most eloquent man, Apolog.
adv. Ruff. lib. 2.
the most elegant of his time, even a Rhodanus of Latin eloquence: Of a
notable faculty to persuade and win men unto the truth, In proaem. comment. in
Galat. lib. 2. Ruff. lib. 1. c. 31.
so that he was one of the most eminent lights of the age he lived in, and in
France shining as the Moon at the full in the Temple of God: Erasm. ubi supra.
In whom this among the rest deserves admiration, Anton. hist. part. 2.
that (though he were otherwise learned yet) being for the most part ignorant
of Ecclesiastical controversies, Baron. ad an. 356. Bellar. de script. Eccl.
he should in so short a time as he did, become so great a Doctor and
Antagonist against the Arians, as to be worthily esteemed a chief pillar of the
Catholic Church, Erasm. epist. ant. Hilar.
being the first among the Latins that wrote against that heresy, of which he
was a bitter enemy, branding the maintainers thereof with the black marks and
characters of impious, Sulp. Sever. lib. 2.
blasphemous, pests, Antichrists, traveling and taking exceeding great pains
for the stopping of its current and the curing and recovering of the infected
world, this contagion having spread it self far and near.

He was excellently skilled in the knowledge of the Scriptures and divine
mysteries, Sulp. Sev. ib.
so that he was of great fame and authority in the Church, as appears by the
venerable mention that Ierom oftentimes makes of him. Erasm. epist. ant. Hilar.
Cent. 4. c. 10.
Many were the the rare gifts wherewith he was richly adorned, and among others
with a singular dexterity in teaching, and a notable faculty of persuading:
Ruff. hist. lib. 1. c. 31.
unto which we may add, his acuteness in discerning and discovering the cunning
conveyances and impostures of the Heretics. Biblioth. lib. 4. epist. ad
Magnum. 84.
Sixtus Senensis styles him an incomparable Bishop; and Ierom, the Confessor of
his time, who stoutly maintained the truth, and constantly opposed the
adversaries thereof, though in so doing he many times exposed himself to no
small perils.

He was of a sweet and mild temper, Ruff. ubi supra.
very venerable in his life and manners, Trithem. de script.
and of such modesty and humility, that though he were deservedly ranked among
thosee of chiefest note in his time, Lib. de Synod. advers. Arian.
yet did he account himself the most unskilful and unlearned of them all. Lib.
3. c 13.
In a word, he was a man (says Sozomen) truly divine in respect both of his
life and learning, yet in this latter not a little defective, in that he had
but small skill in the Greek and Hebrew languages: Erasm. in epist. ant. Hill.
Hebraei sermonis (inquit Hieronymus) ignarus fuit, Graecarum quoque literarum
quandam aurulam ceperat; Ep^ad Marcellam, number. 141.
sed ab Hiliodorio presbytero, quo ille familiariter usus est, ea quae
intelligere non poterat, quomodo ab Origene essent dicta, Ibid.
quaerebat. Yet withal he adds, I dare not (says he) reprehend so great a man,
and the most eloquent in his time, In epist. ante opera Chrysostom.
( vocalem illam Ecclesiae Catholicae tubam, inquit Erasmus) who both for the
merit of his confession, industry of his life, and famousness of his eloquence,
is spoken of as far as the Roman name reaches. In epist. ad Ludovic. Imperat.
de Judaie. superstitionibus.
I may not omit a passage in Agobardus Bishop of Lions concerning him. Qua
cantela (inquit) Iudaeorum semper et haereticorum devitavit Hilarious profana
consortia, vita ejus scripta fatetur: quod it a scilicet hujusmodi hosts
Ecclesiae fuerit execratus, ut non solum convivium, sed ne salutatio quidem ei
extiterit, cum his praetereunti communis.

I shall close his encomium in the words of Venantius, who was also Bishop of
Poictiers, about the year of Christ, 575. Nicaeus. in auctario. de script. Eccl.
And a Poet of chief note according to the time he lived in, He in four books
of Heroic Verse wrote the life of S. Martin, by whose help he had been cured
(as it is reported) of a great pain in his eyes, in the first of which books he
thus speaks in the praise of our Hilary. -- Summus apex fidei, Biblioth. patrum.
virtutis, amoris,
Hilarious famae radios jactabat in orbem:
Buccina terribilis, tuba legis, praeco Tonantis:
Pulchrior electro, ter cocto ardentior auro,
Largior Eridano, Rhodano torrentior amplo,
Vberior Nilo, generoso sparsior Hystro,
Cordis inundantis docilis ructare fluenta,
Fontibus ingenii sitienta pectora rorans.
Doctor Apostolicus, vacuans ratione sophistas,
Dogmate, luce, side informans virtute sequaces.


Which may be thus Englished:
Hilary, top of honor, faith and grace,
Whose fame does dart its rays in every place,
The laws shrill Trumpet, preacher of the most High
Fairer than Amber, sparkling far and nigh,
More than refined Gold, larger than Po,
More vehement than Rhone of swiftest flow,
For fruitfulness passing the Egyptian Nile,
Outstretching generous Ister many a Mile:
Whose swelling heart freely its streams out spues,
And with his wit the thirsty breasts bedews:
Doctor Apostolic skilful to unty,
The cunning knots of subtle Sophistry,
And by sound doctrine to inform aright
His followers with virtue, faith and light.
3. As for the Writings of this Worthy many of them have felt the force of
time, which has raked them up in the dust, so that, they are withdrawn from
the view and use of the present, as also of some preceding Ages. The little of
them which with their names have been preserved unto this day, is that which
follows, viz.

1. His commentary or tractates upon the Book of Job, Hierouym. Apol. 1. adv.
Ruffin.
which is little else than a translation of Origin: For herein (and in his
comment upon the Psalms) are to be found almost forty thousand verses Hierouym.
ibid.
( quadraginta ferme millia versuum Origenis in Job et Psalmos transtulit)
translated out of that Author, Hieron. in catalog.
in which he keeps to the sense though not unto his words. Cent. 4. c. 10.
These were extant in Ieroms time, for he had the sight of them.

2. His comment upon the Canticles, In catalog.
which Ierom only heard of, but it came not to his hands.

3. Of Mysteries. Ibid.


4. Of the Septenary or uneven number, a book mentioned by Ierom, Apol. pro
l^bris. advers. Jovinlan.
dedicated unto Fortunatus: This book (says Victorius) is extant under the
name of Cyprian, In Schol. in Apol. istam.
but that it is rather Hilary's, appears (says he) from the style, Ieroms
authority ascribing it to him, and its dedication unto Fortunatus, who was
Hilary's great friend, as his Poems do testify.

5. His book or commentary (as Possevin calls it) against Dioscorus a
Physician, Cent. 4. c. 10.
or against Salust a Prefect: Hieron. epist ad Magnum number. 84.
wherein (though it were but short, yet was it a learned and accurate piece) he
showed what he could do with his Pen, putting out all the strength both of his
wit and eloquence: Erasm. in ep. ante Hilar. Possev. in apparat.
which is wanting, not without the great loss of the History of the affairs of
France, and other Countries.

6. His book against Valens and Vrsatius, Sulp. Sever. lib. 2.
(two pestilent Arians, who had infected with their heresy, Italy, Illiricum,
and the East,) containing the History of the Acts of the councils of Ariminum
and Seleucia, Erasm. in epist. praedict.
which is lost, unless perhaps it be contained in his book of of Synods.

7. A defense of the Catholic Faith. Trithem. de script.


8. Of heresies.

9. A book of Chronicles, Trith, ibid. Berg. chron.
or an history from the beginning of the world unto the time of Christ.

10. A book of hymns, Ibid.
he was the first among the Catholics, that set forth hymns and verses. In
epist. ant. Hilar.
Declarat (inquit Erasmus) phrasis et compositio Hilariani sermonis, in carmine
non infoelicem fuisse. Et fortassis aliquot hymni, quos hodie canit ecclesia,
non indoctos sed incerti authoris, illius sunt.

11. Diverse Epistles, a work mentioned by Sulpitius Severus, Sac. hist. l. 2.
which reports the great age of Osius the famous Bishop of Corduba, as being
above an hundred year old. Cent. 4. c. 10.
The most of them seem to have been written after his return from banishment
into France, wherein condemning the Arian heresy, he labors to reduce
therefrom those Western Bishops, who by the Eastern in the Council of Seleucia
had been by cunning and craft deceived and drawn into it.

12. Whereas the Centurists speak of a book of his concerning the rebaptization
of heretics, Ibid.
I suppose it belongs not to our, Rivet. crit. sac.
but another Hilary, Hilarious quidam, non Pictaviensis episcopus sed Romanus
diaconus denuo hanc Camarinam movit. Pamel. in vita Cypriani.
who was a Deacon in the Church of Rome, and of Cyprian's mind in the point of
rebaptization of those that had been baptized by heretics, and particularly
the Arians. He indeed wrote certain books upon this subject: of whom Ierom is
to be understood, calling hlm the Worlds Deucalion, as one that thought the
whole World would have perished in the baptism of Heretics as in a second
flood, In dialog. adv. Luciferian.
had not he restored it by another Baptism. Victorius. in Schol. in loc.


There are extant to this day these following books, which are generally
conceived to be his.

1. Twelve books of the Trinity against the Arians, Cent. 4. c. 10. Chemnit. in
or. de lect patrum.
which he wrote when he was banished into Phrygia, being the first among the
Latin Fathers that dealt upon this subject: A work in this regard of no small
advantage unto the Reader, Erasm. in ep. ant. Hilar.
that therein he expounds diverse places not a little obscure, in the Gospel of
John and Epistles of Paul, no less happily than accurately. Erasm. ibid.
The first of these books as it seems he writ last, for it contains an account
or sum of the whole work, setting down particularly the subjects or contents of
each of the other books. Socrat. h. l. 5. c. 12. Theodor. l. 3. c. 14.
It is an elaborate piece, of much strength, and commended even by the
adversaries themselves.

2. Three books or Apologues unto Constantius the Emperor, Cent. 4. c. 10.
who much favored the faction of the Ariaus: In epist. ant. Hiiar.
All which Erasmus thinks to be imperfect, for (says he) they promise
something exact and laborious, but perform not accordingly, being as it were
suddenly silent. The first of these he conceives to have been written after the
death of that Emperor, because he therein deals more freely and sharply with
him; whereas in the other two he is more fair and moderate, Baronius supposes
the first as well as the two later, to have been written while the Emperor was
alive, and therefore that the book mentioned by Jerome to be written after the
death of Constantius, In catalog.
is not now extant; because he says that by this free confession, he tended to
martyrdom, whereunto he exhorts others by the like liberty of speaking, which
would have seemed ridiculous if the persecutor had been now dead. De script.
Eccless.
But (says Bellarmine) perhaps these different opinions may be reconciled, by
thus saying: That at the Writing of the first Epistle, Hilary thought him to
have been dead, though indeed he were then alive.

3. His book against the Arians or against Auxentius Bishop of Millain, Cent.
4. c. 10.
written unto the Bishops and people detesting the Arian heresy: which by
Ierom is styled an elegant book: In catalog.
wherein he accuses the said Bishop as infected with Arianism. To which is
annexed an Epistle of Auxentius, wherein he clears himself, as not guilty of
the crime laid to his charge.

4. His book of Synods unto the Bishops of France, Erasm. ant. Hilar. epist.
whom he congratulates that in the midst of so great tumults as are in the
world, they had kept themselves free from the Arian faction; wherein he
declares in what meetings of the Bishops the Arian heresy had been condemned.
This book (as himself testifies) he translated out of Greek, but with this
liberty that neglecting the words he kept still to the sense, and where the
place invites him so to do, In or. de lect parr. ante loc. com.
he adds and intermingles somewhat of his own. Of which, Chemnitius thus
speaks. He gathered together (says he) the opinions of the Greeks concerning
the Trinity, and unless he had collected the decrees of the Eastern Synods, we
should have known nothing of them as touching their opinions and doctrin^s.

5. His commentary upon the Gospel of Matthew, E^asm in epist ant. Hi^
which he divided into thirty and three Canons, Sixth. Senens. biblioth. l. 4.
by which name it is called of some: Going through almost the whole of that
Evangelist, in a succinct and brief, but learned and solid explanation: Being
more delighted with the allegorical than literal sense herein imitating Origin,
out of whom I doubt not (says Erasmus) he translated this whole work; Ibid.
it does so in all things savor both of the wit and phrase of Origin. For as
it contains many choice things which do proclaim the Author to have been most
absolutely skilled in the sacred Scriptures, so is he sometimes too
superstitious and violent in his allegories, a peculiar fault to be found in
almost all the commentaries of Origin.

6. His commentary upon the Psalms, not the whole but upon the first and
second: then from the one and fiftieth unto the sixty and second: In catalog.
according to Ierom's reckoning, but as now extant in Erasmus his edition, from
the one and fiftyeth unto the end of the sixty and ninth: which addition Sixtus
Senensis says he had read being printed. In biblioth. lib. 4.
Also from the hundred and nineteenth unto the end of the book: only that upon
the last Psalm is imperfect, In ep^st. ant. Hilar.
the last leaf (says Erasmus) in the manuscripts being either torn or worn
away, as it oftentimes falls out. This work is rather an imitation than a
translation of Origin: for he adds somewhat of his own, some do affirm that he
set forth tractates upon the whole book of the Psalms, and that it was extant
in Spain, But commonly no more is to be found than the above mentioned. Ep. ad
Fl^rentium. number. 6.
as also his book of the Synods, being very large, Ierom transcribed with his
own hand at Triers for he had him in very high esteem.

There are also some books abroad under his name, which are justly suspected
and taken for spurious* As,

1. An Epistle unto Abram or Afram his Daughter, Fra^n in ep. ant. Hilar. ^t
(...).
which is a mere toy of some idle and unlearned man, it has nothing in it
worthy of Hilary, much less that which follows, viz.

2. An Hymn which has in it neither rhythm nor reason, yet does Ierom testify
of Hilary, that he wrote in verse, Eras^. ibid.
and perhaps some of those hymns which at this day are sung in the Church,
whose Author is unknown, may be his: De poetis.
He was so far skilled this way, that Gyraldus gives him a place and ranks him
among the Christian Poets. Bellarmine and Possevin had but small reason upon so
slender a ground, as they have, to affirm both of these to be his without doubt.

3. A book of the unity of the Father and the Son, Bellat. de script. Ecci.
which, whether it were his or no, seems very uncertain; seeing Ierom makes no
mention of it. It seems to be a rhapsody of some studious man, In catalog.
libr. Hilar. in edit. Erasm. Cent. 4. c. 10.
taken partly out of the second, but for the most part out of the ninth book of
the Trinity; who omitted and added what he pleased. With this as a distinct
book from it, Bellarmine joins another, of the essence of the Father and the
Son, which yet I find not named by any other Author. Indeed there is an
appendix unto the former of the various names of Christ, Ibid.
(which Bellarmine mentions not) the phrase whereof differs much from Hilary's.
R^v. crit. sac.
The Author whereof would fain imitate Hilary, which he was not negligent in
the performance of: De script. Ecclef.
They are grave and learned books (says Bellarmine of his two) and not
unworthy the spirit and eloquence of Hilary.

4. An Epistle unto Augustine, concerning the remains of the Pelagian heresy,
which cannot be Hilary's, Riv. crit. sac.
because that heresy was not known in his time.

5. Another Epistle unto Augustine, being the eighty and eighth in number among
Augustines: Ibid.
in which he propounds certain questions to be resolved, Bellar. de script.
Ecci.
but neither this nor the ^ormer are our Hilary's, who was dead before
Augustine became a Christian, and yet in his answer he styles him his Son. Riv.
crit. sac.
They both seem to belong unto another Hilary, that was afterward made Bishop
of Arles; who together with Prosper of Aquitain, defended the cause of
Augustine against the French Semipelagians, The former of the Epistles gave
occasion unto Augustine to write his treatises of the predestination of the
Saints and of the good of perseverance, to which are prefixed this Epistle,
together with one from Prosper concerning the same matter.

6. A fragment concerning the things that were done in the Council of Ariminum,
Ad an. 352.
rejected by Baronius.

7. An heroic Poem, Riv crit. sac. Bellar. de script. Eccl.
styled Genesis written unto Pope Leo, who lived Ann. 440. at what time Hilary
had left this life: And therefore it cannot be his, but may better be ascribed
unto the abovenamed Hilary Bishop of Arles.

8. A fragment of the Trinity, Biblioth. Patr. gr (...) tom. 1.
which contains his creed, but of little credit as being no where else
mentioned. It might happily be an extract out of his work upon this subject.

4. As for his style, it is perplex and th^rny, Calvin. ep. 339.
such, as should he handle matters in themselves very clear, yet would it be
both hard to be understood and easy to be depraved. Very lofty he is after the
Gallicane manner, Erasm. in ep. ant. Hilar.
for this seems to be peculiar unto the wit and genius of that nation; (as
appears in Sulpitius Severus Eucherius, and of late the famous Budaeus, adeo
sublimis, ut tubam sonare credas non bominem; adeo faeliciter elaboratus, ut
eruditum lectorem nunquam satiet, Hieron. ep. 13. ad Pauli^um.
trivialiter literatos procul submoveat.) and being adorned with the Flowers of
Greece, he is sometimes involved in long periods, so that he is far above the
reach of, and in vain perused by unskilful Readers, which yet Sixtus Senensis
thinks ought to be referred unto his books of the Trinity, Biblioth. l. 4.
wherein he imitated Quintilian both in his style, Hieron. epist 84. ad Magnum.
and also the number of the books: for in that work though the subject it self
were profound, yet did he affect the praise of subtlety in the handling of it:
which inconvenience (says Erasmus) may be lessened in the Reader through
custom and familiarity. In epist ant. Hilar.
But in his commentaries upon the Psalms and Gospel of Matthew, Sixth. Senens.
lib. 4.
his style is succinct without any affection of art, solid yet sometimes
obscure, but far from all swelling haughtiness.

5. There are many things in his works well worthy of note; I shall present you
with a few which I shall choose to do in his words lest they should lose too
much of their weight, by the translation of them.

1. His Creed or the sum of his faith, Ad Constan. l. 3. sub sinem
which he thus pithily sets down. Intelliges (inquit ad imperatorem
Constantium) a me praedicari unum Deum Patrem, ex quo omnia; et quem misit
Iesum Christum, per qnem omnia, natum ex Deo, qui est ante tempora aeterna, et
erat in principio, apud Deum, Deus Verbum, qui est imago Dei invisibilis, in
quo habitat omnis plenitudo divinitatis conporaliter: qui cum in forma Dei
esset, humilians sese salutis nostrae causa, formam servi ex conceptu Spiritus
sancti de Virgin accepit, factus obediens usque ad mortem, mortem autem
crucis, et post resurrectionem mortis deinde in caelestibus sedens, aderit
judex vivorum et mortuorum, et Rex omnium aeternorum saeculorum. Est enim
unigenitus Deus, et Deus verus et Deus magnus, super omnia Deus, et omnis
lingua confitebitur, quia dominus Jesus Christus in gloria Dei Patris est.

2. Of the Scriptures, In Psalm. 132.
as containing in them all things necessary to be known: Quae (inquit) libro
legis non continentur, ea nec nosse debemus.

3. Of God thus. De trin. l. ^.
Inter haec ( speaking of his doubts concerning the heathen Gods) animus
sollicitus, devinum et aeternum nihil nisi unum esse et indifferens pro certo
habebat, quia id quod sibi ad id quod est author esset, nihil necesse est extra
se quod sui esset praestantius reliquisse. Atque ita omnipotentiam
aeternitatemque non nisi penes unum esse, quia neque in omnipotentia validius
infirmiusque, neque in aeternitate posterius anteriusve cougrueret. In Deo
autem nihil nisi aeternum potensque esse venerandum.

4. Much to the same purpose. In Psalm. 2.
Deus (inquit) beatus atque perfectus profectu non eget cui nihil deest,
demutatione non novus est, qui origin caret. Ipse est, qui quod est non
aliunde est, in sese est cum est, ad se est, s^us sibi est, and ipse sibi omni^
est, carens omni demutatione novitatis, qui nihil aliud quod in se posset
incidere per id quod ipse sibi totum totus est reliquit.

5. Of Christ thus: ^e Trin. l. 4.
Hic unus est disponens ad Abraham, loquens ad Mosen, testans ad Israel, manens
in Prophetis, per Virginem natus, ex Spiritu Sancto, adversantes nobis
inimicasque virtutes ligno passionis affigens, mortem in inferno perimens, spei
nostrae fidem resurrectione confirmans, corruptionem carnis humanae gloria
corporis sui periniens. -- Deo haec unigenito soli propria sunt.

6. Of the Anger of God, ^n Psalm. 2.
thus: Poena patientis, ira esse creditur, decernentis. Atque ita irascitur
Deus, cum per poenae dolorem iram decreti in se sentiat esse punitus, quae non
per dem^tationem naturae in iram ex, placabilitate commota est, sed ex
constitutione poenae ir^ sit puniendis.

7. Of faith, De Trin. lib. 10*
thus: Pietas est non ambigere, and justitia est credere, and salus confiteri.
Non in incerta diffluere neque ad stultiloquia effervere, neque modo
circumscribere potestatem, neque causas investigabilium sacramentorum
retractare, Dominum Iesum confiteri, and a Deo suscitatum a mortuis credere
salus est. Quae vr^o insania est, qualis and oujusmodi sit Iesum calumniari,
^um saelus sola sit hoc solum scire, quod Dominus sit. In simplicitate itaque
fides est, in fide justitia est, in confessione pietas est. Non per difficiles
nos Deus ad beatam vitam quaestiones vocat nec multiplici eloquentis facundiae
gener^ solicitat. In absoluto and nobis ac facili est aeternitas, Iesum
suscitatum a mortuis per Deum credere, and ipsum esse Dominum confiteri.

8. Of the evil of divisions thus, -- usus inolevit, qui postquam nova potius
coepit condere, quam accepta retinere, nec verterata defendit, nec innovata
firmavit, and facta fides temporum potius* Evangeliorum, dum and secundum annos
scribitur, and secundum confessionem baptismi non tenetur. Periculosum nobis
admodum, atque etiam miserabile est, tot nu^c fides existere, quot voluntates:
and tot nobis doctrinas esse, quod mores and tot causas blasphemiarum
pullulare, quot vitia sunt: dum aut ita fides scribuntur ut volumus, aut ita ut
volumus, intelliguntur: and cum secundum unum Deum and unum Dominum, and unum
baptisma, etiam fides una sit, excedimus ab ea fide quae sola est, and dum
plures fiunt, ad id coeperunt esse, ne ulla sit.

9. Of Heretics, De Trinit. lib. 10.
thus; Quis Doctrinae profectus est, placida magis quam docenda conquirere? Aut
quae doctrinae Religio est, non docenda desiderare, sed ^esideratis coac^rvare
doctrinam? Sed baec seducentium Spirituum incentiva suppeditant, and simulatae
religionis falsiloquia confirmant. Sequitur enim fidei defectionem hypoerisis
m^ndax, ut sit vel in verbis pietas quam amiserat conscienti^.

10. Of pardon of sin, In Psalm. 66.
thus: Ex copia bonitatis suae misericordiam in peccatorum remissionem largitur
Deus; and peccatorum remissio non probitatis est meritum, sed spontaneae
indulgentiae voluntas ex bonitatis divitiis ad miserandi ^unus exuberans.

11. Of merit, In Matthew. Canon. 27.
thus, Virgins prudentes fatuis petentibus ut oleum mutuent; responderunt, non
posse se dare, quia non sit forte quod omnibus satis sit, alienis scilicet
operibus ac meritis neminem adjuvandum quia unicuique lampadi suae emere oleum
sit necesse. Suitable hereunto is that remarkable story recorded by Melchior
Adams; In vita Gobelini Personae. vixit. ann. 1420.
to this purpose that a little before the time of Gobelinus, there was set
forth a play at Isenach in Germany, of the wise and foolish Virgins; wherein
the foolish desiring oil of the wise, (which the Actor thus interpreted; that
they would intercede unto God for them that they might be admitted unto the
Marriage, i. e. the Kingdom of heaven) they utterly denied to lend them any.
The foolish fell to knocking, weeping and instant praying, but could not
prevail a jot; but were bidden to be gone and buy oil. Hereat Prince Frederick
(being present) was greatly amazed, crying out Quid est fides nostra
Christiana, si neque Maria (she was one of the five Saints that represented the
wise Virgins) neque alia sancta exorari potest: ut deprecetur pro nobis?
quorsum tot merita and bona opera, ut Sanctorum apud Deus intercessionem nobi^
conciliemus, and gratiam impetremus: This consternation was such, that through
it he fell into a sore and dangerous disease, which ended in an apoplexy
whereof he died about four days after.

12. Of the qualifications of a Bishop or Pastor: De Trin. l. 8.
thus, Quae propria disciplinae ac morum sunt, ad sacerdotii meritum utilia
esse significat Apostolus, Tit. 1. ^.
si etiam haec quae ad docendae ac tuendae fidei scientiam necessaria sunt,
inter reliqna non deerunt. Quia non statim ^oni atque utilis sacerdotis est,
aut tantummodo innocenter agere, aut tantummodo scienter praedicare, cum and
innocens sibi tant^m proficiat, nisi doctus sit: and doctus sine doctrinae sit
autoritare nisi innocens sit. Non enim Apost^licus sermo probitatis
bonestatisque praeceptis hominem tantum seculo conformat ad vitam, neque rursum
per doctrine scientiam scribam synagogae instituit ad legem, sed perfectum
Ecclesiae principem perfectis maximarum virtutum bonis instruit, ut and vita
^jus orn^tur docendo, and doctrina vivendo.

13. Of Scandal, In Psalm. 140*
thus. Differt laqueus a seandalo: Laqueus enim est adhortatio voluptatum, and
ingenium appetitionis inhonestae, quod modo laquei fallens capit. Scandalum
autem est uxor irreligiosa, filius iniquus, and caetera deinceps domi nomina,
and omnis ex Ecclesia frater, aut contumeliosus, aut avarus, aut ebriosus, aut
turpis. In his enim nobis est scandalum, quoticus ad necessitatem irascendi,
inhibendi, vindicandi ex illa quieta fidei nostrae mansuetudine provocamur.

14. Of being under the power of corruption, In Psalm. 125.
thus, Animae captivitas quam infoelix est Avarus cariturus semetipso, carere
timet pecunia, negociosus, tristis, anxius, sine requi^ ulla, domni metu semper
detinetur: honestatis immemor est, amicitiarum inobservans, humanitatis fugax,
religionem nescit, bonitatem omnino odit. At vero cui libido domina est, in quo
coeno dedecoris volutatur? Pendet ad occasiones adulteriorum, anxius circa
lasciviae suae fervorem, oculis, mente, corpore totus in scortis est. Videns
quotidie atque audiens humanas in adulteros leges, adulterium in ipso foro
cogitat: quod agit timet, and quod timet non fugit. Quid vero infaelicius
ebrietatis dominatu? Ventri ultra capacitatem infundere, sensuirationem a
dimere, non loqui, non meminisse, non stare, and mortem quandam naturae
incolumi imperare? quam dedecorosus autem est furentium motus, temeritatis
impetus, odiorum stimulus, livoris anxietas? Quanta ergo perturbatio eorum est,
quanta calamitas, qui supra memoratis malis serviunt?

6. These and such like passages worthy of note, are frequently to be met with
in the writings of this Father; wherein there also some things that call for
the caution of the Reader, as not so warily and fitly uttered as they should
have been, nor altogether allowable and to be approved of. Such are these that
follow.

1. Suam cuique personam distribuens, Lib. 2. de Trinitat.
aeternitatem adsignat patri, imaginem filio, usum Spiritui Sancto. In the
explication of which place, Cent. 4. c. 10.
Augustine much troubled himself, as not knowing what he should mean by the
word Vsus.

2. Videtur Christo tribuere corpus and animam, De Trinit; lib. 10.
nullis obnoxiam molestis affectionibus, e.g. hominem (inquit) verum secundum
similitudinem nostri hominis non deficiens a se Deo sumpsit Christus, in quem
quamvis aut ictus incideret aut vulnus descenderet, aut nodi concurrerent, aut
suspensio elevaret, afferrent quidem haec impeturae passionis, non tamen
dolorem passionis inferrent, ut telum aliquod aut aquam perforans, aut ignem
compungens, aut era vulnerans -- homo ille de Deo est habens ad patiendum
quidem corpus, and passus est, sed naturam non habens ad dolendum.

3. Parum been ab eo dictum est: Ibid.
Mariam Virginem praeter concipiendi, Cent. 4. c. 10.
gestandi and pariendi ministerium, nihil addidisse de suo: ac fi Christus non
ex substantia corporis Mariae carnem and sanguinem suam sumpsisset.

4. Asserit, Do Trin. l. ^
nos cum filio and patre unum esse natura, non adoptione, neque consensu tantum.

5. De creatione sensit: De Trin. lib. 12.
omnia creationis opera simul and semel, sine intervallis aut ordine operum
aliorum post alia creatorum, extitisse; quae opinio manifest cum 1. capite
Geneseos pugnat.

6. De libero arbitrio non satis videtur caute locutus: In Psalm. 118.
cum ait. In Psalm. 119. 33. Prius (inquit) quae a Deo sunt cum honor
praeposuit, and tunc quae a se cum confessione subjecit. Orat igitur ut Deus
tribuat. Est ergo a nobis cum oramus exordium, ut munus ab eo sit: dehinc quia
de exordio nostro munus est ejus, ex nostro rursum est, ut exquiratur, and
obtineatur, and maneat. Ibid.
Item. Est quidem in fide manendi a Deo munus, sed impediendi a nobis origo
est. Et voluntas nostra hoc proprium ex se habere debet, ut velit Deus
incipienti crementum dare; quia consummationem per se infirmitas nostra non
obtinet, meritum tamen adipiscendae consummationis est ex imtio voluntatis.

7. As concerning his end, Cent. 4. c. 10. Osiand. epit. hist. Eccles.
I find this: that upon the death of Constantius, Julian his successor granting
liberty of returning unto all those that by Constantius had been banished,
Cent. 4. l. 3. c. 18.
Hilary among the rest returned into his own country, where having remained by
the space of six years he peaceably ended his days, Sulpit. Sever. l. 2.
in the Reign of the Emperors Valentinian and Valens; Bucholcer. Chron. Baron.
annal.
A^n. Christ, Three hundred sixty six, or as others, Three hundred sixty nine.

FINIS.
Reader, you are entreated to correct the errors of the Press, particularly
that in page 151. for all visions read allusions.

Mantissa.
THis Treatise which has lain dormant by me for several years, was dispatched
and put out of hand, before Mr. Dallee's book of the Writings of Dyonisius
Areopagitae and Ignatius Antiochenus saw the light, and had it then passed the
press (as it was very near to have done) I had been saved this labor, and no
contest had happened between the very learned Dallee and my self. But coming to
a view of it, when mine was adventuring into the world, I thought my self
concerned to say somewhat (and much it shall not be) in vindication of the
Epistles of that holy Martyr Ignatius, as being at least in part genuine, and
not wholly supposititious; though it cannot be denied that both he and they
have been not a little abused by bold and dis-inngenuous persons.

Having therefore perused what the perspicacious Mr. Dallee has done upon this
subject, I find that therein he has given sufficient proof of his singular
learning, judgment and industry: And had his great pains been confined to and
levelled at, the further discovery of the vile injury that has bern offered to
the worthy monuments of that famous Martyr and primitive Pishop, and not the
utter extinction of them, his undertaking might have proved much more
acceptable and successful. He herein follows his Coaetanian Countrymen
Salmasius and Blondel; and of the more ancient, (who yet were Eight hundred
years after Christ) Nicephorus Patriarch of Constantinople, and Anastasius the
Library keeper at Rome, and these are the principal whom he names to have been
of the same mind with himself herein, though the greatest part of learned men
go a contrary way unto him.

The method he proceeds in is this: 1. He endeavors to make out the imposture
(as he apprehends it to be) by no less than sixty six Arguments, drawn from the
Ancients making no mention of these Epistles, especially such as preceded
Eusebius: as also from diverse expressions and passages found in them, which we
cannot imagine should ever drop from the Pen of Ignatius. 2. He undertakes to
answer the arguments and objections against it, made by those that dissent from
him herein.

In answer to the first Argument drawn from the silence of the Ancients making
no mention of them: Besides what the learned Dr. Hammond has said, viz. That
he is clearly destitute of positives, whoever would make use of Negatives, and
says Bellarmine, arguments negatively drawn from authority conclude nothing:
both these sayings Mr. Dalle sets down, Chap. 5. I would offer to consideration.

1. That it is more than probable that Ignatius did write Epistles: this Mr.
Dallee seems to grant: it is not questioned (says he) whether Ignatius wrote
Epistles, (for who is so foolish to deny that he writ some) but whether he
wrote those that are carried about. p. 450. Again, why do we not follow that
which is most likely, to wit, that the impostor having learned that some
Epistles were of old written by Ignatius, and perceiving that they were now
wanting, took counsel from thence to feign and put forth his own under the same
name. p. 454. To which he subjoyns these words of the learned Petavius, I
verily deny not that the Epistles of Ignatius, have been interpolated and
changed by the addition of certain things, and depraved; and that some are
supposititious: But that no Epistles at all were written by Ignatius, I verily
think to be too rashly affirmed. p. 230. Now if he did write Epistles, we
cannot but suppose that those of his time who had him in so high esteem, would
with utmost care preserve them, and not suffer through their negligence so
precious a (...) to be lost: And if so, what hinders why these now remaining
should not (at least in part) be some of them?

2. It Is known that the Ancients do but seldom make use of the writings of
those that went before them, and when they do so they do it many times without
naming the Author from whom the passages are borrowed. So Irenaeus is wont
(says Mr. Dallee) to bring and recite the sayings and sentences of eminent men
more ancient than himself, delivered by them, whether written or by lively
voice, without naming the Authors. p. 266. Again, Mr. Dallee in his treatise of
the right use of the Fathers, lib. 1. Chap. 6. p. 103. If the Fathers (says
he) would have but taken the pains to have given us notice every time, who the
Author was whose opinion they alleged, this manner of commenting upon the
Scriptures, would have been much more beneficial to us and less troublesome.
But this they very seldom do, as you may observe out of the expositions of
Hilary, Ambrose and others who robbing poor Origin without any mercy, do not
yet do him the honor so much as to name him scarcely. From the Ancients not
mentioning the Epistles of Ignatius therefore, to infer that they are none of
his, is very inconsequent, seeing this was a practice very usual with them.

3. We find that Polycarp who lived at the same time with Ignatius, as also
Irenaeus and Origin, (who were all before Eusebius) do make use of some
passages in those Epistles: And the double testimony (says Mr. Dallee p. 458.)
of Polycarp and Irenaeus prevailed with Eusebius so far, that he doubted not
but that it was Ignatius his work. It is true that the Arguments drawn from
hence by the most reverend Vsser, and learned Dr. Hammond, Mr. Dallee labors
to enervate as of no sorce: but of what strength his solutions are we shall
make some trial by and by: And thus much for his first argument drawn from the
Ancients not mentioning, as he pretends, the Epistles of Ignatius.

2. As to his second Argument fetched from the expressions and passages found
in them, which cannot be conceived to have come from Ignatius, but have been
inserted by some latter hand: To this it may be answered, that many of these
(and too many of them have crept into Ignatius his epistles) have been observed
and made mention of by others: though the diligent and quicksighted Mr. Dallee
has taken notice of and discovered many more. The first discoverers of the
imposture from thence concluded (as well they might) that ^oul hands had been
tampering with and defiling them: (and who of the most eminent Ancients have
not been so dealt with by wretched men; that so those worthies might seem to
own some errors, which by this means these hucksters seek to impose upon the
world, and would fain that they should be entertained by unwary Readers) but
yet did not conceive this to be a sufficient ground altogether to disclaim and
reject them, as not written by Ignatius: Et gradus non alterat speciem. And had
Mr. Dallee proceeded no further upon his more narrow inspection into, and
espyal of the fraud of those interpolators, good might have been done by his
laudable pains, and the mischief of the deceit more fully prevented. But Mr.
Dallee seems to have been too much swayed by Nicephorus P. C. and Anastasius
the Roman Library keeper, whom he follows herein, who upon this only account
(as Vsser thinks) because they were interpolated and corrupted, did rank these
Epistles in the number of Apochryphals: as Mr. Dallee tells us p. 251. Though
the instances produced by Mr. Dallee (too many here to be repeated) be looked
on and yielded to have been since added by unworthy interpolators, yet may
there be so much found remaining, as may make up those Epistles as they came
out of the hands of Ignatius; those Epistles of his reckoned to be genuine,
being much shorter in the time of Eusebius than they are at this day. The
interpolations therefore are no sufficient warrant for their utter rejection.
Petav. p. 229.

The second branch of this discourse consists of his answer made to the
Arguments of dissenters, wherein they show that the Ancients before Eusebius,
did make use of diverse passages from Ignatius, and therefore is his pretense of
their silence in this regard of no sorce to annul the Epistles of Ignatius.

Their first argument is drawn from the testimony of Polycarp his contemporary,
which is found in his Epistle to the Philippians.

To which Mr. Dallee returns this solution. 1. That that Epistle to the
Philippians is apochryphal. Answ. Those whose judgment this is, are the
aforesaid Nicephorus P. C. and Anastasius Bibli. R. who follows Nicephorus
herein as Mr. Dallee owns, p. 250. f. so that upon the matter it amounts to no
more than one single testimony; against which we may well oppose the contrary
judgment of Eusebius, much more ancient than they who mention that passage of
Polycarp, (viz. that he had sent them as many Epistles of Ignatius as he had by
him) as contained in his Epistle to the Philippians, without any hesitation of
its being his. hist. lib. 3. cap. 32. and quotes Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 3. as
owning it to be his: Thus, there is (says he) extant an Epistle of Polycarp
unto the Philippians, very profitable etc. hist. lib. 4. cap. 14.

Solut. 2. The Author (says Mr. Dallee) of that particle in Polycarps epistle,
( viz. of Ignatius himself, and those that are with him, signify what ye know
for certain) intimates that when he writ it Ignatius was living, but the Author
of the Epistle most plainly affirms, (using the word (...)) that he was dead:
Therefore wa^ it inserted into the Epistle by some other.

Answ. 1. Were it so; yet this makes not the whole Epistle Apocryphal but only
corrupted, as those of Ignatius have also been, for which cause Nicephorus and
Anastasius reject them: and upon the same reason, as Mr. Dallee imagines, do
they conclude that the Epistle of Polycarp also is Apocryphal, p. 429. m. but
how weakly, judge. And for this particle inserted Mr. Dallee, ibid. thinks it
no crime to say, that those Epistles, viz. of Ignatius, which in this Epistle
of Polycarp to the Philippians, are said to be collected by him, were not
collected by Polycarp, a conjecture but slenderly bottomed. Yea Mr. Dallee
grants that if those words put in by the impostor be left out, all the rest of
the Epistle agrees with the judgment of Photius one of the Successors of
Anastasius in the Patriarchship who says: There was read the Epistle of
Polycarp unto the Philippians, full of many admonitions, with plainness and
simplicity. p. 429. m. It seems by this that Photius (a most learned Writer as
Mr. Dallee there styles him) did not account that Epistle to be Apocryphal, nor
did the judgment of his predecessor sway him herein, which therefore he did not
look on as of so much weight as Mr. Dallee esteems it to be.

And whereas Mr. Dallee tells us that it is apparent that the particle
contained in this Epistle (wherein is mentioned that a collection of Ignatius
his epistles was made by Polycarp) was inserted by the impostor, whence he
concludes that the collection was not made by him: It seems not to be so
apparent, for admit that particle not to be be so coherent with the preceding
clause, as Mr. Dallee conceives, yet we know how usual it is in the close of
Epistles, to add somewhat beside the main intendment of them occasionally.
Besides, all that he gathers from the seeming incoherence is only this; that
those words seem to have been rashly and beside the mind of the Author sown on
by some other hand: and if any thing were added, says he, by the Author beside
the above mentioned words, I should believe that those last words which follow
after the place objected against, ( viz. Scripsistis mihi et vos and Ignatius,
etc. where he speaks of the collection of the Epistles of Ignatius made by him)
were the words that were added. p. 4^7. So, says he, expunging all that which
is said of Ignatius and his Epistles, the whole clause of the Epistle would run
decently. Thus he p. 427. And what amounts all this conjecture unto, but only
this that from the seeming incoherence of that particle with the foregoing
words, it seems to him and he believes, and p. 429. It Is his opinion concerning
the objected place in Polycarp's Epistle, that that particle was added by the
impostor. Let the Reader now judge whether these conjectural apprehensions of
his be sufficient to invalidate Polycarps testimony of the Epistles of Ignatius.

But what can be imagined that the impostor should have in his eye, in adding
this particle to Polycarp's Epistle? seeing it has nothing in it, beside a
commendation of Ignatius his Epistles, but some particular affairs: what
advantage could he gain by such an abuse? Oh much, says Mr. Dallee: the
impostor (whom I think we need not look far for) is even he without doubt, whom
we have hitherto demonstrated by many and manifest proofs to have substituted,
feigning the name of Ignatius, Epistles framed by himself to the holy Martyr.
This is indeed said by Mr. Dallee, but how does it appear that he is the man?
and if he framed Ignatius his Epistles, then all or only some of them: All he
could not, for some were extant before Eusebius his time, who mentions diverse
of them. lib. 3. cap. 33. and he lived. an. 326. And the second collection
being six in number, was made (as the Reverend Vsser conjectures) Ann. 580. or,
as the publisher of the Constantinopolitan Chronicle thinks, ann. 630. So the
space of time between those mentioned by Eusebius, if collected but in his
time, and the second collection is by the former computation. 254. years, and
by the latter 304. years, a time too long to imagine the impostor to have
lived. If he were the forger but of some only, it is demanded of which? and of
this I suppose it will be found somewhat a knotty difficulty to determine.
Besides, if some only be the impostors, then the remainder must be of some
other, and if so why not of Ignatius, being the commonly reputed father of them.

2. That the Author of the Epistle says plainly that Ignatius was then dead,
is not so plainly to be found therein. For those expressions, viz. That he was
(...) and had finished the least act of his conflict, do not necessarily imply
so much, but might be made use of upon this account, because he had been
condemned, and was under the sentence of death, being now also in the way to
his execution: for such are dead in law and looked on as in that state: as that
Phrase holds out, Psalm. 79. 11. According to the greatness of thy power,
preserve thou those that are appointed to dye, or as the Margin reads, the
children of death.

2. The second Argument or objection made by the dissenters, is drawn from the
testimony of Irenaeus; who in his fifth book against heresies, toward the end
has these words: As one of our own, who for the testimony of God, was adjudged
to the beasts; said, I am the Wheat of God, etc.

Solut. Irenaeus says not that he wrote those words, but only that he spoke
so: Then it cannot be gathered that he saw any writing of Ignatius.

Answ. 1. The word (...) denotes indifferently both the thing uttered by the
voice, and those delivered in writing also: so Tit. 1. 12. (...): one of
themselves even a prophet of their own, said, this was written by Epimenides
the Poet. So then notwithstanding the expression (...), he might have that
sentence from some writing of Ignatius. 2. Ierom and others report, that those
words were uttered by him, when he was adjudged to the beasts, which was no
small while before he encountered them. For after his sentence pronounced, he
was led from Syria to Rome, a long journey, wherein he writ his genuine
Epistles, of which that to the Romans was one, containing the words pronounced
by him: So that probable it is that he spoke those words more than once,
between the time of his being sentenced and executed; and therefore may well be
conceived to have made mention of them in an Epistle.

2. Mr. Dallee concludes that Irenaeus never saw or knew of any Epistle of
Ignatius. 1. Because he brings the Authority of such as were Elders before him,
and disciples of the Apoles against the error of Florinus and of Polycarp by
name; but mentions not Ignatius. Answ. 1. His not mentioning of Ignatius, is
but a slender argument to prove that he saw not any Epistle of his, he might
have some reason unknown to us of this his silence. 2. Ignatius is no less
contained in the word Elders, than Polycarp: for he says in general that
Florinus never had his doctrine delivered to him from those Elders, the
disciples of the Apostles: which expression (Elders) comprehends and may be
understood of Ignatius as well as Polycrap, who were both the Disciples of the
Apostle John. 3. In that fragment of his Epistle to Florinus, he says this
only of Polycarp: I, says he, saw thee Florinus, when I was yet a boy with
Polycarp in the lesser Asia, etc. and then adds, if that holy and Apostolic
Elder had heard any such thing, he would straight have stopped his ears.

This therefore is but a weak Proof that he never saw any of Ignatius his
epistles: but rather the contrary, he being as well as Polycarp comprehended in
the name Elders.

2. Because where he mentions the difference between Anicetus, Bishop of Rome
and Polycarp, about the observation of Easter, he speaks not a word of
Ignatius; especially considering that peremptory saying of his (in his Epistle
to the Philippians) that if any one observed Easter with the Jews, he is
partaker with those that slew the Lord and his Apostles: Anicetus might well
have objected this to Polycarp. p. 270. Answ. You have little reason to say
that the Epistle to the Philippians, was altogether unknown to Irenaeus,
because he made not use of this passage to Anicetus: for it is conceived that
those words fell not from the Pen of Ignatius, but were since foisted in by
some one that corrupted that Epistle: we grant that Irenaeus never read those
words there, nor could he well, seeing they were not at that time there to be
found: Yet might he see that Epistle as it came out of the hands of Ignatius,
which had no such blemish in it.

3. Because he is of a contrary mind unto Ignatius, about the time of Christ's
abode upon earth: Ignatius rightly conceiving that being baptized about the
thirtieth year of his Age, he remained on earth but three Passovers after that
time: whereas Irenaeus thinks that he taught to his fortieth or fiftieth year.
Answ. 1. Irenaeus was not bound to follow Ignatius in every thing, if he had a
peculiar apprehension of his own in this matter, what eminent men have not in
some things had the like, wherein yet sometimes they have been in the wrong? 2.
Irenaeus erring herein, thought he had reason for his opinion. Mr. Parker. lib.
4.. 13. de descensu. speaks in his behalf. This tradition, says he, of
Irenaeus carried in it a certain show of truth, and seems to have a foundation
from the Scriptures: He, i. e. Christ was called Master, and had the perfect
age of a Master; he came to save every Age, therefore he passed through every
one: thou art not yet fifty year old, Ioh. 8. 65. therefore was he forty or
upward: for the Jews lied not, or missed, twenty years. Also Irenaeus brings in
men of great name for Authors, namely the Elders which had lived with John in
Asia. He quotes for this Iren. lib. 2. cap. 39. 40. No marvel then that he was
mistaken, and his dissent from Ignatius herein, is but of little strength to
prove, that he was altogether unacquainted with Ignatius his Epistles. I may
here make use of Mr. Dallee's words, cap. 9. p. 282. where speaking of the
disagreement of Clemens Alexandrinus from Ignatius, about the time of Christ's
preaching after his baptism, (whereas Ignatius says it was three years,
Clemens says it was but one) he has this passage: If Clemens had known the
judgment of so great a man as Ignatius, without doubt he either for his piety
would have followed it, or for his learning he would certainly have brought
reasons and confirmed it, why he thought not that to be followed: thus he. And
this we find Irenaeus to have done viz. To have produced reasons.

3. The third Argument or objection made by the dissenters, is drawn from the
testimony of Origin, in whom are to be seen two passages of Ignatius that are
found in his Epistles: the former in bom. in Luc. cap. 6. where naming
Ignatius, I, says he, found written in an epistle of his, that the virginity
of Mary was hidden from the Prince of this world, epist. ad Ephesians. The latter
out of his prologue to his commentary on the Canticles: where he thus speaks. I
remember that one of the Saints spoke thus of Christ; My love was crucified.
So* Ignatius in his Epistle to the Romans.

Solut. The latter of these passages, he says, that he spoke but not that he
writ so. Answ. 1. The word (...) signifies speaking either with the voice, or
by writing: As does also the word (...) of the same import: as Act. 17. 28. As
some of your own Poets have said (...): instancing in a saying of Aratus, in
his Poem entitled Phenomenon. 2. He might both speak and write so too, see his
answer to his Solution of the first argument from the testimony of Irenaeus. 2.
Solut. Each place, says he, alleged out of Origin, is of uncertain and
doubtful Authority.

Answ. 1. If those places be dubious, then the passages of Ignatius might be
reported by Origin as well as not: And the Authority is of equal strength for
the Affirmative or Negative; nothing certain can be concluded from them. 2.
Erasmus his censure (which you produce who thinks it none of his) is not
infallible: and Merlin (to whose pains we are beholding for one edition of
Origin, who therefore should be acquainted with his works) is very confident
that these commentaries are Origen's 3. The reason for which they are judged to
be the work of some Latin Author, seems not to be so cogent, viz. because some
Greek words are interpreted by Latin: For this he might do for the help of
those that might not so well understand some Greek words; which therefore
needed explication. Besides it is known that for Origen's works, although he
wrote them in Greek, yet have we scarcely any of them at this day, but only in
Latin; except his excellent answer to Celsus in eight books. Therefore these
interpretations of diverse Greek words by Latin; and the saying that such a
Latin word or expression is rendered so or so in the Greek, may be done by the
Translators of his works, which is most likely: from whence therefore it cannot
be inferred that those Commentaries are none of Origen's. 4. For his homilies
on Luke they are not mentioned by either Cook or Rivet among the Tracts falsely
ascribed to Origin; which doubtless they would, and (in such a work, their
censure) they ought to have done, had they judged them not to be Origens. 5.
Ierom the interpreter of these Homilies on Luke thinks them to be Origens, but
a birth of his younger years, and not so elaborate, for some errors sprinkled
amongst them. Sixth. Senens. in Biblioth. which errors, as Merlin imagines, were
inserted by those that envied him. So that notwithstanding what is said by Mr.
Dallee, those sayings of Ignatius may have been related by Origin, which he
might be acquainted with from his Epistles.

4. The fourth Argument or objection made by the dissenters, is drawn from the
testimony of Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, who in his Ecclesiatical History,
lib. 3. cap. 32. mentions six Epistles of Ignatius: So the Reverend Vsser
accounts them, making that to the Church of Smyrna, and to Polycarp their
Bishop to be the same, but others reckon seven, judging that to Smyrna, and
that to Polycarp to be two distinct Epistles: These six or seven (says Mr.
Dallee p. 442.) we confess that Eusebius acknowledges and holds them to be
truly the Epistles of Ignatius. To these Mr. Dallee's Solutions are.

1. Solut. His testimony is of no force being of a man that was two hundred
years later than Ignatius. Answ. 1. The Epistles of Ignatius might well be
preserved unto that time: many men's writings have remained many hundred years
longer. 2. If so, then might Eusebius well come to the sight of them though
others not; being a man so inquisitive after books, and Pamphilus his intimate
companion, most studious and diligent in erecting the Library at Cesarea, and
searching after books: So Ierom. Julius Africanus began a well furnished
Library in the University of Caesarea, (says Middendorp of Academyes lib. 2.)
which Pamphilus and Eusebius so enriched, that there is not a more famous one
in the whole Earth. Being then so intimately acquainted with Pamphilus (as that
he added his name to his own, being called Eusebius Pamphili) and assistant
with him (who was very curious to find out the writings of those that went
before him) in completing his Library; questionless they would not omit so
precious a treasure as the epistle of Ignatius; which (says Polycarp. epist.
ad Philip.) are such, that from them you may reap great profit, for they
contain faith, patience, and all edification pertaining to our Lord. Here then
Eusebius might come to see and peruse them, if he had them not among his own
store. 3. The work he undertook and accomplished, ( viz. The compiling of an
Ecclesiastical History, wherein no one had gone before him) required that he
should be supplied with fitting furniture for such an enterprise: who therefore
being most inquisitive after the chief monuments of antiquity, doubtless would
not neglect so choice a relic as those epistles, that might contribute not a
little to his intended design. So that if Ignatius writ any epistles, (and,
says Mr. Dallee it were a foolish part in any to deny that he did, p. 450.)
who was more likely to obtain them (reserved with utmost care by those that
lived with him, as Polycarp and the Churches to whom he sent them) than
Eusebius, so conducing to his purpose?

2 Solut. He leans, says Mr. Dallee upon a broken Reed, viz. the two passages
in Polycarp and Irenaeus, which are falsely said to be found in them, as has
been made to appear. Answ. But we have showed before that the allegations from
them are a ground sufficient to prove that for which they were produced, and
therefore I refer you to what has been said hereof already.

3 Solut. He evidently overthrows this his opinion by somewhat laid down by
himself elsewhere, (which Mr. Dallee styles his Golden Rule) which is this,
that no books inscribed with the names of the Ancients, are to be accounted for
true, but only those whose testimonies were made use of by men, either of the
same or certainly of the next memory or Age, Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 34. Answ.
Eusebius his words are these: speaking of the second Epistle of Clement Bishop
of Rome to the Corinthians) we have to learn, says he, that there is a second
epistle of Clement which was not so received and approved of as the former,
Dallee page 444.
seeing we find not that the Elders (or Ancients) did use it. Now the question
may be what use of it Eusebius means? Not that which Mr. Dallee intends, viz.
their alleging of it in their writings; but the public reading of it in the
Churches: for so Eusebius records of his first epistle. One undoubted Epistle,
says he, of his there is extant, both worthy and notable, which he wrote from
Rome unto Corinth, when sedition was raised among the Corinthians: the same
epistle we have known to have been read publicly in many Churches both of old
and amongst us also, hist. l. 3. c. 14. Again, says he, Dionysius Bishop of
Corinth writing an epistle to the Romans, viz. unto Soter their Bishop,
remembers the Epistle of Clement thus: we have, says he, this day solemnized
the holy Sunday, in which we have read your Epistle and always will for
instructions sake, even as we do the former of Clement written unto us, hist,
l. 4. c. 22, So that Eusebius his golyen rule (as your term it) being thus
misunderstood by you, proves in its right sense, as no way advantageous unto
you, so no whit at all prejudicial unto him.

Thus have I spoken a word in the behalf of Ignatius's his epistles, which
notwithstanding what has been said by the learned Mr. Dallee do not appear to
be altogether supposititious: and that, though they have been basely abused by
unworthy persons with their corrupt interpolations, yet have we to this day
found among us some remains of the monuments of that eminent and glorious
Martyr.

FINIS.

