A VINDICATION OF THE Ancient Liturgy OF THE Church of England. WHEREIN The
Several Pretended REASONS for Altering or Abolishing the same, are Answered and
Confuted.

By HENRY HAMMOND D. D. Written by himself before his Death.

LONDON, Printed for Austin Rice, and are to be fold, at the Crown in Saint
Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

A PREFACE TO THE Ensuing Discourse.
THat the Liturgy of the Church of England, which was at first as it were
written in blood, at the least sealed, and delivered down to us by the
Martyrdom of most of the compilers of it, should ever since be daily solicited,
and called to the same Stage and Theater, to fill up what was behind of the
sufferings of those Fathers, is no strange or new piece of economy in the
Church of God. This proposition I shall take liberty briefly to prove by way of
introduction to the ensuing discourse, and shall hope that you will acknowledge
it with me, if you but consider these severals.

Rome, the other of remaining with it, like the poor Greek Church, our fellow
Martyr, devoured by the Turk for too much Christian profession, and damned by
the Pope for too little, it being the dictate of natural Reason in Aristotle,
(whose rules have seldom failed in that kind, since he observed them) that
the middle virtue is most infallibly known by this, that it is accused by
either extreme as guilty (...) the other extreme: that the true liberality
of mind is by this be^ exemplified, that it is defamed by the prodigal for
passimony, and by the niggard for prodigality, by which (by the way) that great
block of offense, which has scandalized so many, will be in part removed, and
the reproaches so continually heaped upon this book, will to every discerning
Judge of things, pass for as weak an unconcluding argument of guilt in it, as
the scarres of a Military man does of his cowardice, or the (...), the every
Topic of railing Rhetoric, Mal. 5. of the unchristiannesse of the person on
whom they are powered out.

Hooker, and that no one charge of any crime, either against the whole, or any
part of it, which this Directory has offered; which as it might in reason,
make such an act of malice more strange, so will it to him that compares this
matter with other practices of these times, (whose great engine has been the
calumniari fortiter, the gaining credit by the violence of the cry, when it
could not be had by the validity of the proofs, most men being more willing to
believe a calumny, then to examine it) make it but unreasonable to wonder at
it; It being an experiment of daily observation, that those which have no crime
of which they are accusable, are therefore not the less, but the more
vehemently accused, prosecuted, and dragged to execution, that the punishment
may prove them guilty, which nothing else could, it being more probable in the
judgment of the multitude, (who especially are considered now adays, as the
instruments to act our great designs) that a nocent person should plead not
guilty, then an innocent be condemned; which prejudice, as it might be pardoned
from the charity wherein it is grounded, that they who are appointed to punish
vilenesses, will not be so likely to commit them, so being applied to usurping
judges, (whose very judging is one crime, and that no way avowable, but by
making use of more injustices) will prove but a piece of Turcisme, which
concludes all things honest, that prove successful, or of the modern
Divinity in the point of Scandal, which makes it a sufficient exception
against any indifferent usage, that it is by some excepted against, a competent
cause of anger, that men are angry at it though never so without a cause.

cross to have their good things of this world (...), with persecutions. Mar.
10. 30. and so no strange thing that that which is always a dealing with the
Cross, should be sometimes a panting, and gasping under it; There was never
any surer evidence of the cleanness of a creature amongst the Jews, then that
it was permitted to be sacrificed; the Lamb, and the Turtle emblems of
innocence, and charity, and the other Christian virtues, were daily slaughtered
and devoured, while the Swine, the (...), and all the uncleaner creatures, were
denied that favor, placed under a kind of Anathema, or Excommunication
sentence, of such it was not lawful, no not to eat; and so it must be expected
in the antitype, that all the heat of the Satanicall impression, all the fire
of zeal, the sentence to be sacrifized, and devoted, should fall as now it
does, on this Lambe-like, Dove-like creature, of a making not apt to provoke
any man to rage, or quarrel, or any thing, but love of communion, and
thanksgiving to God for such an inestinable donative.

National Church, it was to be expected that the enemy and his instruments,
which can call destruction mercy, embroyling of our old Church the founding of
a new (we know who has told one of the Houses of this Parliament so, that they
have laid a foundation of a Church among us, which if it signify any thing,
imports that there was no Church in this Kingdom before that Session) should
also think the destroying of all Liturgy, the only way of security to Gods
worship, the no-form being as fitly accommodated to no-Church, as the no-hedge,
nowall to the Common, or desert, the no enclosure to the no-plantation.

and to be attended by the abolltion of the Liturgy in the beginning of this
new year, (Episcopacy and Liturgy being like the (...), among the Egyptians,
this Daughter to attend that Mother, as among the Barbarians when their Prince
died, some of the noblest were constantly to bear him company out of the
World, not to mourn for, but to die with him) A thing that the People of this
Kingdom could never have been imagined low or servile enough to bear or
endure (I am sure within few years they that sat at the stern of action
conceived so, and therefore were fain by Declaration, to disavow all such
intentio^n of violence) till by such other assayes, and practices, and
experiments, they were found to be, satis ad servitutem parati, sufficiently
prepared for any thing that was servile, almost incapable of the benefit or
relief of a Jubilee, like the slave in Exodus, that would not go out free, but
required to be bored through the ear by his Master, to be a slave for ever.

departing of the glory from Israel, whether there be not some that (with the
Captive Trojan Woman in Homer, who wept so passionately at the fall of
Patroclu^, but made that public loss the season to prowre out their private
grifes) are sensible of those sufferings of the Church only wherein their
interests are involved, and more nearly concerned; whether not some that count
the invasion of the Revenues of the Church a Sacrilege, a calamity, and
unparalleled, but think the abolition of the Liturgy unconsiderable, a
venial sin and misery; whether that, wherein Gods glory is joined with any
secular interest of our own, that which makes the separation betwixt Christ and
Mammon, may be allowed any expression of our passion or zeal, i. e. in effect,
whether we power out one drop for Christ in all this deluge of tears, or
whether like uncompounded selflovers, whose only center and principle of
motion is ourselves, we have passion to no spectacle but what the looking
glass presents to us, with a (...), making God the pret^nce and apology, for
that kindness, which is paid and powered (...) unto another shrine. For of this
there is no doubt, that of ^ll the changes (...) (...) designed and offered to
authority, there is none for which flesh and blood, passions and interests of
men can allow to ^ree a suf^rage, so regertlesse a consent, as this of the
abolition of the Liturgy, (The s^uggishnesse of ungifted men, the only thing
that is affirmed to be concerned in, or to gain by it, is perfectly mistaken,
as shall a non appear) and were there not a God in Heaven, the care of whose
honor obliged us to endeavor the preservation of it, were not a future growth
of Atheism and Profaneness the feared consequent of such abolition, and
notorious experience ready to avow the justness of this fear, I have reason
to be confident that no Advocate would offer Libell, no Disputer put in
exception, against this present Directory; I am privy to my own sense, that I
should not, I have rather reason to impute it to my self, that the want of any
such carnal motive to stir me up to this defense, might be the cause that I so
long deferred to undertake it, and perhaps should have done so longer, if any
man else had appeared in that argument. And therefore unless it be strange for
men, when there be so many tempters abroad, to be permitted to temptations,
sure Gods yiedling to this act of the importunity of Satan (who has desired in
this new way to explore many) will not be strange neither.

assembling our selves together (the too ordinary fault of too many of the
best of us) our general, scandalous, unexcusable disobedience to the commands
of our Church, which requires that service to be used constantly in public
every day, the vanity of prurient tongues and itching ears, which are still
thirsting news and variety, but above all, the want of ardor and fervency in
the performance of this prescribed service, the admitting of all secular
company (I mean worldly thoughts) into its presence, preferring all secular
business before it, the general irreverence, and indifference in the
celebrations, may well be thought to have encouraged Satan to his expetivit, to
the preferring his petition to God, and his importunity at length to have
provoked God to deliver up our Liturgy to him, and his ministers, to oppose and
malign, to calumniate and defame, and at last to gain the countenance of an
Ordinance, to condemn and execute it as at this day. The Lord be merciful to
them that have yielded to be isntrumental to that great destroyer in this
business.

Peter's exhortation (...), not to think the calamity strange which has
befallen this Church in this matter, on no other purpose, but to discharge that
duty which we owe to Gods secret providence, of observing the visible work of
it, that discerning our selves to be under his afflicting hand, we may, I. Join
in the use of all probable means to remove so sad a pressure, by humbling our
selves, and reforming those sins which have fitted us for this captivity, then
2. that we may compassionate and pardon, and bless, and pray for those whose
hands have been used in the execution of this vengeance and reproach upon the
land: and Lastly, That we may endeavor, if it be possible, to disabuse and
rectify those, who are capable, by more light, of safer resolutions; To which
purpose these following animadversions being designed in the bowels of
compassion to my infatuated Contrymen, and out of a sincere single desire
that our sins may have some end or allay, though our miseries have not, and
therefore framed in such a manner, as I conceived, might prove most useful, by
being most proportionable to them, who stood most in need of them, without any
oblation provided for any other shrine, any civility for the more curious
Reader) are here offered to thee, to be dealt with as thou desire to be
treated at that last dreadful tribunal, which sure then will be with
acceptance of pardon, and with that Charity (the but just return to that which
mixed this antidote for thee) which will cover a multitude of sins.

CHAP. I.
IN the Ordinance prefixed to the Directory (being almost wholly made up of
forms of Repeal) there are only two things worthy of any stay or consideration.

necessary to abolish the Book of Common Prayer, and establish the Directory,
and those are specified to be three. First the consideration of the manifold
inconveniences that have risen by the Book in this Kingdom. 2. The resolution
according to their Covenant, to reform Religion according to the word of God,
and the best reformed Churches. 3. Their having consulted with the Learned, and
Pious, and Reverend Divines to that purpose, from whence they conclude it
necessary to abolish the Book.

prudence, or expedience, of taking it away, somewhat might be pretended for
that inference from the premises, supposing them true: But when it is of
necessity (and that twice repeated, and so not casually fallen from them) there
must then be somewhat of precept divine in the premises to induce that
necessity, or else it will never be induced: for I shall suppose it granted by
them with whom I now dispute, that nothing is necessary in the worship of God,
but what God has prescribed, the necessity of precept being the only one that
can have place in this matter, and the necessitas medii, being most improper to
be here pleaded. But that there is no such direct precept, so much as pretended
to by those three motives it is clear, and as clear, that all together, do not
amount to an interpretative precept. For that a lawful thing though pressed with
manifold inconveniences should be removed, is no where commanded the lawful
Magistrate, but left to his prudence to judge whether there be not conveniences
on the other side, which may counterballance those inconveniences; much less
is it commanded the inferior Courts in despite of King and standing Law. For
what ever of expedience; and so of prudence might be supposed to interpose,
that may be sufficient to incline a Wise Magistrate to make a Law, but not any
else, either to ^surp the power of a Lawmakers, or to do any thing contrary to
established Laws; there being nothing that can justify the least disobedience
of Subjects to their Prince, or the Laws of the Kingdom, but that obligation to
that one superior Law of that higher Prince, our Father which is in heaven,
which being supposed, it is not all the resolutions and Covenants in the world
that can make it lawful for any so to disobey, much less necessary, any more,
then the saying Corban in the Gospel, i^e. pretending a vow will free the
Child from the obligation of honoring or relieving his Father, or then
Herod's vow made it lawful to cut off the head of John the Baptist: and then
how far the consultation with those Divines may induce that necessity, will
upon the same ground also be manifest to any, especially that shall remember,
with what caution that Assembly was by the Houses admitted to consult, and with
what restraints on them, and professions, that they were called only to be
advisers, when they were required, but not to conclude any thing, either by a
general concurrence, or by that of a Major part, any farther then the reasons
which they should offer them, might preuail with them; to which purpose it was
so ordered, that if any one man dissented from the rest of their Divines, his
opinion and reasons were as much to be represented to the Houses, as that other
of the rest of the Assembly.

expedience, and so as unable to infer a necessity, as a Topicall argument is
to demonstrate, or a particular to induce an universal. That which I would in
charity guess of this matter, as the cause of this mistake, is my not
groundless suspicion, that when the Presbyterians had prepared the premises,
the Independents framed the conclusion, the former of these joining at last
with the other in a resolution of taking away the Book, but only on
prudentiall considerations; not out of Conscience of the unlawfulness, and
proportionably setting down those reasons but prudentiall reasons; and the
latter though restrained from putting conscience into the premises, yet
stealing it secretly into the conclusion, and so each deceiving and being
deceived by each-other, I am not sure that my conjecture is right in this
particular, yet have I a reason to insert it. I Because I find in many places
of the Directory certain footsteps of this kind of composition and compliance,
and mixture of those so distant sorts of Reformers. 2. Because the
Presbyterians which have formerly appeared both in other and in this Kingdom
(whose copy these present reformers of that party have transcribed) have
constantly avowed the lawfulness of Liturgy, and so cannot affirm any
necessity of abolishing; witness Calvin himself (whom we shall anon have
occasion to produce) and the practice of the Church of Geneva, and nearer to
our selves, witness those four classes, which in Q. Elizabeth's days, had set
themselves up in this Kingdom. These had made complaint to the Lord Burleigh
against our Liturgy, and entertained hopes of obtaining his favor in that
business about the year 1585. he demanded of them, whether they desired the
taking away of all Liturgy, they answered, no, he then required them to make a
better, such as they would desire to have settled in the stead of this. The
first Classis did accordingly frame a new one, somewhat according to the Geneva
form. But this the second Classis disliked, and altered in 600 particulars;
that again had the fate to be quarreled by the third Classis, and what the
third resolved on, by the fourth; and the dissenting of those Brethren, as the
Division of tongues at Babel, was a fair means to keep that Tower then from
advancing any higher. Nay even for our neighbors of Scotland themselves, what
ever some of them of late have thought fit to do, since they became
Covenanteers, (in animosity perhaps and opposition to that terrible mormo, the
Liturgy sent to them from hence) we know that they were Presbyterians formerly,
without seeing any necessity of abolishing Liturgy.

Knox wrote a Liturgy, wherein there is frequent mention of the days of Common
Prayer; and among many other particulars, these ensuing, worthy your remark. 1.
Plain undisguised confessions of such faults, which this age, though as
notoriously guilty of as they, will not put into public forms, or leave upon
record against themselves, as, That for the pleasure and defense of the French
they P. 102.
had violated their Faith, often breaking the leagues of unity and concord, which
their Kings and Governors had contracted with their Neighbors. And again, that
Ib.
for the maintenance of their friendship, they have not feared to break their
solemned oaths made unto others. To which I might add, from another
Confession, P. 163.
that Whoredom and adultery are but pastimes of the flesh; crafty dealing,
deceit and oppression is counted good conquest, etc. but that it would look too
like a Satyr against some part of that Nation at this time thus to specify.
2. Their great sense and acknowledgement of obligations from this Kingdom of
England, and not only prayers for continuance of peace between England and
Scotland, but even execrations on all (and so sure on those their successors of
this age) which should continue or contribute ought toward the breaking of it,
the words are these. Seeing when P, 106.
we by our power were altogether unable, etc. thou did move the hearts of our
neighbors (of whom we had deserved no such favor) to take upon them the
common burden with us, and for our deliverance, not only to spend the lives
of many, but also to hazard the estate and tranquillity of their Realm, Grant
unto us that with such reverence we may remember thy benefits received, that
after this in our default, we never enter into hostility against the Nation of
England, suffer us never to fall into that ingratitude and detestable
unthankefulnesse, that we should seek the destruction and death of those whom
thou have made instruments to deliver us from the tyranny of merciless
strangers. [the French.] Dissipate thou the counsels of such as deceitfully
travail to stir the hearts of either Realm against the other, let their
malicious practices be their own confusion, and grant thou of thy mercy, that
love, and concord, and tranquillity may continue and increase among the
inhabitants of this Island, even to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Thirdly, that some of their forms of words are directly all one with ours,
others with some small additions retaining our forms, as in the Prayer for the
King, and the Exhortation before the Sacrament, and the adjuration of the
Parties to be married will appear. Fourthly, that on their day of Fast (though
that be with great care provided and ordered to be the Sunday twice together,
quite contrary to the Canons and custom of the Primitive Church, yet) it is
then appointed, that the Minister with the People shall prostrate themselves,
etc. a posture of most humble bodily adoration, made to reproach those who will
not so much as recommend or direct any one kind of corporal worship or gesture
of humiliation in all their Directory. The enlarging to this mention of
particulars I acknowledge to be a digression. But the presenting to your
knowledge or remembrance this Scottish Liturgy is not; By which superadded to
the former, and by much more which might from other Churches be added to that,
it briefly appears what is or has been the uniform judgment of the
Presbyteriansin this matter, directly contrary to the concluded necessity of
abolishing.

ad homines, unanswerably proving the reasonableness of it) to ^eform the
Geneva reformation (as a first rude and so imperfect draught just creeping out
of Popery there, and therefore not supposeable to be complete at the first
assay) as the Presbyterians upon the same pretenses have designed and practiced
on our English Reformation.

necessity will still remain, I must pronounce it a piece of Stoicall fatality,
an insuperable unruly necessity indeed, that will acknowledge no Laws, or
bounds, or limits to confine it.

manifold inconveniences, if that phrase denote those severals which in the
Preface to the Directory are suggested, I shall in due place make it appear.

1. That there are no such inconveniences.

2. That greater then those may easily, and hereafter shall be produced against
their Directory, and consequently that, although true inconveniences were
supposed sufficient to infer a necessity of abolition, yet such only
pretended names of inconveniency, such Chimaera's and Mormo's (especially
over-ballanced with real ones in the other scale) would be abundantly
insufficient to do it. But if the manifold inconveniences have a larger
prospect to refer to, we shall conclude it very uncharitable not to mention
those, which might possible have had the same effect with us as with them,
convinced us also to be their Proselytes, and in the mean time very unjust to
put so uncertain an equivocall phrase into a law, which we have no Criterion or
nomenclature to interpret; but beyond all, very imprudent to mention and lay
weight on such slight and such no inconveniences afterward specified, when
others might have been produced better able to beat the envy of the accusation.

resolution, if it went no higher then the Covenant, and that but to reform
Religion, according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed
Churches, I am sure it cannot oblige, or so much as incline you to take away
that Book, there being nothing in it. 1. Contrary to the design of
Reformation. 2. Contrary to the word of God, or 3. Contrary to the example of
the best reformed Churches.

Not 1. to Reformation, for Reformation is as contrary to abolition of what
should be reformed, as cure to killing; and if it be replied, that the
abolition of Liturgy, as unlawful may be necessary to the reforming of
Religion, I shall yield to that reply on that supposition, but then withal
add, that Liturgy must first be proved unlawful, and that testified from
divine infallible principles; which because it is not through this whole Book so
much as pretended, both that and the second suggestion from the word of God
must necessarily be disclaimed, and then the example of the best reformed
Churches will soon follow, not only because all other Reformed Churches
ordinarily known by that Title, have some kind of Liturgy, and that is as
contrary to abolition, as the continuing of ours without any change, but
because no reformation, is to be preferred before that which cuts off no more
then is necessary to be cut off, and which produces the Scripture rule, the
sword of the Spirit for all such amputations; and therefore the Church of
England, as it stands established by Law is avowable against all the
Calumniators in the world, to be the best and most exemplarie reformed; so far,
that if I did not guess of the sense of the Covenant more by the temper then
words of the Covenanteers, I should think men, that have Covenanted to reform
after the example of the best Reformed Churches, indispensably obliged to
conform to the King- Edward, or Queen- Elizabeth-English Reformation, the most
regular perfect pattern that Europe yields.

consulted with the Divines called together to that purpose, although I have no
reason to doubt of it, yet this I know, that very many of the learned there
present, were, immediately before their imbarking in that employment, otherwise
minded, and that therefore so sudden an universal change of minds savours
either of some strong charm, or strange inconstancy, and I shall make bold to
ask this Question of that whole number of Divines, whether I should do them
wrong in affirming, that there yet are not ten Divines in that number that
think all Liturgy unlawful, and consequently that it was necessary (not to
reform, but) to abolish our Book, which is the style of the Ordinance. If this
challenge of mine may not be answered with a plain punctual subscription of so
many to the condemnation of all Liturgy as unlawful, I am sure this is an
Argument, ad homines, unanswerable. And the ground of my challenge, and of my
specifying that number, is the relation we have often had of the but seven
dissenting Brethren, i. e. the but so many of the Independent Party among them,
which upon my former ground I now suppose the only mortal enemies to all
Liturgy. But if I am mistaken, and this be the common sense of those
Assemblers; then have I reason to add to my former complaints this other of
their so over-cautious expressions, which through this whole Book has not once
intimated either the whole or any part to be unlawful, but only quarreled the
inconveniences, which supose it otherwise to be lawful.

Necessary, of a lower importance then this under which we have hitherto
proceeded against them (though still the Independents, whose judgment is not
wont to be despised in the framing of Ordinances, cannot be imagined to take it
in any other) and that is, that it shall signify only a Political necessity,
or that which is necessary, if not to the being, yet to the well being, i. e.
to the Peace and presperity of this Kingdom. Now because there be two parts of
every Christian Kingdom, a Seat and a Church, and so two branches of Policy,
Civil and Ecclesiastical, I shall not undertake to be so far Master of their
sense, as to pitch upon either as that wherein they affirm this abolition
necessary, but say somewhat to both, and to show that it is not necessary in
either sense of Political necessity.

State, much less be necessary to the prosperity of it, I shall infer only by
this vulgar aphorism, that any notable or grand mutation, if from some higher
principle it appear not necessary to be made, will be necessary not to be
made, at least not to be made (...), altogether, but only by degrees, and
prudent dispensings. I shall not any farther enlarge on so plain a theme, then
to mention one proportion or resemblance of this truth in the natural body
observed by the Physicians in the cure of an hydropicall patient, who, when the
body lies covered with such a deluge of water, that it proves necessary to make
some sluice to let out the burthenous superfluity, do not yet proceed by any
loose way of letting out all at once, because the violent effluvium, or pouring
out of Spirits constantly consequent to that, would certainly destroy the
Patient, and endanger him on dry ground, as much, or more, then in the midst of
those waters; but the method is a (...), the making so small a hole in the
skin, that shall drain the body by insensible degrees by drawing out a little
at once, and never above a pint at a time, though many gallons are designed to
pass by this way of evacuation. I shall add no more to this resemblance, but
that the total violent illegal abolition of Liturgy in a settled Church, is
certainly of this nature, and being superadded to the change of the Government
into a Form quite contrary to that which for 1600 years has prevailed in the
universal Church of Christ, there settled by the Apostles, may be allowed the
style of insignis mutatio, a mutation of some considerable importance to a
Christian state, which being admitted altogether without any preparative
alleviating steps, will (by the rapid sudden motion at least, if there were
nothing else) have a dangerous influence upon the whole body, of which the
cunningest diviner cannot at this distance foresee the effects, or prevent the
emergent mischiefs which succeeding time may discover. If it be said, that this
abolition is now necessary to conclude the present War, and that be affirmed to
be the Politic necessity here meant, I answer, that if it were able to do
that, I should acknowledge it the strongest argument that could be thought on
to prove it Politically necessary, this War being so unnecessarily destructive,
and any thing that could rid us of that, so strongly convenient, that if
Conscience would permit the use of it, I should allow it the title of
necessary. But to make short of this, no man can believe that these Armies were
raised or continued to subdue the Common Prayer Book, for, besides that there
was a time when 'twas found necessary for the Houses to declare, that they had
no design to take away that Book, for fear the people should be disobliged by
it, and another when the Earl of Essex his Army expressed some kindness to it;
It Is now confessed by the Pretenders of both Persuasions, Presbytrians and
Independents, one that they do not, the other that they must not take up Arms
for Religion, and so that kind of political necessity of abolishing the Book
is, and by themselves must be disclaimed also.

necessity, that which is in order to Ecclesiastical or Church-policy, we
shall take liberty in this place to consider this matter at large, because it
may perhaps save us some pains hereafter, and because their pretending of this
necessity of doing what they do, is a tentation, if not a challenge to us to do
so, and then we shall leave it to the Reader to judge what grounds may hence be
fetched for this pretended necessity. And this must be done by laying together
the several things that are in our Liturgy, and are purposely left out in the
Directory, and so are as it were the Characteristicall note, by which the
Directory is by the Assemblers designed to differ from our Liturgy, as so much
food from poison, Christian from Antichristian (if Necessity be properly taken)
or (if improperly for that which is necessary only to the well being) as a
more perfect and more profitable, from that which, if it be so at all, is not
either (in their opinion) in so high a degree.

Liturgy which are purposely avoided in this Directory, I have observed to be
principally these; Of those that are more extrinsecall, six.

1. The prescribing of Forms, or Liturgy it self. 2. Outward or bodily
worship. 3. Uniformity in performing Gods service. 4. The Peoples bearing some
part in the service. 5. The dividing the Prayers into several Collects, and
not putting them all into one continued Prayer. 6. The Ceremonies of kneeling
in the Communion, of Cross in Baptism, of Ring in Marriage, etc.
Then of those that are intrinsecall, and parts of the Service.

1. The Absolution, in the beginning of the Service next after the Confession,
and before the Communion, and in the Visitation of the sick. 2. The Hymns, the
Introite, the Te Deum, etc. 3. The use of the Doxologie or giving glory to God.
4. The Confession of the Faith in the Creeds. 5. The frequent repeating of the
Lords Prayer, and the prayers for the King 6. The observations of diverse Feasts
commemorative, not only of Christ, but of Saints departed, and assigning
Services, Lessons, Epistles, and Gospels, and Collects to them. 7. The reading
the Commandments, and the Prayers belonging to that Service. 8. The order of
the Offertory. 9. Private Baptism. 10. Aprescript form of Catechism. 11.
Confirmation. 12. The solemnities of burying the dead. 13. Thanksgiving after
Childbirth. 14. Communion of the sick. 15. The Service containing the
Communion. 16. The observation of Lent, and the Rogation, and I would add also
of the Ember weeks.
This may seem too loose a task, to enlarge on each of these, and yet we are in
justice to this Book, and for answer to the pretended Necessity of abolishing
it, obliged to do so, as briefly as it may, only so far as may serve to give
the Reader a view of the lawfullnesse at least, and withal of the usefulness
of each of these, and consequently of the no appearance of reason why it should
be thought necessary to abolish any one of them, much less of all the rest for
that ones sake.

necessary in Ecclesiastical Policy, i. e. strongly conducing to the benefit
and edification of a Church to interdict or banish it out of the Kingdom, when
we have proposed these few things concerning it. 1. The example of God himself
and holy men in the Old Testament, prescribing set Forms of blessing the people
to be used daily by Aaron and his Sons, Numb. 6. 23. The Lord bless thee and
keep thee, etc. set Forms for the people to use themselves, Deuteronomy. 26. 3. 5.
Thou shall say before the Lord, A Syrian, etc. as also at the going out of
their Armies, Deuteronomy. 20. 3. and of Thanksgiving, Exodus 15. 1. made by Moses, and
it seems learnt by-heart by all the people; and in the same words used again by
Mirian, v. 21. and so it appears, Isa. 38. 20. that Hezekiah did not only form
a set thanksgiving, but used it all the days of his life. And the same
Hezekiah, 2. Chron. 29. 30. in his thanksgiving commanded the Levites also to
sing praises to God with the words of David and Asaph, i. e. Forms already
prepared to his hand by those sacred Penmen.

Ezra's time constantly using set Forms of Prayer by way of Liturgy; For this
I shall produce no other proof then the testimony of a learned Member of their
Assembly, Mr. Seldom in in his notes on Eutychius, vouching all his affirmation
out of the ancient records of the customs of the Jewish Nation from whom, that
they may be of authority with you, I shall transcribe these severals, That
certain forms of praying, which were to be used by every one daily by Law, or
received custom, were instituted by Ezra and his house, i. e. his consistory.
That the Jews about the end of the Babylonish captivity had their ancient P. 41.
manners as well as language so depraved, that without a Master they either
were not able to pray as they ought, or had not confidence to do so. And P. 42.
therefore that for the future, they might not recede either in the matter of
their prayers (through corruption) or expression (through ignorance) from that
form of piety commanded them by God, this remedy was applied by the men of the
great Synagogue, Ezra and his 120. Colleagues, (where by the way is observable
one special use and benefit of set Forms, not only to provide for the
ignorance, but to be an hedge to true Religion, to keep out all mixtures or
corruptions out of a Church; To which purpose also the Councels in the
Christian Church have designed several parts which we still retain in our
Liturgy, a real and a valuable benefit, if it were considered.) That P. 43.
of this kind there were 18. Prayers or Benedictions, called in the Gemara
composed or appointed Prayers. That the three first of these, and the three
last respected the glory of God the twelve other intermediate were spent on
those prime things that were necessary, either to the whole People, or every
particular man, (proportionable to which perhaps it is that our Savior who
accommodated most institutions of his Baptism and his last Supper, etc. to the
customs of the Church, did also design his prayer, as it is set down in
Matthew, though not according to the number of the Jewish prayers, yet to the
general matter and form of them, the three first branches of it, and the
conclusion, which may pass for three branches more, referring to the glory of
God, and the other intermediate to our private and public wants.) That these
Prayers were to be learnt by every man that the Prayers of the unskilful might
be as perfect as of the most eloquent. That every P. 44.
act of praying was begun with, Psalm. 51. 15. O Lord open thou our lips and our
mouths shall show forth thy praise (the very form of words still retained in
St James his Liturgy, and in ours before the Introite) and concluded with Psalm.
19. the last verse, Into thy hands, etc. That of these 18 Prayers P. 48.
no one was to be omitted, that if any other were added, they were counted of
like free will offerings, as the other were answerable to the prescribed and
were called by that name. That the additions might be made only in those
Prayers which concern their own wants, because those were capable of variation,
but not to those that concerned God. That on Sabbath and Feast-dayes no man
might use a voluntary prayer. That about the time of the Jews destruction P. 49.
Gam^liel and his Sanhedrim added a nineteenth Prayer, and after him others, so
that at length the daily service grew to an 100 Prayers. That it is likely that
the Pagans come to use their set Forms in their Sacrifice P. 50. P. 55.
also, (and perhaps the Mahumedans too) by the example of the Jewish Church,
for which he there referres the Reader to many Books of the Learned. I conceive
the authority of this Gentleman has not been despised by the House of
Commons, and the Assemblers (when it has chanced to agree with their designs
or interest) and therefore I have thus far, as an Argument ad homines,
insisted on it.

Matthew. 26. 44. and upon the Cross in the same manner, praying in the
Psalmists words, only changed into the Syriack dialect, which was then the
vulgar: but also commanded the use of those very words of his perfect form,
which it seems he meant not only as a pattern but a form it self (as the
Standard weight, is not only the measure of all weights, but may it self be
used) Luke 11. 2. when you pray, say, Our Father, etc. which precept no man can
with a good conscience ever obey, that holds all set forms necessary to be cast
out of the Church.

John the Baptist, who taught his disciples to pray, Luke 11. 1. (which
occasioned Christ's Disciples to demand, and him to give them a form of Prayer)
but especially of the Apostles, of which we find intimations, 1. Cor. 14. 26.
When you come together every one of you has a Psalm, which sure referres to
some of the Psalms of David or Asaph, used then ordinarily in their devotions,
(and that as even now I said, authorized by the example of Christ himself upon
the Cross, who it is thought repeated the whole 22. Psalm, it is certain, the
first verse of it, My God, my God, why have thou for saken me) and so certainly
a set form, and that of Prayer too (of which thanksgivings and Praises are a
part.) But because every one had his several Psalm, it is therefore
reprehended by the Apostle, as tending to confusion, and by that consequence,
S. Paul's judgment is thence deducible for the joining of all in the same form,
as being the only course tending to edification in the end of that verse, and
then sure 'twould be hard, that that which the Apostle conceived the only
course for edifying, should now be necessary to be turned out of the Church as
contrary to edification. Farther yet, it is clear by text, that the Apostles
when they met together, to holy duties (such are Fasting, Prayer, receiving the
Sacrament) continued very long time, sometimes a whole day together. This being
too much to be always continued in the Church, and unsuteable to every man's
business, is said to have been the occasion that S. James first made choice of
some special Prayers most frequently by them used, which was after called his
Liturgy, which (or some other in the disguise of that) the Greek Church still
use on solemn days. This also being of the longest for every days use, St
Basil is said to have shortened, and that again St Chrysostom; how certain
these reports are, I shall not take upon me to affirm, but only add, that the
Greek Church, who are most likely to know the truth of it by their records, do
retain all these three Liturgies, and would loudly laugh at any man that should
make doubt whether St James, St Basil, and St Chrysostom, were not the
Authors of them. 2. That the judgment of that Church (if they are deceived
also, and may not be thought worthy to be heeded by our Assemblers) is yet an
argument of great authority to any prudent man, if not that these Liturgies
were purely the same with those which were written by that Apostle, and those
holy men, yet that there were such things as Liturgies of their penning. The
like might be added of that short form of St Peter's, which alone they say was
used in the Roman Church for a great while, till after by some Popes it was
augmented, and the same of St Marks Liturgy. I am sure St Augustine speaking of
some forms retained in the Church, and still to be found in our Liturgy,
particularly that of Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts, etc. faith, that they
are verba ab ipsis Apostolorum temporibus petita, words fetched from the times
of the Apostles, which supposes that they did use such Forms. And for that
particular mentioned by St Augustine, it is agreeable to the Constitutions of
the Apostles, l. 8. c. 16. (which collection if it be not so ancient as it
pretends, does yet imitate Apostolical antiquity) and so in St James's, and
Basils and Chrysostomes Liturgy in the same words with our Book as far as to
the word [bounden] and for many other such particular Forms used by us we find
them in Cyril of Jerusalems Catechism, one of the ancientest Authors we have,
and then that it should be necessary for the Church to turn out what the
Apostles had thus brought into it, will not easily be made good by our
Assemblers.

Cassander, and other writers of the Liturgica, that 'twere a reproach to the
Reader to detain or importune him with testimonies of that nature. To omit the
practice of The same Constantine in his palace imitating the orders of the
Church, among other things, (...), rendered Set Prayers, Eusebius de vit. Constable. l.
4. c. 17. And so it is said of the Nobles about him, that they used (...),
Prayers that the Emperor liked, and were all brought by him, (...), etc. to
pray the same prayers all of the^ even in private, c. 18.
Constantine, who prescribed a form for his Soldiers (a Copy of which we have
in Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 20.) I shall only mention two grand
testimonies for set Forms, one in the 23 Canon of the third Council of
Carthage, Quascunque sibipreces aliquis describet noniis utatur, ^ise prius oas
cum instructioribus fratribus contulerit: No man may use any Prayers which he
has made, unless he first consult with other learneder Christians about the^.
And the other more punctual: Council: Milev. c. 12. Placuit ut precesquae
probatae fuerintin Concilio ab omnibus celebrentur. Nec alia omnino dica^tur in
Ecclesia, nisi quae a prudentioribus tractantur, vel comprobatae in Synod
fuerint, no forte aliquid contra fidem, aut per ignorantiam, aut per minus
studium sit compositum. It was resolved on, that the Prayers that were approved
in the Council should be used by all, and that no other should be said in the
Church but those that had been weighed by the more prudent, or approved in a
Synod, lest any thing, either through ignorance or negligence should be do^ne
against the Faith. Instead of such Citations (and because whatsoever argument
is brought from that Topic of Ecclesiastical tradition, is now presently
defamed with the title of Popish and Antichristian, because forsooth Antichrist
was a working early in the Apostles time, and every thing that we have not a
mind to in antiquity, must needs be one of those works) I shall rather choose
to mention another, as a more convincing argument ad homines, and that is,

Calvin himself in several ample testimonies, one in his Notes upon Psalm. 20.
1. another in his Epistle to the Protector. I shall not give my self license to
transcribe these, or multiply more such Testimonies, only for the honor not
only of Liturgy in general, but particularly of our Liturgy, 'twill be
worth remembering that Gilbertus a German, many years since, in a book of his,
propounds our Book of prayer Precum fol. 301. 212.
for a sample of the Forms of the ancient Church; And for the purity of it,
through Reformation, that Cr^nmer procured the King Edwards Common Prayer Book
to be translated into Latin, and sent it to Bucer, and required his judgment
of it, who answered, that there was nothing in it, but what was taken out of
the word of God, or which was not against it, commode^ acceptum, being taken in
a good sense, some things indeed, says he, quae nisi quis, etc. unless they
be interpreted with Candor, may seem not so agreeable to the word of God, and
which unquiet men may wrest u^te matter of contention. As may be seen at large
in Bucers Scripta Anglicana. Upon this occasion this Book of King Edwards was
again surveyed, and in those particulars, that were Subject to such Cavills,
corrected. After which time the quarrels about that Book were generally with
the Papists (not so much with the opposite extreme (and therefore John Old in
Queen Mary's days wrote against them in defense of it, and of the King Edwards
Reformation. And Cranmer made a challenge, that if he might be permitted by the
Queen to take to him P. Martyr, and four or five more, they would enter the
lists with any Papists living, and defend the Common Prayer Book to be
perfectly agreeable to the Word of God, and the same in effect which had been
for 1500 years in the Church of Christ. This for the reputation of the Book.
Then for the fruit and benefit that by the use of it redounded to Christians,
take an essay by Mr John Hullier, Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, who
was Martyred in Queen Mary's days, Ann. 1557. and being at the stake among
many other books that were thrown into the fire to him, it happened that a
Common Prayer Book fell between his hands, which he joyfully receiving opened,
and read till the flame and smoke suffered him not to see any more, and then he
fell to prayer, holding his hands up to heaven, and the book betwixt his arms
next his heart, thanking God for that mercy in sending him it, the relation is
Mr Foxes, and from thence the plea authentic, that the tree that bare wholesome
fruit, should not be cut down by Acts and Mon. page 1818.
the law, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. even when War was to be made on a City, and as Maimon
adds, l. de Idol. though it were worshipped for an Idol, and if that which was
then of so dear esteem be now so necessary to be cast our, it is an ill
indication of the times into which we are fallen.

Seldom refers to, I shall only add these three testimonies, first of Plato,
l. 7. de leg. where he commands, that what ever Prayers or Hymns the Poets
composed to the Gods, they should first show them to the Priests (as if they
were in a manner leprous till then) before they published them, le^t they should
ask evil things in stead of good (an infirmity that these days are very
subject unto) The second in Thucyd. l. 6. p. 434. (...). Set forms for several
occasions, and a common joint sending them up to heaven. The third in Alexander
ab Alex. l. 4 c. 17. that the Gentiles read their Prayers out of a Book before
their Sacrifices, Ne quid praepostere dicatur, aliquis ex script^ praeire and
ad verbum refer solitus est: That the work might not be done proposterously.
Which two reasons of theirs, the one lest they should stray in the matter of
their Prayers, the other lest offend in the manner, may pass for Christian
reasons, as seasonable with us, as they were among them. And no necessity that
those reasons should be despised by us neither.

Preston (whose memory is, I hope, not lost among these Assemblers) and made
use of in a Printed work of his to the confuting of them. That while they in
opposition to set Forms require the Minister to conceive a Prayer for the
Congregation, they observe not, that the whole Congregation is by that means as
much stinted, and bound to a set Form, to wit, of those words which the
Minister conceives, as if he read them out of a book. 2. That the persons with
whom we have now to deal, though they will not prescribe any Form of Prayer,
yet venture to (...), Act. 14. 12
prescribe the matter of it in these words, page 14. the Minister is to call
upon the Lord to this effect. Now why the prescription of the matter is not the
stinting of the Spirit, as well as the form of words (unless the Spirit, like
the Heathen Mercury be the God of eloquence, and be thought to deal in the
words only) or why the promise of dabitur in illa hora, it shall be given you
in that hour, should not be as full a promise for matter, as for expressions;
especially when that Text forbids care or provision, (...) not only how, but
what they should speak, and the promise is peculiarly Matthew. 10. 19.
for the (...), it shall be given you what you shall speak; and this is it,
that is attributed to the Spirit, v. 20. (from whence if I should conclude,
that the holy Ghost taught the Disciples only the matter of their answer; and
they themselves were left to put it in form of words, there is nothing in that
Text against that assertion; and that it was so in their penning of the New
Testament, many probable Arguments might be produced if it were now
seasonable,) and consequently, why the prescribing of one should not be
unreasonable in them, that condemn all prescribing of the other, I confess is
one of those things which my charity has made me willing to impute to the
shortness of discourse, because I am unwilling to lay any heavier charge upon
it.

passages which have fallen from Ministers in their extemporary Prayers (of
which mere pity and humanity, civility and mercy to Enemies, restrains us from
inserting a large Catalogue) and the no manner of advantage above that which
set Forms may also afford, but only of satisfaction to the itching ear,
exercise and pleasure to the licentio^^ tongue, and the vanity of the
reputation of being able to perform that office so fluently (which yet is no
more then the Rabbis allow Achitophel, that he had every day three new Forms
of prayer) or having a plentiful measure of the Spirit; which is believed to
infuse such eloquence, I shall now conclude it impossible that any humane eye
should discern (...) Necessity, in respect of Ecclesiastical policy, edifying
the Church, why all Liturgy should be destroyed, not washed nor purged with
Soap, suc^ any Reformation would be, but torn and consumed with nitre, for suc^
is abolition, why it should suffer this Ostracisme, unless as Aristides di^
for being too virtuous) be thus vehemently first declaimed, and then b^*nish'd
out of the Church.

outward bodily worship, it is particularly prohibited by the Directory at one
time, at the taking of our seats or places when we enter the Assembly,
(directly contrary to that of I^idor si quis veniat cum lectio celebratur P.
10. De div. Offic. 10.
adoret tantum Deum: If any come in when the Lesson is a reading let him only
perform adoration to God, and hearken to what is read) and neve so much as
recommended at any time, nor, one would think, permitted i^ any part of their
public service, like the Persians in Strabo, l. 15. that never offered any
part of the flesh to the Gods in their sacrifices, kept all the to themselves,
(...), supposing the Gods would b^ content with the souls, which in the blood
were powered out and sacrificed to their honor, (...) they said that the Gods
wanted and desired the souls for a sacrifice, b^ not any thing else; of which
people Herodotus, l. 1. has observed that they had neither Templars nor Altar,
and laughed at them which built either but went to the top of some hill or
other, and there sacrificed, prefe^ring such natural Altars before any other.
The former of these is the avowed Divinity of these men (and might perhaps have
been attende^ with the latter too, were it not that there be so many Churches
alread^ built conveniently to their hands) in stead of which, our Liturgy hat^
thought fit not only to recommend but prescribe bodily worship; fi^^ by
directing in the Rubric what part of service shall be performed kneeling, then
by reading the Venite, where all encourage and call up one the others to
worship, and fall down, and kneel, etc. to worship i. e. adore, which
peculiarly notes bodily worship, and so surely the falling down, and kneeling
before the Lord. And of this I shall say, that it is 1. an act of obedience to
that precept of glorifying God in our bodies, as well as souls. 2. A
transcribing of Christ's copy, who kneeled, and even prostrated himself in
prayer, of many holy men in Scripture, who are affirmed to have done so (and
that affirmation written for our example) and even of the Publican, who though
standing yet by standing afar off, by not looking up, by striking his breast,
did clearly join bodily worship to his prayer, of [Lord be merciful to me a
sinner] used at his coming into the Temple, and in that posture thrived better
then the Pharisee in his loftier garb, went away more justified, says our
Savior, as a vessel at the foot of a hill, will (say the Artists) receive and
contain more water, then the same or the like vessel Vide Clav. in Sacr. Bosc.
c. 1.
on the top of it would be able to do (and he that shall do the like, that
shall join adoration of God, and nothing but God, to the use of that or the
like servent ejaculation at his entrance into Gods house, will sure have
Christ's approbation of the Publicans behavior, to justify him from any charge
of superstition in so doing) and besides 3. the most agreeable humble gesture,
and so best becoming, and Cum hi motus corporis fieri nisi motu animi
praecedente non possin^, eudem r^^sus exter^us visibiliter factis ille interior
invisibilis augetur. Aug. l. de cura pr^ m^r. 5.
evidencing, and helping the inward performance of that most lowly duty of
Prayer, and consequently that it may be charged with blasphemy, as well and as
properly, as with superstition, and probably would be so, if the latter were
not the more odious of the two: and indeed why kneeling or bowing should be
more liable to that censure, then either mental or orall prayer, there is no
reason imaginable, it being as possible that one may be directed to a false
object (and so become Idolatrous, or superstitious in the true notion of those
words (as they denote the worship of Idols, or dead men, (...) or superstites)
as the other, and (for the improper notion of Superstition (the one again as
much capable of being an excess in Religion (the mind or tongue being as
likely to enlarge and exceed as the body) or of using a piece of false
Religion, as the other, the bodily worship duly performed to God, being the
payment of a debt to God (and no doubt acceptable, when it is paid with a true
heart) and no way an argument of want, but a probable evidence of the presence
and cooperation of inward devotion, as I remember Nazianzen says of his
Father, Or. 8. (...), He showed a great deal in the outside, but kept the
greater treasure within in the invisible part. And on the other side, the
stiffnesse of the knee, an argument of some eminent defect, if not of true
piety, yet of somewhat else, and Christ's prediction, John 4. that the time
should come that the worshippers should worship God in spirit and truth, (being
not set in opposition to bodily worship, but to the appropriating it to some
singular places, Jerusalem or that Mountain) not producible as any apology or
excuse for such omission. To these brief intimations I shall need add no more,
when the conclusion that I am to infer is so moderate, being only this, that
it is not necessary to turn all bowing, or kneeling, or bodily worship out of
the Church, (were there any superstition in any one or more gestures, this were
too great a severity, to mulct the Church of all, above the proportion of the
most unlimited arbitrary Court, whose amercements must always be within the
compass of salvo contenemente, which this will not be, if there be no
competency of bodily worship left behind) and that the Liturgy does better to
prescribe it at fit times, then the Directory to omit all mention of it at all
times, unless by way of dislike and prohibition. Which conclusion will be the
more easily evinced against them, by asking them whether in their
Family-Parlour-Prayers; or in their private Closet-prayers, they do not approve
and practice that gesture; which as I believe in charity they do, so I must
from thence infer, that by them the house of God, is the only place thought
fit to be despised. And if it be replied, that the Directory forbids not
kneeling, but only commands it not, leaving it free to use or not to use. I
answer. 1. That the effect of this liberty is very remarkable among them, and
equal to that of a prohibition, no man almost of their persuasion ever
kneeling in their Churches. 2. That the never so much as recommending it, is
very near a forbidding of it. 3. That bowing or adoration is directly forbidden
once (which by the way, is as much the defining of a Ceremony, viz. that of
standing or going upright, and so as contrary to the Independants persuasions,
and to the great clamorous complaint for Liberty in Ceremonies, as any
prescription of kneeling or bowing can be.) 4. That kneeling also is at the
receiving of the Sacrament forbidden, by necessity of consequence, sitting
being prescribed, and therefore that that reply or excuse is false also. And so
now what special advantage this is like to bring in to this Church of ours, to
have the bodies of negligent, or profane, or Factious men left (without any so
much as an admonition) to their own inclinations and so what depth of
Ecclesiastical policy there was which made this change so necessary, I desire
now may be judged.

For uniformity in that Service; (which our Liturgy labors to set up, by
prescribing the manner of it, but the Directory has taken away by leaving all
to the chance of men's wills, which can no more be thought likely to concur in
one form, then Democritus's Atoms to have met together into a world of
beautiful Creatures, without any hand of providence to dispose them) it has
certainly the approbation of all wise men, and command of St Paul, 1 Cor. 14.
40. in that grand place, Let all things be done decently, and in order. Of
which I conceive the clear importance to be, that all be done in the Church
according to custom and appointment. The former employed in (...), (custom
being the only rule of decency, and therefore the indecency of wearing long
hair, is proved by being against nature, i. e, says Suidas in the Scripture
phrase, (...), a custom of some continuance in that place, and thereupon St
Paul thinks it enough against an Ecclesiastical usage, and that which might
supersede all strife about it, 1 Cor. 11. 16. [we have no such customs, etc.])
and the latter in plain words (...), according to order or appointment (for so
the words literally import) and then upon these two grounds is uniformitie
built, and necessarily results, where all that is done in the Church is ruled
by one of these, by custom, or by Law, which being here commanded by St. Paul,
is a proof of the more then lawfulness of (...) prescription of Ceremonies in
a Church, and of uniformity therein. And then what necessity there is or can
be that St Paul's command shall be so neglected, all care of uniformitie so
disclaimed, all (...), constitution, or ordinance, for any Ecclesiastical
matter (unless their ordinance against all such constitutions) so solemnly
disavowed, it will be hard to imagine, or guess, unless it be on purpose to
observe Master Prynnes rule of Conforming the Church to the State, to fill one
as full of disorder and (...), and confusion as the other. I remember a saying
of Socrates which Plato and Cicero record from him, Mutata Musica mutantur and
mores: that the change of a kind of Music, had a great influence on men's
minds, and had a general change of manners consequent to it. I conceive
uniformitie in Gods service to be parallel to Music, being it self an outward
concord, or harmony of the most different affections; and that that should be
not only changed, but lost, I cannot understand any necessity, unless it be
that some such like effects may be wrought in Religion also.

Theodorets story, l. 2. c. 24. where speaking of Flavianus and Diodorus, he
says of them, (...), etc. They divided the Quire of Singers into two parts,
and appointed them to sing the Psalms successively, which custom began by them
(who, says he were admirable men, and labored extremely to stir up all men to
Piety, and to that end invented this) (...), prevaild over the whole world, or
by way of mutual charity, returning a prayer for the Priest, who began one
peculiarly for them; which Innocentius referres to, in his letter to Aurelius
and Augustino, calling the communes and alternas preces, to which he there
attributes more force, quam privatis, then to private, or by way of following
the Presbyter in Confession of sins, both at the beginning of the Service, and
before the Communion; or in Profession of Faith in the Creeds, wherein every
the meanest Christian is to have his part;) it is certainly designed by the
Church, from the example of pure antiquity, to very gainful uses, to quicken
devotion, which the length of continued hearing may have leave to dull and
slacken, and to recall those thoughts which may upon the like temptation have
diverted to other objects; in a word, to engage every one to be made no idle of
unprofitable Spectator of the Service: and as long as there is still need of
that help to these so necessary ends, and not the least show or pretense of
objection against it, how necessary it can be to reject it wholly, and lay all
the task upon the Priest, and not require so much as an Amen (which it seems
was in fashion in St Paul's time) of the (...), or Lay person, I leave to the
most prejudicate Reader to give sentence for me.

Letany, wherein the People are more exercised then in any other part of the
Service, it is certainly designed to make it more proportionable to the title
bestowed on it by the Ancients of (...). earnest or intense Prayer, and in
Methodius, (...), earnest Petitions, in the Greek Liturgy, simply (...),
intense or earnest) from Act. 12. 5. Luke 22. 44. This continual joining of
the people in every passage of it, tending very much both to the improving and
evidencing that fervor and intention, which can never be more necessary then
throughout that Service; of which I shall in passing say these three things,
and justify them against any gain-sayer, that there is not extant any where,
1. a more particular excellent enumeration of all the Christians either private
or common wants, as far as is likely to come to the cognizance of a
Congregation; nor secondly, a more innocent blameless Form, against which
there lies no just objection, and most of the unjust ones that have been made,
are reproachful to Scripture it self, from whence the passages excepted
against are fetched, as that particularly of Praying for Gods mercy upon all
men, from 1. Tim. 2. 1. nor thirdly, a more artificial composure for the
raising that zeal, and keeping it up throughout, then this so defamed part of
our Liturgy; for which and other excellencies undoubtedly it is, (and not for
any Conjuring or Swearing in it) that the Devil has taken care that it should
drink deepest of that bitter cup of Calumny and Reviling, which it can no way
have provoked, but only as Christ did the reproach of the diseased man, What
have I to do with thee? etc. when he came to exorcize and cast out the Devil
that possessed him. And for this to be thrown out of the Church, sure there is no
other necessity, then there was that there should be Scandal^ and Heresies in
it, only because the Devil and his Factors would have it so.

dividing of Prayers into diverse Collects or Portions, and not putting all our
Petitions into one continued Prayer, these advantages it has to give it
authority, 1. the practice of the Jews, whose Liturgy was dispensed into
Lessons, etc. and 18 Collects, or short Prayers. 2. The example of Christ
prescribing a short Form, and in that, says St Chrysostom, (...), teaching us
the measure or length due to each Prayer of ours, Hom: de Ann^f. 965, and
setting a mark of Heathenisme, Mat. 6. and of Pharisaisme, Matthew. 23. 14. on
their long Prayers. 3. The advice of the Ancients, who tell us St Peter's Form,
used for a great while in the Roman Church, was a short one, and that Christ
and S Paul commanded us to make our Prayers, (...), short and frequent, and
with little distances between. And so Epiphanius. Chrysostom. (...).
(...): orat. 6. 24. directs to offer our Petitions, (...), with all
frequencie; and Cassian, de instit. mon. l. 2. 10 from the universal consent
of them, Vtilius censent breves orationes sed creberrimas fieri: The way that
is resolved to be most profitable, is to have short Prayers, but very thick or
frequent. And he adds a consideration which prompted them to this resolution:
Ut Diaboli insidiantis jacula succincta brevitate vitemus: That by that means
the Devils darts which he is wont to find and steal his time to shoot in to our
breasts, may by the brevitie of our Prayers be prevented. To these many more
might be added, but that the no-advantage on the other side above this (save
only the reputation of the labor, and patience of speaking, or hearing so
much in a continued course, in one breath as it were) will save us the pains of
using more motives to persuade any, that sure it is not necessary to exchange
this pleasant easy course of our Liturgy, for the redious toilsome less
profitable course in the Directory.

Ceremonies used in the several Services, much might be said, as particularly
for that of kneeling (in opposition to sitting at the Lords Supper designed in
the Directory) 1. that it is agreeable to the practice Populus in Ecclesia
^^dendi potestatem non habet. Ideo reprehendi meretur, quia apud Idola
celebratur.
of all Antiquity, who though they kneeled not because the Canon of the
Council of Nice, obliged all to stand in the Church, between Easter and
Whitsuntide, or on the Lords day all the year long, (which by the way
absolutely excludes sitting, as also does that saying of Optatus, l. 4. That
the People may not sit in the Church: and of Tertullian, l. de Orat: (...). 12.
That 'twas an Heathen custom to sit in the Church, and therefore ought to be
reprehended;) yet used the Prayer-gesture at receiving, i. e. bowing their
bodies and heads, which the Fathers call adoration: kissing of the hand, is the
propriety of the Latin word, but the ordinary denotation of it, bowing the
body: the (...), which is more then the former, the cultus major, among the
Learned; For as Herodotus observes of the Eastern Nations, that the manner of
equals was to kiss one another at meeting; of inferiors to kiss the hand of
the Superior; but of the Suppliants or Petitioners, that would express the
greatest humility to bow themselves before him, so was this last of the three
continued among the primitive Christians, in their Services of the greatest
piety and humility; Climacus, p. 298. (...), When I receive I worship, or
adore; Agreeable to which the great men in the French Churches, who receive it
passing or going (a mere Egyptian. Passover custom) do first make a lowly
cringe or courtesy before they take it in their hands. 2. That Christ's
Table Gesture at the delivering it, is no Argument for sitting, both because it
is not manifest by the Text that he used that, save only at the Passover,
from which this Supper of the Lord was distinct, and was celebrated by
blessing, and breaking, and giving the bread, etc. to which some other gesture
might be more proper, and more commodious, and because Christ's gesture in that
is no more obligingly exemplary to us, then his doing it after Super was to the
Apostles, who yet did it Fasting. Act. 13. 2. and generally took it before the
agapae, and as by Plinies Epistle it appears, so early in the morning, that the
congregation departed and met again, ad capiendum cibum promiscuum, to take
their meals together. As also 3. that the contrary gesture of sitting, as it
was, not many years since, by a full Synod of Protestants in Poland forbidden,
if not condemned, because they found it used by the Arrians, as complying with
their opinion, who hold our Savior to be a mere Creature, so is now professed by
some of our late Reformers writings to be a badge and cognizance of their
believing in the infallibility of Christ's promise of coming to reign on this
Earth again, and take them into a familiar and (a kind of) equal conversation
with him, the Doctrine of the Millenaries, once in some credit, but after
condemned by the Church, and though favored by some Learned men, both
anciently and of late, is not yet sure clear enough to come into our Creed or
Liturgy: or to be professed and proclaimed by that gesture, when ever we receive
the Sacrament. The evidence or proof of it being primarily that in the
Revelation, which by the rest of that Book I am very apt to suspect, may
signify any thing rather then what the letter of the words imports to us at
the first view of them. But I shall not enlarge on this, nor the other
Ceremonies mentioned, but refer the Reader to the Learned Satisfactory
unanswered labor of Mr Hooker, on these Subjects, and then ask him when he
has read him, 1. whether he repent him of that pains. 2. Whether in his
conscience he can think it necessary, or tending to edification, to cast all
these causelessly out of this Church, or the whole Liturgy for their sakes.

Now for those things that are more intrinsecall to the Liturgy, and parts of
the Service; as

pronouncing of Absolution, which Christ so solemnly instated on the Priest in
his Disciples (by three several acts, first unto Peter as the mouth of the
Apostles, Matthew. 16. 19. then by way of promise to them altogether, cap. 18.
18. then by way of actual instating it on them, breathing that power and the
Holy Ghost on them together, Joh. 20. 23.) and which is so distinctly named by
St James, cap. 5. 15. in the case of sickness, (...), (not as we render they
shall be forgiven him, as if it were (...), and belonged only to God's act of
pardoning, but) impersonally Absolution shall be given him; and so constantly
preserved and exercised in the universal Church in public and private, and
approved as far as our Liturgy uses it) even by those who affirm that power in
the Minister to be only declarative, that any man conversant either in the
Gospel or writings of the Fathers, or modern Authors, or that has but seen
Knox's Scotch Liturgy, and observed that part of it, about the receiving of
Penitents, would be amazed to see a Directory for the public worship of God
(which is a large phrase, and contains the whole office of the Priest) and in
it a title for the visitation of the sick, and yet find never a word about
Absolution, no not in case of scruple, doubt, or temptation, page 67. or the
deathbed it self. This exercise of those Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, i.
e. of the Church, this pronouncing of Gods pardon, and actual giving the
Pardon and Peace of the Church to all her penitent children, especially that
more particular act before the Communion, and on the Bed of sickness, is,
beside the obedience to Christ, so necessary an expression of Christian charity
in every Church to its poor members, and the denying of it, where it is due,
so barbarous an inhumanity (which yet I hope no man shall be the worse for, but
those that do deny it) that as the turning of Public censures out of this
Church, is a rare example of despite unto Christ's command, (there being no
National Church from Christ's time to this to be found without it, till this of
ours for these last three years) so the sending of Absolution after it, and the
affirming it to be necessary to be done, and appointing all footsteps of it to
be turned out of the Service, is a piece of disorder, as contrary to Charity as
to Piety, to Reason as Religion, this being so far from the blame of an
exuberancy in our Service, that there is more reason to wish that there were
more of this nature, then that that, which we have already, were omitted.

Hymns of the Church, it will not be amiss perhaps to give you first the true
notion of the word; there being among the Hebrews three sorts of Songs, 1.
Mizmor, a concise or short verse, 2. Tehillah, Praise, celebrating or
depredicating of God, and 3. Schir, a Canticle, as the word is used in the
title of that Song of Songs. And answerable to these three, we have Col. 3. 17.
(...), and (...), Psalms and Hymns, and Songs, where the word Hymn is
answerable to the second of these, a praising and magnifying of God in and for
some of his most remarkable acts of mercy and power. Thus was it the dictate
even of nature it self among the heathens, to employ a great part of their
Poetry, i. e. their piety (for so Orpheus the first and most famous Writer of
Hymns, was called Theologus Poeta, a Poet that was a Divine also) in framing
of Hymns to their gods, though those of Musaeus and Linus, the other two
Theologi Poetae are not now to be met with. The like we have still of Homer
also, and I remember Galen the famous Physician, in one of his Books, De usu
partium, describing the composure of the Foot, breaks out of a sudden into an
excellent acknowledgement, which he calls (...), a true Hymn in laud of that
God which made these curious bodies of men. This duty of natural Piety,
Christianity certainly has not obstructed, but elevated it to a far higher
pitch by superadding that greatest obligation taken from the Redemption of
mankind, to that old one of the Creation. And thus in all Ages of the Church
some Hymns have been constantly retained to be said or sung in the Churches, I
mean not, only the daily lections of the Psalms of David (which yet this
Directory does not mention, but only commands a more frequent reading of that
Book, then of some other parts of Scripture) nor the singing of some of those
Psalms in Meter, (which yet this Directory does not prescribe neither, save
only on days of Thankesgiving, or after the Sermon if with convenience it may
be done, making it very indifferent, it seems, whether it be kept at all in the
Church or no, unless on those special occasions.) But the alternate reading
of the 'Psalmes both by Priest and people (Psalm ab omnibus celebrentur, Let
the Psalms be said by all, in the Milevit: Counc. Can. 12.) the constant use of
some special Psalms, as the Introite, and of other more purely Christian
Hymns, either framed by holy men in the Scripture in reference to Christ's
Incarnation, or by the Church since on purpose to bless and praise God for his
mercies in Christ, which sure deserve a daily celebration from every Christian,
as well and as richly as any Victory over Enemies, though it be one of theirs
over the King himself, can deserve of them upon any day of Thanksgiving. Of
this kind is the Te Deum, (...) most Divine and admirable Form called
anciently, (...), a triumphant Song, generally thought to be composed by St
Augustine, and St Ambrose, Telman in Basil, T. 1. p. 795.
on the day that St Ambrose baptized St Augustine, and fitted to that purpose
with an acknowledgement of the Trinity, in reference to St Augustines
conversion from Manichaisme. If this be true, then sure is it one of those, the
repeating of which moved St Augustine to so much passion, that he says in his
Confessions, l. 9. Quantum flevi in hymnis and Canticis Ecclesiae tuae, that
and the like hymns of the Church fetched many tears from him. Of which I shall
only say, that to any man that has but an humble, faithful, thankful
fervent heart to go along with it, it is as christian a piece of praise and
prayer, as any humane pen could contribute toward the public worship of God,
which he that has had the use of in the Church, and now thinks fit to banish
out of it, shows his own former coldness and non-proficiencie under that means
of grace, and that he never joined in it with any zeal or earnestness, or else
his retchlesse ingratitude to the Church which has allowed him the benefit of
it.

Lift up your hearts, and ending with the Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts,
etc. a form to be found with little variation, both in Saint Jameses, St
Basils, and St Chrysostomes Liturgy; the other, after the Sacrament, Glory be
to God on high, etc. called anciently Hymnus Angelicus, the Angelical hymn,
from the first part of it which was sung by Angels, and both these such
ancient, pure, excellent composures in themselves, and so fitly accommodated to
the present business, and all that I have named, so far from any appearance of
evil, so free from any the least objection of any the most petulant malicious
calumniatour (as far as I yet ever heard) so well-becoming a congregation of
Saints, who by praising God in the Church, should practice before hand, and fit
themselves for the singing of Hallelujahs perpetually in heaven, and in the
mean time bear the Angels company here (who St Chrysostom tells us, sing all
the hymns with us) that it is little better then fury, savouring much of the
temper of that evil (...) t. 4. p. 753. l 40. edit. Savil. Sect. 32
Spirit on Saul, that was exercised with David's Music, and (therefore may be
allowed to have malice to that and the like ever since) to think it necessary
to throw this piece of heaven out of the Church.

3. For the Doxoligie so constantly annexed to many parts of our service, in
these words, (wherein the people either are to begin or answer) Glory be to the
Father, etc. It is an ancient piece of very great consideration the former
versicle of it being, as it is affirmed by good authorities, composed by the
first Council of Nice, and appointed by them to be used in the Church, as a
lesser Creed, or confession of the Trinity and (...), Consubstantiality of the
Son and holy Ghost, with the Father (at which it has therefore anciently been
the custom to stand up, confession of God, being a praising of him (as the
word in other languages imports) to which therefore that posture is most due)
which may well pass for no fable, because it is clear, that soon after that
time, Flavianus sang it aloud in the Church of Antioch, as appears by l. 3. c.
16.
Zozomen, and l. 2. c. 14.
Theodoret, (and if we may believe l. 18. c. 51
Nicephorus, St Chrysostom joynd with him in it;) Of this Philostorgius the
Arian historiographer tells us, An. 348. Flavianus having gotten a congregation
of Monks together, (...), was the first that began that form of Doxology,
others using that other form of (...), Glory to the Father, by the Son in the
holy Ghost: making the Son inferior to the Father, and the holy Ghost to the
Son, as Eunomius and Eudoxius did, which it seems Philostorgius himself most
approved of, ((...), says his Epitomator of him) others (not as Gotofred mends
his copy, and reads it, (...), but as the Oxford manuscript) (...), Glory to
the Father, and the Son in the holy Ghost. These two several forms, and some
say a third [in the Son and the holy Ghost] were it seems proposed against
Athanasius in the Council of Antioch, An. Dom. 34^, and by men of several
persuasions used in the Church of Antioch, as a character, by which (...), they
expressed their several opinions, says Zozomen. l. 3. c. 19. and l. 4. 27. and
by so doing, (...), every one applied the Psalm or hymn (to the end of which,
as now with us, it was, it seems, then annexed) to his opinion. In which
narration of Philostorgius, we have no reason to suspect any thing, but the
(...), that Flavianus was the first that sang it, wherein his favor with the
Arrians might make him partial, or the truth might be, he was the first that
sang it at Antioch, for there Athanasius was in a Council condemned, and so
still the form might in other places be used more anciently. This first verse
being on this occasion brought into the Church as a testimony, and pillar of
the Catholic verity against the Arrians, and annexed by ancient custom to the
end of the Psalms in the Liturgy, St Jerome, or some body before him, being
moved by the noise of the Macedonians (who excepted against that part of it
concerning the holy Ghost affirming that the Doctrine of the Divinity of the
holy Ghost was novell) is said to have been the Author of adding the other
verse or line to the former, in opposition to them, As it was in the beginning,
etc. to signify this to be the ancient Catholic, no new private doctrine or
opinion; and yet that it was very near, if not as ancient as the former may be
guest by what Theodoret, l. 2. c. 24. says of Leontius Bishop of Antioch, that
he was wont to say to himself the Arrian Doxology so softly, that no word could
be heard by him that stood next, but (...), for ever and ever, (the close of
the second line) and this says he, while Flavianus, who opposed him, was a
Layman. And if this be a time wherein such Forms as these, (which besides
giving glory to God, do secure and defend the Catholic Doctrine of the Trinity
against all ancient or modern Arrians and Macedonians) are necessarily to be
cast out, as hindrances to growth and edification, sure the design is only
to plant Heresies in the Church (to which alone that may prove impediment) but
nothing else.

lesser Creed, should also be able to raise so fierce a Torrent, as to drive
and hurry with it three larger Creeds also, especially that not only of the
Nicene Fathers, but of the Apostles themselves; Against the matter of which I
have not heard, that the Presbyterians have any objection, and sure the
Beads-mans Divinity, that turns the Creed into a Prayer, has not concluded the
use of it to be a restinting of the Spirit. What the effect of this part of
Reformation is likely to be, will not be heard to divine, even Barbarism and
Atheism within a while, the turning God and Christ, and all the Articles of
the Creed out of men's brains also, and not (as yet it is) only out of their
hearts; what is the necessity of doing it, will not so easily be resolved even
by him that has imbibed the Assemblers principles, unless it be to gratify
the Separatists, who are professed deniers of one Article, that of the Holy
Catholic Church, resolving the end and the effect of the Holy Ghosts descent
to have been only to constitute particular Congregations, and none else. As
for the great pattern of the Presbyterians, the practice of Geneva, or
Scotland, that appears by Knocks Common Prayer Book, to have allowed a set form
of Confession of Faith, and designed it for the public use as the first thing
in that Book of Prayers, though the truth is, the Apostles, or other ancient
Creeds being set aside, one of the Geneva forming is fain to supply the place
of them, which yet by the setting the several parts of the Apostles Creed in
the margent, both there and in the order of Baptism, appears rather to be an
interpretation of it, and so still the Separatists must be the only men in the
Church fit to be considered, or else apparently there is no such Political
necessity of this neither.

Lords Prayer, and Prayers for the King in our Service, this account may be
briefly given of it. For the former, that in our Common Prayer Book, there be
several Services for several occasions, of the Sacraments, etc. for several
days, as the Letany, for several times in the day, not only Morning and
Evening but one part to be said earlier in the morning, and then toward noone a
return to another part, (as the ancient Primitives had three Services in a
forenoon, 1. that for the Catechumeni, consisting of Prayers, Psalms, and
Readings; then a 2. for the Penitents, such as our Letany; and a 3. for the
Fideles, the Faithful, our Communion Service;) and even that which is assigned
to one time so discontinued by Psalms, and Hymns, and Lessons, that it becomes
in a manner two Services, clearly two times of Prayer. Now our Savior
commanding, when you pray, say our Father; we have accordingly so assigned it,
to be once repeated in every such part of Service, and I remember to have heard
one of the gravest and most reverend men of the Assembly, being asked his
opinion about the use of the Lords Prayer, to have answered to this purpose,
God forbid that I should ever be upon my knees in Prayer, and rise up without
adding Christ's form to my imperfect petitions. And whereas this Directory is so
bountiful, as to recommend this Prayer to be used in the Prayers of the
Church, and yet so wary as but to recommend it, it is thereby confessed that it
is lawful to retain a set Form, (for that is surely so; and then the often
using of a lawful thing will not make it unlawful) but withal that Christ's
command in point of his Service shall no more oblige to obedience, then the
commands of men, for if it did, this would be more then recommended. And now
why that which may, say they, commendably (must, say we, necessarily in
obedience to Christ) be used in the Prayers of the Church, and being repeated
oftener then once, shall be useful to him who was not come at the first saying,
or may be said more attentively by him who had before been too negligent,
should be necessary to be used but once, when all men's zeal or understanding of
so divine a Form, or perhaps presence at that part of the Service, shall not
necessarily go along with it, I leave to more subtle Diuiners to instruct us.
This I am sure of, that God has made a peculiar promise to importunity in
Prayer, to a coming often to him on the same errand, and Luke 18. 5. by a
phrase in the Parable seems to say, that he that comes often to God in this
manner, will at length force him to shame, if he do not grant his Petition, for
that is the meaning of (...). And from thence the Fathers use a bold phrase in
their Liturgies, (...), I put thee to shame, i. e. importune thee, Basil. in
Liturg: and in the Psaltery of the Greek Church, which has many Prayers mixed
with it, (...), unless thy own goodness put thee to shame, etc. Now that this
will not be subject to the censure of vain repetitions, Mat. 6. 7. which is the
only exception made against it, if the example of David, Psalm. 136. be not
sufficient to authorize the repeating any Form often, which is as faultlesse as
that was) might largely be evidenced, 1. by the nature of the word (...), there
used, which both Hesychius and Suidas apply to another matter, and explain it
by (...), and (...), and (...) long, idle, unseasonable forms, such as Battus
used in his (...), his long-winded Hymns so full of Tautologies, which Munster
therefore renders (...) do not multiply words, unprofitably or unseasonably.
2. by the customs of the Heathens which Christ there referres to [(...), use
not, etc. as the Heathens] and which are evident in their writers, especially
their Tragedians; where it is plain, that their manner was to sound, or chant
for many hours together, some few empty words to the honor of their Gods,
such the (...) in their Bacchanals, from the noise of which they were called
Evantes; such in Sophocles, (...), etc. and especially in the Virgins Chorus of
Aeschylus's Tragedy, called (...). Where there are near an hundred verses, made
up of mere Tautologies, (...), and an enumeration of the several names of the
Gods with unsignificant noises added to them, (...), and within two verses the
same again, and much more of the same style. Two notable examples of this
Heathenish custom the Scripture affords us, one, 1. Kings 18. 26. where the
Prophets of Baal from morning till noon, cry O Baal, hear us, and it follows,
they cried with a loud voice, and cut themselves. (...) according to their
custom or rites (that loud crying the same words so long together was as much
a heathenish rite, as the cutting of themselves,) The other of Ephesians Acts
19. 34. who are affirmed to have cried with one voice for two hours space,
(...), Great is Diana of the Ephesians, and 3. by the designed end that Christ
observes of that heathen custom, 1. that they may be heard by that long noise,
for which Elias sco^^es them, 1. Kings 18. 27. Cry aloud, perhaps your God is a
talking, or a pursuing, etc. 2. that their Petitions may be more intelligible
to their Gods, to which Christ opposes, your heavenly Father knows what you
have need of, and so needs not your Tautologies to explain them to him. Much
more might be said for the explaining of that mistaken place, but that it would
seem unnecessary to this matter, the exception being so causlesse, that the
Vindication would pass for an extravagance.

Paul commands that prayers, and supplications, and intercessions, and
thanksgivings be made for Kings, etc. 1. Tim. 2. 1, 2. where though the mention
of those several sorts of prayers, signified by those four words, might be
matter of apology, for the making several addresses to God for Kings in one
service, supposing them proportioned to those sorts in that text, yet have we
distributed the frequent prayers for him into the several services, one solemn
prayer for him, in the ordinary daily service, (and only a versicle before as
it were prooemiall to it) another in the Letany, another after the
Commandments) on which though our book has two forms together, yet both the
Rubric and Custom, gives us authority to interpret, it was not meant that
both should be said at once, but either of the two chosen by the Minister,)
another before the Communion, where the necessity of the matter, being designed
for the Church militant, makes it more then seasonable to descend to our
particular Church, and the King the supreme of it; just as Herodotus relates
the custom of the Persians, l. 1. p. 52. (...), they pray for all the
Persians, particularly for the King. To this practice of ours so grounded in
the Apostle, we shall add, 1. the reward promised (by the Apostles intimation)
to such Prayers (if not, as I conceive, by those words, that we may live a
peaceable and quiet life, etc. that peaceable and quiet life, of all blessings
the greatest, seeming to be a benefit or donative promised to the faithful
discharge of that duty, of praying, and supplicating, and interceding, and
giving thanks for Kings, yet certainly somewhat else) in that high Declaration
made concerning it in the next words, for this is good and acceptable before
God our Savior, whose acceptance is reward sufficient to any action, and yet
who never accept^ but rewards also. 2. The practice of the ancient Christians,
set down by Tertull. Sacrificamus pro salute Imperatoris pura prece: our
prayers are Ad S^^. cap. 2. Apol. cap. 30.
sent up a pure sacrifice for the prosperity of the Emperor. And that quoties
conveniebant, in another place, at every meeting or service of the Church, and
precantes semper pro omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam prolixam, Imperium securum,
domum tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem, populum probum, Orbem quietum,
quaecunque hominis and Caesaris vot^ sunt: praying always for the Emperors,
and begging of God for them, long life, secure Reign, the safety of his house,
courageous Armies, a faithful Senate, a good people, a quiet world, all those
severals, (which would make up more prayers then our book has assigned) all
that either a Man or King they can stand in need of; and so Athen^goras and
others to the same purpose, especially when they have occasion to justify the
fidelity of Christians to their unchristian Emperors, having no surer evidence
to give of that, then the frequency of their prayers for them, which they which
think necessary to abridge, or supersede, must give us leave by that indication
to judge of somewhat else, by occasion of that topic to observe their other
demonstrations of disloyalty to those that are set over them by God; And to any
that are not guilty of that crime, nor yet of another, of thinking all length
of the public service unsupportable, I shall refer it to be judged, whether
it be necessary, that the King be prayed for in the Church, no oftener then
there is a Sermon there.

triumphant in heaven, Christ and the Saints there, and this on earth militant;
which he that disclaims, by that one act of insolence, casts off one of the
noblest privileges, of which this earth is capable, to be a fellow citizen
with the Saints, and a fellow member with Christ himself. The effects of this
charity on their parts is, in Christ's intercession, and in the Saints
suffrages, and daily prayers to God for us; but on our part thanksgivings and
commemorations, which it is apparent the Primitive Christians used, very early
solemnizing the day of Christ's resurrection, etc. and rehearsing the names of
the Saints out of their Diptycks, in time of the offertory before the
Sacrament; besides this so solemn a Christian duty, another act of charity
there is, which the Church ows to her living sons the educating of them in
the presence of good examples, and setting a remark of honor on all which have
lived Christianly, especially have died in testimony of the truth of that
profession; and again, a great part of the New Testament, being story of the
lives of Christ and his Apostles, (and the rest but doctrine agreeable to what
those lives expressed) it must needs be an excellent compendium of that book,
and a most useful way of infusing it into the understanding, and preserving it
in the memory of the people, to assign proper portions of Scripture in
Lessons, Epistles, and Gospels to every day, every Sunday, every Festival in
the year (which are none in our Church, but for the remembrance of Christ, and
the Scripture-Saints) to infuse by those degrees all necessary Christian
knowledge, and duties into us, the use of which to the ignorant is so great,
that it may well be feared, that when the Festivals, and solemnities for the
birth of Christ, and his other famous passages of life and death, and
resurrection and ascension, and mission of the holy Ghost, and the Lessons
Gospels (and Collects) and Sermons upon them, be turned out of the Church,
together with the Creeds also, 'twill not be in the power of weekly Sermons on
some head of Religion to keep up the knowledge of Christ in men's hearts, a
thing it seems observed by the Casuists, who use to make the number of those
things that are necessario credenda; necessary to be believed, no more, then
the Festivals of Christ make known to men: and sure by the ancient Fathers
whose Preaching was generally on the Gospels for the day; as apears by their
Sermons de tempore, and their postils. To all these ends are all these
Festivals, and these Services designed by the Church, (and to no other that is
capable of any the least brand of novell or superstitious) and till all this
antidote shall be demonstrated to be turned poison, all these wholesome
designs, to be perfectly noxious, till ill or no examples, uncharitableness,
schismatic cutting our selves off from being fellow members with the Saints,
and even with Christ our head, till ingratitude, ignorance, and Atheism it
self, be canonized for Christian and Saint-like, and the only things tending
to edification in a Church, there will hardly appear any so much as politic
necessity to turn these out of it,

For the reading of the Commandments, and prayer before, and the responses
after each of them, though it be not anciently to be found in the Church, as a
part of the Service, (but only retained in the Catechism) till King Edwards
second Liturgy, (and therefore sure no charge of Popery to be affixt on it)
yet seems it to me a very profitable part of devotion, being made use of as
it ought. The Priest after a premised prayer for grace to love and keep Gods
Commandments, is appointed to stand and read every of the Commandments
distinctly to the people, as a kind of Moses, bringing them from God to them;
These are they to receive in the humblest affection of heart, and posture of
body, as means to try and examine themselves, and to humble themselves in a
sense of their several failings, and thereupon implore (every one for himself,
and for others, even for the whole Kingdom) first Gods mercy for pardon for
all that has been committed against the letter of each Commandment, or what
ever Christ, and the Gospel has set down under any, or reducible to any of
those heads. 2. Grace to perform for the time to come, what ever may be
acceptable to Christ in that particular. This being thus distinctly and
leisurely done to each particular precept, the heart enlarging to every
particular under that, proves an excellent form of confession of sins, and of
resolution (and prayer for strength) to forsake them. And let me tell you were
Gods pardon thus ^ervently and often called for by each humble soul in a
Kingdom, for every man's personal, and the whole Kingdom National sins,
the Atheism speculative and practical, the impiety, iufidelity, want of love
and fear, and worship of God, etc. in the first Commandment, and so throughout
all the rest, and the grace of God, to work all the contrary graces in every
heart, in the heart of the whole Kingdom, as humbly and heartily invoked, the
benefit would certainly be so great and so illustrious, that none but Satan,
who is to be dethroned, and part with his kingdom by that means, would ever
deem it necessary to cast out this part of Service, and have nothing at all in
exchange for it.

8. For the order of the Offertory, it must first be observed, that in the
Primitive Apostolic Church, the Offertory was a considerable part of the
action, in the administering and receiving the Sacrament; the manner of it was
thus. At their meetings for divine service, every man as he was able brought
something along with him, bread, or wine, the fruits of the Season etc. of
this, part was used for the Sacrament, the rest kept to furnish a common table
for all the brethren (and therefore in Ignatius, (...), to celebrate the Feast,
is to administer that Sacrament, being joined there with the mention of
Baptism) Rich and Poor to eat together, no one taking precedence of other, or
challenging a greater part to himself by reason of his bringing more; this is
discernable in Saint Paul's words, chiding the Corinthians for their defaults in
this matter, 1 Cor. 11. 21. every man, says he, takes and eats before another
his own supper, (i. e,) the Rich that brought more, eats that which he brought;
(...), as if he were at home eating his own private meal, without respect to
the nature of those (...), which were a common meal for all, and so while one
is filled to the full, some others have little or nothing to eat, which is the
meaning of that which follows, one is hungry, and another is drunken; after the
(...) ceased, and the bringing of the fruits of the season, which were as a
kind of first-fruit offering, was out-dated, whether by Canon of the Church, or
by contrary custom, this manner was still continued, that every receiver
brought somewhat with him to offer, particularly bread, and wine mixed with
water. Justin Mart, Apol. 2. p. 97. sets down the manner of it clearly in his
time, (...), etc. the bread and wine of the brethren, i. e. Communicants is
brought to the Priest or Prefect; (not as in the Latin interpreter reads
Praefecto fratrum, as if (...) were to be joined with (...), which belongs to
(...)) and he receiving it gives la^d and praise unto God, in the name of the
Son and the Holy Ghost, and all the people ioyn in the Amen, then do the
Deacons distribute that (...), the bread, over which he has thus given thanks,
and then, says he, over and above the richer sort and every one as he shall
think good contributes, and that which is so raised is left with the Priest,
who out of that stock succors the Orphan and Widow, and becomes a common
provider for all that are in want. This clearly distinguishes two parts of
the Offertory, one designed for the use of all the Faithful in the Sacrament,
another reserved for the use of the poor, the former called (...), Oblations,
in the Council of Laodicea. the other (...), in that of Gangra, and
proportionably, the reposicory for the first called Sacrarium in the fourth
Council of Carthage, Can. 93. (and by Possidonius in the life of S^ Augustine,
Secretarium unde altari necessari^ inferuntur, where those things are laid, and
from whence fetched, which are necessary to the Altar) the other Gazophylacium
or treasury, the first St. Cyprian calls Sacrificia, sacrifices. the second
Eleemosynae, Alms, l. de op. and Eleem. parallel to those which we find both
together mentioned, Act. 24. 17. I came to bring alms to my Nation and
offerings. This says Justin Dial. cum Tryph. p. 260.
Martyr, is our Christian Sacrifice, which will more appear to him that
considers that the feasting of the people, their partaking of the Sacrifice,
having their (...) and (...), was always annexed to sacrifices both among Jews
and Heathens, which the Apostle calls partaking of the Altar, and consequently
that the Sacrifice, and the feast together, the sacrifice in the offertory, the
feast in the eating and drinking there, do complete and make up the whole
business of this Sacrament, as far as the people are concerned in it; and
all this blessed by the Priest, and God blessed and praised by Priest and People,
and so the title of Eucharist belongs to it. Thus after Justin: Irenaeus. The
Offertory of the Christians is accounted (...) l L. c. 34.
pure sacrifice with God as when St Paul, says he, mentions the acts of the
Philippians liberality, he calls them (...), an acceptable sacrifi^^ (and so
Heb. 3. 16. to do good and to Communicate forget not, such acts (...)
liberality to those that want for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased and
presently defines what this Sacrifice was, primitiae earum quae sunt ^jus
creaturarum, the first fruits of God's creatures, So Tertullian, modicas Apol.
c. 39.
unusquisque stipem menstrua die adponit, every one brings somewhat ever month,
just parallel to our Offertory at monthly Communions; Much more might be said
of this out of ancient Constitutions and Canons, if it were no^ for my desire of
brevity. Effectually St Cyprian, Locuples and dives es, (...) De op. and
Eleemos. p. 180.
dominicam celebrare te credis, and corbonam non respicis, qui in dominicum
sine sacrificio venis, qui partem de sacrificio quod Pauper obtulit ^^mis? Art
thou rich and think thou receivest as thou oughtst, and respecte^ not the
Corban, feedest on the poor men's Sacrifice, and bringst none (...) self? and
St Aug. to the same purpose; and it is worth observing that ma^^ Sermon. de temp.
215.
authorities, which the Papists produce for the external Sacrifice of the b^dy
of Christ in the Mass, are but the detortion and disguising of thos^ places
which belong to the Offertory of the People, and in the Canon of the Mass that
prayer which is used for the offering up of Christ, (la^ded with so many
crosses) plainly betraies it self to have been first instituted by relation to
these gifts and oblations, as appears by the mention of Abels Sacrifice, and
Melchizedecks offering (that of Abels the fruit of the Earth, Melchizedecks a
present only of Bread and Wine to Abraham) and the per quem haec omnia semper
bonacreas (by whom thou createst all these good things) which belongs evidently
to the fruits of the Earth, but is by them now most ridiculously applied to the
body of Christ. I have been thus large in showing the original of the
Offertory, because it has in all ages been counted a special part of divine
worship, the third part of the Christian Holocaust, says Aquinas, 2a, 2ae. q.
85. art. 3. ad 2. the observation of which is yet alive in our Liturgy (I would
it had a more cheerful universal reception in our practice) especially if
that be true which Honorius says, that instead of the ancient oblation of
Bread and Wine, the offering of money was by consent received into the Church
in memory of the pence in Judas's ^ail. Now that this offering of Christians to
God for pious and charitable uses, designed to them who are his Proxies and
Deputy receivers, may be the more liberally and withal more solemnly
performed, many portions of Scripture are by the Liturgy designed to be read to
stir up and quicken this bounty, and those of three sorts, some belonging to
good works in general, others to alms-deeds, others to oblations, and when it
is received and brought to the Priest, he humbly prays God to accept those
alms, and this is it which I call the service of the Offertory, so valued and
esteemed among all Ancients, but wholly omitted in this Directory (only a
casual naming of a Collection for the poor by way of a sage caution, that it
be so ordered, that no part of the public worship be thereby hindered upon what
grounds of policy or pretense of necessity, I know not, unless out of that
great fear le^t works of charity (which the Apostle calls an acceptable
sacrifice, and with which God is well pleased) should pass for any part of the
service or worship of God, which after praying to him is an act that has the
greatest remark, and highest character set upon it and when it is thus in the
Offertory, is accounted pars cultu^s a part of worship, say the Schoolmen. And
beside, where it is used, as it ought proves of excellent benefit (when prudent
faithful officers have the dispensing of it) toward the supplying and
preventing the wants of all, (...), the Minister is thereby enabled to be the
guardian of all that are in want, says Justin M. Apol, 2. and sure necessity
has little or no law or reason in it, when the rejecting of such customs as
these proves the only necessary.

Liturgy prescribes is, that all possible care be taken, that all Children that
are to be Baptized be brought to Church, and not without great cause and
necessity Baptized at home in their houses. And yet when great need shall compel
them so to do, then an order of administering it is prescribed, such as in case
the Child die, it may not be deprived of the Sacrament, and in case it live,
it may, as publicly be presented, and with Prayer received into the Church,
and pronounced to be baptized already, which is equivalent as if it had been
baptized in the public. The clear confessed ground of this practice is the
desire of the Church not to be wanting to any the meanest creature, in allowing
it that which Christ has given it right to, and to encourage and satisfy the
charitable desires of Parents, which in danger of instant death require it for
them. This ground seems clearly to be acknowledged by the Compilers of this
Directory page 41. where'tis affirmed, that the posterity of the Faithful born
within the Church, have by their birth (not by their living to the next Lords
Day, or till they can be brought to Church) interest in the Covenant and right
to the seal of it, which sure is Baptism) and then what necessity there is,
that they that are acknowledged to have right to that seal, should yet not be
permitted to have it, (as in case private Baptism be excluded, some of them
infallibly shall not) I profess my understanding too short to reach: And as
ignorant I must confess to be also, why, when they come to the Congregation,
it should be utterly unlawful for them to be Baptized in the place where Fonts
have hitherto been placed, i. e. near the door of the Church, as the Directory
appoints; A new scandalous piece it seems of Popery, and Superstition, (which
is as dangerous as private Baptism, and therefore with it together forbidden)
and yet very ancient, and far from any superstitious in^ent; Baptism being
at first in any convenient pond or river, as the Gospel, and after that Just.
Martyr, tells us: and is noted by the word (...), which is Apol. 2. in fine.
literally, to dope over head in the water, and by the word (...), a swimming
or diving place, by which the Fathers express the Font. But when Churches were
built, then there was an erection also of Baptisteria, at first without, but
after within the Churches, and those placed near the (...), or Porch of the
Church, on no other design undoubtedly, then to signify the Sacrament there
celebrated to be a rite of initiation or entrance into the Church, (as the
Chancell or upper part of the Church was assigned unto the other Sacrament to
signify it to belong to those only that were come to some perfection) against
which it is not possible any thing should be objected of unfitness, but that
the Ministers voice will not in some Churches so easily be heard by the whole
Congregation, which if it may not be helped, by raising his voice at that time,
will not yet infuse any Popery or Superstition into it, the charge that is here
so heavily laid on it, (as well as that of unfitness) of which if it be
guilty, Superstition is become a strange ubiquitary, ready to fly and affix it
self to any thing they will have it, and shall as justly be fastened by me on
their negative, or prohibition of Baptism in that place [it is not to be
administered in the places where Fonts, etc.] as upon our positive appointing
it. For sure if a significant rite, or designation of place, etc. without any
other guilt, then that it is so, be superstitious; an unsignificant
interdiction of it will be as much; and if the positive superstition be to be
condemned, the negative must be so also.

10. For the prescript form of Catechism, it is placed by our Church in our
Liturgy, and as fit to be placed there as any directions for Preaching can be
in theirs, (which takes up so great a part in their Religion, and consequently
in their Directory) the previous instruction of youth being so much more
necessary then that, as a foundation is then any part of the superstructure,
that being necessary to the end only, but this over and above necessary to
make capable of the other necessary. Of this particular Catechism I might say
somewhat, which would be worthy to be observed in these times, how much
Christian prudence the Church has showed in it, in setting down for all to
learn, only those few things which are necessary to the plainest and meanest,
for the direction of Christian faith and practice; and if we would all keep our
selves within that moderation, and propose no larger Catalogue of credenda to
be believed by all then the Apostles Creed, as it is explained in our
Catechism, does propose, and lay the greater weight upon consideration and
performance of the vow of Baptism, and all the commands of God as they are
explained (and so the obligation, to obedience enlarged) by Christ, and then
only add the explication of the nature and use of the Sacraments, in those
most commodious and intelligible expressions (and none other) which are there
set down, I should be confident there would be less hating and damning one
another (which is most ordinary for opinions) more piety and charity, and so
true Christianity among Christians and Protestants, then hitherto has been met
with. But seeing, though this be fit to be said, yet it is unnecessary in this
place, this Catechism being not put in balance with any other way of
instructing youth in the Directory, but only sold or cast away for naught, and
no money, nothing taken or offered in exchange for it, I am superseded from
this, and only left to wonder why Catechizing of Children in the faith and
knowledge of their vowed duty (which I hope is no stinting of their Spirits)
should be one of those burdens which it is so necessary should be thrown off,
and not so much as considered in this Directory.

11. For Confirmation, which (being a thing wherein the Bishop is a party,
will, I must expect, be matter of some envy and odium but to name it, and)
being so long and so scandalously neglected in this Kingdom (though the rule
have also been severe and careful in requiring it) will now not so easily be
digested, having those vulgar prejudices against it, yet must I most solemnly
profess my opinion of it, That it is a most ancient Christian custom, tending
very much to edification, Which I shall make good by giving you this view of
the manner of it. It is this, that every Rector of any Parish, or Curate of
charge, should by a familiar way of Catechizing instruct the youth of both
sexes within his Cure in the principles of Religion, so far, that every one
of them before the usual time of coming to the Lords Supper, should be able to
understand the particulars of the vow made in Baptism for the credenda and
facienda yea and fugienda also, what must be believed, what done, and what
forsaken; and be able to give an intelligent account of every one of these,
which being done, every such Child so prepared, ought to be brought to the
Bishop for Confirmation. Wherein the intent is, that every such Child attained
to years of understanding shall singly and solemnly before God, the Bishop and
the whole Congregation, with his own mouth, and his own consent take upon
himself the obligation to that, which his Godfathers and God mothers in
Baptism promised in his name, and before all those reverend witnesses, make a
firm, public, renewed promise, that by Gods help he will faithfully endeavor
to discharge that obligation in every poi^^ of it, and persevere in it all the
days of his life. Which resolution and promise so heighrned with all those
solemnities, will in any reason have a mighty impression on the Child, and an
influence on his actions for ever after. And this being thus performed by him,
the Bishop shall severally impose his hands upon every such child (a Ceremony
used to the purpose by Christ himself) and bl^sse, and pray for him, that now
that the temptations of sin, begin more strongly, in respect of his age, to
assau^^ him, he may receive grace and strength against all such temptations
(...) assaults, by way of prevention and special assistance, without which
obtained by prayer from God, he will never be able to do it. This is the sum
of Confirmation, and were it rightly observed (and no man admitted to the Lords
Supper, that had not thus taken the Baptism (...) from the Sureties into his
own name, and no man after that suffered continue in the Church, which brake it
wilfully, but turned out of th^^^ sacred courts, by the power of the keys in
excommunication) it would certainly prove, by the blessing of God there begged,
a most effectual mean to keep men, at least within some terms of Christian
civility, from falling into open enormous sins; and that the defaming and
casting out this so blameless gainful Order should be necessary or useful to
any p^licy save only to defend the Devil from so great a blow, and to sustain
and uphold his Kingdom, I never had yet any temptation or motive to suspect or
imagine. Instead of considering any objections of the adversary, against this
piece, whether of Apostolical or Ecclesiastical discipline (which I never
heard with any color produced) I shall rather express my most passionate wish
unto my Friends, those who sincerely wish the good of this National Church,
that they will endeavor their utmost to revive these means of regaining the
purity and exemplary lives of all its members, when God by restoring our Peace
shall open a door for it.

Sclemnities of Burial, as they are certainly useless to them who are dead,
so are they not designed by us but to the benefit of the living in Lessons and
Prayers upon those occasions, as also for the freeing us from the imputation of
rudeness and uncivility (which Christianity teaches no body) to those bodies
which shall have their parts in the resurrection, and to their memories, which
the obligation of kindred, friendship, at least the common band of
Christianity, make precious to us; and that it should be necessary, and tend to
edification, not to pray such seasonable Prayers, hear, and impresse upon our
hearts such seasonable Lessons, (at a time when they are exemplified before our
eyes, and our hearts being softened with mourning, are become more malleable) to
perform such laudable Christian Civilities, only for fear we should (not pray
but) be thought to pray to or for them, over whom, or near whose hearse, or by
or toward whom we thus pray (which that we do not, our Prayers that then we
use, are ready to testify) is another unreasonable, able to evidence the power
of prejudice and faction to any that is not sufficiently convinced of it.

thanksgiving after Childbirth, as it may be acknowledged, to be taken up in
proportion to, or imitation of Purification among the Jews, so is it not
thereby liable to any charge of evil; For herein is a mavelous mistake among
men, to think that because the continuing of circumcision was so forbidden by
S. Paul, Gal. 5. 2. therefore it should be unlawful for any Christian church,
to institute any usage which had ever been commanded the Jews. For the reasons
which made the retaining of circumcision so dangerous, will not be of any force
against other customs of the Jews, as 1. that it was pressed by the Judaizing
Christians, as necessary to justification, Gal. 5. 4. which is in effect the
disclaiming of Christ or of any profit, v. 2. or effect, v. 4. by him, a
falling from grace, and renouncing the Gospel. 2. That it was contrary to that
liberty or manumission from the Judaicall Law which Christ had purchased, v.
13. to have circumcision imposed as a law of Gods still obligatory, when Christ
by his death has cancelled it. 3. That some carnal professots, which thought
by this means to escape the opposition, and persecution, which then followed
the doctrine of Christ, and profession of Christianity, did much boast that
they put themselves and their Disciples in a course to void the cross, c. 6.
12. which is the meaning of that, v. 13. that they may glory in your flesh, i.
e. in your being circumcised, as that is by Saint Paul opposed to glorying in
the Cross, v. 14. i. e. the persecution that followed profession of the
Gospel, as c. 5. 11. he mentions it as the only reason of his being
persecuted, that he would not Preach Circumcision: agreeable to which is that
of Ignatius in Ep. ad Magnes. (...), etc. If we till now live according to the
Law of the Jews and circumcision of the flesh, we deny that we have received
grace, for the divinest Prophets lived according to Jesus Christ, and (...),
for doing so were persecuted: which they that desired to avoid, and therefore
would be circumcised, or Preach circumcision, those are the men S. Paul so
quarrels with, as those that would not suffer for Christ's sake, that were not
much in love with that Cross of his. To which a fourth reason may also be
added, that many of the Ceremonies of the Law did presignifie the future
Messiah, and the teaching the necessity of such observances as nor yet
abolisht, is the professing Christ not to be the Messiah. All which
notwithstanding, it still remains very possible, that a rite formerly commanded
the Jews, not as significative of the future Messiah; but as decent in the
worship of God, without any depending on it for justisication, without any
opinion that the Jewish Law obliges us, and without any fear of being
persecuted by the Jews, or consequent compliance with them, may now be
prescribed by the Christian Church merely as a humane institution, judging that
decent or useful new, which was so then, and in this case if nothing else can
be objected against it, save only that God once thought fit to prescribe it to
his own People, there will be little fear of danger in, or fault to be found
with any such usage. For it is an ordinary observation which Paulus Fagius in
his Notes on the Targum (a most learned Protestant) first suggested to me, that
many of the Jewish Ceremonies were imitated by Christ himself under the Gospel.
I might show it you in the Apostles, who were answerable to the (...) the missi
or messengers among the Jews, and were by Christ our High Priest sent abroad to
all Nations to bring in (that peculium, which of all others he counted most his
due, having paid so dear for it) sinners to their Savior, as they were among
the Jews sent by the High Priest to ferch in the dues to the Temple. So also
the imposition of hands, a form of benediction among the Jews, as ancient as
Jacob himself, Genesis 48. 14. In blessing Joseph's sons, and is often used by
Christ to that same purpose. And even the two Sacraments are of this nature,
Baptism related to the (...), washings used by them at the initiating or
admitting of Proselytes, and Christ's taking bread, and giving thanks, etc.
after Supper (wherein the other Sacrament was first instituted) was directly
the postcoenium, among the Jews, not a peculiar part of the Passover Feast,
but a Ceremony after all Feasts, very usual among them. So the word (...),
from the Assemblies civil or facred among the Jews, is made use of to signify
the Christian Church, which Christ was to gather together. So the Lords day one
day in seven, proportionably to their Sabbath. So (...), Elders among the Jews
are brought by the Apostler to signify an Order in the Church and (...),
Colleges of many of them together, called by Ignatius, (...) sacred Societies,
(...), Counselors and Assistants of the Bishops; and his (...), in Ep. ad
Trall: are parallel to the Sanbedrim or Council of Elders that were joined to
Moses in his government, to facilitate: the burden to him. The same may be
said of the Deacons which were an imitation of the (...) the Treasurer or
Steward among them, and consequently the place, where the goods which they were
to distribute were kept, is parallel to their (...), the treasury, and so the
Bishop also, says Grotius, is a transcript of the (...) the head of the
Congregation. And the Patriarchs among Christians are taken from the heads of
the Tribes among them, called ordinarily by the 72, (...) and in the Testament
(...) Add unto these the Christian Censure of Excommunication answerable to
their (...) (whether it were from sacred or only from civil Assemblies among
them it matters little, for the civil among them may be accommodated to
Ecclesiastical among Christians, as in some of the forementioned is
acknowledged, and as the word (...), which signifies primarily any kind of
Assembly, and is so taken, Matthew. 6. 5. is appropriated to a place of divine
worship in other places) and the several degrees of it in the Christian
Church, answerable to their Niddui, Cherem, and Schammatha; And so for
Absolution also. All this I have said, and might add much more to make the
demand appear no unreasonable one, that it may be lawful for the Church to use
a custom, which has some resemblance of some Ceremony in sorce anciently
among the Jews, viz. that of the Purification of Women in our Churching. Which
objection being removed there will remain no other, and then that it should be
simply unlawful or unedifing, to take notice of the deliverance of each Woman,
or to pay acknowledgement to God for it, and necessary to set up such Schools
of ingratitude in the Church, is more then ingenucus nature will suffer any
Christian to believe, upon the bare authority of these Assemblers.

Cummunion of the sick, if it be superstition and Popery also, (as sure is
employed by the no mention of it at the visitation of the sick in the Directory)
it is sure of a very long standing in the Church; the Canons of the Councels
about the Lapsi and Excommunicate, that generally take care that they should
have the Peace of the Church in extremis (answerable to our Absolution at that
time) and if with expressions of penitent hearts they desire it; the Sacrament
also, are evidences so clear of this custom, that I shall not need produce any
testimonies; those that are moved with the practice of Antiquity being
sufficiently furnished with them; If any may be unsatisfied in this, let him
read the famous story of the dying S^rapion in Eusebius, l. 6. c. 36. And that
it should be necessary to the edification of that Church, that this viaticum,
(as the Fathers called it) should be denied every hungring and thirsting
traveller at that time when it might yield him most comfort, and our charity
most inclines us to allow it him, nay that the Church should be thought to
suffer by that in any eminent manner (if it were ill) which is done privately
only to some particular, (and order taken that all publicly should be warned
to receive the Communion frequently in the Church, and so not want it on the
bed, or trouble the Minister then for it) and consequently the Church perhaps
never hear of it, this is again a new kind of necessity, to be fetched from some
underground Fundamental Laws of I know not whose laying, that the Christian
Church never heard of till these times.

Service of the Commination, fitted for the first day of Lent; which by
denuntiations against particular sins under the Law, (appointed to be read
to, and attested by the people, with an Amen of acknowledgement, that every
such offender is by the Law cursed, not of Prayer that he may be so dealt with
in Gods justice) is designed to bring men to humiliation and contrition for
sin, the special duty of that day and the ensuing season, and closes with
most affectionate prayers for such penitents; it is matter of some panick
senseless fears to some ignorant men (which are very tender and passionate
friends to their beloved sins, and dare not subscribe to the condemnation of
them) but very useful to awake even those and all others out of this security,
as a Fever to cure the Lethargick, to kindle a fire about men's ears, that they
may see their danger, and make out to the use of all Christian means of
repentance and devotion, and laying hold on Christ to avert it; and if such a
bugbear as that of being thought to curse our selves and friend, in the saying
Amen to the threatenings (which will be true to all impenitents whether we say
or no) be sufficient to exercize such an exorcist, to cast out of the Church
such a powerful means of bringing sinners to repentance, or if bare prejudice
of the Assemblers without either hearing or objecting against it, be enough to
make it necessary to be left out of our service, the Devil will never be in
danger from his enemies, as long as he may have but the spell of the Directory
to put them thus to flight for him.

observation of Lent, etc. if they be considered in general as Fasts, there
will sure be no necessity to renounce them; the Jews had their Fasts as well as
Feasts (and those set public, not only voluntary private Fasts) and not only
that great day of Expiation appointed by God himself, but occasional ones
appointed by men, and yet, when appointed, as constantly observed as that
other, the Fast of the fourth month, of the fifth, of the seventh, and of the
tenth month. Zach. 8. 19. and under Christianity, though in the time of
Christ's presence with the Disciples, they fasted not, yet the fasting of John's
Disciples, nay the twice a week of the Pharisees themselves is not (though
mentioned yet) reprehended, but implicitly approved by Christ, and of his own
says he, they should not have that immunity long, The days should come when
the Bridegroom should be taken away (and that is ever since Christ's Ascension)
and then shall they fast in those days. 'Twere easy to justify this through
the writings, and by the practice of the whole Church of God till these days
of (...) and (...) let loose, till these days of animosities and Epicurisme,
have made the usage of Fasts by Papists, a command to us not to use them, and
concluded the abating any thing of our gluttony to be an intrenchment on our
Christian Liberty, and both those deceits together quarreled all Christian
times of fasting out of our practice first, then out of our Calendar. This
being said in general of fasting, the application of this to these fast^ of
the Church, will be indisputably satisfactory to any, that shall but consider
the occasions of each of them, of the Lenten-fast, the known forty days
example of abstinence in Christ, whereupon says St. Jerome, Vnam quadragesimam
Epist. 54. ad Marcella^.
sec. traditionem Apostolorum, etc. je^unamus: We fast the Lent according to
the tradition of the Apostles. And Epiphanius joins with him to make the Lent
fast an Apostolical tradition, and others of the Ancients concurring for the
practice of it, if not so punctual for the tradition, St, Basil may speak for
all in hom. 2. of fasting, that there was no age, nor place, but knew it, and
observed it. And then I know no necessity of despising Christ's pattern, and
Apostolical practice, unless it be the same which obliges to the destroying
of Episcopacy (which as it is an imparity opposite to the equality of
Presbyters, is clearly deducible from both those Authorities, to which it seems
this year is resolved to prove fat all;) that so there may be at length as
little imitation of Christ among us, as reverence to Apostles. Then for
R^gation week, though the original or occasion of that cannot be deduced so
high, but is by Historians referred to Claud. Mamertus Bishop of Vienn^ in
France, for the averting of some Judgments, which on the observation of many
inauspicious accidents and prodigies were sadly scared to be approaching, yet
will it not be Necessary to turn the Fasts, or the L^tanies, or the Services
assigned to it out of the Church, as long as dangers are either present,
impendent, or possible, or indeed as long as there be sins enough among us to
abode us ill, or provoke any wrath of Heaven, any judgments on us; And when
all those occasions cease, I am content those Services may be laid aside also,
i. e. when we meet all together in Heaven. Next, the Ember weeks are of great
Antiquity in the Church, called the quatuor tempora in the latin Fathers, (...)
(from whence I conceive in the English Ember) in the Greek, and (beside the
first institution of them for quarterly seasons of devotion, proportioned to
each part of the year, as the first fruits of every season, that the whole, and
each division of it might be blessed by it, and again beside their
answerablenesse to those four times of solemn Fast mentioned among the Jews,
that we Christians may not be inferior unto them in that duty) an admirable
use is assigned to them in the Church, in imitation of the Apostles, Act. 13.
3. by Fasting and Prayer to prepare for the ordination of Ministers immediately
consequent to every such week, that God would send, and furnish worthy
Instruments of his glory to serve him in that glorious Office, and till
Ministers are acknowledged to be generally so good, that either they cannot or
need not be better, till those are also grown immortal (as the framers of this
Ordinance) and so no use of care for succession. I shall suppose it not
over-necessary to precipitate these out of the Church of Christ, but rather
wish that there were in our Liturgy some Service appointed of Lessons and
Prayers for this purpose, to be used constantly on the days of Fast through
those weeks.

deliquium animae, to many fainting fits a long while, and at last to its
fatal period, if our Assemblers may be allowed of the Jury, and this Ordinance
have leave to be the executioner; And as yet to the utmost of our impartial
thoughts can we not discern the least degree of necessity, of any the most
moderate signification of the word, to own so tragical an Exit. The leafs
which have been spent in this search, as it may seem unnecessarily, might
perhaps have been better employed; Yet will it not be unreasonable to expect a
expect a favorable reception of them, when it is considered, that by this means
a farther labor is spared, there needing no farther answer to the whole body
of the Directory, or any part of it when it shall thus appear, that there was
no necessity for the change, nay (which I conceive has all along been
concluded) that the continuance of the Liturgy, unless some better offer or
bargain were proposed to us, is still in all policy, in all secular or
Christian prudence most necessary. And therefore when we have considered the
second particular in the Ordinance, and to that annexed a view of some severalls
in the Preface, the Readers task will be at an end, and his patience freed from
the ^entation of our importunity.

Statutes of Edward the sixth, and of Queen Elizabeth, all which are without
more ado repealed by this Ordinance; which I mention not as new acts of
boldness, which now we can be at leisure to declaim or wonder at, but to
justify the calumniated Sons of this Church, who were for a long time offered
up maliciously to the peoples hatred and fury, first as Illegal usurpers, and
adders to Law, then as Popishly affected, and the pattern of Queen Elizabeth's
time vouched to the confirming of this their Charge, and the Erection of her
very Picture in some Churches, and solemnization of a day for her annual
remembrance, (by those who will not now allow any Saint, or even Christ himself
the like favor) designed to upbraid those ways and reprove those thoughts. It
seems now it is a season for these men to traverse the scene, to put off
disguises, and profess openly and confidently, what till now they have been
careful to conceal, that their garnishing the Scpulchre of Q. Elizabeth was no
argument that they were cordially of her Religion or meant kindness sincerely
to the Q. Elizabeth's reformation. Some seeds we know there were of the present
practices transmitted hither from our neighbor Disciplinarians in the dales of
Q. Elizabeth, and some high attempts in private zeal in Hacket, and Coppinger,
and Arthington, at one time, which when God suffered not to prosper, it was the
wisdom of others to call frenzy and madness in those undertakers. And
generally that is the difference of fate between wickedness prospering and
miscarrying, the one passes for Piety, the other for Fury. I shall now not
affirm, (or judge my Brethren) but meekly ask this question, and leave every
man's own conscience to answer (not me, but) himself in it sincerely, and
without partiality, whether if he had lived in the days of Q. Elizabeth, and
had had his present persuasions about him, and the same encouragements and
grounds of hope, that he might prosper and go through with his designs, he
would not then in the matter of Religion have done just the same, which now he
has given his Vote, and taken up Arms to do. If he say, out of the
uprightness of his heart, he would not, I shall then only ask why it is done
now, what ill Planet has made that poison now, which was then wholesome food,
why Queen Elizabeth's Statutes should be now repealed, which were then so
laudable? If any intervenient provocation, or any thing else extrinsecall to
the matter it self have made this change now necessary, this will be great
injustice in the Actors. Or if the examples of severity in her days, (the
hanging of Coppin and Thacker, An. 1513. at S. Edmundsbury, for publishing
Browns book, (says Camden) which (says Stow p. 1174.) was written against the
Common Prayer book) might then restrain those that were contrary minded, I know
no reason why the Laws by which that was done, should not still continue to
restrain; or at least why Conscience should not be as powerful as Fear. From
all this I shall now take confidence to conclude, that were there not many
earlier testimonies to confirm it, this one Ordinance would convince the most
seducible mistaker of these two sad truths.

Laws, so long and so speciously insisted on was but an artifice of design to
gain so much either of authority to their Persons, or of power and force into
their hands, as might enable them to subvert and abolish the most wholesome Laws
of the Kingdom, and in the mean time to accuse others falsely of that, which it
was not their innocence, but their discretion, not their want of will, but of
opportunity, that they were not really, and truly, and perfectly guilty of
themselves, that so they may most completely own and observe the principles by
which they move, and transcribe that practice, which has been constantly used
by the Presbyterian, (wheresoever they have appeared) to pretend their care and
zeal to liberty, that by that means they may get into power (like Absalom a
passionate friend to justice, when he had an itch to be King; or like D^oces in
Herodotus. (...), his ambition of Magistracy made him content to be just) when
as soon as they attain, they enclose, and tyrannically make use of to the
enthralling and enslaving all others; Even Laws themselves, the only Bounds
and Bulwarks of Liberty, which alone can secure it from servitude on one side,
and licentiousness on the other, (which very licentiousness is the surest way
to servitude, the licentiousness of one implying the oppression and captivity
of some other, and being it self in a just weighing of things the greatest
(...). Epist. ad Polycarp. Ignatio adscripto.
slavery as much as the man's own unruly passions are greater tyrants then laws,
or lawful Princes) are to be levelled in their Jehu-march, to be accused and
found at last the only guilty things, and the same calamity designed to
involve the pretended Enemies of Laws and the Laws themselves.

Ordinance has taught us, is that which a while ago had been a Revelation of a
Mystery indeed, which would without any other auxiliary have infallibly quenched
this flame (which now like another Aetna and Vesuvius is gotten into the bowels
of this Kingdom, and is there likely to rage for ever, if it be not assuaged
from Heaven, or determined through want of matter, by having devoured all that
is combustible) but now is a pretty vulgar observation, that has no influence
or impression on any man, and therefore I scarce now think it worthy the
repeating; and yet to conclude this period fairly, I shall; it is only this,
That the framers of this Ordinance, that have so long fought for the defense of
the established. Protestant Religion, will not have the Peace, unless they may
be allowed liberty to cast off and repeal every of those Statutes, that of the
second and third of Edward the sixth, that of the fifth and sixth of the same
King, that of the first of Queen Elzabeth, that of the fifth, that of the
eighth of the same Queen, (though not all at once, yet as far as concerns the
matter in hand, by which you may be assured, that the fragments of those
Statutes which remain yet unabolished, are but reserved for some other
opportunity, as ready for a second and third sacrifice, as thus much of them
was for this), by which the Protestant Religion stands established in this
Kingdom, and in which the whole work of Reformation is consummate. And all
this upon no higher pretense of Reason, then only a Resolution to do so, a not
being advised by their Divines to the contrary, and (to countenance the
weakness of those two motives) a proostesse scandalous mention, or bare naming
of manifold inconveniences, which might as reasonably be made the Excuse of
Robbing, and Murdering, and Damning (as far as an Ordinance would reach) all
men but themselves, as of abolishing this Litu^gio, Lord lay not this ^ix to
their Charge.

CHAP. II.
venerable Liturgy of the Church of England, and account themselves richly
rewarded, for doing so, by this new framed Directory, begins speciously enough,
by seeming to lay down the only P. 1.
reasons, why our Ancestors a hundred years ago, at the first Reformation of
Religion, were not only content, but rejoiced also in the Book of
Common-Prdyer, at that time set forth; But these reasons are set down with some
partiality, there being some other more weighty grounds of the Reformers
framing, and others rejoicing in that Book, then those negative ones which that
preface mentions, viz, the perfect reformation wrought upon the former
Liturgy, the perfect conformity of it with, and composure out of the Word of
God, the excellent orders prescribed, and benefit to be reaped from the use of
that Book, and the no manner of real objection, or exception of any weight
against it; All which if they had been mentioned, as in all justice they ought
(especially when you report not your own judgments of it but the judgments of
those rejoycers of that age, who have left upon record those reasons of their
rejoicing) this Preface had soon been ended, or else proved in that first part,
an answer or confutation of all that follows. But it is the manner of men now
adays, to conceal all that may not tend to their advantage to be taken notice
of, (a practice reproached by honest Cicero, in his books of offices of life,
in the story of the Alexandrian ship-man, that went to relieve Rhodes, and
outgoing the rest of his follows, sold his Corn at so much more gain, by that
infamous artifice though not of lying yet of concealing the mention of the
Fleet that was coming after) and to cut off the locks of that Sampson whom they
mean to bind, pare and circumcise the claws of that creature they are to
combat with; I mean to set out that cause, and those arguments at the weakest,
to which they are to give satisfaction. And yet by the way, I must confess,
that even these weak arguments which they have named, are to me of some moment,
as first, The redress of many things, which were vain, erroneous,
superstitious, and Idolatrous, which argues that all is not now involved under
any of those titles, nor consequently to be abolisht, but further reformed
only. 2. That they which did this, were wise and pious, which they that were,
would never take pains to purge that which was all dross, their wisdom would
have helped them to discern that it was so, and their piety oblige them to
reject it altogether, and not to save one hoof, when all was due to the common
slaughter. 3. That many godly and learned men rejoiced much in the Liturgy,
which argues that all was not to be detested, unless either these men now be
somewhat higher then Godly or Learned, of that middle sort of rationals, that
Iamblichus out of Aristotle speaks of, betwixt God, and Man, the (...), or
unless it be confessed that many Godly and Learned men may be mistaken in a
matter of this moment, and then these may be also mistaken at this time.

approving and rejoicing in the new formed Liturgy, the Composers of that
Preface, I mean speedily to weigh them down, with a heap of contrary sad
matter, and then to leave it to the Readers judgment, whether they are not his
friends, thus to disabuse him, and his silly good-natured ancestors, that were
thus slightly flattered into a good opinion of an inconvenient, if not
mischievous Liturgy. Great have is therefore made, and some arts and
preparations used, to work upon the affection more then judgment of the
Reader, and this is done by that Rhetorical pathetick stroke [Howbeit, long
and sad experience has made it manifest] Words of some consideration and
efficacy, P. 2.
but that they have one weak part in them, an infirmity that this age is very
subject to, that of causlesse and groundless calumny. For how long soever, and
to murmurers, and passionate lovers of news and change, how irksome and tedious
soever the experience of this Liturgy has been, it is notoriously certain that
it has not been sad, save only again to those evil eyes; but on the other
side, a continual float and tide of joy to all true English men, to see and
observe the prosperity and flourishing of this Church, in a perpetual swelling
and growth, ever since the establishing of that Protestant Liturgy and
Religion together among us, till at last (about the time when this vast
calamity brake in upon us) it was grown to such an height, as was certainly
never heard of (or by Enemies themselves affirmed at any other time to have
been) in this Kingdom, or (were it not a little like boasting, to which yet you
have constrained us, I should add) in any other part of Europe also for these
many hundred years.

sad experience has made manifest? Why, that the Liturgy used in the Church
of England (notwithstanding the pains and Religious intentions of the Compilers
of it) has proved an offense, not only to many of the Godly at home, but also
to the Reformed Churches abroad.

In which words we shall not take advantage of the Confession of the Religious
intentions of the Compilers of our Liturgy, which signifies the offense here
spoken of in their notion of it to be acceptum, non datum, taken when it was
not given; nor 2. Oppose those religious intentions to the irreligious mistakes
of others, and accusations of those things which were so religiously intended;
nor. 3. Compare the reputations of those Persons which compiled that Liturgy,
whether in King Edwards (Cranmer, Ridly, P. Martyr) or in Queen Elizabeth's
days (Parker, Grindall, Horn, Whitchead, etc.) with the Members of this
Assembly, much less the intentions of them, which in the mouth of Enemies is
acknowledged religious, with the intentions of these, which if we may measure
by their more visible enterprises, and the Covenant in which they have
associated contrary to all Laws of God and men, we shall have temptation to
suspect not guilty of overmuch Religion; or good purpose to the government of
this Kingdom; nor 4. confront the number of those others that are here confessed
to be pleased and benefited, against those others that are said to be offended,
which were argument enough for thatwhich is established, that considering the
danger of change, it ought in all reason rather to stand to please one sort,
and benefit them still, then to be pulled down to comply with the other. But we
shall confine our selves to that which the objectors principally designed as a
first reason for which our Liturgy must be destroyed, because, forsooth, say
they, it has proved an ^ffence, etc. For the through examining of which
reason, it will be necessary to enquire into these three things: 1. What they
mean by offense: 2. What truth there is in the assertion, that the Liturgy
has proved so to the Godly at home, and to the Reformed Churches abroad: 3.
How far that might be a reason of destroying that which proves an offense.

Offense is an equivocall mistaken word, and by that means is many times a
title of a charge or accusation, when there is no real crime under it; For
sometimes in our English language especially, it is taken for that which any
body is displeased or angry at, and then if the thing be not ill in it self,
that anger is a causeless anger, which he that is guilty of, must know to be a
sin, and humble himself before God for it, and fail into it no more, and then
there need no more be said of such offenses, but that he that is or has been
angry at the Liturgy, must prove the Liturgy to be really ill, (which if it
could be done here, the matter of Offense would never have been charged on it,
for that is set to supply the place of a greater accusation) or else confess
himself, or those others so offended, to have sinned by such anger. But then 2.
If we may guess of the meaning of the word by the reason which is brought to
prove the charge [For not to speak, etc.] it is set here to signify, 1 The
burden of reading all the Prayers; 2. The many unprofitable burdensome
Ceremonies, which has occasioned mischiefby disquieting the Consciences of
those that cocld not yield to them, and by depriving them of the Ordinances of
God, which they may not enjoy without conforming or subscribing to those
Ceremonies. To proceed then to the second thing, what truth there is in this
Assertion, and view it in the severals of the proof.

burden of reading the Prayers; if they were enough to prove the Liturgy
offensive, all Christian virtues would be involved in that charge, because they
have all some burden and difficulty in them, and for this particular, seeing
we speak to Christians, we might hope that the Service would not pass for a
burden to the Godly (who are here named) i. e. to minds truly devout, if it
were longer then it is: and that it may not do so, I am sure it is very
prudently framed with as much variety, and as moderate length of each part, as
could be imagined, and sure he that shall compare the practices, will find the
burden and length both to Minister and People to be as great, by observing the
prescriptions in the Directory, in the shortest manner, as this that our
Liturgy has designed. 3. For the many unprofitable burdensome Ceremonies.
Every of those Epithets is a calumny; for 1. They are not many, To the People I
am sure, For kneeling and standing which are the only Ceremonies in the daily
Service, will not make up that number (and for the rest, there is but a
superaddition of some one in each Service.) As for sitting bare, if reason it
self will not prescribe that civility to be paid to God in the House of God,
(where without any positive precept, Jacob put off his shoes from off his
feet) neither does our Liturgy prescribe it. 2 They are not unprofitable, but
each of them tending to advance the business towhich they are annexed, kneeling
to increase our humility, and join the body with the soul in that duty of
adoration, standing to elevate and again to join with the soul in Confession of
God and Thanksgiving, and the rest proportioned to the business in hand; and
3. If not many, not unproffiable, then not burdensome also. As for the
disquieting the Conscience of many godly Ministers and People, who could not
yield to the Ceremonies; I answer, that by what has formerly been said, and
the no-objection in this Directorie against any such, it appears that thereis
no Ceremony appointed in our Liturgy which is improper or impertinent to the
action, to which it is annexed, much less in it self unlawful. And then for
man's Consciences to be disquieted, it argues that they have not, in that
manner, as they ought, desired information; as for Ministers, we know that all
that have been received into that Order, have voluntarily su scribed to them,
and consequently have receded from their own subscription, if they have after
refused to conform. And we desire to know what tender respect will be had to
the Consciences of those, who shall submit to your Directory, and afterward
refuse to conform unto it. I am sure the denuntiations which we have heard of
against the dissenting Brethren, about the matter of Jurisdiction and Censures
(and now lately concerning the depravers of your Directory) have been none of
the mildest, although those are your own Fellow Members, that have assisted you
as affectionately in the grand Cause as any, and never made themselves liable
to your severitie, by having once conformed to you in those particulars. And so
3. For depriving them of the ordinances of God, etc. if that were the
punishment appointed for the obstinate and refractory, it is no more then the
Laws of the Land appointed for their Portion, and in that sure not without any
example in Scripture and Apostolical practice, who appointed such perverse
Persons to be avoided, which is a censure as high as any has been here on such
inflicted. What Ordinances they were of which such men were deprived, I
conceive is specified by the next words, that sundry good Christians have been
by means thereof kept from the Lords table, which must needs refer to those
that would not kneel there, and why that should be so unreasonable, when the
very Directory lays the matter so, that none shall receive with them who do
not fit, there will be little ground, unless it be that no posture in the
Service of God can be offensive, but only that of kneeling, which indeed has
had the very ill luck by Socinus, in his Tract De Coena Domini, to be turned
out of the Church as Idololatricall (with whom to affirm the same will be as
great a compliance, as kneeling can be with the Papists.) And by these as
superstitious at least, I know not for what guilt, except that of too much
humility, as being in M. Archer his Divinity, as before I intimated, a
betraying of one of the greatest comforts in the Sacrament, the sitting fellow
Kings with Christ in his earthly Kingdom, confessing thereby that some men's
hearts are so set on that earthly Kingdom, that the hope of an Heavenly
Kingdom, will not yield them comfort, unless they may have that other in the
way to it; and withal telling us, that he and his Compeers are those men.

Offense is laid on the Lyturgie, and how little it is proved by these reasons,
I shall only add, that the proposition pretended to be thus proved by these
particulars, is much larger then the proofs can be imagined to extend. For part
of the proposition was, that the Liturgy was offense to the Reformed Churches
abroad, To which the [For] is immediately annexed, as if it introduced some
proof of that also. But it is apparent, that the proofs specified infer not
that, for neither the burden of reading is offense to them, nor are their
Consciences disquieted, nor they deprived of Gods ordinances by that means. In
which respect it is necessary for us to conclude, that the word Offense, as
applied to them nor are their consciences disquieted, nor they deprived of Gods
ordinance by that means. In which respect it is necessary for us to conclude,
that the word Offense, as applied to them, is taken in that other notion, that
they are displeased and angry at it. To which we then must answer, that
although there is no guilt inferred from the undergoing this fate of being
disliked by some, but rather that it is to be deemed an ill indication to be
spoken well of by all, yet have we never heard of any Forrreigne Church which
has expressed any such offense; the utmost that can be said, is (and yet not so
much as that is here suggested) that some particular men have expressed such
dislike; to whom we could easily oppose the judgment of others more eminent
among them who have largely expressed their approbation of it. And it is
observable, that Calvin himself, when from Frank fort he had received an
odious malicious account of many particulars in our Liturgy (as any will
acknowledge that shall compare the report then made, with what he finds) though
he were so far transported as to call them ineptias follies, yet adds the
Epithet of tolerabiles, that though such, they were yet tolerable. And therefore

In the third place, I may now conclude, that if all that is thus affirmed to
prove the Offense in the Liturgy, used in the Church of England were (after
all this evidence of the contrary) supposed true, yet is it no argument to
infer the justice of the present design which is not reforming, but abolishing
both of that and all other Liturgy. Were the Offense in the length of the
Service, that length might be reformed, and yet Liturgy remain; were there
Offense in the Ceremonies, or mischief in the punishing them that have not
conformed, those Ceremonies might be left free, that Conformity be not thus
pressed, and still Liturgy be preserved inviolate. As for the foreign Churches,
1. I shall demand, whether only some are thus offended, or all. Not all, for
some of the wisest in these Churches have commended it; and if some only, then
it seems others are not offended, and why must we be so partial, as to offend
and displease some, that we may escape the offending others? not sure because
we more esteem the judgments of the latter, for by the Apostles rule the
weaker men are, the more care must be taken, that they be not offended. 2 I
shall suppose that their Liturgy, or their having none at all, may possibly
offend us, and then demand why they shall not be as much obliged to change for
the satisfying of us, as we of them? I am ashamed to press this illogicall
discourse too far, which sure never foresaw such examination, being meant only
to give the People a formal specious show for what is done, a heap of popular
Arguments, which have of late gotten away all the custom from Demonstrations,
and then, Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur if the tame Creature will thus be
taken, any fallacy, or Topicke does as well for the turn, as if Euclid had
demonstrated it.

by this means, i. e. P. 3.
of the Liturgy, diverse able and faithful Ministers were debarred from the
exercise of their Ministry, and spoiled of their livelihood to the undoing of
them and their Families. To which I answer. 1. That if this be true, it is very
strange that so few of this present Assembly were of that number. For of them I
may surely say many, very many in proportion, were not debarred of the exercise
of their Ministry, were not despoyled of their livelihood, etc. And if any one
was, which I profess I know not, I believe it will be found, that the standing
of Liturgy, brought not those inflictions upon him. The conclusion from hence
will be, that either these present Assemblers concurred not in judgment with
those many able and faithful Ministers, (and then why do they now bring their
Arguments from them, whose judgment they did not approve and follow?) or else
that they were not so valiant, as to appear when fufferings expected them, or
else that they had a very happy Rainbowe hanging over their heads to avert from
them that common storm. But then secondly, It might be considered, whether
those mentioned penalties have not been legaelly, and by Act of Parliament,
inflicted on those who suffered under them, and then whether that will be
ground sufficient to abolish a Law, because by force thereof some men that
offended against it have been punished. Thirdly, whether somemen did not choose
non conformity as the more instrumental to the exercise of their Ministry,
changing one Parish for the whole diocese and Preaching oftener in private
Families then any other did in the Church, and withal, whether this had not
the encouragement of being the more gainfall trade, of bringing in larger
Pensions then formerly they had received Tithes. Fourthly, whether the
punishments inflicted on such, have not generally been inferior to the rignor
of the Statute, and not executed on any who have not been very unpeaceable, and
then whether unpeaceable persons would not go near to fall under some mulcts,
what ever the Form of Government, what ever the Church Service were, none
having the promise of inheriting (...), the Land of Canaan, an happy prosperous
life in this world, but they whose meekness and obedience to Laws have given
them a claim to that privilege. Fifthly; whether the number of those, who by
Ordinances have lately been so debarred of the exercise their Ministry, and
spoiled of their livelihood, have not been far greater then all those together,
that ever the Liturgy thus offended since the Reformation. Sixthly, whether
this Directory, should it be established, would not be so imposed, that they
which obey it not, shall be subject to these or the like penalties.

Odium, P. 3.
and to involve the Prelates and the Liturgy in the same calamity, (for
otherwise what has the Prelates laboring, etc. to do with the Liturgy) That
the Prelates and their Faction have labored to raise the estimation of the
Liturgy to such an height, as if there were no other worship, or way of
worship of God among us, but only the Service Book, to the great hindrance of
the Preaching the Word. To which I answer, 1. That this or any other action of
the Prelates, if supposed never so true, and never so extravagant, is wholly
extrinsecall and impertinent to the business of the Liturgy, and the more
impertinent, by how much the more extravagant, such actions being easily
coerced, and reduced by and according to the rule, and such unreasonable
enhaunsments separable, without any wound or violence to the Liturgy. Give the
Liturgy its due, not its usurped estimation, and we are all agreed. 2. It Is
here acknowledged that this was but labored, not affirmed that it was
effected, and then this sure is too heavy a doom on the Liturgy, for that
their laboring; we do not find that St Paul was stroke dead, like Herod,
because the Lycaonians meant and labored to do sacrifice unto him. Act. 14.
16. But then 3. he that shall consider who they are which make this objection,
will sure never be moved by it. For certainly they that have formerly set the
prime of their wits and endeavors to vilify and defame the Liturgy; and now
that they think they have power, have absolutely abolisht it, will go near to
be partial when they are to judge of the due estimation of it; they that
declaim at Bishops for advancing it, will they be just and take notice of their
own contempts, which enforced the Bishops thus to rescue and vindicate it? I
shall not expect it from them, nor, till then, that they will deliver any more
then popular shows of truth in this matter. For 4. the Prelates have not raised
the book to an higher estimation then the Law has raised it, that is, that it
may be observed so as may most tend to edification, nor do we now desire any
greater height of value for it, then you for the Directorie, I shall add, nor
so great neither, for we do not exclude all other as unlawful, as you have
done, and then I am confident God will not lay that charge on us, which you do
on the Prelates, nor any man that shall consider how different our titles are,
though our claims not proportioned to them. A piece of modesty and moderation
which we challenge you to transcribe from us. 5. All this all this while is a
mere Calumny, if by the Service Book is meant the use of the prayers in the
Liturgy, for no Prelate ever affirmed, or is known to have thought, that there
is no other way of worship of God, but that among us. But then 6ly, We add
that this way of public prayer by set Form, the only one established by Law,
(and so sure to be esteemed by us before any other) is also in many respects
the most convenient for Public worship, of which affirmation we shall offer
you no other proof or testimony, then what Mr. Calvin, whom before we named,
has given us in his Epistle to the Protector, in these words, Quod ad
formulam, etc. As for Forms of Prayers, and Ecclesiastical Rites, I very much
approve, that it be set or certain. From which it may not be lawful for the
Pastors in their Function to depart, that so there may be provision made for
the simplicity and unskilfulnesse of some, and that the consent of all the
Churches among themselves may more certainly appear: and lastly also, that the
extravagant levity of some, who affect novelties, may be prevented. So probable
was my conjecture, that at first I interposed, that the men that had here
imposed upon their fellows so far, as to conclude the abolition of Liturgy
necessary, were those that undertook to reform Geneva as well as England, to
chastise Calvin's estimation of it, as well as that of our Prelates.

this has been to the great hindrance of the P. 3.
Preaching of the Word, and to the justling it out as unnecessary, or at ^est
inferior to the reading of Common Prayer. I answer, 1. That the Liturgy, or
the just estimation of it, is perfectly incapable of this charge, it being so
far from hindering, that it requires the Preaching of the Word, assigns the
place where the Sermon shall come in, has Prayers for a blessing upon it. 2.
That if any where Sermons have been neglected, it has not been through any
default either of the length or estimation of the Liturgy, for these two, if
Faction and Schism did not set them at odds, would very friendly and
peaceably dwell together, and each tend much to the proficiencie and gain which
might arise from either; Prayers would prepare us to hear as we ought, i. e. to
practice also; and Sermons might incite and stir up the languishing devotion,
and enliven and animate it with zeal and fervencie in Prayer. And constantly
the more we esteemed the Ordinance, and set our selves to the discharge of the
duty of Prayer, the more should we profit by Sermons which were thus received
into an honest heart thus fitted, and made capable of impression by Prayer.
These two may therefore live like Abraham and Lot, and why should there be any
wrangling or controversy betwixt thy Heards-men and my Heards-men? But seeing
it is made a season of complaining, I answer, 3. That it is on the other side
most notorious, that in many places the Sermon has justled out the Common
Prayers, and upon such a provocation, (and only to prevent the like partiality
or oppression) it may be just now to add, that as long as the Liturgy
continues in its legal possession in this Church, there is no other legal way
(as that signifies, commanded by Law) of the public worship of God among us,
and although that voluntary Prayer of the Minister before Sermon, when it is
used, is a part of the worship of God, (as all Prayer is) yet is it not
prescribed by the Law, nor consequently can it without usurpation cut short or
take away any part of that time which is by that assigned to the Liturgy; the
free will offerings, though permitted must not supplant the daily prescribed
oblations, the Corban must not excuse the not honoring of Parents, the
customs which are tolerated must not evacuate or supersede the precepts of the
Church. As for Sermons, which in this period seem the only thing that is here
opposed to Liturgy; I hope they do not undertake to be as eminent a part of
the worship of God among us as Prayer. If they do, I must less blame the poor
ignorant people, that when they have heard a Sermon or two think they have
served God for all that day or week, nor the generality of those seduced ones,
who place so great a part of Piety in hearing, and think so much the more
comfortably of themselves from the number of the hours spent in that Exercise,
which has of late been the only business of the Church, (which was by God
instil'd the House of Prayer) and the Liturgy at most used but as Music to
entertain the Auditors till the Actors be attired, and the Seats be full, and
it be time for the Scene to enter. This if it were true, would avow and
justify that plea in the Gospel [Lord open unto us, for thou have taught in
our streets] i. e. we have heard thee Preach among us. Which sure Christ would
not so have defamed with an [I will say unto them, go you cursed etc.] if it
had been the prime part of his worship to be such hearers; the consideration of
that place will give us a right notion of this business, and it is this, that
hearing of Sermons, or what else appointed by the Church for our instruction,
is a duty of every Christian prescribed in order to practice or good life, to
which knowledge is necessarily preparative, and so, like many others, actus
imperatus, an act commanded by Religion; but so far from being it self an
immediate or elicite act of worship precisely or abstractly, as it is hearing,
that unless that proportionable practice attend it, it is but an aggravation
and accumulation of our guilts, the blessedness not belonging to the hearing,
but the [and keeping the word of God] and the go you Cursed, to none more then
to those, that hear and say, but do not: and for the title of worship of God,
whether outward or inward outwardly expressed, orall Prayer certainly, and
adoration of God is the thing to which that most specially belongs, as may
appear, Psalm. 95. 6. where that of worshipping is attended, with falling down
and kneeling before the Lord our maker. And even your Directory, though it
speak extreme high of Preaching the Word, yet does not it style it any part of
Gods worship, as it does the reading the word of God in the Congregation, p.
12. because indeed our manner of Preaching is but an humane thing, and the word
of man. This I should not here have said, because I would be sure not to
discourage any in the attending any Christian duty (and such I acknowledge
hearing to be, and heartily exhort all my Fellow Laborers in their several
Charges, to take heed to Doctrine, to Reproof, to Exhortation, to be as
frequent and diligent in it, as the wants of their Charges require of them; and
my Fellow Christians also, that they give heed to sound Doctrine, that they
require the Law at the Priests mouth, as of a messenger of the Lord of hosts,
and again to take heed how they hear) but (...), or impropriety of speech, that
I say no more, that is in this matter discernible in the words of the
Directorie, and the consequent dangers which experience has forced us to
observe in them, who place the worship of God especially in hearing, have
extorted thus much from us, which may be useful to give us a due valuation of
Sermon and Prayer, the former as a duty of a Christian, the latter a duty too,
and an elicite act, a prime special part of worship also.

Liturgy by many is made no better then an Idol, 1. That is a speech of great
cunning, but withal of great uncharitableness: P. 4.
cunning, in setting the words so cautiously thus, not an Idol, but [no better
then] (as they, that will rayl, but would not pay for it, whose fear does
moderate the petulancy of their spleen, and covetousness keep them from
letting any thing fall that the Law may take hold of, are wont to do) and yet
withal signifying as odiously as if it had been made an Idol indeed. Whereas
the plain literal sense of the words if it be taken, will be this, that an
Idol is not worse then our Common Prayer Book is to many, or that it is used
by many as ill as an Idol is wont to be used, which is then the most bitter
piece of uncharitablenes, if not grounded on certain knowledge, and that
impossible to be had by others, as could be imagined. The truth is, this
Directory has now proved that there is a true sense of these words, the
Compilers of which have demonstrated themselves to be those many that have made
our Liturgy no better then an Idol, have dealt with it as the good Kings did
with the abominations of the Heathens, brake it in pieces, ground it to powder,
and thrown the dust of it into the Brook; for abolition is the plain sense for
which that is the metaphor. But then a* It Is possible, the calm meaning of
those odious words is no more then this, that many have given this an
estimation higher then it deserves, If any such there be, I desire not to be
their advocate, having to my task only the vindication of it is just esteem;
but yet cannot resist the temptation which prompts me to return to you, that
some men ar near the golden mean as the Assemblers, have said the like of
Preaching, though not expressed it in so large a Declamatory figure; and I shall
ask; whether you have not possibly given them some occasion to do so (as great
perhaps as has been given you to pass this sentence on on them) at least now
confirmed them in so doing, by applying or appropriating to the Preaching of
the word (in the Modern notion of it, and as in your Directory it is
distinguished from reading of the Scriptures) the title which St Paul gives to
the Gospel of Christ, saying, that it is the Power of God unto Salvation, and
one of the greatest and most excellent works of the Ministry of the Gospel, p.
27, which former clause of power of Cod. etc. though it be most truly affirmed
by S. Paul of their Preaching the Gospel, and also truly applied or
accommodated to that Preaching or interpreting of Scripture, which is the
(...), the due application of the Scripture rule to particular cases, yet is it
not true in universum, of all that is now adays called Preaching, much of that
kind being (...), of a mortiferous poisonous savor, not to them that perish,
but to the most Christian auditory it meets with; And that the railing of every
Pulpit- Rabshakeh, the speaking evil of Dignities, etc. should be styled the
power of God to Salvation, I have little temptation to believe. And whether the
latter clause be true also, I refer you to S. Aug. Ep. 108. ad Honorat. where
speaking of damages that come to the people by the absence of the Minister, and
consequently of necessaria Ministeria, the special useful necessary acts of
the Ministry, he names the Sacraments, and receiving of Penitents, and giving
of comfort to them, but mentions neither Praying nor Preaching in that place, I
shall add no more, but that some have on these, and the like grounds been
tempted to say, that you idolize Preaching, because you attribute so much to
any the worst kind of that, above what others have conceived to be its due
proportion. And yet we hope you think not fit to abolish Preaching on that
suggestion, and consequently, that it will be as unjust to abolish Liturgy on
the like, though it should be proved a true one, this being clearly the fault
of Men, end not of Liturgy, as that even now of the Lycaonians and not of Paul,
especially when the many, which are affirmed to have thus offended, by
Idolizing the Liturgy, are said to be ignorant and superstitious, whose faults,
and errors and imprudencies, if they may prove matter sufficient for such a
sentence, may also rob us of all the treasures we have, of our Bibles and Souls
also. For thus has the Gospel been used as a (...), or charm, and that is but
little better then an Idol, and so have some persons been had in admiration,
and believed as if they were infallible, and so in a manner Idolized also, and
that this should be a capital crime in them that were thus admired, would be a
new piece of severitie, that few of Draco's Laws could parallel.

the People pleasing themselves in their presence at that Service, and their
Lip-labor P. 4.
in bearing a part in it, have thereby hardened themselves in their ignorance,
and carelessness of saving knowledge and true piety. To this I answer, 1. That
it is no fault to be so pleased with presence at that service (the congregation
of many Saints is to any a pleasing company) and therefore if it were immediate
to, and inseparable from the Liturgy, would not be a charge against it, nor in
any probability hinder but advance the desire, and acquisition of saving
knowledge and true piety, which is there proposed to all that are present at
the Liturgy. But if the phrase signify being pleased with the bare presence,
or the being present, and doing nothing of that they come for, as the lip.
labor seems to denote the hard labor of the lip, and not joining any zeal or
intention of the heart, it is but then an uncharitable censure again, if it be
not upon certain knowledge, and if it be, it is as incident to that order of the
Directories proposing, as to the Liturgy, One may please himself with a bare
presence at Sermon, and either sleep it out, or think on some worldly matter;
one, may say all or most of the Ministers Prayer after him, and sigh and groan
at every period and satisfy himself that this is a gallant work of piety, but
truly I would be unwilling to be he that should pass this censure on any whose
heart I did not know (for sure it is not necessary that any man should leave
his heart at home, when his body is present, or employ it on some thing else,
when his lips are busied either in our Liturgy or that Directory prayer) nor,
if I did so should I think that the Directories order for worship should be
rejected for this fault of others, if there were nothing else to be said
against it. As for the Peoples bearing a part in the Service, which seems to
refer to the responses, this has had an account given of it already

saving knowledge, and true piety, is no where to be had, but in those Sermons,
which are not ^shered in with the Liturgy; which we shall not wonder at them
for affirming, who have a long time thus persuaded the people, that all saving
knowledge is to be had from them, and their accomplices, and blasted all others
for carnal men, of which many discriminative Characters were formerly given, as
kneeling or praying at the time of entrance into pue or pulpit; but now it
seems the use of the Liturgy supplies the place of all, as being incompatible
with saving knowledge and true piety. If this be true, that will be a very
popular plausible argument I confess, and therefore I shall oppose unto, that
which I hope will not pass for boast either with God or Angels, that of the
Sermons which have been Preached since the Reformation in this Kingdom, and
commended to the Press and public view, very few were Preached by those that
excluded the Liturgy out of the Churches, and that since this Directory came
into use, and so made a visible discrimination among men there has been as
much saving knowledge, i. e, Orthodox doctrine, and exhortation to repentance,
Prayer, Faith, Hope, and Love of God, Selfdeniall, and readiness to take up
the cross, (duties toward God) and to Allegiance, Justice, Mercy,
Peaceablenesse, Meekness, Charity even to Enemies, (and the rest of the duties
toward man) to be heard in the Sermons of those that retain the Liturgy, and as
much obedience to those observable in the lives of those that frequent it, as
is to be met with in the espousers of the Directory. If it be not thus, I
confess I shall have little hope, that God will suffer such a jewel as the
Liturgy is, to continue any longer among us so unprofitably, and yet if men
were guilty of this fault also, and the Liturgy of the unhappiness of having
none but such Clients, yet would not this be sufficient authority for any men
to abolish it, any more then it will be just to hang him who has been
unfortunate, or to make any man's infelicity his guilt. I beseech God to inflame
all our hearts with that zeal, attention, fervency, which is due to that action
of of Prayer in our Liturgy, and that cheerful obedience to all that is taught
us out of his Word, and then I am sure this argument or objection against our
Liturgy will be answered, if as yet it be not.

that our Book is a compliance with them in a great part of the Service, and so
that they were not a little confirmed in their Superstition and Idolatry, etc.
Where I shall 1. demand, is there any Superstition or Idolatry in that part of
the Service wherein we thus comply with them? if so, it is more then a
compliance with Papists, it is in it self a downright damning sin; and if there
be not, but all that is Idolatrous or superstitious in their Service is
reformed in ours, then sure this will be far from confirming them in either of
those, if they depend any thing upon our judgments or our co^plyance. 2. It Is
a little unreasonable, that they who will not believe the Papists in any thing
else, should believe their boast against us, and think it an accusation
sufficiently proved, because they say it; whereas this affirmation of the
Papists, if it be theirs, (and not the Assemblers rather imposed upon them) is
as gross, though perhaps not as dangerous a falsity, as any one which the
Assemblers have condemned in them. For 3. The truth is notorious, that our
Reformers retained not any part of Popish-service, reformed their Brevi^ry and
Processionall, and Masse-book, as they did their Doctrine, retained nothing but
what the Papists had received from purer Antiquity, and was as clear from the
true charge of Popery, as any period in either Prayer or Sermon in the
Directory; which argues our compliance with the ancient Church, and not with
them; the very thing that Isaac Casaubon so admired in this Church of ours, the
care of antiquity and purity, proclaiming every where in his Epistles to all
his friends, that there was not any where else in the world the like to be
found, nor ever hoped he to see it till he came into this Kingdom. And sure
there is no Soloecisme in this, that we being a Reformed Church, should desire
to have a Reformed Liturgy, which has always had such a consent and sympathy
with the Church, that it will not be a causlesse fear, lest the abolition of
Liturgy as far as God in judgment permits it to extend, (the just punishment
of them that have rejected it) be attended with the abolition of the Church in
time, and even of Christianity also.

confirming of Papists in their superstition by this means, I desire it be
considered whether it be a probable accusation, viz. 1. Whether the rejecting
that which the Papists have from antiquity, as well as what they have obtruded
on, or superadded to it, be a more likely means to win them to hear us or
reform themselves, then our retaining with them what they retain from
Antiquity, i. e. whether a servant (much more whether a brother) that is
reprehended as much for his diligence, as for his neglects, for his good and
faithful, as for his ill and false services, be more likely thereby to be
inclined to mend his faults, then he that is seasonably and meekly reproved for
his miscarriages only? It was good advice in that ancient Epistle to
Polycarpus, ascribed to S. Ignatius, (...), meekness is the best means to
bring down the most pestilent adversary, and the resemblance by which he
express it as seasonable, (...), Fomentations are most proper to allay any
exasperation of humors. And it is Hippocrates advice, that the Physician should
never go abroad without some (...), lenitives or mollifying applications about
him; It seems there was nothing of so daily approved use as those. And that
will avow this method of complying with adversaries, as far as w^ may, to be a
probable and a wise, as well as a Christian course to bring them from their
superstition, and not to confirm them in it. And another use there is wherein
the Papists themselves confess this co^pliance was politic, to take all
scruple out of the heads and hearts of the people of England, concerning the
lawfulness of this Reformation, (This is the opinion of the Papists expressed /
in a Book called Babel and Jerusalem, or Monarcho-machia Protestantium,
subscibed by P. D. M. but conceived to be Patisons; p. 314.) that they might
conceive, that the Service and Religion still continued the same, but was
translated into English only, for their hetter edification, and so, says he,
(...) was indeed very politickly handled. 2. Whether that which drives away all
Papists from all kind communion or conversation with us, from all hearing of
our Preaching or Doctrine, be more likely to work them over to our side, then
that which permits them to come to our Churches with us. For this is
notoriously known, that as our Liturgy now is, and was framed in Queen
Elizabeth's days, the Papists did for ten years together, at the beginning of
her Reign, come to Church with us, and so continved, till the Popes
exco^municating the Queen and our Nation, made it so appear unlawful for them.
And perhaps but appear too, for an account might be given of this business,
that it is no way unlawful (by his own principles) to a Papist, remaining thus
to come to our Churches, and be present at our Liturgy, and (if that be thought
an objection or reproach against us, I shall then add) not only to ours, but
to that Service which is performed according to the Directory also, the only
difference being, that if both by them were conceived lawful (as by mistake, I
believe, in them neither now is) our Liturgy would be more likely to attract
them, then the Directory; And this we conceive not such a fault as to offer any
excuse for it, (for if S. Paul by being a Jew to the Jew, could hope to gain
the Jew, why should not we (without being Papists to the Papists, but only
Christians in those things wherein they are so too) expect to gain the Papist
also? For supposing this to be, as you call it a compliance with them, sure
'twere a more probable gaining way, then to denounce enmity to all, whom they
ever converst with; I mean to the primitive Liturgies for no other crime, but
because they made use of them, Who are best Diviners in this matter, they, or
we, experience may perhaps hereafter prove. In the mean, I cannot imagine but
Liturgy and moderation, and charity, may be able to bring in as fair a shole of
Proselytes, to convert as many Papists to us, or at least to confirm
Protestants, as an Ordinance for Sequestration of all their goods, and Halter,
and a Directory will be able to do, yea with an Ordinance for the ordinatio^ of
Ministers by mere Presbyters too, called in to assist the

Papists were very P. 4.
much encouraged in that expectation, when upon the pretended warrantablenes of
imposing of the former Ceremonies, new ones were daily obtruded upon the
Church. 1. I demand an occasion of that phrase [pretended warrantablenesse of
imposing of Ceremonies.] May any Ceremonies be imposed or no? if they may, then
an Act of Parliament may certainly do it, and such was that which confirmed our
Liturgy, and so the warrantablenesse not pretended; if not, why then do you
impose entering the Assembly not irreverently, p. 10. and taking their places
without bowing? For that general, and that negative is notation of some
Ceremony, if it have any sense in it. The phrase [not irreverently] prescribes
some reverence, there being no middle between those two, and consequently the
forbidding of the one being a prescription of the other. For I shall ask. Is
keeping on the hat irreverence at that time? If it be, then pulling it off, or
not keeping it on is a Reverence then required; And if this be avoided by
saying, that this is only there directed, not commanded; I reply, that an
Ordinance prefixed for the establishing that direction, requiring that what is
there directed shall be used, amounts to a prescription. The same may be said
of causing the man to take the woman by the right hand in marriage, in the
Directory, which is the prescribing of a Ceremony, as much as if the Ring had
been appointed to be used there also. 2. I answer that we know not of any
Ceremonies which have been obtruded or forced on any which the Law has not
commanded, (or if there had, this had been nothing to the Liturgy, nor
consequently to be fetched in as a part of a charge against it;) That of bowing
at the entrance into the Church, is the most likely to be the Ceremony here
spoken of, and yet that is neither a new one (never by any Law or Canon turned
out at the Reformation, but only not then imposed under any command, and since
disused in some places) nor yet was it lately imposed or obtruded on the
Church, but on the other side in the Canon of the last so hated Convocation,
(which alone could be said to deal with the Church in this matter) it was only
reco^mended, and explained, and vindicated from all mistake, and then the
practice of using of it left to every man's liberty, with the caution of the
Apostle, that they that use it should not condemn the^ that use it not, nor
they that use it not, judge them that use it. 3. That the warrantablenesse of
imposing the former Ceremonies was no means or occasion of obtruding new daily,
but rather an hedge to keep off such obtrusion; for when it is resolved by Law,
that such Ceremonies shall be used, it is the implicit intimation of that Law,
that all other unco^manded are left free, and that, without authority (as the
word [daily] supposes the discourse here to mean) no other can be obtruded. For
sure it is not the quality of Law to steal in illegal pressures, but to keep
them out rather, to define and limit our Liberty, not to enthrall us, to set us
bounds and rules of life, not to remove all such. But then 4. That it may
appear of how many truths this period is composed (every one of them with the
help of one syllable a [not] set before the principal verb, able to become
such) I shall add that the very obtrusion of such Ceremonies, if they had been
obtruded, would never have encouraged a rational Papist to expect our return
to them, but only have signified that we meant by complying with them, as far
as it was lawful, to leave them without excuse, if they did not do so too,
comply with us in what they might, and restore the Peace and Union of
Christendom by that means. This with any moderate Papist would most probably
work some good, and for the more fiery Jesuited, I am confident none were ever
more mortally hated by them, then those who were favorers of the Ceremonies
now mentioned, and for the truth of what I say, you are obliged to believe that
passage in Romes Masterpeece, which you appointed to be set out, wherein the
King, and the late Archbishop of Canterbury, were by the popish contrivers
designed to slaughter (...) persons wh^^ they despaired to gain to them: but
that any of the now Assemblers were so hated, or so feared, or thought so
necessary to be taken out of the way, we have not yet heard, but are rather
confident that if a pe^tion of Rome, or a Cardinals cap, will keep them longer
together to do more such work as this, so reproachful to the Protestant
Religion, they should be so hired, rather then dissolve too speedily.

found out by experience, that the Liturgy has been a great means to make and
increase an idle and unedifying Ministry, which P. 5.
contented it self with set forms made to their hands by others without putting
forth themselves to exercise the gift of prayer. To this I answer, that those
Ministers are not presently proved to be idle and unedifying which have been
content to use the Liturgy. I hope there may be other ways of labor, beside
that of extemporary prayer (which can be no longer a labor then while it is a
speaking.) For 1. I had thought that these men might have acknowledged
preaching and Catechizing, the former at least, to have been the work of a
Minister, and that an edifying work, and that s^re those men have been
exercised in, who have retaind the Litu^gy also. 2. Study of all kind of Divine
learning, of which the haters of Liturgy have not gotten the enclosure, may
pass with sober men for a labor also, and that which may tend to edification,
if it have charity joined with it, and that may be had too, without hating the
Liturgy. But then 3. I conceive that this Directory is no necessary provision
against this reproached idleness, or unedifyingnesse in any that were formerly
guilty of them in the days of Liturgy. For sure the labor will not be much
increased to the Minister, that will observe the Directory, because either he
may pray extempore, which will be no pains, but of his lungs and sides in the
delivery, or else a form being composed by any, according to the Directory
(which is in effect a Form it self,) he may thenceforth continue as idle as he
who uses our form of Liturgy, and he which has a mind to be idle, may with
that use of it, and that you acknowledge, when you interpose that caution P. 8.
[that the Ministers become not herely slothful and negligent] which were
wholly an unnecessary caution, if this Directory made idleness impossible; and
if a caution will serve turn, the like may be added to our Liturgy also,
without abrogating of it. And for the edifying, I desire it may be considered,
whether the extravagancies and impertinences, which our experience (as well
grounded as that which taught these men this mystery of the idle unedifying
Ministry) bids us expect from those who neglect set forms, do more tend to the
edifying of any then the use of those prayers which are by the piety and
judgment of our Reformers composed, and with which the Auditory being
acquainted, may with uninterrupted devotion go along and say, Amen.

Lord Christ pleases to furnish all his Servants whom he calls to that office
with the gift of Prayer. I P. 5.
desire 1. That it may be showed what evidence we have from any promise of
Christ in his word, that any such gift shall be perpetually annexed by him to
the Ministry; I believe the places which will be brought to enforce it, will
conclude for gifts of Healing, making of psalms, and other the like also, which
Ministers do not now a days pretend to. 2. I would know also why Christ, if he
do so furnish them, may not also be thought to help them to the matter of their
prayers (in which yet here the Directory is fain to assist them, and page 8.
supposes the Minister may have need of such help and furniture,) as well as the
form of words, in which the Liturgy makes the supply. 3 I shall not doubt to
affirm, that if the gift of prayer signify an ability of praying in public
without any premeditation, discreetly and reverently, and so as never to offend
against either of those necessaries, every Minister is not furnished with this
gift, some men of very excellent abilities wanting that sudden promptness of
elocution, and choice of words for all their conceptions, others being
naturally modest and bashful, and not endued with this charisma of boldness,
which is a great part, a special ingredient of that which is here called the
gift of prayer. And even for those which have the former of these, and are not
so happy as to want the latter, that yet they are not sufficiently gifted for
prayer in public, experience has taught us by the very creditable relations
of some, who have fallen into so many indiscreti^^s, that we say no worse in that
performance It Is true that God enableth men sufficiently in private to express
their necessities to him, being able to understand sighs and groans, when words
are wanting, and as well content with such Rhetoric in the Closet as any, but
this is not peculiar to Ministers, and for any such ability in public, there
will not be the like security, unless the language of sighs and groans,
without other expressions, be there current also, which appears by some, who
are forced to pay that debt to God in that coin, having through unthriftinesse
provided no other; and yet 'twere well also if that were the worst of it, but
the truth is, blasphemy is somewhat worse then saying nothing.

countenance of the Liturgy would be a P. 5.
matter of endless strife and contention in the Church, and a snare to many
godly Ministers, etc. to the end of that page. Where 1. is observable the
temper and resolution of these men, of whom such special care is taken, which
makes it so necessary for them, not only to strive and contend, 1. against
established Law. 2. about forms of Prayer, (which sure is none of the prime
Articles of the Creed) but also to strive for ever, which being observed, it
seems secondly, That they have a very charitable opinion of us all who are
assertors of Liturgy, that we will never strive or contend for it, for
otherwise the strife may be as endless upon its taking away. And sure in
ordinary judging (if they be not sure that none are contentious, but their
favorites) we see no reason, why the introduction of a new way of worship,
should not be more matter of strife, and so also a snare to more (if any can be
ensnared or scandalized, but they) then the continuance of the old established
Liturgy. Where, by the way, the snare they speak of seems to signify that
which catches and intraps their estates and not their souls, causes them to be
persecuted, etc. which is a notable paralogisme and fallacy put upon the
Scripture use of that phrase, if we took pleasure in making such discoveries.
But then thirdly, We desire experience may be judge, and upon the sentence
which that shall give, that it may be considered, whether upon the ballancing
of the Kingdom, it will not be found that a far greater number are now at this
time offended at the Directory, and thereby ensnared in their Estates, if they
lie within your power, then formerly at any time (I shall add in all times
since the Reformation, put together) ever were by the Liturgy.

in these latter times God vouchsafes to his people mere and better means for
the discovery of error and Superstition.] Though this sounds somewhat like his
Divinity who makes the power of resisting Kings, to be a truth which God
pleas,d to reveal in these latter times, for the turning Antichrist out of the
world, but hid in the primitive times, that Antichrist might come in, yet I
shall not now quarrel with it (because it is possible it may have another
sense, and I would not deny any thing but what is apparently and inexcusably
false) but from thence assume, 1. That I hope God vouchsafes these means to
them, that use the Liturgy also; For if it must be supposed a ^in to continue
the use of it, it is not, I hope, such a wasting sin, as to deprive men of all
grace, even of the Charismata, which unsanctified men may be capable of, and of
means of knowledge, which is but a common grace, and therefore I must hope that
the phrase [his people] is not here meant in a discriminative sense (like the
Montanists form of nos spirituales, in opposition to all others, as animales
and phychici) to signify only those that are for the Directory, for then let
them be assured, Gods gifts are not so enclosed, but that Ox^ord is vouchsafed
as plentiful means for the discovery of err^ur and superstition, as London,
and have, among other acts of knowledge, discovered this one by Gods blessing,
(which again I shall mention) that there may be as much error and
Superstition, in rejecting of all L^turgie, as in retaining of any, in opposing
Ceremonies, as in asserting them, a negative (as I said) touch not, taste not,
kneel not, bow not, as well as a positive superstition; as also that there be
errors in practice, as well as doctrine, (...) infidelities against the
Commandments, and Sermon of Christ in the Mount, as well as against the Creed
it self, and that imposing of Laws on the King and Kingdom by the Sword,
abolishing Liturgy, setting up Directories by that s^erne way of argument,
those carnal weapons of mili^ia or warfare, when they are not only practiced,
but asserted for lawful, are errors, damnable errors also, and such as are
very near the ordinary notion of Superstition, the teaching for doctrine the
Commandments of men, I would I might not say of -- also. But then 2. all this
being supposed of Gods granting better means of knowledge now, then formerly, I
shall yet interpose, that sure this is not a truth of an unlimited extent, for
there have been Apostles, which had ^etter means then we, and they that were
nearest ^h^m, (and knew their doctrines, and practices, better then it is
possible we should) had so also, nay Universal Councels meeting in the Holy
Ghost, and piously and judiciously debating, had by the privilege of Prayer,
more right to that promise of Christ's being in the midst of them, and leading
them into all truth, then an illegally congregated Assembly; and all these have
been greater favorers of Liturgy then any of equal authority with them have
been of your Directory; And 3. if all were supposed and granted which you
claim, yet still the means of knowledge now vouchsafed do not make you
infallible, lay not any moral or physical (...) (...) (...) you to be
faultlesse or errourlesse, and therefore still this may be error in you as
probably, as Liturgy should be Superstition in us. And for gifts of Preaching
and Prayer, I answer, if they are and have been truly gifts, others of former
times may be the Spirit have had as liberal a portion of them, as we. For sure
those days wherein the spirit was promised to be powered out on all flesh, are
not these days of ours, or of this age, exclusively to all others; Of this I
am confident, that some other ages have had them in such a measure, as was most
agreeable to the propagating of the Gospel, and if that were then by forming or
using of Liturgies, why may it not be so at this time also?

limited truth, I must now add, that if they be argumentative, and so meant as
a proof that these Assemblers are likely to be in the right, while they destroy
Liturgy, although all the Christian world before them have asserted it, this
will be a gross piece of insolency and untruth together; a taking upon them to
be the only people of God of these latter times, nay to have greater judgment
knowledge, gifts, then all the whole Christian world, for all Ages together,
including the Apostles and Christ himself, have had. For all these have been
produced together with the suffrage of Jews, Heathens, Mahometans also, to
maintain set Forms; and though it be true, that some of late have found out
many Superstitions, that never were discovered before, one or other almost in
every p^sture or motion in Gods Service, yet this sure is by the help of an
injustice in applying without all reason that title to those actions, and not
by a greater sagacity, in discerning, making many acts of indifferent
performance, nay of Piety it self, go defamed and mourning under the reproach
of Superstition, and not bringing any true light into the world, that before
was wanting. This one Odium fastened on all Orthodox Ministers in this Kingdom
at this time, of being superstitious, and the mistake of the true notion of the
word which has to that end been in^u^ed into many, (but is by a Tract lately
printed somewhat discovered) has brought in a shole of Sequestrations of
Livings, which have been very necessary and isntrumental, to the maintaining
of these present distempers. And now at length it proves in more respects then
one, that what ever un^atiate hydropecall appetices are tempted to take away,
is presently involved under that title, a name that has an universal
malignitie in it, makes any thing lawful prize that is in the company. God
will in time display this deceit also.

Having mentioned these so many reasons of their abolishing our Liturgy, i. e.
their so many (...) against our Church and Churchmen, all if they were true,
hang so loose and so separable from Liturgy, that they cannot justify the
abolition of it; At length they shut up their suggestions with [Vpon these and
many the like weighty considerations, and because of diverse particulars
contained in the Book, they have resolved to lay aside the Book] P. 6. P. 7.
where if the many considerations unmentioned be of no more truth or validity
then these, and so be like weighty considerations, I acknowledge their*
prudenc^ in not naming them, and think that no part of the World is like to
prove the worse for this their reservednesse, only by the way a general
charge is nothing in Law, and in generalibus latet dolus, is a legal exception
against any thing of that nature. But if they have any other which they
conceive to be of any weight, ^hey are very unjust and very uncharitable to us,
thus to ensnare our estates (the fault even now laid upon the Prelates) by
requiring our approbation of their Directorie, and conformity of our practice
to it, and yet not vouchsafe us that conviction, which they are able, to
satisfy us of the reasons of their proceedings. But the truth is, we shall not
charge this on them neither, being made confident by the weakness of the
motives produced, that they have not any more effectual in store. And for the
particulars contained in the Book, if there were any infirm parts in it, any
thing unjustifiable, (which we conceive their Conscience tells them there is
not, having not in this whole Book produced one, and yet their charity to it
not so great, as to cover or conceal any store of sins) yet would not this
infer any more then only farther Reformation of the Book, which is not the
design against which we now argue.

testimonies and accusatious so unsufficient and unproportionable to such a
^^ndenmation, they could not but foresee the opinion that would be had of the
action, and the ill and odious consequents that would attend it, which
therefore to keep off, is the next endeavor, by professing that which is done,
is not from any love of Novelty. And truly it is well you tell us so, for
otherwise the semblance of that love in this and other actions, might have
persuaded us mortals, who see but the outsides, so to judge. And still
notwithstanding the affirmation, (which is not of much value in your own cause,
unless we had more testimonies of the Authors infallibility, then this Preface
has afforded us) the consideration of the matter and terms of the change from
what and to what, of the no manner of advantage or acquisition by it to
recompense all the disadvantages, the great temerity, if not impiety to boot,
in separating from this National, and in scorning and defying the practice of
the Universal Church, and the great illegality, that I say no worse, of your
action and the preparatory steps of motion to it, may tempt us to affirm, that
it must needs be a love of novelty, even a Plat^nick love, as the phrase is now
adays, a love of novelty, as novelty, without any other hope for reward,
without any other avowed design in seeking it; for if there be any other which
may be owned, I am confident it has already appeared by what has been said,
that this is not the way to it. But then 2. Such a profession as this will not
sure signify much, to innovate, and yet to say we love not innovation, to act
with a proud high hand in despite of so much at least of God, as is imprinted
in the Laws of man, and our lawful Superiour's, and then to excuse it by
saying we love not to do so, will but little alleviate the matter before any
equal Judge. It Is certain there is something unlovely in the reproachful name
of sin, how glibly soever the pleasures of it go down, yea and even in the sin
it self, it has the (...), the two Cups in Homer, more truly then that to
which he applies it, its bitter and hateful, as well as its sweeter lovelier
parts, extemplo quodcunque malum committitur, ipsi Displicet, and if men may
have leave and excuse to commit adultery so long, till they fall in love not
only with the pleasure of it, but the very sinfulness of it, and the name and
reproach also, we shall give them a good large space of Repentance: the short
is, the mention of Novelty is an evidence that the Composers Conscience tells
them, that what they now do is such, and it is not their not loving it (perhaps
only thinking, perhaps only saying they do not love it) which will much
lessen the fault but rather define it to be an act against Conscience, to be
and continue guilty of so huge a novelty, when they profess they love it not.

envy that they labor to avoid, is the having an intention to disparage the
Reformers, of whom they are persuaded, that were they now alive they would join
with them in this work. This is another (...), to blanch your actions with
contrary intentions, to do that which is most reproachful to the Reformers, to
obliterate, or which is worse, to defame their memory (whom yet at the
beginning you called wise and pi^us) and then say you intended them no
disparagement, nay to make* them repent and retract after their death (i. e. to
put them in a kind of Purgatory) to undertake for them that they have changed
their minds, and not only that they are now content to part with that finally
out of the Church, the short temporary loss of which, one of them (Archbishop
Cranmer in one of his letters published by Miles Coverdale) laments, as the
severest part of the Persecuters tyranny toward him, viz. that they would not
permit him the use of the Common Prayer Book in the prison; but withal that
they are grown zelots too, are content to act most illegally and seditionsly to
cast it out. The judgment of this matter we leave to any ordinary arbitration,
1 Whether it be likely that they would join, against Law to take that away,
which they compiled, or make all prescribed Forms unlawful, who did not think
any fit in public, but those which were prescribed. 2. Whether any man can
have ground of such persuasion, when they died in the constant exercise of it,
and have sent them no message from the dead of their change of mind. 3.
Whether it be not strongly improbable, that they of the first Reformation who
in Queen Mari^s days flying and living in Frankf^rd, and there meeting with
the objections that have been produced by our new reformers maintained the Book
against them all, would now if they were returned to us from a longer exile,
disclaim all that they had thus maintained. 4. Whether it be not an argument of
a strong confidence and assurance, (which is the most d^nge^ous mother of
Schism and Heresy imaginable) of strong (...) and (...) judgment, to think
that all men would be of their side (as (...) thought ve^ily that all London
would rise with him* as soon as he appeared in Chea^ side) upon no other ground
of that persuasion mention^d, but (...) that they are of it, which is but in
effect as the same H^^k^t did showing no evidence of his being a Prophet, but
only his confidence, which produced all kind of direful Oa^bes that he was,
and hideous im^recations on himself, if he were not so. That which is added by
way of honor to those Martyrs, that they were excellent instruments to begin
the ^^^ging and building of his house, may be but an artifice of raising their
own reputation, who have perfected those rude beginnings, or if it be meant in
earnest, as kindness to them, it is but an unsignificant civilitie, to abolish
all the records of their Reformation, and then pay them a little praise in
exchange for them, Martyr their ashes (as the Papists did Fagius and Bucer) and
then lay them down into the earth again, with a dirge or an^^em, defame the
Reformation, and Commend the Reformers; but still to intimate how much wiser
and Godlier you are, then all those Martyrs were.

ad amoliendam invidiam; Now to the positive motives, of setting upon this
great work of innovation, and those are, 1. To answer in some measure the
gracious providence of God which at this time calls upon them for farther
Reformation: What they should mean by the gracious providence of God in this
place, I confess I cannot guess, (if it be not a mere name to add some
credit to the cause) unless it be the prosperity and good success of their
Arms; which if throughout this War they had reason to brag or take notice of
(as sure they have) not, but of Gods hand many times visibly showed against
them, in raising the low estate of the King, without visible means, and
bringing down their mighty strengths, as the Septuagint makes God promise to
fight against Amalek (...), by secret hand, by invisible,) yet sure would not
that justify the taking up of those Arms, much less be able to consecrate all
other sins, that those Arms may enable any to be guilty of. It Is the Turks
Divinity, as before I intimated, to p^^^e sentence on the action by the
prosperity of the man, to make one killing of a Father villainy and sacrilege,
because the design it aimed at miscarried, and another of the same making an
heroic act, that God was pleased with, because it brought the designer to the
Kingdom: And therefore, I beseech you, look no longer on the cause through the
deceivable and deceitful glasses of your conceited victories, but through that
one true glass the word of Christ in the New Testament; and if that call you
to this farther reformation, go on in Gods name; But if it be any else that
calls you, (as sure somewhat else it is you mean, for if it were Gods word
you would ere now have showed it us, and here have called it Gods word, which
is plain and intelligible, not Gods providence, which is of an ambiguous
signification) if any extraordinary revelation however conveyed to you; this
you will never be able to approve to any that should doubt your call, and
therefore I shall meekly desire you, and in the bowels of Christian compassion
to your selves, if not to your bleeding Country, once more to examine
seriously, what ground you have in Gods word, to satisfy conscience of the
lawfulness of such attempts, which you have used, to gain strength to work
your Reformation; and this we the rather desire to be showed by you, because
you add, that having consulted with Gods holy word, you resolve to lay aside
the former Liturgy, which cannot signify that upon command of Gods word
particularly speaking to this matter, you have done it, for then all this
while, you would sure have showed us that word, but that the Word of God has
lead you to the whole work in general, which you have taken in hand, and
therefore that is it, which as a light shining in so dark a place, we require
you in the name of God to hold out to us.

After this there is a second motive, the satisfaction of your own consciences.
This I cannot speak to, because neither I know them, nor the grounds of them,
save only by what is here mentioned, which I am sure is not sufficient to
satisfy conscience; (fancy perhaps it may) only this I shall interpose, that
it is possible your own consciences may be erroneous, and we are confident they
are so, and then you are not bound to satisfy them, save only by seeking
better information, which one would think might be as feaseable a task as
abolishing of Liturgy.

you may satisfy the expectation of other Reformed Churches; To this first I
say, that this is not the rule for the reforming of a National Church (...),
and independent. And such I conceive, the last Canon of the Council of
Ephesus, will by consequence conclude this of England to be; and its being so
is a sufficient plea, 1. To clear us from all show of Schism in Separating
from the Roman Church (to which we were not, according to the Ephesine rule,
subj^sted as a part) though we reformed our selves, when the Pope vehemently
required the contrary, and would not himself be reformed; and from the Church
universal, of which we still remain a member undivided, 2. To answer this
motive of our Assemblers, by telling them that in the reforming such a Church
(as this of ours, if not by others, yet by them is acknowledged to be) the care
must be, to do what the head and members, of the Church, shall in the fear of
God resolve to be fittest, and not what other Churches expect; for if that were
the rule, it would be a very fallacious and very puzling one, the expectations
of several Churches being as several, and the choice of some difficulty,
which of them was fittest to be answered. But then secondly, what the
expectation of other Churches have been in this point, or what the reasons of
them, we do not punctually know, only this we do, that after your soliciting
of many (which is another thing, somewhat distant from their expecting) we hear
not of any, that have declared their concurrence in opinion with you in this:
But on the contrary, that in answer to your Letter directed to the Church of
Zeland, the Wallachrian Classis made this return to you, that they did approve
set and prescribed forms of public Prayer, as profitable and tending to
edification, quite contrary to what you before objected of the Offense to the
Protestant Churches abroad, and now of their expectation, etc.) and give
reasons for that approbation, both from Texts of Scriptures, and the general
practice of the Reformed Church, avouching particularly the forementioned place
of Calvin, and conclude it to be a precise singularity in those men who do
reject them. And now, I beseech you, speak your knowledge, and instance in the
particular, if any Church have in any address made to you, or answer to your
invitation, signified their expectation that you should abolish Liturgy, or
their approbation of your fact, able to count balance this censure from the
pen of those your friends thus unexpectedly fallen upon you. Some ingenuity
either of making good your assertion of the Churches, or else of Confession
that you cannot, will be in common equity expected from you.

desires of many of the Godly among your selves (which you mention as a fourth
motive for abolition) will signify little, because how many suffrages soever
might be brought for the upholding of Liturgy, those who are against it shall
by you be called, the godly, and that number what ever it is, go for a
multitude. But then again, Godly they may be, but not wise, (piety gives no
infallibility of doctrine to the professor) at least in this point, unless you
can first prove the Liturgy to be ungodly; nay they that rejoiced in it, were,
as you say, godly and learned, and they that made it wise and pious, and
therefore sure some respect was due to the w^se, as well as godly in the
abrogation. And yet it may be added farther, that the way of expressing of the
desires of those whom you mean by the Godly, has been ordinarily by way of
Petitions, and those it cannot be dissembled have been often framed and put into
their hands (I say not by whom) even in set prescribed Forms: not thinking it
enough to give them a Directory for matter, without stinting their Spirits, by
appointing the words also. This shows that the desires of those many of the
Godly, are not of any huge consideration in this business, and yet I have not
heard to my remembrance of any Petition, yet ever so insolent, as to demand
what you have done (in answer it seems to some inarticulate groans or sighs)
the abolition of all Liturgy.

you may give some public testimony of your endeavors for uniformity in
divine worship promised in your Solemn League and Covenant. To this the answer
will be short, because it has for the main already been considered. 1. That
the Covenant it self is unlawful, which therefore obliges to nothing but
Repentance, and restitution of a stray Subject to his Allegiance to God and the
King again. 2. That there is one special thing considerable of this Covenant,
which will keep it either from obliging or from being any kind of excuse or
extenuation of the crimes that this action is guilty of, and that is the
voluntary taking of that Covenant on purpose, thus to ensnare your selves in
this obligation, to do what should not otherwise be done; We before told you,
that He^ods oath would not justify the beheading of John; and shall now add,
that if some precedaneous hatred to John, made Herod lay this design before
hand, that Herodias's daughter should dance, that upon her dancing he would be
vehemently pleased, that upon her pleasing of him he would swear to give her
any thing she should ask, even to half his Kingdom, and the same compact
appoint her to make this Petition, to take John Baptist's head for her reward,
(as it is not unlikely but that as Herodias was of counsel with her Daughter,
so Herod might be with Herodias) if the train I say, lay thus, sure Herod's oath
would take off but little from the crimson dye of his murder, but rather
superadde that sin of deep hypocrisy, of making piety, and the Religion of
oaths, a servant and instrument to his incest and murdering of a Prophet. And
then I shall no farther apply, then by asking this question, did you not take
this Covenant on purpose to lay this obligation upon you, and now pretend that
for your Covenants sake, you must needs do it? If you cannot deny this, O then
remember Herod. But if you took the Covenant without any such design, but now
^ind your selves thus ensnared by it, then rather remember the times to get out
of that snare, and not to engage your selves faster in it. 3. I answer, that if
by uniformity be meant that among your selves in this Kingdom; the taking away
our Liturgy by Ordinance, while it remains established by valid Law, is no
over-fit means to that end, nothing but a new Act, and an assurance that all
would be obedient to that Act, can be proper for that purpose; and I am sure
there are some men in the World, whom if such an Act displeased, the obedience
would not be very uniform; what ever it may seem to be when better Subjects are
supposed to be concluded by it. But if it be uniformity with the best reformed
Churches (as your Covenant mentions) then 1. That uniformitie in matters of
Form or Ceremony is no way necessary, (Communion betwixt Churches may be
preserved without it) not near so useful, as that other among our selves, and
therefore the bargain will be none of the most thriving, when that acquisition
is paid so dear for, uniformity with strangers purchased with confusion at
home, as bad a market, as unequal a barter, as if we should enter upon a
Civil War, for no other gain, then to make up a Peace with some Neighbor
Prince; which none but a mad Statesman would ever counsel. But then 4. The
Covenant for such uniformitie, obliges not to make this Directory, which I
shall prove. 1. By the verdict of those themselves which have taken the
Covenant, of whom many, I am confident, never conceived themselves thereby
obliged to abolish Liturgy, there being no such intelligible sense contained
in any branch of the Covenant, any such intention of the imposers a^owed at the
giving of it. 2. Because we conceive we have made it manifest, that that part
of the Covenant which mentions uniformity with other best reformed Churches,
does not oblige to abolish Liturgy, not only because the general matter of
the Covenant refers unto the Government, and not to the Liturgy, but because
this of England, as it now stands established by Law, is the best Reformed, both
according to that rule of Scripture, and standard of the purest Ancient Church;
For which we have also the testimony of Learned Protestants of other Countries,
preferring it before their own, and shall be ready to justify the boast by any
test or (...), that shall be resolved on fit to decide this doubt or
competition between this of ours, and any that you shall Vote or name to be the
best.

ta^it intimation of yours more then once fallen from you in this Preface, and
in the body of the Directory, p. 40. and 73. viz. that the Church of England
has hitherto been guilty of Superstition in her Liturgy. To which we first
reply by desiring, that you mention any one particular wherein that accusation
may appear to be true, (and we hereby undertake to maintain the contrary
against all the learned in that Assembly) which if you will not undertake to
specify and prove, you must acknowledge to be guilty of great
uncharitableness in affirming. I shall not be so uncharitable as to wish that
the judgment of the Civil Law may be your doom, and the sentence that belongs
to Superstition be the reward of your defamation, I shall not say so much as
the Lord reprove, by way of imprecation, but once more repeat, Lord lay it not
to your charge.

[having not consulted with flesh and blood, etc.] This sure in St Paul's
phrase, Gal. 1. 16. signifies not consulting with men, though Apostolical; as
consulting with them is opposed to immediate revelation from Heaven; and then
sure your Assembly was very spiritual, and very heavenly, for with them you
confess to have consulted; but if you mean by the phrase, in a larger sense,
earthly or humane interests, I shall only ask, whether all the actions which
have proceeded from you are so visibly divine, and unmixt with earth, so
apparently uninterested, that your own testimony should be sufficient to give
credit to this affirmation?

to set up the Directory, and in it to hold forth such things as are of divine
Institution in every Ordinance, and other things be set forth according to the
rules of Christian Prudence; agreeable to the general rules of the Word of
God. And now it is a little strange, (but yet that which my temper obliges me to
desire may still be my fate, when I fall upon a Controversy with any) that we
which have been at such distance all this while, should just now mee^ at
parting, that such contradictory premises, should beget the same conclusion;
For there is not a better Rule in the World, nor any which I would rather choose
to be judged by in this matter, then that which is here proposed by you; Only
I desire a little importunately to be advertised, where it is that the
Compilers of our Liturgy have swerved from it. Where you have swerved, we have
instanced in many particulars in our Answer to the Ordinance, and shall now
once for all demand, what rules of prudence oblige you to turn those many
severals there mentioned out of the Service of the Church, every one of them
tending to edfication directly, over and above the agreeableness of each to
the general rules of Scripture; in particular, whether it be agreeable to
Christian Prudence to a bolish a Liturgy, which has been so piously and
discrectly framed, by those who have sealed our Reformation with their blood,
and in stead of it to bring in a voluntary way of serving God in a National
Church, where there be many thousand Parishes, and no such promise of divine
inspiration or enthusiasme, but that there may be still some number of those
Ministers, who will not be able to speak constantly in the Congregation, so as
in the presence of Angels they ought to speak. The experiments that have given
us reason thus to fear, and desire prevention of the like, we are again tempted
to add unto this paper, but we delight not to demonstrate them guilty of
Blasphemies, who have accused us of Superstition. We desire this fault may be
cured by some milder recipe.

Directory Ministers may be directed to keep like soundness of Doctrine, this
indeed is a prerogative of the Liturgy, (which has always been used as an
hedge to keep out errors, and to retain a common profession of Catholic
verities) but cannot belong to your Directory, which has neither Creed nor
Catechism, nor one Article of Religion, or Doctrine asserted in it, but leaves
that wholly to the Preacher, whose doctrine that it should be sound at all, or
agree with the doctrine of all other Preachers, and so be like sound, here is
no provision made.

We have thus called your Preface also to some trial, and found it of such a
composure and temper, 1. So many variations from truth (which one that desires
to be civil, must be unjust if he do not call them so) that we cannot with any
pleasure give an account of our judgment of them. 2. So many unconcluding
premises, Affirmations, which if they were all supposed true, would never come
home to abolition, and among all the heap, so no one truth which is of
importance or weight toward that conclusion, that now we conceive we have
discharged the task, given the Reader such a view of the inward parts of this
spacious fabric, that he will not wonder, that we are not so passionately
taken with the beauty, as to receive at a venture whatsoever is contained in
it; For supposing there were never an unseasonable Direction in all the Book
following, yet the reception of that, being founded in the ablition both of
ours, and of all Liturgy, the Christians prudence agreeable to the word of God,
which is here commended to us, obliges us to stop our ears to such slight
temptations, and never to yield consent, to the but laying aside that form of
Service, which we have by established Law so long enjoyed, to the great content
and benefit of this Nation; though God knows some have not made so holy, others
so thankful an use of it, as it deserved of us, some neglecting it, others
slandering, and so many bringing worldly hearts along with them, which though
they are great evils, under which this divine Liturgy has suffered, yet being
the infelicities, not the crimes, the cross, which has made it like unto our
Savior, in being spit on, ^evil'd, and crowned with thorns (for such he calls
the cares of this world, the most contumeli^us part of the suffering) and not
at all the guilt (being wholly accidental and extrinsecall to it) must never
be exchanged, for the certain evils, natural and intrinsecall to the
no-Liturgy, and withal the greater mischiefs which may probably follow this
alteration; for all which patience and submission, we have not the least kind
of invitation, save only that of the noise, and importunity of some enemies,
which should it be yielded to, would, I doubt not, be resisted and pressed again,
with the Petitions of many thousands more, importuning the return and
restitution of the Liturgy again; unless by this means the Devil should gain
an absolute and total manumission, cast off all his trashes, and presently get
rid of both his enemies, Religion, and Liturgy together.

A Postscript by way of Appendix to the two former Chapters.
authentic and undeniable to them, against whom we speak. And it is, (what the
providence of God, and the power of truth has extorted from them) their own
confession, in a book just now come to my hands, called, a Supply of Prayer for
the Ships that want Ministers to pray with them, agreea^le to the Directory
established by Parliament, published by Authority. From which these things will
be worth observing, 1. That the very body of it is a set form of Prayer, and so
no Superstition in set forms. 2. That their publishing it by authority, is the
prescribing of that form, and so it is lawful to prescribe such forms. 3. That
the title, [of Supply of Prayer] proves that some there are, to whom such
supplies are necessary, and so a Directory not sufficient for all. And 4. That
[its being agreeable to the Directory] Or as it is, word for word formed out of
it, (the Directory turned into a Prayer) shows, that out of the Directory a
Prayer may easily first be made, and then constantly used, and so the Minister
ever after continue as idle without exercising that gift, as under our Liturgy
is pretended, and so here under pretense of supplying the ships, all such idle
Mariners in the ship of the Church are supplied also, which it seems was
foreseen at the writing that preface to the Directory, where they say, P. 8.
the Minister may if need be, have from them some help and furniture. 5. That
the Preface to this new Work entitled, A reason of this work, contains many
other things, which tend as much to the retracting their former work, as
Judas's throwing back the money did to his repentance.

That there are thousands of Ships belonging to this Kingdom, which have not
Ministers with them, to guide them in Prayer, and therefore either use the
Common prayer, or no Prayer at all. This shows the nature of that fact of those
which without any objection mentioned against any Prayer in that book, which
was the only help for the devotion of many thousands, left them for some
months, to perfect irreligion and Atheism, and not praying at all. And
besides these ships (which they here confess) how many Land-companies be there
in the same condition? how many thousand families which have no Minister in
them? (of which number the House of Commons was always wont to be one, and the
House of Lords, since the Bishops were removed from thence) and to deal
plainly, how many Ministers will there always be, in England and Wales (for
sure your care for the Universities is not so great as to be likely to work
Miracles) which will not have skill, or Power, or gift, (which you please) of
conceiving Prayers as they ought to do? and therefore let me impart to you the
thoughts of many prudent men (since the news of your Directory, and abolition
of our Liturgy) that it would prove a most expedite way to bring in Atheism;
and this it seems, you do already discern and confess in the next words, that
the no prayer at all, which succeeded the abolishing of the Liturgy, is rather
to make them Heathers then Christians, and has left the Lords day without any
mark of piety or devotion: (a sad and most considerable truth, which some
persons ought to lament with a wounded bleeding conscience, the longest day of
their life) and therefore we a^e apt to believe your charity to be more
extensive, then the title of that book enlarges it, and that it has designed
this supply, not only to those ships, but to all other in the like want of our
Liturgy. Your only blame in this particular has been, that you would not be
so ingenuous, as Judas and some others, that have soon retracted their
precipitous action, and confessed they did so, and made restitution presently,
while you, rather then you will (to rescue men from heathenisme caused by your
abolition) restore the Book again, and confess you have sinned in condemning
an innocent Liturgy, will appoint some Assembler, to compile a poor, sorry,
pitteous form of his own, of which I will appeal to your greatest flatterer, if
it be not so low that it cannot come into any terms of comparison, or
competition, with those forms already prescribed in our Book; and so still you
justify your error, even while you confess it.

now hoped that 'twill be no grief of heart to full Christians, if the thirsty
drink out of cisterns, when themselves drink out of fountains, etc. which is
the special part of that ground, on which we have first formed, and now
labored to preserve our Liturgy, on purpose that weak Ministers may not be
forced to betray their weakness, that they that have not the gift of Prayer
(as even in the Apostles time there were diverse gifts, and all Ministers had
not promise to succeed in all, but one in one, another in another gift by the
same spirit) may have the help of these common gifts, and standing treasures of
Prayer in the Church; and (because there be so many of these kinds to be looked
for in a Church) that those which are able to pray as they ought, without a
form, may yet in public submit to be thus restrained, to the use of so
excellent a form thus set before them, rather then others should be thus
adventured to their own temerity, or incur the reproach of being thought not
able; and then this providing for the weak, both Minister, and People, will not
now, I hope, be charged on the Liturgy, by those, who hope their supply of
Prayer will be no grief to others.

That these Prayers being enlivened, and sent up by the spirit in him that
prays, may be lively Prayers, and acceptable to him, who is a Spirit, and
accepts of service in spirit and truth. Where 1. it appears by that confession,
that as the place that speaks of worshipping in spirit and truth, is not of any
force against set prayers, so neither is that either of the Spirits helping our
infirmities, belonging as it is here confessed most truly, to the zeal, and
fervor, and intensenes of devot^^^ ^nfused by the Spirit, (and not to the words
wherein the address (...) (...) which if the Spirit may not infuse also in the
use of our Liturgy, and assist a Minister and Congregation in the Church, as
well and as effectually as a company of Mar^mers in a ship, I shall then
confess that the Directory first, and then this Supply, may be allowed to turn
it out of the Church.

That in truth though Prayers come never so new even from the Spirit, in one
that is a guide in Prayer, if the Spirit do not quicken and enliven that Prayer
in the hearer that follows him, it is to him but a dead form, and a very
carcass of Prayer, which words being really what they say, a truth, a perfect
truth, and more soberly spoken then all or any period in the Preface to the
Directory, I shall oppose against that whole Act of abolition, as a ground of
confutation of the principal part of it, and shall only add my desire, that
it be considered what Prayers are most likely to be thus quickened and enlivened
by the Spirit in the hearer those that he is master of, and understands and
knows he may join in, or those which depend wholly on the will of the Speaker,
which perhaps he understands not, and never knows what they are, till they
are delivered, nor whether they be fit for him to join in; or in plainer words,
whether a man be likely to pray, and ask most fervently he knows not what, or
that which he knows, and comes on purpose to pray. For sure the quickening and
enlivening of the Spirit, is not so perfectly miracle, as to exclude all use of
reason or understanding to prepare for a capacity of it, for then there had
been no need to have turned the Latin Service out of the Church, the Spirit
would have quickened those Prayers also,

CHAP. III.
HAving thus past through the Ordinance and the Preface, and in the view of the
Ordinance stated and settled aright the comparison betwixt the Liturgy and the
Directory, and demonstrated the no-necessity, but plain unreasonablenesse of
the change, and so by the way insisted on most of the defects of the Directory,
which are the special matter of accusation we prosesse to find in it, I shall
account it a Superfluous importunity to proceed to a review of the whole body
of it, which makes up the bulk of that Book, but instead of insisting on the
faults and infirm parts of it (such are, the prohibition of adoration toward
any place, p. 10. that is of all adoration, while we have bodies about us for
that must be toward some place; the interdicting of all parts of (...)
^^ochryphal Books, p. 12. which yet the Ancient Church avowed to be read for
the directing of manners, though not as rule of Faith, the frequent motion of
the Covenant in the directions for Prayer, once as a special mercy of God, p.
17. which is the greatest curse could befall this Kingdom, and a great
occasion, if not Author of all the rest, which are now upon it, then as a
means of a strict and religious Union, p. 21. which is rather an engagement of
an irreligious War; then as a precious band that men must pray that it never be
broken, p. 21. which is in effect to pray, that they may never repent, but
continue in Rebellion for ever. Then as a mercy again, p. 37. as if this
Covenant were the greatest treasure we ever enjoyed. Then the praying for the
Armies by Land and Sea, p. 38. with that addition [for the defense of King and
Parliament, and Kingdome] as resolving now to put that cheat upon God himself,
which they have used to their Fellow Subjects, that of fighting against the
King for the defense of him, (Beloved be not deceived, God is not mocked:) Then
affirming that the Fonts were superstitiously placed in time of Popery, and
therefore the Child must now be baptized in some other place, p. 40. while yet
they show not any ground of that accusation, nor ever will be able to do. Then
that the customs of kneeling and praying by, and toward the dead, is
superstitious, p. 73. which literally it were, (Superstitum cultus) if it were
praying to them, but now is far enough from that guilt. And lastly, that the
Lords day is commanded in the Scripture to be kept holy, p, 85. the
sanctification of which we acknowledge to be grounded in the Scripture, and
instituted by the Apostles, but not commanded in the Scripture, by any revealed
precept. (The first that we meet with to this purpose, is that of Ignatius,
Epist. ad Magnes. (...), Let us therefore Sabbatize no longer; Let every
Christian celebrate the Lords day, which saying of an Apostolic writer being
added to the mention of the Lords day in the New Testament is a great argument
of the Apostolic institution of that day, which the universal practice of the
Church ever since does sufficiently confirm unto us, and we are content and
satisfied with that authority, although it does not offer to show us any
command in the Scripture for it. And then you may please to observe, that the
same Ignatius, within a page before that place, foreciting for the observing of
the Lords day, has a command for Common Prayer, and I conceive for some set
Form, I shall give you the words, (...), Let all meet together to the same,
whether action or place in Prayer, Let there be one Common Prayer, one mind,
etc. and Cle^^. S^rom. l. ^
Alex. to the same purpose, the Altar which we have here on Earth, is the
company of those that dedicate themselves to Prayers, as having (...) a common
voice, and one mind, which cannot well be, unless there be some common Form by
all agreed on.) Instead I say of pressing these or the like frailties upon this
work, which will argue the Composers of it to be men and fallible. I shall
rather desire to express and evidence my charity (and my endeavor to read it
without any prejudice) by adding my opinion, that there be some things said in
it (by way of direction for the matter of Prayer, and course of Preaching)
which agree with wholesome doctrine, and may tend to edification, and I shall
not rob those of that approbation which is due to them, nor conceive our Cause
to need such p^evish means to sustain it; Being not thereby obliged to quarrel
at the Directory absolutely as a Book, but only as it supplants the Liturgy
(which if it had a thousand more excellencies in it then it has, it would not
be fit to do.) And being willing to give others an example of peaceablenesse,
and of a resolution to make no more quarrels then are necessary, and therefore
contributing my part of the endeavor to conclude this one as soon as is
possible. And the rather because it is in a matter, which (if without detriment
to the Church, and the Souls of men, the Book might be universally received,
and so the experiment could be made) would I am confident within very few years
as soon as the pleasure of the change and the novelty were over, prove it is own
largest confutation, confess it is own wants and faults; and so all but mad men
see the error, and require the restitution of Liturgy again. This I speak
upon a serious observation and pondering of the tempers of men, and the so
mutable habits of their minds, which as they are (...), easily changed from
good to evil, so are they (which is the difference of men from lap^st Angels)
(...), easily reduced also to their former state again, when reason comes to
them in the cool of the day, when the heat of the kindness is past, and a
sa^iety hastening in its stead, or if it prove not so well, yet falling from one
change to another, and never coming to stability. How possible this may prove
in this particular, I shall now evidence no farther, then by the parallel
vehement dislikes, that the Presbyteriall Government has already met with
among other of our reforming Spirits, very liberally expressed in many Pamphlets
which we have lately received from London, but in none more fully then in the
Epistle to the Book entitled, John Baptist: first charging the Presbyteriant
(who formerly exclaimed against Episc^pacy for stinking the spirit) that they
began to take upon them to establish a Dagon in his throne, in stinking the
whole worship of the God of Heaven, etc. and in plain words without mi^cing or
dissembling, that they had rather the French King, nay the great Turk should
rule over them, then these, The only use which I would now make of these
experiments is this, to admire that blessed excellent Christian grace of
obedience (and contentment with our present lot, whatsoever it be, that brings
not any necessity of sinning on us.) I mean, to commend to all in matters of
indifference, (or where Scripture has not given any immediate rule, but left
us to obey those who are set over us) that happy choice of submitting, rather
then letting loose our appetites, of obeying, then prescribing; A duty, which
besides the very great ease it brings withit, has much of virtue in it, and
will be abundant reward to it self here on Earth, and yet have a mighty arrear
remaining to be paid to it in Heaven hereafter; which when it is heartily
considered, it will be a thing of some difficulty to invent or feign a heavier
affliction to the meek and quiet spirit, a more ensuaring piece of treachery to
the Christian Soul, (I am sure to his Estate, and temporal prosperity) then
that of contrary irreconciliable commands, which is now the case, and must
always be when Ordinances undertake to supersede Laws, when the inferior, but
over-swaying power, adventures to check the Superior. Of which subject I have
temptation to annex a full tide of thoughts, would it not prove too much a
(...), and be most sure to be so esteemed by them to whom this address is now
tendered. The good Lord of Heaven and Earth incline our hearts to keep that Law
of his (...). Ephesians. 6. 2. which is a prime Commandment, and that with a
promise of secular Peace and abundance annexed (if not confined) to it.

To conclude therefore, and sum up all in a word, we have discovered by this
brief survey, the resonablenesse of this act of Gods providence, in permitting
our Liturgy to be thus defamed, though in all reason the Liturgy it self
deserve not that fate, the no-inconveniences so much as pretended to arise from
our Liturgy, to which the Directory is not much more liable, the no-objection
from the Word of God against the whole or any part of it produced, or offered
by you, the no-manner of the least or loosest kind of necessity to abolish it,
the perfect justifiablenesse, and withal usefulness of set Forms above
extemporary effusions, the very many particulars of eminent benefit to the
Church, and of authority in it, preserved in our Liturgy, but in the Directory
totally omitted, and that in the despite of all Statutes both of K. Edward,
and Q. Elizabeth, by which the Reformation of this Church is established among
us, and I trust shall still continue, notwithstanding the opposition of those
who pretended kindness, but now run riot against this Reformation; we have
showed you also the true grounds of our ancestors rejoicing in our Liturgy,
instead of the partial imperfect account given of that business by your
Preface, the wonderful prosperity of this Church under it, contrary to the
pretended sad experience, etc. and withal we have made it clear, that all the
exceptions here proposed against the Liturgy, are perfectly vain and causlesse;
as that it has proved an offense, etc. the ordinary crime charged on those
actions that are liable to no other, and so that offense without a cause; that
this offense has been by the length of the Service, which will only offend
the profane, and withal, is as observable in your Service; by the many
unprofitable burdensome Ceremonies, which have been showed neither to be many,
nor unprofitable, nor burdensome; by the disquieting of Consciences, i. e.
only of the unquiet; by depriving them of the Ordinance, i. e. those who would
rather loose the Sacrament, then receive it kneeling, or reverently; that the
offense was extended to the reformed Churches abroad also, and yet for that no
one proof offered, nor Church named that was so offended: and if there were,
yet still this supposed offensivenesse, no just plea for any thing but
Reformation. So also that by means of the Liturgy, many were debarred of the
exercise of their Ministry, the suggestion for the most part a mere calumny,
and that which was true in it, ready to be retorted upon these Reformers: that
the Prelates have labored to raise the estimation of the Liturgy too high, yet
that no higher then you would the value of your Directory, to have it the rule
for the manner of public worship, or if they did, this is the fault of those
Prelates, not of the Liturgy; who yet were said but to have labored it
neither, not to have effected it; and even that labor or desire of theirs, to
have amounted no higher then Calvin's letter to the Protector would avow; that
this has been to the justling out of Preaching, which is rather a special
help to it, and prescribes it, and allows it its proper place, but has often the
ill luck to be turned out by Preaching; that it has been made no better then
an Idol, which if it be a fault in the Liturgy, is as far more chargeable on
the hearing of Sermons that the people please themselves in their presence, and
lip-labor in that service; an uncharitable judging of men's hearts, and a crime
to which your Directory makes men as liable as the Liturgy; that our Liturgy is
a compliance with Papists, and so a means to confirm them in their Idolatry,
etc. whereas it complies with them in nothing that is Idolatrous, etc. and by
complying with them, where they do with antiquity and truth, it is more apt to
convince them of their errors, and by charity to invite, then by defiance; that
it makes an idle Ministry; which sure the Directory will not unmake, being as
fit for that turn, either by forming and conning the Prayer there delineated,
or by depending on present conceptions, as the Liturgy can be; that it hinders
the gift of Prayer, which if it signify the elocution, or conception of words
in Prayer, is not peculiar to the Minister, and for any thing else, hindering it
no more then the Directory does; that the continuance of it would be matter of
endless strifes etc. which sure it is more reasonable to think of an
introduction of a new way of Service, then the retaining of the old; that there
be many other weighty considerations, and many particulars in the book, on
which this condemnation is grounded, and yet not one of these mentioned, but
kept to boil in their own breasts, if there be any, or which is more likely,
falsely here pretended to inflame the reckoning; that they are not moved to
this by any love of novelty, and yet do that which is most novell; that they
intend not to disparage the Reformers, and yet do that which is most to their
disparagement; that they do this to answer Gods providence, which never called
them to this work, to satisfy their own Conscience, which if Erroneous, must
not thus be satisfied; to satisfy the expectation of other Churches which
expect it not, or if they did, might rather conform to us and satisfy us; and
the desires of many of the godly at home, whose piety is no assurance that
their desires are reasonable, and yet are not known to have expressed any such
desires; that they may give testimony of their endeavors for uniformity,
whereas with other Churches, there is no such necessity of conforming in such
matters, and within our selves, nothing is so contrary to uniformity, as this
endeavor. And lastly, we have learnt from them, a rule by which they pretend
to form their Directory, the agreeableness to the Word of God, and Christian
prudence, and are most confident to justify our Liturgy by that rule, against
all Disputers in the World; And having now over and above all this, a plain
confession under their own hands, in their Supply of Prayer, to justify all
that we pretend to, and so being saved the pains of any farther superfluous
confutation, we shall leave it to the judgment of any rational Layman in the
New Assembly, to judge betwixt us and his fellow Members; whose pretensions are
most moderate in this matter, whose most like Christian, those that are to
rescue and preserve, or those which to destroy. Thus in the Council of Nice,
holden before Constantine and Helena, in a controversy of great importance,
Craton and Zenosius, not only Laymen, but Heathens were appointed Judges or
Arbitratours, only on this ground, because Craton a Philosopher would not
possess any worldly goods, and Zenosimus in time of his Consulship, De council.
l. 2. c. 6.
never received Present from any, says Jacobosius: thus also Eutropius a Pagan
Philosopher, was chosen umpire between Orig^n and the Marcionites, it being
supposed, that such an one was as fit to understand their several claims, and
judge according to Allegations and proofs as any; And if we fall or misc^^ry
before such an Aristarch^s, I shall then resolve, that a Covenant may wast a
soul, (even drive the man into the field with Nebuchadnezar) deprive it of
those (...) common principles of discourse, (by which, till it be debauched, it
is (...), able in some measure, to judge of truth, proposed and debated before
it) and then I shall hope for more candor in the business from an intelligent
heathen, then from him. My only appeal in that case shall be to Heaven, that
the host of Angels, may by the Lord of that Host be appointed, to guard and
assist that cause, and those Armies whose pretentions in this, and all other
particulars, are most righteous, and most acceptable in his sight.

Do not err my beloved Brethren.

Now the Lord of all mercies, and God of love and Peace, grant us to be like
minded in all things, that we may join with one heart, and tongue, to praise
him, and worship him, to bless him, and to magnify him for ever.

FINIS.

