OF SCANDAL.

(...).

The second Edition.

OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL Printer to the UNIVERSITY. 1646.

OF SCANDAL.
Scandal or Offense, or to be Offended or Scandalized (as they are taken for
the same) need not seek into many authors for it. The new Testament, and the
Apocryphal books, and the Greek translation of the old Testament, are the
prime authors that have used these words, and all other later Christian writers
may justly be thought to have had them from that Fountain; ancient profane
writers not affording them. Scandal among them are either natural (as
generally in the old Testament,) or borrowed, (...)
i. e. metaphorical, (as cheifely in the new.) It naturally signifies 3
things. 1. A Trapp, a Gin, or Snare to catch any thing: So in the Greek
translation of Psalm. snare and gin, (...)
) and in our new translation is rendered a trapp: wherefore in the place of Romans
11. 9. where the same words are cited out of the Septuagints translation, and
not out of the Hebrew text of the Psalm, I should conceive it should be
rendered by analogy, not stumbling blocks, but gin, or some other word belonging
to this first signification. In this sense it is used 1 Mac. 5. 4. where it is
all one with snare, and it is farther interpreted by (laying wait by the way)
to catch them treacherously. So again Wisd: 14. 11. the word is used, and
explained by another word, signifying a trapp, or snare, the very same that was
used in the Psalms, and to the Romans.

Obstacle or hindrance laid in a man's way, by which the passenger is detained
or stopped, peculiarly a sharp Stake, such as in time of war men were wont to
put in the fields where their enemy should follow, to wound their feet or legs
in their passage: against which being so ordinary in war, they anciently used
greaves of brass to defend their feet or legs. 1 Samuel: 17. 6. to which you may
refer that Epithet so frequent in Homer, (...), and (...): to signify those
greaves brazen or otherwise, that the Grecians used; described by that Poet,
(...) by (...) made of tin, and covering the whole leg to the knee, of so
firm a substance that it made a loud noise at the stroke of the weapon on it.
(...) says he. Thus is the word (...) used, Judith. 5. 1. where we render it
impediments, a word somewhat too general to signify those sharp stakes or
other instruments to wound or gall the passengers, which are known to every
body: for which I believe we have some proper English word, I think it is a
gal trapp.

stone or block in the way, at which men are apt (if they be not careful, or
if they go in the dark) to stumble and fall: and thereupon in the old
Testament it is taken for a fall: and so sometimes for sin, the fall of the
soul, as Judith 12. 2. (where these words [left it be an offence] would more
clearly be rendered out of the Greek, left it become an offense, 1. a sin or
pollution, as you may see in the same matter which is there treated of Dan. 1.
8. Tob. 1. 11. and 1 Samuel 25. 31.) and sometimes for ruin or destruction, the
fall of the whole person, which we are brought to by sin, as Judith 5. 20.
our English renders it ruin, (...)
and Ps. 49. 13. where though we read folly, the Septuagint read Scandal, by
that rendering an Hebrew word which signifies both folly and ruin. I confess
this last acception of the word for ruin, is somewhat rare (yet authorized by
our English in the place of Judith) and therefore if any dislike it, I shall
not stand much upon it; because in both those places last mentioned it may well
enough signify sin, as that is a snare or stumbling block, an occasion of
ruin, or falling, or destruction, in which sense I conceive it is used, Judge:
8. 27. where it is rendered a snare, i. e. a sin ensnaring or occasioning ruin.

Psalm. 50. 20, for slander, or calumny, or defamation, (for so the Hebrew there
signifies) a sense which is vulgar amongst us in English; (...)
by a Scandal meaning a slander: but that sense being but once met with in the
whole Bible, or twice at most (Eccl. 27. 23. where yet I conceive the
translation might be mended) will not deserve to be taken into consideration.

(...).
is known to have used it; only Arist ophanes once a word near it. This being
premised, 'twill be worth our pains (at least by so doing we shall put the
whole matter beyond exception) to survey briefly all the places in the new
Testament, where the word is used.

Matt. 13. 41. the Angels shall gather out all Scandalls: it is in a sense
borrowed from the second mentioned signification of a sharp stake, which he
who has once met with and been galled by it, is wont to gather up and cast
into the fire, as there it follows the Angels for our sakes should do, v: 24.
(to which Saint Paul also seems to allude 2 Cor: 11. 29. in putting
Scandalizing and burning together) and denotes simply whatsoever may wound or
gall us in our Christian course, and by that means foreslow our pace, cause us
to slacken, or give over, or lie down in the service of Christ, so Mat. 17.
27. Christ paies tribute, that he may not offend the Jews, i. e. that they
might not think him a Contemner of the Temple, to which the Tribute was due,
and so forsake and not beleeeve in him; that he might not discourage them from
following him. So Mat. 15. 12. the Pharisees hearing a doctrine that galled
them particularly, were offended and forsook him, that doctrine drove them
away from following him. So again (Mat. 18. 7.) it must needs be that
offenses come, which seems to refer to false doctrines and heresies, if you
compare that verse with 1 Cor: 11. 19. there must he Heresies (and Romans 16. 17.
where offenses are said to be contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, and that they
must be avoided, as the Heretic must Tit: 3. 10.) So in Polycarpus's Epist. to
the Philipp. p. 20. where (...) is joined with (...) etc.
the venting of which of all things most hinders others in their Christian
course, but whether it be meant peculiarly of Heresies, or exemplary sins, it
matters not. To which soever you apply it, another place, Luke 17. 1. will
belong unto it also, being the place directly parallel to it. So Mat: 18. 6. He
that shall offend one of these little ones. i. e. he that shall occasion their
falling off into any sin; or, which the place especially imports, by contemning
them, discourage them from the study of piety. For so on the contrary side to
receive them, v. 5. is by Saint Mark 9. 41. expressed to consist in doing them
kindness, to encourage them in the ways of godliness. So Christ crucified is
said a Scandal to the Jews, i. e. they that were otherwise not ill opinion'd
of him, and so followed him with the multitudes, when they saw him crucified,
were quite discouraged, and fell away from him, (as they that are so galled by
those stakes are feign to give over the pursuit, to return) and so resolved,
seeing him dye, that he was not the Messiah whom they expected, a glorious
temporal deliverer. To which belongs that notable place Mat. 11. 6. Luk: 7.
23. Blessed is he that shall not be offended in me, i. e. shall not be galled
and discouraged, and so fall off by seeing the sufferings that befall me, and
await my disciples or followers. So again Mat: 13. 57. Mark. 6. 3. It is said,
that the consideration of his known and mean birth occasioned their being
offended in him, i. e. their deserting and not believing of him, when the
miracles which he had done inclined them somewhat to a valuing of him. So John
6. 61. When Christ talks of eating the flesh of the son of man, they were
offended, (that is) that speech carnally understood (either that Christ was to
dye, (which the eating his flesh presupposed, and they did not like to hear
of; dreaming of a temporal glorious Messiah) or that they were to turn
Caniballs, and eat man's flesh,) discouraged them from following him, at least
from taking him for the Messiah. So Gal: 5. 11. persecution is called the
Scandal of the Cross, or that upon which so many are discouraged from
professing the crucified Savior, according to that in the parable of the
sower, Mat: 13. 21. Mark: 4. 17. upon the coming of persecution presently he is
offended, i. e. galled and falls off, and Mat. 24. 10. on the same occasion,
and in the same sense. So Mat. 26. 31. Mark. 14. 27. this night (to wit of my
attachement) Ye shall all be offended because of me. i. e. fall back, for
sake me: and so in Saint Peter's answer, v. 23. Although all men should be
offended, yet will I never be offended: upon which, that which Christ rejoynes
(before the Cock crow; i. e. before morning, or day break, all one with this
night, v 31. thou shall deny me thrice) is an interpretation of the word
offended, and shows, that to be offended, is to deny Christ. And so Joh. 16.
1. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended; where
Christ foretells the persecutions that should befall them, that they might be
forewarned too, and not fall off, when they befall them.

Scandal in a Metaphorical borrowed sense belongs, and of all of them, and
each, you may observe.

Scandal signifies either some sin, the occasion of farther sin in others; or
else somewhat else, which though it be not sin, yet occasions sin in
others, though very indirectly sometimes, as the Cross of Christ: and whether
in one or other, the rule will be, that he that is offended or Scandalized,
does directly commit some sin, and that, for most of the places, the sin of
infidelity, or forsaking, or denying Christ.

Scandalized, falling off from Christ, (or the effect which follows that
occasion,) has no reflection or influence (in any of the places) on that which
was the occasion; so as to make it sinful or avoydable, if it were not so
before, (as will appear to any that will survey the places) and consequently
that another being Scandalized is not sufficient to lay a charge on him whose
action (otherwise not chargeable or criminous) was the occasion of his being
scandalized. Let the Cross of Christ, with which so many were in this sense
scandalized, suffice for a proof of this.

snare or gin to catch one in. So Mat. 16. 23. Thou art an offense unto me, i.
e. by expressing thy detestation against my sufferings, thou labourest to bring
me into an horror and fear of suffering, and so in effect temptest me to
sin; where you must mark, that though Peter were an offense to Christ, that
is, tempted him, labored to ensnare him, yet Christ was not Scandalized,
offended, ensnared, or overcome by the temptation. In the same sense is that
Revel: 2. 14. of Balaam who taught Balaack (...), we render it to cast a
stumbling block; but sure it is most clearly, to lay a snare before the
Children of Israel, to entice them by their Daughters to Idolatry, and by
Idolatry to entrap and destroy them.

Scandal is so perfectly all one with Temptation, that, as a learned man has
observed, Lud: de Deiu (...)
the Ethiopick interpreter of the new Testament, instead of Scandal puts a
word that signifies Temptation, from (...)
and the same that in the Lords prayer is put for Temptation: in this sense is
that of the eye and the foot offending us. Mat. 5. 29. 18. 8. Mark: 9. 47. i.
e. when a man's eye, or any other member of his body proves a snare to him, an
inlet to temptations, a means of bringing him to any sin.

Scandal: but as Satan tempted him, Matthew. 4. yet he yielded not, but overcame
the tempter: So here he uses that other Satan: for to have been offended in
this sense had been all one with being overcome by a temptation.

de facto appear that they did) though no body be taken in it, as he that
tempts to evil commits a sin, though his temptation prove not effectual.
The setting of a snare being a positive act, a note of a treacherous design,
though it do not succeed. And therefore in 1 Macchab. 1, 36. the laying of
snares for to entrap the Israelites, or bring them from observing the Law, is
called there by the devils name, an evil Adversary, (...).
or as the Greek has it, a devil to Israel.

stumbling block, so when the word stone is joined with it, or the Greek word
that signifies stumbling, (...).
so Romans 9. 33. Christ is called a stumbling block, a rock of offense, i. e.
an occasion of fall, or sin in many, and consequently of increasing their
condemnation, as he says, if he had not come, etc. they had not had sin, i.
e. had not been so great sinners, had not been guilty of the great sin of
unbeleife, and crucifying of Christ: and therefore Simeon prophecies of Christ,
that he would be for the fall of many in Israel; many sins his coming should
be the occasion of. So Romans 14. 13. That no man lay a stumbling block, or
scandal (which we render an occasion of falling) in his brothers way, that is,
do or practice any thing, that may bring another that comes after him, upon his
nose, or to commit any sin. So 1 Pet. 2. 8. Christ is called a stone of
stumbling, and rock of offense, at which to stumble is to be disobedient to
Christ, so To. 14. 21. stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak, i. e. by
following thee, does fall, commits some sin, does some act unlawful for him,
(though simply it were not for thee; it being against his Conscience, though
not against thine) and so by falling bruises and weakens himself, makes
himself less able for Gods service, then he was: for so every sin against
Conscience being a greiveing the spirit, is consequently the spiritual
weakening of the man, or if you will (as in St James (...) signifies c. 5. 14.)
the wound or disease of the soul. So again, 1 Cor. 8. 9. stumbling block to
the weak, and v. 13. where the case is clearly the same that we last
mentioned: that if any man by doing any indifferent thing (which he in
Conscience is informed to be perfectly lawful for him to do) shall occasion
another man's sin by doing that after him which he is not resolved to be
lawful, that man offends against that charity due to his brother, and
therefore must think fit to deny himself the use of that liberty which Christ
has given him. To this may belong that other place, 1 Jo. 2. 10. where that
phrase (there is no Scandal in him) seems to signify, falls not into those
sins that ignorant men or uncharitable (who are said in the Antithesis, v.
11. to walk in the dark) are subject unto. One place more there is belonging
to this purpose, where though the word Scandal be not used in the Text, yet
(...), offense, is used, and that I confess to be all one, and it is 2 Cor. 6.
3. giving no offense in any thing; where yet offense is interpreted by Beza,
quippiam ad quod possint impingere any thing that others may stumble at, or be
alien'd from the Gospel by; as if we fail in any Christian duty (mentioned v.
4. 5. 6.) they that see us, would be apt to do: and so that which follows
imports also (that the ministry be not blamed) that is, that our Actions be not
justly reprehended or found fault with, but in all things approving our selves,
etc.

offended, sins himself, stumbles, and falls, and bruises himself, and 2.
that he that is the occasion of his fall does not always sin (for Christ, and
grace, and that which should have been for their wealth, proves to many an
occasion of falling) but yet sometimes he does: as if he purposely in a matter
indifferent, when he might have chosen, does any thing which another whose
Conscience is doubtful, does after him* and so sins; nay if he do not
abstain from that indifferent action, when he sees that consequent likely to
follow; nay if he be not careful to observe, whether the consequent be likely
to follow, and if so, to abstain. This third sort of Scandal you see is
applied peculiarly to one kind of actions, those by the doing of which another
coming after, and doing the same, falls into sin, as when either the example
was sinful, or being indifferent in it self is against the other man's
conscience, and so being imitated by him, is in him a sin against conscience,
and not indifferent. And then

unlawful, yet very apt to be mistaken by other men, for somewhat else which
is unlawful; and see it strongly probable, that those which will be apt so to
mistake, will be as apt also by occasion of this action of mine, to commit that
other sin which they conceive me to have committed, or to confirm and harden
themselves in that sin through that mistaken example of mine, which they might
otherwise probably have reformed, if they had not received encouragement by
this action of mine; And if question be made, what is to be thought of this. I
answer, that although I am not sure that that place of Scripture in our English
Bibles which commands [to abstain from all appearance of evil,] 1 Thessalonians. 5.
22.
does come home to this purpose, (because (...) which we render [from all
appearance] may bear another sense, and signify no more then from every kind
or sort of evil, for so both the Greek (...), and latin species import; and
with all, appearance of evil is so uncertain, and inconstant a thing, that to
abstain from it universim cannot be matter of any possible command. And
again, though I dare not from that other precept of (...), whatsoever is of
good report, Phil. 4. 8. conclude it unlawful to do any thing which has the
ill luck to be of ill report, i. e. to be mistaken for a sin (because 1.
there is no prohibition in that place interdicting the doing of every thing
which is of ill report, 2. no analogy of other Christian rules to infer such
prohibition, it being rather the fate of all Christian virtues to be evil
spoken of, and the receiving the praise of men, being branded by Christ as
unreconcileable with beleiving, 3. because some actions of Christ were of ill
report, particularly that of eating and drinking with publicans and sinners,
(which rendered him suspected for a glutton) and that of casting out of Devils
(which was defamed for sorcery or compact with Beelzebub,) 4. because that
which is of ill report with one, may be of good report with a thousand others,
and there the judgment of that one will not be considerable against those
thousand to defame an innocent laudable action) yet still I conceive that the
great obligation to (...) and (...), loving of all men, and desiring the good
of their souls, which lies upon all Christians (by force of Christ's example,
and legacy, and precept of charity) will extend so far, as to have the force
of precept, that every man abstain from such purely indifferent actions (being
so in themselves, and then by the Magistrate uncommanded) which he foresees
will be thus mistaken for unlawful by those who are likely to be moved by his
example to commit those sins which they conceive him to have committed; this
being an inseparable attendant of my charity to my brothers soul, to use all
lawful means which my conscience tells me will be to his ghostly health, or
preservation.

commendable, though not commanded; of use, though not of necessity; and such
as extra causam scandali I should on pious considerations be moved to choose,
or practice: and in this case, if it be demanded whether that sole fear of
scandal ought to restrain me from that which all other motives rather incline
me to, and so make me abstain; or whether I should rather claim the
privilege of my Christian liberty, and that make me not to abstain. I answer,
that a middle course may yet be better, then either extreme crudely taken: that
is, that I ought to do my best to free this laudable indifferent action of mine
from the evil color that it is capable of, by rectifying his judgment whom I
discern to be mistaken in it, and by declaring (either expressly, or by some
significative character of my intentions fastened to my action) the clearenesse
and innocence of my purposes to any other that may be so mistaken; and by so
doing if I cannot free my self from his uncharitable censure, yet I shall be
sure to keep him from any danger of following me to that sin; for sure my very
disclaiming of that sin which he suspects me guilty of, will divest that sin of
all authority which it may receive from my committing it, and not invite, but
rather deter and fortify others from falling into that sin, which they see
disavowed and disliked by me. For if my authority be of any force with them, it
will persuade them to abstain from that which I disclaim, and profess my
self to hate (who certainly know my own mind best) rather then to do, what
they only conceive I do, but I profess I do not. And therefore the case being
thus set of the commendable useful indifferent, not of the mere frivolous
unconsiderable, when the use and gain of my action to me is certain, and the
danger of being mistaken by others at most but possible, and that also
preventable by these other means, neither piety nor prudence will advise to
abstain from that healthful food, which if it be by accident unhealthfull by
others, has yet an antidote administered with it. Which will be yet farther
heightened also, if this laudable indifferent fall out to be such as the
examples of holy men in scripture, or the practice of the Church in purer times
have given countenance to, especially if the perpetual current of antiquity
have commended it to us: for certainly these will be of great authority with
all prudent pious men, and the more early and Catholic that practice, the
greater that authority.

compliance with the heathen customs of Idolaters. Such was that prohibition
Ex. 34. 26. thou shall not sees a kid in the mothers milk, in the sacrifice
of the in-gathering; given no doubt in opposition to the Gentile practice of
those which at the time of gathering in their fruits, solemnly used this
custom of seething a kid in the dammes milk, and then in a Magical way
sprinkled their trees and fields, and gardens with it to make them fructify
the next year, as Abrab^nel, and others out of Jewish writers have observed.
Such was also the prohibition. Lev. 19. 27. against rounding the corners of
their heads, in reference to the (...), or, (...) the round cut used by the
Arabians, Thal. c. 8.
says Herodotus, and thereupon forbidden the Jews, and a woe pronounced Jere.
9. 26. (...), etc. on every one that was so cut round, Si adjuverit tonsorem,
De Idol. c. 12.
says Maimonides, if he directed, or willingly permitted the Barber to put him
into that heathenish guise: And many others in the Old Testament of the like
nature, and the following Rabbis have added many more directions, if not
precepts of the same nature. That one book of Maimonides concerning Idolatry
will furnish the Reader with store of examples: but some such as do not so well
become the gravity of that author; c. 3.
as that, If the Jew has a thorn in his foot, when he is near an Idol he
must not stoop to take it out. c. 7.
If a tree have been worshipped, or an Idol set in it, it is not lawful to sit
in the shade of the trunk or body of that tree, though of the boughs or
leaves it be lawful, if there be any other way it is not lawful to pass
under it; if none, then he must run by it, Dionysius Vossius in his notes on
that author has added some parallel passages out of other Jewish writers as
that of R. Menasse. who being showed an Idol, did in contempt cast stones at
it, which action of his, because the Image was the image of Mercury (who was
wont to be worshipped by the Heathens after that manner, by throwing stones at
it, or scattering stones before him, to which custom or ceremony the
Mercuriall Statues refer, says Phornutus (...) was therefore noted, accused,
brought before the Judge, and by him pronounced to be unlawful, because it was
the proper worship of that Idol, though used in despite, not civility by that
man. So again, if there be but one way to an Idolatrous City, it is unlawful
to go that way, Aboda Zara c. 1.. 4. and so, says he, the Hebrews in Robbot
mention a tradition, that the reason why Mordochai would not bow to Haman was
because there was woven in his garment the image of a false God.

practice of the ancient Christian Church (mentioned by Tertullian de Cor.
mil.) to this purpose of absteining from things indifferent, for fear of any
appearing compliance with the Heathens. Of which yet it must be observed 1 that
this was in things of no manner of spiritual use or profit, neither
commendable, nor advantageous, in things of ancient Christian prescription, or
practice of purer times. 2 that it was in matters of such a quality, as that
compliance would have seemed a dissembling or renouncing of the Christian
faith, (and not of imitating of former purer Christians) and so contrary to
that great Christian duty of confessing Christ before men, which they could not
be said to do, who when that confession was persecuted, did thus comply with or
not profess open dislike of the actions of those persecuters. And so those
instances will not be so proper to the matter of Scandal, as to that other
head of Christian duty the necessity of confessing of Christ before men, (those
especially who are the greatest oppugners of him, to which matter also those
other Judaicall instances do belong) unless that non-confessing of Christ, may
by the example scandalize also. 3 That the same men thought it not amiss, or
unlawful at other times to comply with other as great enemies of Christianity,
as the Gentiles, namely with the Jews in observation of some of their
out-dated ceremonies, nay thought themselves obliged so to do, when in prudence
they conceived it more likely to gain those enemies by that means, then to
confirm them in their dislikes of Christianity, or drive others to those
dislikes. 4 That even with the Heathen themselves they could in other things
think fit to comply also, when prudence dictated that compliance as more
isntrumental to Christian policy; and from these premises 5 that this whole
matter is to be referred to the Christians pious discretion or prudence, it
being free to him either to abstain or not to abstain from any indifferent
action (remaining such) according as that piety, and that prudence shall
represent it to be most charitable and beneficial to other men's souls; and he
that shall not thus regulate his actions by what he is convinced will be thus
most conducting to that grand Christian end, the saving, or not destroying, or
not suffering sin upon his brother, shall not by me be excused from the guilt
and blame of having Scandalized his brother in this last new Testament sense,
at least in some other which is not far distant from it; though after all this
it must be observed, that he which thus is betrayed to, or confirmed in any sin
by conceiving me to have committed it, when I have not, (this easy prostitute
seducible sinner who will thus sin upon any, upon no occasion) is not Saint
Paul's weak, i. e. doubtfull-conscienc'd Christian, of whom he takes such care,
that he should not be scandalized.

Romans 14. with 1 Cor. 8. where the (...) in one, is all one with the (...) in
the other, weakness in faith, with want of knowledge.

Paul to be so tenderly handled, not to be vilified, or set at naught To. 14.
3. but care taken that they be not scandalized in the end of that chapt: and 1
Cor. 8. and yet in the Epistle to the Galatians, they are by the Apostle
reviled [O foolish etc.] c. 3. 1. and chid and reproached out of their
Judaicall performances, and no care taken of not scandalizing them. The
answering of this will require us to consider the different estate of those
Galatians from those Romans. The Galatians had been formerly Gentiles, and
(though as it seems not improbable from Gal. 4. 9. formerly converted to
Judaisme, yet) by Saint Paul thoroughly converted from thence and baptized into
Christianity, as that is opposite both to Judaisme and Gentilisme also, i. e.
fully instructed by him in the nature of Christian doctrine, and liberty, and
had given up their hearts as well as names unto it, only after they had been
begotten by Saint Paul in the Gospel, had begun in the spirit, Gal. 3. 3. had
come to an absolute abrenunciation of all their former Jewish persuasions, and
to some good progress in Christianity, some false Judaizing teachers began to
corrupt and poison them, Gal. 3. 1. and 5. 7 and to bring them back again to
that yoke, that they had been taught to cast off; and these taires the Apostle
could hope by reprehensions and sharpness to root out without endangering the
wheat, and therefore sets severely and heartily to it, thinks not fit either
in civility or charity to use any compliances, or condescendings, or softer
medicines, (knowing their errors to be contrary to the doctrine to which they
had been baptized, and consequently that they might in reason give place unto
it, and there was no fear that the rooting out of these would root out
Christianity with them, as it might probably do, if they had been sowed or
planted together, but imployes all his vehemence and bowels of kindness toward
them, in conjuring out that evil spirit that had so lately got possession of
them, and doubts not but Christianity that was earlier planted in them, (and
that by him who had begotten them in the Gospel, and so had a paternall
authority with them) then these vain legal dreams, that some false teachers
had lately instilled into them, might be able to survive them also. And in this
case being to deal with adversaries and false teachers, not with weakelings,
but corrupters, had the Apostle used any compliance, had he circumcised Titus
Gal. 2. 3. (as at another time he did Timothy) had he then given place but for
an hour, v. 5. suspended the use of his liberty then, when liberty was
decryed, this had been scandalous in the Apostle, this had probably been the
confirming of the erroneous, the encouraging of the adversary, the misleading
of the doubtful, shaking the faithful, and disturbing what he had before
settled among them.

abstinences (...), says Saint Chrysostom in prooem. ad ep ad Romans but
continued their obligation to the law after receiving of the faith. being some
of them (as may appear by the matter of Saint Paul's disc^urse to them, in the
former part especially of that Epistle) natural Jews, dispersed thither; who
could not be easily brought to assent to such doctrine, but would probably have
refused to embrace Christianity, if it had been offered them on such hard
conditions, some others of them (who were Gentiles by birth) being perhaps
proselytes to Moses and Christ together, partakers of the infelicity of those
who are mentioned, Act: 15. 5. that by the doctrine of the Pharisee. Christians
(or beleivers of the sect of the Pharisees) had at their entrance on the faith,
a necessity of receiving Judaisme also pressed upon them. This Saint Paul
testifies clearly of Saint Peter, Gal. 2. 14. that he constrained the Gentiles
to Judaize, to receive the Mosaicall as well as Christian law, and himself
durst not converse or eat with the Gentiles whilst any Jewish Christians were
by, v. 12. by which whether doctrine or compliance of Saint Peter, it was no
strange thing if it came to pass, that those which were by him converted to
the faith, (as Eusebius and other Ecclesiasticke historians agree that the
Romans were, vid. Ec. hist. l. 2. c: 14, and 15.) although they were Christians
in the positive part, acknowledging so much as was answerable to the
now-articles of the Creed, etc. yet being not so in the negative, concerning
the evacuating of the Judaicall law (but rather persuaded of the contrary)
could no more eat swines flesh, then a mere Jew could do; and therefore it is
Saint Chrysostom's opinion that these being so wedded to those Judaicall
observances, rather then they would eat forbidden flesh, would in universum
eat no flesh at all, (...), and so came to eat nothing but Herbs, Romans 14.
2.

weak in faith, v. 1. that is either infirm, feeble, uninstructed Christians,
babes not men; or else; (as the fathers enlarge the sense, and as weakness
(...) mostly imports in the new Testament) sick and diseased in mind, brought
up in this Judaicall error, the Apostle To. 14. gives these directions. 1. That
the stronger, healthfuller, i. e. more knowing and more Orthodox Christians
should (...) (the vulgar read assumere) take them to them, first freindly to
afford them communion, and not separate from them for this error, 2. labor to
cure their malady, get them out of their error, and not leave them in the
pride and folly of their own hearts, to judge and censure those who have done
nothing amiss, but rather desire their good (which Saint Chrysostom
understands by (...), and so Saint Jerome also, intending it thus, Nolite
secundum vestras cogitationes, quae lex non judicat judicare, alius enim credit
etc.) and from that verse observes, that though the Apostle exhorts the strong,
yet he covertly reprehends, and on their backs as it were whips, the weak or
erroneous Judaizers, first in saying they are sick, 2. in bidding (...) which
is an evidence says he, (...) that they are in very ill case, and 3. in
mentioning (...) which notes (says he) that they judge and censure those that
least deserve it, and that are willing to communicate with them, and labor the
curing of them; and indeed that these weak ones did so judge the strong is
plain, v. 3. where the exhortation is distinct, let not him that eats not,
judge him that eats.) 2. That the knowing again should not vilify or set at
naught the weaker [(...) v. 3.] not call him Racha, empty senseless fellow,
not reproach or scoff at his scrupulous conscience, but in charity suppose it
to proceed from want of knowledge only, and consequently to have the excuse
and benefit of that Gospel antidote, weakness or ignorance to plead for it,
3. That the stronger Christians (which although they have liberty, yet are not
obliged always to make use of it) abstain from those lawful enjoyments which
those weak ones, which count them unlawful, may yet by their example be
emboldened against Conscience to venture on.

weak or sick erroneous Christian, that cannot with a good Conscience use
that liberty himself, is commanded. 1. (...) that he do not judge or censure
the strong, upon a reasons: 1. because (...), v. 3. God has by calling him to
the faith, assumed or received the strong (as that strong had been exhorted to
do the weak v. 1.) (...) to freindship or communion first, (as (...) is used
Philem. 12.) then to help and cure him of his former defect or disease, and
bring him to perfect health and growth in Christianity: and 2dly. because he is
Gods servant and domesticke, and stands and falls to his own Master v. 4. 2ly.
That he be sure never to do any thing against Conscience, or which he is not
fully persuaded in mind, that it is lawful for him.

to add much about the Corinthians in the almost parallel place 1 Cor. 8. This
only difference will be worth noting between them, that (as there were two
sorts of proselytes among the Jews, one of Justice, or of those that
undertook the observation of the whole Judaicall law; the other of the Gates,
those that received only the precepts of the sons of Noah, of which the
absteining from things offered to Idols was one, and as when the difference was
betwixt the brethren, Act. 15. whether the Gentile-converts should be
circumcised v. 1. i. e. be admitted proselytes of Justice, or only receive the
7 precepts of Noah, abstain from things offered to Idols etc: v. 19 it was
determined in the Council of the Apostles, that it should suffice, if they
were proselytes of the gates, and therefore they tell them that if they thus be
entered, abstain from things offered to Idols, etc. they shall do well, so)
the Romans being either Jews, or under the first head of Jewish proselytes, in
St Chrysostomes opinion, and so thinking themselves bound to all legal
Mosaicall abstinences, the Corinthians were only under the second, and so by
their principles, which they had received of those, who converted, baptized,
and begot them in the faith, (and that according to the result of that
Apostolic consultation Act. 15.) did continue to think it unlawful to eat
any thing offered to Idols, or that came from an Idol feast (which yet by the
way St Paul resolves was but an error in them, 1 Cor. 8. 4. and by that
judgment of his you see the unobligeingnesse of that interdict, Act. 15.) and
therefore (in like manner, as before) those, that were better instructed then
they, ought to have that charity to them, as not to do any thing in their
presence which might by the example draw them to venture on that which was
against their conscience, especially considering, that they had not knowledge
or understanding enough to judge how nothing an Idol was v: 7.

Chrysostom observes to be the cause of the like difference in Saint Paul's
behavior to the Colossians from that forementioned to the Romans. It is a
special passage in his prooeme to the Epistles. Where having mentioned the
order wherein the Epistles were written, different from the order of setting
them in our books, concludes that this was no unprofitable disquisition, for
thereby many passages in the book would be interpreted: As, that Romans 14. he
condescends to the weak brethren, but not so Col. 2. which says he was for no
other reason, but because, that to the Romans was written before the other, and
therefore as Physicians and Masters deal not so sharply with Scholars or
Patients at first, as afterward, so the Apostle in the beginning (...), adding
that he was not so familiar with the Romans as yet, having never been amongst
them at the time of writing that Epistle to them, as appears To. 115.

weak (either in the notion of babes or sick men) so that they are not able
to discern lawful from unlawful (as the Idol to be nothing 1 Cor. 8. 7.)
merely for want of sufficient instruction, or somewhat proportionable to that,
principles of understanding, or the like; but especially if they received those
errors or mistakes together with their Christianity from the Apostle, or from
the Church which gave them baptism, they must then, 1 in meekness be
instructed, and cured of their ill habit of soul: 2. not be vilified or
reproacht: yea thirdly be so charitably considered, that till they have
received satisfaction of conscience and reformation of error, we are not to do
any thing in their presence, that may by the example bring them to do what
their conscience is not persuaded to be lawful, or if we do, we are said to
scandalize a weak brother, i. e. an erroneous Christian. But then withal it is
as clear: 1 That those who have first received the true doctrine, and are for
some good time rooted in it, that are otherwise taught by the Church that gave
them baptism, are not within the compass of this the Apostles care, but (as
the Galathians) to be reprehended, chid, and shamed out of their childish
errors, these diseases of soul that their own itching ears have brought upon
them: 2 That they that have knowledge in other things, nay are able to
distinguish as critically as any, even to divide a person from himself, and
obey one when they assault the other, (and by their subtlety in other matters
demonstrate their blindness in this one to be the effect of malice, of
passion, of lusts, of carnality, and not of any blameless infirmity or
impotence,) are again excluded from the Apostles care: and so thirdly that
they that are come to these errors by the infusions of false teachers, which
not the providence of God but their own choice has helped them to, preferring
every new poison before the ancient daily food of souls, have no right to that
care or providence of the Apostle, any farther then every kind of sinner has
right to every thing in every fellow Christians power which may prevent or cure
his malady, i. e. by the general large rule of charity, and not the closer
particular law of Scandal. Nay fourthly, that the case may be such, and the
adversaries of Christian liberty, the opposers of the use of lawful ceremonies
so contrary to weak blameless mistakers, that it may be duty not to allow
them the least temporary compliance, but then to express most zeal in
retaining our lawful indifferent observances, to vindicate our liberty from
enslavers when the truth of Christ would be disclaimed by a cowardly
condiscending, the adversaries of our faith confirmed and heightened, and the
true weakeling seduced, (a copy of which we read in St Peter's (...), Gal. 2.
12. and Barnabat and the Jewish converts being carried away with it. v. 13.
falling by his example into the same fault of dissimulation pusillanimity,
non-profession of the truth) which is a most proper kind of scandal, as
frequent and incident, as any, and so being as dangerous, as fit also to be
prevented. To which I might add a fifth proposition also, That the Apostles
speech of scandal Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8. has been thought by holy men among
the ancients to have much of civility in it, at the most to be but an act of
Apostolical care for those weak ones, (proportionable to those which in other
places he prescribes for every other kind of sinner) both which are far
enough from being able to infer any claim or challenge of those weak for
themselves, any farther then what the first part of it amounts to, that of
instruction; or at least the second, that of not being vilified, as the sick
has right to the Physician, to cure him and not to reproach him, civilly to
get him out of his malady, i. e. to rectify not to scoff at his mistake. For
that he should challenge any right to the third part of that care, that he
should restrain me from the use of my lawful liberty, because else he will
sin against his own conscience, do after me what he resolves unlawful to do,
supposes a wilful sin of his to be to him a foundation of dominion over me,
and so that every man that will thus damn himself, does for that merit and
acquire command over me, which if it be supposed, is sure as wild an
extravagant irregular way to power, as that of its being founded in gratia, or
any that these worst days experience has taught us.

Scandal in the stricter notion of it, by way of farther caution and
restraint, and it is this, that

offended, stumbling and falling in this third and last sense, is not to be
extended to all kinds of sins, which a man may commit upon occasion of another
man's indifferent action; but only to that one kind, that consists in doing that
after him, either doubting or against Conscience, which he did with an
instructed Conscience; or at most to this other kind also, of doing some
unlawful thing which another lawful action was yet by mistake conceived to
give authority to; and which that man probably would not have done, had not
that mistaken example thus emboldened him. For if all sins that by any
accident might be occasioned by my indifferent action, should come under the
nature of being offended or scandalized, consequently I must be interdicted all
indifferent actions at all times, because at all times each of them may
occasion (by some accident) some sin in another: and 'twill be impossible for
me to foresee or comprehend all such accidents that may occasion such sins. An
action of mine may by accident produce a contrary effect; my fasting from flesh
may move another (that dislikes me) by way of opposition to me, to eat flesh,
though in Conscience he be persuaded he ought not; as in philosophy there is a
thing called Antiperistasis (by which excessive cold produces heat) and
equivocall generations, as when living creatures are begotten of dust and
slime: and for such accidental, perhaps contrary productions, no law makes
provision, no care is effectual: only for those effects, that per se, of their
own accord are likely to follow (as transcribing a Copy is a proper consequent
only to the writing of it) these the law of the Apostle belongs to, and to them
our care and spiritual prudence must be joined, so that we do nothing, though
to us never so lawful, which we have reason to fear, that another who thinks
it unlawful, may yet, without satisfying his Conscience, be likely to do after
us, or on occasion of which he may probably do something else, which otherwise
he would not venture to do.

Scandal it is clear. 1. That no man is offended or scandalized, but he that
falls into some sin, and therefore to say I am scandalized, in the Scripture
sense is to confess I have done that which I ought not to have done: and then
my only remedy must be repentance and amendment.

That to be angry greived, troubled at any action of another, is not [to be
offended] in the Scripture sense, nor consequently does it follow, that I have
done amiss in doing that which another man is angry at, unless my action be
in it self Evil. For if it be not, then he is angry without cause, and that
is his fault, not mine; yea and (...), he judges or censures his brother that
has done no hurt, which the weak is forbid to do. Romans 14 3. And secondly, he
is of all men most unlikely to do that after me, which he is angry at me for
doing, and therefore I have least reason to fear, or possibility to foresee,
that he will be Scandalized in the Scripture phrase: which fear or foresight
were the only just motive to me to abstain from any justifiable indifferent
action.

Philosophers style the (...)) the reason that men think it a fault to do any
indifferent thing that another is angry or displeased at, is first the
equivocallnesse of the English phrase to be offended, for that in English
signifies to be displeased: but in Greek (the language wherein the New
Testament is written) it signifies no such matter, unless by accident, when
being displeased with Christ, makes a man deny him and forsake him: but then
also it is not the being displeased, but the forsaking or denying him that is
meant by being offended, that is Scandalized.

To. 14. for there indeed v. 15. this phrase is used, [if with thy meat i. e.
with thy eating, thy brother is greived, or made sorry.] Where yet 1. I hope
'twill be much more just that that one single word should receive its
importance from the whole context, then the whole context from that one word.
The whole context from the 13. to the last v. belongs to the 3 sort of
Scandal, when a weak brother seeing me eat what is lawful for me, because my
Conscience is instructed, follows me, and eats too, though it be with a
doubting or resisting Conscience* and so falls into sin; as appears v. 14. to
him that thinks a thing unclean or unlawful, to him it is so, and therefore
if he shall do it, he sins by so doing, and v. 23. he that doubts is damned
if he eat, and therefore in all probability that must be the meaning of the 10
verse also. [Is greived] i. e. wounded, or falls into sin.] explained by 3 words
v. 21. stumbling, being offended, and being weak or sick. And so it may easily
be resolved to signify. For secondly (...), grief, may be taken for the cause
of grief, a disease, or wound, or fall etc. as fear in Scripture signifies
danger, which is the cause of fear, according to a vulgar Hebraisme ordinary
in the new Testament, where for want of the conjugation hiphil, which in Hebrew
signifies [to make to do any thing] the Greek is feign to use the active to do.
An observation which Hugo Grotius makes use of to explain that Phrase (I shall
not enquire how truly) Mat. 19. 9. and resolves that there (...) [committeth
adultery] must signify [maketh her from who^ he divorceth to commit adultery]
parallel to what we read, Mat. 5. 23. So also (...), to bewail 2 Cor. 12* 21.
signifies to punish, to use sharpness, which will cause grief, or wailing in
them that suffer it. The word is very near this other of which now we speak,
and therefore Hesychius (the best glossary for the new Testament) renders (...)
both by (...) calamity, and (...) grief, i. e. grief and the cause of grief;
which is also very observable in the use of this very word (...) or (...) in
the Septuagint; the word (...) which signifies infirm or weak, or sick, being
rendered (...), Lam. 1. 22. (...), where we render my heart is faint, and so Is.
1. 15. (...), the whole heart is faint, by faintness meaning sickness, which
is the cause of grief; and therefore the same Hebrew word, is in other places
rendered (...), affliction or pain, and (...) Disease Deuteronomy. 7. 15. agreeable to
the 21 verse of that To 14. where stumbling or being offended is explained by
being made weak, which phrase is not to be taken in the sense that weakness
is used in, v. 1, a. that of infirmity or error (for such he is, before
stumbling) but in this other, as weakness and disease, i. e. sin, are all one.
So also another Hebrew word (...) which signifies perdition, and destruction,
and is frequently rendered by (...), is once interpreted (...) Pr. 31. 6. (...),
for which our English read, ready to perish* very agreeable to which does St
Paul here interpret greiving the brother by destroying him, i. e. bringing him
into some snare or sin; the notion of Scandal, which all this while we speak
of. From all which observations, and analogies it will be no rashness to
conclude, that (...), being greived, in that place, is perfectly synonymous
with (...) (which we there render is made weak, and indivers places of the new
Testament signifies (...) disease, or sickness, and is so rendered by us Jam.
5. 14. (...) is any man sick) and with (...) 1 Cor. 8. 11. in the same matter,
thy brother is weak, and dies, or perishes through weakness, and with the
like phrase in this chapter also, in the end of v. 15. All which clearly
denotate the disease or perishing of the soul, i. e. sin, which will destroy,
if repentance and mercy intervene not.

i. e. a desire to lay some crime to the charge of them, with whom they are
angry, if it be but se defendendo, that they may not be said to be angry
without a cause, and when they cannot find any such real crime, then they fly
to the case of Scandal, and mistaking that for offending, or displeasing, or
occasioning anger and dislike, their being angry with them, must make them with
whom they are angry, criminous; which what a circle it is, first to be angry
without a cause, and then to make that a cause of anger, (i. e. a sin in the
other) because I am angry, I conceive will not be hard for any to understand.



by the event, but by the natural scandalousnesse, or aptness to give
Scandals inherent in them; for I conceive God passes Judgment upon sinners by
intuition, not by prevision, by seeing what the sin is in it self, and in the
aggravating circumstances that are inseparable from it (as that it is apt to
give scandals etc.) not by the casual consequents that may possibly either
follow or not follow. And I conceive, that that opinion of the Papists (on
which they lay part of the foundation of their Purgatory) that men may after
their Deaths sin, and have more acts of sin lying on them, (by reason of other
men sinning by the scandal which they gave in their lives) then they had at
their Death, and so require in just recompense,some punishments increasable
above what they could be adjudg'd to at their death, is but a phansy or School
notion, that has some show of truth, but little substance, seeing God
punishes every man by the verdict of his own Conscience; and therefore that
other sin, which my sin is apt to produce in another, will be by way of
aggravation, laid to my charge by God, that sees my heart, and the inherent
scandalousnesse of that action of mine, (though that other man by the grace of
God do resist the Temptation which my Scandal gave him) as much as if he had
not resisted it, and so as his not sinning shall not excuse and lessen my fault
which was apt to have brought him to sin; so in like manner, if he do not
resist the temptation, or if by occasion of it, he fall by accident (i. e. by
the motion of some other part of his temper) into some other sin, to wit that
of causlesse anger (which no action of another can be said apt to produce; for
if it might, the anger would cease to be causlesse) this accidental fall of
his shall not add to the sinfulness of my act, any more then his former not
sinning did detract from it, nor consequently make it sinful, if of it self
it were not so.

Heliodor a Bishop committed a fault, first in writing, then in setting forth
an amorous light fiction or Romance, and then improving that fault by choosing
rather to loose his Bishopric then to subscribe the condemnation of his work,
is and may be reasonably acknowledged; That some men also by reading that
Author have since been transported to the commission of some sins, may not
improbably be imagined; but having granted all this (and withal that the
aptness to give such Scandal, was matter of aggravation to his sin) let me
now suppose, that immediately after his death that book had been burnt (as
before his death it was condemned) when he was no longer able to preserve it,
would the Councels condemning and committing that execution upon that work,
any whit have mitigated his sentence in Heaven? to affirm that, were to
suppose Purgatory, or somewhat like it, or else that God by his foresight of
that act of the Council should have allowed him that mitigation at the day of
his particular judgment, i. e. imputed the casual future actions of others to
the present acquitting of him; and then, besides the many inconveniences that
might attend such concessions it must also follow, that every reprinting of
that book since that time, has been a damnable sin (not only of giving Scandal
to such as have been since infected by it, but especially) of uncharitablenes
to that poor dead Bishop, in increasing his Torments, or making them capable of
increase ever since, by giving him a capacity of corrupting more readers; which
humanity and charity, and our great obligations to the nature of which we
partake, would not permit any good Christian to do willingly; and besides
though our prayers may not be allowed to be able to fetch souls out of
Purgatory, yet such a not reprinting of his book might do somewhat like it,
prevent the enlargement of his pains, though not make expiation for him. So
again when those obscene pictures that historians mention (as I remember in
Tiberius his time) after the Authors death were burnt, and not permitted
liberty to corrupt the eyes of posterity, but Aretynes have had that luck to
do it, it would by that School reason follow, that Aretyne though in the work
and the design but equal sinner, were yet by this mishap of not perishing,
become far more criminously guilty, then that other Author; which sure to
affirm were a very irrational nicety.

give Scandal is then most criminous, when it signifies by my example to bring
another man to a sin, especially if this scandalous action of mine be of it
self a sin, abstracted from the sin adherent of Scandal; and then let any
indifferent man judge in what degree may those be truly said to scandalize or
offend others (or indeed how they can be excused from that crime) who by being
angry with me without a cause, and so committing that sin against Christ's law,
Mat. 5. 22. do also by so doing not only provoke and tempt me to anger back
again, which is a sin in me, if I yield to it, and that more then accidentally
caused by them that provoke me, Ephesians. 5. 4. but give other men, who have a good
opinion of their Judgment and sanctity, a plain pattern of that sin of
uncharitableness to transcribe and copy out, I mean, to sin also by causlesse
anger.

the great sin of Scandal in the use of things indifferent, that Saint Paul
speaks of, and resolves against, To. 14. is the sin of uncharitableness, or
pride in despising and not condescending to the weak brother meaning by the
weak brother not every one that may fall into any sin (for so everyone living
will come under that title) but particularly in him that is (...) weak and
ignorant and unsettled in the faith; as it is opposed to the strong. i. e. the
knowing Christian.

scandalized; but only angry at me, or my Action, and so offended.

weakness, for disease of soul, it may well pass; and deserve to be the
object of my charity and compassion, as much or more then weakness is: and
therefore the uncharitableness of my brother or his causlesse anger against me
being such, I conceive my self bound to use any lawful means which I can
hope may be able to prevent any such sin in him, or to get or recover him out
of it; especially if that sin of his may become probably over and above his
uncharitableness, a means to stop or hinder him in his course of reformation,
or farther growth in piety; as probably it will be, if I against whom he is
thus unjustly wrath, be his lawful Pastor; for then that causlesse anger or
rage of his against me may, through his farther default, occasion in him some
vow or resolution, never to hear me, never to be moved or persuaded by me in
any thing, that out of the Pulpit or in private reasoning or exhortation, I
shall (never so convincingly) propose unto him.



abstain from this indifferent action, which I foresee will be the matter,
though not the cause of all this sin in him, of uncharitableness and
non-proficiency in his Christian course, and whether if I do not so abstain
this be not to scandalize my brother? To which I briefly answer, 1. That this
anger or uncharitableness of his, is not the being scandalized in the
scripture sense, nor consequently in that respect my Action a Scandal, though
it be the matter of the anger, or that which he is angry with.

Scandalized, i. e. to fall and be stopped in the service of God: but this only
in a general sense; as every other such hardhearted obdurate resisting of Gods
grace is, or may be called also: and that which occasi ons this being
Scandalized, is not my indifferent action, but his anger or uncharitable
conceit of me for it, unless equivocally, or remotely, as my action is the
object of that anger, which anger is the Author of that profane resolution.



Maimov. d: I. col. c. 5.
as the Jews resolve that a tree set for fruit though it chance to be
worshiped, is not made unlawful by that means, so that indifferent useful
action of mine will not be made unlawful by the possibility of that ill
consequent: Or secondly unless that action in it self indifferent, by lawful
authority be commanded, and so cease to be indifferent to me who am under that
authority: Or thirdly, unless my absteining may as probably prove matter of
anger to some other of contrary persuasions. Or fourthly, unless that my
absteining, or receding, or undoing what before I had done, be more likely to
confirm him in his error (which otherwise in time being not yielded to, he
may forsake) then to prevent or allay his causlesse anger and those effects of
it. Or fifthly, unless I use some means in prudence not only sufficient, but
probable to prevent this sin of unjust anger in him before, or to reform it
afterward.

more immediate to my absteining, then his resolving against my preaching, is
to my doing of it.

i. e. against his own salvation, though I by absteining from that particular
action, deprive him of that.



guilt upon his soul, if I had not then invited him. I conceive it hard to
maintain the affirmative, for though with men, who see not the heart, no sin
is punishable but that in the members (unless in case of Treason) yet with God
the sin of the heart and the hand seems to be equally great, the act of the
mind and the act of the body; And the minutely preparations of that to sin as
punishable, as the minutely execution of this. As in the Schoolmens resemblance
the pressing of the stone to the ground is as great when it is withheld by my
hand, as when it is actually moving toward the center.

Augustine somewhere expresses his opinion, that though in good things God
mercifully accepts the will for the deed, yet out of the same mercy and
indulgence he punishes not so in evil things; Yet because Saint Augustine may
perhaps mean the incompleate and not perfect act of the will, (which though we
yield to be less then the outward act, yet the complete act of the will,
wanting nothing but opportunity of execution, may still be as great,) Or
however, because there are not such demonstrable grounds of resolution, as to
yield clear conviction to all in this matter, and to assure the Christian,
that such an addition of any outward act of sin shall make the punishment the
heavier to the habitual sinner, and so the absence of that outward act
alleviate it; therefore, although I said I think he should do well to
abstain, I dare not yet affirm that he is bound in charity to do so; Nothing
but charity binding him to it, and the man that still has that propension
unresisted, being (upon this supposition, which we have made not improbable)
like to reap little profit from that charity.

As free, and not using your liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness, but as the
servants of God. 1 Pet. 2. 16. But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with
his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment. Mat. 5. 22.
FINIS.

