To the Right Honorable, THE LORD FAIRFAX, AND His COUNCIL OF WAR: THE
HVMBLE ADDRESS OF HENRY HAMMOND.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON.

Printed for Richard Royston in Ivie-lane. 1649.

My Lord, and Gentlemen,
HAving by the Weekly occurrences of your proceedings, not only taken notice
of the weighty matters which you have of late chosen to be the subject of your
Debates, such as never any Council in this Kingdom are known to have taken
into their cognizance, or consideration; but withal, discerned the cheerful
and hospitable reception of one mean Persons advice, which pretended to have
received some counsel from God to communicate to you: And having also as
sincere a desire and zeal to your good, (testified by my daily prayers to God,
that he will incline your hearts to thoughts of true Christian meekness and
charity) and consequently, as deep an interest in the due management of your
Affairs, as any others; and as great an assurance, that what I shall say to
you, proceeds from a peaceable, and an humble spirit; and which tends more
immediately to your welfare, and honor, both before God and man, than any
thing which is known of late to have been represented to you: And lastly,
having among you some of the nearest of my blood, whose eternal weal must
needs be very dear and precious to me; I am in the fear of God, and the
prosecution and discharge of my duty and conscience, desirous to make this
short address to you, to desire you, in the name, and in the bowels of Jesus
Christ, and by all the obligations of Christian duty and Charity, to review
some of the principles by which you seem to be acted, and whereon to ground the
high enterprises which you have now in hand.

And 1. whereas you seem to believe, that God by his Spirit has put it into
your hearts to do what hitherto you have done, and what now you profess to
deliberate to do further against His Majesty, and all others, who are now
fallen into your hands; I beseech you to consider in the presence of that God,
to whose directions and Spirit you pretend, what safe ground you have for so
doing. For, I shall suppose that the plain words of Scripture are not that
voice of the Spirit which is your only guide in this matter: or if it be, I
desire that Charity from you for my self and others, that you will point us
out those Scriptures: and I must profess to believe you bound in duty to God,
and man, and to your selves, to satisfy this desire, to produce that voice of
the Spirit in the received Scriptures of God, which may say that to other
Christians also which it appears to do to you. But if Gods Spirit be by you
conceived to have spoken to you any other way than in, or by some part of the
written Word; then my second request is, that you will declare to others the
ground of this your persuasion, that you have received any such Revelation from
God; that so that pretended Spirit may according to the rules prescribed by God
in his acknowledged Word be tried and examined regularly, whether it be of God,
or no? before the subject matter of such Revelation be believed infallible, or
accordingly built upon by you as your warrant or principle of acting any thing.
For, there are evil Spirits that come into the world, and which many times are
by God permitted to seduce men, and that they may do so the better, they
constantly pretend to come from God, and assume divine Authority to recommend
and authorize their delusions; (a thing so ordinary in all Ages, that the Poet
that would express the Imbroyling of a Kingdom, thinks he cannot do it
better then by bringing in Alecto, a Fury, with a Message from Heaven, to
avenge such or such an injury.) And of these our Savior forewarns us, and
tells us, that we shall know them by their fruits; and so directs us to judge
of the truth of their pretensions by the goodness and commendablenesse, at
least, justifiablenesse of their actions, and not to judge of their actions by
their pretenses. And besides these evil spirits from without, there is also an
evil spirit within, a great deal of disguised wickedness in the heart of
man, which when it remains unmortified in those who believe themselves to be
Gods chosen Saints, and taught by him, is very apt to be mistaken for an
inclination of Gods Spirit, and a flame of zeal, when it is really the most
contrary to it: and because there is so much danger, that what is not fetched
from the acknowledged Word of God, may thus flow from one of these contrary
principles: my next request is, that it be considered, whether when an Angel
from Heaven, in case he should teach any other Doctrine, than what had been by
Saint Paul preached to his Galathians, were-to be anathematized, and when the
judgments are so fearful, which are pronounced against them which shall add
to the Words of that Prophecy, which we now retain under the title of the
Apocalypse or Revelation (which being the last Writing which is known to be
dictated by the Spirit, may very probably contain a severe denuntiation
against all those, who pretend to any Revelation or Prophecy after that,
concerning the Christian Church) whether I say it be not a matter of fear and
just apprehension, to all those, who shall affix or impose upon the Spirit of
God (or pretend to be revealed to them from that) any matter of Doctrine or
Practice, which acknowledges not the Spirit of God speaking in the Scripture
for its only warrant or foundation. Or lastly, if from the Scriptures you
conceive it may be proved, that any part of the Unction mentioned there so
far belongs to you, that it shall surely lead you into all truth: then first,
I beseech you to consider, whether you do not oblige your selves by the same,
or some other Scripture to prove to others (and not only your selves to be
persuaded) that you are those special Saints of God, to whom that privilege
peculiarly belongs, and as clearly to demonstrate that all others who conceive
that that Unction teaches them directly the contrary to that which you profess
to be taught by it, are impious Persons possessed with that deluding Spirit,
which I now desire you to beware of. And secondly, to examine whether this
differencing of your selves from others, this bearing witness to your selves,
and judging others (beside that it will look like an act of most Pharisaicall
presumption, and the very thing, which from Simon Magus downward, has been
observed in all Heretics, calling themselves the Spiritual, and all others
Animal, carnal Men) will not be also a great injustice at this time toward
them who pretend not to learn any thing from this Unction, but what they
receive from the Doctrine of the Gospel, in those Books, which have in effect,
and in the last result, the testimony of God from Heaven, that they are his
true infallible Word, and dictate of his Spirit; and which desire to make no
other use of this to their own advantage, but only topreserve them in a quiet
possession of what by Law belongs to them, and a capacity of making good their
Allegiance to Him, to whom they have often by Law been required to swear it.

A second principle which I must desire you to review, is that, upon which you
conclude that God has borne testimony to your Cause by the many Victories
which he has given you: this concluding of yours, first, proceeds upon a
premise directly false in matter of fact. For, you say that the King by taking
up Arms made His appeal to Heaven, which it is most certain that He never did,
(but only used a strength which God put in his hands to repel them, whom He
looked on as His Subjects declining their duty to Him, and invading the settled
Laws, and never referred the right of the Cause to be judged by the success
of His Arms) nor indeed could rationally have occasion to do so, any more
than any one of you would make such appeal, when a violent Person should
invade, what you conceive to be your undoubted right; nor could He religiously,
or Christianly have done this, when those Laws that allowed of such appeals
by Ordeale, or Duel, and the like, have been justly censured as unchristian
and barbarous. Nay secondly, this concluding of yours will by the same reason
infer that Christianity is not, and that Mahumetisme is the true Religion,
because when the Turks asserted one, and the Greek Church the other, and that
difference begat a War betwixt them, it is clear that the Turks were
successful, and the Greek Church was most sadly wasted and subdued by them,
and so remains to this hour in that unreturn'd Captivity. Which will
therefore be a fit opportunity to make you revert to the trying of that Spirit
(which inclines you thus to argue) by this touchstone. 1. By considering and
examining whether in the written Word any thing be more frequent and visible
than the sufferings of Gods people, the shedding the blood of the Saints, the
fastening all kind of cont(...)ties on such, particularly that reproach of [you
bloody man] upon David, who was a King after Gods heart, the sending or
permitting an Host against the daily sacrifice to cast down the truth to the
ground, and to practice and prosper. 2. Whether it were not Rabshekeh's
Argument against the Peoples adhering to their lawful King Hezekiah, that his
Masters Arms had been invincible. 3. Whether that saddest fate of
Nebuchadnezzar, who for conquering of Gods people, and others, was by God
styled his Hammer, and Battleaxe of the whole earth, may not be expected the
final lot of others also; first, to destroy men, and then to be cast out into
the field, to inhabit among Beasts. 4. Whether it were not a crime complained
of by the people of God, in those, which, when God was a little displeased, did
as Adversaries, help forward their affliction. And 5. whether the Psalmist lay
not the like ill character on all, who persecute those whom God has smitten,
and talk how they may vex them whom God has wounded? By all which it is most
evident, (without any necessity of defining or demonstrating any thing of the
justice of the Cause) that most commonly the prosperity of Arms has not been
the lot of the most righteous, but that either the chastisement of the Sword is
thought fit to be their discipline, or the comforts of peace (and not the
triumphs of war) their blessing in this life.

The third principle is, your persuasion that the community of the People is
the Supreme power, and that the KING is inferior to them, and to them
accountable for His breach of Trust, of which you now affirm Him guilty. In
this procedure of yours, there be many things worthy of your serious pondering:
As whether 1. by Scripture: or 2. by Reason: or 3. by Story of times it can be
concluded, that the Supreme Power was ever by God put into the hands of the
community of the People. For the first way of concluding it, (the testimony of
Scripture) I cannot but take notice of one place, which has been produced to
that purpose, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Be subject to every humane Ordinance, or Creature,
or Creation, etc. This place I have some reason to believe to carry some weight
with you, because it was 6 years since for the justifying the Cause against the
King's party, produced by a Person of great dexterity, That very Person, who
has now undertaken to justify your late proceedings so far as not only to
clear them from all blame, but also to pretend to demonstrate the honor and
worth of them, and to lift them up to an high pitch, not only, 1. of a blessed
victory (the highest that Christians are appointed to aspire to) of overcomming
evil by doing good: but 2. of calling to men's minds the unparellable example
of the Lord Jesus Christ, who went down into the Chambers of death, from
thence to bring up with him a lost world: and 3. of being a lineament of the
face of Divine goodness, in the doing good to so many, as well Enemies, as
Friends: and 4. deserving that place at the table of honor, which the Roman
Orator says, all Nations bestowed on the Assertors of their Countries
liberties, even next to the immortal Gods themselves: and 5. of imitating the
method of the warfare of Heaven, and seeking to reconcile a Nation to
themselves by not imputing their unthankefulnesse. The largnesse and
exorbitancy of these expressions I was my self so amazed at, that I cannot but
mention them to you (by the way) as matters of horror, which like the Peoples
acclamation to Herod, or the Lycaonians to Paul and Barnabas, if they beget not
in you a just indignation with the latter, may very probably bring the just
fate of the former upon you, to be eaten up with Worms, (after you have been
thus deified) now, that you have no other visible Enemy but your selves, and
such Flatterers, (that I say no worse) to appear against you, having craved
your pardon for this not unseasonable excursion, I return now to the view of
that Scripture, produced from Saint Peter, to prove Kings to be a creation or
creature of men, and so their power to be derived from the People. To which I
Answer, 1. that there is a signal character in that very Text, that keeps it
from concluding the supreme power to be originally in the People, not only by
calling the King in the end of that Verse, Supreme; such as in Saint Paul's
divinity, Romans 13. are affirmed to be ordained of God, and so no humane
Ordinance, but also by distinguishing the Governors, v. 14. from the King or
Supreme, v. 13. by this that the Governors are sent by (i. e. have Commission
from) the King, which might in like manner be also affirmed of the King, that
He were sent by the People, if He were the Creature, or creation of them, but
is not so much as intimated by that Apostle; but on the contrary, supremacy
affixt to Him, and subjection commanded to be paid Him (not for the Peoples,
but for the Lords sake) as subordination to, and mission from the King, is
affirmed of all other Magistrates. But then 2. to take away all color of plea
for populacy from this Text, it is to be observed what is the meaning of the
Greek word in the New Testament, which is there rendered (...)
ordinance, or creature, or creation. That word when it is set in its largnesse
without any restraint, signifies generally all mankind, Gentiles, as well as
Jews. Thus [the creation] and [the world] are all one, and [all the creation]
(or every creature) Mar. 16. 15. the same with [the whole world] in the
beginning of that Verse, and [all Nations] in the parallel places of Saint
Matthew and Saint Luke. And thus Romans 8. 19. [the expectation of the creature,
or creation] is the hope which the heathen world had, that at the revelation of
the gracious privileges of the Messiah, they (i. e. the Gentiles) also should
be freed from the slavery of corruption (their villainous heathen sins) unto
the liberty, etc. that true liberty not from obedience to Superiors, but from
slavery to lusts and passions, which Christ came to bestow upon us; And so when
v. 22. it is added, that the whole creation groans, etc. the clear meaning is,
that the Gentiles as well as Jews did thus, as might be evidenced at large.
Agreeable to this notion of the whole creation, or every creature, is this same
phrase (with the addition of humane, to take off all restraint, and to extend
it as far as all mankind) to be understood, and so the meaning of the precept
of Saint Peter to his Jew Christians is clearly this and no more, that they
must be obedient not only to Christian Magistrates, but to Gentiles, Heathen
also, (such as they should fall under in all their dispersions) i. e. to all
whatsoever they were, and that for the Lords sake who constituted those
Heathens also, as Saint Paul says. If to this it shall be objected, that by
this way of interpreting, the precept will be extended so, as to subject us to
all Heathens, and not only to Magistrates: I answer, that this, which is the
only objection against this interpretation, is of little force, and is
answered, 1. by observing the word [be subject] which relating to Magistrates
will require our obedience to none, but those, as v. 17. when he commands to
honor all, it must be understood, all to whom honor belongs; Superiors, not
Inferiors: or as, when chapter 5. 5. he commands them to be subject to one
another, it must not be understood, that the Superior must be subject to the
Inferior, as the Inferior to the Superior, but as the nature of the duty
inforces to interpret, the Inferior to be subject to the Superior only: and
2. by the' Apostles express enumeration of those to whom this obedience must
be paid in the end of the Verse, to the King as Supreme; and then, v. 14. to
Governors, as inferior Magistrates sent by Him. That this is the full
importance of that place, may (if there be any need) farther appear by the
occasion of the Apostles discourse, which was the confuting of the vile sect of
Christians then calling themselves Gnostics, (as a title of great perfection
of knowledge in the Mysteries of Heaven) who taught the doctrine of liberty and
manumission to Christian Subjects or Servants, from heathen (yea and Christian)
Masters, and Kings; To which false doctrine of theirs this Exhortation thus
interpreted is directly contrary (and cannot otherwise be pertinent to it) and
very coherent to that Admonition in the 12 ver. immediately preceding, of
having their conversation good among the Gentiles, that they might not speak
ill of them as evil Doers; which they would be justly apt to do, in case they
should withdraw their obedience to their lawful Princes, as soon as they were
become Christians; which, by the way, lays a very ill character upon those,
who by pretense of Christianity, or piety, seek, or claim to themselves any
other liberty, than what by the Laws under which they are borne, does
confestly belong unto them.

Having thus far enlarged to clear that testimony of Scripture, and not
knowing of any other which is thought favorable to your pretension, I shall,
in stead of retorting the multitude of plain places directly opposite, which
will abundantly take away all force from this: proceed next to the second plea,
that of Reason. And there I shall desire you to confider, 1. Whether if Adam
had never fallen, and his posterity remained in the same innocence, they would
not yet have been capable of positive precepts in order to civil life; and
consequently, whether in reason some one or more men should not have had
superiority over all others, Parents over Children, and the like; and to this
purpose, whether the diverse Orders, and subordination of the Angels, that never
fell, be not an evidence that even in state of innocence, God designed
superiority, not equality. But then 2. The passions of men being through sin
grown irregular, and so needing Rules and Laws, and Rulers and Lawmakers, it
was both reasonable, that God should, and is most certain that he did design
and appoint Government (as appears by what is said by God to the first Woman,
and second Man, to Eve, Genesis 3. 16. and to Cain, Genesis 4. 7.) and so gave not
all men that freedom which is the supposed foundation of that doctrine, which
places supreme power in the People. And of any rational person that yet thinks
he did give this freedom to all mankind; I should but ask this one question,
Whether ever any man were by God or nature invested with power of his own
life; I mean, with power to take away his own life, or to kill himself? In
every thing else man may be believed to have a power over himself, over his
body, to cut or lance it, when that is for his turn, and particularly over
that freedom which naturally belongs to him; whatever the degree of that be, a
man may by act of his own will, part with it irreversibly. Thus might the Jew
under Gods own government, give himself up wholly into the power of his
Master, and by having his ear bored thorough, become from a Freeman, a Slave
for ever, and generally through the whole world the course has been the same,
that he which is most free has power over his own liberty so to divest
himself of it, as that it shall never revert to him again; and our Savionr
that is thought to have brought liberty into the world, does yet, by the
quality of most of his precepts, given to Christians by himself and his
Apostles, mark out this condition of subjection to them, as that under which
they were generally to live, and from which the Christian profession should be
so far from freeing them, that the strict practice of obedience to heathen
Rulers or Masters, is often prescribed as a special means to advance Christ's
maine end, to magnify and promote the Gospel. But for power over a man's own
life no man can be believed to be borne with it, for if he were, he might then
as lawfully kill himself (and if he might do it lawfully, there are many
cases which might make it prudent for him to do it at some times) as pull out an
aching tooth, or dispose of his liberty or estate out of his own possession; a
thing which no Christian has ever thought lawful, but made this felonia de
se, this self-murder, or felony against ones self, a crime, as contrary to
the sixth Commandment, as the killing of any other man. Having proceeded thus
far, I shall now take that for granted, which, that I know of, is denied by
none, I am sure, which is not denied in the published scheme of the designed
Representative, viz. that the supreme power includes the power of life, (I
mean not such an arbitrary power of killing whom they please without sin,
but a power of putting capital Malefactors to death, and so a power over every
(call it Subjects or Free-mans) life in case of capital crime) And the
granting of this (as it is too visible that it is by you a granted truth) being
added to the former, does to me irrefragably conclude, that the supreme power
neither is, nor can be in the community of the People, or in their
Representative, by force merely of their original or natural liberty; The
inference is clear, because the power of life which is part of the Supremacy,
is not part of that natural liberty, and therefore is neither inherent
naturally in that community of men, (which is but, in other words, so many
particular men together, endowed with that power (and no more) which every man
has singly over himself) nor consequently by them communicable to any
Representative. And by this also it appears, that supreme Magistracy,
wheresoever it is truly placed, is the ordinance, and creation of God, (who
alone has power of all men's lives) and not of man, who has no power of his
own, much less of any others life, any farther then he is a Representative,
or Proxy, or Deputy of God, who has that Power, not of the People, who have it
not. For it is possible I may put you in mind of an evident truth, which
perhaps you have not taken notice of; That, as the original of Government in
any particular place cannot be imagined to be by any more than two ways,
Either Gods designment, or the Peoples act; so in either of those two cases
it is God only, and not the People, that gives the power of the Sword, or power
of Life to the Governor; when God himself sets a King over men, it is so
clear that be thus impowers that King, that that need not be proved; and when
the community of a People (suppose in the Original, ten men in the freedom of
nature) choose one of themselves, or more to rule over them; it is clear, they
do not invest him with more power than themselves had; and that he that was
thus chosen by them, has the power of life over any of them (which they
single, or all together in the community had not) must needs come from some
other, and not from them; and if you will know from whom it comes, I answer,
that it comes from Gods appointment (for the economy of the world) that the
supreme Magistrate shall as his Deputy have this power from God communicated to
him, as an endowment necessary to that power which is designed to protect, and
govern others. And in case it were the act of the People, and not of God
immediately, that designs or nominates the Person to that Office, yet does not
this nomination bestow this power, but God who alone has that power, bestows
it on him who is thus nominated. In this case all that the People bestow, or
part with by their act is their own liberty, or that part of it of which they
voluntarily divest themselves, that they may by obedience empower him, whom
they have set over them; and that they may reasonably part with for that
greater benefit of protection from him, which, while he is obeyed by all, he
may by their united obedience to his commands be able to afford them, and could
not probably without it; now this giving up their liberties to one, or more,
makes that man, or men a Ruler over them; and being a Ruler, to him belongs
(derived from God, not from them) that power of life, and death, which Gods
forementioned decree has enstated on the supreme power, or Ruler; who is
therefore in that relation (of Avenger for wrath, or punishment) styled by the
Apostle, the Minister of God, Romans 13. and not of the People. By this it
appears that (for the original of power) the utmost that comes from the
People, is that of which they have the power, till by some act of Gods, or
their own, they have parted with it, the liberty or power of their Persons (or
in some sort and degree, as they shall part with it, of their bodies, or
possessions in like manner) but not of their lives; For that other is of an
higher origination; and therefore, supposing the power they had parted with,
should, upon any emergent, revert to them again, yet the power of life and
death, or of the Sword can never revert, because it never proceeded from them,
but as the soul that came from God does at the falling of the body back to its
elements, or earth, from which it was first taken, return to the hands of God
that gave it, so the power of life, the prerogative first, and then the gift or
investitute of God, must at the dlssolution of any Government, and the supposed
posed reverting to its principles again, return to its proper fountain, to
God, and none but him. And to imagine it to divolve to the community of the
people, is the same unreasonable, as to conceive the immortal soul, that one
beam of divinity (as this power of life and death is another) to accompany the
carcass to the grave also. I have insisted the longer on this to make the
mistake the more palpable, and the more impossible not to be discerned by you;
and if I could foresee any color of reason, that could possibly pretend
against this evidence, I should yet enlarge yours, and my own trouble, to
discover it; but being, I profess, unable to mention any thing, which the
grounds, which are already laid, have not prevented: I shall now proceed to the
third and last way of examining this truth.

By the history of times, and there I shall be forced to retract, at least to
suspend the acknowledging of that, which, that I might examine it by reason, I
was willing to suppose, but not grant, and shall now demand,

1. Whether by any authentic story it appears, that there ever were any
Nation or People in the world, who can be presumed or proved to have had this
supreme power vested in the whole community originally, or from their first
coming together? or if so, whether Gods judgment so visibly interposed, and
the example of his instituting of Judges, and of Kings, (neither of them
accountable to the People) be not to be preferred before all such presidents?

2. If 'twere granted, that in some one, or more places the power has been
originally in the People, yet it will never appear by the originalls of all,
or of this Kingdom, that in all or in this it was so; or if men will still
opiniate, and affirm against the evidence of the Laws, and constitution of
this Kingdom, and against those Oaths which have for so many years
acknowledged the seat of the Supremacy in the King, and not in the People; yet
that, which is so false in matter of fact, being taken for truth also, there
will again be matter of inquiry, in point of reason, which will deserve your
farthermost serious pondering:

1. Whether, after that the People have upon deliberation, and from choice
entrusted some one or more Persons (in any certain course of succession by Law
designed) to rule over them, and after the Law has declared the person of that
Supreme Magistrate not to be accountable, but his Ministers only, (which may be
a prudence of State, more advantageous to a peoples peace, then possibly is
well understood) whether, I say, in this case any number of men whatsoever,
can, upon any pretense, re-call that Trust, and void that Law, by which that
KING, and His Heirs for ever, were constituted the Ruler of them? or if they
might, whether this were not most contrary to the end of all Government, quiet,
and peace, and probably the parent of all confusion in the world, which is much
worse than the hardest subjection?

Nay 2. if it should be ganted still, that the community of people have power
to recall, or void that trust, yet 'twill be matter of more than doubt again,
whether at this time in this Kingdom there be any way for the whole community
to act, or whether it can by any man be reasonably believed, that what is now
done, is acted by the community of the People?

For if (to that purpose) it be conceived, that the House of Commons is (or
that the two Houses together are) the Representative of all the People; Then
first, it is to be considered that there is a great number of men in this
Kingdom, that are not represented by these, and who never put (nor can by any
interpretation be thought to have put) into their hands that Power, which is
supposed to be in every free Commoner in this Kingdom. 2. That you your selves
have expressed your opinion, that this, which now is, is an unequal
Representative, and have on that consideration thought your selves obliged to
propound another Form. 3. It Is sure, that (whatever possibly might have been)
yet they, that have ever till this time chosen Knights or Burgesses to the
Parliament, did never actually put into their hands, as into their
Representatives, all that power, which (in this case of the Peoples being the
Supreme Power) is naturally supposed to be vested in them, but only a power of
doing those things, for which the Writ (sent out under the Broad Seal) did
command them to be returned, i. e. to consult with the King of the difficult
affairs of the Kingdom, not to settle any part of it without, or against Him.
And 4. It Is clear, that in such an acknowledged conjuncture of time as this is,
a small (far less) part of those that were returned by the Countries, cannot
be said to be that entire company, or body, by which the whole community is
represented; Or if it be said, that the godly People of the Land, who by
Petitions to the General, the Lord Fairfax have expressed their desires, that
Justice be executed upon those, whom they call Delinquents, are to be reputed
as the community of the People: then first, it will be clear, that those that
have so Petitioned (beside, that they are most of the body of the Army) are not
the thousandth part of the people of this Kingdom, and therefore cannot by any
rule of Judgment or Estimation be reputed as the whole Community; and if this
president might be admitted, that a few persons, under the title of the Godly,
may pretend to the right of the whole, it is very well worth foreseeing, how
dangerous such examples may prove to the peace of Posterity. 2. All the
evidence of their godliness that we can perceive, is only their desiring
liberty for themselves and others, and therefore Justice on those who stand in
their way to that liberty; and I conceive it demonstrable that a quiet
submission and obedience, and a desire not to cast off their duty, but still to
continue under it, rather then to be their own carvers, or contrivers of
liberty, is a far surer sign of true godliness. And thirdly, there has yet
been no fair indifferent means used to know whether there be not far greater
numbers of such godly meek men, who would rather desire that the KING should be
restored to His Government, then that any course should be taken by any,
without, or against the KING. And the plain truth is, that if you will go on in
the course you are in, and yet desire freely to appear, and be accounted the
Conservers, and not Conquerours of the liberty of your Countrymen, if you will
not impose upon the people, as you say Kings have done; Nothing can be more
suitable to those pretenses, then to declare most publicly, that it shall be
free for every man to subscribe, whether he does desire this total change by
you tendered in the draught of your Representative, or the continuance of the
present established Government, (with an assurance of your submission
thereunto.) 4. It Is (upon supposition that all power is originally in the
People) most undeniable and clear, that nothing but the consent of each person
(at least of a major part of the whole being convoked together) can divest any
one, or more men of that their supposed Original right; and consequently, that
other men's saying that they are not Godly, and that themselves are so, can
never exclude them from their Birthright; By which it will infallibly be
concluded, that all those that have adhered to the KING all this time, or that
favored the Votes of the two Houses, which resolved the KING's late
Concessions at Newport to be a fit ground of peace (whatsoever censure or brand
is by you set upon them) are as much to be considered to the making up the
community of the People, as any others. And if so, Let it then be considered by
all equal minded men, what a violation it is of those Rights, which you
pretend to vindicate, what an invasion of the natural freedom of your
Brethren (by you acknowledged, the inheritance of each man) to force them
against their wills, with their very great incommodation and detriment, to
revert to that liberty, which is by you supposed to belong to all naturally,
but without which we of this Nation have happily lived, under the far greater
advantages of Regal government. And yet so contrary to this principle have you
now proceeded, that when you have thus thrown us back into our first chaos
again, only that you may reduce our liberty, you then immediately by your
Representative so bind us up, that we are not permitted, upon whatsoever
emergency, to cast our selves into any new form, although the exchange should
appear never so advantageous, and gainful to us; which besides that, it is an
evidence of your inward fear, that the change now designed will be soon
repented of again, is certainly so far from being an enlarging, that it is
the retrenching of our liberty, and denying us that freedom, of which the most
barbarous and the most civilized People have been equally partakers, when
subjection seemed better for their turns. As beside the examples of the
Servants in Exodus, which are there supposed sometimes to prefer their
servitude to their Masters before the privilege of the Sabbaticke year, we
find practiced by the Campanians, who voluntarily cast themselves at the feet,
and surrendered themselves into the power of the Romans, to purchase thereby
that right of being protected by them; and by many Barbarians in Appia,, who
sent Ambassadors to Rome on purpose to petition the favor of being receivd
into the number of their subjects.

I have insisted the longer upon this, in obedience to your own invitation;
which was also a great motive and encouragement to make this whole address to
you, and gives me assurance of your kind reception of it.

The last principle to be reviewed is this, That there having been much blood
spilt in this Kingdom in the late Wars, there must now be some sacrifice
offered to God (i. e. some more blood shed) for the expiation of that sin of
bloudguiltinesse, before God can be pacified, or reconciled to the Land. On
which particular, it will first be worth your serious enquiry, how it should
appear that that great issue of blood, let out in the late Wars (which has
with great reason been looked on, as the sharpest of Gods plagues, and the
saddest part of punishment of the former sins of this Nation) is now the
maine, and only sin of the Land, with which God is not reconciled: Or 2. if
it were supposed to be so, yet how it can be thought that a general
Reformation of that sin, an humiliation before God for it, through the whole
Land, and a resolution never to spill one drop more, were not a more Christian
probable means to pacify God, than the proceeding in cold blood to the
effusion of more: The blood of men being never thought a fit sacrifice for any,
but the evil Spirit; and peaceable-mindednesse, and charity, and the contrite
heart being the special, if not only sacrifices, which we find mentioned in
the Gospel. Or 3. how it can appear that if God require any such sacrifice,
you, or any but those whom the known Laws of the Land have placed in a
Tribunal (and that legally erected for such cognizances) have any right to put
your selves into the office of Gentile Priests, as the only Persons appointed
to slay that sacrifice. Nay 4. it will be worth your observing, that Christ
disclaimed the office of a Judge, and thereby rendered very unfit for any of you
to put your selves unto that office by virtue of no other title, but that of
being his Disciples. And lastly, it is worth your saddest thought, Whether by
your present Council, and the necessity by you supposed of changing the former
Government, it do not now appear, that the defense of the established Laws
was on the KING's part the occasion of His taking Arms, and on Your parts, the
design of altering those Laws, and introducing others more suitable to your
inclinations. And if now by a civil or martial course, in an arbitrary way of
trial, contrary to the Laws established, it should be by you thought fit to
proceed to blood against those whom engagements have been for the defense of
those established Laws: Let it be considered, how impolitick this may be, and
what matter of discouragement to all that shall be entrusted with the managery,
or defense of future Government: Which single consideration will, I hope, abate
much of your designed severity. But if God should permit you to go on
undisturbed to the shedding of more blood, as the Jews did from other lower
acts to the crucifying their King: How possible were it, not only that this
should prove the provoking of God to deliver you up for ever to your own
hearts lusts, but be to the whole Nation a filling up the measure of our
iniquities, and the forerunner of all the calamities, that can befall a People.

Having mentioned the weakness, and falliblenesse of these few principles, I
shall leave you to the farther consideration of the frailnesse, and danger of
those superstructures, which shall be erected on any, or all of these. And if
there were never a God in the world to avenge them, yet the experience now
before your eyes, how easy it is for principles taken up for men's present
advantages to prove within a while most disadvantageous, and pernicious to them
(as the weapons of a disarmed man turned into his own breast) may infuse into
you that fear and temper, that caution, and moderation, and timely wisdom,
which the Author of this Address may be otherwise too unskilful to impresse
on you: Who yet, if he might any way be useful to you, does profess to be
ready to contribute his utmost endeavor to your service, if it be but thereby
to demonstrate to you, how just it is for him (and what a duty, and obligation
of charity toward you) to intercede daily at the throne of grace, that God
would mollify your hearts toward the KING, and all His conscientious faithful
Subjects, or else interpose his hand, to rescue His Royal Person out of your
power; believing confidently, that, if God have any remainders of mercy for
this Kingdom, or the true Protestant profession in it, he will in his good
time hear and answer this prayer of all true Englishmen, and among them of

Jan. 15. 1648. Your Lordships humble Servant, H. HAMMOND.

FINIS.

