CLAYTON, Mayor,
Jovis xxiiio die September. 1680. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi, Angl',
etc. xxxiio.
THis Court does desire Mr. Hancocke to print his Sermon, Preached at the
Guildhall-Chappel on Sunday last before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.

Wagstaffe,

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, AND THE COURT of
ALDERMEN, AT Guildhall-Chappel, September. 19. 1680.

By ROBERT HANCOCKE, Fellow of Clare-hall in Cambridge, and Rector of Northill
in Bedfordshire.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft for Tho. Flesher at the Angel and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and W.Leech at the Crown in Cornhill. 1680.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Robert Clayton Kr. Lord Mayor of the City of
London, And to the Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
THE present Juncture of our Affairs is such, that nothing but the most active
Zeal for our Religion, the most constant Loyalty to the King, and the firmest
Union among our selves, can (without a Miracle) secure this Church and Kingdom.
The design of the following Discourse is to recommend these great indispensable
Duties, and to root out all those Lusts and Passions, which are destructive of
true Religion or Human Society, and apt to foment Intestine Divisions or
Foreign Usurpations: God grant that in this our Day, we may yet know the
things that belong to our Peace, the preservation of his Majesty's Person and
Government, and the continuance of the true Reformed Religion among us.

I am Right Honorable, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Robert
Hancocke.

St. Luke XIX. 42. If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day,
the things which belong to thy peace; but now they are hidden from thine eyes.


IN these Words we have a great Instance, both of the stupidity and
incorrigibleness of the Jews, and of our Savior's love and tenderness toward
his implacable Enemies. For he was no sooner come within view of Jerusalem, but
he laments those Desolations, which (by the just Judgment of God) were breaking
in upon them: When he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it Verse
41.
And as he could not behold their destruction without tears, so neither would
he express his apprehensions of it, without some kind of abruptness.

Whether there was an irreversible Decree already past in Heaven against the
Jewish Nation, as it cannot be determined from this Text, so it is besides my
present purpose to enquire: But it is more certain, that a flaming Sword was
now hanging over their heads; there were too many Symptoms of their approaching
ruin; and our Savior in the next Verse tells them plainly, That the Romans
should be the Executioners of the Divine Vengeance upon them. Yet some of the
Jews were secure and inapprehensive of the common Danger; and the rest did
neither resolve the Judgments of God into their proper Principles, nor comply
with the end and design of them, by considering the time of their Visitation
Verse 44.
These profound Politicians invented a new State-engine (the putting Christ to
death) to secure themselves not only from the Romans, but from their own Sins
too. They frustrated all the designs of God's Mercies and Judgments; they
filled up the measure of their Fathers; and at last they forced the Almighty to
find out unheard of methods of punishment, as might be showed from the fatal
circumstances of that dreadful Story.

I know, we have not yet had as loud Alarms from Heaven as they, but yet we
have just reason to believe, that God in the way of his Providence, speaks to
us in the language of the Text, If you had known, etc. Or, Oh that ye would yet
know and lay to heart the things that belong to your peace, etc. For are not
our Divisions and Animosities as high? Are not our sins aggravated with as
signal mercies and deliverances, as theirs? We are crumbled into as many Sects
and Parties as they, and most of them are so much more intent upon their
private Interests, then upon the common Interest of Protestants, that it seems
no very hard matter for the Modern Romans to enter in at those Breaches, which
are made amongst us.

There were two things, which were both the Causes and Symptoms of the Jewish
Calamities.

1. Ageneral corruption and licentiousness in the lives of men.

2. Those unnatural dissentions and feuds among themselves.

If ever our Adversaries of Rome prevail against us, they must make use of
these two mighty Advantages, which we have put into their hands; and so long as
our Sins and our Divisions are battering our Walls, and pecking at our
Foundations, I know nothing but a Miracle of Mercy, that can preserve our
Religion and Government. These were the Causes of our former Sufferings, as
they are of our present fears, and the doing what in us lies (in our respective
Capacities) toward the removal of them, is the only effectual way of minding
the things which belong to the peace of our Church and Kingdom. I crave leave
therefore to represent and enforce this seasonable Duty, with respect to the
present juncture of Affairs, so far as the peculiar care of some, and the
prayers and endeavors of all of you are concerned in it.

1. We must begin with a sincere Reformation, and cleansing our selves from all
manner of Debauchery and Profaneness. The Wisdom which is from above, is first
pure, then peaceable St. James 3.17.
; and till the Lusts that war in our Members be subdued, it is in vain to look
for a lasting Settlement, for there is no peace to the wicked Isai. 57.21.
. If ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King
Sam. 12.25.
.

But (to descend to particulars) our continuance in Licentiousness and
Irreligion, is the way to subvert the Civil Peace, to let in Popery, or else a
mere empty Formal Religion among us.

1. It is the way to subvert the Civil Peace.

If the sinful Lusts and Passions of men do naturally tend to the dissolution
of a Government; if the Divine Protection be that wherein the Safety of a
Kingdom does consist; if the practice of Christian Righteousness be that alone
which can entitle us to the favor of God; If downright Atheism, or the
contempt of all revealed Religion; if the most monstrous Ingratitude, or the
most obstinate Incorrigibleness; if the mocking of God by Hypocritical
Wickedness; or the proclaiming War against him by notorious Profaneness, can
provoke him to Wrath and Vengeance; then I am sure that nothing but a timely
Reformation can provide for the Peace and Settlement of this Kingdom.

2. This is the way to let in Popery among us.

For that is a Religion (such a one as it is) that all loose and licentious
People are already prepared for; it is the most pleasant and easy, the most gay
and pompous Religion in the World; it is such a one as they would devise, were
they to make a Religion for themselves. For the truth of this Charge I appeal
to any man, that understands the virtue of their Indulgencies and Masses,
Relics and Pennances; the omnipotent power of Absolutions, and other ways of
reconciling a sinner to God in the Roman Church. Are not some of those
practices, which make up a great part of their Religion, but the Mint, Anise,
and Cummin of Christianity? Are not diverse others of them inconsistent with the
life and power of Godliness? I mean their Crossings and Unctions, their
voluntary Whippings and Severities, their superficial Confessions and
Abstinencies, their mumbling over their Prayers without devotion or attention.
Were not those dark and superstitious Ages, wherein Popery first stole into the
World, times of the greatest Licentiousness and Irreligion? I confess the
Monasteries were Seminaries of Virtue and Piety for some Ages; but as the Monks
increased in Wealth and Revenues, so they degenerated into Idleness and Luxury.
This is so plain a Truth, that even some of their own Authors, that are most
devoted to the Papal See, cannot deny or conceal it.

I know it is usually imputed to the Jesuits, that they allow men to lie and
forswear themselves; to swallow a thousand: Venial Sins without danger of
Damnation, and to repent of as many Mortal Sins without forsaking them. It is
commonly said, Than they undertake to pardon or dispense with some of the most
monstrous Crimes; and that some of the blackest ones are with them lawful or
meritorious; and these are the Guides of Souls in the Church of Rome. But I
will be so just to that Order, as to acknowledge, they not only affirm, but
prove it too, that this is the Practical Divinity of the Church it self. Is not
the very Canon Law stuff't with Forgeries and Wickedness? Are not such
extravagant Maxims to be found in the Divines and Casuists of other Orders, as
the more sober Heathens abhorred? Are not the Books published with the Authority
and Approbation of the Church? Are not the Authors of them entrusted by her
with the Consciences of men? Why don't they acquaint the World what expurgatory
Index has condemned the Writings of the three Cardinal Jesuits, what
Anathema's their Church has bestowed upon them Bellarmine, Baronius, and Tolet.
.

Were not their Persons had in admiration; and are not their Writings applauded
by the teaching governing part of the Church?

The truth is, the Interest and Grandeur of Rome are supported by them, and
they must be maintained, whatever becomes of the Souls and Consciences of Men.

I do not think that Popery is able to root out all good Nature; and if any of
that Communion be so eminent for Virtue and Charity, as I hope they be, we must
not thank the Doctrines of their Church, or the Integrity of the ruling party
for it; but either their natural Dispositions, or the overruling Grace of God,
which have preserved them from the Contagion of their Religion.

3. This is the way to propagate a mere empty formal Religion amongst us; A
Religion that teaches men to build their hopes of Salvation upon such
Conditions, as may be observed without offering Violence to their sensual Lusts
and dearest Interests. And so long as they desire to go to Heaven with as
little trouble as they can, I do not wonder that they will not endure sound
Doctrine, but after their own lusts heap to themselves Teachers, having itching
ears 2 Timothy 4.3.
.

They will be content to offer God the Calves of their lips, rather then to
give him their hearts; to censure or commend many Sermons, rather then to put
one in practice; to put on a sour or demure countenance, rather then a broken
and contrite heart; to present God Almighty with variety of Phrases, or the
most pathetical Expressions, rather then to pray with Faith and Devotion,
Humility and Heavenly-mindedness, in which the Spirit of Prayer consists. For
such things as these serve for ostentation and vainglory, they are very
obvious and sensible, they are no great Enemies to the Passions and Interests
of men: Whereas Purity and Devotion, Self-denial and Meekness, Obedience and
Charity, Mortification of the Will and Affections, have less of the Pomp and
Form, though infinitely more of the Life and Power of Godliness in them.

Thus I have given you a short Account of the most natural and pernicious
effects of Vice and Wickedness upon a Church and Kingdom.

And, since these things are so, I would make an humble Address to all in
Authority, That, as you value the Honor and Security of our most holy
Religion, or the Peace and Happiness of your King and Country, you would
endeavor to suppress the growth of Vice and Immorality.

For what Peace, so long as there is so much Riot and Luxury, Leudness and
Debauchery, Injustice and Oppression, customary Swearing, profane Drollery,
and contempt of Religion among us? What Peace, so long as such a Deluge of Sin
and Wickedness overflows the Nation? For these the Lord has a Controversy
with the Inhabitants of the Land; therefore shall the Land mourn Hosea 4.1, 3.
.

These are the Nurseries of Plots and Treasons, of Schism and Sedition. But if
you cannot compel men to be truly Pious and Holy, you may at least force them
to sin with more modesty and civility; If you cannot quite banish Sin out of
the Nation, yet it is in your power to stigmatize it with disgrace, and make it
sneak into Corners; you may restrain it from being barefaced and impudent,
from infecting the Land and involving us in the guilt of it. If you cannot root
out all secret Wickedness, you may stop the growth of horrid Impieties, of
public and crying Sins. If wicked men will have the exercise of their
Irreligion in private, yet, I beseech you, let them not sin in the face of the
Sun, and openly make Proselytes in defiance of the Laws of God and Man. And
would you have men make conscience of all their Oaths, Contracts, and Promises?
Would you have them be Loyal to the King, Obedient to Magistrates, and
Serviceable to one another? Do what you can (in your several Spheres) to
encourage and promote the practice of solid and substantial Religion.

But, if we desire the suppressing of Atheism and Immorality, we must take heed
of those licentious Doctrines and Principles, which are most apt to lead us
into such practices: For what wonder is it to see men act in conformity to
their Principles? What reason is there to hope, that the generality of the
World will be better, then the Doctrines of their Religion incline them to be?
I will mention the principal of them, and leave you to judge, whether the
natural result of them be not the banishing true Religion and Holiness out of
the Nation.

1. I begin with the Principles of the Leviathan. That there is nothing but
Body in the World, and that the very notion of an Incorporeal Being implies a
Contradiction Leviathan. c. 4. c. 5. c. 12. c. 34.
. That men are good or evil fatally and unavoidably: And that God may be the
Author of Sin Lev. c. 21. Lib. and Nec. in diverse places.
. That the Law of the Civil Magistrate is the only obliging Rule of Just and
Unjust; and that the New Testament is not a Law of any place, where the
Commonwealth has not made it so Lev. c. 42.
. That the Obligation of Subjects to their Sovereign lasts no longer, then
the power lasts, by which he is able to protect them Lev. c. 21.
.

2. What is the consequence of the Practical Divinity of the Romish Divines and
Casuists, about Repentance, Purgatory, and the efficacy of the Sacraments in
conferring Grace, but the subverting the necessity of an Holy Life?

3. There are some malignant Doctrines, that have a more immediate influence on
Kingdoms and Governments; and they are such as these. That Dominion is founded
in Grace. That the Obligation of Oaths and Promises may be taken away by some
Authority on Earth. That it is lawful to make use of Equivocations and mental
Reservations. That Churchmen are exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Civil
Power. That a Sovereign Prince is either the Pope's Subject, or the Peoples
Trustee. That he is accountable for Heresy or evil Government to his Holiness
at Rome, or to some Assembly of Churchmen or Inferior Magistrates within his
own Dominions.

4. I wish, the Libertines, Antinomians, and other Carnal Gospellers of this
Age, had not furnished us with another Catalogue of Licentious Doctrines. The
chief of them are these that follow: That the Moral Law is abrogated by Jesus
Christ. That the Covenant of Grace is absolute and unconditional; and that no
man ought to work for Salvation, much less for the fear of Hell. That the
Torments of Hell are not properly Eternal. That a good Moral Man is further
from the Kingdom of God then a loose Liver. That justifying Faith consists in
believing that a man is perdestinated to Eternal Life. That Sins are pardoned
before they are committed; and that God sees no Sin in his People.

To this Head I might reduce all such Notions of Christian Liberty, as destroy
the necessity of Obedience in all lawful things. All such Notions of God and
his Decrees, as make him the Author of our Sin or Misery, or set up the Decrees
of God in opposition to his Laws, or one of his Attributes in opposition to
another. All such Notions of Jesus Christ, as set up his Person in opposition
to his Gospel; or make us righteous with Christ's Righteousness, whilst we
continue in any Course of Sin.

But thus much may suffice to have spoken of the first thing.

2. We have reason to be apprehensive of the effects of our unnatural
Contentions and Animosities, as well as of our open and notorious Vices.
Certainly never any People enjoyed more excellent means of Peace and Unity;
never any People labored more under the Calamities of Rebellions and Factions;
never was any People assaulted with more bloody and implacable, more subtle and
industrious Enemies, then we are. It is therefore the Duty and Interest of all
Loyal Subjects and good Christians, to endeavor to correct that Spirit of
Sedition and Division that is working among us, and to promote the Security and
Establishment both of our Government and Religion.

1. I begin with the Civil Government.

You have (blessed be God) the Scriptures in your own Language, and if you read
them without partiality and prejudice, you will soon learn those indispensable
Duties of Peace, Humility, and Obedience. They will teach you to pray for the
King, and all in Authority under him 1 Timothy 2.1.
. To be subject, not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake Romans 13.5.
. They will plant in you all those dispositions, which are essential to the
support of Government and Society; they will subdue all those Passions, and
mortify all those Lusts, which are the Parents of Strifes and Quarrels, of
Confusions and Treasons; besides, you are Members of a Church; whose just glory
it is, to assert the Rights of Princes with so much plainness and sincerity,
that no man can be true to the Church of England, whilst he is false to his
Sovereign. This holy and peaceable Religion, will teach you to beware of, and
suppress all others (of what Communion soever) that vent any seditious
Doctrines, or allow of such practices as are consonant to them.

I know, the most horrid things have been taught and acted among us, under the
disguise of Religion; but of all men living, the Romanists have the least
reason to charge any of our Sects with Treason and Sedition: For the most
barbarous Villainies that were committed in these Kingdoms, may be justified by
the principles of that Faction; and the most Antimonarchical Doctrines, that
ever came from the Pulpit or the Press, either were or might be derived from
the Canon Law, the Popes and Councils, the most approved Casuists and Guides of
Souls. Let Pope Sixtus the Fifth have the honor, of being either the first
inventer or polisher of the Fanatic Art of Canting and perverting the
Scriptures, admiring the providence of God in the murder of a lawful King, and
the truth is, the first Thanksgiving Sermon that I find on such an Occasion,
was preached by his Holiness in the Roman Consistory See his Panegyric Oration
on the murder of H. 3 of. France; It was printed at Paris, An. 1589 with the
approbation of three Doctors.
. Nor do I envy the Roman Church, the glory of sanctifying Rebellions and
Murders, Perfidiousness and Cruelty by the Authority of some of her General
Councils. It Is no wonder, if the same power, which transforms bread and wine
into the substance of Christ's natural body and blood, do also transform
Christians into Wolves and Tigers. Did some of our Sectaries abuse Curse ye
Meroz, and other parts of Scripture to the carrying on the blackest Designs? So
did Alexander the third, Ep. Alex. 3. Conc. Bin. tom. 7 par. 2. page 656.
so did Pius the fifth those Bullar. Cherub. tom. 2. page 305. printed at Rome
1617.
words of God, I have set thee over Nations and Kingdoms etc. Did not Innocent
the Fourth prove his power of deposing Princes from that Text, Whatsoever ye
shall bind on Earth, etc. See Pope Innocent the Fourth's Sentence of
Deprivation against the Emperor Ferdinando in the Council of Vienna.
. Have you never heard of the incomparable Interpretations of Rise Peter, kill
and eat? Feed my Sheep? Upon this Rock will I build my Church? It were no hard
matter to give you a Specimen of the Divinity of Popes and Cardinals, men of
greater Learning and Authority, but of as little Conscience and Loyalty as the
Authors of our most pestilent Sermons and Pamphlets. Are any of these under
unlawful Oaths and Engagements? So are all the Bishops, Jesuits, Monks, and
Friars of that Church under Oaths of absolute Allegiance to the Pope, or of
blind Obedience to their Superiors, that are his Creatures and Vassals See
Pontif. Romans p. 59. where you have the Oath it self which is taken by every
Bishop at his Consecration; and it is the strictest Oath of Allegience that
ever was invented. See the Bulls of Paul 3. 1549. Bullar. tom. 1. p. 687. of
Julius 3. 1650. of Pins 4. 1564.
. Was there an infamous High Court of Justice set up in England? There have
been many such erected at Rome, (and as well deserving that name) wherein
Sovereign Princes have been condemned, for not submitting to the Jurisdiction
of the Court.

From whom did the Rigicides learn, That the Original of all Civil Power is
from the People? That it is derived to the Sovereign by way of mutual Contract?
That he is no more but an Officer in Trust? That the Duty of Subjects is only
Conditional? That the Commonwealth has Authority to curb or restrain him, to
bring him to trial for Maladministration or Tyranny Reynolds ( under the
counterfeit Name of Rossaeus) has written De just a Christianae Reipublicae in
Feges Impios and Haeresicos Authoritare. His Book was written at the request of
the Leaguers in France, and approved by the Papal See. See Mariana. L. 1. c. 8.
Parsons ( under the name of Doleman) and Bellarmine in many places. Sober
Reckoning page 424.

Em. Sa. Aph. V. princeps; with the whole Herd of the Jesuits.


? Didsome wild Sectaries attempt to dethrone the Lord's Anointed, for the
advancement of Christ's Kingdom? These have done as much for his Vicar, as they
did for the Master. Who was it that taught them, That Religion is to be
propagated with the Sword This is the express Doctrine of the third and fourth
Council of Lateran.
? That Princes may be put to death for Tyranny or Heresy, and in what method
they are to be brought to the Block? Fr. Verone wrote an Apology for a Traitor,
one of the most desperate Villains in the World. That infamous Book of Boucher
(a French Jesuit) De justa Hen. 3. abdications is well known. Bellarmine was a
principal Actor in the French League. Pope Sixtus the Fifth applauded the
murder of Hen. 3. The General Council of Constance supposes it to be lawful in
some cases to put a Prince to death. See more of this Subject in Verone,
Rossaeus, Mariana, etc.


Let any man produce greater Enemies to the Rights of Princes, then the Lawful
Representatives of the Roman Church in their Holy Synods. Let any man show me a
mo^e pernicious Account of the rise of Civil Government, then is to be found in
the Epistles of Pope Gregory the Seventh.

Indeed I can hardly meet with any Treasonable Positions, any Texts of
Scripture, or Arguments to maintain them (in the Pamphlets of this last Age)
which are not expressly contained in the Writings of Popes and Jesuits, or at
least to be paralleled in the most approved Authors of the Roman Church.

Who taught the English Rebels the distinction between the Authority and the
Person of a King? Who taught them to fight for the King, whilst they shot
against his Person? and to kill the Tyrant without killing the King This
distinction was invented by the Jesuits; and it is their common Doctrine, that
after a King is deposed, declared a public Enemy by the Pope, or the States of
the Kingdom, he ceases to be a King.
? Were some of them Sainted by their own party? and were not some of the
Gunpowder Traitors preferred at Rome? Is not Becket (that lived and died a
Traitor to his King) honored as a Saint and Martyr in the public Offices of
that Church Breviar. Romans Hic est vere Martyr, qui pro Christi nomine, etc.
?

I know there are some, that profess themselves to be Catholics of the Church,
but not of the Court of Rome; and I do verily believe, that some of that
Communion do (as they pretend) abominate the Usurpations of the Roman Court.
Interest in some, and good nature in others, have made them better Subjects,
then the principles of their Religion, allow them to be. Some of them have too
much honesty; others have too little zeal for the Catholic Cause, to be
entrusted with such a Mystery of Iniquity, and many do not understand how much
Pride and Covetousness lies at the bottom of the Church, as well as of the
Court of Rome. But yet all the loyalty or peaceableness of these men depends
either on their natural Dispositions, or their private interests, or their
lukewarmness in Religion; or their ignorance of the Doctrine of their own
Church.

As to the Distinction it self; that dare not show its face at Rome; though it
be more talked of, then understood in England, I have two things to say.

1. That such Doctrines, as strike at the very root of our Religion and
Government, have been determined by the Roman Church, in some of her General
Councils; I mean the Doctrines of Deposing Princes, and absolving Subjects from
their Allegiance to them Besides the third and fourth General Councils of Lat.
see the General Council of Lions in the Decree for the recovery of the Holy
Land. That the Sentence of Deposition against Frederick the Emperor, was the
act of the Council as well as of the Pope, is proved by the Author of the
Supplement to Parson's Discussion, etc. See also M. Paris, p 666, 667, 668.

The Council of Trent (though it was then no time to speak plain) passed such a
Decree ( Sess. 25.) as was sufficient to keep up the claim to this power.


; of breaking Faith with Heretics Conc. Constable. Sess. 19.
; of rooting them out with Fire and Sword Conc. Lat. 3. c. 27. Conc. Lat. 4. c.
de Haereticis. And this Doctrine was put in practice by the General Council of
Constance.
; and of the exemption of the Clergy from the Jurisdiction of Secular Princes
Conc. Lat. 3. c. 14. Conc. Lat. 4. c. 43. And the Council of Trent confirmed
the same Doctrine; of which see more in the excellent History of that Council.
. These are the Orthodox Doctrines of the most Loyal and Charitable Church of
Rome.

2. Though there might be some plausible pretense for this distinction, before
the Reformation, yet the Council of Trent (the great Oracle of the present
Roman Church) has utterly destroyed it, as to those purposes, for which it is
produced. For the Reformers having asserted the Rights of the Church, against
the Usurpations of the Papal See, and appealed to a lawful General Council, the
Fathers at Trent gave up the Cause, espoused the Interest of the Court of Rome,
and made its Judgment absolute and unappealable.

But I will conclude this Part of my Discourse with two Inferences.

1. It may serve for an Antidote against some late Books and Pamphlets of the
Romish Emissaries.

They complain of the uncharitableness of Protestants, they inveigh against us
merely for believing our own Senses; I mean, That the Catholic Religion (the
Roman Catholic they should say) allows of Traiterous Principles, destructive
to Peace and Government; That Catholics hold it an Article of Faith, (I speak
their own words) that the Pope can depose Kings, and absolve Subjects from
their Allegiance.

I stand amazed at the ignorance or dishonesty of some of them, that profess to
the World, they never found any such Principles asserted in any of their
General Councils. As if we had outdone them in their old trade of Forgery! As
if the General Councils of Lions and Trent, the third and fourth Councils of
Lateran were mere fictions of the Protestants! I am sure, either these are the
Doctrines of the Church of Rome, or Transubstantiation itself is none of them;
either these are her Doctrines, or she has none at all.

2. I might from hence take occasion, to vindicate the peaceableness and
loyalty of the Reformed Religion; that excellent Religion, which is the best
Friend in the World to Kings and Princes. And yet it suffers in the esteem of
some men, for the Crimes of those, that with as much reason arrogate the Name
of Protestants, as the Papists do that of Catholics to their own party. I know
no Protestant Church in the World, that has by any public act maintained any
treasonable Principles. It Is certain we have been educated in a Faith of
Loyalty and Obedience, and I hope we shall never be tempted by any (though
never so specious) pretenses to desert it.

Whether there be amongst us a sort of men, that under the disguise of zeal
against Popery, labor to undermine the Government, I know not; but if there
be, they are either Papists in Masquerade, or at least such as serve the
interest of Rome (though against their wills,) as truly as the Pope's own
Creatures: I am sure, neither the Church of England, nor the best Reformed
Churches in Christendom will own them. God deliver us from the sad effects of a
fiery seditious Religion, whether of an Enthusiastic, or Roman Catholic
Spirit.

2. I should now come to show, what we are to contribute toward the peace of
the Church, the composing or suppressing our religious quarrels, which have
almost eaten out the life and soul of Christianity among us. But having already
spent most of the time allotted for this Exercise, I shall only recommend to
you these two things, wherein every one that hears me, is concerned.

1. I doubt not, but a right understanding of the nature of Christianity, would
go a great way toward the abating our contentions about it. It must needs put
an end to some of our controversies, and secure us from the sad consequences of
the rest of them, if we had a true notion of the difference between such
things, as are essential to Religion, and such as are at a great distance from
it.

Now true Religion consists in the imitation of the Divine perfections; Be ye
perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect St. Matthew. 5.48.
. As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
Conversation 1. Pet. 1.15.
: that is, so far as we are capable of being like to the most excellent Being,
in this fallen and imperfect State. And this consists in the mortifying of our
Lusts and Passions, in living a Life of Spiritual Purity and Devotion,
Self-denial and Meekness, Justice and Charity, Patience and Peaceableness,
Sobriety and Chastity; and because in many things we offend all St. James 3.2.
, through ignorance, or inadvertency, or weakness, when we have done our best,
we are to trust in the Merits of Christ, for the pardon of our sins, and the
acceptance of our imperfect Righteousness.

These are the substantials of our Religion, about which all wise and good men
are agreed, however we differ about other matters. Did we make conscience of
these as we ought to do, we should soon find by happy experience, that they are
infinitely more for the honor of God, the peace of the Church, and the good of
one another, then an hot and fiery contention about speculative, indeterminable
and unprofitable Questions. Could men be persuaded to a greater care and study
of this Catholic Christianity, the minding of it would take up so much of our
time and pains, that we should hardly be at leisure to raise or foment
differences. Yet if any Disputes should arise about lesser matters, yet we
should all agree in obeying our Superiors, where we are not sure of the
unlawfulness of their commands, and in loving, praying for, doing good to one
another.

Now since these things are so, let us bring our Opinions and Practices to this
trial.

1. As to matters of Doctrine or Opinion; it is too evident, that the Articles
of Faith are monstruously swelled of late in the Roman Church; I mean by the
addition of 12 new Articles of Pius the fourth, not one of which is to be found
in the Scriptures, or the Creeds of the Primitive Church. I cannot mention,
without horror, the dreadful Anathema's they denounce against all that presume
to deny any of them; but (to the honor of the Church of England let it be
said) whatsoever is imposed on us, as necessary to the Salvation of all men, is
contained in the Apostles Creed. This is the Faith of the first and best times
of Christianity; the Faith into which we are baptized; and the belief of this
Creed has a direct influence on our Christian practice, which is the great
business of Religion. Let us therefore contend earnestly for this Faith, which
was once delivered to the Saints Jude v. 3.
; Let us not entertain any other Opinions, which invalidate the necessity of an
holy life; let us not propagate our private conceptions with the breach of the
public peace and order; and then we shall have no reason to quarrel with one
another for simple invincible Errors.

2. Let us judge of matters of practice by the same rule; and then we shall lay
the greatest stress upon such things, as bring us to the nearest conformity to
God; we shall not build our hopes of Salvation on any outward observances or
abstinences about the mode of our Worship, but on the great indispensable
Duties of Christianity: We shall comply with the Injunctions of Authority in
all things, about which Christ has not left us any standing Law. For since
many things done by Christ and his Apostles were occasional and temporary,
fitted to the circumstances of those times, but not of ours; since they were
not founded on any moral reason, nor have we any command for the continuance of
them; since there is no Law in Scripture about these things, there can be no
transgression in the practice or disuse of them, otherwise then as they tend to
the dividing the Church, the contempt of Authority, or the scandalizing our
Brethren. But this brings me to the second thing.

2. Let us remember that we are under Christian Laws and Government; and from
hence we shall learn these three things.

1. That we ought not to provide for our own safety, or the security of our
Religion by Tumults, Insurrections, or any other unlawful means: For it is
impossible that true Religion should be promoted by sin and wickedness, by such
ways as are contrary to the nature and ends of Religion. The Christian Religion
neither commands nor allows us to fight for the Lord of Hosts, by breaking his
Laws; and it was established by doing good, by patient and constant suffering
for it. Let it therefore be the peculiar glory of Turks and Papists, to
propagate their Religion with sword and bloodshed; but let us regulate our zeal
with prudence, obedience, and charity, which make up the truly Christian temper
of English Protestants; and let no private passion or interest transport us
beyond the bounds of our Duty to God and our Allegiance to the King: For if
they do, we shall convince all impartial men, that we have as little sense of
true Religion, as our Adversaries.

2. We are also to obey the commands of our Superiors, as far as we can without
sin. For either all the Gospel Precepts of obedience signify nothing at all,
or they signify thus much, that we ought to come up to Authority, as far as we
can without disobeying the Law of God. Let us therefore lay aside all prejudice
and groundless disaffection; let us come with modest and humble dispositions,
ready to obey in all lawful things, and resolved to make the breach no wider,
then we are bound in conscience to do. Could men be persuaded thus far, (and
there is no reason why they should not) we might yet hope to see, though not a
perfect union, yet a lasting peace in our days: For men would proportion their
zeal to the nature of things, they would seek out for information; they would
not take up objections upon trust, nor revile the legal Constitutions; the
number of Dissenters would be much lessened, and they would join with us in a
joint opposition of the common Enemy: They would bear with such inconveniences
as are not sinful, for what Church under Heaven is perfect in all matters of
worship and discipline? they would yield to a restraint of their liberty (in
the exercise of it) for the peace of the Church; For must not every Member of
any Society part with something that he desires, (might he choose for himself)
in order to the public Good?

3. Where any thing is of a doubtful signification, we must put the most
favorable construction of it, that it is fairly capable of. Were this (favor
shall I say, or) common equity allowed to the Constitutions of our Church,
which is to all other things of Human composure, we should hear no more of
those vehement charges of Antichristianism and Popery, that are drawn up
against them.

I am sure it is neither conscience nor prudence to expose the Church of England
to the hatred of foreign Protestants; and who can believe, that they way to
keep out Popery, and strengthen the interest of the Reformation, is by
inflaming the popular fury against that Church, which is the strongest Bulwark
in Christendom against the Papal Usurpations?

And now I shall draw to a conclusion; Oh that we would know in this our day,
etc.

If the Judgments of God, which we have already groaned under, cannot, sure the
dangers that threaten us and our Religion, might help to abate our heats, and
suppress our differences. We know, the wonderful zeal of the Jews for the
interest of every private party, and their inapprehensiveness of the common
danger, made them become a prey to the Romans. Did not Christianity decay in
the Church of Corinth, as their Schisms and Factions increased? Did not the
divisions in the Eastern Churches end either in a total subversion, or a dismal
corruption of Christianity among them? How were the glorious beginings of the
Reformation obstructed by the differences of some of the chief Reformers? And
if our Adversaries of Rome have of late made many Proselytes in these Kingdoms,
their success is not owing to the goodness of their cause, but to the force of
those Arguments, which we have put into their hands. Were not the former
conquests of these Nations the effects of our own divisions? God grant that
saying may never be applied to us which was used of our Forefathers; that
whilst they severally quarrelled among themselves, they were all overcome by
the common Enemy. We are told by one of their own Authors, That the most
effectual way to destroy the Protestants, is by dividing them from and against
one another Windeck de Haeres. extirp. p. 415.
. The advice of Campanella Cap. 25. p. 207.
has been pursued by the Romish Emissaries, that have been industrious in
heightning our Animosities, and blowing up every spark into a flame; in working
on the passions of discontented men, making harangues against the Church and
Government; in subdividing us into lesser parties, and promoting a general
Toleration. They know well enough, that the reformed Religion in England must
needs fall with our Church; they have seen how hard it is to set up a better
(or any, established) Church in the room of it; they are convinced, that a
number of petty Sects, and divided Interests, cannot long maintain their ground
against the Roman Forces.

If then we be concerned in good earnest (as I hope we are) to preserve the
Reformed Religion, let us all endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace Ephesians. 4.3.
. And that you may understand what kind of Religion they are laboring to
introduce, I will conclude with a short account of Popery.

It Is a Religion that teaches you to put off humanity, that you may be
Catholics, and to deny your senses in a plain sensible matter; to know the
will of God without a Bible, to pray to him by a Proxy, and to worship him just
as the old Heathens did; to believe twice as much as Christ and his Apostles
require, and to leave out one Commandment which God himself enjoined; to
promote Christian Charity by killing one another; and convert men with fire and
faggot; to deny a known truth without telling a lie, and to swear to a known
falsity without perjury; to obtain pardon of your sins without repentance, and
to go to Heaven without holiness; to worship a Deity of your Priests making,
and then to sacrifice him to God.

And now let all wise and good men offer up their prayers to God, that he would
make up those breaches, which our sins, and the subtilty of our enemies have
made in the Church; that he, who is the Prince of Pesace, would inspire us with
that wisdom that is pure and peaceable, and all our Governors with wisdom and
courage, to suppress the growth of Atheism and Profaneness, of Superstition
and Idolatry, of Schism and Sedition.

FINIS.

