A REPLY TO THE CATHOLIC GENTLEMAN'S ANSWER TO The most material parts of the
Book of SCHISM. Whereto is annexed, An Account of H. T. his Appendix to his
Manual of Controversies, concerning the Abbot of Bangors Answer to Augustine.
By H. HAMMOND, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1654.

A REPLY TO The Catholic Gentleman's Answer to the Book of SCHISM.
The Introduction.
Letter from the Catholic Gentleman, which undertakes to have answered the
most material parts of the Book of Schism, is said to expect some account
from me. And I shall give it, if not quite, with the same brevity, yet directly
in the same method which he has chosen, attending him, as he shall please to
lead, not by resuming the whole matter again, but by reflecting on those few
passages, which he has thought good to take notice of, and freeing them from
all though the lightest exceptions, which he has made to them.

account, I shall say very little to his Prooem in these words,

SIR,
You have been pleased to send me Doctor Hammonds Book of Schism, or a
Defense of the Church of England, against the exceptions of the Romanists, as
also your Letters, wherein you lay commands on me to read it, and thereupon to
give you my opinion: truly Sir, both the one and the other could never have
come to me in better season, for having heard from some of my friends in
England a good while since, of another Book, written by Doctor Fern to the
same purpose, as also one lately come out, of the Bishop of Derries, and of
this which you have sent me, I was wondering what those, who call themselves of
the Church of England, could say to defend themselves from Schism; but now
through your favor of letting me see this of Doctor Hammonds, I am freed from
my bondage, and satisfied, in supposition, that the most can add little to
what has been upon that subject of Schism said by him, whom you style Wise
and Learned, and well may he be so; but here he has failed, as all men must
that take in hand to defend a bad cause, which I think to make appear to you,
or any indifferent judge, and which I will do rather upon some observations of
several passages in his book, than consideration of the whole, which I will
leave for some other, who has more leisure. In the mean time I must say with
the Poet, speaking of some Lawyers in his time, Fur es, ait Pedio, Pedius quid?
Crimina raris
Librat in Antithetis:


The Roman Catholic says to Doctor Hammond, You are an Heretic, you are a
Schismatic, and Doctor Hammond replies good English, some Criticismes, much
Greek, with many citations out of antiquity, indifferent to both parts of the
question.

aveit the good words bestowed on me, because 1. if they had been meant in
earnest, they have yet no influence on the matter in hand; As unlearned a Man,
as I, and as learned as he, which is by some characters thought to be the
Author of this Answer, may agree in this common fate, that as one is not able
to defend a bad cause, so the other has not in any eminent manner betrayed a
good: 2. because it is evident, that it was design, and artifice to bestow the
good words on me, that so he might get himself the easier task: And therefore
the only thing that is here necessary for me to tell the Reader, by way of
Prooeme, is, that since the publishing this tract of Schism, that most
excellent discourse on the same subject, written by the Bishop of Derry has
truly made that former care of mine very unnecessary, and so should in all
reason have been undertaken and answered by this Catholic Gentleman, if he had
really designed to satisfy conscience in this question. And should it be
believed by him; what here he says in the Title page, that he has answered
the most material parts of Doctor Hammonds Book of Schism, yet I can assure
him he is so much mistaken in his supposall, that there can little be added by
any to what has been said by him, that he is in all justice to undeceive the
Reader, and make him amends by giving him not a slight, but punctual answer to
every part of that Bishops Book, before he think he may safely charge the
Church of England with Schism, as still he adventures to do.

Reply, to the rest of his Prooeme, but proceed immediately to his first and
only exception, wherein the first Chapter is concerned.

CHAP. I Of the cause of Schism being left out of this debate.
Sect. I.
No cause able to justify Schism. Every voluntary Division a Schism,
whatsoever the motive were. Master Knot's Testimony.

But to draw near your satisfaction, His first Chapter is, for the body of it,
common to both parts, yet I cannot omit one strange piece of Logic at the end
of the first Chapter, Sect. 9. where he concludes, that the occasion or motive
of Schism is not to be considered, but only the fact of Schism, Of which
position I can see no connection to any praemises going before, and it self is
a pure contradiction, for not a Division, but a causlesse division is a
Schism, and how a Division can be showed to be unreasonable and causeless,
without examining the occasions and motives, I do not understand, nor (with
his favor) I think he himself.

Logic there is in that conclusion of the first Chapter, which extorted this
animadversion from the Romanist, and what store of that faculty (somewhat
necessary to the managing of a controversy) we are to expect from him, will
soon be discernible by the view of that place which is accused by him, where
having praemised the criminousnesse and weight of Schism, and unexcusablenesse
of all, that, upon what provocation soever, break the unity of the Church, I
conclude that he that shall really be guilty of it, and the fact, wherein that
guilt consists, proved against him will no way be able to defend himself by
pleading the cause or motive to his Schism, there being no such cause
imaginable, which can justify this fact of his, as both out of Irenaeus and
Saint Augustine had been newly vouched. Upon which, my resolution there, was
(as to me seemed) but necessary, to divolve the Whole debate into this one
quaere, whether we of the Church of England were de facto, guilty of this
crime, were Schismatics or no, concluding that if we were, there were nothing
to be said in excuse of us.

rational importance of that Section, 1. It is evident (what the Romanist
professes not to be able to see) what is the connection of my position to the
praemises foregoing, viz. this, no cause can excuse the Schismatic, therefore
the examination of the cause is unnecessary, whatsoever can be pretended on
that head, is not worth the producing or heeding in this matter.

position it self is removed from being a contradiction, which yet the
Romanists Logic has pronounced to be a pure one. A pure contradiction is in
our Logic, est and non est, It is a Schism, and It is not a Schism, It is
causlesse, and it is not causlesse, and the like. But certainly my concluding
that no cause can justify a Schism, or if the Schism be proved, it is in vain
to plead that we had cause for it, contains no such contradictory
enuntiations. He that should say that a Seditious person or a Rebel, is worthy
of death whatsoever cause it were that incited him to that villainy, does
neither affirm the Rebel to be no Rebel, nor the cause he pretends, to be no
cause, only he says indeed, that whatsoever the cause be, it is incompetent to
justify so foul a fact.

proof, which he adds to conclude this position to be a pure contradiction,
is very far from proving it. The proof is this, for, says he, not a
division, but a causeless division is a Schism. But this has been showed to
have no truth in it, because Division and Schism being exactly the same, one a
Latin, the other a Greek word, every Division is and must necessarily be, in
him who is guilty of it, a Schism, and if a voluntary Division, a criminous
Schism, whatsoever were the motive or cause of it, by Division or Schism
understanding (as I declare my self to do) a spontaneous receding, or
dividing from the unity of the Church, not being cut off or driven from it.

consectary of his proof, that [ he does not understand how a Division can be
showed unreasonable and causeless, without examining the occasions and
motives] he may now, if he please, without much difficulty comprehend, viz. by
considering, that no cause or reason, how weighty soever, is sufficient to
justify a division. For as long as this is either proved or granted, the
conclusion will be indubitable, without examining of the motives, that the
Division is unreasonable and causeless. Let it once be granted or proved by
the known Laws of a Nation, that every act of Sedition is a transgression of
Law, criminous and punishable, whatsoever the motive be that incited it, and
then there will need no more than conviction of the fact, to conclude that fact
unreasonable. That which is in it self so culpable and inexcusable, that no
reason whatsoever can be able to justify it, is ready for the sentence of
condemnation, without farther process; when it is reasonably resolved, that no
reason can excuse such a fact, what reason can there be to lose time in
examining reasons? This is the very case in hand, as it is apparent to any that
will but view the place, and it is not much for my encouragement in this task,
that the Gentleman, to whom I must reply, was willing to think this so deep a
riddle, so much above common understandings.

Romanist, being a concession that cut me off from many visible advantages, and
so deserved his reward, much better than rebuke, and being thus early and
unexpectedly fallen under his short displeasure, by my endeavor to oblige him,
I have yet a shield, which promises me security from the continuance of it, I
mean not the evidence of the truth affirmed by me, (for that is not an amulet
always to be depended on, when it is against interest to acknowledge it) but
the suffrage of his own great Champion Master Knot, who has directly affirmed
what I affirmed (and therefore I may be allowed not to understand, how this
should be so unintelligible) citing it out of Saint Augustine, That there is no
just necessity to divide unity, And that it is not possible that any man have
just cause to separate -- Infideli unmasked, cap. 7. number. 5. And so it is as
manifest that this part of the first Chapter is common to both, as the former
of which he affirms it, the conclusion in all reason being involved in the
same condition which belonged to the Praemises, and it was only my ill luck,
or his willingness to find fault, that it was not formerly apprehended to be
so.

CHAP. II. Concerning Heresy, Excommunication, Infallibility.
Sect. I.
Of passing slightly over the difference betwixt Heresy and Schism.

exceptions to the second Chapter are three; the first concerning Heresy, the
second concerning Excommunication, the third concerning Master Knots
concession, which ushers in a Discourse of Infallibility.



slight passing over the distinction of Heresy and Schism, is one piece of
injustice in him, and the cause to which it is affixt, my unwillingnesse that
it should be understood that all Heresy is Schism, will soon appear to be
another.

first, It is evident that in that Sect. 3. of Chap. 2. I do not at all
consider the distinction of Heresy, and Schism, nor could, without absolute
interruption and disturbance of the discourse in hand, and direct transgression
of all rules of method, say any thing to that subject, in that place. The thing
that I there manifest is the difference betwixt Excommunication and Schism
(and sure that is not Heresy and Schism, unless Excommunication be Heresy,
and so the punishment of the Sin be the Sin it self) between the passive and
the active, or reciprocal division or separation, and all that I say in that
Section, which can relate to Heresy, is, that where the offense, for which a
man is excommunicated, is Heresy and not Schism, there it is evident, that
his Excommunication, which still is his punishment and not his sin (the cause
of it also being not Schism, but somewhat else, Heresy, or the like) cannot
be the guilt of Schism in him that is so punished.

pass over that slightly, which I do not speak to at all, and to which I had
no occasion to speak, and consequently that I was no way liable to this
exception.

exception, that of the ground on which I do this, must needs be as causlesse
as the former. For 1. it is certain, that my thoughts, or wishes, or designs,
are not things which can duly fall under this objecters cognizance (he cannot
upon any sure grounds, divine or affirm, what I aimed at in such or such a
slight passage) and 2. it is yet more certain, that no collection can justly be
made from my doing that slightly, which I did not meddle with at all. But then
3. to remove all scruple or possible occasion of jealousy in this matter, it is
the design of Chapter 8. (the method then leading to it) under a second sort
of Schism, to consider the departure from the Unity of the Faith, which being
but a periphrasis of Heresy, is consequently the defining all Heresy is
Schism, and so the professed avowing of that, which he suspected me unwilling to
have understood. And so still there is not the least appearance of justice in
this suggestion.

Sect. II.
Excommunication how it differs from Schism. Wilful continuance under
censures is Schism. The Bishop of Rome is not our Lawful Governor. The
severe conditions of their Communion.

exception is perfectly of the same making with the former, thus,

Again, says he, treating of Excommunication, he easily slideth over this
part, that wilful continuance in a just Excommunication makes Schism.

Excommunication, nor have any occasion fitly to treat of it, farther than to
show, that Schism, being a voluntary separation, the word in no propriety
pertaines to that act of the Governor of the Church, whereby he separates or
cuts off any by way of Censures. Certainly he that is put to death by Sentence
of Law, cannot be judged a Felo de se, one that has voluntarily put himself
out of the number of the living, or be liable to those forfeitures which by the
Law belong to such. He that is banished out of the Kingdom cannot be guilty of
the breach of that Statute, which forbids all Subjects going out of it, nor be
punished justly for that which is his suffering, not his deed; his punishment,
not his delinquency.

wilful continuance under just Censures, the wilfulness of that, certainly
makes him culpable, and the continuance in Excommunication, being also
continuance in separation from the Church, which is Schism, whenever it is
voluntary, I make no doubt of the consequence, that such wilful continuance in
Excommunication, be it just or unjust, is actual Schism, supposing (as the
word wilful must suppose) that this continuance is wholly imputable to the
will of the Excommunicate, i. e. that if he will submit to that which is
lawful for him to submit to, he may be absolved and freed from it.

explicitly affirmed, then I answer, that as there I had no occasion to speak
to it, so now upon his slightest demand I make no scruple to give him my full
sense of it, that he, which being cast into prison for just cause, may upon his
Petition, and promise of Reformation be released, or if the cause were unjust,
may yet without doing any thing any way unlawful, regaine his Liberty, from
thenceforth becomes not the Magistrates, but his own Prisoner, and is guilty
of all the damage, be it disease, famishing, death it self, which is
consequent to his imprisonment. And the analogy holds directly in
Excommunication; He that continues under the Censures of his Ecclesiastical
Ruler, when he might fairly obtain absolution from them, is by himself
sentenced to the continuance of this punishment, as by the Governor of the
Church, to the beginning of it. But then all this while this is not the
condition of our Church, in respect of the Church of Rome, they being not our
Lawful Superiors, endued with jurisdiction over us, and for other communion,
such as alone can be maintained or broken among fellow-brethren, or Christians,
it is carefully maintained by us, as far as it is lawfully maintainable.

Chapters, I did not warily or purposely abstain from (because I had nothing
that suggested to me any opportunity of) saying any thing more to this purpose.
The severe conditions which are by the Romanists required of us to render us
capable of their communion, subscription of error, or profession against
Conscience, make it impertinent to propose or discuss either of these two
questions, 1. Whether we lie under a just excommunication, 2. Whether, if we
did, we would wilfully continue under it, or consequently, whether we be now
guilty of Schism in this notion?

Sect. III.
Mr. Knots concession and conclusion. The power of a fallible Church to require
belief. Of Antiquity, Possession, Persuasion of Infallibility, Motives for
Union. Uncertainty of the Protestants reasons. The grand Heresy and Schism of
not believing Rome infallible. Belief sufficient without infallibility.
Fictions of Cases.

exception inlargeth to some length, in these words,

What he calls Master Knots concession, I take to be the public profession of
the Roman or Catholic Church, and that nature it self teaches all rational
men, that any Congregation that can lie, and knows not whether it does lie or
no, in any proposition, cannot have power to bind any particular to believe
what she says, neither can any man of understanding have an obligation to
believe what she teaches, farther than agrees with the rules of his own
reason: Out of which it follows, that the Roman Churches binding of men to a
profession of Faith (which the Protestants and other haereticall multitudes
have likewise usurped) if she be infallible, is evidently gentle, charitable,
right, and necessary, as contrariwise in any other Church or Congregation,
which pretends not to infallibility, the same is unjust, tyrannical and a
selfe-condemnation to the binders: so that the state of the question will be
this, whether the Catholic or Roman Church be infallible or no, for she
pretends not to bind any man to tenets or beliefs upon any other ground or
title* By this you may perceive much of his discourse -- to be not only
superfluous and unnecessary, but also contrary to himself, for he labors to
persuade that the Protestant may be certain of some truth, against which the
Roman Catholic Church binds to profession of error, which is as much as to
say, as he who pretends to have no infallible rule by which to govern his
Doctrine, shall be supposed to be infallible, and he that pretends to have an
infallible rule, shall be supposed to be fallible; at most because fallible
objections are brought against him: now then consider what a meek and humble
Son of the Church ought to do, when of the one side is the Authority of
Antiquity and Possession (such Antiquity and Possession without dispute or
contradictions from the adversary, as no King can show for his Crown, and much
less any other person or persons for any other thing) the persuasion of
infallibility, all the pledges that Christ has left to his Church for Motives
of Union: on the other side, uncertain reasons of a few men pretending to
learning, every day contradicted by incomparable numbers of men Wise and
Learned, and those few men confessing those reason and themselves uncertain,
fallible, and subject to error, certainly without a bias of interest or
prejudice, it is impossible for him to leave the Church if he be in it, or not
return if he be out of it: for if infallibility be the ground of the Churches
power to command belief, as she pretends no other, no time, no separation
within memory of History, can justify a continuance out of the Church: You may
please to consider then how solid this Doctors discourse is, who tells us,
for his great evidence, that we, (says he) who do not acknowledge the Church
of Rome to be infallible, may be allowed to make certain suppositions (that
follow there) The question is, whether a Protestant be a Schismatic because a
Protestant? and he will prove he is not a Schismatic, because he goes
consequently to Protestant, that is Schismatical grounds: I pray you reflect,
that not to acknowledge the Church to be infallible is that for which we charge
the Doctor with Schism and Heresy in Capite, and more than for all the rest
he holds distinct from us, for this principle takes away all belief, and all
ground of belief, and turns it into uncertainty and weathercock opinion,
puts us into the condition to be circumferri omni vento Doctrinae,
submits us to Atheism and all sort of miscreancy, let him not then
over-leap the question, but either prove this is not sufficient to make him a
Schismatic and an Heretic too, or let him acknowledge he is both.

consideration of fallibility and infallibility in a Church, is certainly a
digression in this place, and taking the occasion from some words of mine,
Sect. 6. of a concession of Master Knots, it is a little necessary to recount,
what concession that was, and the use that I there made of it, that so it may
appear, whether there were any thing blameable in my procedure.

Sect. 5. was the undoubted lawfulness of being and continuing excluded from
any such Church, the conditions of whose communion contain Sin in them. To
this head of discourse I mentioned a concession of Master Knots, that it is
perfectly unlawful to dissemble, aequivocate, or lie in matters of Faith, and
this as a confirmation of my then present assertion, that when I am not
permitted by the Romanists to have external communion with them, unless I do
thus dissemble, equivocate and lie, affirm my self to believe what I do not
believe, I may lawfully continue thus excluded from their communion. But then I
could not justly conceal what Master Knot there added as his conclusion from
hence (together with the acknowledged unlawfulness of forsaking the external
communion of Gods visible Church) that therefore the Church of Rome is
infallible, because otherwise men might forsake her communion.

strange, that this conclusion should be thus deduced from such praemisses,
that it should be deemed lawful to separate from a Church for every error, or
for no more but being subject to error, being fallible, though it were actually
guilty of no error, which I conceived to be the same in effect, as to affirm
it lawful, to forsake the communion of all but Saints, and Angels, and God in
Heaven, because all others were peccable and fallible. But yet I thought not
fit to go farther out of my way to press the unreasonablenesse of it, but
contented my self with that, which was for my present turn, his confession
that it was lawful to separate or continue in separation from the Church of
Christ, in case we could not without lying, etc. be permitted to communicate
with it.

Sect. Let us now see what a confusion is made to gain some small advantage
from hence, or excuse for a long digression.

conclusion, viz. [that any Congregation that can lie, etc. cannot have power
to bind any to believe what she saith] which he says is called by me Master
Knots concession. But this is a great mistake, I never looked on this as his
concession, never called it by that title, but as a conclusion that he made a
strange shift to deduce from another concession.

concession, this Gentleman should in reason have understood to be somewhat
which the Adversary yields, and which the disputer gains advantage by his
yiedling it, such was his assertion, that all lying and dissembling was
unlawful, and that rather than that should be admitted, it were lawful to
forsake the external communion of the Church of Christ. And that, and nothing
but that, was by me cited as his concession.

conclusion it self, that the Congregation that is fallible cannot have power
to bind to believe, -- is not so much as considered by me in that place or
else where; I said not one word against it, which might provoke this objector
to take it up, and confirm it, neither was it in the least needful, or
pertinent to the matter then in hand, to enter into the consideration of it.
All that was by me taken notice of (and that but in passing) was the
consequence or coherence betwixt the praemisses and that conclusion, which
naturally inferred a third thing, that it was in Mr. Knots opinion, lawful to
forsake the Communion of any fallible Church, which I thought by the way, would
be sure to excuse us (though we should be granted to have forsaken and
continued wilfully in Separation from the Roman Church) if it might but
appear, that either that were guilty of any one error, or liable to fall into
any one. And this being entirely all that was there said by me, there is no
reason I should so far attend this Gentleman in his digression, as to consider
what here he proceeds to say, upon his new-sprung subject of discourse, very
distant from that of Schism, to which I endeavored to adhere, having
elsewhere pursued at large, the Romanists other hypothesis concerning their
Churches Infallibility.

remote from our matter in hand, and perfectly unnecessary to the defense of
our Church from Schism, I might discover farther many infirm parts in this
procedure. I shall but briefly touch on some of them.

proposition [that a Congregation that can lie, i. e. a Church that is
fallible, and knows not (i. e. has no infallible certainty) whether it lie
or no in any proposition, cannot have power to bind any to believe what
shesaith] I may certainly affirm, 1. That this is no infallible truth, being
no where affirmed by any infallible speaker, or deduced from any infallible
principle. For as to the Scripture, it is not pretended to be affirmed by that,
and for Natural Reason, that cannot be an infallible Judge in this matter of
defining what power may be, or is by God given to a Church, without defining it
infallible. A Prince may no doubt be empowered by God to give Laws, and those
Laws oblige Subjects to obedience, and yet that Prince never be imagined
infallible in making Laws. And natural reason cannot conclude it impossible,
that a Church should have a proportionable power given it by God to bind
belief, etc.

Catholic or Roman Church, 1. that is a misprision, the Catholic is not the
single Roman Church, nor the Roman the Catholic. 2. There no where appears any
such definition, either of the Catholic, i. e. Universal Church of God, or
particularly of the Roman Church, no act of Council representative of that
Church, no known affirmation of that diffused body under the Bishop of Rome's
Pastorage, that all authority to oblige belief is founded in Infallibility. 3.
If any such definition did appear, it could no way be foundation of belief to
us, who do not believe that Church, or any definition thereof, as such, to be
infallible.

distinguish and limit the terms, 1. what is meant by [ can lie] 2. By knowing
or not knowing whether it lie or no, 3. By power to bind, 4 By belief (as
every of these have a latitude of signification, and may be easily mistaken,
till they are duly limited) It will then soon appear that there is no unlimited
truth in that which he says is the whole Churches affirmation, nor prejudice
to our pretensions from that limited truth, which shall be found in it.

can lie] may denote no more than such a possibility of erring, as yet is
joined neither with actual error, nor with any principle, whether of
deficiency on one side, nor of malignity on the other, which shall be sure to
betray it into error. Thus that particular Church, that is at the present in
the right, in all matters of faith, and has before it the Scripture to guide
it in all its decisions, together with the traditions and doctrines of the
ancient and Primitive Church, and having skill in all those knowledges, which
are useful to fetch out the true meaning of Scripture, and ability to inquire
into the ancient path, and to compare her self with all other considerable
parts of the Universal Church, and then is diligent and faithful to make use
of all these succors, and in uprightness of heart seeks the truth, and applies
it self to God in humble, and ardent, and continual prayer for his guidance to
lead into all truth, This Church, I say, is yet fallible, may affirm and teach
false, i. e. this is naturally possible that it may, but it is not strongly
probable that it will, as long as it is thus assisted, and disposed to make use
of these assistances, and means of true defining.

Churches knowledge, whether it define truly or no in any proposition, may
signify no more than a full persuasion or belief (cui non subest dubium,
wherein they neither doubt nor apprehend reason of doubting) that what they
define is the very truth, though for knowledge properly so called, or
assurance, cui non potest subesse falsum, which is unerrable or infallible in
strictness of speech, it may not have attained, or pretend to have attained to
it.

power to bind may be meant no more than authority derived to them from the
Apostles of Christ to make decisions, when difficulties arise, to prescribe
rules for ceremonies or government, such as shall oblige inferiors to due
observance and obedience, by force of the Apostles (...), his precept to obey
the rulers set over us in the Church, which we may do without thinking them
simply, or by any promise of God, inerrable or infallible, as the obedience
which is due to civil Magistrates, which supposes in them a power of binding
subjects to obey, does yet no way suppose or imply them incapable of erring and
sinning, and giving unreasonable commands, and such as wherein it is unlawful
to yield obedience to them.

general obligation that lies on all men, to believe what is with due grounds
of conviction proposed to them, such as the disbelieving or doubting of it
shall be in them inseparable from obstinacy; and this obligation is again the
greater, when that which is thus convincingly proposed, is proposed by our
superiors, from whose mouth it is regular to seek and receive Gods will.

Lastly, Believing may signify not an implicit, irrational, blind, but a
well-grounded, rational, explicit belief of that which, as the truth of God,
is duly proposed to us; or again, where there is not that degree of
manifestation, yet a consent to that which is proposed as most probable, on the
grounds afforded to judge by, or when the person is not competent to search
grounds, a bare yiedling to the judgment of superiors, and deeming it better
to adhere to them, than to attribute any thing to their own judgment, a
believing so far as not to disbelieve. And this again may rationally be
yielded to a Church, or the Rulers and Governors of it, without deeming them
inerrable or infallible.

proposition defined is such, that every member of that Church cannot without
violence to his understanding yield any such degree of belief unto it, yet he
that believes it not, may behave himself peaceably and reverently, either duly
representing his grounds, why he cannot consent to it, or if his subscription
or consent be neither formally nor interpretatively required of him, quietly
enjoy his contrary opinion. And this may tend as much to the peace and unity of
a Church, as the persuasion of the inerrability thereof can be supposed to do.

latitude of these terms, and the limitations they are capable of, it is now
not so difficult to discern, in what sense the proposition under consideration
is false, and in what sense it is true, and by us acknowledged to be so.

congregation that is fallible, and has no knowledge or assurance (cui non
potest subesse falsum) that it is not deceived in any particular proposition,
may yet have authority to make decisions, etc. and to require inferiors so
far to acquiesce to their determinations, as not to disquiet the peace of
that Church with their contrary opinions.

absolute infallible belief or consent, that no Church, which is not it self
absolutely infallible, and which does not infallibly know that it is
infallible, has power to require of any.

true, which in the following words is suggested of Protestants, that they
bind men to a Profession of Faith, and how injustly it is added, that,
supposing them not to be infallibe, it is unjust, tyrannical, and
self-condemnation to the binders. The contrary whereto is most evident,
understanding the obligation with that temper, and the infallibity in that
notion, wherein it is evident we understand it. For what injustice or tyranny
etc. can it be in any lawful superior, having defined what verily he believes
to be the truth of God, and no way doubts of his having deduced it rightly from
the Scripture, but yet knows that he, as a man, is fallible, and that it is
possible he may have some way failed in this, as in any other his most
circumspect action, what injustice, I say, can it be, authoritatively to direct
this definition to those, who are committed to his charge, and expect their due
submission to it? meaning by submission, what I have here expressed to mean by it.

Roman Church, how far it is from gentle or charitable in them to bind men to
profess, as matter of faith, whatsoever is by that Church defined, upon this
one account, that the Church is infallible and cannot err; when this very
thing, that it is infallible, is not at all made probable, much less
infallibly deduced from any reason or testimony that is infallible.

the state of the question will be this, whether the Roman Church be infallible
or no, I am not sure I know what question he means, whether the main Question
on which the Tract of Schism was written, i. e. whether the Church of England
be schismatic or no, or whether the particular question, which this
Gentleman's haste has framed to himself in this place, Whether a fallible
Church may have power to bind any to believe what she says? But I suppose by
some indications, that the latter is it, and then, as from hence I learn what
he means by infallible, a Church that cannot possibly err, all whose
definitions are such, quibus nequit subesse falsum, so until this be proved of
that Church, I must be allowed to speak like one who think not my self obliged
to the belief of it, and being sure of this, that a Protestant is or may be
verily persuaded of some truth, against which the Roman Church binds to
profession of error (meaning by verily persuaded, such a certainty only, cui
non subest dubium, he has no doubt nor reason to induce doubting of it) I
cannot imagine how that part of my discourse, wherein I have supposed or
asserted this, can be either superfluous, unnecessary, or (whatever other
weakness it be guilty of) contrary to my self. For certainly I that think I am
fallible, may yet verily believe, without all doubt, the truth of many
propositions, which if I should affirm my self not to believe, I must
doubtless lie, and then sin, by Mr. Knot's former concession. And it is as
certain on the other side, that he that pretends to have an infallible rule,
may yet foully mistake, both in that general, original, and in many other
particular, derivative pretensions; His supposed infallibility, if it be not
rightly supposed (and till it be proved, it will not be so) will be so far
from an amulet to keep him safe from all error, that it is the likeliest way to
deliver him up to it, as the premature persuasion of his particular election
may be the ingulsing any, through security and presumption, in the most certain
ruin.

discourse he is pleased to mention four advantages of the Roman Church above
any other, Antiquity, possession, persuasion of Infallibility, the pledges that
Christ has left to his Church for motives of union, and nothing but uncertain
reasons on the other side, which says he, must make it impossible for any
without interest or prejudice to leave the Church, if he be in it, or not
return, if he be out of it.

scales between them and us, and particularly to the fourth advantage pretended
to, the pledges that Christ left for motives of union, it is sufficient to
reply in general, that for us, which have not voluntarily separated, but are
by them violently removed from communion with them, and cannot be admitted to
reunion, but upon conditions, which without dissembling and lying we cannot
undergo, it is in vain to speak of motives or obligations to return to their
communion. We that are bound, as much as in us lies, to have peace with all
men, must not admit any known or wilful sin in order to that most desirable
end. And this one thing as alone it is pertinent to the matter in hand, that of
schism, so it is necessarily the concluding of this controversy, We that are
not permitted to return, and so we are, if the conditions of our return be so
encumbered, as to include sin, cannot with any justice or equity be charged for
not returning.

advantages on their side. And none of these are of any force to persuade our
return, upon such conditions as these, much less to exact it as duty from us.

Antiquity and Possession, as here they are spoken of, I am apt to suppose he
means not antiquity of the Roman Church, or the present doctrines (and
therefore I shall not speak of them) but the antiquity of our communion with
them (if he mean a Possession in the belief of the Popes Universal Pastorship,
I shall have occasion to speak of that Ch 7. Sect. 1.
hereafter.) And if this be granted, as for fraternall communion, and such as
is due from one sister Church to another, it is willingly granted, then this
will divolve the blame on those who are guilty of this breach, who have cast us
out, and permit us no way of returning with a good conscience, And so this is
little for the Romanists advantage.

fraternall communion, it be subjection to the Roman See, that is by his words
claimed, and pretended to by possession, then as we willingly grant to that See
all that the ancient Canons allowed to it, and so cannot in that respect offend
against Antiquity, so what, contrary to those Canons, they have at any time
assumed, and unlawfully possessed themselves of, can no way be pretended to be
their right, or they to be bonae fidei possessores, true or fair possessors of
it, which qualification and condition is yet absolutely necessary to found
their plea from possession, and which alone can bear any proportion with that,
which Kings can show for their crowns, or proprietaries for their inheritances.

possession, or prescription, it were easy to add much more, by considering
that claim and title, by the known rules whether of the Canon, or Civil Law.
The Civil Law, which is generally more favorable to Prescription, does yet
acknowledge many ways of interrupting it, as by calling it into question, and
that is sufficiently done in some cases, per solam conventionem, by citing, or
summoning the possessor, and when contestatio litis, the entering a suit is
actually required, yet still he that appears to have caused the impediment, and
kept it from coming to this contestation, is not to gain any advantage by his
guilt, but adversus eum lis habetur pro contestato, he shall be looked on, as if
the suit had been actually contested against him. See Bartolus in l. si eum.
qui injuriarum in fi: ff. si quis caut:

Canon Law, which in all reason the Catholic is to own in this question, it is
known that it admits not any the longest prescription, without the bonae
fidei possessio, (he that came by any thing dishonestly, is for ever obliged to
restitution) and for the judging of that, allows of many ways of probation,
from the nature of the thing (the course we have taken in this present debate)
and from other probable indications, and where the appearances are equal on
both sides, the Law, though it be wont to judge most favorably, does yet
incline to question the honesty of coming to the possession, and to presume the
dishonesty, upon this account, because mala fides, dishonesty is presumed
industriously to contrive its own secrecy, and to lie hid in those recesses,
from which at a distance of time it is not easily fetched out. So Felinus in C.
ult: de praescript: per leg: ult: C. unde vi. And in a word, it is the
affirmation of the Doctors, presumi malam fidem ex antiquiore adversarii
possessione, the presumption is strong that the possession was not honestly
come by, when it appears to have been anciently in the other hands, and the way
of conveyance from one to the other is not discernible. See Panormit: and
Felinus in c. si diligenti X de prescript: Menochius arbit: quaest: Casu 225.
n. 4. and others referred to by the learned Groti^^ in Consil: Jurid: super iis
quae Nassavii -- p. 36. etc. But I have no need of these nicer disquisitions.

persuasion of infallibility, meaning, as they must, their own persuasion of
it, that can have no influence upon us, who are sure that we are not so
persuaded, unless the grounds, on which their persuasion is founded, be so
convincingly represented to us, that it must be our prejudice, or other vicious
defect, or affection in us, that we are not in the like manner persuaded of it.
But on this we are known to insist, and never yet have had any such grounds
offered to us: As may in some measure appear by the view of that Controversy
as it lies visible in the Book, entitled, The view of Infallibility.

uncertainty of the reasons on the Protestants side, by uncertainty, meaning
fallibility, and the potest subesse falsum, whilst yet we are, without
doubting, verily persuaded that our reasons have force in them; that cannot
make it possible for us to believe what we do not believe, or lawful upon any
the fairest intuition to profess contrary to our belief. I believe that Henry
VIII. was King of this Nation, and the reasons on which I believe it, are, the
testimonies of mere men, and so fallible; yet the bare fallibility of those
testimonies cannot infuse into me any doubt of the truth of them, has no force
to shake that but humane belief, and while I thus believe, I am sure it were
wilful sin in me, though for the greatest and most precious acquisitions in my
view, to profess I do not believe it. The like must be said of any other
persuasion of mine, denied by the Romanists, and the denying whereof is part of
the condition required of me to make me capable of communion with them.

nothing produced against it, and because here follows a much higher
undertaking, which swallows up all these inferior differences between us, viz:
that not to acknowledge the Church (that must be the Roman Church) to be
infallible, is the great crime of schime and heresy in capite, and more than
all that I hold distinct from the Romanists.

Tract of Schism, and may serve for the una litura, the one answer to remove
all that is there said. For if our grand Fundamental schism and heresy be all
summed up in this one comprehensive guilt, our not acknowledging the Church of
Rome to be infallible, then it was and still is impertinent to discourse on any
other subject but that one of Infallibility, for if that be gained by them to
belong to their Church, I am sure we are concluded Schismatics, and till it be
gained, I am sure there is no reason to suppose it.

compendious way of answering the Tract of Schism, and I wonder, after he had
said this, he could think it seasonable to proceed to make exceptions to any
other particulars, this one great mistake of the Question being discovered,
made all other more minute considerations unnecessary (as he that has sprung a
mine to blow up the whole Fort, need not set wispes of straw to several
corners to burn it) so it falls out a little unluckily, that this does not
supersede, but only remove this Gentleman's labor, it being now as necessary
that he should defend his hypothesis of the Church of Romes Infallibility,
against all that is formerly said by me on that subject, as now it was to make
this Answer to the Book of Schism, and till that be done, or attempted to be
done, there is nothing left for me to reply to in this matter.

affirmations, that the not acknowledging their Infallibility takes away all
belief and ground of belief, turns all into uncertainty, etc. nay, submits
to Atheism and all sorts of miscreancy.] It is sure but a mistake or
misunderstanding as of some other things, so particularly of the nature of
belief; For beside that I may have other grounds of belief than the
affirmations of the Roman Church, the authority of Scripture for the severalls
contained in it, and the Testimony of the universal Primitive (that sure is
more than of the present Roman) Church, to assure me that what we take for
Scripture is Scripture, and to derive Apostolical traditions to me, and so I
may believe enough without ever knowing that the Roman Church defines any thing
de fide, but much more without acknowledging the truth of all she defines, and
yet much more without acknowledging her inerrable and infallible: Beside this,
I say, it is evident that belief is no more than consent to the truth of any
thing, and the grounds of belief, such arguments as are sufficient to exclude
doubting, to induce conviction and persuasion, and where that is actually
induced, there is belief, though there be no pretense of infallibility in the
argument, nor opinion of it in him that is persuaded by it.

God has said is true, I believe by a belief or persuasion, cui non potest
subesse falsum, wherein I cannot be deceived, and there I acknowledge
infallibility upon this ground, whether of nature or of grace, of common
dictate, or of religion, that it is impossible for God to lie, to deceive, or
to be deceived; But that the whole Canon of Scripture, as it is delivered to us
by the Laodicean Council, is the Word of God, though I fully believe this also,
and have not the least doubt to any part of it, yet I account not my self
infallible in this belief, nor can any Church that affirms the same, unless
they are otherwise privileged by God, be infallible in affirming it, nor any
that believes that Church be infallible in their belief; And as that privilege
is not yet proved by any donation of Gods to belong to any Church, particularly
to the Roman, so till it be proved, and proved infallibly, it can be no
competent medium to induce any new act of Infallible belief, the want of which
may denominate us either heretics or schismatics.

believe any thing infallibly in this matter, not so much as that the Church is
not infallible, must yet be acknowledged to believe her fallible, or else I
could not by this Gentleman be adjudged a scismatick for so believing: And then
this supposes that I may believe what in his opinion I believe untruly, that
sure is, that I may believe what I do not believe infallibly. The matter is
visible, I cannot think fit to enlarge on it.

ground which he here had, on which he founds his exception against the
solidity of my discourse, calling it my great evidence, that we that do not
acknowledge the Church of Rome to be infallible, may be allowed to make certain
suppositions that follow there.

Chap. II. Sect. 12. lies thus. In examining the nature of schism, I have
occasion to mention one (not real, but) fiction of case; Suppose first that
our Ancestors had criminously separated from the Church of Rome, and suppose
secondly, that we their posterity repented, and desired to reform their sin,
and to be reunited to them; yet supposing thirdly, that they should require to
our reunion any condition which were unlawful for us to perform, in this
conjuncture, I say, we could not justly be charged for continuing that
separation.

fiction of case I could not think had any weak part in it, for as it supposed
that on one side, which I knew a Romanist would not grant, viz: that they
should require any condition unlawful for us to perform, so it supposed on the
other side, that which we can no way grant, viz: that our Ancestors criminously
separated; But this I knew was ordinary to be done in fictions of cases;
Suppositio non ponit, is the acknowledged rule, my supposing either of these
was not the taking them for granted, And yet after all this, I foresaw that
objection, that the Romanist, who acknowledges not any such hard condition
required to our reconciliation, will conceive this an impossible case; And to
this I answered, that we, that acknowledge not their Church to be infallible
may be allowed to make a supposition (meaning as before a fiction of case)
which is founded in the possibility of her inserting some error in her
confessions, and making the acknowledgment of it the indispensable condition of
her communion. What I have offended herein, I cannot imagine, for 1. I only
set a fiction of case, do not take their infallibility for a thing confestly
false, nor in that place so much as dispute against it, Only I say that which
was sufficiently known before I said it, that their Infallibity is not
acknowledged by us, and so that her inserting some error in her Confessions, is
to us, i. e. in our opinion a thing possible, and so for disputation sake
supposable, in the same manner as I suppose that which I am known not to
believe, and if this Gentleman be thus severe, I shall despair to approve my
discourses to him.

Secondly, that I make it my great evidence, is not with any appearance of
reason suggested by him, It comes in merely as an incidentall, last branch, the
least necessary, most unconsiderable of any, and that which might have been
spared then, or left out now, without any weakening of, or disturbing the
discourse.

Thirdly, Whereas he adds, that I proceed to make certain suppositions that
follow there, this is still of the same strein, I make but one supposition,
viz: in case she make any unlawful act the indispensable condition of her
Communion, And that one certainly is not in the plural, more, or indefinitely,
certain suppositions.

one case as possible, and then proceeded to consider, what were by the
principles acknowledged by all, particularly by Mr. Knot, to be done in that
one case, was agreeable to the strictest laws of discourse which I have met
with. And if in compliance with this Gentleman, I must deny my self such
liberties, and yet yield him so much greater, on the other side, If I must at
the beginning of a defense of the Church of England, be required to grant the
Church of Rome infallible, i. e. to yield not only that she speaks all truth,
but also that it is impossible she should speak any thing but truth, whom yet,
by entering on this theme, I undertake to contradict, and to prove injurious in
censuring us for Schismatics, this were, as I have said, an hard task indeed,
The very same as if I were required to begin a duel by presenting and
delivering up all weapons into the enemies hand, to plead a cause, and
introduce my defense by confessing my self guilty of all that the plaintiff
does, or can have the confidence to charge upon me.

conditions of a dispute, these will questionless be hard, whatsoever the
conditions of our reunion be conceived to be, and moreover this Gentleman will
be as infallible as his Church, and then it is pity he should lavish out
medicines, that is so secured by charms, that he should defend his cause by
reasons, which has this one so much cheaper expedient, to answer a whole book
in one period.

Animadversions on this second Chapter, which are no excellent presage of that
which we are to expect in the ensuing.

CHAP. III. Exceptions to the third Chapter answered.
Sect. I.
The Division of Schism justified. Of Schism against the authority of
Counsels. Of Unanimity of belief in the dispersion of the Churches.

exceptions against the third Chap: are reducible to 4 heads. The first about
the insufficiency of the division of Schism, in these words,



And again in the next page, by way of recollection or second thoughts, thus,

But I must not forget here what I omitted to insert before, that in his
division of Schism he omitteth the Principal, if not indeed, and in the use
of the word by the Ancients, the only schism, which is when one breaks from
the whole Church of God: for though a breach made from the immediate superior,
or a particular Church, may in some sort, and in our ordinary manner of
speaking be called a schism, yet that by which one breaks away from the
communion of the whole Church, is properly, and in a higher sense called
Schism, and is that out of which the present question proceeds, whereas
other divisions, as long as both parts remain in communion with the Universal
Church, are not properly schisms, but with a diminutive particle, so that in
this division he left out that part which appertained to the question.

division of schism is that which I could not conceive subject to the
exceptions of any rational man, of what persuasions soever; schism being a
breach of unity and communion; as many sorts as were conceivable of unity and
communion, so many, and no more, I set down of schism, some as breaches of the
subordination which Christ settled in his Church, others of mutual charity,
which he left among his Disciples.

all men in the world are either our superiors, or inferiors, or our equals?
and can I break communion with any, as long as being an inferior, I live
regularly under all my superiors, and brotherly with all my equals? There is
certainly no place of doubt in this. When therefore in his second period here
set down, he mentions it, as the principal, (and in the Ancients use of the
word) the only Schism, when one breaks from the whole Church of God, It is
strange he should think that man was not comprised in either member of my
division, when certainly he is guilty of both. For how can he separate from the
whole Church, unless he separate both from his superiors and his equals too?
And if he separate from both, then questionless he separates from one, and
from more than one of them.

sollicitously to have prevented this exception, than that which by me was
used, when among the branches of equality, with which every one is obliged to
preserve unity and communion, I reckoned up, not only the believers of the same
Congregation, etc. but the several communities of Christian men from Parishes
and Dioeceses, to climes of the whole Christian world, Chap. 3.. 5. And indeed
it is a great piece of austerity, that when I have indevoured to prove that we
of the Church of England have not voluntarily separated (and that only is the
crime of Schism) from any one particular Church, and no one of those proofs is
invalidated, nor as yet so much as excepted against, it should yet be thought
seasonable to reply, that we have broken off from the whole Church of God.

whole made up of these severals, as a body of limbs, the universal of
particulars? And can the hand be broken off from the whole body, when it is not
broken off, but remains in perfect union with every part of the body? If the
arm be broken from the body, the hand, which remains united to the arm, may yet
be separate from the whole body, because by being fastened to the arm it is
united but to one, and not to all the members of the body. But an union to all
the members of the body supposes a separation from no one part that remains in
the body, and sure that must be an union with the whole body, which is nothing
else, but all the members together.

second thoughts were effects, not remedies of his forgetfulness, the very
same, which he had mentioned before under the style of separation from the
Catholic world, so certainly they were again effects of his inobservance, that
his principal sort of schism, separation from the whole Church, was
comprehended by me under this style, separation from the several communities
of the whole Christian world.

division of schism, into that which is against Monarchical (I said, and when
he recites my words, he should do so too, paternal) power, and that which is
against fraternall charity, I omit to mention the authority of Councels, It is
evidently a causlesse suggestion. For 1. if Councels, as he says, have any
authority, that will certainly be reducible to paternal power. And if they have
none, any farther than by way of counsel and advice, that will directly fall
under the head of fraternall charity.

Secondly, If by Councels he mean Provincial Councels, it is evident that the
power which severally belongs to the Bishops of each Province, is united in
that of a Provincial Council, where all the Diocesan Bishops are assembled,
and the despising of that is an offense under the first sort of schism, a
breach of the subordination to the Bishop, yea, and the Metropolitan too, who
presides in the Provincial Council.

National Counsels, the power of the Bishops of all the Provinces there
assembled, divolves upon this assembly, compounded of all of them, the
despising thereof is the despising of these Ecclesiastical superiors of the
whole nation, and culpable, and schismatic upon that account.

Oecumenicall or General Counsels, if they be truly such, the power of all
the Bishops of all the Provinces in all Christian nations divolves upon that,
and so cannot be despised without despising of all ranks of our Ecclesiastical
superiors, Bishops, Metropolitans, Primates or Patriarchs, and therefore this
sort of schism could not be deemed to be omitted, where all those other
branches, of which it is made up, were so particularly handled.

special consideration was not taken of General Counsels in that discourse,
the account (beside that which is now given) is more than intimated in that
Tract of Schism, page 60. first because they were remedies of schism, and
extraordinary, not any standing Judicatures, to which our constant
subordination and subjection was required. 2. Because these were such, as
without which the Church continued for the first 300 years, and so could not
belong to a general discourse, which spoke of all the certain and ordinary and
constant sorts of schism, and such as all times were capable of, and enlarged
not to those other of accidental emergencies. 3. Because they are now morally
impossible to be had, the Christian world being under so many Empires, and
divided into so many communions, that it is not visible to the eye of man how
they should be regularly assembled.

past, and are on due grounds to be acknowledged truly Oecumenicall, the
communion, which is possible to be had or broken with them, is that of
compliance with, or recession from their definitions, and our innocence in that
respect is avowed, p. 160. as the congregating of the like (when possible, and
probable toward the end) is recommended, p. 158. as a supply, when there should
be need of extraordinary remedies.

Lastly, If none of this had been done, or if this had not been undertaken so
solemnly and formally, as some other supposed branches of schism were, in that
Tract, yet the account of that is visible to any, because the principal sort of
schism charged by the Romanist on the Church of England is that of casting out
the Bishop of Rome, not contemning the authority of Councels, and therefore I
was in reason to apply my discourse most largely and particularly to that head,
to which their objections, not my own choice directed me. So evidently contrary
to the notoriety of the fact is this complaint of this Gentleman, that my
division of schism was insufficient, and that I took no notice of this (as he
pleases to call it) conciliatory authority.

probable, he advisedly chose to change the terms of my division from that
which was against Paternal, to that which is against Monarchical power, upon
this apprehension, that Paternal power would visibly include that of the
Fathers in Council assembled, as well as in several; but Monarchical power
could not so fitly bear it, I shall not enter into his secrets to divine. This
I am sure of, that the unanimity of belief in the dispersion of the Churches,
cannot with any propriety (as by him it is) be defined a branch of Conciliatory
authority, for certainly the Churches dispersed are not met together, the (...)
or dispersion of the Jews differed much from the Council assembled at
Jerusalem, and the Christian Church at this day is without question no
Ecumenical Council.

authority scattered members can have, which never legally command, or exercise
authority, but when they are in conjunction, I shall not here make stay to
demonstrate: whatsoever there is of this nature will most properly be comprised
under the head of communion or unity Fraternal, and the schism which is a
transgression of that, being at large handled also, Chap. 8. 9, 10. there was
no insufficiency, in any justice, to be charged on this division.

Sect. II.
Of the extent of the Roman Province. The Bishops of Italy distinct from those
that belong to Rome. The Ecclesiastical distributions agreeable with the Civil.
Ruffinus vindicated.

extent of the Roman Patriarchie, in these words:

In this Chap: he tells us many things, some true, some not so, but all
either common to us both, or not appertaining to the controversy, until he
concludes, that certainly the Roman Patriarchie did not extend it self to all
Italy, and this he does out of a word in Ruffinus, which he supposes to be
taken in a special propriety of law, whereas indeed that author's knowledge in
Grammar was not such as should necessarily exact any such belief, especially
learned men saying the contrary.

exception belongs, is not set down by this Gentleman, but by annexing the
testimony out of Ruffinus, I discern it to be that of page 52. where speaking
of the Picenum suburbicarium and Annonarium, I say the former belonged to the
Praefecture of Rome; the latter, with the seven Provinces in the broader part
of Italy, belonged to the Diocese (as it was anciently called) of Italy, of
which Milan was the Metropolis.

affirmation which he excepteth against, I did not, nor yet do make any
question of vindicating, and defending it against any objection.

learned men say the contrary, is here suggested, in the close, but as there is
not one learned man named, nor testimony produced (which therefore amounts no
higher than the bare opinion or affirmation of this one Gentleman, without any
one reason or authority to support it) so when any such learned men's names and
testimonies shall be produced, it will be easy to show, that there is very
little of their learning expressed in so saying.

margent) referred to some testimonies whereon my assertion was founded, viz:
those which manifestly distinguished the Province of the Bishop of Rome from the
Province of Italy, which could not have had truth in them, if the Province of
the Patriarch of Rome extended to all Italy.

l. 7. c. (...).
Eusebius distinctly mentioning the Bishops of the Cities of Italy, and the
Bishops that belong to the City of the Romans. The testimony out of the Edict
of the Emperor Aurelian, in the controversy betwixt Paulus Samosatenus and
Domnus, where it is decreed, that the house, about which they contended, should
be delivered (...), to those to whom the Bishops through Italy and the City of
the Romans should decree it.

Council of Sardice set down in Apoll: 2. ad Imp: Constable: Edit: Par: Tom: 1. p.
756.
Athanasius in the title of their Epistle to the Alexandrians, Thus, (...),
etc. The holy Synod by God's grace assembled at Sardice, from Rome, and Spain,
France, Italy, etc.

(...), Paris: Ed: t. 1. p. 827. C.
Athanasius's declaration of his own affairs, and the ((...)) agreement of many
Bishops with him, he specifies, who and how many they were, (...), etc. There
were more than four hundred both from great Rome, and from all Italy, and from
Calabria, etc. Where the Bishops of the Roman Province are distinguished from
the Bishops of Italy, as those again from the Bishops of Calabria, etc.

Council: tom: 1. p. 266.
first Council of Arles, we have ex provincia Italiae, civitate Mediclanensi,
etc. ex urbe Roma, quos Sylvester Episcopus misit ex Provincia Romana, civitate
Portuensi, etc. of the Province of Italy, from the city of Milan etc. from the
city of Rome those Whom Bishop Sylvester sent, of the Province of Rome, from
the City of Porta etc. such and such were assembled at that Council, where
again the matter is clear as to the distinction of those Provinces of Rome and
Italy, the former under the presidency of the Bishop of Rome, the later of the
Bishop of Milan.

Gentleman (if as he pleased to mention the much Greek, in his Preface, so he
had been at leisure to consider the importance of it) that beside the testimony
(which he will call a word) of Ruffinus, I had made use of other ways of
proof, that the presidency of the Bishop of Rome (I suppose that he must mean
by the Roman Patriarchie) did not extend it self to all Italy.

testimony of Ruffinus, I mentioned another evidence, from the proportioning
Ecclesiastical jurisdictions to the Temporal of the Lieutenants; This may
appear in thesi, by the words of Cont: Cells: l. 3.
Origin, of which I shall now, because I did not there, take notice, (...), It
is fit that the Prefect of the Church of each City, should correspond to the
Governor of those which are in the City. And that so it was, appears by the
second Canon of the Council of Constantinople, where the jurisdictions of the
Bishops are still proportioned to the condition of the Cities where they were,
the Bishop of Alexandria to have power over all Egypt, the Metropolis whereof
was Alexandria, and so in the rest. And this is in the Tract of Schism largely
deduced and cleared also, p. 54, 55, etc. and need not be here again repeated,
And so here was more again than the word of Ruffinus, for what I said.

Lastly, that for which Ruffinus was cited, being but this, that the Bishop of
Rome was authorized by the Nicene Canon to take care of the suburbicarian
regions, I could not sure be mistaken in thinking, that he took the word
suburbicarian in such a propriety (I say not of law, but) of common language,
as will conclude the Picenum suburbicarium to belong to the Roman Prefecture,
as the Annonarium did to the Diocese of Italy.

Ruffinus, that lived so near after the Council of Nice, and that in Italy, a
Presbyter of Aquileia, knew how that was distributed in his time, better than
this Gentleman at this distance can pretend to do, may also be allowed to know
so much of Grammar, as to express his own sense (in a Paraphrase) of that
Nicene Canon.

excellent person, Jac: Leschasserius in his Consultatio ad Claris: Venet:
Ruffino bellum indicunt scriptores Romani hujus temporis, etc. The Romanists of
this time are displeased with Ruffinus, not knowing what Churches they were,
which the Nicene Canon understands to be under the first and ordinary power of
the Pope. Whereas Ruffinus understood it of the Churches of the suburbicarian
Provinces and regions, which are four, the first the Roman, with the bounds of
the Prefecture of the City, and three other with which that is incompast, All
Campania, Picenum suburbicarium, and Tuscia suburbicaria, of which there is
frequent mention in the Notitiae of the Roman Empire. And of this the same
Author has written a learned Tract, And so here is a distinct testimony of a
very learned man, and this is a sufficient answer to his bare indefinite
affirmation that learned men say the contrary.

Sect. III.
The identity of the office of Primates and Patriarchs, the authorities of
Gratian, and Anacletus, and Anicetus.

charge wherein this third Chapter is concerned, remains about the identity of
the office of Primates, and P^triarchs, in these words:

Then he tells you that the office of Primates and Patriarchs was the same,
He urges Gratian too.
only authorizing that affirmation from an Epistle of Anacletus, the which, as
soon as occasion serves, he will tell you is of no authority, but fictitious.

Primates and Patriarchs, that though the Patriarchs had the precedence, in
Councels, the deference in respect of place, yet the power and jurisdiction of
Primates was as great as of Patriarchs, and the office the same, I thought had
sufficiently been evidenced to the Romanist p. 58. For as one manifest
indication of it was there mentioned, viz: that in Authors the very titles are
confounded, witness Justinian who commonly gives Primates the name of
Patriarchs of the Dioceses, so the reference to those two authorities so
acknowledged and owned by the Romanists, the Epistle of Anacletus, and the
Decree of Gratian, seemed to me to put it out of all question.

body of their Canon Law corrected and set out by Pope Gregory XIII. as
Gratian's decree makes up the first and principal part* so in that, par: 1.
distinct: 99. we have these words, De Primatibus autem quaeritur quem gradum in
Ecclesia tenuerint, an in aliquo a Patriarchis differant, The question is made
concerning Primates, what degree they have in the Church, and whether in any
thing they differ from Patriarchs. And the answer is, Primates and Patriarchae
diversorum sunt nominum, sed ejusdem officii, Primates and Patriarchs are of
different names, but of the same office.

punctually and expressly to the business in hand? What more authentic and
dilucid testimony could have been produced to any Romanist, with whom I had to
do? And it is a little strange, that this Gentleman should say that I only
authorize my affirmation from an Epistle of Anacletus, and then either he, or
some Supervisor for him, put in as a marginal note, He urges Gratian too, When
1. if I urged Gratian, I did not urge Anacletus only; and 2. it is evident I
did urge Gratian as punctually as Anacletus, and 3. Gratian's words are so
express as nothing can be more, and 4. Gratian's authority with them is as
great as any could have been produced; and 5. there is not one word offered to
avoid the force of Gratian's testimony, as to that other of Anacletus there is,
which argues that this Gentleman was concluded by Gratian, yet would not
consent to the proposition unanswerably inferred from him. And this may suffice
to be noted concerning that testimony.

Anacletus 1. his words are these, Provinciarum divisio ab Apostolis est
renovata, The division of Provinces was renewed by the Apostles, Et in capite
Provinciarum -- Patriarchas vel Primates, qui unam formam tenent, licet diversa
sint nomine, leges divinae and Ecclesiasticae poni and esse jusserunt, ad quos
Episcopi, si necesse fuerit, confugerent, eosque appellarent, And in the head
of the Province -- Patriarchs, or Primates, who hold the same form (are of the
same nature) though they be diverse names, are placed by divine and
Ecclesiastical laws, so that to them the Bishops, when it is needful, may
resort and make their appeals. This testimony again as punctual to the purpose
as could have been devised.

secondly, this being by the Romanists received as a Decretall Epistle of that
Pope and ancient Bishop of Rome, was in reason, whatsoever it were to us, to
stand with the Romanist in full authority.

Thirdly, This being in perfect concord with the decree of Gratian, is in the
aforesaid body of their Canon law approved, and set out by Pope Gregory XIII.
annexed to that decree of Gratian, Distinct: 99. C. 1.

fourthly, whereas this Gentleman says, that as soon as occasion serves I will
tell you this Epistle of Anacletus is of no authority, I must say 1. that I
have no where, that I remember, ever said so. 2. That this Gentleman cannot
without divining tell me now, what I shall do hereafter. 3. That occasion not
yet requiring it of me, but Anacletus affirming what I affirm, I have no
temptation to do so, and so as yet he can have no pretense to make use of this
subterfuge. 4. That there are things called argumenta ad homines, arguments
that may bind him who acknowledges the authority, from which they are drawn,
though they conclude not him that allows not those authorities, and such is
this of Anacletus his Epistle, to a Romanist.

Logic that he can infer that Anacletus's authority was unduely produced by
me, who (as he but thinks) will not stand to Anacletus's authority, I may sure
conclude that Anacletus's authority was duly produced by me, because against
him, who, I have reason to presume, must stand to Anacletus's authority.

third testimony of the same nature I shall now add, which must again have
force with a Romanist, that of Anicetus ad Episcopos Galliae, which follows
there in the Decret: Great: par: 1. did: 92. c. 2.
Corpus Juris Canonici. Primarum civitatum Episcopos Apostoli and successores
Apostolorum regulariter Patriarchas and Primates esse constituerunt. The
Apostles and their successors regularly appointed that the Bishops of the Prime
Cities should be Primates and Patriarchs, And till somewhat be produced to the
contrary, as it is sure here is nothing offered by this Gentleman, this may at
the present suffice in this place.

Sect. IV.
The supreme Ecclesiastical power of Patriarchs. The power of convoking
Counsels, a prerogative of Supremacy. That the Bishop of Rome is not over
Patriarchs. Proofs from the Counsels, and Canons Apostolic, and the Corpus
Juris, and Pope Gregorys arguing.

supreme Power of Patriarchs, or the no superiority of any Ecclesiastical
power over them, Thus.

Then he says there was no power over the Patriarchs, his proof is because the
Emperor used his secular authority in gathering of Councels, concluding, that
because the Pope did not gather general Councels, therefore he had no authority
over the Universal Church, which how unconsequent that is, I leave to your
judgment.

supreme power in the Bishop of Rome, nor in any other above that of Primates
and Patriarchs, but only that of the Emperor in the whole Christian world, as
of every sovereign Prince in his dominions, I thought sufficiently proved by
this, that the power of convoking Councels did not belong to the Bishop of
Rome, but to the Prince in every nation, and the Emperor in the whole world.
And I deemed this a sufficient proof, not because there are no other branches
of a supreme authority imaginable, or which are claimed by the Bishop of Rome
save only this; but I. because this of convoking Councels is certainly one
such prerogative of the supreme power, inseparable from it, and he that has
not that, has not the supreme power (as in any nation some prerogatives there
are, which always are annexed to the Imperial Majesty, and wherever any one of
them truly is, there is the supreme power, and it is treason for any but the
supreme, to assume any one of them, and one of that number is calling of
national Assemblies) And secondly, because the Bishop of Rome does as avowedly
challenge this power of convoking General Councels, as any other I could have
named or insisted on. And truly that was the only reason why I specified in
this, because this of all others is most eminent in it self, most
characteristical of the supreme power, and most challenged by the Bishop of
Rome, and most due to him, in case he be the Universal Pastor.

several branches of a power, all resident in the same subject inseparably,
from the absence of one to collect the absence of all, I must still think, a
solid way of probation, and cannot discern the infirm part, or inconsequence of
it. If I could, it would be no difficult matter to repair it, and supply the
imperfectnesse of the proof, by what is put together in the Corpus Juris
Canonici (even now cited) Decret: par: 1. did: 99. c. 3, 4, 5.

summum genus, any supreme either of, or over Patriarchs, beside the Prince or
Emperor. To this, as far as concerns the negative part, that the Bishop of
Rome is not this summum genus, I now cite from that third Chap. Primae sedis
Episcopus non appelletur Princeps sacerdotum, vel summus sacerdos, The Bishop
of the first seat ought not to be called Prince of the Priests, or supreme
Priest. And this testified out of the African Council, Can: 6. where the very
words are recited with this addition of [ aut aliquid hujusmodi] he is not to
be called by any other title of the same kind, sed tantum primae sedis
Episcopus, but only Bishop of the first See, and there were three such at that
time, (those named in the Nicene Canon) Alexandria, Rome, Antioch, as is
sufficiently known.

practice of the Church was perfectly concordant with that definition, I
refer this Gentleman to the Milevitan Council, cap. 22. where speaking of
appeals from their Bishops, the rule is, non provocent nisi ad Africana
concilia, vel ad Primates Provinciarum suarum, They must appeal to none but the
African Councels, or the Primates of their own Provinces. Ad transmarina autem
qui putaverint appellandum, a nullo intra Africam in communionem recipiantur.
But if any shall think fit to appeal to any transmarine (foreign) judicature,
they are not to be admitted to communion by any within Africa.

And indeed the same had been before defined by the first Nicene Council,
Bishops in each Province was to stand good according to the Canon (I suppose
the 12 Apostolic) which pronounces (...), that they which are excommunicated
by some, shall not be received by others. And accordingly in the Synodical
Epistle of the African Council to Pope Caelestine, which is in the Book of
Canons of the Roman Church, and in the Greek collection of the Canons of the
African Church, we find these words, (...), We entreat you (the style of one
Church to another) that for the future you will not easily admit those who have
come to you from hence, and that you will not receive to your communion those
who are excommunicate by us, seeing the Council of Nice has thus defined, as
you may easily discern.

African out of the Nicene, and by the Nicene out of the Apostolic Canon, it
is evident that the Bishop of Rome has not power to absolve any person
excommunicate by any Bishop of another Province, and that it is unlawful for
any such to make appeal to him, which certainly will conclude against every the
most inferior branch of his pretended authority over the Universal Church.

Apostolic Canon, (...). The Bishops of every nation must know him that is the
first among them, i. e. their Primate, and account him as their head. Which
sure inferres that the Bishop of Rome is not the one only head of all Bishops.
The same is afterward transcribed by the 9 Canon of Antioch.

Corpus Juris, so again Decret: par: 1. did: 99. c. 4. Nec etiam Romanus
Pontifex universalis est appellandus. The Pope of Rome is not to be called
Universal Bishop, citing the Epistle of Pope Pelagius II. Nullus Patriarcharum
Vniversalitatis vocabulo unquam utatur, quia si unus Patriarcha unversalis
dicatur, Patriarcharum nomen caeteris derogatur. No Patriarch must ever use the
title of Universal, for if one be called universal Patriarch, the name of
Patriarch is taken from all the rest, And more to the same purpose; the very
thing that I was here to prove.

Epistle of Pope Gregory to Eulogius Patriarch of Alexandria, where refusing
the title of Vniversalis Papa, Universal Pope, or Father, or Patriarch, and
calling it superbae appellaetionis verbum, a proud title, he adds, si enim
Vniversalem me Papam vestra Sanctit as dicit, negat se hoc esse, quod me
fatetur Vniversum, If the Patriarch of Alexandria call the Pope universal
Father, he does thereby deny himself to be that which he affirms the Pope to be
universally; The meaning is clear, If the Pope be universal Patriarch, then is
he Patriarch of Egypt, for sure that is a part of the Universe; and then as
there cannot be two supremes, so the Bishop of Alexandria cannot be Patriarch
of Egypt, which yet from S. Mark's time was generally resolved to belong to
him, and the words of the Nicene Canon are express to it, that according to
the (...) original, Primitive customs, the Bishop of Alexandria should have
power over all Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, adding (...), etc. seeing this is
also customary with the Bishop of Rome, of Antioch, etc. (...), that the
privileges should be preserved to the Churches.

Pope, yea, and that great Council were perfectly unconcluding ( inconsequent,
as mine was said to be) if the Bishop of Rome, or any other, had power over
Patriarchs, or authority over the universal Church, which here this Gentleman
is pleased to affirm, and so sure must think Gregory more than fallible, when
he thus protested, and disputed the contrary.

Gregory ascended in expressing his detestation of that title, is sufficiently
known from his Epistle to Mauritius the Emperor, In regist: 1. 4. Ep: 30. I
shall not here trouble him with the recitation of it.

body of the Law, shows indeed that the Popes continued not always of this
mind, Neither was I of opinion that they did, the story being known to all how
Boniface III. with much ado obtained of Phocas the Emperor an Edict for the
Primacy and Universal jurisdiction of the Church of Rome (see Paul: Diac: de
Gest is Romanorum, l. 18.) which yet is an argument that till then it had no
foundation.

Patriarchs, and whether now there ought to be, was the question before me, and
both those I must think concluded by what I have here set down, as far as
relates to any true, i. e. original right, from any appointment of christ, or
title of succession to S. Peter.

necessary to be replied to a bare suggestion, without any specifying what that
power is, which may belong to the Pope over the Universal Church, though
convoking of Councels did not belong to him, and without any offer of proof,
that any such did really belong to him.

CHAP. IV. An Answer to the Exceptions made to the fourth Chapter.
Sect. I.
The Romanists pretensions founded in S. Peter's universal Pastership. Of
Possession without debating of Right. What Power the Pope was possessed of here.

fourth Chap: his objections begin to grow to some height, they are reducible
to three heads, the first is by way of Preface, a charge of a very considerable
default in the whole discourse that I remember not what matters I handle; the
other two are refutations of the two evidences I use to disprove the Popes
claim of universal Trimacie from Christ's donation to S. Peter.

The first of the three is set down in these words:

In the fourth Chapter he pretends to examine whether by Christ his donation
S. Peter had a Trimacie ever the Church, where not to reflect upon his curious
division, I cannot omit that he remembers not what matters he handles, when he
thinks the Catholic ought to prove that his Church or Pope has an universal
Primacie; for it being granted that in England, the Pope was in quiet
possession of such a Primacie, the proof that it was just belongs not to us,
more than to any King, who received his Kingdom from his Ancestors, time out
of mind, to prove his pretension to the Crown just: for quiet possession of it
self is a proof, until the contrary be convinced, as who should rebel against
such a King were a Rebel, until he showed sufficient cause for quitting
obedience; with this difference, that obedience to a King may be prescription
or bargain be made unnecessary, but if Christ has commanded obedience to his
Church, no length of years, nor change of humane affairs can ever quit us from
this duty of obedience, so that the charge of proving the Pope to have no such
authority from Christ, lies upon the Protestants now as freshly, as the first
day of the breach, and will do so until the very last.

method in the beginning of Chap: 4. is visibly this; The Church of England
being by the Romanist charged of schism in departing from the obedience of the
Bishop of Rome, and this upon pretense that he, as successor of S. Peter has a
supremacy over all the Churches in the world, I undertake to examine the truth
of two branches of this suggestion, one whether Saint Peter had this universal
Supremacy given him by Christ; the second, whether this power, if supposed to
be instated on Saint Peter, devolved on the Bishops of Rome. The former of
these I examined in that Chapter. And I must now discern, if I can, how I have
failed in any particle of my undertaking.

curious division. And I that know there was no curiosity in any division of
mine, but on the other side, such perspicuity as was agreeable to a desire and
endeavor to set down the whole matter of debate between us as distinctly and
intelligibly as I could, that the Reader might be sure to judge whether I
answered their charge, or no, I have no reason in the least to suspect the
fitness and usefulness of my division, nor consequently to be impertinently
sollicitous in reflecting on it.

cannot omit, I shall make haste to consider with him, viz: my great mistake,
in thinking the Catholic ought to prove his Church or Pope has an universal
Primacie.

foundation or pretense for this exception here. For I no where say the least
word toward this purpose of requiring the Romanist to prove his pretensions, or
to prove them by this medium, Only I take it for granted, that he does
actually produce arguments to infer the Pope's universal Primacie, and that
Christ's donation to S. Peter is one of those arguments. And that I was not
herein mistaken, I shall, instead of a larger deduction of evidences from all
sorts of Romish writers, make my appeal to the objecter himself, in several
places of this little tract, particularly p. 20. where he has these words, we
rely on the first, as the foundation, and cornerstone of the whole building,
And what that first is, appears by the words immediately precedent, that the
pretensions for the Pope's supremacy in England must be founded as successor to
S. Peter in the universal Pastorship of the Church, so including England as a
member thereof. From whence in stead of recriminating and retorting on him the
charge of the ill memory, I shall only make this undeniable inference, that I
was not mistaken in thinking that the Romanist does actually found his
pretensions in the universal Pastorship of Saint Peter, and consequently, If I
prove that to fail, I have removed that which in his own style is the
foundation and corner stone of his whole building.

Romanist to prove his pretension just, but that it suffices that he has the
possession, I desire to propose these three things to his consideration, 1. By
demanding whether at this time, or for these 100 years the Pope has had the
possession of the obedience of this nation; I suppose he will say he has not;
And if so, then by the force of his own argument, that possession, and all the
arguments deducible from thence, are now lost to him, the prescription being
now on our side, as before on theirs, and there is nothing left him to plead,
but the original right on his side, against the violence of the succeeding
possession: And if he come to the pleading of the right, then that is the very
method that I proposed, and so did not offend or forget my self in so doing.

Secondly, Concerning their possession before Henry VIII. his days, I shall
demand how long they had it, and how they acquired it; If he will not at all
think fit to answer this question in either part, then I confess he has made
an end of the dispute, and by refusing to give account of the right he had to
his possession, he will leave every man to catch and hold what he can, and then
to imitate him, and give no account to any how he came by it, which as it is an
unchristian method, every man being obliged to clear his actions from manifest
charges of injustice and violence, so again it is an evil lesson against
himself, and unless we will confess our selves Schismatics in casting off
their obedience, it is impossible for him ever to prove us such, this kind of
schism, which now we speak of, being by all acknowledged to be a separation
from our lawful superiors, and no way being imaginable to prove the Pope to be
such to this nation, without offering some proof to the point of right, as well
as adhering to his possession.

secular things it is not every possession that gives a right, but 1. either
the bonae fidci possessio, a possession honestly come by, or the unjustnesse of
whose original is not contested or made to appear. And 2. whatsoever privilege
by humane laws belongs to prescription, yet in divine or Ecclesiastical
matters prescription can be of no force against truth of right, and so this
Gentleman seems to acknowledge here, extending the force of possession no
farther than till sufficient cause be showed to the contrary. 3. That though
whilst I am in possession I need not be bound to prove my right, yet when I am
out of possession, there is not, beside absolute force, any way possible to
recover a possession, but this of contesting and evidencing the right of it,
and that, it is evident, is the present case.

answer the question in either part of it, then by the answer to the first part
of it, he must be forced to set down the original of it; and by answer to the
second, the right of that original (and so he has been fain to do, as
elsewhere, so in this very paragraph, where he speaks of Christ's commanding
obedience to his Church, I suppose he must mean the Church of Rome) and that is
again the very method in which I proposed to debate, and consider this matter.

Thirdly, For the power, of which the Pope was possessed in this Kingdom, either
it was no more than an Ecclesiastical Primacie, such as by the ancient Canons
belongs to a Primate or Patriarch over Metropolitans and Bishops, or else it
was a supreme power over the King himself, whether in Spiritual, or also in
Temporal affairs.

former of these, then the power of Kings to erect or translate Primacies or
Patriarchates, which is insisted on and evidenced in the Tract of Schism, c
6.. 9. was sufficient then to justify what here was done, no possession being
pleadable against the King, to restrain or exclude this exercise of his power,
and so now to free us from schism, (by this Gentleman's rule) this act of the
Kings in translating the Primacie being sufficient cause for quitting our
obedience, supposing the Bishop of Rome formerly to have been our Primate.

pretensions be higher, even for the Supremacy it self, either in whole, or in
part, then 1. I may surely say they were never bonae fidei possessores of that,
And 2. that the King, who by being so, is supreme in his own Kingdom, and
cannot admit of another supreme either in or out of it, has all the advantages
of possession, which are here spoken of by this Gentleman, and must not be
divested of his right, nay must not, cannot (remaining a King) divest himself
of it, nor might any without the guilt of rebellion quit his obedience to him.

Lastly, to remove all appearance of reason from this whole exception, 1. It is
manifest that at the time of casting out the power of the Pope out of this
Kingdom, there were (I must have leave to suppose, convincing) reasons given
for the doing of it, A breviate of which the Reader may find in that one
Treatise (mentioned in the Tract of Schism, p. 135.) De vera differentia Regiae
and Ecclesiasticae potestatis, then composed and published by the Bishops, and
since reprinted by Melchior Goldastus in Monarchia, tom: 3. p. 22. under the
title of opus eximium, a very notable excellent work. 2. That how meanly so
ever it has been performed, yet this was one special design of the Tract of
Schism (which this Gentleman says will always lie upon Protestants) to prove
the Pope to have no such authority from Christ, as the Romanist pretends him
to have. And this I hope may suffice to be said to his (...), his prelusory
skirmish against this fourth Chapter.

Sect. II.
The condition of S. Peter's Province. The Apostles distribution of their great
Province, the World, into several portions. (...), Act. 1. the interpretation
thereof vindicated.

evidence I make use of to disprove the Pope's claim to universal Primacie from
Christ's donation to S. Peter.

Peter's Province, as by agreement betwixt him and his fellow Apostle S. Paul,
it was assigned him, Gal. 2. 7, 9. that he should be the Apostle of the
circumcision or Jews (which certainly was not the whole world) exclusively to
the Gentile part, or the uncircumcision, which was remitted to S. Paul both
there and Romans 11. 13. and this, as is Of Schism, p. 74.
there specified, in every city where they met together. And because the
universal extensive commission of Christ to all and every Apostle, giving them
authority to go and preach to the whole world, might seem to be contrary to
this special assignation, I took care to prevent this objection, by premising
that this commission given by Christ indefinitely, and unlimitedly, and
extending equally to the whole world, was restrained by some subsequent act or
acts of the Apostles themselves, who distributed their universal Province into
several portions and assignations, called (...), portions of Apostolacy, and
the several Provinces where they were thus to labor, styled each of them
(...), to each an assigned peculiar place, Act. 1. 25.

groundwork of my ensuing probation, he makes his first exception in these
words:

As for his Proofs, which he calls Evidences, he tells us first that S. Peter
was the Apostle of the circumcision exclusively to the uncircumcision or
Gentiles; Sect. 5.
To prove this, he says the Apostles distributed their universal Province into
several (...), that is, by his interpretation, lesser Provinces, and cites
Act. 1. v. 25. where S. Peter with the other Apostles prays God to show which
of the two proposed he was pleased to have promoted to the dignity of being an
Apostle, this they call (...), and this rigorous interpreter says, it
signifies the special Province S. Matthias was to have, though the Scripture it
self expresses the contrary, saying the effect was that afterward he was
counted amongst the Apostles: Could any man not blinded with error make so
wretched an interpretation? but he goes on presently adding that S. Peter in
the same place calls these particular Provinces (...), and will you know what
this (...) or proper place is, read the Text, and you shall find that S. Peter
speaks of Judass, 'going to Hell to receive his eternal damnation: Methinks
you should wonder I can go on without astonishment at such blasphemous
explications, for sure it can be no less so to abuse the Word of God, and
after this what do you expect?

two great charges, the first introduced by styling me a rigorous interpreter,
and prosecuted, by affirming me blinded with error, my interpretation wretched
and contrary to what the Scripture expresses. But the second is of no less
than blasphemy, and abusing the Word of God, and his friend is to wonder that
he is not astonished, and after I have been guilty of such crimes as these,
it is in vain forsooth to expect any thing from me, the whole ensuing discourse
is utterly defamed and blasted, like A. Gellius, l. 18. c. 3.
Philopemen's good counsel in the Senate of Lacedaemon, by being delivered by
so ill a man, so infamous a person, as a blasphemer is justly deemed by him.

disquieted with this, or to prepare any reply to the Rhetorical passionate
part of it, if the interpretations shall be found agreeable to Scripture, the
astonishment and the outcrie will be soon at an end, And therefore that is the
only care that I shall here assume on me.

story, and from the very end to which this commissionating so great a number
of twelve Apostles was designed, that all the Apostles were not to go together,
in consort, to preach unto all the world, It would have been long ere the Faith
would have been propagated to all the world, if this slower method had been
taken.

Savior having left the world in common before them, the distribution of that
one wider into several lesser Provinces must be an act of the Apostles
themselves, as when God had given the land of Canaan to the 12 tribes of
Israel, Eleazar, and Josua, and the heads of the Fathers of the tribes
distribute to every tribe their (...) or portion (which because it was to
continue to their posterity, we ordinarily style their inheritance) Jos. 14. 1.

fact, so if this one thing be granted me, there is no more incumbent on me to
prove in this matter; and though neither of those phrases, Act. 1. 25. should
be for my turn, yet my conclusion remains good to me, as far as it pretends
to be deducible from those phrases, viz: that the Apostles distributed their
great Province, the whole world, into several lesser Provinces, one, or
possibly more than one to go one way, the other another.

ex abundanti, more than was necessary, that I annexed the use of those phrases
to that purpose, not undertaking to prove this (as this Gentleman says) by
those texts, much less Peter's being Apostle of the circumcision (which was a
consectary and had its several probation afterward) but only accommodating
those phrases to the matter in hand, and by the way assigning what I thought
the most probable notion of them.

explications on this Gentleman, the conclusion having as yet no use of them,
yet being obliged to give him such an account of my actions, as may free me
from blasphemy, and abuse of the Word of God, I shall here adventure to make my
apology, by premising 1. not out of Grammarians only, but out of the
Scripture it self, the notion of the word (...), which signifying originally a
lot or way of division (into severals) of that, which belongs to all in common
(one means of settling propriety among men) it comes next by an easy figure to
signify that which is thus divided, or which in the division falls to every
man as his portion.

Phavorinus (...), and (...), the verb signifies distribution both active and
passive: and accordingly in the son of Syrach we have (...) division of, or, by
lot, Ecclus. 14 15. and by that we may understand a less obvious expression,
c. 37. 8. beware of a counselor, etc. (...), lest he cast the lot upon thee,
i. e. lest he help another to cheat thee, and then go sharer with him, divide
thee betwixt them.

Phavorinus of the substantive (...), and (...), it signifies a part, that
which falls to one's lot, a portion, As Act. 8. 21. (...) and (...) portion and
lot are all one. And he that has a possession thus settled on him, and dominion
by that means, or he that undertakes to dress or till so much land, (...) and
(...), the Lord and the husbandman, are both the interpretation of (...), he
that has such a lot or portion assigned him.

Governor of the Church is set over, are called his (...) or lot, and 1 Pet.
5. 3. such Governors are commanded (...), not to behave themselves as the
Roman Pretors were wont to do over their several Provinces, oppressing and
tyrannizing over them.

Act. 1. 17. should denote such a portion of ministerial office, as belonged to
one that was sent or commissionated by Christ (...) to a task or work, expressed
v. 20. by (...) his Episcopal office (for that though it be a rule, yet is also
(...) a ministry, Mat. 23. 11.) in the Church.

portion of employment in preaching the Faith, testifying the resurrection of
Christ, which belonged to one single Apostle, such as Judas was, and (...) from
which he departed by his sin, and to which another succeed^ by way of
surrogation, is as fitly styled (...) a portion of Apostolacy, a (...) or
division of that grand employment.

error or act of blindness was committed in thus interpreting, much more
occoecation or being blinded with error, which I suppose the compound
accumulation (whether only sin or punishment also) of many errors, what rigor
or wretchedness of interpretation, I am still so blind as not to discern, and
this Gentleman is not so charitable, as to give me his least directions to
recover to my way, or my eyes again.

Scriptures expressing the contrary, in saying he was counted among the
Apostles, that sure is no evidence against my interpretation, for Matthias may
become one of the twelve, succeed to Judas's office and lot, that which did, or
should, if he had lived, have belonged to him, and yet neither he, if he had
lived, nor now Matthias in his stead, have more than a particular Province,
this or that region, (not the whole world in common) assigned for his
appartment.

text in thinking (...) the lot or division of Apostolacy, to be the several
task that belonged to any of the twelve Apostles, or that portion of labor,
that by consent at their parting one from another should be assigned to each of
them.

analogy will still hold perfectly, that as this distribution of tasks
consisted in going to several quarters for the preaching of the faith of
Christ, one, one way; another, another; so he that had received his (...)
portion of Apostolacy, should be said to have (...) a peculiar or proper place,
and having so, should (not immediately, but soon after the Holy Ghost's
descent) (...), go, or, betake himself to it.

fitness, both in respect of the words, and the context, I take to be the
meaning of that phrase (...), to go to his proper place, his peculiar
assignation, And I cannot imagine the least inconvenience that can lie against
this rendering.

true, yet it can be any thing as soon as blasphemy, thus to interpret it. It Is
certainly nothing to the dishonor of God, to say that Matthias went and
preached the Gospel in such a region peculiarly, and so there is no blasphemy
in that, viz: the matter of the interpretation; and for the abusing of the Word
of God, it is hard to divine how that can be deemed such, which affixeth
nothing to the Word of God, but that which is notoriously true (for so it is
that Matthias went one way to preach the Gospel, and S. John and S. Bartholomew
each of them another) and would be acknowledged to do so, if this text were
not applied to it.

interpretation of the words (which this Gentleman is pleased to prefer, and
might have enjoyed his own judgment, without censuring them as blasphemers,
that differed from him in expounding one difficult phrase) by affixing it to
Judas, and not to Matthias, 1. there is no indication in the context that
favors that, it was sufficient to say of Judas that which had been said v. 16,
17, 18, 19. to set out the horror of his fact, which soon attended it in his
own breast, and the bloody death which it brought upon him, but he needed not
proceed to revealing of secrets, the sadder consequents, which remained in
arrear after death, and it is Chrysostom's observation on v. 16. behold, says
he, (...), the wise Christian carriage of S. Peter, (...), how he does not
reproach, and insult on him, calling him (...), villain, or detestable villain,
(...), but sets down the fact simply, and on v. 16. (...), he sets down, says
he, his present vengeance, that sure is it which befell him in this world,
which, by the way, cannot well consist with the interpreting it of hell.

Parentheses in scripture is very ordinary, and if that be here admitted (which
it well may, without any more formal expression of it, than by putting a comma
after (...), as it is already in the printed copies) then the interpretation is
clear and unavoidable, to receive the lot or portion of his Ministry and
Apostleship (from which Judas by transgression fell) to go, or, that he may go
to his proper place.

Hell being the (...) the common place or lot of all wicked men, it cannot
fitly be expressed with such a double emphasis, (...), the place, the proper
place, i. e. the place peculiar to him, which yet may very fitly be affirmed of
Matthias his Province, so his, as it was not any man's else.

Lastly, It is not near so proper to say that he sinned (...) to go to hell, as
that the other was chosen and surrogated into Judas's place (...) to go to
preach to such a quarter of the world, or that the Apostles desired God to
signify his pleasure whom he had chosen, that so he might take his portion of
labor and go; His going was visibly the end intended in all this, but
damnation or punishment, going to hell, was never intended by Judas in his
transgression, though it be supposed the deserved reward and consequent of it.

innocent, and, I hope, obvious (far from wrested) interpretation from such
an accumulation of charge, as is laid upon it, without any tender of reason
against it, but the (...), O wretched (blasphemous etc.) in Lucian. And so much
in answer to that Paragraph.

Sect. III.
S. Peter the Apostle of the Circumcision; The agreement betwixt the Apostles.
Peter's preaching to Cornelius.

exception is to the position it self of Peter's being the Apostle of the Jews
exclusively to the Gentiles, and it is in these words:

His position is a directly against Scripture, as if he had done it on purpose,
the Scripture telling us how by a special vision S. Peter was commanded to
preach to Cornelius a Gentile first of all the Apostles, and himself in the
Council of Jerusalem protesting the same; and yet this Doctor can teach he was
made Apostle to the Jews, exclusively to the Gentiles, though all story say
the contrary.

directly against the Scripture, was to my understanding the express
affirmation of Scripture it self, I am sure from thence it was that I learnt
it, and I must fail very much in my expectation, if this Gentleman himself do
not acknowledge the testimony produced, Gal. 2. 7. to be sufficient ground to
infer it. There Peter is said to be (...), entrusted with the Gospel of the
circumcision, That the circumcision there signifies the Jews, and the (...),
which we render Gospel, the office of preaching or revealing the faith to them,
(...) the Apostolacy of the circumcision, ver. 8. if it be not of it self plain
enough, it is made so by ver. 9. where it is added that Peter etc. were by
agreement to go (...) to the circumcision, where circumcision, being the object
or term of his motion, must needs be the Jews, not circumcision it self, and
so Saint Chrysostom at large expounds it, (...), not to signify the thing,
circumcision, but the persons, the Jews, in opposition to (...) the Gentiles,
in the former words, and then going to them must needs be preaching to them,
going to them as to a Province, the care of which was entrusted to him; and the
right hands of fellowship, the agreement that was made betwixt them, James the
Bishop of Jerusalem, and Peter, and the beloved disciple on one side, and Paul
and Barnabas on the other side, is side, is sure the interpretation of the
(...) the being entrusted or having that, as a Province, committed to them.

Chrysostom, of the (...), but contrariwise (the beginning of ver. 7.) as that
is opposed to the (...) their adding to him v. 6. James, says he, and Peter
and John, were so far from opposing any thing that he had done, from advising
any thing more, from telling him any circumstance more than before he knew,
that they not only approved, but commended what he had done, and to set the
things the more unquestionably for the future, made this agreement with him and
Barnabas, that whenever they should come to the same city, mixed of Jews and
Gentiles, Peter and John should betake themselves to the Jewish, and Paul and
Barnabas to the Gentile part of it. For, as was said, it was not by any
particular assignation of Christ's, but by agreement among themselves that this
assignation of Provinces was made.

propriety, when that which is supposed to lie by nature in common to all, is,
to avoid contentions and confusions, and the state of perpetual hostility, so
distributed by agreement among the fellow-communers, as that one portion shall
be assigned as the propriety and appartment of one, the other of another, then
and from thenceforth that which is the proportion of one, is so his, that it
belongs to no other, and again so his, that he has no right to any other part
(which I should express by saying that that part is his exclusively to any
other part, for sure his standing to any such division cuts him out, and so
excludes him from any farther right) so here after this agreement between those
Apostles jointly made, concerning the two parts of mankind, Jews and
Gentiles, to which they were to preach, and among whom to preside, the Jews
are become S. Peter's peculiar, or portion, or Province, and that so his, as
the Gentiles were not his, they being left to S. Paul (and Barnabas) who is
both there affirmed to have them committed to him, and Romans 11. 13. to be the
Apostle of the Gentiles; And that I expressed by that phrase, Peter was the
Apostle of the Jews (so it is said of him expressly Gal. 2. 8.) exclusively to
the uncircumcision] and truly I knew not (nor yet do) how to express it more
significatively, and more to the rendering of the full importance of those plain
texts, and this Gentleman has not pleased to direct me how to do it better.

Scripture thus clear and irrefragable for my position, if now I should not be
able to salve the Antinomies, to answer his objections from scripture to it,
this were certainly but my dullness (another that has a greater (...) might be
able to do it) and therefore ought not to be any prejudice to the truth of the
affirmation. But unless the difficulties be greater than as yet appear, I
shall not much doubt of undertaking the task, of reconciling all the (...)
that can be phansied.

Peter by special vision was once commanded to preach to Cornelius a Gentile?
Sure this is very competible with my position, For not to mention that this is
acknowledged to have been a peculiar commission by special vision determined to
that particular person and his family, which, till he had this vision, he
thought it utterly unlawful to preach to, Act. 10. 28. (And it is certain that
one special case were no prejudice to the general position) and again that
Cornelius though a Gentile, was yet a Proselyte of the Jews, such as they
called a Proselyte of the gates, though not of justice, a (...) or devout man,
though not circumcised; To omit these, I say, the answer is obvious, 1. That
this agreement, of which I speak, was at the time of Paul's going up to
Jerusalem, Act. 15. i. e. some years after this of Peter's preaching to
Cornelius, as may appear Gal. 2. 1. which defines it to be about 14 years after
S. Paul's conversion, whereas that of Peter's preaching to Cornelius, Act. 10.
placed in the next chapter to that which described the conversion of Paul, must
needs be some considerable space before this time of his going up to the
Council at Jerusalem. And so that of Peter's preaching to Cornelius, and his
protesting the same in the Council of Jerusalem, has nothing of opposition to
this agreement (made for the future, sure, not for the time past) what should
be done in their afterpreaching, I suppose I need add no more to that which is
thus evident.

Secondly, I have already sufficiently Tract of Schism, c. 4.. 7.
expressed, how far this agreement extended, and how far exclusive it was,
not that it should be unlawful for Peter to preach to a Gentile, or for Paul to
preach to a Jew, but that when they met in the same city (as at Antioch
certainly they did, and at Rome also I make no question) then the one should
constantly apply himself to the Jews, receive disciples, form them into a
Church, leave them to be governed by a Bishop of his assignation, and the other
should do in like manner to the Gentiles.

consequents of the story, is largely showed in that Tract. c. 4.. 8.etc.
What could have been said more punctually to prevent this exception taken from
Peter's preaching to Cornelius, I cannot yet discern. I wish this Gentleman had
pleased to take notice of it; As it is, I hope he will now be more sure to do
so.

Sect. IV.
Paul's first preaching to the Jews in every city. To what the agreement
between him and Peter belonged.

third Exception.

Again, if he were made the Apostle of the Jews, exclusively to the Gentiles,
by the same reason S. Paul was made Apostle of the Gentiles exclusively to the
Jews, for the words are like; and yet the scripture teaches us that wherever
he came, he preached first to the Jews: Is not this to make scripture
ridiculous?

severity again, a charge of making scripture ridiculous, But I hope I have
been far from any guilt of it. That S. Paul, whenever he came to a city,
where the faith had not been preached, and where there was any synagogue of the
Jews, went into that synagogue in time of their public assembling, I never
made any question, were this before, or were it after the story of Act. 15.when
I suppose this agreement to be made betwixt him and S. Peter, etc.

reason, and no small obligation there was for that; For I. Christ had
commanded that the preaching should begin at Jerusalem, the Metropolis of the
Jews, and as to the Jews first ((...)) God had raised up his Son Jesus, Act.
3. 26. so the Gospel of the resurrection was to be revealed ((...)) to the Jew
first, Romans 1. 16.

Paul's commission from Christ it were peculiarly express that he should preach
the Gospel to the Gentiles, Act. 9. 15. and 22. 21. yet according to this great
fundamental oeconomie he counted it necessary, first to make tender of his
service, and of the glad tidings of the Gospel, to the Jews, and so he tells
them Act. 13. 46. It was necessary that the word of God should first have been
spoken to you, and till the Jews refuse it and reject it, he does not betake
himself so peculiarly to the Gentiles.

publishing the Faith, For that was most advantageously to be done in the
public Assemblies, that it might be known to all that were in the city: And
the synagogues of the Jews being such, were in all reason by him, that was a
Jew, to be preferred before the Idolatrous Temples of the heathens: And
according to these obligations, and inducements, so generally he did; But then
as this no way prejudiceth his title of Apostle of the Gentiles, to which he
was at the first assigned by Christ, so neither is it any way contrary to, or
unreconcileable with the agreement which I suppose to be made between him and
Peter and John, which concerned only those cities and regions, where they met,
and came to plant Churches; There, and there only it is, that I affirm this
distribution of Provinces to have been made, and consequently the affirmation
is no farther in any justice to be extended, than thus, that when they so met,
Paul betook himself to the Gentile part, compacted the Gentile proselytes or
believers into a Church, put them into the hands of a Bishop of his own
assignation, Ignatius at Antioch, Timothy at Ephesus, whereas Euodius was in
the former, Bishop of the Jewish part, and in the latter, and in all Asia, John
was the Apostle of the circumcision, and constituted Bishops there. And this I
suppose, without farther enlarging, may satisfy the importunity of his second
Argument.

Sect. V.
Of the Gentiles being S. Paul's Province peculiarly.

fourth exception is to my producing the words of scripture, Gal. 2. 7, 9. to
the proof of my position, Thus,

But he goes on telling us, that the Gentiles exclusively to the circumcision
were the lot of S. Paul by S. Peter's own confession, his words are, for the
uncircumcision or Gentiles they were not S. Peter 's Province, but peculiarly
S. Paul 's etc. but look on the place and you shall find no word of exclusion
as [ pec'iarly] is, and whereon lies the whole question, so that the Doctors
evidence is his own word against the main torrent of scripture on the other
side.

torrent of the scripture is against me, has already been made manifest in the
foregoing sections, where the contrary appearances, by this Gentleman produced,
as they are far enough from a main torrent, or from the common force of such,
(or but even of an ordinary stream) carrying the whole business before them,
so they are severally examined, and allowed, as far as they have any force in
them, and found perfectly reconcilable with our pretensions.

Apostle of the Gentiles, so styled by himself, and so, by agreement betwixt
the Apostles, acknowledged by S. Peter, was so, peculiarly or exclusively to
the Jews.

argument drawn only from hence, that in the text to the Galatians there is no
word of exclusion, that sure is of little force; If there were any agreement,
and division, and several assignation of Provinces, it must follow that what
was said to be one man's Province, is his, so as it is not the others, and so
peculiarly, and so as far as that agreement holds, exclusively his, As in the
estate first held in common, and then after by agreement divided, it has
appeared so evidently, that I need add no more to that matter.

Sect. VI.
Of S. Peter's withdrawing from the Gentile-communion. Of the Gentile diet. The
prudence of S. Peter's action.

fifth Exception concerns an incidental passage about S. Peter, and is an actio
injuriarum.

Again (says he) see how he wrongs S. Peter and his Jewish Proselytes, where
he says he withdrew from all communion with the Gentile Christians. Sect. 8, 9.
Whereas the text expresses no more, than that he withdrew from eating with
them, that is keeping the Gentile diet.

wrong I have done S. Peter and his Gentile Proselytes, I am yet to learn, nor
am I sure that I know wherein this Gentleman places the supposed injury, But I
think it most probable to consist in this, that I say he withdrew from all
communion with the gentile Christians, whereas he conceives that he withdrew
only from keeping the gentile diet.

Gentleman, what he means by Gentile diet? I suppose using those sorts of
meats, which were by the Jewish law forbidden; And if that be acknowledged of
S. Peter, that he would not thus eat with the Gentiles, lest he should seem to
offend against the Jewish law, then by the same reason he must certainly be
supposed to abstain from other communion with them, because it was equally
against the Jewish law, that a Jew should converse with a Gentile, as the woman
of Samaria tells Christ, when he spoke to her, but to draw him some water, Ioh.
4. 9. How, said she, do thou being a Jew ask me to drink (and it was but
water, none of the interdicted Gentile diet) being a woman of Samaria? and
either she or the Evangelist renders the reason, in as comprehensive terms as
mine were, (...), for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritanes, and
accordingly v. 27. the disciples marvelled that he talked with the woman. And
therefore certainly Peter did abstain from all those other ways of converse
and communion with the Gentiles, which the Jews thought as unlawful, as
eating of the Gentile diet, or else he failed of the end of his action, which
is evident what it was, a fear of scandalizing his countrymen, and from thence
a show of compliance with them, lest he should be thought by those that came
from Jerusalem to forsake the Iudaical law.

Preaching to a Gentile (which was the loosest degree of communion) was,
according to the Jewish principles as unlawful as eating any unclean meat,
using the Gentile diet, is plain by Peter's provision, Act. 10. 12. where the
one is represented by the other, and had he not received that vision, which
made it lawful to him to eat all kind of meats, he acknowledges that he durst
not have adventured to come to one of another nation, v. 28. affirming in as
plain words as could be, that it was an unlawful thing for a man that was a Jew
to keep company or come to one of another nation, (...), which certainly
includes all communion, and not only that of the Genile diet. Thus unhappy is
this Gentleman continually in his objections.

opinion of the Ancients of the prudence and to kind of uncharitableness of S.
Peter's action, which would farther evidence how far I am from wronging S.
Peter or his Proselytes, in affirming what I affirm of them. But the present
objection does not make that necessary, I refer the Reader for it to the
((...)) interpretation, or Comments of Savil: ed: t. 3. p. 730, 731.
S. Chrysostom, who sets it down exactly (...)
not as a quarrel, but as an (...), an act of prudent managery, a wise
ordering, designed by him and S. Paul, as most likely to reduce the Jews from
their errors, when he that did thus much to comply with them (not for fear of
persecution from them, but for fear of averting them from Christianity) and was
herein seemingly opposed by S. Paul (the (...) v. 11. being not to be rendered,
he was to be blamed, in Paul's opinion, but he was blamed by the Gentile
Christians) made no manner of reply in defense of that compliance with the
Jews, and so yielded that S. Paul was in the right, and not the Iudaizers.
This interpretation of Chrysostom is followed by the Greek Commentators, and
taken up by Jerome, but disliked by Augustine in his Epistles to Jerome, and
therefore I lay not weight upon it, nor have my pretensions any need of it.

Sect. VII.
The two plantations of Gentile and Jewish Christians at Antioch. Euodius and
Ignatius. The differences of the Ancients about them reconciled. The two
Bishops at Rome. Jews in England. Simon Zelotes. Gentium Ecclesia the Church
of Jews as well as Gentiles.

exceptions, and the position remaining still firm against all, I have less
reason to suspect what is built upon this foundation in the ensuing sections:
Yet against them altogether he casts one stone, before he will part, in those
words,

Upon this wisely laid ground, he would persuade us, followed the division of
the Bishoprics both in Antioch and Rome, but bringing not one word of
Antiquity proving this to have been the cause, yet is he so certain of it, that
he will find a colonie of Jews even in England, for fear S. Peter should have
touched a Gentile, and yet he cites S. Prosper, that both S. Peter and S. Paul
founded the Church of Gentiles in Rome.

suggestion, I shall not here need to set down at large. There be three
branches of it, 1. That I bring not a word of antiquity to prove (what I say)
that this the cause of the divisions of the Bishoprics both in Antioch and
Rome. 2. That I will find a Colonie of Jews in England. 3. That I cite
Prosper, that both S. Peter and S. Paul founded the Church of Gentiles in Rome.

first, I desire the Reader to review what is already said in the Tract of
Schism c. 4. from. 8. to. 20. and I shall much wonder if he return of this
Gentleman's mind, that there is not one word there brought out of Antiquity to
confirm what I say. The short is, It is there manifested from Antiquity, that
the Church of Antioch was founded by S. Peter and S. Paul, that there were two
Churches there, one of Jewish, the other of Gentile Christians, that in those
Churches at the same time sat two distinct Bishops, Euodius and Ignatius; by
which means some appearing difficulties in ancient writers are explained.

repeating, add thus much more. Of Euodius, Suidas's words will be easily
turned to, in (...) etc. In the reign of Claudius Caesar, Peter the Apostle
ordained Euodius Bishop at Antioch. Of Ignatius the l. 7. c. 47.
Author of the Constitutions is express, (...), Ignatius was ordained Bishop
there by S. Paul. Now seeing in those Acts of Ignatius which are put together
by Simeon Metaphrastes, Ignatius is said to succeed Euodius, as Euodius
succeeded Peter ((...)) and the Anonymus ancient writer of the Acts of
Ignatius, which remains unprinted, has the same, (...) Ignatius succeeded
Euodius, and seeing this ordination of Ignatius is also said by in (...)
Theodores, and by Epist: ad Zenon:
Felix III. Bishop of Rome to have been done by the hand of Saint Peter, This
seeming difference is removed by in Chron: (MS. Oxon:) l. 10.
Ioannes Malela Antiochenus, who thus sets down the whole matter, (...), When
Peter went to Rome, passing by Antioch the great, Euodius Bishop and Patriarch
of Antioch happened to die, and Ignatius (who was, as was said, first
constituted by S. Paul over the Gentiles there) received the Bishopric (that I
suppose must now be, of the Jewish Province also; over which Euodius had been
in his life time) S. Peter ordaining and enthroning him, And so that is become
most clear which En^om: Ignat:
S. Chrysostom said of this Ignatius, that (...) etc. the hands of the blessed
Apostles, (in the plural, first of Paul, then of Peter) had been laid on
Ignatius.

Rome, * was so cleared by the words of Epiphanius, Sect. 9.
who says of Peter and Paul both, that they were (...), Apostles and Bishops
at Rome, and so many other evidences produced to the same purpose, from the
inscription on their tombs, by Gaius contemporary to Pope Zephyrinus, by
Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, by Prosper, by the seals of the Popes, and so
again by the Ecclesiastic story, Sect. 12.
that makes Clemens S. Peter's Deacon and successor in the Bishopric, and Linus
S. Paul's that sure there can be no need of farther proofs or testimonies from
Antiquity in this matter.

Churches are * instanced in, particularly the Churches of Asia, Sect. 14.
wherein S. Paul and S. John had all the command, and S. Peter had nothing to
do, whether in planting or governing them, which alone is sufficient to carry
the whole matter against S. Peter's universal Pastorship, and no word is by
this Gentleman replied to that so considerable a part of my probation, Only
instead of it, a far more compendious way, that of the scornful or
fastidious scossing at my wisely laid ground, as he pleases to call it, and
adding that I bring not one word of Antiquity etc.

second branch of his suggestion, that I will find a colonie of Jews in
England, that is no where said by me, Only thus, that upon supposition, if the
saying of Simeon Metaphrastes (speaking of S. Peter's preaching and ordaining
Bishops in England, Neronis 12) should be thought to have truth in it, it must
be extended no farther than the Jews, which might at that time be dispersed
there.

conclusion from that supposition is founded in the analogy, that as, where S.
Paul and S. Peter met in any plantation, they divided their Province etc. so in
reason it ought to be, where S. Peter and Simon Zelotes, or Joseph of Arimathea
met in like manner, so all that of the Jews in England I there affirm, is
only this, that it was possible they that were dispersed in so many regions,
might be, some of them, dispersed in Britannie, which how improbable soever it
may appear at that time, is sure as probable, as that S. Peter preached and
ordained Bishops in Britannie, and in consequence to that only it was, that I
made the supposition of the possibility of it, knowing it the affirmation of
our Antiquaries, that Joseph of Arimathea, or Simon Zelotes ('it is possible also
that Simeon Metaphrastes might mistake Simon Peter for him and then that matter
is at an end) planted the faith in this Island.

suggestion, that I cite Saint Prosper, that both S Peter and S. Paul founded
the Church of Gentiles in Rome, I desire the truth of it may be considered by
the words which I cite from him, In ipsa Jerusalem Iacobus and Ioannes apud
Ephesum, Andreas and caeteri per totam Asiam, Petrus and Paulus Apostoli in
urbe Roma Gentium Ecclesiam pacatam unamque posteris tradentes ex dominica
pactione sacrarunt, James at Jerusalem, John at Ephesus, Andrew and the rest
through all Asia, Peter and Paul at Rome, consecrated the Church of the
Nations. What Nations were these, sure of Jews, as well as Gentiles, else
Jerusalem could not be any part of them, no nor John's converts at Ephesus, for
they were Jews, and therefore this Gentleman did not do well to substitute
the word Gentiles for Nations, and yet could not, without doing so, have made
this exception to my words.

exceptions to my first evidence against the Universal Pastorship of Saint
Peter.

Sect. VIII.
No promise of Keys to S. Peter, which was not made and performed to all the
Apostles, Joh. 20. 21. the completion of the promise, Mat. 16. 19. Pasce oves.
Joh. 21. an exhortation, not commission.

second sort of Exceptions follows, those against my evidence drawn from the
power of the Keys, which I say, and prove both from Scripture, and express
testimonies of the Fathers, that it was given equally to all the Apostles; And
his exceptions begin thus:

A second evidence he brings from the donation of the Keys, which he says
were given equally to the Apostles, Mat. 28. yet confesses the Keys were
especially promised to S. Peter, Mat. 16. but performed only in common, Mat.
28. which though they may be both true, yet is absurdly said, for who
acknowledges a special promise, should have found out a special performance,
which is done, Joh. 21.

exception being not to the matter of what I say, but to the absurdnesse of the
expression (to which censure I must suppose every thing liable, which is
contrary to his pretensions, and yet proved so manifestly that it cannot be
denied by him) I shall briefly evidence how commodious, and proper the
expression was.

confession, that the Keys were especially promised to S. Peter, this is not
with truth suggested; My words are, Sect. 20.
This power Mat. 16. 19. is promised to S. Peter] But the [ especially] is an
interpolation of this Gentleman's, to prepare my words for his exceptions, for
which otherwise they were no way qualified.

sense, is, that in the next Section, I foresaw, and so mentioned an objection
from Christ's making this promise to him peculiarly (and yet even that is not,
to him especially, but to him particularly, or singly, I will give unto thee
etc.) To this, as to an objection, I presently made reply, that the repetition
of that promise Mat. 18. 18. to all the Apostles indefinitely, and without any
peculiarity of restriction (I say to you, in the plural, and, Whatsoever ye
shall bind etc.) will take away all appearance from this objection.

Gentleman's exception also, For if what was at one time promised to S. Peter
singly, was so soon after promised to all the Apostles indefinitely, what
absurdity is there in seeking no other performance of this promise, than that
which was at once afforded to all the Apostles together, in the descent of the
Holy Ghost, when the fire, that represented that Spirit, divided and sat upon
every one of them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and no show of
peculiarity, or mark of especial eminence to S Peter in all this.

General should promise a Commission this day to one, and to morrow should
make the like promise to eleven more, that one being in their company, and
then, upon a set day, some weeks after, should send 12 Commissions sealed to
those 12, one for each of them, I wonder who would doubt of the exact
performance of this promise to that first, or seek for any more special
performance of it.

Gentleman having phansied a special promise (as that is with him somewhat more
than a particular promise, for otherwise a common performance might have served
the turn, it being certain that an Universal contains every particular under
it) must needs have a special performance, and that Ioh. 21. I suppose in those
words of Christ to S. Peter, Feed my sheep, and, Feed my lambs, thrice repeated.

particular reference to the words of the promise, Mat. 16. 19. The promise
was, I will give thee the Keys -- and, Whatsoever thou shall bind -- And sure
the direct completion of this, as far as could be expected from Christ
personally, whilst he was here on earth, is that of Ioh. 20. 21. where, as the
sending or commissionating is answerable to giving the Keys, the insigne of
the OEconomus, so remitting and retaining of sins is all one with the binding
and loosing.

Chap. 21. It is I. by that very position of it; but 2. more by the occasion;
and yet more 3. by the matter of the words, prejudged from being any more than
an exhortation to discharge that duty, for which in the former Chap: he, with
the rest of the twelve, had received his commission, and so is still as far
from being a special performance, as that of Matthew. 16. had been from a
special promise.

Pasce oves, Feed my sheep and lambs, thrice repeated, was certainly a
direction to him how he might approve his love to that Master and Savior, whom
he had thrice renounced, testify it now to be a sincere constant love (such as
would cast out all fear of danger, through which formerly he had fallen) by an
eminent diligence in discharge of that Pastoral office, which was entrusted to
him, but 'twas not so much as an intimation, that his diligence would be
actually greater than all others (for sure S. Paul said truth, that he labored
more abundantly than they all, of whom S. Peter was one) but rather that he,
that after such professions had fallen so foully, had the more need now of
having this proof of his love inculcated and pressed, lest he should fail again
(much less is it a sealing any power or authority to him, above that which
before had been conferred on him, and with him on those others also.

energie, or special commission in these words, but only the thing crudely
affirmed, by naming Ioh. 21. there is no need of making any farther answer, a
bare denial is a proportionable return to an unproved affirmation.

Peter thus underslood the reiteration of Christ's question, as a reproach of
his three denialls; The Text says, Peter was grieved, because he said unto him
the third time, Love thou me? Which sure he would not have been, if he had
looked on it, as an introduction to so great a preferment, as it must be, if
the supremacy and Universal Pastorship of the Church were by those words
conferred on him.

Sect. IX.
Of the peculiarity of the power given to S. Peter.

power of the Keys follows a second Exception in these words,

Peter, Sect. 2.
calling it a peculiarity and enclosure of S. Peter, as if the other Apostles
had them not, which is a calumny.

calumniating the whole Catholic Church, or any one member of it, will appear
by this brief review of what is there said, It is this, The power of the Keys
is promised S. Peter, Mat. 16. but to him that from hence, i. e. from the
promising it to him singly in that place, pretends this donative and consequent
power as a peculiarity and enclosure of Peter's, two considerations are there
offered, and thought sufficient to supersede any such conclusion.

supposition will not be the accusing or consequently accusing falsely, i. e.
calumniating of any. If no man say this, besides my losing my pains in
superseding such a (but possible) conclusion, there is no other harm done.
Only I shall demand, Is that promise of the Keys to Saint Peter, Mat. 16.
made use of by a Romanist to prove Christ's promise of some special power to S.
Peter, which was not promised to the other Apostles? If this Gentleman answer,
No; then 1. I must infer, that this Gentleman is no Romanist, because in this
very page he mentions the first words of this text, Tues Petrus, as one of the
two most considerable texts of Scripture, fit to be alleged for S. Peter's
supremacy. 2. I shall conclude from this his present supposed negation,
together with his own words in the last Paragraph, that the words of Christ,
Ioh. 21. Feed my sheep etc.] were not the instating of any power on S. Peter,
which was not common also to the rest of the Apostles, for those words Ioh. 21.
were, says he, a special performance, answerable to that promise of the Keys
to Peter, Mat. 16. as a special promise, and consequently if there were nothing
in that promise peculiar to S. Peter, there was nothing in that performance
peculiar to him. And so neither he nor any Romanist must henceforth conclude
any thing for S. Peter from either of those particular addresses of Christ to
him, Mat. 16. or Ioh. 21. which they will not equally yield from thence to all
the other Apostles; And then that will more compendiously perform what I by a
greater circuit of considerations indevoured to do, i. e. supersede all the
Romanists conclusions from one or both these places; for certainly if they
pretend not to infer somewhat for S. Peter, which is not by them equally
granted to all the rest of the Apostles, all that those texts will be able to
do, is to confute the Presbytery, not to establish the Papacy, no more being
from hence deducible for the Bishop of Rome the successor of one Apostle, than
for the several other Bishops, successors of the other Apostles.

consequences, he shall now say, that in this of Mat. 16. 19. there is any
thing, be it never so little (so as to be capable of the phrase a special
promise) ensured upon S. Peter, which was not elsewhere promised also to the
other Apostles, I shall then conclude, that it seems I have not calumniated
him, or the Church which he defends, in saying that they make this power a
peculiarity and enclosure of Saint Peter, for so it must be, if it belong to
him and not to others.

power of the Keys was common to him with the other Apostles, but yet some
other special power was there reserved to S. Peter, For of that specialty,
whatsoever it is, my present Dilemma proceeds, and desires to be informed,
whether any Romanist conclude it from that text of Mat. 16. and if he do not,
then the inconveniences will press him, which I have here mentioned. If he do
then I shall now conclude anew (not that the Catholic Church, but) that this
Catholic Gentleman holds that which he will not be able to prove, because
there is not the least minute portion of power promised to him in that 16 Chap:
which is not elsewhere promised to all the Apostles; Peter is called a stone,
on which the Church shall be built, and to Peter the Keys are promised; and
the twelve Apostles are in like manner, and all equally twelve
foundation-stones of the same building, and the Keys are equally promised to
all them. And this being there proved at large. 21. and the probations
extended, not only to the power of the Keys, but (after) to the compellation
of Tues Petrus (and they will be extensible to all the most diminutive
imaginary fractions of either of those powers) I shall farther conclude, that
whatsoever he shall now return to this Dilemma, will equally secure me from
having calumniated either him, or the Church maintained by him.

Sect. X.
Sitting on twelve Thrones, Mat. 19.

third Exception to this Chap: is to another interpretation of mine, which it
seems has not the luck to approve it self to him, Thus,

Sect. out of Mat. 19. speaking of the twelve Thrones at the day of Judgment,
he explicates, to rule or preside in the Church.

twelve Thrones, Mat. 19. of the Apostles ruling and presiding in the Church,
and S. Augustine long before so understood it, and if Christ's sitting on the
throne of his glory may be the interpretation of (...), whether it be rendered
in the regeneration, or in the resurrection, meaning thereby Christ's
resurrection and ascension to the throne of his glory, there will then be no
difficulty so to understand it, that when Christ was gone to heaven, these
should succeed him in the government of his Church on earth, and so (as the
Phylarchae ruled and judged the several tribes of Israel) exercise judicature,
bind and loose, excommunicate and absolve in the Church, no one having the
(...), any more than of order, among them.

Gentleman gives no reason for preferring any other interpretation, only calls
mine an odd one, And when I have replied first, that this place comes in ex
abundanti, only as it is (being thus interpreted) in concord with that other
of Mat. 16. and 18. and therefore secondly, it is not an odd one, and thirdly,
the cause in hand will stand as firm, though this interpretation should be
found to have no truth in it: fourthly, that my interpretation is reconcilable
with his, and therefore his, if granted, will not be exclusive of mine, they
that shall judge the world hereafter may for some time have presided in the
Church, and so also judged here; fifthly, that this place, and the grounds of
this interpretation are Annot: on Mat. 19. d. and Power of Keys, c. 5.. 13.
elsewhere insisted on at large, I shall need add no more to this single
dislike of his, in this place.

Sect. XI.
The equivalence of (...) and (...). Twelve foundation-stones.

Tues Petrus, Thus,

Peter the Church was built specially, though not with exclusion of others.

equivalence and perfect identity of the words, (...) and (...). for a stone,
seemed to me particularly useful to the understanding of the meaning of
Christ's speech, when he said, he would build his Church on this (...). or
(...), i. e. this stone. For not to mention what has by diverse of the Ancients
been said of that text, applying it not to the person of S. Peter, but to the
faith, where of he then had newly made confession, I was here willing to grant
the Romanist the utmost that he could pretend to, viz: that the person of Peter
was that Petra or stone, on which Christ promised to build his Church: And why
this Gentleman should be so unwilling to be gratified, or why the setting down
the bare notation of the Greek word, should deserve his reproach, and be called
quibling or levity, I profess I can render no reason but his haste, which
permitted him not to consider either the undeniable truth, or his own
advantages from what was said.

another branch of that fourth Section, viz: that this stone, from whence Peter
had his name, peculiarly relating to a building, and so being to be considered
as a foundation stone, not only he, but all the rest of the Apostles were
herein made equal with Peter, being all partakers of this common appellation,
(...) twelve foundations, Apoc. 21. 14. and those by circumstances in that text
manifested to have an equal proportion of power and Province assigned to each
of them. And to this there is nothing here answered by this Gentleman, and his
unprovoked quarrel at that, which was said concerning the nature of the word,
is an indication that he had nothing more to object to it.

on Peter the Church was built especially, I demand what he means by specially?
If no more than that he was one special person, on whom the Church was built,
then I grant it, and reply, that so was John, and so was Andrew, and so was
every other of the twelve, a special foundation-stone of the Church. But if by
[ specially.] he mean in an extraordinary, or more eminent manner, than any of
the other Apostles, Then I answer, 1. that Christ's telling him he was a stone
on which he would build his Church, implies no such matter, the other Apostles
each of them are by Christ, in vision to S. John, affirmed to be foundations of
this building, as well as he; 2. That among foundation-stones there is but one,
that has any eminence above others, and that is the (...), the chief or
head-corner-stone, and that title belongs not to S. Peter (as neither to any
other Apostle) but only to Christ himself, Ephesians. 2. 20. And so still nothing
belongs to Peter in this matter of being a stone or foundation, which does not
equally appear to belong to those others, as well as him. And so much for the
vindicating of the Evidences set down in the fourth Chapter.

CHAP. V. An Answer to the Exceptions made to the fifth Chapter.
Sect. I.
Of slight passing over Pasce oves, and Tues Petrus.

excepts against, is my too slight passing over two, which he thinks the most
considerable texts, to support the supremacy of S. Peter, In these words,

Peter's supremacy, viz: Feed my sheep, and, Thou art Peter: because they have
no appearance, and have been often answered: Why no appearance? because he and
his fellows say so, and as if being so often repeated was not as likely to show
the answer was naught, as the answering to impeach the ob^ecter: but who
understands the principles of Catholic Faith, knows, that as well for other
points of our Faith, as for this of S. Peter's supremacy we rely not only
upon such places of Scripture.

light passing over those two places of Scripture, I think I can give a very
reasonable account, 1. From his own words p. 10. where he tells me that I am
mistaken in thinking that the Catholic ought to prove that the Pope has an
universal Primacy, For if he be not obliged to prove it, if the right pretended
depend wholly upon possession, why should not I make haste, through those
proofs, which some have ex abundanti (as to him it seems) made use of.

Secondly, I did in the simplicity of my heart verily believe (what here is
recited from me) that those two texts had so very little appearance of strength
in them, and this so often manifested by the variety of answers made to them by
our writers, that no Romanist would in earnest have laid such weight on them,
as to require of me a more punctual answer to them, than I had before given in
the former Chapter. There I had evidenced that the whole world was not S.
Peter's province, but only one portion of one part of the world, the Jewish
believers in Antioch and Rome etc. the Gentile Christians in those very cities
being under S. Paul, and the Jewish of other conntreys under other Apostles,
those of Asia under John etc.

Christ's Pasce oves etc. Feed my sheep and my lambs, were granted to be a form
of commission, instating of power on him, it must yet be restrained to his
particular Province, so as to leave other his fellow Apostles their Provinces
also, and not extended to an Universal Pastorship.

farther consideration was behind, that indeed this of Pasce oves] was not the
form of commission to S. Peter, but that in the former Chapter, Joh. 20. 21. as
my Father sent me, so send I you etc. and that to S. Peter in common with the
rest of the Apostles, and not the least indication of any branch of power
appropriated to him (on which I have already insisted in this Reply, though in
that Tract of Schism I did not think it necessary) I hope I may have pardon
for not returning to a strict survey of it in that fifth Chapter.

Tues Petrus, that was the very text wherein the donation of the Keys was
promised to S. Peter, Mat. 16. 18. and that had particularly been examined in
both parts of it, both as to the Keys, and the compellation, in the fourth
Chap: and the Keys promised him, manifested by other texts to belong equally
to all the other Apostles, and so the compellation of stone, or (which is all
one, as was there showed) foundation, or foundation-stone in the building of
the Church, bestowed equally upon the rest of the twelve Apostles also. And so
considering what I had already done my self, and what others had done much more
largely, there remained little appearance of force in those texts, which might
suggest to me a more diligent survey of them. And all these together, if not
two of them alone, were a competent reason of passing lightly over them in that
fifth Chapter, where I was engaged in a new stage, i. e. of not returning
afresh, and loco non suo, to a yet larger consideration of them.

notice of his displeasure endeavor to pacify him by reforming my former
omission, and enter upon a yet more solemn survey of these two texts, but that
I see him already resolved not to trust his cause to the support which those
texts can afford him, telling me in the close, that he relies not only on such
places of Scripture, and if I should dwell longer upon them, I should be
thought impertinent, and again reprehended, as forgetting what matter I handle,
And therefore till he please to tell me how far he relies on them, and show
me that I have not yet removed them from being a foundation so far to be
relied on, I shall spare mine own and the Readers pains, and flatter my self,
that I have said much more to invalidate any conclusion, which he shall infer
to his advantage from these two places, than he has yet said in my hearing, to
confirm his pretensions from both or either of them.

Sect. II.
The Bishop of Antioch's title from succession to S. Peter equal to the Bishops
of Rome. Peter formed a Church there. His dying at Rome no argument.

velitation he now proceeds to the weightier impression, excepting first to an
argument taken from the Primogeniture of Antioch, Thus,

Peter were the base of the Popes supremacy, Antioch should be the chief See,
because S. Peter sat there, wherein to omit his first and second question,
whereof the first is untrue, I answer to the third negatively, that the
constituting a Church and Bishop at Antioch, before at Rome, did confer no
privilege extraordinary on that Church, and the reason is clearly deduced out
of his second Quaere, because it was before Rome, for he could not give any
such authority, but by divesting himself, since there cannot be two heads to
one body, and therefore this authority and privilege of S. Peter can rest and
be no where but where he died.

Chap.. 2. that what I there produced against the power of the Bishop of Rome,
under the notion of successor to S. Peter, was perfectly ex abundanti, more
than needed, the whole matter being sufficiently concluded in the former
Chapter, which concerned S. Peter's person, and had showed that S. Peter
himself had no Universal Pastorship belonging to him, or supremacy over any
other Apostle, from whence it was evidently consequent, that to his successor,
as such, no such power pertained.

proceed with that evidence as to demonstrate again what was so sufficiently
cleared already, Only to those, whose curiosity was not satisfied, when their
reason was, I proposed some considerations, which pretended to no more than
this, that beside that Peter had no supremacy, there were also other defects in
the Bishop of Rome's tenure, particularly this, that he did no more succeed S.
Peter, than the Bishop of Antioch did, nay, that S. Peter having left a
successor Bishop at Antioch, before he did at Rome, the Bishop of Antioch had
in a manner the Primogeniture, and by that, as good (if not a better) title to
praeeminence, as any the Bishop of Rome had, upon that tenure of succession
from S. Peter.

probability, there can lie no exception, unless it appear either to be untrue
in any part, or in the whole less probable than what is offered by the
Romanist for the other side; And this is now to be examined.

first question is untrue; But he is so reserved as not to express his reason
for so saying. I shall therefore give my reasons to the contrary, 1. because a
question cannot be untrue, all truth and falsehood being in affirmations and
negations (and asking a question, or proposing a thing to consideration whether
it be so or no, is neither of those) in answering not in asking of questions.

Secondly, Because this question being resolved into an affirmation, viz: that
Peter as truly planted a Church at Antioch, and left a successor Bishop
there, as he is or can be supposed to have done at Rome, it relies on the
uncontradicted Testification of ancient writers.

planting a Church I mean not that he was the first that preached the Gospel at
Antioch (though Leo the Great seems to affirm it, ( in Antiochena Ecclesia
primum praedicante beato Apostolo Petro, Christianum nomen exortum est, Ep:
53.) and from thence pleads the right of precedence to belong to that Church,
(in paternae constitutionis ordine perseveret) against Anatholius Bishop of
Constantinople) for that seems by S. Luke to be attributed to those that were
scattered abroad upon the persecution that rose about S. Stephen, Act. 11. 19.
but his forming them into a Church or regular assembly. And that so he did, and
left Euodius Bishop there, and after his death Ignatius the Martyr, is
elsewhere manifested at large, and I shall not repeat it, but only add one
Testimony (which I suppose will be authentic with him) of Leo the Great,
Bishop of Rome, Ep: 62. to Maximus Bishop of Antioch, bidding him be mindful
of that doctrine, quam praecipuus Apostolorum omnium, beatissimus Petrus per
totum mundum quidem uniformi praedicatione, sed speciali Magisterio in
Antiochena and Romana urbe fundavit. Where it is the clear affirmation of that
Pope, that S. Peter founded the doctrine of Christ first in Antioch, then in
Rome by a special authority, or power, or magisterie, which he had in those two
cities, more than in the rest of the world. And so I cannot guess what untruth
there could be in that affirmation, if it had been such, which was but a
consideration, or question, as he calls it.

Peter's constituting a Church and Bishop at Antioch, before he did the like at
Rome, is a proof that he conferred no extraordinary privilege on Antioch, and
renders the reason for it, because he could not do it without divesting
himself, and consequently this privilege must rest no where but where he died,
and consequently at Rome only, because he died there.

extraordinary privilege at Antioch I do not believe, any more than he did so
at Rome, and therefore I cannot be required to prove any more than this, that
it is as reasonable for me to affirm it of Antioch upon the title of
succession, as for him to assume it of Rome, upon the same title.

Christ there is nothing that will fix it at Rome, rather than at Antioch, and
in the Law of Nations concerning inheritances, nothing is or can be applied to
this purpose. It must needs be then from the free act of S. Peter's will,
whatsoever is pretended to. And in respect of that it is sure as reasonable to
believe, that he which planted a Church, and placed a Bishop first in one,
after in another city, should delegate the (...) double portion, the greater
dignity and privileges to the former as to the latter. If the right of
Primogeniture be no right in this matter, yet sure the younger sister has
neither law, nor custom, that the inheritance should belong to her.

own reason here offered, that it cannot belong to the Elder, that is no
reason; For S. Peter might do, as Christ did, make an assignation of power in
his life time, fix it by promise, yet not divest himself of it till his death,
And if S. Peter had done so, if at his planting a Bishop at Antioch, on
consideration that in that city they were first called Christians, he had
decreed that after his own death that Bishop should succeed to all that
authority, which he had received from Christ, with power to communicate it to
any, I shall ask this Gentleman whether he might not have done it without
either devesting himself whilst he lived, or making two heads to one body, or
whether his bare dying at Rome, would have invalidated any such former act of
his, in case he had done so. If it would, there must then be more owing to his
death than to his life, to his martyrdom than to his preaching or ordaining of
Bishops, that this privilege belongs to Rome. And then again Jerusalem, where
Christ himself died, will by that title of his blood shed there, have a more
unquestionable right, than that city where Peter did but faintly transcribe
that copy, which had in a more eminent manner been set him by Christ.

Lastly, if by this argument of Rome's being the place where Peter died, the
supremacy had belonged to that See, precisely or peculiarly, how could it be
transferred to Avenion, as we know it was, and there continued for some time?
But I shall no longer insist on such fiction of case, as this, if that had been
which never was, what then would certainly have followed, whether if S. Peter
had been Universal Pastor, it must eo ipso be concluded that his successor of
Rome, and not at Antioch was such after him, when it has been rendered evident
in the former Chapter, that S. Peter had no such supremacy.

Sect. III.
The Act of the Council of Chalcedon; of the ground of Rome's precedence. The
safety of the Church reconcilable with removing the chief See. Of the Bishop
of Constantinople being ashamed of that act. No tumult in the Council. The
story of it.

original of that precedence which belongs to Rome, as the Council of Chalcedon
had derived it, Thus,

Rome is surely much more fitly deduced by the Council of Chalcedon from this,
that Rome was then the Imperial city, or ordinary residence of the Emperor: a
very wise judgment, that the quality upon which the unity, that is the safety
of the Church Universal relies, should be planted upon a bottom fallible and
subject to fail, but the resolution was so shameful, that the very Patriarch
was ashamed, and imputed it to his ambitious clergy, who how tumultuary and
unruly they were, is to be seen in the Acts of the Council.

objections are made to the wisdom of that Act or judgment of that Council,
and I that foresaw it would be thus rejected by him, Sect. 5.
and from thence observed how little Councels are considered by them, when they
define not as they would have them, and therefore laid no more weight on that
Canon, than the Romanists very rejecting it allowed me, might now spare the
pains of defending the judgment of that Council. Yet it is so easy to return
answer in few words to his two objections, that I shall not decline doing it.

precedence of Rome, which there I speak of, being a Primacy only of dignity
and order, and not of Power, is no such quality, on which the unity and safety
of the Church relies. For how can that be concerned what Bishop sits uppermost,
gives the first or last suffrage in a Council? This Gentleman thinks of a
supremacy of power, when he thus speaks, but that he cannot but know is denied
by us to be placed in any one Bishop, and therefore must not imagine me to
assign the original of that, to which I deny a being. And it matters not
though he say I am injurious in denying it, for besides that that is petitio
principii on his side, to say so, it is also certain that the question now
betwixt us in this Paragraph, is not whether I am just in denying that
supremacy, but whether it be more than a Primacy of order, which I divolve to
this original.

supremacy it self, and fixed it on a bottom so far fallible, as that it
might be removed by the change of Empires from one city to another, if it were
but resolved that the supreme Ecclesiastical power, and so the fountain of
unity should follow the Imperial seat, I see not why the safety of the Church
might not by this means be provided for.

little first, as it is easily supposeable. Suppose the Church of England
(...), nay for argument's sake, suppose there were no other Church but that of
England, and suppose there were a supremacy in one Bishop, in him, whosoever
were the Bishop of that city, where the royal throne were placed, and suppose
that that were for the present removed to York, and so that the Bishop of
York were the supreme Bishop, and by that means the unity and safety of the
Church competently provided for, I shall then demand, in case the royal seat
should be removed to Winchester, could there be any question, but the supreme
Episcopal See would be removed so too? and might not all appeals be made from
thenceforth to Winchester, and the safety of the Church be as well provided for
by this way, as by it is being fixed unmoveably at York?

Primacy we know has often thus been removed, and never more inconvenience come
of it, than by S. Peter's See being removed to Avenion. And if any supremacy
belonged to any succession of Bishops over the whole world, and that were never
mutable, but by the removal of the Emperial seat, a certain, illustriously
visible thing, it is not easily discernible, how this should more prejudice the
safety of the Church, than the change of that power from one Bishop that dies,
to his successor in the same See. But this is still much more than needed to
have been said.

Patriarch's (I suppose he must mean of Constantinople) being ashamed of that
resolution of that Council, and imputing it to his ambitious Clergy, ^. he
gives us not any testimony for this, only says, that in the Acts of that
Council may be seen how tumultuary and unruly they were. And to that
affirmation, and that not very pertinent roof of it, I have two things to say,
which indeed the Acts of that Council, and the Epistles both of Anatolius
Bishop of Constantinople, and Leo Bishop of Rome may assure us to have truth in
them. 1. That if by being ashamed be meant retracting or renouncing this
resolution of the Council, It then has no truth in it, that the Patriarch was
ashamed.

Leo's reprehensions in this matter of the Primacy adjudged him by that
Council, Anatolius chose to take no notice, and to return no answer, that Leo
tells the Emperor of it, Ep: 59. maluit praedictus Antistes meam gratulationem
tacere, quam suam ambitum publicare, and charge it upon Anatolius himself,
that he made no reply to what he had said to him; Ad quas cum non rescriberes
ipse te a colloquii nostri consortio separasti, by not making any return to my
admonitory letters, thou have thy self separated thy self from the communion of
our discourse. Ep: 71.

Leo charged it upon him, as an act of ambition and pride, that he had procured
that Canon to be made (as he does at large, Colon: Edit. fol. 118.
Ep: 53. making it an invasion of the Bishop of Alexandria and Antioch his
right settled by the Council of Nice, and so in his Ep: ^4 fol. 119.
Epistle to Martian the Emperor, and Ep: 55. fol. 120.
another to the Empress Pulcheria) Anatolius writing to him upon occasion,
tells him that the Clergy of the Church of Constantinople, and Culpam, quam de
augenda potestate, aliena (ut asseris) adhortatione contraxeras, etsi non ad
sola Clericorum sonfilia transtulisses. Leo. Ep: 71.
not he, brought this matter before the Council, and therefore Leo needed not
be so angry with him, and complain so sharply against his ambition.

Gentleman must refer to, if there be the least color of truth in his
suggestion; But sure this disclaiming of pride or ambition in what was done,
regularly, according to a long continued custom, and the Canon of the Council
of Constantinople is much more the justifying his innocence, than the
acknowledgment of any fault, an act of confidence and assurance, no indication
either of guilt or shame, no disowning the dignity confirmed to him by the
Council.

evidences there are in the story of those times that the Bishop of
Constantinople did no way reject this power and dignity, which that Council had
confirmed to him; It Is annexed to the Acts of that Council, how he exercised it
in an eminent manner on the Patriarch of Alexandria, Leo the Emperor having
put wholly into his hands the judging of a great affair, and quieting a
disturbance in that Church, see the Edit: Paris: Tom: 3. p. 504. etc.
third part of that Council of Chalcedon. In which matter may be observed that
in the Epistle of the Egyptian Bishops, and Clergy of Alexandria, in a
re^itation of the Bishops of the whole world, the first place being reserved to
Leo the Bishop of Rome, the second is given Ibid p. 506. B.
Regiae Constantinopolis Anatolio, to Anatolius of Constantinople the Royal
seat, and then follow Basil of Antioch, and Juvenalis of Jerusalem.

Chalcedon was for the main but the reciting and confirming what was done
formerly at the Council of Constantinople (a judgment, says Lib. 2. in fine.
Euagrius, that this matter was well-ordered already, (...), and what the
Bishop of Constantinople held by Custom before that Council also, Epist:
Council: Chalt ad Leon: Pap: Council: t. 3 p. 475. B.
(...), a custom that had been long in force, and subscript: Eleu^herii
Chalced: Ep: Ibid: p. 46. F.
(...) by a precedaneous custom etc. Secondly, that this was done by this
Council (if their professions may be believed) (...), not so much to add any
thing to the Sea of Constantinople, as to provide for the quiet of other
Metropoles in Asia, Pontus and Thracia. Thirdly, that the Council attested all
this, and sent a relation of it to the Bishop of Rome, (...), being persuaded
that he being rightly informed would receive and confirm it, though his Legates
had obstinately opposed it. Fourthly, That all the objections, which the Pope
or his Legates had to it, were proposed and clearly answered in the Council: ^.
3. p 460.
Council; that of the contrariety of the Canon to the decree of the Council of
Nice, by reading that Decrce, and showing that it was perfectly reconcilable
to it; That of invading the rights of the Metropoles of Asia, Pontus and
Thracia, by the several Bishops of those regions being examined by the
Emperors proxies, p. 461. D.
whether they consented to it (...), by their own will, or by any necessity
imposed on them, and their several cheerful answers, (...), I subscribed
willingly as in the presence of God, and the like; To which if we add the
depression of the Bishop of Antioch, which ad Maxim. Antioch: Ep: 62. fol 124.
Leo objects, it is likewise answered by Maximus the Bishop of Antioch his
subscription to this Canon. Lastly, that as this was enacted, by Tom: 6. An:
454 N. 13.etc.
Baronius's own confession by 600 Bishops, i. e. by the whole Council, not
only by a party of it, So the Bishop of Constantinople Anatolius p. 453.
subscribed it in the first place, and next after him the Bishop of Antioch,
there will be no possibility of finding any truth in this Gentleman's
affirmation, that the Patriarch was ashamed of this judgment of the Council.

Pope, though not Leo, was ashamed of his opposing it, for within 30 years
after, we find Felix He. of his own accord consenting to his Primacy, and
acknowledging Acacius Bishop of Constantinople to have power over the Bishops
that were under him, Ep: 1 and Innocent III. confirms it with a solemn
constitution ap: Antiqua: de Privileg: that I add not the establishment of it
again by the Council of Florence, sess: ult: in lit. Vnion^.

reason which is here offered to confirm the truth of his affirmation, it has
it self no truth in it, and so cannot be a reason of the affirmation. It is not
true; for there was no tumult nor unruliness in the Council, only the Pope's
Legates opposed the Canon, and made their complaint to the Judges, and were
heard most regularly in all they could pretend, and at length the Canon was
defined by the cheerful consent of all but them. See the story of it in
Binius,(...):

Canon, the Legates, Paschasinus and Lucentius make their address to the
Judges, the (...), that supplied the Emperors place, who bad them speak what
they would have; They say, that yesterday, after the Judges and they were
risen, some things were done against the Canons, and desire they may be read.
That was appointed to be done; but first Aetius Archdeacon of Constantinople
makes a relation, how after matters of faith agreed on, they proceeded
according to the manner to some constitutions, in these they desired the
Legates to join with them, they refused saying, they had received comands from
Rome to do so, which being remonstrated to the Judges they had bid the Council
proceed, and hereupon the Council had unanimously decreed; Appealing to them
all, whether it were not true, nothing being done (...), clancularly or by
stealth, but (...), of course, regularly and canonically. Then the Canon was
read, being a plain recitation of what was before done in the Council of
Constantinople, and then all the subscriptions follow. Then the Legates desire
it may be inquired, whether none have subscribed by force, suggesting that the
Constantinopolitan Canon was contrary to the Nicene; Thereupon the Canons were
both read, and upon the Judges appointment, they that were most concerned, the
Bishops of Asia, Pontus, and Thracia, who were now brought under the
Patriarchate of Constantinople, being supposed formerly to be free, were called
out severally and asked whether they had acted under any force, and they
severally profess the contrary. p. 463.
Whereupon the Judges sum up the business and conclude, that they had weighed
all, and found that none had injury, the privileges of the Bishop of Rome were
preserved entire according to the Canons, and that the Bishop of new Rome,
Constantinople, was to have equal privileges with him, etc And this being
their sense, they desire the whole Council to deliver theirs, and they all
cried out, (...), This is a just sentence. This we all say, let this be
consigned and confirmed, desiring they may now be dismissed every man to his
home, and so the Judges pronounce, (...), The Synod has confirmed all.

Legates, and that, it seems, went for nothing when the rest so universally
consented; so far is this suggestion from all show of truth, that the Clergy
of Constantinople were tumultuary and unruly.

unruliness there were, it was on the Legate's part, who would thus stand out
and complain without the least reason to do so, not on the Councels, which
proceeded according to the precedent custom and Canon, and such grounds to
which neither the Pope nor his Legate did then so much as object any thing,
viz: the same title by which Rome it self ascended to her greatness, (...).
by being the Imperial city.

Sect. IV.
The Popes judging in his own cause. His Legates suffrages in Councels, Of what
necessity. Antioch's equality to Rome. Constantinople preferred to no more but
a Patriarchy. The dignity of the Bishop of Rome merely from Rome's being the
Imperial city.

Council of Chalcedon two exceptions more he offers (which are not so weighty
but they may be put together) in these words,

Antioch's being equal to Rome, and that Constantinople desired but the same
privileges, against the very nature of the story; for Constantinople being then
a Patriarchy, if that made it equal to Rome, as this Doctor feigneth, what did
it pretend (...) for? seeing the Doctor assumes before that all Patriarchs were
equal, neither Rome it self, and less Antioch had cause to complain.

cavilling at the privilege of supreme Magistracy, that sure is but gratis
dictum, and a begging of that, which in the whole controversy he knows to be
most denied him.

assumes a supreme Magistracy to himself, should by no means be concluded to be
an assumer, till he make his own confession of it, and give his suffrage to his
condemnation, I mentioned, and cannot but look upon still, as a method of
perfect security, beyond all amulets and defensatives; For how can it be
imagined, that he, that contests a right, should at the same time acknowledge
it not to belong to him, when he knows that nothing but this confession is
sufficient to deprive him of it? As for any such privilege belonging to
supreme Magistracy in general, or any way applicable to the Bishop of Rome, in
relation to a General Council, it may be worth considering a while.

supreme Magistracy in general, This privilege does not extend to all matters.
In a contest of particular right between a supreme Magistrate and a subject,
brought before any legal judicature, it is certain the supreme Magistrate may be
concluded without his own suffrage or consent, and agreeable to that it was,
when the question was brought in this Council before the Judges by the
complaint of the Pope's Legates, whether the Canon were the day before, after
the Legate's departure, duly passed or no, For if it were not so, what needed
this complaint to the Judges, the bare absence, and so not consenting of the
Legates had been sufficient to cassate and annull the Acts: Whatsoever
Magistracy therefore was then pretended to by the Bishop of Rome, this
Privilege does not then seem to have belonged to it, that his, or his Legate's
suffrages should be necessary to the passing every Canon.

liberty to come to the Council, that nothing were done clancularly or by
stealth, at a time when they knew not of it, that no force were used on those
that were present, nor the like to hinder the presence of any, this was
necessary to the freedom, and so to the very being of a Council, and
consequently to the validity of every act thereof, and accordingly on these
heads it was that the Legates in their complaint to the Judges insisted (and so
does Tom. 6. Ann: 451. Number: 143.
Baronius, styling that lost Action of that Council, spuriam and clandestinam,
and ab Anatolio furtim adjectam, a spurious clandestine action stolen in by
Anatolius) as also, on the authority of the Nicene Canons, which they pretended
to be infringed by that latter of Constantinople, on which this of Chalcedon
was founded, and this they thought sufficient to cassate this Act, but for this
of the want of the Pope's or his Legate's suffrage, that it should invalidate
that decree, it is not so much as pretended by the Legates, in the relations of
the passages of that Council.

Hierome, put into their Canon Law, Decret: par: 1. did: 193. c. Legimus.
si authoritas quaeritur, orbis major est urbe, if authority be looked for, the
whole world is more than the one city of Rome, it is the resolution of de
author: Eccl: 7.
Almain, merito Concilium Chalcedonense Leoni resistenti praevaluisse, that the
Council of Chalcedon did well in standing out against Pope Leo, and did justly
prevail against him.

amulet it seems had not virtue to stand him in so much stead, as Ann: 454.
Number: 13, etc.
Baronius is pleased to fancy, setting out the power and greatness of Pope
Leo by this, that he did alone cassate what this Council had decreed by the
suffrages of 600 Bishops. Which how well it consists with his former
affirmation, that this Canon was spurious and clandestine, and stolen in by
Anatolius, I shall not here examine. It Is sure, if the Popes authority were so
sovereign, the act needed not have been made spurious first, to qualify it for
the cassation. But this of the power or superiority of a Pope over an
Ecumenical Council, is a question not so necessary here to be debated, unless
what this Gentleman was pleased to mention of the privilege of supreme
Magistracy, had been indevoured some way to be proved by him.

Antioch was equal to Rome, and that Constantinople desired but the same
privileges, and this he says is against the very nature of the story.

Antioch had the (...) equal privileges with Rome, so far as to the dignity
of a Patriarchate etc. (allowing to Rome the Primacy of order and dignity) I
thought was competently concluded from the Pope's pretensions against that
Canon of Chalcedon, making it an invasion of the rights of Antioch, and as
derogatory to that as to Rome; And so still it seems to me, For if Antioch had
not (...) equal privileges with Rome, how could Constantinople's aspiring to
equal privileges with Rome, be as derogatory to Antioch as to Rome? But I need
not this help from Pope Leo's argument, the thing asserted by me, is not
denied, that I know of, by any Romanist, viz: that Antioch had the dignity of a
Patriarchate, for that is all that I express my self to mean by Antioch's
having (...) equal privileges with Rome, and I that maintain (as this Gentleman
truly says I do) that all Patriarchs are equal (in respect of Power,
differing only in order or precedence) cannot be imagined to mean any thing
else by it.

Constantinople desired no more but the privileges of a Patriarch, and that
that is the meaning of the (...) equal privileges, is by me said in opposition
to acquiring any ordinary jurisdiction over other Churches, and this instead of
being contrary to the nature of the story, is directly agreeable to the whole
course of it, and to the express words of the Canon, which defines, that as
the city of Constantinople was honored with the Empire and Senate, and enjoyed
equal privileges with old Imperial Rome, so the Church of Constantinople
((...)) should be exalted to the same height with that, (...), having the next
place after it, adding that the Metropolitans (and none else of Asia, Pontus
and Thraeia, etc. should be ordained by the Bishop of Constantinople, the
Bishops of each of those Provinces being left to be ordained by their
respective Metropolitans; This is so plain that there can be no need of farther
proof of it.

Gentleman's objection, by way of Question, that Constantinople being then a
Patriarchy, if that made it equal with Rome, for what did it pretend (...), I
answer 1. that Constantinople being by custom, and by Act of the Council held
in that city, a Patriachate already, it sought not to acquire any new advantage
or increase by this Canon of Chalcedon, but only to continue what already it
had.

story, where that Canon of Constantinople was produced and read, as the
foundation on which this new Canon was built, and so by the express words in
the beginning of the Canon, (...) etc. following constantly the definitions of
the Holy Fathers, and knowing the Canon newly read of the 150 Bishops assembled
in the reign of the Emperor Theodosius at the Imperial city Constantinople or
new Rome. And agreeably Euagrius sets down the story, that in this Council of
Chalcedon (...) it was thought just or determined that the Constantinopolitan
See (...) was rightly and duly placed next after Rome.

Gentleman assumes, that if this were so, the neither Rome it self, and less
Antioch had cause to complain, I shall most willingly join with him in it,
being no way obliged by my pretensions to justify the Pope or his Legates
dislike to that Canon. And for Antioch I am sure enough that the Bishop
thereof, Maximus, though he had received an Epistle from the Pope to exasperate
and persuade him to stand upon his right, did very readily subscribe it,
setting his name and consent next after the Bishop of Constantinople, as has
formerly been set down out of the story.

Antioch did so, who was the loser by it, if precedence signify any thing, I
confess I can render no cause (unless it be the Pompejusve parem, impatience
of any equal) why the Bishop of Rome, who lost not so much as precedence by
this advancement or confirmation of dignity to the Bishop of Constantinople,
should be so obstinately and implacably offended at it.

attempt and tittle of exception offered by this Gentleman in this matter, and
have now leisure to complain, that the one thing that I desired to be taken
notice of from this Canon, is not so much as considered, or at all replied to
by him, viz: that the Dignity that old Rome had by ancient Canons in oyed was
given it upon this account, (...) because Rome was the Imperial seat; which as
it is the proof of my whole pretension, that the Pope was not Universal Pastor,
upon title of his succession from S. Peter, (for if whatsoever he had, the
Councels gave it him, (...), says the Canon, and gave it him as Bishop of the
Imperial See, then sure 'twas no inheritance from S. Peter) so it was truly
observed out of the story of the Council of Chalcedon, and may be seen both in
the Legate's complaint to the Judges, and in the Epistles of Leo to the
Emperor Martianus, the Empress Pulcheria, Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople
and Maximus of Antioch, and his instructions to his Legates, that he never made
any exception to that branch of the Canon that thus derived the original of his
greatness from the Imperial dignity of the city, never thought himself injured
by this way of setting down his title.

Sect. V.
Of the Canon of Ephesus. The power of Metropolitans, of Primates. The case of
the Archbishop of Cyprus no peculiar case. The deduction thence against the
Popes Universal Pastorship. Of the Popes tenure by the institution of Christ.

exception concerns the Canon of the Council of Ephesus, thus,

Ephesus touching the Archbishop of Cyprus, it plainly shows that the
Metropolitans were subordinate to the Patriarchs, seeing this case of Cyprus
was a peculiar excepted case, the reason given does show that the superiority
of Patriarchs was by custom received from their Ancestors, contrary to that
which the Doctor before affirmed, however it is still nothing to the purpose,
because the authority, which we say belongs to the Pope, is neither
Patriarchal, nor derived from any institution or custom of the Church, but
from the institution of Christ.

Canon of Ephesus, says he, plainly shows that Metropolitans were subordinate
to Patriarchs, seeing this of Cyprus was a peculiar excepted case. To this I
see not how any pretensions of ours oblige me to make any return, yet because
it may be subject to some mistake for want of explicating, I shall clear that
whole matter by these three Propositions.

First, that the controversy, which occasioned that Canon, was this, Whether
the Bishop of Constance, Metropolitan of the Province of Cyprus, was to be
ordained by the Patriarch of Antioch, or (without seeking abroad) by his own
Synod, the Bishops of Cyprus. Thus is the state of the question set down in the
Councels, Tom. 2. p. 670. at the beginning of the 7 Action. Discussa est
controversia inter Rheginum Episcopum Constantiae Cypri, and Johannem
Antiochenum, qui sibi Cyprias Ecclesias subdere moliebatur. The controversy
was discussed between Rheginus Bishop of Constance of Cyprus, and John of
Antioch, who endeavored to bring the Cypriotes Churches into subjection to
himself.

Secondly, that the ancient custom had been favorable to Rheginus his
pretension, and so the claim of Antioch is defined (...), a thing innovated
against the Ecclesiastical Laws, and so (...), that which, by the example, or
president, would concern the liberty of all Churches. Cod: Can: Eccl: Un:(...)

Thirdly, that the Council defined on the Cypriots side, that according to the
Canous, and ancient custom, the Bishops of Cyprus should retein their
previlege inviolable, (...), ordaining their Bishops within, and by themselves,
and consequently that it was an act of assuming, and invasion in the Bishop of
Antioch, to claim (...) to make any Ordinations within Cyprus. And what was
thus adjudged in the case of the Cypriots, was by that Council in the same
Canon thought fit to be extended in like manner to all other Provinces ((...),
the same shall be observed also through all Dioceses and Provinces every where)
(...) etc. that no Bishop shall meddle with another Province, which has not
from the beginning been under him, i. e. under his predecessors power. And so
there is no truth in what is here suggested, that this of Cyprus was a peculiar
excepted case; It certainly, by the express words of the Canon, belonged to
all other Metropolitans and their Provinces over all the world, that neither
Bishop of Antioch nor of Rome was to meddle with any ordinations except in
their own particular Provinces, but the Synod of the Bishops of each Province,
(...), to make the ordinations of their Bishops by themselves.

superiority of Patriarchs by custom received from their Ancestors, First,
that the reason given in that Ephesine Canon does show it; Secondly, that it is
contrary to that which the Doctor before affirmed; Thirdly, that it is still
nothing to the purpose in hand, of the authority of the Pope; has not, that I
can discern, any truth in any part of it. For as to the first, whatsoever
superiority Patriarchs be acknowledged to have, there is no word of mention
concerning it in that Canon, neither was there any occasion to define any thing
of it; It was the Synod, and Bishops of Cyprus their right, that was invaded,
and of that only that Canon speaks, devolving it to original custom, and
Canons, and so for all other Metropolitans. But that is not the superiority of
Patriarchs. Secondly, for my affirmation, certainly it was never such as could
be deemed contrary either to that Ephesine Canon about ordination of their
Metropolitans, or that due superiority, which by Canons or customs does belong
to Primates or Patriarchs; what this is I have often set down, and need not
again repeat it.

Lastly, for the application of this Canon to the present affair of the
Universal Pastorship of the Bishop of Rome, thus much is evident, First, that
all Provinces every where, (...) were concluded by this Canon, that they should
ordain their Bishops within themselves, and then I pray how can the (...) power
of ordaining all belong to the Bishop of Rome, and ordination and jurisdiction
going together, how can he have the Universal Jurisdiction, or which is all one
the Universal Pastorship?

Secondly, if the Pope his authority be not Patriarchal, as this Gentleman here
says, then till he has proved that it is more than Patriarchal, and answered
all that is said to the contrary in that Tract of Schism, that which is by the
Ephesiue Canon judged in order to the Patriarch of Antioch, will also conclude
him.

thirdly, that which is held by the institution of Christ being certainly
derived (...) from the beginning, must needs be included in the words of this
Canon, which requires that all should remain, as by custom (immemorial) from
the beginning it had been, to which therefore we appeal, and inquire, whether
Cyprus was not as Independent from Rome at that time, as from Antioch; if not,
how any such dependence at that time appears, or how is it imaginable there
should be any such, when all Provinces every where were to be ruled and ordered
(...) by their own Synod and Bishops.

tenure, by which the Pope is now, in the close of this Paragraph, clearly said
to stand, not from any institution or custom of the Church, but from the
institution of Christ. First, this is more than ever this Gentleman would
acknowledge before, telling us p. 14. that who understands the Principles of
the Catholic faith, knows they rely not only upon such places of Scripture,
as, Thou art Peter, and Feed my sheep, From whence I thought my self obliged to
conclude they relied not only on Christ his institution, for that I suppose
must be set down in some, and if in any, sure in those Scriptures, And in
another place, that I forget my self when I think a Catholic ought to prove
that the hope has an Universal Primacie (referring all to his Possession)
whereas in case he pretend to hold by the institution of Christ (as here he
says) certainly he is obliged to produce that institution, and that is to
prove his pretension.

secondly, that there is indeed any such thing, that the Pope holds by
Institution of Christ, is still the thing denied by us, and the contrary, I
think, demonstrated in the former chapter, and all the places producible for
it, answered, and so it must not be here begged or assumed, without any word
added for the proof of it.

Sect. VI.
The exemption of Justiniana prima, The several exceptions against this
instance answered.

Paragraph pretends to be answer to the evidence brought from the example of
Justiniana prima, which was by the Emperor made independent from any other
Ecclesiastical power. His answer is this,

Justiniana prima, and Carthage were made exempt cities by the Emperor, and
sees not that his own instance gives the answer, for as in the temporal
donation, he does not exempt them from his own subjection, so neither from the
Popes in spiritual, nor as much as gives them the style of Patriarchs; though
the Bishop of Constantinople in his own city ordinarily had it.

Justiniana prima was by Justinian exempted from all others (and so from the
Bishop of Rome his) Jurisdiction (and so Carthage also, being invested with the
same privileges) I thought sufficiently proved by the plain words of the
constitution, that for any differences that should befall in that Province, the
Archbishop of that new erection from time to time, should decide them finally,
nec ad alium quendam eatur, and they should go to no other for decision, or by
way of appeal and so in the Novell, (...) etc. he shall have under his own
jurisdiction the Bishops of Dacia, etc. which what is it, but a perfect
exemption and independency?

constitution, that concerning ordination of that Archbishop, It was, as was
said, to be done by his own Synod of Metropolitans. To which agrees that of the
Novell 131. (...) He must be ordained by his own Synod.

and given, says he, by my own instance, is no more than this, that as in the
temporal donation he does not exempt them from his own subjection, so neither
from the Popes in spiritual. But sure there is no force in this comparison; For
the not exempting him in temporal things from his own power, does no way
conclude a nonexemption from the Pope; When Henry VIII. removed the Papal power
out of this nation, no man thinks he divested himself of the regal; the
Archbishop of Canterbury was made Independent, and exempt from the Bishop of
Rome, but remained still subordinate to the King: So in like manner Justinian
might do, make Instiniana a Primacy, and yet leave the Bishop and his whole
Province in the same subjection to the Emperor, that before it had been; And
as this is very possible, so if it were not the plain truth of the fact, that
must be made appear by the story, or by the investiture.

exempting that Bishop from the Imperial subjection, and so we cannot imagine,
without any ground, that there was any such thing, but for Ecclesiastical
judicature and ordination, they are both distinctly specified, that he and his
Metropolitans should have them within themselves, without fetching them abroad
from any other; and so by that the Bishop of Rome is explicitly excluded from
having any thing to do there.

fact, for after the first Archbishop was ordained by Pope Vigilius, his
successors were constantly ordained by their own Metropolitans, and not by the
Bishop of Rome, but also by farther express words in the (...).
Novell, (...), In the Provinces subject to him he shall hold the place of the
Apostolical seat of Rome, i. e. do all within those Provinces that the Bishop
of Rome was wont to do, before this Primacy was erected, and this, it seems,
by direct consent of Vigilius then Pope, as there it follows, (...), according
to what was defined by the Holy Father Vigilius.

deputation from the Pope by which this power was held, and so be made use of
as an argument to infer his continued dependence on the Sea of Rome, that
will be found to be a mistake, the whole investiture giving the Archbishop
there an (...) a perfect freedom, and absoluteness, to be head within his
Province, independent from all others. And should it by any other way appear
that Vigilius, who ordained the first Bishop there (as it is sure he must be
ordained by some body, and none fitter for it than the Bishop of old Rome) did
farther give him a deputation, as I see it affirmed (but not by this Gentleman)
both of Vigilius, and after him of Gregory, yet certainly this was but a
formality, without any farther effect or influence on the investiture, the
privileges of that See came to it merely by the Act of the Emperor (and that
Act was entered a Part of the Imperial Law) to which the supposed addition of
the Pope's deputation can be no prejudice; And secondly, the Bishop of
Carthage, which by that Constitution is invested with the very same privileges
by the Emperor, is not pretended to have received any such deputation from the
Pope, and yet by virtue of the Emperors act was freed from all former
dependence, and enjoyed the (...) and (...) the privilege of a Metropolitan, in
the same manner, as Iustiniana did.

Gentleman adds, that the Emperor gave not so much as the style of Patriarch
to the Bishop of Iustiniana, though the Bishop of Constantinople in his own
city ordinarily had it, will soon appear to signify nothing; For first, the
power, not the title is that we speak of, and that may be had in plenitude,
without the name; the Archbishop of Cyprus was by the Council, of Ephesus
adjudged to have all power within himself, so as to go neither to Antioch nor
to Rome for it, and yet was not raised to any higher title, than that of
Archbishop.

Secondly, I suppose Primate and Patriarch to be perfectly all one, as to
matter of power and dignity; that the Archbishop of Constantinople and
Jerusalem, so styled in the ancient Canons, were yet ordinarily called
Patriarchs, was no injury to the Patriarch of Antioch, says Theod: Balsamon,
himself Patriarch of Antioch in his (...), because of the identity of the
honor. And accordingly in the Councels the Archbishop of Constantinople, under
that title is placed before the Patriarch of Antioch, yea and of Alexandria,
who yet by the (...) divine and holy writings (i. e. the Canons) by the (...)
traditions of the Fathers, was styled Pope, says Balsamon. And therefore for
Justiniana also this was sufficient; It was made a Primacy, and then it matters
not, though it were not styled a Patriarchy; The exemption from Rome and all
other foreign power is all I pretend this city had, and of that there can be
no question, whatsoever title belonged to it.

Thirdly, this Gentleman's saying that the Bishop of Constantinople had the
title of Patriarch in his own city, would make one believe that he had it not
elsewhere, which yet it is notorious that he had, (...); he and the Archbishop
of Jerusalem were publicly called Patriarchs, says Balsamon, and he renders
the reason, (...), because the five Patriarchs (of which number they were two)
held the place of the head of the body, to wit, of the holy Churches of God.
But whatsoever the title were, it is still sure enough it had the power and
dignity of a Patriarchate, first by custom, then by Canons of two General
Councels, Constantinople and Chalcedon (for I suppose the setting it next and
equal to Rome, and before Antioch and Alexandria, (...).
will amount to this) also by that very Novell of Justinian, where the
privileges are conferred on Justiniana, (...), the Archbishop of new Rome,
Constantinople, has the next place after the Apostolical See of old Rome, and
the precedence of honor before all others. And so much for the Exceptions to
the fifth Chapter.

CHAP. VI. An Answer to the Exceptions made to the sixth Chapter.
Sect. I.
The plea for the Popes power from the conversion of England, Of acquiring of
right by two titles.

plantation, which was considered in the sixth Chapter, he now proceeds to, in
these words,

England, viz: that our Nation was converted by mission from Rome, Sect. 1.
and this is totally beside the question, for no man is so stupid as to pretend
S. Peter or the Church of Rome to have power over the Universal Church, because
his successors converted England: But some pretend a special title of
gratitude, the violation of which aggravateth the sin of schismatizing from the
Church of Rome in our nation, yet no man, as far as I can understand, thinks
this latter obligation of so high a nature, as that for no occasion or never so
great cause, it may not be dispensed with; but only press it then when the
benefit is slighted, or by colorable arguments to the contrary unworthily
avoided: And yet this Doctor quite mistaking the Question frames an argument,
Sect. 2.
as full of words as empty of matter, affirming there cannot be two successive
titles to possession of the same thing, telling us, that he who claims a
reward as of his own labor and travel must disclaim a donation, etc. if any
passed before, and that if a King have right by descent, he cannot claim any
thing by conquest, by which you may see his understanding the Law is not much
more than his understanding of our principles.

Gentleman here premiseth, that this plea from the Conversion of this nation by
mission from Rome is not used by the Romanist to prove us schismatics, I have
no reason to confute but shall from thence suppose that that sixth Chapter might
have been spared out of that little Treatise, and our Church competently
justified by the precedent Chapters; And then all that I shall need added, is,
First, that I hope what was by me added superfluously, above the necessities of
our cause, will not destroy what was before said pertinently, and then as I
shall only have lost my pains, and there is no farther hurt done, so it must
needs be very unnecessary for this Gentleman to adapt any farther answers to
that sixth Chapter, when he has once adjudged all that is there said to be
totally beside the Question.

Secondly, That if others had been as prudent, as this Gentleman, I had
certainly spared that Chapter, It being no interest of mine to invent pleas for
the Romanist, and although, as this Gentleman has pleased to set it, it be a
competent stupidity, and that which I never thought any Romanist guilty of, to
make the conversion of England a plea to power over the Universal Church, yet
England, and not the Universal Church, being the subject of our Question, there
is not quite so much stupidity in it, to plead the Popes power over England
from the supposed Conversion of England, And certainly I did not dream that
some Romanists have thus pleaded, but, as I said before, if this Gentleman will
not insist on it, neither shall I farther importune him about it.

gratitude which he now mentions only as an aggravation of the sin of
schismatizing, which that we are guilty of, he acknowledges must be proved by
some other means, I yield to the force of it, that it might justly add a
weight to the obligation, which formerly lay upon us, supposing any such there
were, but cannot lay an obligation to obedience where before it was not due,
much less were it due unto another. All the benefits that can be heaped on me
by any man that gives me not my being, cannot oblige or engage my subjection to
him, without the intervenience of my own consent, if I am perfectly free to
choose my Sovereign, and without the consent of my former Sovereign, if I have
any.

Question must be, whether by any original right the Bishop of Rome had power
over this Kingdom, and so whether by that, our obedience was due to him, for
if it were, then this gratitude was not the tenure, but that other; and if it
were not, then neither of the titles are in force against us; not the first,
which has no being; nor the second, which whatsoever it be, obliges not to
obedience.

instance of the several claims to a Kingdom, by descent, and by conquest, the
one of which, if it stood, as the title, supersedeth the other, he that holds
by inheritance, cannot be properly said to hold by conquest, even when it is
true that he has conquered also. For in that case, when the right heir being
forced to make use of his sword to give him possession, is successful and
victorious in it, all that his sword does, is to give him possession, not to
give him right, for that he had before by inheritance.

right cannot be held by two tenures appears by this; because if it might, it
being evidently possible that those two tenures might be separated and placed
in several subjects, the inheritance in one, the conquest in another, it must
follow from thence, that each of those persons shall have the right; which as
it is unimaginable, speaking of the whole right or propriety in integrum to the
whole power, for if one have it all, the other can have no part of it, so if it
be applied to a partial right (which more than one may have, either severally,
or socially, and jointly, to the same thing) then that is the changing of the
Question which spoke of the whole right, and not only of some one or more
parts or branches of it.

Gentleman agrees with me in the conclusion, that Rome has no title to our
obedience, from that of converting us, or if it had, it could not plead the
same from S. Peter 's universal Pastorship, so I cannot discern, why my way of
inferring it was disliked, or my ignorance in the Laws censured, for saying
that the title of descent is exclusive to that of conquest, meaning it not of
several parts, of which one comes by descent, the other by conquest, but of the
same whole thing, of which he that has the right by descent, may by the sword
and conquest vindicate his right, and acquire quiet possession, but cannot be
said to acquire his right by those means, being supposed to have had it, before
he made use of them.

Sect. II.
The British Church not converted from Rome.

conclusion, that our obedience to Rome is not due from the Nation's conversion
by mission from thence, he is yet resolved to examine my arguments, by which I
prove what he grants. And there be three things, that here he takes notice of.
The first in these words,

Augustine's time, surely he means by the name of Island, the Land and
Mountains and trees, for if he speak of the men, what has the conversion of
the former Islanders to do with the subjection and duty which the Saxons owe.

Island, I mean not the mountains, nor trees, on one side, any more than the
present individual persons on the other side, but the inhabitants of it
indefinitely, who have succeeded one another, whether British or Saxon by
extraction. For, first, of the British it is certain that they were not
converted by mission from Rome, but were Christians long before S. Augustine's
coming hither, And Secondly, of the Saxons it may be remembered, that Augustine
did not absolutely introduce Christianity among them here, but Luidhardus, that
came out of France with Bertha, Ethelred's Wife, and was a Bishop here, had
prepared the way for Augustine. See Bid Hist: Eccl: lib. 1. c. 25, 26. And
Thirdly, if Augustine were the first converter of the Saxons, and so that be,
without farther question, granted of him, yet that cannot belong to the whole
Island, the Dominion of Wales being neither of Saxon extraction, nor converted
from Rome to Christianity. And this is the design of that argument of mine, In
case there were a duty owing to that See, from whence the converter came, and
in case that were acknowledged to pertain to the Saxons, yet still the British
part would not be concluded by either of these, it being certain that their
Ancestors were not comprehended in this number.

Gentleman waves this title from conversion, neither shall I farther insist to
disprove it; But rather ask, why no answer was made to those testimonies, which
in that place were occasionally vouched to show that at the time of Augustine's
coming into this Island, the Christian Church here acknowledged no subjection
to Rome, or to any other Church, to be due from them, which certainly is some
prejudice to the claim drawn from the Universal Pastorship of S. Peter and his
successor at Rome.

Annals of Gisburne, It will not be amiss here to add what our stories tell
us, that when the Pelagian heresy, which first sprang from Morgan a Britain,
was by Agricola brought into this Island, the Britains Neque suscipere dogma
perversii vellent, neque versutiam nefariae persuasioni^ refutare verbis
certando sufficevent: Bed. l. 1. c. 17.
unwilling to receive their infusions, and yet unable to resist them without
assistance from some other Church, in this time of need, applied not themselves
to Rome, as in their Bed. l. 1. c. 12, 13.
secular distresses they had accustomed, but to their neighbors of France, who
calling a Council sent Germanus Altisiodorensis and Lupus to their aid, by
which means the Catholic Faith was much revived and increased and propagated
among them.

Sect. III.
S. Paul's plantations an argument against the Universal Pastorship of S.
Peter. S. Paul's being Bishop of Rome, no answer to it.

argument which he next speaks to, is that wherein from Paul's having planted
some Churches, which yet are not subjected to the Chair, where S. Paul sat
(whether Antioch or Rome) I conclude against this claim of power from the title
of conversion: To this he thus speaks,

Paul converted, Sect. 8.
were obliged to be under him; truly if it were to purpose, I believe there
might be proof that S. Paul expected it; but he does not remember that he told
us S. Paul was Bishop of Rome, and so it comes to the same quesion, but indeed
he quite misseth the matter, for no body stateth this for the Popes title, but
aggravation of the schism.

might be proof, and yet to produce none, I know not; This only I desire to
note, that if any such proof were produced, and, without that, by the bare
pretending that it might be proved, S. Peter's universal Pastorship must be
disclaimed, and consequently all right which derives its original from thence.

's labors being more abundant than all the Apostles, it is certain great
numbers were converted by him, and if all they were to be under S. Paul, how
can S. Peter be Pastor and Ruler of all, it being certain, that S. Paul was not
subordinate to S. Peter.

forgot it) that S. Paul was Bishop of Rome, and so it comes to the same
question: For 1. S. Paul being Bishop of the Gentile part of the Roman
Christians, as S. Peter of the Jewish, and those then disparate congregations,
S. Paul cannot be thought in his converting the Gentiles of other nations, to
bring in subjects to S. Peter; And 2. it is evident that S. Paul was not Bishop
of Rome when he placed Timothy over Asia, and Titus over Crete, and
consequently the conversion and establishment of those Churches was not in any
reason to acquire any Dominion to Rome, which S. Paul had never seen at that
time, and which was it self converted after those, and that was it which I was
proving.

conversion is not the Pope's title to England, And having done so before, why
might he not have permitted me to bring undeniable evidences for the proof of
it?

Sect. IV.
The concernments of Rome in the Princes power to remove Patriarchates. The
examples of it. Justiniana, the Canon of Chalcedon, and the 6t Council.
Valentinian making Ravenna a Patriarchate. (...).

controversy, viz: that the Church of England is not bound to be subject to
that Church, from which it first received the Faith, one head of argument I
pitched on, the power of Kings to remove or erect Primacies and Patriarchates,
which if it have truth in it, evidently proves, that in case we were once under
the Sea of Rome, as our Patriarchate or Prime See (supposing that of Universal
Pastorship disproved before, and not reconcilable with this title to England
by having converted) yet it was in the power of our Kings to remove that from
Rome to Canterbury. For the proof of this, evidences were brought both from the
Council (and that Ecumenical) of Chalcedon, and from the practice of Princes,
particularly Justinian in an eminent instance, and Valentinian and others
before the Council of Chalcedon, and many the like examples in the Records of
this Kingdom, and of others, as is showed at large, and the ground of all
insisted on, the supreme power of Kings in Ecclesiastical affairs, and this is
done in 16 sections, from the 9th to the end of that Chapter. Against all which
(that we may see how true the title of this Gentleman's Book is, An Answer to
the most material parts etc.) that which is confronted, is contained in these
words,

was requisite to make good his proof; neither does he say whether the thing
were done or no by the consent of Bishops, especially since the Pope was an
Actor in the business, he adds an Apocryphal decree of Valentinian the
third, for giving of privileges purely Ecclesiastical to the Bishop of Ravenna,
which out of his liberality he makes a Patriarch, but on the whole matter this
is to be observed, that generally the Bishops consents were praedemanded or
praeordered, as in the Council of Chalcedon, Can. 7. it is ordered that the
Church should translate their Bishoprick^ according to the Emperors changing
of his City, and when the Emperors did it, it is said they did it according to
the power given them, to wit, by the Church, so that a few examples to the
contrary, produced in the reigns of headstrong and Tyrannical Princes, as the
most of those are noted to be, under whom they are urged, prove nothing, and if
they did, yet cannot they be taken as testimonies, when these matters of fact
are only so attributed to Princes, as no way to exclude the Church, but
whatsoever it was, it does not at all appertain to the question, since the
Popes authority, in the sense he calls him Pope, is not properly Patriarchal,
nor has any dependency upon, or from change of places made by the command of
Princes.

Romanists purpose to dispute, whether or no the Emperor has power to
constitute Patriarchs. (He ought to have added, or to translate them from one
City to another, for that is in that Tract also expressly proved, but this I
suppose not without reason omitted, because the power to erect or constitute,
supposes and implies the power to translate them) And if this be not this
Gentleman's interest to dispute, I shall then by his good leave, suppose it
yielded me, and observe what the consequences will be.

power of the Pope be a Patriarchal power, and no more, and that appear to be
all that the ancient Councils ever allowed it to be, then it immediately
follows, that it is in the power of the Emperor to translate and remove it
from that to any other See, and in that case what befell Constantinople by way
of advancement, from the title of an ordinary Suffragan Bishops See, it
ascended to equal dignity and privileges with Rome it self, will in the reverse
be the condition of Rome; from the first Patriarchal See in the whole world,
nothing hinders but that it may become the Sea of the most ordinary Bishop And
sure 'twill be the Romanists concernment to dispute that principle, from which
this may possibly be the undeniable conclusion.

power of Rome be that of Universal Pastorship, no way dependant on the nature
of Patriarchs, or on any other tenure, but the donation of Christ to Saint
Peter, then 1. it must be remembered that after the refuting of any such right
from Christ's donation in the former Chapters, the removal also of this was in
all reason to prove of some interest to the Romanist, and so it must, all the
proofs of those Chapters be perfectly answered, which yet has not been done
in any degree, as this reply to the few answers applied to those Chapters has
showed.

donation of Christ, and the Universal Pastorship deduced from thence, is the
direct disclaiming of all the Canonical Privileges belonging to Rome, on the
score of Patriarchy, and so in case that first tenure shall fail, it is the
degrading of Rome from that dignity, which by ancient Canon belonged to it,
that of the Prime Patriarchy, and so cuts the Romanist off from all the
advantage he can reap either from the affirmation of Fathers or Councels, any
farther than they are founded in, and refer to Christ's donation of Universal
Pastorship to Saint Peter, which whether it will prove to be the interest of
this Gentleman, I must leave him to judge for himself, and only add in the
last place, that against him that asserts the Bishop of Romes Universal
Pastorship upon what title soever, this will necessarily be a shrewd prejudice,
if it be not disputed but yielded, that it is in the power of Princes to erect
or translate Patriarchies, by Patriarchies understanding (as it is evident I
do in that discourse) chief Independent authorities over other Churches, such
as was by Justinian conferred on Justiniana Prima and Carthage, by Valentinian
on Ravenna, without any subordination to, or dependence on any other,
particularly on the Sea of Rome.

prejudicial to the Universal Pastorship of Rome than this? Can Rome be Pastor
of those who have no dependence on her? or can that be Universal, from which
some particulars are exempt?

necessary for this Gentleman to undertake two things in the following words,
that I neither understand the question, nor prove what I would; for if I shall
yet appear to judge aright of the question, even as it is by this Gentleman
brought back to that which had been debated in the former Chapters, whether the
Bishop of Rome be Universal Pastor by Christ's donation to Saint Peter, and if I
have really proved that it is in the power of Emperors and Princes to
constitute and remove Patriarchies, It will certainly follow, that I have done
all that I undertook to do, evinced the matter of the question, and showed that
it is in the power of Princes to exempt some Churches from the Popes dominion,
and so superseded the Universality of his Pastorship.

validity of my proofs, that must be judged by the view of the Answers applied
to them, 1. that I produce only the act of an Emperor accounted Tyrannical
toward the Church. To this I answer, 1. that the word [ onely] excluding all
others, the proposition can have no truth in it, it being evident that I
produce many other acts of the same Imperial power, as the Reader may find by
casting his eye on the place, the latter part of that 6. Chap: and this
Gentleman himself shall be my witness, (who says of me [ he adds an
Apocryphal decree of Valentinian] which though it be not a recitation of all
that are by me added, yet is sufficient to tefie the contrary, to what the [
onely] had affirmed.

character that is given that Emperor, whose act I first produced, that he is
accounted Tyrannical toward the Church, will, I suppose, signify but this,
that he that did any thing derogatory to the Universal Pastorship of the Bishop
of Rome, is by this prejudged from yiedling us any competent testimony in this
dispute, which is in effect that this Gentleman is in the right, and all that
is, or shall, or can be brought against him must signify nothing, which sure
is not the way of answering arguments, but adhering to conclusions, without
weighing what is or can be brought against them.

particular act, and the Emperor which is thus censured: It is Justinian, that
great and famous Emperor, his making the Bishop of Justiniana Prima the head
of all Daciae, etc. of which this Gentleman had past a very different
judgment, when it came under his view in the former Chapter.

answer was, the Emperor exempted it not from the Popes subjection, page 15.
and yet now when the very same passage comes in his way again, he has
forgotten himself, and the Emperor, that just now had as great care of the
Popes spiritual power, as of his own civil, is in a moment become Tyrannical
toward the Church. I desire one of these answers, being thus engaged, may make
good the contest against the other.

Emperor in other respects, it is certain that this erecting of Justiniana was
no act of tyranny against the Church, but the very thing that is authorized by
the 17 Canon of the General Council of Chalcedon (which is one of those that
the Pope at his consecration solemnly vows to observe, and all the Ordinances
made in them) for that resolves that if any City be built or restored by the
Kings power, the Ecclesiastical order must follow the Political, (...) i. e.
the (...), says the Scholiast, the Imperial decrees concerning that City
Balsam. in Council: in Trull: Can. 38.
(...) to have the dignity of an Episcopal or Metropolitical See. And the same
again in the same words was decreed by the 6. Council in Trullo, Can. 38. from
whence certainly Balsamon's conclusion is irrefragable, 1 Council. Chal. c. 17.
(...) that it is lawful (and so sure not Tyrannical) for a Prince to take
away (or remove) the privileges of the Church of any City, and Ib. page 342.
(...), to determine, as he shall please, concerning the Privileges of Bishops.

answer is, that I do not say whether the thing were done or no by the consent
of Bishops, especially since the Pope was an Actor in the business. To which I
answer, that when I have made it appear to be the act of the Emperor, and that
by the Canons of Councels it was acknowledged fully lawful for the Emperor,
and so for other Princes, to do so, I need neither inquire whether the consent
of Bishops, or of the Pope himself were added to it, such formalities of
consent may be had or omitted without any disturbance to, or influence on the
matter.

answer is applied to that Act of Valentinian, which made Ravenna a
Patriarchate, and first he calls the Decree of that Emperor an Apocryphal
decree; 2. He says that it was giving to the Bishop privileges purely
Ecclesiastical, reproving me for making him a Patriarch; For the first, I
answer, that as I never thought it any piece of the Canon of Scripture, by
which Valentinian did this or any more than a Rescript of an Emperor, which,
if such, is certainly sufficient to express it an Imperial Act, so the
authorities for this may rescue it from farther question, for though it were
not Baronius's interest to believe it, and so it is by him suspected of
forgery, An. 432. n. 93. yet even he acknowledges it to be very ancient, and
owned by several Writers, n. 92. and afterward, when the same authorities
which are produced for this, Hier: Rubeus, and the Records of Ravenna, seem to
favor his grand design, i. e. make for Rome, he can then very fairly make use
of them, though it be but a narration of a vision, An. 433. n. 24. But I need
not lay more weight on this, than the Apocryphal (as he calls it) Decree will
be able to support, this is no singular president, many examples there are of
the like which are there mentioned in the Tract of Schism.

Patriarchal power Ravenna had without any dependence on the Bishop of Rome,
and I pretend no more for the Bishop of Canterbury, and therein also shall bate
bim the title of Patriarch, What he adds (by way of observation on the whole
matter) 1. that generally the Bishops consents were praedemanded or
praeordered, as in the Council of Chalcedon, Can. 17. Secondly, that what the
Emperors did, they did by the power given them by the Church, will soon appear
to bring him little advantage, For

Bishop's (I suppose he means the Bishop of Rome his) consent was not asked;
One part of the story is, that when the Bishop of Ravenna, being fain to fly
to the Bishop of Rome for support against the Longobards, submitted himself to
him, the people of Ravenna thought themselves injured thereby; And 2. it is not
truly said, that it was praeordered, and the Canon of the Council of Chalcedon
cannot be brought to that purpose, this act of Valentinians dated Anno 432.
being 19 years before the Council of Chalcedon, which was assembled Anno 451.
and so sure not praeordained by that which was subsequent; And indeed the Canon
of that Council mentioning Cities and Churches in the plural, which had been
(...), Can. 12.
before their Session made Metropoles by several Kings, is a clear evidence
that there were other such, beside that of Ravenna, and (...), Balsam: in Can:
12.
Balsamon expresses them by the name of Madyta, and Abydus etc.

Thirdly, If this be acknowledged an act of Council confirming the lawfulness
of what the Emperors had thus done, and decreeing (as clearly the Council of
Chalcedon and that other in Trullo did) that generally it should be thus, that
as the Prince made an ordinary City a Metropolis, the Church of that City
should be a Metropolitical Church, then still this is the fuller evidence, that
it was lawful for Princes thus to do, and that as often as they did, such
changes in the Churches followed, for sure a King was not obliged to ask the
Churches leave to repair or build a city.

Lastly, What out of Balsamon was cited by me, that what the Emperors did in
this matter they did according to the power that was given them] was, it seems,
either an occasion of stumbling to this Gentleman, or an excuse of it; For from
hence he concludes that this power was given them by the Church; This, if it be
true, is the thing that I would demand, and so far, from answering mine
instance: for if the Church have given Princes this power, then they may freely
and lawfully make use of it; and Justinian's doing so could be no tyrannical
act against the Church. But let us view in Chalced: Can. 12.
Balsamon's words, They are these, (...), such definitions are made by Kings
according to the power given them from above. That word (...) from above,
sometimes signifies in respect of time, sometimes also in respect of place; In
the first respect it signifies from of old, and is often joined with (...), from
the beginning; and if it be so taken here, as Gentianus Hervetus interprets it
olim, it must then signify that this power was yielded to Kings either by the
Apostles, or by the Primitive Canons of the Church, and if it were thus given
them by the Church, then sure they might justly challenge and exercise it
freely. But in the second sense, it is as certain that (...) signifies from
above, i. e. from heaven, so Joh. 19. 11. Christ tells Pilate, thou could
have no power over me, (...), unless it were given thee from above, i. e. sure
from heaven, from God, by whom Kings reign and have their power, and so it very
frequently signifies in the Jam. 1. 17. 3. 15, 17. etc.
Scripture; And if that be the the meaning, then this Gentleman sees how well
he has inferred his conclusion from this passage.

examples produced are but few, and those of tyrannical Princes, and no way
excluding the Church] just as much, and no more, as was in the premises, which
induced it, and those being discovered already, it is superfluous to make
repetitions so soon in this place.

fortress, that the Popes power is not Patriarchal, and so that he is still
safe from all that has been said on that head; But it has now appeared, that
if any other be made a Patriarch or Primate, or (whatever the style be) a
Bishop without any dependence on the Pope, this is a prejudice sufficient to
his Universal Pastorship, and other disadvantages he is rather in reason to
expect by disclaiming the Patriarchal authority, which the Canons have allowed
him, than hope to gain any thing by contemning his inheritance.

CHAP. VII. An Answer to the Exceptions made to the seventh Chapter.
Sect. I.
King Henry's desire of Reconciliation to Rome. The sacrilege, etc. no
argument against Regal power to remove Patriarchies. Possession in the belief
of the Popes supremacy. Prescribing for error. Napier's testimony. Possession,
if granted from Augustine's coming into England, no argument of truth.
Confessions of Popes. Augustine required it not. Pope Gregory's testimony. Many
evidences that this belief was not received after Augustine's time.

Chapter 7. which concerned Henry VIII. his act of ejecting the Power of the
Pope, will be full matter for a first section of this Chapter. He begins thus,

Begun in Hen. 8.
as also that it was but the coming two days short of a Post to Rome, which
hindered that the reconcilement was not actually made, as may be seen in my
Lord of Cherbery's Book fol. 368. and that the moderate Protestants curse the
day wherein it was made, so the very naming of Hen. VIII. is enough to confute
all his discourse, Sir Walter Raleigh in Prefito Histor: of the World.
one of the darlings of his daughter having given him such a character, as has
stamped him for England's Nero to future posterity, and as it was said of Nero
in respect of Christian religion, so might it be of him respecting the unity of
the Church, viz: it must be a great good that he began to persecute and
abolish: and as for the Acts passed in the Universities, Convocation, or
Parliament, let the blood shed by that Tyrant bear witness what voluntary and
free Acts they were especially those two upon his Seneca and Burrhus, Bishop
Fisher, and the Chancellor More, that he might want nothing of being thoroughly
para^eld to Nero.

But methinks the Doctor differs not much in this, seeming tacitly to grant the
Bishops were forced, awed by that noted sword in a slender thread, the
praemunire which did hang over their heads, though in the conclusion of that
Sect: he says we ought to judge charitably, viz: that they did not judge for
fear nor temporal Interests, yet after waves the advantage of that charitable
judgment, and says, That if what was determined were falsely determined by the
King and Bishops, then the voluntary and free doing it will not justify, and
if it were not, then was there truth in it, antecedent to, and abstracted from
the determination, and it was their duty so to determine, and crime that they
were unwilling: laying the whole weight of the argument upon this, that the
pretensions for the Popes supremacy in England must be founded either as
successor to S. Peter in the univer sal Pastorship of the Church, so including
England as a member thereof; or upon paternal right respecting S. Augustine's
conversion, or upon concession from some of our Kings etc. To which I answer,
that we rely on the first as the foundation and cornerstone of the whole
building, On the second as an action worthy the successor of S. Peter, which
requires a grateful consideration from us; And on the third not as a
concession, but as a just acknowlengment of what was necessary for the good of
Christian Religion, taught our Kings by those who taught them Christian
Religion; of which belief, I mean that the Pope as Successor to S. Peter is
head and governor of the Universal Church, we have been in possession ever
since the conversion of our English Ancestors, then Saxons, to the Christian
religion, made by Austin the Monk sent hither by Pope Gregory for that purpose;
until that good King Henry the VIII. out of scrupulosity of conscience (no
noubt) was pleased to cut the Gordian knot of those bonds, within which all his
Ancestors limited themselves; neither shall all that the Doctor and his fellows
have said, or can say, justify themselves so, but that such a possession, as I
here speak of, will convince them of schism, though all those replies, which
by ours have been 40 times made to every one of those arguments the Doctor
uses, should bear but equal weight in the scale, which we think hoises it up
into the air, for the arguments must be demonstrative and clear to men of
common sense, that must overthrow such a possession; and therefore it is that
the Puritans, who are much less friends to the Church of Rome than to the
Church of England, Napier on the Revelation.
wave all disputing out of Antiquity, and confess that the Church of Rome has
born a sway without any debatable contradiction over the Christian world 126
years, a time that no King in the world can pretend to by succession from his
Ancestors for possession of his crown, and yet I believe the Doctor would
conclude those subjects guilty of rebellion, which should go about to deprive
such a King of his Crown, though he could not show writings evidently
concluding for him 12, 14, 15, or 1600 years ago, how much more if he could
show them demonstrating his right, in the interpretation of as wise and learned
men as the world has, and 20 times the numbers of their adversaries.

discourse, is, as Orators are wont to do for the raising of passions, a
mention of some circumstances, which though extrinsecal to the matter, may yet
hope to have some influence on an unwary Reader, and infuse no small prejudices
into him; such are the infamous occasion of the breach begun by that King, and
such is the odious character fastened on him of England's Nero etc.

Apology on either of these two heads, If that which he did in this particular
of ejecting the Papal power, be in it self justifiable, both in respect of the
matter of the action, and the competency of the power that did it, it matters
not what moved him to do it, or how inclinable he was to have rescinded it.
The farther he were from a truly pious man, the more likely it is, he might be
brought by secular interests (and the less likely that it was by any
religious) to undo all that upon the weightiest grounds of reason, had been
established by him. Without examining therefore the truth of that suggestion,
that to his dying day he desired to be reconciled, and without demanding what
is meant by that phrase, desired to be reconciled, whether any overture to
receive the Popes on his own terms, into full possession again, or only a
desire to approve himself to the Pope, that he still maintained the Catholic,
nay Roman Faith (as we know he put men to death for denying some Doctrines
professed at Rome) that what he had done was no whit injurious to him,
prejudicial, or derogatory to any right, which could justly be challenged by
the Pope in this Kingdom; without either of these inquires, I say, If I shall
take for granted the utmost that can be pretended, that for a long time
together he desired to have rescinded what he had done, I see not what
disadvantage this can be to our pretensions.

reconciled, a truly changed and Pious Prince, was that principle of wicked
life so soon eradicated, which even now denominated him a Nero, and made it
fit to esteem that a great good, which he began to abolish, and did he thus
continue a new, reformed penitent to his dying day? If so, then truly Sir W. R.
was very unkind and unchristian in recording his crimes, and omitting his
repentance; and it is no excellent port of this Gentleman's character, that he
thought fit to imitate and quote him in this; the same injustice in an
Historian or Observator, that it had been in Eusebius to take so much of the
life of Constantine out of Zosimus or Julian's Caesar's, as should render him
justly odious, and to omit the whole latter part of his life, which was so
eminently virtuous and Christian.

Prince still continued to be like that image, which here is pourtrayed of him,
then sure I shall with the same evidence of proof be allowed to object those
vices, and those no excellent Christian motives that incited it, to his desire
of being reconciled or his willingness to re-admit the Papal power into this
Kingdom, and conclude, that the ejection of it must be a great good, which he
was so inclinable to abolish, and so the faith of the reformed, which he so
more than began to persecute, and all this as regularly as his personal vices,
and the infamus occasion, be it never so truly so, can be objected to that act
of State, which past in that Kings reign, for the disclaimig the Papal powers
among us.

passage in his story had acquired a yet farther degree of Truth, if the Post
had come two days sooner to Rome, and so had actually composed the difference
between that King and that Pope, so as had been most for the interest of Rome,
yet it is evident, that my discourse had no way been concerned in this; This
evidently had been no more, than what afterward came to pass in Queen Marie's
days, and it would still be in the power of King Henry's immediate successor,
to remove the power from Rome to Canterbury, as it had been in the power of
Henry either to do it, or undo it again.

tract of Schism) to that one question, whether the Bishop of Rome had at that
time any real authority here, which the King might not lawfully remove from him
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and must be decided as there it is, by the
view of Evidences, whether that pretended from Peter's Universal Pastorship, or
that from Augustines planting Christianity here, or that from the voluntary
con^ession of some Kings, and each of them is so disproved there, that till
some competent answer be rendered to those particulars, (which certainly is not
yet done by this Gentleman, who only here tells us the manner how he relyes on
each of these, and the possession they had of the belief that the Pope was
head of the Universal Church) it is perfectly unnecessary farther to consider
what is here added, only to inflame passions, but not to satisfy Conscience,
to exasperate, not to argue.

moderate Protestants should truly curse the day, etc. or, in a more Christian
dialect, express their dislike to the great Sacrilege, and some other
enormities, which were committed in that Princes reign, what prejudice will
this be to any lawful exercise of that regal power? It Is certain that all the
Acts of a bad Prince are not invalid or null, and much more evident still, that
he that has not offended in assuming the power which really belongs to him,
may by being denied that, be enraged, and laid open, to importune Temptations,
and if he be not a through Christian, constant and masterly, fall, and that
foulely under those temptations. And if Henry VIII. did so, still this is very
extrinsecall to the present inquiry, whether he as King had power to remove a
Patriarchy, and by that to remove all foreign jurisdiction or authority out
of this Church.

Section, farther to be spoken to, is the possession that is here pleaded, not
in the power it self, (if it were, that has formerly been spoken to) but in
the belief, that the Pope as successor to S. Peter, is head and Governor of
the Universal Church, This belief, says he, they have been in possession of,
ever since the Conversion of our English Ancestors, till King Henry; and for
this, beside his own bare affirmation, he brings no other proof, than one
testimony of Na^ier on the Revelation, confessing that the Church of Rome has
borne a sway over the Christian world above 1200. years.

Possession, possession in the belief of any thing, any farther than that
which is believed is true, and that appear some other way, than by our having
so long believed it, certainly this is no matter of any deep consideration to
us; If it still appear to be true upon grounds of reason, those grounds are
the considerable, and not the belief; And if the grounds be discovered to be
fallacious, and the contrary to be more reasonable to be believed, then sure
this has but the advantage of an Ancient error, and the older it is, the
fitter not to be longer continued in, it must be immediately deposited. And
against this, or instead of doing thus, to talk of possession is unnatural,
and irrational, the same plea that may serve for any sin that has had the
luck to get the first hold in us, the same that would certainly have held for
all the Idolatry of the Heathens, when Christ came into the world; And he that
has long lived in obscurity and misery (he, and his Ancestors) for many years
together, and were now offered an advancement out of that sad condition, would
he ever be so unkind to himself as to refuse that offer, upon this one
account, because it is the turning him out of a possession? This prescribing
for Error, and prescribing for Sin, and prescribing for Misery, are in effect
the same, equally unnatural and irrational, supposing it to be truly Error and
Sin, and Misery which we treat of.

particular before us, how does it appear that the Romanist has been in
possession in this belief, so long as he pretends? He here brings but one
Testimony to confirm it, that of Napier; But for this testimony the answer is
easy, that the affirmations or confessions of such as Napier was (and is by
this Gentleman acknowledged to be) in their arguing against the credit of
Antiquity, or to make good other hypotheses of theirs, are of as little
authority with us, as I suppose they will be with them, when they are contrary
to their pretensions or interests; Secondly, that the Popes bearing a sway over
the Christian world is not interpretable to signify his Universal Pastorship;
The Bishop of the Prime imperial See, may justly be very considerable, and so
bear a sway, but it follows not thence that his ordinary jurisdiction has
been thus extended to the whole Christian world.

contrary to this has been sufficiently evidenced Chap: 4. and 5. both as
concerns Saint Peter himself, and the Bishop of Rome as successor to Saint
Peter, and till those evidences are refuted, the affirmation of Napier being so
imperfect and infirm, both in respect of the testifier and the matter of the
testimony, will be very unfit to bear sway with any rational man.

confidence is resolved into the bare authority of the Speaker, this Gentleman,
who says it, that ever since the conversion of the English Nation, the
Romanists have had possession of this belief, that the Pope, as successor to
Saint Peter is Governor of the Universal Church.

particularly to this, I shall premise one thing, that if indeed this were
granted, which is suggested, it would not be of any great force toward the
inducing of this conclusion, that the Pope really was and is Universal Pastor.
For supposing the Pope to have assumed that authority, at the time of Augustine
the Monk his coming into England and making his plantation, and supposing him
to have preached this to King Ethelbert, and the rest of his Proselites, with
the same gravity and confidence, that he used in imparting all the Doctrines of
Christian Faith (in the same manner as Xaverius the Apostle of the Indics
imparted to them two Gospels, the one of Christ, the other of Saint Peter) I
shall not doubt but upon these grounds it would be very consequent, that all,
that willingly embraced the preaching of Augustine, and had no other Doctrine
to compare it with, or examine it by, should probably receive this branch of
belief, and so all others from and after them, that insisted firmly and
punctually on Augustine's way; and thus it is possible the possession of that
belief might be continued till the days of Hen. VIII.

proof that what in this particular Augustine affirmed was true, or that the
belief of it had possession in the whole Church before, Nay, the contrary will
be most evident, that at that very time the British Bishops acknowledged not
any such power over them in the Pope or any other, as is cited from the Abbate
of Bangor, cap. 16. Sect. 5. and much more to the same purpose.

Canon Law, that some of their Popes have disclaimed (and that not without
great aversation and detestation of the arrogance of it) the title of Universal
Bishop or Pastor, and acknowleged it is a very ominous Symptom in any that
shall assume it, and considering the prejudices that lie against it, from the
first ecumenical Councils, all the Ordinances whereof the Popes at their
creations vow to maintain inviolably, and against which to constitute or
innovate any thing, ne hujus quidem sedis potest authoritas, it is not in the
power of this See, says Pope Zosimus, 25. qu. 1. c. Contra. I may justly
conclude that all are obliged to do the like.

secondly, what truth there is in it in thesi, that from S. Augustine's
plantation to this time of Henry VIII. the Romanists have been in possession of
this belief of the Popes universal Pastorship, must be contested by evidences.
And 1. For Augustine himself it appears not by the story in Bid, that he did
at all preach this doctrine to the nation, nay, as upon Augustine's demand
concerning ceremonies, Pope Gregory binds him not to conform all to the Canons
or practice of Rome, but bids him Eccl: Hist: l. 1. c. 27.
freely choose that which may most please God, wheresoever he finds it, sive
in Gallia^um, sive in qualibet Ecclesi^, whether in France, or in any other
Church, and haec quasi in Fasciculum collecta apud Anglorum mentes in
consuetudinem deponere, make up a Book of such Canons to be observed in England
(which clearly shows that the Romish Canons were not to be in power in England)
so when the difference betwixt him and the British Bishops (of whom it has
been showed that they acknowledged not the Pope to have any power over them)
came to be composed, he required compliance and obedience from them but in
three things, the Ib: l. 2. c. 2.
observation of Easter according to the order of the Church of Rome (and the
Nicene Canon) the Ministration of Baptism, and joining with him to preach to
the English; Which is some prejudice to the founding of this belief in
Augustine's preaching.

Bid comes to speak of Gregory then Pope, by way of Encomium at his death, the
utmost he faith of him is, that cum primum in toto orb gereret Pontifieatum,
and conversis jamdudum Ecclesiis praelatus esset etc. being Bishop of the Prime
Church in the whole world, and set over those Churches which had been long
since converted, and having now taken care to propagate that faith to England,
he might justly be called our Apostle, and say as S. Paul did, that if to
others he were not an Apostle, yet he was to us.

Universal Pastorship certainly we may take Gregory's own word, that no such
thing was then thought to belong to him, in his Epistle to Eulogius Bishop of
Alexandria, visible among his works, and inserted in the B. Gre: Ep: ex regist:
l. 7. Indict: 1. c. 30.
body of their Canon Law. Nam dixi etc. I told you that you were not to write
to me or any other in that style, and behold in the Preface of that Epistle
directed to me who thus prohibited, you have set this proud appellation,
calling me universal Pope or Father, which I desire you will do no more, for
it is a derogating from par: 1. did: 99. Ecce
you, to bestow on another more than reason requires, I count it not my honor,
wherein I know my brethren lose their honor, My honor is the honor of the
universal Church, My honor is that my brethren should enjoy what fully belongs
to them (so I render fratrum meorum solidus vigor) then am I truly honored
when the honor, which is due to all, is denied to none. For if you call me
universal Pope, you deny that to your self which you attribute all to me; And
farther tells him, with expressions of aversation, Absit and recedant --, that
this honor had by a Council been offered to his Predecessors, the Council of
Chalcedon (that gave it equally to him and the Bishop of Constantinople, which
is in effect to give to neither the power or sense, but only the title of it)
but no one of them would ever use this title. This sure i^ evidence enough,
that if at that time any such belief of the Universal Pastorship of the Pope
entered this Nation, it must needs be the belief of a known acknowledged
falsity, and so far from a bonae fidei possessio.

possession this belief had among us, may be judged by some of those many l. de
diff: Reg: et Eccl: Potest:
instances put together by the Bishops in Henry VIII. his days, as the
premises whereon that King built his conclusion of ejecting that Power which
was then usurped by the Pope.

statute, that for Ecclesiastical appeals they shall in the last resort lie
from the Archbishop to the King, so as not to proceed any farther without the
Kings assent.

Secondly, that Tunstan Archbishop elect of York, asking leave of the King to
go to a Council designed by Calixtus, had it granted with this reserve, that he
should not receive Episcopal benediction from the Pope.

Thirdly, that the Kings of England from time to time, had and exercised
authority of making laws in Ecclesiastical matters; Eight such Laws are there
recited of Canutus his making, the like of King Ethelred, Edgar, Edmund,
Aethelstane, Ina King of the West Saxons, and King Alfred.

Fourthly, that William the Conqueror instituting and indowing the Abbey of
Battle, gave the Abbat exemption from all jurisdiction of any Bishops, aut
quarumlibet personarum dominatione, from all dominion or rule of any persons
whatsoever, sicut Ecclesia Christi Cantuariensis, in like manner as the Church
of Canterbury; Which imports two things, 1. that the Church of Canterbury had
no such Ruler over him (but the King) and 2. that the Abbat of Battle was by
regal power invested with the same privileges.

derogatory enough to the possession in this belief here pretended, will but
add one more to the number of such arguments, of which this Gentleman says,
that they have forty times had replies made to them; And truly this is a good
easy compendious way, which as it secures him against all that can be
produced, so it does not encourage me to spend time in collecting and producing
more, and therefore this shall suffice to have added now concerning this
matter, being apt to flatter my self, that these arguments are demonstrative
and clear enough to men of common sense, to disprove, and so to overthrow this
Possession.

Sect. II.
Queen Mary's retaining the Supremacy. Power of refusing Legates,
unreconcileable with the Popes Supremacy.

Paragraph is an account of a passage cited by me from the story of Queen Mary,
Thus,

Queen Mary's titular retaining of the Supremacy until she could dispose the
disordered hearts of her subjects to get it peaceably revoked, is no authority
for the Doctor, she never pretending it to be lawfully done, but that she could
not do otherwise, no more is her refusing of a Legate, which in all Catholic
times and countries has been practiced and thought lawful.

civil or secular motives they were, which kept that Queen so long from
rejecting the title of supreme in her own Kingdom, I shall not need to
inquire; If it were no unpardonable sin in her to continue the title, and
exercise of that power, which was incompetible with the Pope's universal
Pastorship, then why should it be so heinous in her Father to assume it? Her
never pretending that it was lawfully done, signifies very little, as long as
she pretends not the contrary, that it was unlawful; The truth may well lie in
the middle, that she thought it lawful to retain it, yet lawful also to bestow
it on the Bishop of Rome, and upon the strength of the former persuasion, my
charity obliges me to think, that she did the former, and in force of the
latter it is possible also, that she did the latter, though possible too, that
she did it upon reason of state, the validity of her mother's marriage, and
consequently her legitimation depending upon the acknowledgment of the Pope's
absolute power in this Nation.

opinion or practice is of no more force one way, than the other, and therefore
was taken in as a supernumerary observation, and not such as on that alone to
found any grand argument.

power of refusing a Legate from the Pope, I cannot discern how that is
reconcilable with the Popes pretensions to supreme power in this Kingdom; Can
it be lawful for any Province to refuse a Procurator, or Praetor, or
Proconsul, sent solemnly commissionated by the Lawful Prince? Was it lawful
for the tenants or dressers of the vineyard to deny entrance to the King's son
or but servant? Is not this a derogation to supreme power and domination? If
this be practiced and counted lawful in all Catholic times and Countries, this
is to me an indication, that in no time or country there has been possession
of this belief that the Pope is the supreme Pastor of all, for sure if he were,
his Legate which is his image, might in power of the original require
admission, and he that is (...) thus sent and commissionated by him, must by S.
Peter's precept be allowed obedience from all his subjects, and so from that
Queen, if such she were, and such she must be, so far as he had the supremacy.

Cardinal Petou was sent to be Bishop of Sarisbury, the denying him that
Bishopric was a check to the Pope's absolute supremacy, but of that this
Gentleman was in prudence to take no notice.

Sect. III.
King Edward his Reformation. The Duke of Somerset. The Duke of Northumberland,
his Treason no prejudice to the Reformation under that King.

King Edward VI. King Henry's immediate successor, Thus,

King Edward a child of nine years old fell into the hands of wicked and
ambitious traitors, who knowing the Kingdom affected for religion sake to
Queen Mary, to cut off her succession, and introduce their own, thought sit to
strengthen their faction, which beside what they might hope from abroad,
consisted of many Lutherans and Calvinists at home: those two sects having by
opportunity of that rupture in Henry VIII. his time, spread and nest led
themselves in many parts of England.

truth in it, and as little of argument, if it were truth. That the youth of
the Prince can be no foundation of argument against the Legality of what was
done by the Duke of Somerset his uncle, the Protector, in his nonage, was
sufficiently showed before, and might be exemplified through all times and
places. That this Protector should at this time, when the young King legally
fell into his hands, be styled a wicked ambitious Traitor, has not any degree
of truth in it, the crime, for which he afterward lost his life, being far
from any disloyalty to his Sovereign.

Duke of Northumberland, who obtained the King's consent to settle the
inheritance on Jane Gray, and accordingly, after the King's death, proclaimed
her Queen, and suffered as a traitor for so doing, all that I shall need to say
is this, 1. that this act of his, how traiterous soever, cannot justify what
is here said, that the King at nine years old fell into the hands of traitors,
for that one Duke cannot truly be called traitors in the plural, and the King
at that age did not fall into his hands, but into the hands of Edward Seymour
Duke of Somerset, under whom the six Articles and other acts of severity
against the Protestants were called in, and the Acts against the Papal
authority confirmed, the Romish Mass abrogated, the Bible translated, and
published in the English tongue, the Liturgy reformed, and the public offices
performed in English, the sacrament of the Lord's Supper administered in both
kinds etc. And so whatsoever was afterward done (were it never so
traitorously) by the Duke of Northumberland, could have no influence on this
change, and is therefore very impertinently here inserted, after the manner of
the Orator, not the historian, to raise passions, inflame dislkes and aversions
in the Reader, and not to give him any exact view of the truth of the story.

Secondly, that the design of the Duke of Northumberland not succeeding, but
costing him so dear, the loss of his own life and hers, whom he set up to be
Queen, and the succession regularly descending on Queen Mary, there can be no
reasonable account given, why this treason of that Duke should here be proposed
as the one considerable, it being evident in the story, that all things were
composed to the full satisfaction of Queen Mary, and just as they should have
been, in case that traiterous attempt had never been made by that Duke.

treason of his was founded on that very act, which in the next paragraph this
Gentleman thinks fit to vouch as authentic, and if it were so, that could be
no treason in that Duke, viz: the Act whereby Mary as well as Elizabeth were
adjudged illegitimate, and so incapable of the succession. But these are
considerations very extrinsecal and remote from the matter, as it lies here in
the contest between us.

Kingdom were for Religion's sake affected to Queen Mary, it could not
certainly be skillful, or popular, or any way Politic in them that thus
desired to strengthen themselves, to introduce this change in Religion. For
whatsoever aid they might hope for, either from Lutherans or Calvinists at home
or abroad, sure they might have hoped for more by the other way, if it be true
what he affirms of the Kingdom indefinitely, that it was affected to Queen
Mary's Religion. For that other Kingdoms of Europe generally were so at that
time, there is small question.

Sect. III.
Queen Elizabeth's illegitimacy answered. The unpolitickness of her Councels of
Reforming.

exceptions to that part of the story which concern Queen Elizabeth; The first
by the by, Thus,

Queen Elizabeth being by Act of Parliament recorded a Bastard, and so
pronounced by two Popes, and therefore mistrusting all her Catholic subjects,
who she feared did adhere to the Queen of Scots title, in which she was then
likely to be supported by the King of France her husband, was by the advice of
men partly infected with Calvinisme or Lutheranisme, partly ambitious of making
their fortunes, cast upon that desperate counsel of changing religion;
desperate I say, for see amongst what a number of rocks she was, in consequence
of that Counsel forced to sail, witness her adhering to the rebels of all her
neighbor Kings, so provoking them thereby, as if the French King had not been
taken out of this world, and wind and weather fought against the Spanish
Armado, in all likelihood she had been ruined, especially her Catholic
subjects being so provoked as they were, by most cruel and bloody Laws: but
this by the by: though from hence the Reader may judge of reason of changing
religion in her time, and what a solid foundation the Church of England has.

Queen Elizabeth was by Act of Parliament recorded a bastard; has no farther
truth in it, than is of force against Queen Mary also, The same Act of
Parliament affirming the marriages with Queen Katharine, and Anne of Bolen void,
and their children Mary and Elizabeth illegitimate, and so involving them
equa'y under the same censure.

Gentleman by mentioning it is obliged to think there is) it must be much more
to Queen Mary's disadvantage, for it is certain that upon the birth of Queen
Elizabeth, 'twas enacted by Parliament, that the marriage with Katharine was
null, because incestuous, and so this with Anne lawful (which certainly it
was, if the former was incestuous and the resolution of the Universities and
most learned men, not only in England, but at Paris, and elsewhere was, that
it was of such a nature, as it could not by the Pope's power be dispensed with,
being so contrary to the law of God) and by the same act Elizabeth is declared
heir of the Kingdom, in case the King should have no heir male, and Oath of
Allegiance taken to the King and to his heirs by Anne the mother of Elizabeth.
And to conclude, the subsequent act, that decreed the succession, and
established it first in Edward, then in Mary, then in Elizabeth, by which it was
that Mary did actually ascend to the throne, was equally favorable to both of
them.

concluded from this Gentleman's prooemial consideration, it still lies more
against Queen Mary, than against Queen Elizabeth, if not in respect of the
merit of the cause (on which this Gentleman will give me leave to suppose it
was, that our stories tell us, that the Pope had given Cardinal Campeius his
Legate a Private Bull, much in favor of the King's pretensions, but kept it
under some restraint till he saw how the Emperor's affairs in Italy would
succeed) yet in respect of the several declarations against the one, and but
one only against the other, and that how well founded, is easy to discern, if
this were a place for such disputes.

Politic considerations that here follow, whether the counsel of re-excluding
the Papacy, and proceeding to a farther Reformation in her Kingdoms, were a
desperate Counsel or no, For if to this Gentleman's arguments I shall grant it
were so, the conclusion will be only this, that her action was unskilful in
secular considerations, from which it is no way consequent, that it was more
than, as Prince, she had power to do, or impious in the sight of God, or that
that, which being built on so feeble a foundation, proved yet competently
successful, is by this means conclusible to have been unlawful and null, for
in that alone can be founded the truth of the suggestion here, that we that
adhere to her Reformation, must be adjudged schismatics.

Sect. IV.
The Ordination of Bishops in Queen Elizabeth's time. Mr. Masons Record.
Introducing of Turcisme.

Queen Elizabeth, as the narration after this long Prooeme, the (...) after an
acknowledged (yet at large) (...), will be soon dispatched; It is thus,

How far Master Mason can justify the ordination of Queen Elizabeth's Bishops,
I will not now examine; but certain it is, that the Record (if there be such
an one) has a great prejudice of being forged, since it lay some fifty years
unknown amongst the Clamors against the flagrant act, and no permission given
to Gatholikes to examine the ingenuity of it, but howsoever it is nothing to
our purpose, for whatsoever material mission they had by an external
consecration, those Bishops, who are said to have consecrated them, are not so
much as pretended to have given them order to preach the Dectrine, or exercise
the Religion they after did, which is the true meaning and effect of mission. I
cannot end without noting in his 24. Parag: the foundation upon what he
himself says his whole design relies; which is, that because the recession
from the Roman Church was done by those, by whom, and to whom only the power
of right belonged legally, viz the King and Bishops of this Nation, therefore
it is no Schism, that is, what soever the reason of dividing has been, even
to turn Turks, or for violating never so fundamental points of Religion, yet
it had not been Schism.

Mr. Masons Records are, and of how good and unquestionable authority, I leave
to the view of his Book, which sets down all so particularly, and
irrefragably, that nothing can be more contrary to the Gentleman's interests,
than the most strict examination of that whole matter, in order to the
vindicating and justifying this truth, that the succession of Bishops, and
order Ecclesiastical has been regularly preserved in our Church, at that time,
when alone the Romanist accuses us for the interruption of it, i. e. in Queen
Elizabeth's reformation. (To which head of discourse it is not amiss to add
the resolution of Cudsemius the Jesuit, de desper: Calvini causa, cap. 11.
that the English Nation are not Heretics, because they remain in a perpetual
succession of Bishops.)

Sect. 16. I purposed to conclude from Mr. Masons work, and the Records by him
produced, it lies not on me to prove that they which ordained those Queen
Eilzabeth-Bishops, gave them order to preach the Doctrine they after did, or to
examine the truth of his suggestion, that this is the true meaning and effect
of Mission. It may suffice that they which consecrated them, gave them the same
power which themselves derived by succession from the Apostles, and that was
sufficient to authorize them to preach all Apostolical doctrine, and if they
preached any other, let it appear, and I shall never justify their preaching.
But that is not attempted here, and therefore I have herein no farther matter,
that exacts reply from me.

cannot omit, in reply to Sect 20. certainly it has little impression on my
discourse in that place, which does not inquire what is unlawful or criminous
Universally, for then sure I should have acknowledged that the bringing in
Turcisme, or violating fundamental points of Religion had been such, but
peculiarly and precisely this, what is Schism, in that one notion of Schism,
as that is a voluntary separation from our Ecclesiastical Superiors; of which
that we are not, or cannot be guilty, when we act in perfect concord,
compliance and subordination to all those to whom the right of superiority
legally belonged, is I suppose, so manifest, that it can need no farther proof.

lawful Superiors in bringing in Turcisme, or violating fundamental points, I
should not be apt to style that Schism (any more than I would call perjury,
lying, or incest, simple fornication) it being in the first part of the
instance, Apostasy and total defection from Christ, which I hope is a little
more than denying the Popes Universal Pastorship, or Infallibility of the
Church (in which consists his grand species of Schism) and in the second,
Heresy, and the grossest sort of Schism together, that of departing from the
unity of the Faith, which being by me Chap. 8. distinctly handled, as a second
species of schism, all that I need here say to this Gentleman's exception, is,
that I indevoured to speak as distinctly, and not as confusedly as I could, and
therefore did not mix things that were distant, and therefore did not speak of
that second kind of schism at the same time when I proposed to speak of the
first only, and upon this account only said nothing to it in that Chapter.
And I hope this was but my duty to do, agreeably to all rules of method, and
so that he might very well have spared that animadversion which he says he
could not end without noting.

CHAP. VIII. An Answer to the Exceptions made to the eighth Chapter.
Sect. I.
The Division of Schism. An Answer to many Questions about Schism, A retortion.

Chap. 8. this Gentleman without any cause is pleased to change the division of
the second sort of schism there handled, into another, which it seems was more
suitable to his understanding, and then to make two light skirmishes against the
discourse of that Chapter. He begins thus,

In his 8th Chapter, as far as I understand, he divides Schism into formal,
that is, breach of unity; and material, that is, breach of Doctrine or
Customs, in which the Church was united: the former he brancheth into
subordination to the Pope, Sect. 4.
of which enough has been said; and breach of the way provided by Christ for
maintaining the unity of faith, the which he puts in many subordinations
without any effect, Sect. 5.
For let us ask, if inferior Clergymen dissent from their own Bishops, but
not from their Metropolitan, in matter of faith, is it Schism? he will answer,
No: If a Metropolitan dissent from his Primate, but agree with the rest of the
Patriarchs, is it schism? I think he must say, No: If a Patriarch dissent from
the first, but agree with the rest, is it schism? No: If a Nation or a Bishop
dissent from the rest of the General Council, is it schism? still I believe he
will answer, No: Where then is schism provided against? or where truly is
there any subordination in Faith? if none of these are subject, and bound to
their Superiors or Vniversals in matters of faith?

division there is, will be obvious enough to any man's understanding. In the
third Chap: the foundation had been laid in the opposition betwixt Schism and
Ecclesiastical Unity, and as the unity was the conserving all due relations,
whether of subordination, or equality, wherein each member of Christ's Church
is concerned one toward another, so there were two prime branches of schism,
the one against the subordination which Christ settled in his Church, the second
against the mutual charity, which he left as his Legacy among Christians. And
the former of these being discussed at large in order to the present debate, in
the 8. Chapter, the method led me to the latter of them, to consider Schism,
as it is an offense against the mutual unity, Peace, and Charity, which Christ
left, and prescribed among Christians; And that I might be sure not to
streighten the bounds of this sort of Schism, or omit any thing, that can, by
any rule of discourse, be placed in the borders or confines of it, by the
means either to lay charge on us, or render our Vindication the clearer, I
distributed it into as many parts, as in my opinion the matter could by any be
thought to bear, i. e. into three species,

1. A breach in the Doctrines or Traditions (together with the institutions of
Christ, his Apostles, and the Primitive Church, whether in government, or
observances.)

2. An offense against external peace or communion Ecclesiastical.

3. The want of that Charity which is due from every Christian to every
Christian.

The first of these again subdivided and considered, 1. in the gross, as it
is a departing from the rules appointed by Christ for the founding and
upholding unity of Doctrine, etc. 2. in particular, the asserting of any
particular doctrine, contrary to Christ's and the Apostolical pure Churches
establishment.

Scheme being thus laid as regular, and as comprehensive, as I could devise 1.
here is not one word said to express any cause of dislike or exception to it;
and yet 2. it is quite laid aside, and another of formal and material Schism,
etc. substituted instead of it, upon what temptation or design, save only a
willingness to gain somewhat by the shuffle and confusion, more than the
distinctnesse of discourse could yield him, I cannot divine.

particular advantages he had in his intuition, but suppose them latent and
reserved; For to his special discovery that he means to make by asking (and
supposing answers to) many questions proportionable to the several links in the
subordination, the account will be easy enough, that as long as any particular
Bishop remains in the due subordination to his Canonical superiors, so long the
departure of any clergy man that is under his jurisdiction, from that
obedience which Canonically he owes him, is in him that is thus guilty of it,
an act of schism.

departure he puts dissent (which may belong to light matters, wherein liberty
of dissent from Superiors, is yielded to all men, or to greater matters,
without departing from obedience or Communion) this is not fairly done, this
difference having a visible influence on the matter.

Secondly, when of the inferior clergie-man's dissent from his own Bishop, he
makes me answer that it is not schism, if it be not from his Metropolitan, I
never gave him my letter of Proxy to do so: But on the other side, if the
dissent be supposed to be improved into a departure (which alone makes schism)
I shall not doubt to pronounce it schism, unless he have first made his
appeal from his Bishop to his Metropolitan, and by him and his Council of
Bishops be adjudged to be in the right, and then if his Bishop by that judgment
be reduced to order, he may not, he cannot again without schism depart from
him.

Thirdly, when from Primates he ascends to Patriarchs, as if that latter had a
power superior to the former, and again from the l'atriarchs to the first
Patriarch, i. e. the Bishop of Rome, this he knows has no place with us, who
acknowledge no power of any Patriarch above a Primate, no supremacy over all
in the Bishop of Rome, but yet allow them and him (proportionably to the (...),
if that will content him) that Primacie of order, which by the ancient Canons,
is allowed them.

Fourthly, whatsoever concerning these several steps from the lowest Clergy
man to the first of Patriarchs, he phansies to be answered by us; and from
thence concludes, that then schism is no way provided against, is visibly much
more true of any Romanist; For certainly if he dissent not from the Bishop of
Rome, it must be no schism, in him though he dissent from his own Bishop, his
own Archbishop, Primate, and Patriarch, and if he do dissent from him, it is
not his consenting with all his inferior Governors, that will stand him in
stead for his vindication.

answer himself to his own questions, be found really to conclude (as he says
it does) against all subordination, it is now evident, who is most blameable for
it, he doubtless, that has divolved all into the Monarchike supremacy of the
Pope, and permits us not to consider, what any other our immediate superiors
require of us.

Lastly, what he puts into my mouth by way of answer, concerning subordination
to a General Council, that if a nation or Bishop dissent from the rest of a
General Council, still it is not schism, unless, as I said, there be deceit
in substituting the word Dissent, for Departure or Recession, I shall no way
acknowledge the answer which he believes I will make; For certainly I
acknowledge, as much as he, or any man, the authority of a General Council
against the dissents of a nation, much more of a particular Bishop. And these
were misadventures enough to be noted in one Paragraph.

Sect. II.
The sufficiency of the few heads resolved on by the Apostles. The notion of
Fundamentals. The Canon of Ephesus concerning it. The definition of the Council
of Florence. Many Churches have not betrayed this trust. Christian practice to
be super-added. The few things preserved by Tradition.

discourse of that Chapter, concerning the heads resolved on by the Apostles,
in order to planting Christian life, and to that he thus offers his exceptions.

But, says the Doctor, the Apostles resolved upon some few heads of special
force and efficacy to the planting of Christian life through the world, and
preaching and depositing them in every Church of their plantation. Truly I do
not know what a Catholic professes more, so that by the word few, he means
enough to form a Religion, and Christian life, and will show us a Church which
has not betrayed the trust deposited; for if there be none, what avails this
depositing? if there be any, clear it is that it preserved it by Tradition; if
there be a question whether it has or no, again I demand to what purpose was
the depositing, so that if the Doctor would speak aloud, I doubt he would be
subject to as much jealousy, as he says Grotius was.

conformably, to the Catholics profession, may be as full and explicit as he
can desire, I doubt not to express my meaning to be, that the few heads, that
the Apostles resolved on, were sufficient both for number and efficacy, or in
Epist. ad Epict.
Athanasius his language, (...), sufficient for the averting all impiety, and
establishment of all piety in Christ; And for his satisfaction therein, I
refer him to the Treatise of Fundamentals, printed since that of Schism, of
which the only design was to insist on this, as the grand notion of
Fundamentals, such as were by the Apostles and Christ himself, deemed most
proper and effectual to plant Christian life in a world of Jews, and Gentiles,
and briefly to set down and enumerate all those that the Apostles thought thus
necessary.

observation, that this sufficiency of the foundation by them laid and somewhat
explained (on occasion of Heretical opposers) by the Council of Nice, etc. was
such, that the Ephesine Council following that of Nice, 106. years, made a
decree, (...), etc. that it should not be lawful for any man to produce,
write, (...) compose any belief beside that which was established by the
Fathers at Nice, and that they which should dare to compose or offer any such
to any that would from Gentilisme, Judaisme, or whatever Heresy convert to the
ackcowledgment of the truth, if they were Bishops, should be deposed from their
Bishoprics, if Laymen, anathematised, etc. Can. 7.

authority being pressed by the Greeks to the Latins, in the Council of Sess. 10.
Florence, and that with this smart expression, (...), No man will accuse the
Faith (that which those Fathers had professed) or charge it of imperfection,
unless he be mad, Council. l. 7. p. 642. A. The Latins answer is but this,
that that Canon did not forbid, (...), another explication agreeable to the
truth contained in that Creed, acknowledging that it did forbid (...),
difference as well as contrariety (page 644. b) and even for such a bare
explication they counted not that lawful for any but the Fathers convened in O
Ecumenical Synods, citing it from Aquinas, 2a. 2 ae. qu: 1: ar. 10. and adding
that he spoke, (...), of any Creed whatsoever which was common to the whole
Church. Ib. p. 641. D.


Epistle of Celestine to Nestorius, (...), The belief delivered by the
Apostles requires neither addition nor diminution.

impose so many new articles of belief upon their own Churches, and upon all
that desire Communion with them, I leave to each Romanist to consider, ann
shall only add the words of the Catechism taken out of the works of
Costerus, Petrus de Soto, and others, and set out by command of the Archbishop
of Triers, resp. ad 2. qu. Neque ulla unquam ex titit haresis, quae non hoc
symbolo damnari potuerit, There was never any Heresy which might not be
condemned by the Apostles Creed. It were well we might be allowed the benefit
of this trial.

pledge of my readiness to answer his questions, though I discern not any
obligation, arising from my former discourse, to lie upon me, yet I shall not
be so nice or sparing of my pains, as to deny him a clear account also of his
subsequent demands, but shall speak as loud as he would wish, and tell him
first to the first demand, that as to those few heads I spoke of, I can,
blessed be God, show him Churches enough, which have not betrayed the trust
deposited; The Church of England, even now, under the saddest persecution, has
not been tempted to betray that trust, the Church of Rome, through all the
Prosperity and Splendour, and Grandeur, which it has long enjoyed, and which,
the Historian tells us, acrioribus stimulis animum explorant, has as yet held
out thus far: I mean has retainnd those few head^, and in that respect is
not accused by us to have betrayed that trust (I wish it were as blameless in
all things else, particularly in that wherein our present debate is most
concerned, in imposing new Articles of Faith on all Christians, and her own
infallibility for the first of them.)

National Churches, that I know of, confining my discourse still to the small
(yet in the Apostles opinions sufficient) number of heads of special force to
the planting of Christian life through the world.

Gentleman is much disappointed in his expectation, that I should not be able
to name any Church that has not betrayed the trust deposited, so I must
profess to him, I think it as reasonable, that they that agree in believing
and conserving those few precious heads of truth, designed to so glorious an
end, as is the peopling a world with a peculiar colonie of inhabitants, all
uniformly zealous of good works, should all join hands and hearts, to add
that superstructure to the foundation, pure, immaculate, Elevated, Heroical, i.
e. Christian practice, to the untainted belief of these few things.

Canon of Ephesus) most justly belongs unto them that make it their great
interest to quarrel, divide from, and anathematize, all others, who cannot
believe all other things which they chance to believe, though they know they
agree with them in all that the Apostles thus thought necessary to be agreed
in; and indeed how contrary this is, and destructive to this superstructure, of
which Charity in one principal ingredient, and so to the design of laying the
foundation, though not to the foundation it self, I shall leave this Gentleman
and every sober Christian to consider, and if he judge not as I do, yet I
shall not (...) number it among the prodigies of the age, or indeed think
stranger of it, than I have long done of the great distance betwixt Reason and
Passion in the same sort of creatures, Man, and ( God knows too often) in the
same Individual creature, the same Man and Christian.

Gentleman's lightest intimation of his pleasure, in satisfaction to his first
demand, I shall in the same humor proceed without all reserve to the next,
doubting as little as he, but that these few things (all justice must allow our
discourse to he coherent, and so to adhere to the same subject with which we
began) have been preserved in each Church by Tradition, and then to the third,
that there is no place of doubt concerning the fact, and so of question,
whether they have or no, and if by thus speaking aloud to every of his demands,
I render my self subject to as much jealousy as I say Grotius was, I shall
not accuse him as my tempter, but only support and comfort my self, that I
have retained as much innocence as I always thought Grotius had done, and by
declaring my meaning thus clearly, and professing that I mean no whit more than
I say, I see no place for jealousy remaining to any.

believe the Apostles Creed to be conveyed down to us by tradition in every
national Church from the Apostles time to this, be any heresy, I am visibly
guilty of it, and need not have my words put upon the rack (as Grotius's have
been) to extort a more explicit confession from them.

Sect. III.
Submission without opinion of infallibility. The appeal to the Fathers of the
first 300 years, and the four General Conncels, to what it belongs. The silence
of the first times no advantage to the Romanist. Two Questions of Additaments
to Faith; The way of debating each of them.

exception to this Chapter is to our profession of humility and temper, which
it seems those of our religion must not be permitted to assume to themselves
(and which I was no farther so insolent to assume, than as it is observable in
the peculiarity of the frame of the Church of England's Reformation) Thus,

I cannot but admire indeed the great temper he professes men of his religion
have, in choosing of Doctrines, to wit, their submission to the three first
Ages, and the four first Councels, but I confess it is a humility I understand
not, first to profess, they know not whether their teachers say true or no
(that is, that they are fallible) and then to hold under pain of damnation what
they say. Another piece of their humility is in submitting to ages, where very
few witnesses can be found, in regard of the rarity of the Authors and the
little occasion they had to speak of present controversies. A third note of
humility is, that whereas the fourth Council was held about the midst of the
fifth Age, these lovers of truth will stand to it, but not to the fourth Age
precedent, or that very Age in which it was held, so humble they are to submit
to any authority, that touches not the questions in present controversy, but
where do they find Christ's Church shall be judge in three Ages, and fail in
the fourth, or that the Councels in the fifth Age shall be sound, but not the
Fathers.

Gentleman. Our humility is one while by him censured as really too great,
another while the want of it is our crime, and we equally to be scoffed at on
both accounts.

criminous excess of humility forsooth, to submit to those, of whom we first
profess not to know that they are infallible. But as long as we do verily
believe they do actually affirm truth, why may we not submit to them, though
we know not that they are infallible? For certainly I may submit to my natural,
or civil parent in this manner, obey him in all his commands (supposing, as now
I do, that none of his commands are by me apprehended to be unlawful, as none
of these Councels definitions, as by us believed to be, contrary to the Word
and Will of God) though yet I neither account him inerrable nor impeccable. But
of this I have spoken already Chap: I. Sect. 3.

holding under pain of damnation what they say, is in this place an insertion
of this Gentleman's, no word being said of it in that section, to which his
words are confronted, and having elsewhere spoken to that, I abstain from
adding more at this time.

humility is too scanty, for when I have submitted to be judged by the
scriptures, the consent of the first 300 years, or the four General Councels,
whether we have departed from the Apostolical doctrines or traditions, this,
says he, is submitting to Ages where very few witnesses can be found etc. But
I desire it may be remembered, what there I speak of, (for perhaps this
Gentleman's haste has not permitted him to advert to it) the contesting or
innocence in this, that we of the Church of England have not departed from the
Apostolic doctrine and traditions; And for this whether could the appeal more
properly be directed, than to the scriptures, the Conservatorie of the Apostles
written doctrine, and the three first Centuries, the conservatorie of their
traditions, It being unimaginable that any thing should be so per saltum
conveyed to us from the Apostles, as to leap over those three Centuries next to
them, without leaving any footstep discernible among them.

witnesses of those times, the authors that remain to us be never so few, yet
unless by some of their hands we be directed what the Apostles delivered to
them, how can we know what was delivered? It being all one in this respect not
to be, as not to appear, Tradition, even Apostolical, being no more than an
empty name, unless we suppose our selves able to avouch some competent
testifiers of the Tradition.

four General Councels, because they were held against the great disturbers of
the unity of the Faith, and they maintained the true faith by these two special
weapons, the Scriptures and Tradition, testified by the first Writers, and our
Church has taken in their Creed^ into our Liturgies, and their definitions
into our Articles of religion, and so I have by that appeal so far testified
our non departure from the Faith, I hope there is no offense in this, no degree
of defect in our humility.

little occasion these first had to speak of the present controversies, that
sure cannot be objected against our procedure (any more than the paucity of the
Authors could) for if the Romanist do but grant this one thing, it will be
found a real prejudice to his pretensions, if (which was the point in hand) the
question be, whether the Church of England have departed from the unity of the
Apostolic Faith, denied any Apost^lick Doctrine or Tradition.

Controversy how shall it be proved, that we have departed, unless that
Doctrine or Tradition being specified what it is, it be evidenced also, that it
was delivered by the Apostles, and how can that be evidenced, but by those
which within some competent distance of their time, affirm that from them, and
how can they be pretended to affirm that, if it be granted of them that they
had no occasion to speak of it, and so are utterly silent in it.

humility i. e. the next expression of his scoptical humor, there can be no
need of applying any answer, it being no where intimated in that Treatise that
we are not ready to stand to the fourth Age, or that wherein the fourth Council
was held; All that was said, was, that the three first Ages, and the four
General Councels were competent witnesses of the Apostolical doctrines and
traditions, and I desire any man to name any other that were more competent to
this purpose, i. e. to testify what the Apostles taught, It being certain that
whosoever does (not by inspiration) tell us any thing of that kind, must
assume to tell it from them, and as evident that all those things (that even
now were spoken of) which the Apostles resolved on, as heads of special force
to form religion and Christian life, were by this means conveyed to us.

matters there are, which we look on as additaments to the doctrines of Faith,
and so are the subject of a double question, 1. whether they be parts of that
faith which was once, or at once delivered to the saints, 2. whether not
appearing to be so, there be any other just reason to believe, though but by an
humane Faith, that they have any truth in them.

questions, as the resolution of the former depends upon those Ages, which
alone can conveigh Tradition to the succeeding, and so still for that we
refer our selves to the former Vmpirage, so of the second, I did not then,
because I had not occasion to speak in that place.

answer be required now, I shall readily give it, that in matters of this
nature the Opinions of the Fathers of the Church in the most flourishing Ages
of it, wherein their writings are most voluminous, and their Learning in
Theology most venerable, are with us of great weight and consideration; we do
(and shall upon all occasions demonstrate our selves to) allow them as full an
authority, pay as great and true a reverence to their judgments, endeavor as
uniformly to conform our selves to the declarations of their sense, as any
sober Romanists are by us discerned to do, or as it can be their interest to
do, in respect of the controversies that lie between us. And so still I
discern not, wherein our humility can be judged to fail by those, with whom I
now dispute, being content that it should by others be judged excessive.

CHAP. IX. An Answer to the Exceptions made to the ninth Chapter.
Sect. I.
The hindrances of Communion imputable to the Romanist, not to us. Siquis
Ecclesiam non audierit, one of our grounds. What is meant by Ecclesia.

Exceptions to this Chapter are not very great, whether we respect their weight
or number, yet upon the same account that the former have been our exercise,
these may for a while detain us also.

In his 9th Chap: says he, he pretends the Roman Catholic Church is cause
of this division, because they desire communion, and cannot be admitted, but
under the belief and practice of things contrary to their consciences, of which
two propositions, if the second be not proved, the first is vain, and is as if
a subject should plead he is unjustly outlawed, because he does not desire it:
Now to prove the latter, he assumeth that the Protestant is ready to contest
his Negatives, by grounds that all good Christians ought to be concluded by,
what he means by that, I know not, for that they will convince their Negatives
by any ground, a good Christian ought to be concluded by, I see nothing less.

What then will they contest it by? all grounds a good orthodox Christian ought
to be concluded by? If they answer in the Affirmative, we shall ask them
whether siquis Ecclesiam non audierit be one of their grounds, and if they say
no, we shall clearly disprove their Major, but then their defense is, if any
ground, or rule of it self firm and good, speaks nothing clearly of a point
in question, they will contest that point by those grounds, and is not this a
goodly excuse?

Chap: 9. of the Treatise of Schism, is to vindicate us from all guilt of
schism, as that signifies offense against external peace and communion
Ecclesiastical, and it being certain that we exclude none from our Communion,
that acknowledge the foundation, and that we desire to be admitted to the like
freedom of external communion, with all members of all other Christian
Churches, the result is visible, that the hindrances, that obstruct this
freedom, are wholly imputable to the Romanist, such are their excommunicating
us, and imposing conditions on their communion, such as we cannot admit of
without sin, or scandal, acting contrary to conscience, or making an unsound
confession.

answered is, that unless this second be proved, viz: that such conditions are
by them imposed on their communion, the first, that of our desire of Communion,
is vain; And to this I make no doubt to yield, for if we may with a good
conscience be admitted to their Communion, and yet wilfully withdraw our selves
from it, then I confess there is no place for this plea of ours; But for the
contesting of this, there was not then, neither will there now be any place,
without descending to the severals in difference between us (which was beyond
the design either of those, or these Papers) and therefore for that all that
can be said is, that we are ready to maintain our Negatives, by grounds that
all good Christians ought to be concluded by; And because it is here asked,
whether siquis Ecclesiam non audierit be one of those grounds, I answer without
question it is, and so is every other affirmation of Christ, or the Apostles,
however made known to us to be such. And I cannot sufficiently admire, why,
when it is known to all Romanists, that we are ready to be judged by Scripture,
and when it is certain that siquis Ecclesiam non audierit] are the words of
scripture, he should suppose (as here he does) that we will say, No: i. e. that
we will refuse to be tried or concluded by that.

Ecclesiam he understands the Roman (which he calls Catholic) Church; but then
this interpretation or understanding of his, is one thing, and those words of
Christ are another, for they belonging to the Church indefinitely, under which
any man, that has offended, is regularly placed, do to a member of the
particular Roman Church signify that, as to an English man the Church wherein
he lives, and that, is not the Roman, or the Universal Church of God, and that
is more than the Roman.

scripture, we are no way obliged to believe all that that particular Church of
Rome, to which we owe no obedience (and are as ready to contest that by the
same means also) exacts of us.

contesting any point by that ground or rule which speaks nothing clearly of
it, I gave him no occasion to make any such objection against us, and withal
have said what was sufficient to it Chap. 8. Sect. 3. n. 7. and so need not
here farther attend to it.

CHAP. X. An Answer to the Exceptions made to the tenth Chapter.
Sect. I.
The Romanists want of charity wherein it consists.

Chap: 10. he takes notice of two charges by us brought in against them, 1.
judging, 2. despising their brethren, but contents himself with a very brief
reply, and that only to one of them, Thus,

In his 10th Chap: he says, we judge them and despise them; as to the first I
have often wondered, and do now, that men, pretending to learning and reason,
should therein charge us with want of charity, for if our judgment be false, it
is error, not malice, and whether true or false, we press it upon them out of
love and kindness, to keep them from the harm, that according to our belief
may come upon them, but since they deny they are Schismatics, and offer to
prove it, we must not say it: yet I think we ought, until we have cause to
believe them, since our highest tribunal, the Churches voice, from which we
have no appeal, has passed judgment against them.

charity, with which we charge the Romanist in this matter, is not their
warning us of our danger, which may reasonably be interpreted love, and
kindness, and care to keep us from harm, and if they err in admonishing, when
there is no need of it, there is nothing still but charity in this; but it is
their casting us out of their Communion on this score, that we consent not to
all their Dictates, that we withdraw our obedience from those, who without
right usurped it over us, their anathematizing and damning us, and being no way
perswadable to withdraw these sanguinary Censures, unless we will change or
dissemble our beliefs, and as there cannot be charity in this, any thing that
can tend to the mending of any, for how can it be deemed any act of reformation
in any, to forsake his present persuasions, whilst he is not convinced of any
error in them, and surely the bare damning of us is not any such matter of
conviction; so there is a double uncharitableness, 1. of being angry without
cause, and expressing that anger in very ill language, of which that of
Heretic and Schismatic is the mildest, and each of those causlesse too, if
they be affixt to any particular man, much more to a whole Church, before
either of them be sufficiently proved against us: For certainly as the
Romanist's judgment concerning us, if it be false, may yet be but error not
malice (by which this Gentleman here justifies himself from want of charity) so
our opinions and persuasions of the erroneousness of their doctrines and
sinfulness of their practices, if possibly they be not true also, are still as
justly and equitably capable of the same excuse, that they are involuntary
errors, and then by their own rule, cannot justly fall under such their rigid
censures, which belong to none but voluntary offenders.

Secondly, the indevouring to ensnare and pervert fearful or feeble minds,
using these terrors, as the Lion does his roaring, to intimidate the prey, and
make it not rationally but astonishtly, fall down before them. And as the
offering due grounds of conviction to him that is in error may justly be deemed
charity, so this tender of nothing but frights, without offer of such grounds
of conviction, is but leading men into temptation to sin against conscience, to
dissimulation etc. and so the hating the brother in the heart, Lev. 19. the
more than suffering sin upon him.

weight with the Fathers of the Church in all times, that seeing the Censures
of the Church were left there, (...), for edification not for destruction, and
are only designed to charitative ends, (must never be used to any other
purpose) therefore when obedience it utterly cast off, the band, be it of
subordination or co-ordination so broken, that the issuing out of Censures
cannot expect to compose, but only to widen the breach, not to mollify but
exasperate, there Christian prudence is to endeavor by milder ways, what
severity is not likely to effect, and so the thunderbolts to be laid up, till
there may be some probability of doing good by them.

Rome and us, save only as a majori it may be accommodated to us; we have cast
off neither obedience to any, to whom it was due, nor charity to those, who
have least to us, nor truth, to the utmost of our understandings, and yet we
must be cast out and anathematized, and after all that, condemned as wilful
schismatics, i. e. (...), dividers and condemners of our selves, because we
quietly submit to that fate, which will cost us too dear, the wounding and
disquiet of our conscience, to qualify our selves for a capacity of getting
out of it.

highest tribunal, the Churches voice, which has passed this judgment against
us, belongs I suppose to those Bishops of Rome, which have sent out their Bulls
against us, and therefore I must in reason add, that those are principally
guilty of this schism, and so their successors principally obliged to retract
and reform the sin of it, and after them, all others in the order and measure,
that they have partaked in this guilt with them.

charity than to beseech all in the bowels of Christ to return to the practice
of that charity, which has too long been exiled from among Christian
Professors.

CHAP. XI. An Answer to the Exceptions made to the last Chapter.
Sect. I.
Of the present state of the Church of England. The Catholics promise for
eternity to his Church. Roma aeterna. Particular Churches perishable. Mr.
Hooker's prediction of the Church The power of the secular Magistrate to remove
Bishops Sees, not to make Bishops. The Council of Florence concerning the Popes
supremacy etc. Marcus's opinion of it. Joseph: Methonens: his answer briefly
examined.

Gentleman's endeavor is to persuade men that the Church of England is not
only persecuted but destroyed, and of that he means to make his advantage to
fetch in Proselytes, being out of his great charity very sensible of their
estate, unwilling they should sit any longer in the vault or charnel house to
communicate with shades, when they are invited to a fairer sunshine, in a vital
and very flourishing society. Thus then he begins his reply to the 11th Chapter,

In the last Chapter he complains of the Catholics for reproaching them with
the loss of their Church, and arguing with their disciples in this sort;
Communion in some Church, even externally, is necessary, but you cannot now
communicate with your late Church, for that has no subsistence, therefore you
ought to return to the Church from whence you went out* truly in this case I
think they ought to pardon the Catholic who has, or undoubtedly is persuaded
he has a promise for eternity to his Church, and experience in the execution
of that promise for 16 Ages, Hooker 's Eccl: Pol:
in which none other can compare with him, and sees another Church judged by
one of the learned and most prudent persons confessedly that ever was among
them, to be a building likely to last but 80 years, and to be now torn up by
the roots, and this done by the same means by which it was settled; I say if
this Catholic believe his eyes, he is at least to be excused; and though I
know the Doctor will reply his Church is still in being, preserved in Bishops
and Presbyters rightly ordained, yet let him remember how inconsequent this is,
to what be has said before, for ask him how it does remain in being, if there
be no such Bishops or Presbyters among them, for his defense against the Church
of Rome is, that the secular authority has power to make and change Bishops
and Presbyters: from whence it will follow, that as they were set up by a
secular authority, so are they pulled down, and unbishoped by another secular
authority; if it be said the Parliament that pulled them down had not the three
bodies requisite to make a Parliament, no more had that which set them up, for
the Lords Spiritual were wanting both in Parliament and Convocation, so that
there was as much authority to pull them down as to set them up: but it will be
replied that though they are pulled down, yet are they still Bishops, viz: the
character remains upon them.

Alas what is their Character, if their mission of Preaching and Teaching be
extinguished, which follows their jurisdiction, which jurisdiction the Doctor
makes subject to the secular authority, so that whatsoever characters their
Bishops and Presbyters pretend to have, they have according to his principles
no power over the laity, and so no character can be made of any Bishop as head
and Pastor, and of the People as body and flock, and consequently their Church
is gone.

But we account our selves Bishops and Priests not from an authority dependent
upon Princes, or inherited from Augustus or Nero, but from Peter and Paul, and
so shall stand and continue, whatsoever Princes or secular powers decree; when
they according to their doctrines and arguments are not to wonder if they be
thrown down by the same authority that set them up, and as the Synagogue was a
Church to have an end, so is this with this difference, that the Synagogue was
a true Church in reference to a better, but this is a counterfeit and tyranical
one to punish a better. As concerning the Doctors prayer for Peace and
Communion, all good people will join with him, if he produce Fructus dignos
poenitentiae, especially i he acknowledge the infallibility of the Church, and
supremacy of the Pope, the former is explicated sufficiently in diverse Books,
the latter is expressed in the Council of Florence in these words, viz. we
define that the Holy Apostolical See, and the Bishop of Rome have the primacy
over all the world, and that the Bishop of Rome is successor to S. Peter, the
Prince of the Apostles, and truly Christ's Vicar, and head of the whole Church,
and the Father and Teacher of all Christians, and that there was given him in
Saint Peter from Christ a full power to feed, direct and govern the Catholic
Church: So far the Council. Without obeying this, the Doctor is a
Schismatic, and without confessing the other, an Heretic, but let him join
with us in these, all the rest will follow.

complaint (if it were indeed such, and not rather a bare proposing of a last
foreseen objection against us) knowing how little compassion any sufferings of
ours may expect to receive from this Gentleman, I shall only join issue with
his tenders of proof, that our Church has now no subsistence; but yet before I
do so, take notice of one part of his arguing, viz. that the Catholic has,
or is undoubtedly persuaded he has a promise for eternity to his Church. Where
certainly the fallacy is very visible, and sufficient to supersede (if he
shall advert to it) his undoubted persuasion. For what promise of eternity can
this Gentleman here reflect on? undoubtedly that of the Church of Christ
indefinitely, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16. 18.

phrase is Annot. on the place.
elsewhere largely showed, and need not be here any farther repeated, than that
the promise infallibly belongs not to any particular Church, of any one
denomination, but to the whole body, Christ will preserve to himself a Church
in this world, as long as this world lasts, in despite of all the malice,
cunning, or force of men, and devils.

security, or promise of eternity to any particular Church, whether of Rome or
England, any more than of Thyatira or Laodicea (which contrary to any such
promise, is threatened to be Spued out, Rev. 3. 16.) is in it self most evident,
because the destroying any one particular Church is reconcilable with Christ's
preserving some other, as the Species of mankind is preserved, though the
Gentleman and I should be supposed to perish, and because the (...) my Church,
which is there the subject of the discourse, is not the Romanist (or in that
sense the Catholic) his Church, as is here suggested, but the Church of Christ
built upon the foundation of the Apostles, of which Simon is there said to be
one (...), i. e stone or foundation-stone, so as he was of other Churches,
beside that of Rome, and so as others were of other Churches, which he never
came near, and even of this of Rome, Saint Paul as well as he.

promise (which as truly belongs to every Church, as it does to Rome, but
indeed belongs to no particular, but to the Christian Church, to conclude that
the Church of Rome is eternal, is a first ungrounded persuasion in this
Gentleman, the very same, as to conclude a particular is an universal, or that
the destruction of one part is the utter dissolution of the whole; and the
proof from experience of 16. ages, which is here added, is a strange way of
argumentation, such as that Methusalem might have used the very day before his
death, to prove that he should never dye, and the very same that Heathen Rome
did use, at the time of their approaching destruction, calling her self
Hieron. qu. 11. ad Alga^.
Vrbem aeternam, the eternali City, and Atheneus, l. 1.
(...), Rome the Heaven-City, and Golizius in Thesau: Dio in Adriano Prudentius.
(...), Rome a Goddess, which accordingly had by Adrian a Temple erected to
it, and the Emperors thereof, and the very name of the place worshipped as a
deity (More Deae, nomenque loci seu numen adorant) and all this upon this one
score, that it had stood and prospered so long.

Church of the Jews, built upon a promise, which had more of peculiarity to
the seed of Abraham, than this of Mat. 16. can be imagined to have to the
Church of Rome, and yet that Church was destroyed, and nothing more contributed
to the provocation, and merit of that destruction, than their own confidence
of being unperishable. The best admonition in this respect, is that of the
Apostle, Be ye not high minded but fear, and if God spared not the Natural
branches, take heed also lest he spare not you; and this Gentleman cannot be
ignorant what Romans 11. 2.
Church it was, that was then capable of this exhortation. And the very making
this matter of argument, and in this respect (not of purity, but of duration)
exalting the Romanist's Church, above all other Churches in these words [ none
other can compare with him,] as it is one character which determines the speech
to the particular Church of Rome, (for else how can he speak of others and
affirm that they cannot compare) so it is no very humble, or consequently
Christian expression in this Gentleman.

Hooker, and applies as the judgment of that learned man concerning the Church
of England, yields us these farther observations, 1. That in all reason this
Gentleman must in his former words speak of his Church of Rome, as that is a
particular Church, for else how can he after his Church, name another Church,
meaning this of England, of which says he, Mr. Hooker speaks? and that will
conclude the evident falsity of his assumption, that by Christ's promise
eternity belonged to it, for that it cannot do to any particular Church,
because the Universal may be preserved, when that is destroyed, and the promise
being made indefinitely to the Church, may be performed in any part of it.

Secondly, That a very small matter will serve turn with this Gentleman, to
support a con lusion, which he has a mind to infer, otherwise Master Hookers
Testimony had never been produced to this matter. The words of that (truly)
most learned and prudent person, are to be found in his fifth Book, Number. 79. in
the Conclusion. The subject of that whole Paragraph, beginning page 424. is of
Oblations, Foundations, Endowments, Tithes, all intended for the perpetuity of
Religion, which was in his opinion sure to be frustrated, by alienation of
Church livings, and this being largely handled by him throughout that
Paragraph, at length he observes, 1. what waste Covetousness had made in the
Church by such Commutations, as were proportionable to Glaucus's change, giving
the Church flanel for Gold: and 2. how Religion it self was made a Solicitor
and perswader of Sacrilege, signifying, that to give to God, is error, and to
take it away again Reformation of error, concluding in these words, By these
or the like suggestions received with all joy, and with like sedulity practiced
in certain parts of the Christian world, they have brought to pass, that as
David does say of Man, so it is in danger to be verified concerning the whole
Religion and service of God, the time thereof may peradventure fall out to be
threescore and ten years, or if strength do serve unto fourscore, what
follows, is likely to be small joy for them, whosoever they be that behold
it. Thus have the best things been overthrown, not so much by puissance and
might of a versaries, as through defect of Council in them that should have
upheld and defended the same.

Gentleman has so disguised in his abbreviation. Mr. Hooker foretells what a
destructive influence, Sacrilege may have on the whole Religion and Service of
God, observes in certain parts of the Christian world (without naming any) that
sacrilegious suggestions are received with all joy, and putting these two
together, presageth sad events to the whole Religion, and service of God,
within threescore and ten, or fourscore years, and from hence this Gentleman
concludes it Master Hooker's judgment, that the Church of England was a
building likely to last but fourscore years.

mode and figure this conclusion is thus made from the premises, he leaves us
to divine, who have not sagacity enough to discern it; The conclusion to all
men's understanding will most regularly follow thus, that the Church of England
was so constituted, that all the enemies thereof on either side were never
likely to destroy it by arguments, and consequent'y that the most probable way
remaining to Satan to accomplish his design was, by sacrilegious violations to
impoverish and subdue the maintainers of it, which as he foresaw very likely to
come to pass within the age of a man, so it would be no joyful sight when it
should come, he was not so unkind to any part of the Church of God, as to be
willing to live to see it.

Gentleman's inclinations have qualified him for the receiving pleasure or joy
in such a spectacle, I shall as little envy him the prosperity which has thus
petrified his bowels, as he shall think fit to envy me the honor of being a
member of the purest (being withal the most persecuted) Church.

Thirdly, That these words of Mr. Hooker thus pitifully distorted are the only
proof he has for his assertion, that this Church of ours has now no
subsistence, and that it is now torn up by the roots, A way of arguing very
conformable to his characters of a true Church, of which external glory and
prosperity must never miss to be one, but very unlike the image of Christ the
head, to which his Church the body may be allowed to hold some proportion of
conformity, for of him we can give no livelier pourtraiture, than as we find
him crucified between two thieves, whilst the soldiers divide his garments,
though they were not over-sumptuous, and cast lots who shall have his vesture.

objection of ours (and that is a farther evidence of what I said, that Mr.
Hooker's distorted speech is the only proof of his proposition) The objection
is, that our Church is still in being preserved in Bishops and Presbyters
rightly ordained; and to this objection he will make some answer from our own
principles, of which he supposes this to be one, that the secular authority
has power to make and change Bishops and Presbyters, and says without any
regrets, that this is my defense against the Bishop of Rome.

answer. As 1. that this, to which the answer is accommodated, is not my
objection. The truth is, I took not on me the objectors part in that place, but
evidenced it by clear demonstration, that if twenty years ago the Church of
England was a Church, it must needs be so now, being the very same that then it
was, except these bands, as the Apostle once said, who I hope did not cease to
be an Apostle by being imprisoned. And when I mentioned the Church of Englands
being preserved in Bishops and Presbyters rightly ordained, together with
multitudes rightly baptized (which sure are all the necessary ingredients in
constituting a visible Church) I added, none of which have fallen off from
their profession, and then foreseeing the only possible objection to infer
the Church guilty of schism, I answered that by remembering the Primitive
persecutions and night-meetings, and the very manner of the Romanists serving
God in this Kingdom for these many years.

clue, and fumbled together into an objection of mine, supposed to be made
against that which the Romanist, without either tender of proof, or reason, had
crudely affirmed. But truly I may be believed, that I meant not that
affirmation so much respect, as to offer objection against it: And then that is
one speedy way of concluding this matter.

secondly, for that saying of mine, on which he will form his answer to this
imaginary objection, it is certain I never said any such thing, as is here
suggested: That the supreme Magistrate has power to erect and translate
Patriarchates, and the like, I had affirmed indeed, i. e. to make that a
Patriarchal See, which had not formerly been such, so to ennoble a town or
city, that according to the Canons of the Church it should become an Episcopal,
or Archiepiscopal, or Chief, or Patriarchal See, and my meaning is evident, and
not possible to be mistaken by any that understands the Language, and adverts
to what he reads.

secular authority has power to make Bishops and Presbyters, and there is no
question but this Gentleman knows, if he has read what he answers, that in the
Tract of Schism I never said it.

practice in this Church, as in all others, for the supreme power to change, as
that signifies to remove Bishops from one See to another, and so for every
lay-Patron in the same sense to change Presbyters: But what is that to the
making of Bishops or Presbyters, did ever King or lay-Patron pretend to that?
This is too visible to need insisting on.

Thirdly, when he says there was as much authority to pull down Bishops and
Presbyters in this nation as to set them up, I might demand, 1. Whether he has
any reason to pretend that Presbyters are now pulled down in this nation, for
this is by him supposed, who inquires by what authority they are pulled down:
2. Whether he can, either upon mine or his own principles, assume with any
color of truth, that none had any hand in setting up the Bishops in this
Kingdom, but those whom here he affirms to have consented to the pulling them
down, and consequently affirm, that there was as much authority to pull them
down, as to set them up? 3. Whether it have any truth in it, (whether he speak
of what was done in Parliament in King Henry's, or King Edward's, or Queen
Elizabeth's days) that the Lords Spiritual were wanting both in Parliament and
Convocation? 4. What he has said to make it in the least degree probable, that
the Bishops and Presbyters mission of preaching and teaching is extinguished
among us, any more than it was in the Primitive Church, when the Emperor was
not favorable to the profession, and when the Jews called it heresy: And
lastly, whether, if no one of these can with any degree of verity be answered
in the affirmative, this be not very immoderate liberty, which this Gentleman
has given himself in affirming or supposing all these, and then adding, that
our portion is to be looked for with the Jewish Synagogue, as one, so the other,
to have an end; not considering that he has as little skill in revealing
secrets, as even now in interpreting Mr. Hooker's prophecy, that he cannot yet
tell, what God has within his veil decreed concerning our Church, and which
may yet make the greatest speed to follow the Synagogue's fate, they which are
cast down, but not destroyed, or they which (to say no worse) stand by, and
rejoice at it.

Treatise of Schism concludes with a Prayer for Peace and Communion, and for
the matter of it, we have his seeming confession that all good people will
join in it. But even in such a Prayer, wherein all good people will join,
this Gentleman will not join with me, but upon such terms, which I shall not
undertake, to qualify me for his favor, I mean not the fructus dignos
poenitentiae, such as John Baptist would prescribe, but the penances of this
severer confessor, to acknowledge the Infallibility of the Church in his notion
of the Church, Supremacy of the Pope, etc.

joining with me, pray in secret, what I began to him, and endeavor so to
qualify himself with charity and other graces, which may wing his prayers
unto that holy place, where all humble Christians supplications daily meet, and
then I shall again pray God, that I may be found in the number of those, that
so I may be secured to meet and join with him, at that common throne of grace.

Council of Florence, to the business of the Popes supremacy. To this I might
reply that this definition is there visibly subscribed, as the act of the
Bishop of Rome, Eugeni Pp. IV. (who was a liberal carver and definer for
himself) as may be seen in that very Conc p. 858 Paris:
page, where the words cited will be found, both by the Seal of his
Pontificate there impressed, Saint Peter on the left hand, Saint Paul on the
right, and Eugenius Pp. IV. under it: and by the last part of the date in these
words, (...), in the ninth year of our Pontificate; which though I shall
suppose to be the mode, the Pope to pronounce the definition of the Council,
yet this was much varied from the old form, and the Council being dated at
Florence, in the year of our Lord 1439. so near Rome, and so far from the
first times, where more simplicity and just distribution of rights might be
expected, this might be a competent answer to this testimony, and a vindicating
my self from all schism or heresy, that my want of the obedience or
confession, which he requires, might fix on me.

longer way, and transcribe part of Marcus the Metropolitan of Ephesus his
answer, wherein he expresses his opinion, and others, of that definition of
the Council, as it lies in the Jose, thon: p cil: F^ p. 102
Apology of Joseph Methonensis for that Council, (...), We also account the
Pope as one of the Patriarchs, But these do with great gravity pronounce him
Vicar of Christ, and Father and Teacher of all Christians: and this both to
them and us is matter of some wonder, how ((...)) with so much gravity, they
could thus pronounce, what had so little of truth in it.

justifying of that definition Joseph Methonensis was able to reply there to
that Bishop (and that reply thought worthy to be inserted into the Acts of the
Council) 1. That he does not say that the Pope is two or three, but only one
of the Patriarchs, (...), having praeeminence among those of the same Order
with him.

Chrysostom's authority in his 17 Homily on the Acts, where, he says, that
among the seven there was one, (...), one above the rest (and the seven there,
were the seven Deacons, and the same praeeminence that Stephen then had over
them, and all the rest of the world, we shall not deny the Bishop of Rome,
especially if, as it follows there, he have the (...) more grace than all the
other Bishops, and will acknowledge, as it is there also, the (...), the same
ordination of him and all other Bishops.)

Secondly, the saying of Christ, that, He that hears you, hears me, and the
common maxim (...), that every Bishop is the successor of Christ (But then how
came the Bishop of Rome to impropriate that title, to be the only one that all
are obliged to hear, when, as he confesses there, (...), This was said in
common to them all.)

Thirdly, the words of Theodorus Studita (one, by the way, that had been
imprisoned for opposing the Bishop of Constantinople, and who did not
communicate with that Church, see Zonaras tom: 3. p. 9. and 102.) to the
Emperor Michael, that if he doubted of, or disbelieved any thing that had been
there resolved, he should command a (...) declaration or explication to be sent
him from old Rome, (...), how from of old, and from the beginning it had been
delivered by tradition of Fathers, adding that that was (...) the uppermost of
the Churches of God, of which Peter was (...), the first that sat Bishop
there, unto whom Christ said, Thou art Peter, etc. (But all this still amounts
to no more, but that Rome was the prime Apostolic See, that might very
probably explicate a difficulty to the Emperor, by telling what had been from
time to time delivered, and believed in that Church.)

Fourthly, the words of the same Theodorus Studita again, in his Epistle to
Naucraticus, which speaks of some that had broken off themselves from the body
of Christ, from the chief See, in which Christ placed the Keys of that faith,
against which the gates of hell, the mouths of heretics had not, should not
prevail, (But then still, supposing his testimony were authentic, this is no
more, but that, they which divided from the true doctrine, which he supposed to
be at Rome, did in his opinion break off themselves from the body of Christ,
that Rome again was the prime See, that it had the Keys of knowledge and faith
entrusted to it by Christ, at the Apostles founding a Church there, but this
not exclusively to other Churches, which doubtless had those Keys, as well as
she, and that the faith of Christ should never be utterly destroyed by
heretics.)

Fifthly, the words of Arcadius a Bishop in the third Council, that of Ephesus,
proposing that the words of Coelestine the Pope, who was to be named with all
reverence, Bishop of the Apostolical See, should be read, that they might see
what care he had of all Churches (and why might not the like be said of any
other truly Christian Bishop?) And so the like speech again of Cyrill of
Alexandria, that the letter of Coelestine, the most holy Bishop of the holy
Apostolic Church (a title which belonged, and was ordinarily given to other
Sees, beside that of Rome) (...) might be read with due honor or respect (but
sure that does not prove his supreme power over all the Churches of God.)

Lastly, the words of the Emperor's letter (called (...) a divine letter) in
the Council of Chalcedon, that the most blessed Bishop of the city of Rome, to
whom antiquity has given (...), priesthood over all, (...) may have a place
and power to judge of faith and of Priests, from whence he roundly concludes,
(...), etc. Seeing then he has power to judge of Faith and Priests, he is
justly defined by the Council of Florence (...), the teacher of all Christians.

last and most probable, and indeed only Testimony, to justify with any
color of reason the definition of that Council, it is not amiss to consider
it a little, and with that to conclude also the debate with this Gentleman, as
Joseph Methonensis there did with the Bishop of Ephesus. And if we turn to the
Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, we shall soon discern the full weight of it.

Council: tom: 3. p. 25.
first part, number: 25. we shall find this Letter, styled (...), sent by
Valentinian the Emperor to Theodosius, (...), that he would command a Synod to
be called in the parts of Italy. This then was the subject of the Letter, and
this the occasion; A second Synod had lately been held at Ephesus, in which the
heresy of Eutyches had received some assistance, Upon this Pope Leo, and his
Synod of Bishops met at Rome, Ibid: n. 19. p. 19.
writes earnestly to the Emperor Valentinian, that he will (...) command (...)
a General Council to be called in the parts of Italy, that may remove and
mollify all offenses. The same he Ibid: n. 20. p. 20.
again proposes to the Emperor Theodosius there, desiring (...) a special
Council to be convened in the parts of Italy. Hereupon soon follows a letter of
Valentinian to Theodosius to the same purpose, in condescension to Leo's
request, and in it those very words (recited by Joseph Methonensis in defense
of the Council of Florence) to no other sense but this, that such a Council
might be convened in Italy, to review and reform what had been done amiss in
that second Council of Ephesus.

that he may have a place and power] that some place may be assigned him and
the Bishops, to meet in Council, that he may have power, or faculty, or
Commission to sit (not he by himself, but he and the Bishops in Council) and
when they sit, (...), to judge of faith and Priests, as in all Councels it is
done, to define what is the true faith, opposed by heretics, and what persons,
Bishops or others are fit to be censured for any thing done or taught by them.

Epistle accords, that an Universal Council should be called in Italy, wherein
the Pope was doubtless to preside, and he (...), all other Bishops also being
convened from the whole world, should consider and define, what the true faith
required. And so this is a fair testimony to prove that the Pope is the Vicar
of Christ, the Father and teacher of all Christians.

The Conclusion.
close of this Gentleman's Answer in these words,

Thus, Sir, you have my sense of Doctor Hammond's Book in all the particulars,
which, I think, to the purpose; my time, nor the brevity fit for a Letter, not
permitting I should be more methodical, and do rest

Your friend and humble servant, B. P.
Bruxels, the 30 March, 1654.
Aristarchus, and to involve under no light censure, of impertinency at the
least, the far greatest part of that Treatise of Schism, for certainly that
which he has not offered any Answer to, is such, and yet he here undertakes to
have given his sense in all the particulars, which he thinks to the purpose,
which must conclude it his opinion, that all other particulars are not to the
purpose. This indeed is a performance somewhat above the promise of the title
page, which obliged him to an Answer of the most material parts of that
Treatise; And it were very easy to show that there is no degree of truth in
either of these, that on the contrary, he has not offered any word of Reply to
the most material, which I hope are not the least pertinent parts of that
Treatise. But instead of this larger Reflection it may suffice, that whatsoever
he has though fit to take notice of, and thereby has expressed his judgment
of it, that it is most material in comparison of the rest has here been very
particularly considered, and his Answers manifested to have no force in them.
And so I very friendly take my leave of him.

The God of all grace and peace bind up the wounds of his bleeding Church.
An Account of H. T. his APPENDIX TO HIS MANUAL of CONTROVERSIES, CONCERNING
The Abbot of Bangor's Answer to Augustine.
Reply to the Catholic Gentleman, I received news of a Manual of Controversies
in the press, wherein I was said to be particularly concerned, and having soon
gotten a sight of it, I found that the matter was of no greater bulk or weight,
than might receive an account in few words, and those most proper to be here
annexed, by way of Appendix:

Manual, the Author of it is pleased to take notice of (no more than) one
testimony, which I had cited out of Sir Henry Spelman's Anglicane Councels,
containing an Answer of the Abbot of Bangor to Augustine the Monk, when he
demanded of the Britains an acknowledgment of submission to the Bishop of Rome.

Welsh, English, and Latin, in that tome of the Councels, p. 108. and is
recited in the Treatise of Schism, p. 111. and the sum of it is, that he and
the rest of the British Church were under the government of the Archbishop of
Caerleon upon Vske, and owed no obedience (or respect, save that of fraternal
charity) to the Pope of Rome.

Answer of that Abbot, the Author has thought good to censure (by way of
Appendix to the Article concerning the Pope's Supremacy) 1. As unapt to
conclude against the Romanist's pretensions concerning the Papal power over the
whole Church. 2. As unworthily alleged by persons of any ordinary judgment or
erudition. 3. As that which may easily be convicted to be a simple imposture,
and the ways of demonstrating it clearly, promised in that ensuing discourse.

force or evidence of demonstration, I shall, with the Reader's good leave,
examine anon, after I have premised this one consideration, That the only
thing, which is by us contested, and concluded against the Romanist from this
testimony, is a matter of fact of known truth, and such as the Romanists
themselves (yea and this Author H. T. who has thought sit to arraign this
testimony) acknowledge to be such, and therefore, as in case this one
testimony should be demonstrated to be a simple imposture, we can very
unconcernedly and easily part with it, standing in no manner of need of this
auxiliarie, so it is a little strange that this Author should think it worth
his solemn pains, to wrest it out of our hands, and dedicate this whole
Appendix to that one work, when if he were successful to his wish; his
acquisitions hereby, and proportionably our losses, must be so unconsiderable.

Romanist is no more but this, that the Britains, particularly those of Bangor,
denied to yield obedience to the Pope upon Augustine's demand of it. And for
this we have the notoriousness of the fact, as it is set down by the Authors
which are of credit, and are vouched in this matter by the Romanist,
particularly by Bid, in the second Book of his Ecclesiastic History, c. 2.
where the whole story may be read at large, and out of which I shall collect,
and, in passing, clear these few things.

First, that Augustine and the British Bishops met in Council at Augustine's
Oak in Worcestershire; This passage lies very corruptly in the Latin Bid, in
loco ubi usque hodie lingua Anglorum Augistinuzat, id est, robur Augustini in
confinio Vectiorum and Occidentalium Saxonum appellatur. Three corruptions I
suppose there will soon appear to be in these words, which I shall briefly
remove for the clearing of our entrance, and disabusing the Author of this
Manual in one of them.

first, and chief of them is, that Augustinuzat is a (...), mistaken for
Augustines-ac, i. e. Augustines oak, whether that were the name of a Tree, or
a Village, most probably the former, after the manner of that Council, which
was held against S. Chrysostom, called ordinarily the Synod ad quercum, at, or
under the Oak.

Secondly, that [ ubi] should be read [ qui] which is an easy mistake, and so
the construction will be facile, which now is rough, in loco qui usque
hodie-Augustines-ac appellatur, in the place which even to this day is called
Augustine's-ac, and accordingly the Saxon reads on (...) ac, in the place still
named Augustine's Oak.

Thirdly, that Vectiorum (which the Author of this Appendix renders Vectians,
and interprets to be the Isle of Wight, quite against all probable conjecture,
for how can it be believed that the Britains should give him a meeting so far
from the place of their own present habitation?) should be Wicciorum (so l. 3.
p. 325.
Huntington reads it, and the Saxon Bid Hpicna) meaning Worcestershire by that
style, and accordingly this Synod is by Authors often called Wigorniensis
Synodus, the Worcestershire Synod; and among the British Bishops, who are
recorded to be present at the second Session, Wiccensis, the Bishop of
Worcester is one. In what part of that County it was that that Synod convened,
I see it is uncertain among our later Writers, and so there may be place for
conjecture, Sir Henry Spelman from the Map proposes Austric, as a probable
contraction from Austinsric, Augustini ditio, as that which may give some light
in a doubtful matter, but upon inquiry I hear that that village is called
Aufric or Alfric, not Austric, and therefore I shall take confidence to
mention, what seems to me far more probable, that it was in the parish of
Merton, which has the agnomen of Vssentree, or Ossentree, in old rolls, Merton
juxta Ossentree, Merton close by Ossentree, an easy variation from, and
contraction of Austin tree, and is three miles from Worcester, near the rode to
Droitwich, where the hill-Church is Augustine's Church.

Secondly, that the business of this convention, designed to draw the British
to obedience to Augustine and the Sea of Rome, began with a proposition only
of conformity in the observation of Easter, in the Ceremonies of Baptism etc.
But this in vain; for, says Bid, after a long disputation they would give no
assent to the entreaties, and exhortations and chidings of Augustine, but
preferred their own tradition before all the Churches through the world, which
accorded with Rome in the particular of Easter, etc.

Thirdly, that for the convincing of them, Augustine challenged them to do
miracles, and by prayer to God cured a blind man, and was much cried up for so
doing, the British still adhering to their way, and answering him, that absque
consensu and licentia suorum, without consent and license of their whether
Rulers of Church, or whatsoever other superiors also (their Metropolitan, I
suppose, which cannot be thought to have been with them at this, being
certainly none of the seven Bishops, which are affirmed to have been present at
the later convention) they could not forsake their ancient customs.

Fourthly, that upon proposal, it was agreed that they should have a second
meeting, at which were present seven British Bishops (which other Writers
express to have been the Bishop of Hereford, Landaff, Bangor, S. Assaph,
Worcester, Paternensis, Morganensis) and many other learned men, especially de
nobilissimo eorum Monasterio, quod vocatur lingua Anglorum Bancornaburg, cui
tempore illo Dinooth Abbas praefuisse narratur, of the famous Monastery of
Bangor, of which Dinooth was Abbot at that time.

Fifthly, that before they went to this Meeting, they were advised by a
religious person, whose directions they asked, to observe diligently the
behavior of Augustine, when they came, whether he were meek and lowly in
heart, a mark by which they might know whether he had taken Christ's yoke upon
him, and consequently whether it were the yoke of Christ, which he now desired
to impose upon them, and upon Augustine's fitting still upon his stool or seat,
and never rising up with any civility or humility, at their approach, they were
so displeased, says Bid, that they contradicted all the proposals that he
made to them.

Sixthly, that upon his making three Propositions to them, concerning Easter,
Baptism, and preaching to the English, and promising to bear with them in all
other differences, (of which sort, said he, there were many wherein their
practice was contrary consuetudini nostrae, imo Vniversalis Ecclesiae, to the
custom of the Roman, yea the Universal Church) they answered, nihil horum se
facturos, nec illum pro Archiepiscopo habituros, that they would not comply
with him in any of them, nor acknowledge him for their Archbishop; Upon which
follows that rough sanguinarie answer of Augustine's, quod si pacem cum
fratribus accipere nollent, bellum ab hostibus forent accepturi, that if they
would not accept of peace with brethren, they should have war from enemies,
and, as it follows in very plain language, per Anglorum manu^ ultienem mortis
essent passuri, the hands of the English should act a bloody revenge upon them.

Monks of Bangor, of which order there were at that time above two thousand,
who lived all by the labor of their own hands. For, says he, King Edilfred of
Northumberland, coming with a great Army to C^erleon, made his first onset on
their Priests, who were assembled by themselves to fast and pray for their
brethren, (as Moses holding up his hands in prayer, whilst Josua held up his
in sighting) and upon no other provocation (taken notice of by the Historian)
but this, that they fought against him with their prayers (contra nos pugnant
qui adversus no^ in preca^i^s ibus prosequuntur) he first set upon them, killed
1^00 of them, and then destroyed the whole Army. Sicque compie^um est
praesagium sancti Pontificis Augustini, and so the presage of the holy Bishop
St. Augustine was fulfi^led upon them.

story I have thus puctually set down in obedience to the rebuke of this
Author, who p. 412. charge it upon Sir Hen: Spelman, and those others that
borrow out of him, as a want of wilingness to see the truth, and of fidelity to
com^nicate it to others, that they have chosen to reflect on that testimony
(which he is pleased to call upstart, and) which appeared not till within these
15 years, and not upon that true antiquity, which having endured the shock of
almost a 1000 years. Sir Henry had a little before transcribed out of Bid,
wherein, says he, every one may read, first that miracle in giving sight to
the blind man, then that divine vengeance prophetically foretold by Augustine,
p. 413.
which (in his opinion) more than sufficiently prove, that S. Augustine, sent
by the Pope, came in the name of God, from a lawful authority, and that his
demands of conformity to the Church of Rome in the points specified were good,
and to be yielded to by the Britains.

enlarge, and examine the force of this twofold argument, that of the
miraculous cure, and that of the predicted vengeance, and offer many things to
consideration concerning each head.

credit that has been given to the relations of Bid on this head of miracles
(of which his Story is so richly furnished) together with the great deceit that
such pretensions have been experimented to subject men to: Secondly, the
confession of Bid, that the Britains were Quod cum adversarii, inviti licet,
concederent.
unwilling to yield to this trial of their cause, and accordingly when he
says that the Cum oblatus Britonis^ sacerdotibus nil curationis horum
ministerio cepit.
blind man being offered to the Priests of the Britains, he received no cure
or benefit by them, he does not so much as pretend that the Britains attempted
to do the miracle, and failed in it, but leaves us to resolve that they wholly
waved this trial: Thirdly, that if the miracle were granted to be a true
miracle, and a testimony of Gods asserting the doctrines then contested between
them, yet this would not be any concludent testimony for the Pope's Supremacy,
but only for those things which were then the matter of the question, the time
of the observation of Easter, the rites of Baptism, accustomed in the Roman
Church, and at the most some such like traditions, wherein the British custom
varied from that of Rome, for this was the form of the proposed trial, quae
sequenda traditio quibus sit viis ad ingressum regni illius properandum, what
tradition was to be followed (in the celebration of Easter, that which the
Britains had received and retained from their first conversion, imputed to an
Apostle or Apostolical person, Simon Zelotes or Joseph of Arimathea, or that
which the Romans deduced from S. Peter) by what ways they were to hasten to
entrance into that Kingdom (referring, I suppose, to the rites of baptism,
the second head of debate between them) And in both these, (as also in refusing
to join with Augustine in the common work of preaching to the Gentiles) it may
easily be granted by us, that the truth was on the Romanists side, and not on
the Britains, without ye^lding a supremacy of the Church of Rome over the
British Churches. Fourthly, that the Britains by Bede's confession,
acknowledged themselves convinced by that miracle, that the way of
righteousness which Augustine preached, was the true way, yet added, that they
could not renounce their ancient customs without the consent and license of
their own (superiors) which evidently confines and determines the miracle and
all the supposed virtue thereof to the confirming the Traditions which
Augustine delivered, without farther extending it to the asserting the Papal
power (to which the Abbot of Bangor's answer was particularly confronted) for
had they once acknowledged themselves convinced of that, there had been no
place left for the licentia suorum, no need of the consent or license of any
other superiors, which yet they resolutely adhere to. Lastly, that at their
second meeting the Britains deemed Augustine's pride a more valid convincing
argument, that the yoke which he designed to impose on them was not the yoke of
Christ, than the supposed miracle, that it was.

slaughter, first Fertur minitans praedixisse. Bid, Terruit eos vaticinio
futurae super eos calamitatis. Sigebert.
threatened and then fulfilled upon them, 1. If that were indeed a miracle, it
was not of the complexion, which is generally observed in Christ's miracles,
used for the working of faith, but proportionable to the Spirit of the
Boanerges, which would have the fire from heaven called down upon the
Samaritans, and were answered by Christ that this was not agreeable to the
Spirit of the Gospel; And if the example of S. Peter on Ananias and Sapphyra,
or of S. Paul on Elymas be made use of as a precedent for this severity, yet
sure the answer of Pope Gregory to Augustine at that time, supposing different
Churches to enjoy different customs, and not imposing the Roman upon all,
might have directed him to greater moderation. See Bed: l. 1. c. 27. in his
answer to the third Interrogation. Secondly, it is no very great miracle, that
a grand Army falling first upon unarmed Monks, should obtain the victory
against them, and afterward against all other their opposers; nor consequently
is it any whit strange that Augustine, that was so provoked, and meant to use
this bloody revengefull course, should thus threaten what he then designed to
see performed, for that is the full meaning of his foretelling it.

Bid, or some Interpolator, that copied out the original Latin of that
History, has thought good to insert some words in the end of that story, l.
2. c. 2. in fine, (quamvis ipso jam multo ante tempore ad coelestia regna
sublato) which might delude men into a persuasion, that this bloody act was a
long time after Augustine's death; But for this, First, it is observable that
King Alfred's Saxon translation or paraphrase of Bid, wholly omits that
parenthesis, and reads it only thus, (...) B. A (...), etc. and so was
fulfilled the prediction of S. Augustine, that they should feel the revenge of
temporal destruction. Secondly, that the series of the story in Bid gives just
prejudice to that parenthesis, for this of the slaughter of the Britans being
set down in the end of that second Chap: the third begins with Augustine's
ordaining two Bishops, Mellitus and Justus, which sure was not after his death,
and as the Saxon paraphrase of King Alfred begins that Chapter with this form
of reference to the former passage, (...) -- It was after this -- which plainly
defines Augustine to have survived that bloody fact, so the Latin Bid, which
sets down the time of Augustine's ordaining those two Bishops, Anno Dominicae
incarnationis sexcentefimo quarto, In the year 604, does yet more incline us to
suspect that Parenthesis, for though Bid, who sets down the month and day of
Augustine's death, sets not down the year of it, but leaves it in a latitude to
be between the year 596 in which he came to England, and the year 613. (or, as
the Saxon reads 616.) in which King Ethelbert died, yet others commonly affirm
that he continued Bishop 15 or 16 years, and so died about 612 or 13. whereas
Chronologers affirm the slaughter of the Monks of Bangor etc. to have been in
the year 603, and so the year immediately precedent to Augustine's ordaining
those two Bishops. Thirdly, when in the relation of this slaughter, the Latin
Bid begins Siquidem, posthaec ipse, de quo diximus, Rex Anglorum -- For after
this, i. e. after Augustine's threatening destruction to the British, the
forenamed King of the Angles gathered an Army -- the Saxon paraphrase reads,
(...), and soon rath, i. e. very soon after this, which again persuades that it
was before Augustine's death, at least that the jam multo ante in the
Parenthesis (that Augustine died long before) could have no truth in it.
Lastly, as some Writers of these dark times have made a shift to affirm with
the Latin Bid that Augustine was first dead, so it is known also that others
charge it on him, that he was not only the inciter to it, but that he met the
Kings when they were ready for the fight, and was present with them; And Trivet
in his French Chronicle, that says it was done after Augustine's death, yet
adds that Ethelbert King of Kent; who stirred up Ethelfred King of
Northumberland and his Saxons against the Britans, and by name against Dinoth
Abbot of Bangor forementioned, was highly displeased and inflamed, that he had
despised Augustine. All which being considered, it is certain, that this was no
very Christian action, whether in Augustine or in Ethelbert, and the threats of
the one, and performances of the other, as they bear an exact proportion, so
are they equally argumentative, not for, but against that cause, which was
willing thus unchristianly to support it self.

Thirdly, if the slaughter of these poor Monks shall yet be thought a solid
probation, as an act of divine vengeance upon them (just such as the falling of
the tower of Siloe was, from which none but a Jew, or Turk, or the Barbarians,
Act. 28. or those that make prosperity the special mark of the true Church,
will think fit to conclude any thing) there is one part of the story yet
behind, which will refute and retort that argument, for when Edilfrid had used
them so bloodily, and in the heat of his rage and victory proceeded to destroy
the remainder of those Monks, and their Monastery together, the avengers of
blood met him, three British Commanders, with their forces, routed his Army,
killed ten thousand and sixty of them, wounded the king, and put him and the
remainder of his Army to flight, which certainly is an argument of as much
validity to infer that God maintained the cause of those innocent Monks
against the Saxons and Augustine, as the former was argumentative on their side
against the British.

view of the story in Bid was to be concluded, is only this, that upon the
relations, as in him they lie, and are by this Author H. T. vouched against us,
there can be no doubt of our Conclusion, that the Abbot and Monks of Bangor
opposed Augustine, yielded him no obedience, referred themselves only to their
own Governors, without any acknowledgment of obedience to the Pope; And this
is generally the result of other Authors narrations of this matter.

^in Dinoth.
Balaeus, speaking of that convention, Dinotus omnium primu^ graviter and docte
de non approbanda apud eos Romanorum authoritate disputabat, Dinoth in the
first place gravely and learnedly disputed against the Authority of the Bishops
of Rome among them, adding, Fortiter praeterea tuebatur Menevensis
Archiepiscopi in Ecclesiarum suarum rebus ratam jurisdictionem, that he
moreover strongly and courageously defended the validity of the jurisdiction of
the Archbishop of S. David's (the same that in the Abbots answer is called the
Bishop of Caerleon) in the affairs of his own churches.

Geffrey of Monmouth, Edelbertus Rex Kantiorum, ut vidit Britones dedignantes
subjectionem Augustino facere, Northumbrorum and cateros Saxonum regulos
instimulavit, ut collecto grandi exercitu in civitatem Bangor Abbatem Dinoth
and caeteros clericos, qui eos spreverunt, perditum irent. King Ethelbert
seeing the Britains disdain to yield their subjection to Augustine, stirred up
the King of Northumberland and other Saxon Kings to gather a great army against
the city Bangor, to destory Dinoth the Abbot and the other Clerks of that
Monastery, who had scorned Augustine and the Saxons.

Sigebert in Anno 602. Augustinus -- habita Synodo cum Britonum and Scotorum
Episcopis, qua sacerdotes and Monachos invenit adversarios aequitatis --
Augustine had a meeting with the British and Scottish Bishops, and there found
an opposition from the Priests and Monks, and terrified them by prediction of a
calamity that should fall on them. Other evidences to the same purpose are set
down in the Collection of the Anglicane Councels, and Mr. Whelock's Notes on
his edition of the Saxon Bid, p. 115. if there could now remain any question
of it.

Author of this Appendix, if it had been for his Interest to have taken notice
of it, is evident by his mention of the miracle and divine vengeance, as of
proofs that Augustine was in the right against these refusers, who yet
continued, says he still refractory to his proposals. And this was all I
concluded from the Abbot's answer, and this stands firm in this Romanist's own
confession, though the words of the Abbot's answer had not been preserved to us.

validity of this testimony, and so secured from all danger of being bribed by
interests to judge more favorably of it than the matter requires, I shall now
proceed calmly to consider, whether there be that clearness and evidence in
this Author's arguments for the invalidating this testimony, which he assures
us we shall find in them.

argument is negative from the [ not least scrap of Antiquity so much as
pretended to prove that the Cambrian (i. e. Welsh) lines cited, were the Abbot
of Bangor's answer to Augustine upon the occasion specified, p. 405.
nor that the renouned Dinoth was that Abbot, nor that the old Manuser: whence
Sir Henry Spel: extracts the testimony, was copied out of any more ancient.

proof from antiquity should be expected from Sir Henry Spelman to give
authority to these lines, than what readily offers it self in this matter, I
do not understand; That the British, particularly those of Bangor, and yet
more peculiarly Dinoth the famous Abbot of that Monastery, disputed against
Augustine's pretensions for the authority of the Bishop of Rome, and asserted
their own subjection to their Metropolitan, has already appeared to be the
affirmation of those, who are most competent witnesses of it, and the
Manuscript passage in Welsh and English, which Sir H. Spel: had transcribed
from Mr. Moston's Copy (and directs the Reader to Sir Robert Cotton's Library
to satisfy himself in that matter) is directly agreeable to this for the
matter of it, and so gave that very judicious Knight just reason both to set
some value on it himself, and to communicate it to others, as that which might
gratify their curiosity, and approve it self by its own light to any judicious
Reader, to be, if not the very words of that Abbot's answer, yet the sense and
substance of it, and whether of these it should be judged to be, it matters not.

contents of this Testimony been any way contrary to other undoubted records of
those times, or indeed any disparate new relation, that had not formerly been
taken notice of, and was now to owe the whole credit and support to this
Testimony, some reason there might have been for an Aristarchus to proceed
with more caution than here was used, and to yield nothing to bare groundless
conjectures (and the Romanist has as much reason as any man to lay this to
heart, to act with this caution in other Testimonies) but when the matter is
agreed on among the Ancients, and an old record offers it self to our view, in
perfect concord with that which we had formerly all reason to believe, and
only affirms that more legibly and distinctly, which was in substance before,
but not so punctually delivered to us, I cannot think the severest Critic,
supposing him unconcerned and impartial, without any hypothesis of his own to
be defended or tended by him, would have any aversion or dislike to a testimony
thus produced, though for some circumstances of it, such as are here mentioned,
the producer have nothing of authority to back his own conjectures.

unjust, not to give credit to a Manuscript, that it is what it pretends to be,
unless I have some express affirmation of Antiquity concerning that
particular Manuscript; should such rules of severity be now imposed on the
press, the Vatican must never bring forth more rarities, the wealth of all the
Archives in the world must lie dead, like a Miser's treasure, no one volume
being able to testify for the veracity of its neighbor, or if it were, it
self must also bring its voucher along with it, and so on in infinitum, or else
it would not be (...) a competent testification in this matter, and when it is
remembered, that all, which is now made public by the help of Printing, lay
once in single Manuscripts, and those multipliable only by transcribing, and
neither the originals nor Copies any other way testified to be what they
pretended to be, than as these Cambrian lines are delivered to us by Sir Henry,
I hope this will be deemed a competent proof, that this first argument is not
so clearly demonstrative as was promised.

first argument, in these words, p. 405.
And certainly if his Manuscript be no elder than the interlined English, he
has grossly wronged himself and his Reader, by honoring it with the style of
Ancient: For, as every one sees, the English is purely modern, and cannot be so
old by many years as Henry the Eighth^s cashiering the Pope's authority, and
arrogating the supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters to himself, for maintenance
whereof it is alleged, and was certainly forged.

answer briefly, that it is not pretended by Sir Henry, that the English is as
ancient as the times of Dinoth, no nor the Welsh neither, but that those two
Languages were made use of by some, whose ages he pretends not to know, to
conveigh to us intelligibly the answer of that Abbot, in what language soever
it were delivered by him; And if it shall now be granted to this Author, that
the English idiome evidenceth it to be written within these last 100 years,
this can be no prejudice or ground of suspicion, much less a proof of forgery
against this Manuscript, as long as the Welsh is allowed to be more ancient, to
which the English may upon a latter transcribing have been annexed, as fitly as
old Greek MSS. are daily printed with the Latin translations of a later date,
in the same or several pages.

second argument is deduced from the Cambrian lines, in which he pretends to
discover many un-Cambrian mixtures of English words, p. 406, 7, 8.
helpio and gleimio, for help and claim, want of Orthographie, and the like; To
which being utterly unskilful in the Welsh language, I acknowledge my self
incompetent to give any very particular reply, yet shall give my reason, why I
cannot think that this second argument of his is any more demonstrative against
the validity of the testimony, than the former; For 1. supposing this Copy of
Mr. Moston^s to be a transcript, not the original (as it is evident S. H.
Spelman supposes) what difficulty is there to imagine, that that Copy was
transcribed by one unskilful in the Orthographie of that language, especially
when it is known, how ordinary this is to be found, not only among the vulgar,
but among learned Churchmen of that nation, who are fain by study to acquire
skill of reading before they can officiate in that language. Secondly, I shall
readily grant, or, if he please, yield to the force of his arguments, that the
Welsh lines are not the words, or language wherein Dinoth delivered his answer,
but (as this Gentleman after contends) that Dinoth, a writer of Latin Books,
being to speak to Augustine, that understood not the British language, gave his
answer in Latin; What hinders now, but that this Latin answer being conserved
among the Britans, might in later times (before Henry the eight) in any age to
which the idiome of the Welsh lines shall direct a Critic in that language to
affix them, be translated into imperfect (I mean more modern) yet intelligible
Welsh, either by a native of that Country, or by any other, who had acquired
so much of that language, as was sufficient for no weightier an enterprise? I
discern not what disadvantage I can receive by this concession, and then sure
there will be small difficulty in vindicating Sir Henry's integrity, if this
shall be supposed; For he no where pretends, that the Cambrian lines, in the
form here presented, were the language, or words of the answer of Dinoth, but
that the matter of his answer, in what language soever delivered by him, is
communicated to us by that MS. And that it was not, here is no word of so much
as probable argument, much less of clear demonstration tenderd by the Author
of this Appendix.

Lastly, for the two words which occasioned his charge of the English mixtures,
I am, by those which have skill in the language, enabled to return him some
answer, that the word help, from whence is the infinitive helpio or helpu, is
found used by Tudor Aled, who wrote an: 1490. and by Lluellyn, who is thought
to be more ancient, and that gleimio, or cleimio is by the Latin and Welsh
Dictionary set down in the word vendico, in the first place, (and after that
holy) as the most proper Welsh word for it, not borrowed from the English; From
whence as I shall not conclude, that these Welsh lines, were the original of
Dinoth's answer (that were to retract my former concession) so I may safely
assume, that these two words (his only instances of English mixtures) do no
way demonstrate this Welsh translation to be later than Henry the Eight's
cashiering the Pope's authority (as of the English it was granted) nor
consequently leave it under suspicion of being forged by any Protestant.

third argument is of more seeming force, taken from the mention of this
Abbot's subjection to the Bishop of Caerleon upon Vske, p. 409.
in which he finds two absurdities, 1. says he, Bangor is very near, if not
in the Diocese of ^han Elwy, now commonly called S. Assaph, 2. all Histories
testify that the Archiepiscopal Seat was removed from Caerleon to S. David 's
in King Arthur 's time, who died about the year 544. i. e. 50 years before
Augustine 's first entrance into Britain.

probation, certainly the answer is very obvious to the first, that
acknowledging and supposing that the Monastery of Banchor, situate in
Flintshire, though within the confines of Chestshire, was under the diocesan
Bishop either of S. Asaph, or of Chester the Episcopal See of Bangor lying in
the County of Caernarven) yet this can be of no manner of force against this
testimony, for he that was under the Bishop of S. Asaph, as his immediate
superior, or diocesan, may yet be under the Bishop of Caerleon, as his
Metropolitan, as he that is under the Bishop of Rochester in one respect, is
under the Bishop of Canterbury in another. And so that is a full answer to his
first difficulty.

second, it is acknowledged that before this time of Dinoth's answer to
Augustine, the Archiepiscopal See had been by authority of Synod removed first
from Caerleon to Landaffe by Dubritius, Anno 512. and so it is affirmed by Sir
Hen: Spelman in his Apparat: p. 25. (where by the way lin: 5. the Printer has
mistaken ad Meneviam for ad Landaviam) and in like manner by his successor S.
David, Anno 516. by license from King Arthur, from Landaff to Menevia, which
from that eminent Bishop, under whom that change was made, was after called S.
David's. But this removal of the Metropolitical See from one city to another was
not of such weight or consideration, but that the Metropolitical dignity,
having been so long fixed at Caerleon, might still retain that title after the
translation.

Abbot of Bangor making answer to Augustine^s claim, which was founded in some
old right, which he pretended the Pope to have over all Churches, it was most
proper to contest this by former practice, not only how it stood at that
present, but especially how it had been (...), of old, or from the beginning,
by custom immemorial, and herein not to consider such immaterial changes, as
were the removing of the Primate's See from one city to another, but to look on
it, as it had always layn, in opposition to all foreign jurisdiction: And it
being certain that Caerleon was anciently this Prime See, nothing was more
agreeable to this contest, as it is supposed to be managed by that Abbot, than
thus to refer to the (...) (as the Councels of Nice, and Antioch, and
Chalcedon, and Ephesus had done, in the like controversies) to tell Augustine
that the British Christians had always, from their first plantation, been
under a British Primate, and to call the British Primate by that title, which
had most anciently belonged to him, i. e. Bishop of Caerleon, and not by the
later of Landaffe, or the yet later of S. David's.

Author here objects against the former of these answers, saying, 1. That this
is not proved. And 1. that it implies a contradiction to say the Sea was
translated, and the former title still retained, Translation importing the
taking a new, and desertion of the old title,] is no way applicable to this
second answer (which consequently remains in full force) and therefore I need
not farther attend to it; And in relation to the former answer, It is far
from the promised clearness of demonstration.

first part of it, the thing may be true, though it be not proved* the contrary
must be proved by him that promises clear or demonstrative confutations: And
for the second, it must be founded in some new notion of Contradiction, which
my Logic has not acquainted me with, for sure he that says the Sea was
translated, and the former title retained, does neither say that the Sea was
translated and not translated (which is the only form of a Logical
contradiction) nor that the former title was retained and not retained; Nor
consequently can I discern the least inconvenience, much less contradiction,
either direct, or by way of implication, that the Metropolitical See being
translated from Caerleon to another city, the Metropolitan should still retain
his original title, that of Bishop of Caerleon.

exceptions he proceeds to add, but those so far again from being, p. 410.
according to promise, demonstrative evidences against this testimony, that
they are no way worthy to be attended to.

First, that Dinoth would probably have answered in Latin, and to that I have
already replied, that I may well grant he did so, and consequently that both
the Welsh and English in Mr. Moston's MS. were translations of that Latin.

Secondly, that the words in Welsh rendered [whom you name to be Pope -- ] are
not rightly translated; In this again I cannot contend, having no knowledge in
that language, but as before I followed Sir Henry's translation, and finding it
not very clear, did endeavor to express his meaning by a just Paraphrase, and
thereby happily rendered the true sense of the place, so if I should now believe
my teacher again, this Author, that undertakes to correct Sir Henry's
translation, it would not be impossible so to render the words, as should bear
a very commdious sense, and perfectly agreeable to the notion I formerly had of
them.

H. T. (whom now I discern to be no Welch-man) has really the skill in that
language, which his animadversions pretend to, I thought it more reasonable to
consult some other more knowing guide, and am now from a judicious hand
assured, that there is an error in the distinction between Daad: and yw
gleimio, which being taken away, the true rendering of the whole is this, Et
aliam obedientiam, quam istam, non agnosco ego cujusquam esse, quem vos nominat
is Papam, vel patrem patrum, vendicare and postulare, And any other obedience
than that, I acknowledge not to be any man's (or to belong to any man) whom ye
name Pope, or Father of Fathers, to challenge and require. This is plain sense,
and still perfectly agreeable to the understanding, I formerly had of the
words, and I doubt not but upon the most Critical examination it will be found
to be the most literal rendering of them.

third, of the no good sense of the English is already answered also, by
adhering to that better translation, which is as perfectly fit for our turns,
as the other was imagined to be, and much more intelligible and clear, as
appeared in the last number.

fourth is, that the words used of the Bishop of Caerleon* [who is to oversee
under God over us] makes against the ^ym of the Prelatick reformers, and
particularly against me, who labor to support the King's Supremacy against
the Pope, whereas these words exclude the King as well as the Pope] But
certainly there is no force in this, for Augustine's demand, or question being
only of that obedience and subordination which belonged to the supreme Bishop,
whether that were the Bishop of Rome, or the Bishop, of Caerleon, and not at
all inquiring into the nature or extent of the regal or imperial power (there
being no occasion to suggest any such inquiry) the Abbot's answer can in no
probability be extended any farther than the question extended, i. e. to the
asserting the Prime Episcopal power to belong to the Metropolitan of Caerleon
or S. David's, without any subordination to the Pope of Rome.

fifth place he adds of the miracle and divine vengeance, in Bid, and so
concludes his Appendix, to that I have spoken n. 19, 20.
already, in that which I thought meet to premise to this debate, and so I have
no more to add by way of answer to his exceptions, but that I cannot
sufficiently wonder, that this Author (so recommended to the the Reader by his
learned Friend in the front of his Book) should make it his solemn business to
invalidate this one supernumerary testimony, being withal no better provided
with arguments to promise him success in it.

The End.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 28. after him add,

p. 15. l. 24. after side re: or

p. 33. marg: l. 3. re: Apolog: l. 29. after must add,

p. 36. l. 32. re: nomina

p. 40. l. 12. re: (...) l. 13. re: (...)

p. 83. l. 34. re: (...)

p. 15. l. 24. after (...) dele,

p. 19. l. 33. after else add)

p. 90. l. 17. for (...) re: (...) l. 20. for the re: then

p. 96. l. ult: re: (...)

p. 108. l. 30. re: testify

p. 111. marg: l. 11. re: (...)

p. 120. l. 26. re: it as

p. 121. l. 11. re: Campegius

p. 129. l. 8. re: (...) l. 6. re: yet larger

p 133. l. 17. re: by this

p. 135. l. 6. re: schism in him,

p. 136. l. 35. re: (...)

p. 137. l. 29. re: and shall l. 32. re: extitit

p. 138. l. ult: re: is one

p. 141. l. 7. re: are by us believed to be con-l. 24. re: our innocence

p. 148. l. 36. re: is utterly

p. 150. l. 7. re: this

p. 155. l. 11. re: the fall

p. 160. l. 36. re: (...)

p. 161. l. 11. re: Naucratius


