(...), OR A Pacifick Discourse of Gods GRACE and DECREES: In a Letter, of full
Accordance written to the Reverend, and most learned, Dr. Robert Sanderson.

By Henry Hammond. D. D.

To which are annexed the Extracts of three Letters concerning Gods Prescience
reconciled with Liberty and Contingency.

Together with two Sermons preached before these evil times, the one to the
Clergy, the other to the Citizens of London.

LONDON.

Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in IVy-lane, 1660.

TO All our BRETHREN Of the Church of ENGLAND.
. 1. IN relation to the Controversies concerning Gods Grace and Decrees,
nothing was ever Superior, in my thoughts, to the fear that the great
Interests of Religion, Christian practice, and particularly that of Charity,
might be obstructed by them.

. 2. It has long been the Complaint of pious and learned men, (of the justice
whereof, if formerly we had, we cannot now reasonably retain any doubt,) that
the crude and unwary treating of these, and (from thence derived,) an hasty
premature persuasion of their being in Christ, (assisted by a belief of
irrespective Decrees, and Grace irresistible, and no possibility of
interrupting their justified estate,) was apt to contribute to the presumtions,
and securities, and final impenitences of some men, who having most loudly
renounced the power, choose yet not to quit the form of Godliness.

. 3. And for the hears, and uncharitable distempers, which the managing of
these controversies particularly have been guilty of, we need not look abroad
among the Dominicans and Jesuits, Jansenists and Molinists, for proofs. Our
own Region has not of a long time failed of evidences. The old weapon of
(...), crying down for carnal men and herericks, Pelagians and Semipelagians,
Papists, Socinians, and what not? (even rifling the Poets Hell to fetch out
Titles for their adversaryes,) has never been more nimbly taken up, and
vigorously handled, then in these days.

. 4. And as if fuel to dissentions were still wanting, it has been the
endeavor of some to suggest this jealousy, and clancularly to infuse it into
the minds of men, that they which oppose unconditionate Decrees, etc. (and
pretend to think they effectually serve the ends of Christianity thereby,) have
entertained such vehement dislikes, and aversations to all that Scheme of
doctrines, that they retain no charity to the maintainers of them, though they
be in other things as constant, obedient sonns of the Church of England, as
any; and when opportunity shall assist their design, will take care rigorously
to fence their communion from them, and whatever the accord be in other
doctrines, (wherein our Church is eminently concerned against the common
Adversaries,) will proceed finally to exterminate and exclude them.

. 5. The Consequences of this persuasion, once imbibed, be it never so
causeless and unprovoked, how noxious and inauspicious they may prove to all
that are on either side concerned in them, what leven of bitter zele and
animosityes it may cause to ferment in the minds of some, what blasts and
improsperityes it may bring on the endeavors of others; and, betwixt both,
what detriment to the true and solid ends, whether of Religion, or Reformation,
(the squaring of our lives according to that other, more sublime, pattern in
the mount, Mat. v. the inhaunsed, transcendent, indispensable Laws of Purity
and Peaceableness,) I shall not here need to set forth, every man's sagacity
serving him competently to make this discovery.

. 6. Yet was it not a rational hope, that the bare disclaiming and renouncing
so great a guilt, would be admitted to the purgation of those, against whom it
had been suggested and believed. It therefore seemed to me more seasonable to
tender an ocular demonstration of the contrary, by bringing my Lamb, or Turtle,
(my offering to the Temple of Peace,) and really exemplifying the charity and
accordance, that may readily be attained between dissenters, when minds
prepared with meekness, and love of the Truth, wheresoever they meet with it,
can take courage to deny themselves, and so to deposit prejudices, and instead
of names and shadows, to give themselves up to the entire guidance of that
light which shines in Scripture.

. 7. In order to this end, it seemed not improper, to offer at this time to
public view the present Sentiments of the Judicious Dr. Sanderson, the Regius
Professor of the University of Oxford, (and the rather, because some manuscript
Tables of his former thoughts, and some passages from his Sermons, long since
preached, and now republished, have been made use of, to gain authority to
those Doctrines which he is now far from owning,) and briefly and
perspicuously to annex unto, and compare with them, those Amicable and Pacifick
Reflections, which may hope to gain the unanimous consent of all true Sons of
our Venerable Mother, the Church of England, whose chief aim it has always
been to discountenance divisions and fractions, and occasions and fomenters of
those, especially singular Doctrines and Novell Articles of Faith, and in a
Catholic harmonious charity, to plant Primitive belief, and zele of good
works, and so instead of the empty Form, the full power of Godliness.

. 8. What is so largely added on that one head of Prescience, had some
appearance of necessity, to repel a shaft borrowed of late from the Socinian's
quiver, who having resolved it impossible for God himself to for esee future
Contingents, have given disputers their choice, whether they like best, bluntly
to deny God's Prescience, and so, at his cost, maintain their own Liberty, or
more piously to maintain Prescience, and then give it the same force of
evacuating all Liberty and Contingency, which Predetermination of all events
was justly accused to draw after it; The mistake very dangerous on either side,
and the temtation equally fitted for both, if it were not timely obviated.

. 9. That these ensuing Discourses may be effectually successful to the
designed end, of advancing the threefold interest of Truth, and Peace, and
Uniforme Christian obedience, that it may supplant the Vinegar by the Oil, the
Nitre by the Balsome, and procure, by consent of Litigants, a solemn
Supersedeas, if not Conclusion to debates, (an aversion to these heathen
Agones, which afford nothing, but to the combatant blows, and leaves to the
conqueror,) above all, that it may provide us, by this truce, a greater
vacancy for the continued exercises of real Piety, and engage us to make
diligent use of it, (to add, as to our Faith virtue, (or courage,) so to our
Godliness brotherly-kindnesse, and to (...), 2. Pet. 1. 5.
that the yet higher ascent and accomplishment of charity,) that it may compact
us all into that union that most succesfully contributes to our growth, and so
possess us of that qualification, to which immarcessible joys are awarded by
our Righteous Judge, shall be continually the prayer, as in the following
sheets it has been the sincere single endeavor, of

Festo Omnium Sanctorum. Your-fellow Labourer H. HAMMOND.

A Letter of full Accordance, Written to D. ROBERT SANDERSON, CONCERNING Gods
Grace and Decrees.
Dear Sir,
. 1. HAving had a sight of the Letter which you sent M. -- about the
Antiremonstrant Controversies dated Mar. 26. and observing one of the reasons,
which you render of your having avoided to appear on that theme, [A loathness
to engage in a quarrel whereof you should never hope to see an end] I thought
my self in some degree qualified to answer this reason of yours, and thereby to
do acceptable service to many, who do not think fit that any considerations,
which have not real and weighty truth in them, should obstruct that which may
be so much to the common good, I mean, your writing and declaring your mind on
any profitable subject.

. 2. That which qualifies me more then some others, to evacuate the force of
this one reason of yours, and makes me willing to attempt it, though not to
appear in opposition to any other passage, that ever you have written, is the
true friendship that has passed between us, and the sweet conversation that
for sometime we enjoyed, without any allay or unequableness, sharp word, or
unkind, or jealous thought. The remembrance whereof assures me unquestionably,
that you and I may engage in this question, as far as either of us shall think
profitable, without any the least beginning of a quarrel, and then that will
competently be removed from such, as of which you cannot hope to see an end.

. 3. And before I go any farther, I appeal to your own judgment, whether
herein I do not at least speak probably, and then whether it were not a
misprision, which you are in all reason to deposite, to apprehend such
insuperable difficulties or impossibilities at a distance, which when they are
prudently approached, and examined, so presently vanish before you. If this one
reflection do not convince you, it remains, that the speculation be brought to
practice, and exemplified to your senses.

4. You set out with a mention of some Five Positions agreed on by all.
positions, wherein, you say, Divines, though of contrary Judgments, do yet
all agree. And then it is not credible that you and I should be so singular, as
to differ in them endlesly; of this number you propose five, 1. That the will
of man is free in all his actions. 2. That very many things in the world happen
contingently. 3. That God from all eternity foreseeth all, even the most free
and contingent events. 4. That whatsoever God foreseeth shall infallibly come
to pass. 5, That sinners are converted by the effectual working of Gods grace.
Of each of these you say we have from Scripture, Reason and Experience, as good
and full assurance, as can be desired for the (...), or truth of them, that they
are so.] And I who fully subscribe to the undoubted truth of each of the
Propositions, and do it also upon the very same three grounds (of Scripture,
Reason, and Experience) which you mention, need not the intercession of our
friendship to render it impossible to give you any the least trouble of so much
as explaining your sense in any of these.

. 5. Next, when you resolve, that all the Three heads of difficulty.
difficulty is about the (...) (referring that to no more then three heads) 1.
How to reconcile the certain futurition of what God foreseeth, with the liberty
of the rational creature, and the contingency of casual effects, as they
proceed from inferior causes. 2. In what manner or measure the effectual Grace
of God cooperateth and concurreth with the free will of man, in the conversion
of a sinner. 3. How to cut so even a thread, as to take the whole of what we do
amiss to our selves, and leave the whole glory of what we do well to his
grace.] You are again as secure as any amulet can make you, that this
resolution of abbreviating the Controversies, and confining them to these few
heads, shall never engage you in the least degree of Debate: And then I shall
challenge you to feign, how it can remain possible, without contradicting ones
self (which still is not quarrelling with you) to engage you in any uneasy
contention, unless it be on one of these three heads,, and when I have by
promise obliged my self, which now I do, not to raise any Dispute, or attempt
to ensnare or entangle you in any of these three, you have then nothing to
retract but your fears, to which if I tell you, you cannot adhere, discerning a
sure and near period to that which you apprehended endless, this is all the
victory I shall project, or be capable of in this matter.

. 6. Of the first of these three Difficulties, Of reconciling Praescience with
Liberty of Contingency.
the reconciling the certain futurition of what God foresees, with the liberty
of the rational creature, and the contingency and casual effects, It falls out,
that you have in your shorter Letter, dated Ap. 8. given that account, which
evidenceth it to be, in your opinion, no invincible difficulty, your words are
these, [That Gods praescience lays no necessity at all upon any event, but
that yet all events, as they are foreseen of God, so shall they certainly and
infallibly come to pass, in such sort as they are foreseen, else the knowledge
of God should be fallible, which certainty of the event may in some sort be
called necessity, to wit, consequentis or ex hypothesi, according as all the
most contingent things are necessary, when they actually exist, which is a
necessity infinitely distant from that which praedetermination imports.] This
I take to be so clear an explication of that difficulty, and so solid a
determining of the (...), the manner of reconciling praescience with
contingency, that as I fully consent to it in every part of your period, so I
doubt not but the last part alone has made it as intelligible to any ordinary
understanding, as whole books of Philosophers have attempted to do.

. 7. For Gods praescience from all eternity being but the seeing every thing
that ever exists, as it is, contingents, as contingents, necessary, as
necessary, can neither work any change in the object, by thus seeing it,
(convert a contingent into a necessary) nor it self be deceived in what it
sees, which it must be, if any thing in process of time should be otherwise,
then from all eternity God saw it to be.

. 8. I was lately advised with by a Divine, to me unknown, but one that seems
to be a man of good learning, about the distinction frequently made in this
matter, betwixt inevitably and infallibly, and my answer and replies to his
several objections, (because I would demonstrate the perfect accordance
betwixt you and me in this, which, within this year or two is put into a very
grave attire, and revered as a great difficulty) I will give you at large by
way of Appendage at the end of this Letter, having by hap a copy retained by
me, and though it cost you some minutes to survey them, yet I know your
patience of all such exercises so well, that I doubt not of your willingness to
be thus detained by me, which yet here you shall not, loco non suo.

. 9. Then for the second, In what manner and measure the effectual Grace of
God cooperateth, or Of the manner and measure of the cooperation of Effectual
Grace with the free will of man.
concurreth with the free will of man in his conversion] you seem to me to have
given a punctual account of each part of that also, in the said second Letter,
in these words, That God works not by his Grace irresistibly, but yet so
effectually on those whom he has ex beneplacito appointed to salvation, in
ordering the means, occasions and opportunities with such congruity to that
end, as that de facto it is not finally resisted] Here it is evident your
resolution comes home to each term in the difficulty; For if effectual Grace
work not irresistibly, then we see in what manner it cooperates with the free
will of man, viz. so as it still remains possible for him to resist it. And if
the effectualness of his working consist in ordering the means, occasions, and
opportunities with such congruity, etc. then as that stateth the measure of the
cooperation (the only second part of the difficulty) and does it expressly in
Bishop Overals way, so this supposes Grace sufficient to conversion and
salvation to be given to those, who are not converted, and saved, quite
contrary to the three grand praetensions of Doctor Twisse, the Supralapsarians,
and Sublapsarians, and whether it be true or no, is presently freed from all
the odious consequences charged on the several Schemes of the Antiremonstrants,
and so may safely be granted, or not opposed by them, who yet want evidence of
Scripture to establish it, and so this is not likely to bring any uneasy
engagement upon you.

. 10. And then as there remains no more difficulties, but the third, so, if you
mark it, the How to attribute all good to God, and evil to our selves.
grounds are already laid, whereby that is unquestionably resolved, for having
granted that God gives sufficient Grace, and yet, when he cooperates most
effectually, he does it not irresistibly, this is the very thread you seek to
cut by, so as to devolve the whole blame of all our miscarriages on our selves,
and the entire glory and praise of all our (...), good performances, or good
successes on his Grace. Were any of us so left or past by, as to be denied
sufficient grace, and yet destined to perish, merely through want of
necessaries; the whole blame could not rationally fall on our selves, it could
not be said of Christ's yoke, that it were Matthew xi.
easy, or his Romans x.
Commandment not far from us, the fault that was found with the Mosaical
economy, Heb. viii. 8. and which made another (the Evangelical) necessary,
would still lie against this, viz. that men were not enabled to perform what
was required, and yet the nonperformance eternally revenged on many of them.
But sufficient Grace being tendered by God, and by no default, but their own,
proving ineffectuall, the entire blame falls unavoidably on those, who do not
thus open to him that knocks, so receive, as to make use of it, but resist, or
grieve, or quench what was so mercifully designed, and might have been improved
by the humble and diligent receivers unto their greatest advantages.

. 11. On the other side, if our nature being universally corrupted by Adam's
fall, all possibility of rising out of that grave of sin be the effect and
benefit of the Grace, as that is of the death of Christ, if it be God that
works in us both to will and to do, of his good pleasure, the first by his
preventing, the second by his assisting Grace, and both those bottomed merely
in his (...) good pleasure, nothing in us any way meriting the first act, or
purpose of Giving Grace, any farther then our wants and miseries rendered us
the proper objects of his compassions and reliefs; and the subsequent aids in
like manner challengeable, only from his promise, and the purport of the
parable of the Talents, of Giving to him that has, rewarding the use of the
lower, with the gift of an higher degree of Grace, then still is this, the
attributing nothing to our selves, but demerits, and provocations, and giving
the whole glory to God.

. 12. Having gone thus far without any considerable disagreement, about the
(...), how to reconcile these three seeming repugnancies, wherein you
apprehended the greatest difficulty to lie, and being hereby, as by so many
postulata accorded between us, competently provided and furnished of a
standard, and umpire, (in case any light difference should arise) what
objection can S. Paul's (...), Romans xi. 33. (belonging Saint Paul's O the Depth.
expressly to another matter, the cutting off the obdurate, and gathering all
perswasible believing Jews and Gentiles, and no way applicable to this)
interpose, why we should not proceed together to the consideration of the
Doctrine of Decrees, as it has been variously debated by others, and by you
perspicuously recapitulated in the process of your papers?

. 13. To this therefore I presume of your good leave that we now proceed, and
whereas you have prudently chosen to begin with an history of your own thoughts
on this subject, which you have laid down with great particularity, I shall set
out with a bare transcript of that, which will need no comment of mine, to
render An History of Doctor Sandersons thoughts in these points.
it useful to the Reader, in discovering to him the true and sole original of
the thriving (for some time) of those Doctrines among us, and how so many of
our Church came to be seasoned with them, and in giving him a but necessary
caution for the laying the grounds of the study of Divinity in the writings of
the ancient Church, rather then in our modern systemes and Institutions. Your
words are these,

. 14. When I began to set my self to the Study of Divinity as my proper
business, (which was after I had the degree of Master of Arts, being then newly
xxi. years of age) the first thing I thought fit for me to do, was to consider
well of the Articles of the Church of England, which I had formerly read over
twice, or thrice, and whereunto I had subscribed. And because I had then met
with some Puritanicall Pamphlets written against the Liturgy, and Ceremonies;
although most of the Arguments therein were such as needed no great skill to
give satisfactory answers unto, yet for my fuller satisfaction (the questions
being de rebus agendis, and so the more suitable to my proper inclination) I
read over with great diligence and no less delight that excellent piece of
Learned Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity. And I have great cause to bless God
for it that so I did, not only for that it much both cleared and settled my
judgment for ever after in very many weighty points (as of Scandal, Christian
Liberty, Obligation of Laws, Obedience, etc.) but that it also proved (by his
good providence) a good preparative to me (that I say not, Antidote) for the
reading of Calvin's Institutions with more caution then perhaps (otherwise) I
should have done. For that Book was commended to me, as it was generally to all
young Scholars in those times, as the best and perfectest systeme of Divinity,
and fittest to be laid as a ground work in the study of that profession. And
indeed being so prepared as is said, my expectation was not at all deceived, in
the reading of those Institutions. I found, so far as I was then able to judge,
the method exact, the expressions clear, the style grave, equal and
unaffected: his Doctrine for the most part conform to S. Augustines, in a word,
the whole work very elaborate, and useful to the Churches of God in a good
measure; and might have been (I verily believe) much more useful, if the
honor of his name had not given so much reputation to his very errors. I must
acknowledge my self to have reaped great benefit by the reading thereof. But as
for the questions of Election, Reprobation, Effectual Grace, Perseverance,
etc. I took as little notice of the two first, as of any other thing contained
in the book; both because I was always afraid to pry much into those secrets,
and because I could not certainly inform my self from his own writings, whether
he were a Supralapsarian (as most speak him, and he seems often to incline
much that way) or a Sublapsarian, as sundry passages in the book seem to
import. But giving my self mostly still to the study of Moral Divinity, (and
taking most other things upon trust, as they were in a manner generally taught
both in the Schools and Pulpits in both Universities) I did for many years
together acquiesce without troubling my self any farther about them, in the
more commonly received opinions concerning both these two, and the other points
depending thereupon. Yet in the Sublapsarian way ever, which seemed to me of
the two, the more moderate, rationally and agreeable to the goodness, and
justice of God: for the rigid Supralapsarian doctrine could never find any
entertainment in my thoughts from first to last. But MDCXXV. a Parliament being
called, wherein I was chosen one of the Clerks of the Convocation for the
Diocese of Lincoln, during the continuance of that Parliament (which was about
four months, as I remember) there was some expectation that those Arminian
points (the only questions almost in agitation at that time) should have been
debated by the Clergy, in that CONVOCATION. Which occasioned me (as it did
sundry others) being then at some leisure, to endeavor by study and conference
to inform my self, as thoroughly and exactly in the state of those
Controversies, as I could have opportunity, and as my wit would serve me for
it. In order whereunto, I made it my first business to take a survey of the
several different opinions concerning the ordering of Gods Decrees, as to the
salvation or damnation of men; not as they are supposed to be really in Mente
Divina (for all his Decrees are eternal and therefore coeternall, and so no
priority or posteriority among them:) but quoad nostrum intelligendi modum,
because we cannot conceive or speak of the things of God, but in a way suitable
to our own finite condition, and understanding: Even as God himself has been
pleased to reveal himself to us in the holy Scriptures by the like suitable
condescensions and accommodations. Which opinions, the better to represent
their differences to the eye, uno quasi intuitu, for their more easy conveying
to the understanding by that means, and the avoiding of confusion and tedious
discoursings, I reduced into five Schemes or Tables, much after the manner as I
had used to draw Pedigrees (a thing which I think you know I have very much
fancied, as to me of all others the most delightful recreation) of which
Schemes, some special friends, to whom I showed them, desired copies: who, as
it seems, valuing them more then I did (for diverse men have copies of them,
as I hear, but I do not know that I have any such my self) communicated them
farther, and so they are come into many hands. Those are they which Doctor
Reynolds, in his Epistle prefixed to Master Barlees Correptory Correction, had
taken notice of. Having all these Schemes before my eyes at once, so as I might
with ease compare them one with another, and having considered of the
conveniences and inconveniences of each, as well as I could, I soon discerned a
necessity of quitting the Sublapsarian way of which I had a better liking
before, as well as the Supralapsarian, which I could never fancy.]

. 15. Thus far your history, which, I verily believe to have perfect truth in
every step of it, without any disguise or varnish, and so I pass from it
without any farther Reflections.

. 16. Next then follows your distincter view of the several ways, which have
been embraced by those of the Antiremonstrant persuasion, and the motives on
which you were forced to dissent and depart from each of them, and to this I am
obliged to attend you (...). And the ways being especially three, the method
of greatest advantage will be to begin with a transient view of those, each of
which you with great reason reject, and to set Doctor Twisses first (though it
came last into the world and adorned it self with the spoils of the other two)
because that sets the object of Election higher, then the other do, homo
creabilis, man considered before he is created. His design and scheme you have
perspicuously drawn, thus, [That God making D. Twiss his way.
his own Glory the only end of all other his Decrees, all these decrees of
creating man, of permitting sin, of sending Christ, of preaching the Gospel, of
Electing some, of Reprobating others, and the rest, make up one entire
coordinate Medium, conducing to that one End, and so the whole subordinate to
it, but not any one part, or joint thereof subordinate to any other of the
same.] Against this, your objection I profess to be very convincing, taken from
his Causes of rejecting it.
own beloved axiom, so often repeated by him, (and borrowed from him, and built
upon by others) that whatsoever is first in the intention, is last in the
execution. For as it is most evident, that of these his supposed coordinate
decrees some are after others in execution (the fall after the creation, the
coming of Christ after both, and so of the rest) so if he will stand to his
principle, he must, as you say, grant, that those that were thus after any
other in the execution, were in Gods intention before them, which will
necessarily bring in a subordination among them, and so quite overthrow this
(as you call it) new crochet of coordination.

. 17. Your other causes of dislike to His way are equally rational, 1. the
falsness of that his Logic Maxim, which he builds so much upon, which yet
has no certain truth, or other then casual, but when it is applied to final
causes, and the means used for the attaining any end. 2. The prodigiousness of
his other doctrine, that there are more degrees of bonity in damnato quam
annihilato, (because the bonitas entis) and so that it is better for the
Creature to be in eternal misery, then simply not to be; when Christ expressly
pronounces the contrary of wicked men, that it had been better for them never
to have been born, to have a millstone about the neck, and to be cast into the
sea, (a figure to represent annihilation) then to be involved in those dangers
that attend their sins. 3. His resolving Gods Election of a man to life
eternal to be L. 1. digr. 9.
no act of his mercy, and likewise his Ibid. digr. 10.
reprobating and ordaining to damnation to be no act of his Justice, but of his
pleasure.] A few such Propositions as these are competent to blast and defame
any cause, which requires such aids, stands in need of such supporters, and
therefore you will be confident I concur with you in rejection of that, though
I think neither of us likely to undertake the travel of refuting of his whole
work.

. 18. Next then for the Supralapsarians, with whom the object of the decree is
homo conditus, The Supralapsarians way, The Sublapsarians.
man created, not yet fallen, and the Sublapsarians, with whom it is Man
fallen, or the corrupt Mass, your rejections and reasons thereof are twined
together, and are especially two, which you justly call very weighty, and so I
suppose they will be deemed by any man, that shall consider the force of them,
without prejudice, I shall therefore set them down from your letter in your own
words.

. 19. The first reason is, because though it might perhaps be defensible, as to
the justice of Reasons against both.
God, in regard of his absolute power over his own creature, yet it seems very
hardly reconcilable with the goodness of God, and his exceeding great love to
mankind, as they are plentifully and passionately set forth in his holy word,
to decree the eternal damnation of the greater part of mankind, for that sin,
and for that sin only which was utterly and naturally impossible for him to
avoid, for the Decree of Reprobation according to the Sublapsarian Doctrine,
being nothing else but a mere preterition or non-election of some persons whom
God left, as he found them, involved in the guilt of the first Adams
transgression, without any actual personal sin of their own, when he withdrew
some others, as guilty as they, without any respect to Christ the second Adam,
it must needs follow that the persons so left are destined to eternal misery,
for no other cause, but this only, that Adam some thousand years since did eat
the forbidden fruit, and they being yet unborn could not help it.

. 20. The other reason was, because the Scripture not only says expressly,
that God has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.
4, 5. and consequently the decree of sending Christ must be praecedaneous to
that of Election, but also does every where, and upon all occasions hold forth
the death of Christ, as intended by God for the benefit of mankind, in the
utmost extent, [the world, the whole world, mankind, every man, etc.] and not
for the benefit of some few only, the rest by an antecedent peremptory decree
excluded. To which it would be consequent, that according to the tenure of (the
more moderate of these) the Sublapsarians doctrine, Jesus Christ the Judge at
the last day, when he should proceed to pronounce sentence upon the damned,
should bespeak them to this effect, Ite maledicti, voluit enim Pater meus pro
beneplacito, ut Adam peccato suo vos perderet, noluit ut ego sanguine meo vos
redimerem, Go ye cursed, for my Father of his mere pleasure willed that Adam by
his sin should destroy you, willed not that I by my blood should redeem you,
the very thought whereof (you say) your soul so much abhorred, that you were
forced to forsake that opinion of the Sublapsarians, (having, as you profess,
never phansied the Superlapsarians) and conclude it unsafe to place the decree
of Election before that of sending Christ.

. 21. These two reasons of changing your judgment, are, I confess, so worthy
of a considering man, who makes Gods revealed will his Cynosure, and does not
first espouse doctrines of men, and then catch at some few obscure places of
Scripture, to countenance them, nor makes his retreat to the abyss of Gods
unfathomable Counsels, as the reason of (that which is its contradictory) his
attempting to fathom and define them, that I doubt not but the tendering of
them to all dispassionate seekers of truth, that have not so me interests to
serve by adhering peremptorily and obstinately to their prepossessions, will be
of the same force to disabuse and extort from them the same confessions, which
they have from you, causing them fairly to deposite these two Schemes, and
either not to desine at all, or to seek out other solider Methods, and more
Catholic Grounds of defining; and if the wise heathen were in the right

Virtus est vitium fugere, and sapientia prima Stultitia caruisse -- this will
be some degree of proficiency, which they that shall with unspeakable joy have
transcribed from you, will also have temptation to accuse your fears, or
waryness, that they received not this lesson sooner from you, especially when
they are told, what here you express, that these have been your thoughts, ever
since the year 1625. i. e. 34. years since, which is an age or generation in
the Scripture-use of the word.

. 22. That none may be any longer deprived of this means of their conviction,
or permitted to think or teach securely and confidently, and as in accord with
you, what you profess your soul thus long to have abhorred the very thought of,
I desire you will at length communicate your thoughts your self, or else allow
this letter of mine to be your (...) and do it for you, under some testimony of
your full approbation of this your sense.

. 23. But all this, thus far advanced, is but the rejection of the several
erroneous ways, and only the negative part of your thoughts, which yet, by
the way let me tell you, is fully sufficient both to the peace of Churches, and
of particular The negative part sufficient to Peace, etc,
souls; If the erroneous ways be rejected, from whence all the
misapprehensions of God, and ill consequences thereof flow, the Church is
competently secured from tares, and then what need express articles, and
positive definitions come in to her rescue?

. 24. This I suppose the reason both of our Churches Moderation in framing the
Article of Our Churches moderation. The Kings Declaration in order to Peace.
Predestination, and of our late Kings Declaration, in silencing the debate of
the questions. For if by these methods the Church could but have prevailed to
have the definitions of the several pretenders forgotten, all men contenting
themselves, as our Article prescribes, with the promises of God, as they are
declared in Scripture, (which sure are Universal and conditionate, not absolute
and particular) the turmoil and heat, and impertinence of Disputes had been
prevented, which now goes for an engagement in Gods cause, the bare fervor and
zeal in which is taken in commutation for much other piety, by many the most
eager contenders. The doctrines being deemed doctrines of God, are counted
evidences of sanctified men, and affix the censure of carnality on opposers,
and from hence come bitter envyings, railings, and at the least evil
surmisings, and these are most contrary to the outward peace of a Church or
Nation.

. 25. And for particular men's souls, if the rigid Good life.
doctrines be found apt to cool all those men's love of God, who have not the
confidence to believe themselves of the number of the few chosen vessels, and
to beget security and presumption in others, who have conquered those
difficulties, and resolved that they are of that number, and to obstruct
industry and vigorous endeavors, and fear of falling, and so to have malignant
influences on practice, yet seeing it is the believing the Antiremonstrant
Schemes (one or other of them) to be the truth of God, which lies under these
ill consequences, the bare laying them aside, leaves every man indispensably
under the force of Christ's commands to disciples, terrors to the unreformed,
and conditional (most expressly conditional) promises to all; and those being
substantially backed with the firm belief of all the Articles of the Creed,
particularly of the judgment to come, are by the grace of God abundantly
sufficient to secure Evangelical obedience, the true foundation of peace to
every Christian soul, and therefore I say, est aliquid prodire tenus, your
negative part, if there were no more behind, will be of sovereign use to all
that have been seduced into any liking of those errors, which are by a man of
your moderation and judgment, in despite of contrary prepossessions, on
reasons so convincing and perspicuous, rejected.

. 26. But in the space of thirty four years, though you have permitted your
genius to lead you to other studies (which if your rejections be granted, I
shall willingly confess to be more universally profitable, then any minuter
searches into the decrees) those of moral or practical Divinity, yet it seems
you have not lived such an obstinate Recluse from the disputes and transactions
of men, but that occasions you have met with to excite your faculties, to wade
a little farther into the Positive part of these Doctrines: and indeed it is
hard to conceive how a man can have spent so many hours, as the Survey of
Doctor Twisses Vindiciae Gratiae, were it never so slight and desultory, must
have cost you, without some other reflections, besides those of bare aversation
to his Hypotheses.

. 27. To these you at length proceed, proposing them with difference, owning
some of them, as your present thoughts, and opinion, whilst in others you
profess to be purely sceptick, and to propose them only as conjectures, that
seem to you in the mean time not improbable, until you meet with some other
more satisfactory. And in making this difference I fully accord with you,
discerning that undeniable evidence of grounds in the former, which is not so
readily discoverable in the latter. I shall therefore follow your direction
herein, and rank these severally, setting down Difference between Opinions and
Conjectures.
those which you own as your opinion first, and afterward, with that note of
difference, proceed to your Conjectures.

. 28. Concerning the Decrees of Election and Three Propositions concerning Gods
Decrees,
Reprobation, your present opinion is contained in these three propositions
(prefaced with two more, which are but the disavowing the three ways of Massa
nondum condita, condita ante lapsum, and corrupta.)

. 29. I. That man being made upright, and so left Man's Fall.
in manu consilii sui (God permitting him to act according to that freedom of
will wherewith as a reasonable creature he had endowed him) did by his own
voluntary disobedience, through the cunning of Satan, tempting him thereunto,
fall away from God, cast himself into a state of sin and misery, under the
bondage of Satan, without any power, possibility, or so much as desire to
recover himself out of that wretched condition; All which God did decree not to
hinder, as purposing to make use thereof, as a fit occasion for the greater
manifestation of his power, wisdom, goodness, mercy, justice, etc. Of this my
opinion is, that it is, in every branch of it, so undeniably founded in the
express affirmations of holy Writ, that there can be no doubt of it to any
Christian.

. 30. II. That man being thus falln, God out of his infinite compassion to his
creature, made after The giving of Christ for Mankind.
his own image (and that Satan might not finally triumph in so rich a conquest,
if the whole mass of mankind should perish) decreed to send his only begotten
Son Jesus Christ into the world, to undertake the great work of our Redemption,
and to satisfy his Justice for sin, that so notwithstanding the same, the
whole mass of mankind lost by the fall of the first Adam, might be restored to
a capability of salvation, through the mercy of God, and the merits of Jesus
Christ, the second Adam.

In this, compared with what you before said, and afterward add, I discern
your full agreement to the words of our Church-Catechism, as those are exactly
consonant to the manifold testimonies of sacred Writ, that Christ dyed for, and
thereby redeemed all mankind; your words being not (to my apprehension) capable
of any of those evasions, that others are willing to reserve themselves in this
business, as of his dying sufficiently, but not intentionally for all, for that
(...) is superseded by your words of Gods sending Christ etc. that so mankind
etc.] which must needs import his unfeigned intention, that mankind should be
restored to a real capability of salvation, which is not with truth
affirmable, if any one individual of that whole kind be absolutely passed by,
or left, or excluded from his part in this restoration, and capability of
salvation, which yet we must resolve many millions to be, if that which is
perfectly necessary to the recovery of those which were so totally lost, as
your former proposition truly supposed, be not really and effectively made up
to them by Christ. And as in this full latitude I am obliged to understand you,
so I wish not any more pregnant words to express it, then those which you have
chosen.

. 31. III. That man having by his fall rendered The new Covenant,
himself incapable of receiving any benefit from the Covenant made with him in
his first Creation, God was graciously pleased to enter into a new Covenant
with mankind, founded in his Son Jesus Christ, consisting of Evangelical but
conditional promises, of granting remission of sins, and everlasting life, upon
the condition of faith in Christ, repentance from dead works, and new
obedience: and gave commandment that the said Covenant by the preaching of the
Gospel should be published throughout the world. this, you say, you conceive to
be that which the Arminians call the general decree of Predestination, but is
rejected by the Calvinists,] And that all these Decrees are (according to our
weak manner of understanding the way of Gods counsels, salva coexistentia and
praesentialitate rerum omnium in mente divina ab aeterno) antecedent to the
decrees of Election and Reprobation.]

To this also I fully assent, both as to the truth, and fullness of the
expression in every part, especially in that of Gods entering with mankind
(without any restraint) the new Covenant, founded in Christ: of the
conditionateness of the promises of that new Evangelical Covenant: of
repentance and new obedience, together with faith in Christ, making up that
complete condition: of the antecedency of this Covenant in Christ (and the
command of publishing it throughout the world) to the decrees of Election and
Reprobation: which seems to me to be expressly set down from Christ's words Mar.
xvi. 15, 16. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature, he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, he
that believes not, shall be damned.] which evidently founds those two decrees
in the precedaneous preaching, and men's receiving or rejecting of the Gospel.

. 32. And when the Gospels are all so express in setting down that command of
Christ to his Apostles The Decree of publishing the Gospel to all the world,
of preaching the Gospel to all the world, to the whole Creation, i. e, the
whole Gentile, as well as Jewish world, (and the travels of the Apostles
witness their obedience to it) and when the command of Christ is equivalent
with a decree, and his giving of that in time an evidence of its being by him
predestined from all eternity, it is very strange that this should be denied or
questioned by the Calvinists, or the Arminians rejected by them, when in effect
they do but repeat Christ's own words, who if he gave command to publish the
Gospel to all, then must the publishing of the Gospel be matter of a general
decree, there being no other so sure a way of discerning what was ab aeterno
predestined by God in his secret counsel, as the Scriptures telling us what was
by the Father, or Christ in time actually commanded.

. 33. Thus far and no farther reach those which you own to be your present
opinions, and pronounce of them, that you are so far convinced from the phrases
and expressions frequent in Scripture, that you cannot but own them as such,
And then let me tell you, it were very happy that all men would agree in these,
and yet more happy, it instead of more curious enquiries, they would sit down,
and betake themselves uniformly and vigorously to that Evangelical Obedience,
task, which the^e data bind indispensably upon them, and which is of that
weight, that it may well employ the remainder of their lives to perform it to
purpose, I mean the work of Evangelical obedience, the condition of the new
Covenant, without which the capability of pardon and salvation, which was
purchased for mankind in general and for every man, shall never be actuated to
any.

. 34. Beyond these therefore what you add, Matters of Conjecture.
you acknowledge to be but conjectures, which though to you they seem not
improbable, yet you profess to maintain your (...) or Scepticisme in them. And
if in any of these I should, on the same terms of conjecture, or seeming
probability, differ from you, this still were fully to accord with you in the
general, viz. the suspension of belief, and proceeding no farther then
conjectures in these things.

What the issue will be, shall now be speedily experimented, by proceeding to a
view of them, remembering still that you propose them but as conjectures.

. 35. The first is, That the object of the decrees of Election and Reprobation,
as they are set forth in The first.
the Scripture, seems to you to be man preached unto, Those being elected to
eternal life, who receive Christ, as he is offered to them in the Gospel, viz.
as their Lord and Savior, and those reprobated, who do not so receive him.]
Herein I not only perfectly agree with you, but more then so, I do think it an
unquestionable truth, which carries it is evidence along with it, and so will be
acknowledged by any that observes the limitation by you affixt to the subject
of the proposition, the object of the decrees [as they are set forth in the
Scripture] For he that shall but consider, that the holy Scripture is a The
object of Scripture Election.
donative afforded us by God, and designed for our eternal advantages, not to
enable us to judge of others, but our selves, not to discover all the
unsearchable recesses of his closet, or secret counsels (abs condita Domino Deo
nostro) but to reveal to men those truths, which themselves are concerned in,
would make no difficulty to conclude, that the Scripture speaks only of those,
to whom it speaks, and as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. v. 12. What has he to do
to judge them that are without? leaving them wholly to Gods judgment, so does
the Scripture declare Gods dealing only with those, to whom the Scripture
comes, to whom some way or other (whether by writing or preaching it matters
not) the Gospel of Christ is revealed.

. 36. This as it appears by innumerable evidences in the Scripture, so it is
put beyond all dispute by that even now recited text, at Christ's farewell, Mar.
xvi. his commission to his Apostles, and declaration of the fixed determined
consequences of it, an express transcript of Gods eternal destinations or
decrees in that matter, Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, and he that
believes not shall be damned] In which words what can be the meaning of [shall
be saved, and shall be damned] but this, that God has decreed salvation and
damnation to such? Those therefore are the object of those divine decrees, who
are the subject of that proposition, and those are evidently men preached to,
of which some believe, and are baptized, and those have their parts in the
first decree, that of election to salvation, some reject the Gospel, and
believe not, and those fall under the second branch, that of rejection to
Damnation.

. 37. Against the evidence of this, no opposition All Scripture decrees
conditionate,
can be made, and to this it is undeniably consequent, that all the Decrees
whereof Scripture treats, are conditionate, receiving Christ as the Gospel
offers him, as Lord, and Savior, the former as well as the latter being the
condition of Scripture-election, and the rejecting or not receiving him thus,
the condition of the Scripture-reprobation.

. 38. As for any other which can be phansied distant from this (and so all
absolute Election or inconditionate Reprobation) it must needs be resolved to
be the mere invention and fabric of men's brains, without the duct of Gods
Spirit in Scripture, which if at least it hold not a strict analogy with that
which the Scripture has thus revealed to us, will never be excused from great
temerity, Temerity of introducing absolute Decrees.
and the sin of dogmatizing, the rifling Gods secrets, and setting up our own
imaginations, if not prejudices, for the oracles of God. If this were well
thought of, it would infallibly set a period to all further disputes, on this
subject. And the proposition, which I have last set down from you, is so
irrefragably convincing, that I hope it may be successful to so good an end,
and all men that read it, resolve it their duty to preach no other Decrees of
God from Scripture, but this, that all that receive the Gospel preached, and
live according to the praescript rule thereof, (for that is to receive Christ
as there he is offered to them, as a Lord and Savior) shall be saved, and all
they that reject it, when it is thus revealed, or live in contradiction to the
terms whereon it is established, shall be damned. This would probably change
curiosity into industry, unprofitable disquisitions into the search and trying
of our own ways, and working out our own salvation.

. 39. To this proposition, if it shall be granted, you annex two Corollaries,
and I that have not only yielded but challenged the undoubted truth of the
Proposition, can make no question of the Corollaries, The first is this,

. 40. That it will be impossible to maintain the Doctrine of Universal Grace in
that manner as the Remonstrants are said to assert it, against the objection
which is usually made by their adversaries, how evangelical Grace can be
offered to such nations or persons, as never had the Gospel preached unto them.]

. 41. The truth of this Corollary (as of all other) must be judged of by the
dependence from Whether the heathens have Evangelical Grace.
the Principle, the connection it has with the former proposition; That spoke
of the Decrees, as they are set forth in Scripture, and of the condition
required of them that are elected to salvation, receiving Christ preached, as
he is offered in the Gospel, and accordingly it is most evident, that they that
will found their Doctrine on Scripture, must find not only difficulty, but
impossibility to maintain the gift of evangelicall Grace (which I suppose to be
a supernatural power to believe and obey the Gospel) to those, to whom the
Gospel has never been revealed. What the Remonstrants are said to assert in
this matter, I shall forbear to examine, because I design not to engage in any
controversy at this time with any; only as on one side it is evident, that
their adversaries can receive no benefit by the objection, the salvability of
all to whom the Gospel is preached, being as contrary to their Doctrine of
only the Elect, as it would be, if extended to the heathens also, all
Christians being not with them in the number of the Elect; so on the other
side, I should think it strange, that in our present notion of Evangelical
grace, for a strength from God to receive and obey the Gospel preached, it
should, by the Remonstrants, or any other, be affirmed from Scripture, that it
is given, or offered to those to whom the Gospel has not been revealed: S.
Paul styles the Gospel, the power of God unto salvation, and the preaching of
it the (...) administration of the spirit, and indeed the spirit is in
Scripture promised only to them who believe in Christ, and therefore speaking
of what may be maintained by Scripture, and confining the speech to evangelical
Grace, the Universality of it can no farther be by that maintained to extend,
then to those to whom the Gospel is preached, for if Faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word, i. e. preaching the Gospel, it must follow, they
cannot believe, and so have not Evangelical Grace, or strength to believe,
without a Preacher.

. 42. And therefore I remember the Learned Bishop of Sarisbury, Doctor Davenant
in his Lent Sermon (I think the last he preached before the King) declared his
opinion to be (as for Universal Redemption, so) for Universal Grace within the
Church; and as for this he was, I think, by none accounted an Arminian, so I
never heard any that was of the Remonstrant persuasions, unsatisfied with the
scantness of that declaration, but thought it as much, as, speaking of Grace in
the Scripture notion of it, evangelical Grace, could with any reason be
required of him.

. 43. As for the state and condition of heathens, to whom the Gospel is not
revealed, and yet it is no fault of theirs that it is not, as all those that
lived before Christ and many since, as it is evident the Scripture was not
delivered to them, nor consequently gave to us Christians rules for the judging
of them, so it is most reasonable which you add in your second Corollary, which
is this,

. 44. That into the consideration of Gods Decrees Of the condition of those to
whom the Gospel is not revealed,
such nations or persons are not at all to be taken, as never heard of the
Gospel, but they are to be left wholly to the judgment of God, since he has
not thought fit to reveal to us any certainty concerning their condition, but
reserved it to himself, amongst his other secret counsels, the reasons of his
wonderful and unsearchable dispensations in that kind.] To which I most
willingly subscribe in every tittle, and challenge it as the just debt to the
force of that reason, that shines in it, that no man pass fatal decretory
sentences on so great a part of mankind, by force of those rules, which they
never heard of, nor without hearing could possibly know that they were to be
sentenced by them. And this the rather Four Considerations concerning them. The
first.
upon four considerations which Scripture assures us of. First, that as all men
were dead in Adam, so Christ died for all, that were thus dead, for every man,
even for those that deny him, and finally perish: which as it must needs extend
and be intended by him, that thus tasted death for them, to the benefit of
those that knew him not (for if he died for them that deny him, why not for
them that are less guilty, as having never heard of him, especially when it is
not the Revelation of Christ, to which the Redemption is affixt, but his Death)
so the certain truth of this is most expressly revealed and frequently
inculcated in the Scripture (though nothing be there found of Gods decrees
concerning them) upon this ground especially, that no person of what nation
soever should have any prejudice to Christian Religion, when it should be first
revealed to him, when he finds his interest so expressly provided for by so
gracious a Redeemer, who if he had not dyed for every man, 'twere impossible
for any Preacher to assure an Infidel, that he dyed for him, or propose any
constringent reason to him, why he should believe on him for salvation. To this
it is consequent, that whatsoever Gods unrevealed ways are, to deal with any
heathen, what degree of repentance from Dead works, obedience, or performance
soever he accept from them, this must needs be founded in the Covenant made
with mankind in Christ, which you most truly have established, there being no
other name under heaven, no salvation possible to lapsed man by any other
Covenant; Which, being set in opposition to the first Covenant of perfect
unsinning obedience, and therefore called a second and Evangelical Covenant, on
condition only of sincere obedience, of doing what by Gods gift, purchased by
Christ, men are enabled to do, it follows still, that whatsoever acceptance or
mercy they, who never heard of Christ, can be imagined to have afforded them by
God, must be conformable to the tenure of the Evangelicall Covenant, and so to
the praise of the Glory of that Grace, whereby whosoever is accepted by God, is
accepted in the beloved.

. 45. The second Consideration is the analogy, The second,
which, in one respect, is observable between those to whom the Gospel is not
revealed, and all children and Idiots within the pale of the Church, for
although believing in Christ were supposed equally by the law of Scripture to
be exacted of all, and so of both those sorts (nay by the intervention of the
vow of Baptism to be more expressly the obligation of those that are baptized,
then those that are not) yet there is no reason producible to free the
Christian children and idiots from the blame of not believing, which will not
with equal force be producible for those heathens, to whom the Gospel was
never revealed, it being as impossible to see without the presence of the
object, as without the faculty of sight, without the Sun, as without eyes,
without the revelation of Christ, as without the intellective faculty; which if
it be not part of the importance of that decree of heaven, Go and preach, and
then he that believes not shall be damned, yet it is fully accordant to it,
and shows that that Text was not designed to give suffrage to the damnation of
all but Christians, which is all that your Corollary, or my observations have
aspired unto; to which it is yet farther necessarily consequent, that these
Scripture Decrees which you speak of (and whosoever speaks of any other must be
resolved to speak from some other dictate, then that of Scripture) comprize not
all men, no nor all baptized Christians under them, being terminated only in
those to whom the Gospel is revealed, and those certainly are not all that are
brought into the world, or even to Baptismal new birth.

. 46. The third consideration is, that seeing The third.
the Scripture assures us, that they which have received more, of them more
shall be required, and that he that knows and does not, shall be beaten with
many stripes, this must needs advertise us, that whatever privileges
Christians may have beyond heathens, this is not one, that a smaller degree of
obedience and performances shall be accepted of them, then of heathens would
be, but the contrary, that to whom less is given, less will be required,
according to that of S. Augustine, Ex De lib. A^bit. l. 3. c. 16,
eo quod non accepit, nullus reus est, No man is guilty from that which he has
not received.

. 47. The fourth Consideration is, that God rewards those that have made use of
the single talent, The fourth.
that lowest proportion of Grace, which he is pleased to give; and the method
of his rewarding is by giving them more grace, which as it is in some degree
applicable to heathens, who have certainly the talent of natural knowledge,
and are strictly responsible for it, so if they use not that, but retain the
truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. that makes their condition but the same
with ours, (who are finally lost also, and at the present have our talent taken
away from us) if we make not the due use of it.

. 48. This, it is visible, has befaln those Nations who once had the Gospel
preached to them, and after the knowledge of the truth, returned to their
heathen sins, and so had their candlestick taken from them (to which and not to
Gods primary denying them Evangelical Grace, their present Barbarity is to be
imputed) And the only conclusion which we can hence duly make, is the
acknowledgement of Gods just judgments on them, and reasonable fear lest he
deal in like manner with us, if we transcribe their copy, imitate them in their
demerits. Should God most justly thus punish this nation at this time, could it
either now or in future ages be reasonable hence to argue against the Doctrine
of Universal Grace, in case there were a concurrence of all other evidences for
the truth of the Doctrine? Certainly it could not. In like manner then it
cannot be reasonable to argue thus from the like fate, and effects on other
Nations.

. 49. To which I may add, that Christ being, we know, in Gods decree and
promise, the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, if this argument be
now of force against the heathens, it must equally hold against all that
understood no more of the Predictions of Christ, then the Pagans do now of the
History.

. 50. And then it must, should it have force, follow, not only that the
Sacrifice of Christ was intended to be of avail to none but the Jews, to whom
only the Oracles of God were committed, (which yet you acknowledge was
intended to all) but also that as far as we have ways of judging, a very small
part of those Jews received the salvifick Grace of Christ, if it were confined
and annexed to the revelation and belief of him; For if we may judge of other
ages by that wherein Christ appeared, the Prophecies of the Crucified Messiah
were very little understood by that people. All this makes it more prudent, and
rational, and pious to search our own ways, then to pass sentence on other
men, which is the only thing I have aimed at in these four Considerations.

. 51. Your second Proposition, which you tender as a Conjecture, I cannot but
own under an The second Conjecture an undoubted truth.
higher style of an evident truth of Scripture, It is this, That there is to
the outward tender of Grace in the ministry of the Gospel annexed an inward
offer also of the same to the heart, by the spirit of God Inward grace annexed
to the Ministry of the Gospel.
going along with his word, which some of the Schoolmen call auxilium Gratiae
generale, sufficient in it self to convert the soul of the hearer, if he do not
resist the Holy Ghost, and reject the Grace offerr'd: which as it is grounded
upon these words, Behold I stand at the door and knock, and upon very many
other passages of Scripture beside, so it stands with reason, that the offer,
if it were accepted, should be sufficient ex part sui to do the work, which if
not accepted, is sufficient to leave the person, not accepting the same,
unexcusable.] This I say I am obliged to assent to in the terms, and upon the
double ground both of Scripture and reason, whereon you induce it. If there
were but one text of Scripture so convincingly inferring it, that sure would
advance it above a barely probable Conjecture. But I think the whole tenure of
the new Testament inforceth the same, and though you name but one, you say
there are many other passages of Scripture, on which it is founded. I shall
mention but two, 1. that of the Apostle who calls preaching the word, (...) the
administration of the Spirit, which the Father expresses by verbum vehiculum
Spiritus, the word is the chariot in which the Spirit descends to us, 2. that
description of resisting the holy spirit, which S. Stephen gives us, Act. vii.
51. by their being like the Jews, which persecuted the Prophets which spoke
unto them, which concludes the holy spirit to be given with the preaching of
the Gospel, else how could the rejecting and persecuting the one be the
resisting of the other? So likewise though you mention but one reason, yet that
is as constringent as many, nothing but sufficiency of supernatural Grace
being competent to render him, that is acknowledged naturally impotent,
unexcusable. And therefore deeming that abundantly confirmed to advance it
above a disputable problem, I proceed to the next Proposition, the third,
which you rank under the style of Conjectures, It is this,

52. That because the sufficiency of this General The third Conjecture of
effectual Grace and Scripture-Election and Reprobation.
Grace notwithstanding, through the strength of natural corruption it might
happen to prove uneffectuall to all persons, God vouchsafed out of the
supereffluence of his goodness, yet ex mero beneplacito, without any thing on
their part to deserve it, to confer upon such persons as it pleased him to fix
upon, (without inquiring into under what qualifications, preparations or
dispositions considered,) a more special measure of Grace which should
effectually work in them faith and perseverance unto salvation] This (you say)
you take to be the election especially spoken of in the Scriptures, and if so,
then the Decree of Reprobation must be nothing else but the dereliction or
preterition of the rest, as to that special favor of conferring upon them this
higher degree of effectual Grace. Against this, you say, you know enough may
be objected, and much more then you esteem your self able to answer, yet to
your apprehension somewhat less then may be objected against either of the
extreme opinions.]

. 53. Of this Proposition, as being the first by you produced, to which your
caution seems to be Animadversions on this Conjecture.
due, some things may in passing be fitly noted.

First, that for the stating of that community The first.
which is here set down as the object of Election and reprobation, and expressed
by a general style [all persons] this Caution is necessarily to be taken in,
that the proposition is not to be interpreted in the utmost latitude, that the
style [all persons] is capable of, but as analogy with your former doctrine
strictly requires, for the generality of men preached to: and so neither
belongs to heathens, nor to the Infants or Idiots, or uninstructed among
Christians, but to those that having the Gospel revealed to them, and
sufficient grace to enable them to receive it, are yet left in the hand of
their own counsel, whether they will actually receive it, or no.

. 54. Now of these (which is the second thing to be The second from Scripture.
observed in your proposition) it is manifest, that if (as you suppose both in
the former, and in this Proposition,) they have grace truly sufficient afforded
them, then they want nothing necessary to a fallen weak sinful creature, to
conversion, perseverance and salvation, and if so, then by the strength of this
Grace, without addition of any more, they may effectually convert, persevere
and be saved; and then though what may be, may also not be, and so it be also
possible that of all that are thus preached to, and made partakers of this
Grace, no one shall make use of it to these effects, yet this is but barely
possible, and not rendered so much as probable, either upon any grounds of
Scripture or Reason. In the Scripture there is no word revealed to that sense,
or, that I ever heard of, produced or applied to it, but on the contrary, in
the Parable of the Talents (which seems to respect this matter particularly)
they that received the Talents to negotiate with, did all of them, except one,
make profit of them, and bring in that account to their Master, which received
a reward, which is utterly unreconcileable with the hypothesis of Gods
foreseeing that the talent of sufficient Grace would be made use of by none
that received no more then so. As for that one that made not use of it, all
that is intimated concerning him, is, that if his share comparatively was mean,
yet by the Lord he is charged as guilty for not putting it into the bank, that
at his coming he might receive his own with usury, which certainly evinces,
that that lazy servant is there considered as one that might have managed his
stock as well as the rest, and that that stock was improvable no less then the
other, according to their several proportions, and so herein there is no
difference taken notice of in favor to your Conjecture.

And in Reason it has no sound of probability, that of so great a number of
Christians, sufficiently And Reason.
furnished by God, no one should make use of it to their souls health; it is
evident in the Apostles preaching at Jerusalem and elsewhere, that at the first
proposal of the truth of Christ to them, and the Doctrine of Repentance, whole
multitudes received the Faith, and came in, and no doubt many of them proved
true, and constant Christians, and it is not amiss to observe of the heads of
Doctrine, which the Apostles agreed to publish in all their peregrinations,
that they are of such force (and were on that account pitched on by them) as
might reasonably and probably, with the supposed concurrence of Gods Grace,
beget repentance, and new life in all, to whom they were preached over the
whole world, (and then what the Apostles deemed a rational and probable means
to that end, there is no reason or probability to think should never in any
produce this effect) according to that of Athanasius, that the Faith confessed by
the Fathers In Ep. ad Epictes.
of Nice, according to holy Writ, is (...), sufficient for the averting of all
impiety, and the establishment of all piety in Christ. To which may be applied
that of S. Augustine of the Creed, Quae pauca verba fidelibus nota sunt, In
libel. de fide and symbolo, in Tom. iii.
ut credendo subjugentur Deo, ut subjugati recte vivant, recte vivendo, cor
mundent, cord mundo, quod credant, intelligant. These few words are known to
believers, that by believing, they may be subjugated to God, that by being
subjugated, they way live well, that by living well they may cleanse their
hearts, that by cleansing their hearts they may understand what they believe.
And herein the allwise providence and infinite mercy of God seems to be
engaged, who in the Parable of his dealing with his Vineyard, Isa. v. not only
expostulates, What could I have done more to my vineyard which I have not done]
but also affirms that he looked it should bring forth grapes, and as a
farther evidence of that, built a wine press, in expectation of its bearing
fruit by strength of what he had done to it, which could not well be affirmed
by, or of God, if it were not probable and rational, that in some it should
have the desired effect.

. 55. And if what, on account both of Scripture And the unreconcile ableness of
this conjecture with making man preached to, the object of the Decrees.
and reason (the only ways left us to judge by in this matter) is thus far
removed from improbable, may be supposed to have any truth in it, i. e. if the
sufficient Grace annexed to the authorized sufficient means, have without
farther addition, ever converted any, it then follows necessarily in the third
place, that the Election and Dereliction now proposed by you must have for its
object not indefinitely (as before you set it) man preached unto, or all that
part of mankind to whom the Gospel is offered, and that Grace annexed thereto,
but only that portion of such, as are not wrought upon, or who God in his
infinite prescience discerns would not be wrought upon effectually, and
converted by that measure of sufficient Grace, which he has annexed to the word
preached. For without enquiring what proportion of the number of men preached
unto may probably be placed in that rank (or without assuming any more, then
that it is neither impossible nor improbable that there should be such a rank)
of men converted, and persevering by the strength of that foresaid sufficient
Grace, annexed to the word, the inference is undeniable, that all, whether few
or many, that are of this rank (it being no way probable there should be none)
shall certainly be saved by force of the second Covenant, which decreed
eternal life to all that should believe on him and receive him, as the Gospel
tenders him, as their Lord and Savior, and so cannot be comprised in the
number of them to whom this supereffluence of goodness is supposed to be
vouchsafed, in the granting of which ex mero beneplacito your conjecture makes
the Scripture-Election to consist, and in the Dereliction and Preterition of
the rest (in respect of that special favor) the Decree of Reprobation.

. 56. The plain issue whereof is but this, that if this conjecture, thus
explicated, be adhered to, then many not only of Children, Idiots, heathen
(formerly reserved to Gods secret judgments) but of adult baptized Christians
also, either are or may be saved, who are not of the number of the
Scripture-Elect. Which whether it be reconcile able with the purport of those
places, which in Scripture seem to you to respect Election, or to favor this
opinion, I must leave to farther consideration, being as yet incompetent to
interpose any judgment of it, because I know not what those places are which
most seem to favor it.

. 57. As for the Doctrine it self, of supereffluence of Grace to some,
(abstracted from making The Doctrine of supereffluence of Grace to some,
acknowledged.
it any account of Gods Decrees of Election and Reprobation) It is such as I
can no way question, for certainly God being granted to give sufficient Grace
to all, there is no objection imaginable against this superabounding to some ex
mero beneplacito; Nothing more agreeable to an infinite abyss and unexhaustible
fountain of goodness, then such supereffluence, and he that has not his part
in it, yet having his portion, and that supposed sufficient, ought not to have
an evil eye, to complain and murmr at this partiality, and inequality of
distribution of Gods goodness, or if he do, the words of the parable of the
Laborers in the Vineyard must here have place, Friend, I do thee no wrong, did
not I agree with thee for a penny, take that is thine, and go thy way, is it
not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? Mat. xx. 13, 14, 15. And it is
there observable, that all the occasion of murmuring arose from the order there
observed in accounting with, and paying the Laborers, beginning with them that
came last into the vineyard, for by that means they being allowed a days wages
for an hours labor, the others expectation was raised to an higher pitch, then
probably it would, if they had been paid, and discharged first, for then not
seeing the liberality that others tasted of, they would in all probability have
expected no more, then the hire for which they agreed; And then why should so
casual a circumstance, as the being paid last or first, have any influence on
their minds, or tempt them to murmr at Gods goodness, who from the nature of
the thing had no least temptation to it?

. 58. Only by the way it must be yielded to But this of supereffluence no part
of the Covenant of grace.
the force of that parable, that that supereffluence of which some are there
supposed to taste, was no part of the Covenant of Grace, (his agreement with
them being but in these words, Go into the vineyard, and what is right you
shall receive, v. 7.) but, above what his bargain or covenant obliges, of his
good pleasure, though, on the other side, it be observable, 1. That an
allowable account is there given by those men of their not coming sooner into
the Vineyard, and consequently of their not bearing the heat of the day, in
which all the disproportion between them and others, all the seeming
supereffluence is founded, viz. they were no sooner called, or hired by any
man, and 2. that by the application of the parable to the (...) and (...), to
those that came first, and those that came later into the Apostleship, to
Peter, and Paul, there might still be place for more abundant laboring in
those that came last, and so for reward, in proportion (though through mercy)
to that more abundant laboring, according to the way of setting down the same
parable among the Jews, in ^^d. Bera^^^th.
Gemara Hierosol where the Kings answer to the murmurers is, He in those two
hours has labored as much as you have done all the day.

. 59. But without examining the Acts of Gods munificence, according to any
rules but those of munificence, and again without insisting on the method which
God himself seems to direct us to in this matter, in the parable of the
Talents, where the Rule is general, that to him that has shall be given, and
he shall have abundance, i. e. that the supereffluence of Grace is ordinarily
proportioned to the faithful discharge of former trusts, making use of the
foregoing sufficient Grace, there will be little reason to doubt, but that God
out of his mere good pleasure, without any desert on our part, does thus
dispense his favors to one, more then to another, to one servant five talents,
to another ten, but to all some, only the difficulties will be, 1. whether
Difficulties concerning supereffluence.
it be not as possible, though not as probable, that the supereffluence of
Grace may be resisted, as the lower, but sufficient degree, and then, whether
the condemnation be not the greater, there will be no doubt; Paul that is the
most pregnant example of the supereffluence, is still, under a woe, obliged to
preach the Gospel, and whilst he preaches I. Whether it be not Resistible.
to others, supposes it possible, that himself, if he do not bring his body in
subjection, may become a castaway, and till he has fought his good fight, and
finished his course, and constantly kept the faith, we never find him confident
of receiving his crown, which then he challenges from Gods righteousness, or
fidelity; 2. whether the extraordinary favor II. Whether it belong not rather
to providence then Grace.
of God, which some men receive, and by virtue of which, over and above the
sufficient Grace, they may be thought to be wrought on effectually, may not
rather be imputed to Gods special providence, then his special Grace? so in
Bishop Overals way it seems affirmable, for in his Scheme the effectualness
seems to be attributed to the giving what is given, tempore congruo, at a time
when (whether by sickness, or by any other circumstance of their state) they
are foreseen by God to be so qualified and disposed, that they shall infallibly
accept Christ offered, on his own conditions, and so convert, and receive the
seed into good ground, and so persevere and be saved, when the same man, out of
those circumstances, would not have been wrought on by the same means. And if
this be it which you mean (as I doubt not but it is, and that herein you
perfectly agree with Bishop Overall) then I say the question is, whether the
seasonable application or timeing be not rather to be imputed to special
Providence, the mercy of Gods wise and gracious disposal to those men that are
thus favored, then to special Grace, as that signifies an higher degree of
Gods grace, then is that sufficient measure, which is afforded to others; it
being possible that an equal, nay a lower degree of Grace, being congruously
timed and tendered, may prove effectual, when the like, nay an higher, at
another time, proves uneffectual. And though all acts of Gods good providence
may in some sense be styled acts of his Grace, and so extraordinary providence
may be styled special Graces, in which sense, the striking Paul in his journey
to Damascus, and calling to him out of heaven with grace proportionable to that
call, may fitly be called a work of Gods special Grace; and so is every
sickness or other judgment, that is sent to melt any, supposeable to have a
proportionable, and that is an extraordinary and special Grace annexed to it;
and the providence, and so the grace is the greater, if it be applied tempore
congruo, when there is no potent obstacle or principle for resistance; yet
still the question is seasonable, whether this be all that is meant by this
special measure of Grace, which shall work effectually, or if more be meant,
what ground there is for it in the Scripture.

. 60. To this second question your advertisement by letter has given the
satisfaction I expected, that you were not curious to consider the distinction
between the Grace and the Providence of God, there being no necessity for so
doing, as to your purpose, which was only to express your sense, that it must
be the work of God (whether of Grace or Providence it matters not) that must do
the deed, and make the sufficient Grace effectual. This answer I accept, and
make no farther return to it, only from the uncertainty of the former, as to
any establishment from Scripture-grounds, and so likewise of this latter, till
it shall appear by any sure word of promise to have any real influence on the
matter in hand, there is way made for a third question,

. 61. Whether granting the truth of all that is pretended for the
supereffluence of Gods goodness III. Whether this be it to which Election is
determined.
to some, this can fitly de defined the thing, whereto Election is determined,
and whether all that have not their part in this, are in Scripture-style said
to be Reprobated. This I say, not to propose any new matter of dispute, or to
require answer to all that may be objected against this notion of Decrees,
which you (and other very Learned and sober men) have proposed by way of
conjecture only, but rather to demonstrate my concurrence with you, that this
can amount no higher at most, then to a matter of conjecture.

. 62. And having said this, I shall propose it Considerations from Scripture
opposed to the former conjecture.
to your impartial consideration, I. Whether the Scripture ought not to be our
guide in all even opining and conjecturing in such matters, which are so much
above our reason? II. Whether the Scripture do not furnish us with these
express grounds, 1. that there are some sort of auditors that come to Christ,
become his Proselytes, embrace the Gospel, when it is preached unto them, that
are (...), fit, or prepared, or disposed for the kingdom of God, obedience
Luke ix, 62
to the Gospel, (...), disposed for eternal life, on file for it (in
opposition to others Act. xiii. 48.
who are (...) v. 46. not worthy of, meet, or qualified for the Evangelical
state) 2. that probity of mind is specified to be this temper, a willingness
Jo. vii. 17.
to do Gods will, that (in the parable) of the good ground, and the honest
heart meant by it. 3. that the Evangelical dispensations are governed Mat.
xiii. 8.
by the maxim of habenti dabitur, to Luc, viii, 15,
the humble he gives more grace, the poor are Evangelized, the children, and
poor in spirit, of such, Mat, xiii, 1^,
and of them is the kingdom of heaven; and lastly, Jam, iv, 6, Mat, xi, 5,
Mat. xix. 14. and v. 3. Luc. vi. 22. 1 Cor. 1. 27. The ground of Effectualness
of grace more probably deduced from probity of heart.
that God has chosen the foolish things of the world, the weak, the
degenerous, the vilified, those that are not, in opposition to the mighty,
powerful, noble and wise. III. Whether on these and many other the like
fundamental Truths of the Gospel, it be not more reasonable to fetch the
ground of the effectualness of that sufficient Grace to one, which is not
effectual to another, from the temper and disposition of the heart, to which
the Gospel is preached, then from any other circumstance (especially when this
does not deny, or exclude the proper efficacy of those circumstances,
whatsoever they or it shall any way appear to be) God having made the Baptist
the forerunner to Christ, repentance to Faith, the ^er. iv. 3.
breaking up our fallow grounds, to his not sowing among thorns, and the very
nature of the Gospel being such, that all that are truly sensible of their
sins, the odiousness and danger of them, and heartily desirous to get out of
that state, the weary and heavy laden, the humble, docile, tractable, honest
heart, willing to take Christ's yoke upon them, are constantly wrought on, and
converted, when the promulgate mercies, or promises of the Gospel, and the
Grace annexed to it, are addressed to them, whereas the very same, nay perhaps a
greater degree of light and Grace, meeting with a proud, refractary,
pleasurable, or any way hypocritical, and deceitful heart, either is not at all
heeded and received, or takes no firm root in it.

. 63. And if now (the only objection I can foresee) it be demanded, whether
this of probity, This probity no natural preparation, but of Gods planting by
preventing grace.
humility, etc. the subactum solum, soil mellow'd, and prepared for this
effectual work of Grace, be not some natural quality, of the man, for if so,
then the efficacy of grace will be imputed to these natural, or moral
preparations, which is grossly prejudicial to the grace of God, and to the owing
of all our good to his supernatural operations, the answer is obvious and
unquestionable, that this (I shall call it Evangelical) temper is far from
being natural to any corrupt child of Adam, where ever it is met with, it is a
special plant of Gods planting, a work of his preparing, softning, preventing
Grace, and as much imputable to the operation of his holy Spirit, as any effect
of his subsequent or cooperating Grace is, which I challenge to be the meaning
of those words of Christ, Joh. vi. 37. All that my Father gives me, shall come
to me; where such as these, are first fitted by God, and then by him are said
to be given to Christ, works of his finger, his spirit, and then by the author
of them presented to Christ, as the persons rightly disposed for his
discipleship, and his kingdom in men's hearts, and this work of Gods in fitting
them, is there called his drawing of them to Christ, v. 44. and as there it is
said that none but such can come to Christ, so verse. 37. all such shall come to
him, which is an evidence that the coming, wherein the effectualness of the
grace consists, is imputable to this temper wrought in them by God. And if
still it be demanded why this is not wrought in all Christians hearts, I answer
finally, that the only reason the Scripture teaches us is, because some resist
that spirit, that is graciously given by God, and purposely designed to work it
in them.

. 64. And if it still be suggested, that some are naturally more proud and
refractary, and voluptuously The one objection against this satisfied
disposed then others, (an effect of their temper, owing often to their immediate
parents, who may transfuse their depravations and corruptions immediately to
their children, as well as Adam has done to us all mediately) and so a greater
degree of grace will be necessary to the humbling and mollifying them, and a
lower, which might be sufficient for meeker tempers, will be unsufficient for
them, and so still these are as infallibly excluded, and barred out, as if it
were by a fatal decree passing them by in Massa, this will be also satisfied,
by resolving, that God in his wise disposals and abundant mercies, proportioned
according to men's wants, gives a greater degree of preventing Grace to such as
he sees to be naturally in greatest need of it, or else applies it so
advantageously by congruous timing, as he knows is sufficient even to them, to
remove these natural obstacles, but all this (to them, as to others)
resistibly still, and so, as though it succeed sometimes, yet is frequently
resisted.

. 65. By this means he that is proud and obstinate, and continues, and holds
out such against all the softning preparations of heaven, (sufficient to have
wrought a kindlier temper in him) being so ill qualified for the holy spirit of
discipline, is not converted, but hardened by the same or equal means of the
word and grace, by which the humble is converted, and then replenished with
higher degrees; And when the Scripture is so favorable to this notion, saying
expressly that God chooses one and not the other, gives more grace to one, and
from the other takes away that which he has, resists the proud (when they
refuse discipline) Mat. xiii. 13.
speaks to them only in parables, because seeing they see not, i. e. resist
and frustrate Gods preventing graces, and infinite the like, why may not this
rather be the Scripture-election, then that other which seems not to have any,
at least not so visible grounds in it?

. 66. Should this be but a Conjecture too, it is not the less fit for this
place, where our discourse has been of such, and the only seasonable inquiry
is, either 1. which is of probables the most, or of improbables the least such,
(and that I suppose is competently showed already) or 2. which may be most
safe, and least noxious, in case it should fail of exact truth.

. 67. On which occasion I shall add but this, that the only consequence
naturally arising from The safeness of this stating.
this Scheme is, that we make our elections after the pattern of God, choose
humility and probity, and avert pride and hypocrisy, that before all things in
the world, every man think himself highly concerned 1. not to resist or
frustrate Gods preventing Graces, but cheerfully to receive, cooperate, and
improve them, to pray, and labor, and attend and watch all opportunities of
Grace and Providence, to work humility and probity in his heart, impatience of
sin, and hungring and thirsting after righteousness, as the only soil,
wherein the Gospel will ever thrive, to begin his discipleship with repentance
from dead works, and not with assurance of his election and salvation, to set
out early, and resolutely, without procrastinating, or (...), Tit. Bostr.
looking back, Luke ix. 62. and 2. if he has overslipt such opportunities, to
bewail and retrive them betimes, lest he be hardened by the deceitfulness of
sin. and 3. whatsoever good he shall ever advance to, by the strength of Gods
sanctifying and assisting grace, to remember with the utmost gratitude, how
nothing has been imputable to himself in the whole work, but from the
beginning to the end, all due to supernatural Grace, the foundation
particularly (that which if it be the most imperfect, is yet the most necessary
part of the building, and the sure laying of which tends extremely to the
stability of the whole) laid in Gods preventions, cultivating our nature, and
fitting us with capacities of his higher donatives; And what can less
prejudice, nay more tend to the glory of his grace, then this?

. 68. Whereas the other Scheme, as it takes Compared with the other.
special care to attribute all the work of conversion to Grace, and withal not
so to limit that communicative spring, as to leave any destitute of a
sufficient portion of it (in which respect I have nothing really to object
against it, if it could but approve it self by Gods word to be the Truth) so
when it bears not any such impress of Divine Character upon it, it may not be
amiss to consider, Whether he that is persuaded that the sufficient Grace is
such as may, and (as some set it) God sees will never do any man good, without
the addition of his superesfluence, which he affords to few, (and that if that
come, it will infallibly do the work, if it come not, he is so past by, as to
be reprobated by God) may not have some temptations to despair on one side, and
not do his utmost to cooperate with that sufficient Grace, which is allowed
him, and so with the fool in Ecclesiastes Cap. iv. 5.
fold his hands together till he comes to eat his own flesh, or else to presume
on the other side, and expect securely till the coming of the congruous good
time of Gods choice, which shall give the effectualness to his Grace, and so be
slothful and perish by that presumption?

. 69. Whether the Scheme, as it is set by learned men, (abstracting now from
the truth of it) be in any considerable degree liable to this danger, I leave
those, that are favorable to it, to consider, presuming that if it be, it will
not be thought fit to be pitched upon, as the most commodious, without either
the authority of Scripture, or some other preponderating advantages tendered by
it, which to me are yet invisible. And thus much may serve for the doctrine of
Gods Decrees, which if I mistake not, leaves them in relation to man, in this
posture, (as far as the Scripture Light leads us) An Anacephalaecsis of the
Doctrine of Gods Decreess


. 70. 1. That God decreed to create man after his own image, a free and
rational agent, to give him a Law of perfect unsinning obedience, and conferr
on him grace and faculties to perform it, and to reward that obedience with
eternal bliss, and proportionably to punish disobedience.

2. That foreseeing the wilful fall of the first Of Election.
Man, with whom, and with all mankind, in him, this Covenant was made, and
consequent to that, the depravation of that image, and that Grace, (the image
of Satan, corruption of the will, and all the faculties, taking the place of
it) he decreed to give his Son to seek and to save that which was lost, making
in him, and sealing in his blood a new Covenant, consisting of a promise of
pardon and sufficient Grace, and requiring of all the condition of uniform
sincere obedience.

3. That he decreed to commissionate messengers to preach this Covenant to all
mankind, promised to accompany the preaching of it to all hearts with his
inward sufficient grace, enabling men to perform it in such a degree, as he in
this second covenant had promised to accept of.

4. That the method which he has decreed to use in dispensing this sufficient
Grace, is, 1. to prevent and prepare men's hearts by giving them the grace of
humility, repentance and probity of heart, i. e. by awaking and convincing men
of sin, and giving them (in answer to their diligent prayers) grace sufficient
to produce this in their hearts, and then upon their making use of this Grace
to the designed end to add more powerful assistances and excitations, enabling
them both to will and to do, and upon their constant right use of these, still
to advance them to an higher degree of sanctification, and perseverance, till
at length he accomplish and reward them with a crown of Glory.

. 71. On the other side, to forsake them in justice, that obstinately resist
and frustrate all these Of Reprobation.
wise and gracious methods of his, and having most affectionately set life and
death before them, and conjured them to choose one, and avoid the other, still
to leave unto them, as to free and rational Agents, a liberty to refuse all
his calls, to let his talents lie by them unprofitably; which if out of their
own perverse choices they continue to do, he decrees to punish the contumacy
finally, by assigning them their own options, to take their talents from them,
and cast them into outer darkness, where shall be weeping and wailing and
gnashing of teeth.

. 72. How clearly every part of this Scheme is agreeable to the several
parables, whereby Christ The Conclusion.
was pleased to adumbrate the kingdom of heaven, and innumerable other
passages in the Gospel, and the whole purport of the new Covenant, I leave to
every man to consider, and then to judge for himself, whether it be not safer
and more Christian to content our selves with this portion, which Christ has
thought fit to reveal to us, then to permit our curiosities to deeper and more
pragmatick searches, especially if those shall either directly, or but
consequentially undo, or but darken what is thus explicitly settled.

. 73. I proceed now to your second head of Discourse, (which also I suppose,
is, by what has Of the Efficacy of Grace.
been already considered, competently established) concerning the efficacy of
Grace, etc. where your Proposition is thus set down.

. 74. That in the conversion of a sinner, and the begetting of Faith in the
heart of man, the Grace of God has the main stroke, chiefest operation, yet
so, that the free will of man does in some sort cooperate therewith (for no man
is converted or believes without his own consent) all parties pretend to
agree. The point of difference is, how to state the manner and degree of the
cooperation, as well of the one, as of the other, so as neither the glory of
Gods Grace be eclipsed, nor the freedom of man's will destroyed. In which
difficult point, you say, you think it fitter to acquiesce in those aforesaid
acknowledged truths, in which both sides agree, then to hold close to either
opinion]

. 75. In this proposition, it being by you in the Conclusion most undeniably
and Christianly The Power of Grace in conversion, etc
resolved, that the one care ought to be, that neither the glory of Gods Grace
be eclipsed, nor the freedom of man's will destroyed, It would not be amiss a
little to reflect on the former part, and demand whether your expression were
not a little too cautious, in saying, the grace of God has the main stroke and
chiefest operation] did I not discern the ground of that caution, because you
were to express that whereunto all parties must be supposed to consent. This
being abundantly sufficient to account for your caution, I shall not doubt of
your concurrence with me, that it may with truth be said, and I suppose also by
the agreement, if not of all Christians, yet of both parties in this debate,
particularly of the Remonstrants, that the Grace of God is in lapsed man the
one sole principle of spiritual life, Conversion, Regeneration, Repentance,
Faith and all other Evangelical virtues, and that all that can justly be
attributed to our will in any of these, is the obeying the motions, and making
use of the powers, which are thus bestowed upon us, by that supernatural
principle; To work and work out our own salvation, upon the strength of Gods
giving us to will and to do; by [giving us to will and to do] meaning his
giving us power to each, as (...), Luke 1. is giving us power to serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives, every initiall and more
perfect act of holiness, especially persevering in it all our days, being
wholly imputable to that power, which is given by Gods Spirit. For indeed when
it is considered, what the state of our corrupt will is, being naturally
averted from God, and strongly inclined to evil, it seems to me scarce proper
to call this, in relation to supernatural virtues, a free will, till God by his
preventing Grace has in some degree manumitted it, till Christ has made it
free; Being then what it is, i. e. in some degree emancipated by Gods Grace,
and by Grace only, (this act of Christ's love, and Grace being reached out to
enemies, to men in their corrupt state of aversion and opposition to God) the
will is then enabled (still by the same principle of Grace) to choose life,
when it is proposed, and What the freedom of will now it.
the ways and means to it, and though it be left free to act or not to act, to
choose or not to choose, yet when it does act and choose life, it does it no
otherwise (to my understanding) then the body does perform all the actions of
life, merely by the strength of the soul, and that continual animation it
has, it receives from it; which makes the parallel complete, and gave ground
to the expression and comparison betwixt giving of natural life, and
regeneration.

. 76. What freedom the will naturally (under this corrupt state) has to other
things, of all sorts, I do not now consider any farther, then that it is fully
furnished with ability to sin, and Ability to sin.
so to refuse and contemn, and to receive in vain the Grace of God, and Grace
it self does not deprive it of that part of its corrupt patrimony: As for an
uniform constant choice of those things that belong to our peace and spiritual
end, for the beginning of that, and every step of motion through, and
perseverance in it, Its freedom, and strength, and every degree of life, or
action, is wholly and entirely from Grace, and then he that without him can do
nothing, can do all things through Christ that strengthens him. And so the
only remaining question is (which to me, I confess, is a posing one) What
exception can possibly be started against this stating, and consequently what
farther doubt there can be in this matter.

. 77. I have of my self by my natural Generation, (but this is also from God)
power for natural, All good due to Grace.
nay sinful actings, for this I need no farther principle, and the
supervenience of a supernatural takes it not from me; Our experience assures
us, what the Scripture so often mentions, that we often resist the Holy Ghost,
which we could not do, if at least it were not tendered to us: But for all
degrees of good, from the first good motion toward conversion, to the enstating
us in glory, it is wholly received from the Spirit of God, and the glory of it
cannot in any degree, without the utmost sacrilege, be arrogated or assumed to
our selves, as the work of our free will; and seeing it is one act of
superabundant grace to enable us to do any thing, and another to reward us for
doing it in so imperfect a manner, (and with such mixtures of manifold
pollutions) and a third to exercise us in, and reward us for those things,
which are so agreeable and grateful to our reasonable nature, Commandments far
from grievous, a gracious yoke, as well as a light burden, Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name, give we the praise. Praise the Lord, O my
soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name.

. 78. What you add on this theme, is by way of reflection, on the inconvenient
opinions of the opposite parties in this matter.

1. That on the Calvinists part these two things, viz. the physical
predetermination, and (which must Predetermination and irresistibility,
necessarily follow thereupon) the Irresistibility of the work of Grace, seem
to you to be so inconsistent with the natural liberty of the will, and so
impossible to be reconciled therewith, that you can not yet by any means fully
assent thereto] The style wherein this concludes [cannot yet fully] signifies
to me, that you have, with great impartiality (if not with favor and
prepossession of kindness to the Antiremonstrant side) endeavored your utmost
to reconcile these two Doctrines of Predetermination and Irresistibility, with
the common notions of Morality How unreconcileable with Christian principles.
and Christianity, and you cannot find any means to do it; and I fully consent
to you in it, and cannot but add, that the very being of all future judgment,
and so of heaven and hell, considered as rewards of what is here done in our
bodies, whether good or bad, nay the whole economy of the Gospel, of giving,
and giving more, and withholding and withdrawing Grace, and the difference
betwixt the Grace of Conversion and Perseverance, and the force of
exhortations, promises, threats, commands (and what not?) depends immediately
and unavoidably on the truth of the Catholic Doctrine of all ages, as in these
points of Predetermination and Irresistibility, it stands in opposition to the
Calvinists. The showing this diffusedly, according to the merit of the matter,
through the several steps, were the work of a volume, of which I shall hope
there can be no need, after so many have been written on the subject.

. 79. Your next reflection is on the Arminians, of whom you say,

On the other side, me thinks, the Arminians ascribe less to the grace of God,
and more to the free Of Arminians attributing too little to Grace.
will of man, then they ought, in this, That according to their Doctrine, why
of two persons (as Peter and Judas) supposed to have all outward means of
conversion equally applied, yet one should be effectually converted, the other
not, the discriminating power is by them placed in the will of man, which (you
say) you should rather ascribe to the work of Grace] If this be the right
stating of the case between the Arminians and their opposites, I am then
without consulting the Authors, assured by you that I am no Arminian, for I
deem it impossible (I say not for any man, not knowing what miracles the magic
of some men's passions may enable them to work, but) for you that have written
what I have now set down from you, to imagine you ascribe more to the Grace of
God, and less to the will of man, then I have thought my self obliged to do,
making it my challenge and interest, and requiring it to be granted me (and not
my concession only) that all that any man is enabled to do, is by Christ's
strengthening him,

. 80. But not to question what others do, or to accuse or apologize for any,
let us consider the case you set, and allow the truth to be judged of, in this
whole question, by what this particular case shall exact.

. 81. But 1. in the setting of it, I cannot but Of Judas whether he were not
converted.
mark two things, 1. That the persons made use of to set the case in, are Judas
and Peter. 2. That to the word [converted] is prefixed [effectually.] This
would make it probable that you think a man may be converted, and yet not
effectually converted, or however that Judas was not effectually converted.
That Judas was converted, and, as far as concerned the present state,
abstracted from perseverance, effectually converted, I offer but this one
testimony, the words of Christ to his Father, Joh. xvii. 12,
[Of those whom thou gave me I have lost none, save only the son of
perdition] That whosoever is by the Father given to Christ, is converted, and
that effectually, is concluded from Christ's universal proposition, All that my
Father gives me, shall come to me, Joh. vi. 37. and here it is expressly said
that Judas (though by his apostasy now become the son of perdition) was by God
given to Christ, and therefore he came to Christ, i. e. was converted, which
also his being lost, his very Apostasy testifies, for how could he Apostatize
from Christ, that was never come to him? From hence it seems to me necessary
either to interpret your speech of final perseverance, as if none were
effectually converted, but such who persevere, (which as it belongs to another
question, that of perseverance, to which you after proceed, and not to this of
reconciling irresistibility and free will, so it would seem to state it
otherwise, then I perceive you afterward do) or, to avoid that, to understand
no more by Judas and Peter then any other two names, suppose Robert and
Richard, John at Noke and John at Style, (as you since tell me your meaning
was) the one converted effectually, i. e. really, the other not, when both are
supposed to have the same outward means of conversion equally applied to them.

. 82. Now to the question thus set of any two, and supposing what has been
granted between you and me, that the outward means are accompanied to both with
a sufficient measure of inward Grace, My answer you discern already, that the
Whence discrimination comes.
Discrimination comes immediately from one man's resisting sufficient Grace,
which the other does not resist, but makes use of: In this should I add no
more, there could be no difficulty, because as it is from corruption, and
liberty to do evil, (that meeting with the resistibility of this sufficient
grace) that one resists it, so it is wholly from the work of Grace upon an
obedient heart, that the other is converted; And so this stating ascribes all
the good to the work of Grace, i. e. to that power, which by supernatural Grace
is given him, and all From man's liberty to resist.
the ill to man and his liberty, or ability to resist.

. 83. But from what has been said, there is yet more to be added, viz. that
the obedience of the one to the call of Grace, when the other, supposed to have
sufficient, if not an equal measure, obeyes not, may reasonably be imputed to
the humble, malleable, melting temper, (which the From Gods Preventions.
other wanted) and that again owing to the preventing Graces of God, and not to
the natural probity, or free will of Man, whereas the other, having resisted
those preparing Graces, or not made use of them, lies under some degree of
obduration, pride, sloth, voluptuousness, etc. and that makes the
discrimination on his side, i. e. renders him unqualified and incapable to be
wrought on by sufficient Grace, and so still, if it be attentively weighed,
this attributes nothing to free will, considered by it self, but the power of
resisting Nothing imputed to man but power of resisting.
and frustrating Gods methods (which I should think, they that are such
assertors of the corruption of our nature, should make no difficulty to yield
him, but that they also assert the irresistibility of Grace, and that is not
reconcilable with it) yielding the glory of all the work of conversion, and
all the first preparations to it, to his sole Grace, by which the will is first
set free, then fitted The whole work of conversion to Grace.
and cultivated, and then the seed of eternal life successfully sowed in it.

. 84. If the Remonstrants yield not this, you see my profession of dissent from
them, if they do, as for ought I ever heard or read (which indeed has been but
little in their works, that I might reserve my self to judge of these things,
without prepossession) they doubt not to do, you see you have had them
misrepresented to you. But this either way is extrinsecall and unconcernant to
the merit of the cause, which is not to be defended or patronized by names (but
arguments) much less to be prejudged or blasted by them.

. 85. You now add, as a reason to enforce your last proposition, That although
the Grace of God Of the congruous manner etc. making Grace effectual.
work not by any physical determination of the will, but by way of moral
suasion only, and therefore in what degree soever supposed, must needs be
granted ex natura rei possible to be resisted, yet God by his infinite wisdom
can so sweetly order and attemper the outward means in such a congruous manner,
and make such gracious inward applications and insinuations, by the secret
imperceptible operation of his holy Spirit, into the hearts of his chosen, as
that de sacto the will shall not finally resist. That (you say) of the son of
Syrach, Fortiter and Suaviter, is an excellent Motto, and fit to be affixed, as
to all the ways of Gods providence in general, so to this of the effectual
working of his Grace in particular.]

. 86. This for the substance falls in with the This a member of the former
Conjecture.
last of those which you so cautiously set down for mere conjectures, seeming
to you not improbable. And so here you continue to propose it, 1, as that,
which God can do, (and thus no Christian can doubt of it) 2. by the one
testimony which you tender for the proof of it, the words of Ecclesiasticus
[strongly but sweetly;] which though Fortiter and suaviter.
it be there most probably interpreted of the works of Gods providence, not
particularly of his Grace, so if it were, most fully expresses their thoughts,
who building on the promise of sufficient Grace, and the way of the working of
that by moral suasion, will apply the fortiter to the sufficiency, and the
suaviter to the suasion, and yet resolve (what frequent experience tells us)
that those that are thus wrought on, strongly and sweetly too, and as strongly
and sweetly (if not sometimes more so) as they that are converted by it, are
yet very (very) many times, not converted.

. 87. Here therefore the point lies, not whether God can thus effectually work
upon all that he tenders sufficient grace unto, nor again, whether sometimes
(and whenever he pleases) he does thus work, (for as this is the most that
you demand, so this is most evident, and readily granted) but 1. whether all
are effectually converted and persevere, and so are finally saved, on whom God
What is the only question here.
does work thus sweetly and powerfully, attempering the outward and inward
means, applications and insinuations, by the secret imperceptible operations of
his spirit, and that in a congruous manner (I add time also) 2. Whether his
doing thus is such an act of his Election, as that all to whom this is not
done, shall be said in Scripture to be left, past by, and reprobated.

. 88. If thus it is, (not only can be) and if it may be convincingly testified
by any text of Scripture, that this really is the Scripture Election, it shall
be most willingly and gladly yielded to: But till this be done, 1. that other
Scheme, which I so lately set down, may be allowed to maintain it is competition
against this, and 2. it is to be remembered from the premises, that the glory of
Gods Grace in every one's conversion is abundantly taken care of, and secured,
without the assistance of this: 3. that the ground of the Antiremonstrants
exception to the Arminian occurrs in this way of stating too, for since it is
here affirmed, that Grace even thus applied is possible to be resisted, why may
not the accepting this higher degree be as imputable to man's will, as of the
other barely sufficient Grace the objecter supposes it to be?

. 89. Lastly, the saying of our Savior Mat. xi. 21. is of no small moment in
the case, and Mat. xi. 21. a special prejudice to the Conjecture.
yields a substantial prejudice to this way. For 1. it is expressly affirmed
verse. 20. of those Cities wherein were wrought (...) his most abundant powers
or miracles, that (...) they repented not; His miracles I suppose had his grace
annexed to them, and it is hard to believe that where his most numerous
miracles were afforded, they should all want the advantage of the congruous
timings to give them their due weight of efficacy: However there is no pretense
of believing it here, where it is said, Christ (...) began to reproach and
upbraid them, that the miracles had been so successless among them, which he
could with no propriety do, if any circumstance needful to their efficacy had
been wanting to them: and v. 22. the more intolerable measure of damnation,
which is denounced against them, puts this beyond question, that these wanted
not the more superabundant advantages of Grace. Secondly, it is also as
explicitly pronounced by Christ, that those miracles and that Grace which were
not effectual to the conversion of those Jewish cities, Chorazin and
Bethsaida, would have been successful to the conversion of others, and made
them Proselytes and penitents of the severest kind, in sackcloth and ashes.
Whereupon I demand, Had those means, those miracles (the instruments and
vehicles of Grace, that were then used to Chorazin and Bethsaida) the timings
and other advantageous circumstances, which the opinion, now under
consideration, pretends to be the infallible means of the salvation of the
elect, or had they not? If they had, then it seems these may fail of
converting, and so have not that special efficacy, which is pretended, it
being expressly affirmed, that here they succeeded not to conversion. But if
they had not the timings etc. then it remains as undeniable, as the affirmation
of Christ can render it, that those means, that Grace, which has not those
advantageous circumstances, may be, nay, if granted to Tire and Sidon, heathen
cities, would actually have been successful to them. And what can be more
effectual to the prejudice of a conjecture, then this double force of the
words of Christ confronted expressly to both branches of it? And then I hope I
may with modesty conclude, that there remains no visible advantage of this way,
to recommend it, in case the Scripture be not found to own, and more then
favor it in some other passages.

. 90. Your last Proposition on this Theme is, that Since the Consistence of
Grace and free will is a Mystery so transcending our weak understandings, that
it has for many years exercised and puzzled the wits of the acutest Schoolmen
to find it out, insomuch as hundreds of volumes have been written and daily are
de concursu Gratiae and liberi arbitrii, and yet no accord has hitherto
followed, you say, you have ever held, and still do hold it the more pious and
safe way, to place the Grace of God in the throne, where we think it should
stand, and so to leave the will of man to shift for the maintenance of its own
freedom, as well as it can, then to establish the power and liberty of free
will at the height, and then to be at a loss how to maintain the power and
efficacy of Gods Grace,]

. 91. But if what has been clearly laid down, for the attributing all our
spiritual good to the work of Grace, and assuming nothing of this kind to the
innate power of free will, but a liberty to resist Grace, the rest being humbly
acknowledged to be due to a supernaturally conferred freedom, or emancipation,
whereby we are enabled to make use of Grace, and by the power thereof to
cooperate with it; Then 1. the consistence of Consistance of Grace and free
will.
grace and free will in this sense, is no such transcending Mystery, and I
think there is no text in Scripture that sounds any thing toward the making it
so. 2. It Is evident, that the difficulties that have exercised the Schools in
this matter arise from their endeavoring to state it otherwise, some by
maintaining Predetermination and irresistibility, The difficulties in the
Schoolmens way whence.
which all the powers of nature cannot reconcile with Man's free will ad
oppositum; And some few that go another milder way, are yet afraid of departing
too far from the former, and instead of irresistibility substitute efficacy, as
that signifies infallibility of the event to the Elect, and so find difficulty
to extricate themselves; whereas Grace sufficient, but resistible, given
together with the word to all, to whom Christ is revealed, has 1. it self How
easily superseded.
nothing of difficulty in the conception, and 2. being understood, utterly
removes all farther difficulty in this matter. For hereby we place the Grace of
God in the throne, to rule and reign in the whole work of conversion,
perseverance, and salvation, (and what can be more demanded, that we have not
asserted? certainly nothing by you, who in setting down the consent of all
parties, expressed it by no more then its having the main stroke and chiefest
operation) and need not put the will of man to shift for the maintenance of its
own freedom, as long as we can do it with much more safety and temper, then
either by setting it at the height with the Pelagians, or endangering to
convert it into a mere trunk, or leaving men to the duct of their own humors,
either to advance it above its due, and grow insolent, or depresse it below
what is meet, and so give up themselves to sloth, and indifferency.

. 92. On the third or last head concerning Grace and perseverance, your
propositions are three, the two former I shall set down together, because the
first is but a preparative to, or one way of proof of the second, which only
concerns our purpose.

I. That Faith and all holy Graces inherent in us, Love, Patience, and
Humility, etc. are the gifts Of falling from Grace.
of God wrought in us by his Grace and holy Spirit, none will deny; But that
they are wrought in us by infusion and in instanti (as Philosophers teach forms
to be introduced into the matter by natural generation in instanti,) at least
that they are always or ordinarily so infused, you see no necessity of
believing, or why it may not be said of these (...) (spiritual Graces)
notwithstanding they be acknowledged the gifts of God, as well as of those
(...) (spiritual gifts, as we translate them) which are certainly the gifts of
God as well as the other, and so acknowledged; that they are (after the manner
of other habits) ordinarily acquirable by industry and frequented acts, and the
blessing of God upon our prayers and endeavors. To what purpose else were it
for Ministers in their Sermons usually to press motives to stir up men to
labor to get Faith, Love, etc. and to propose means for their better
direction, how to get them?

II. Whence (you say) it seems to you further probable, that Faith and all
other inherent Graces, as they may be with Gods blessing attained, may be also
lost again by sloth, negligence, and carnal security, and therefore you cannot
but doubt of the truth of that assertion which the Contra-remonstrants do yet
aver with great confidence, That Faith once had, cannot be lost, and other
the like. The distinction that they use, as a salvo in this Question, of a true
and temporary Faith, signifies (say you) little or nothing, for it at once
both beggeth and yields the whole Question: It 1. beggeth the question, when
it denies that Faith that may be lost, to be true Faith, and withal 2.
yields the question, when it grants a temporary Faith, which term is
capable of no other construction, then of such a Faith, as being once had is
afterward lost. It is one of the Articles of our Church, that after we have
received the holy Our Article.
Ghost, we may depart from Grace given.]

. 93. In these two there is nothing for me to question, and as little to add to
them, unless I annex, what I suppose you did not think needful, the express
consent of Scriptures and Fathers, whereon our Churches Article must be
resolved to Grounds of it in Scripture. In the old Testament.
have been founded. In the old Testament the examples of the Angels in Heaven,
of Adam in Paradise, and in a remarkable manner of two to whom God had given
eminent testimony, 1. David, in the matter of Vriah, an odious murder added to
adultery, and continued in impenitently, till after the birth of the child, the
blemish whereof still sticks to him, and remains upon record, as an allay to
all his excellencies, now that he is in heaven. 2, Solomon, whose heart was by
his multitude of wives and concubines taken off from God, and debauched to
Idols, no way being left us to discern whether ever he returned or no, unless
his Ecclesiastes be a declaration and fruit of his Repentance; And as these and
many other examples, even of that whole Old-Testament-church, the Jews, make
this evident, so the words of Ezekiel are express both for total and final
falling away. If the righteous turn from his righteousness, in his
unrighteousness Chapter iii. 20. and xviii. 24.
shall he die.

. 94. The new also is parallel, in the example of Peter, thrice, with time of
deliberation between, In the (...).
and after express warning from Christ, and his resolute promise to the
contrary, denying and abjuring of Christ, whose return from this fall with
bitter tears, is called by Christ Conversion, and the sin upbraided to him
thrice after his resurrection, Luke xxii. 32
Simon, son of Jonas love thou me more then these? Joh. xxi. 25.
in reference to his confident undertaking, though all men should deny thee, or
be offended, yet will not I. Mar. xiv. 29, 31.
And if the argument from Christ's express words, formerly produced, be of
force, then is Judas (one of those that was by God given to Christ, and came
Joh. xvii. 12. and vi. 37.
unto, and believed on him) an example of the blackest sort, testifying to this
sad truth, That a believer and Disciple of Christ may betray him to his
Crucifixion, and die in desperation,

. 95. To these two instances, the former greatly aggravated with circumstances,
the latter final, and of the highest degree imaginable, It is not needful to
add more, else it is obvious to increase the catalogue with those that were
polluted by the Gnostics, by name, Hymenaeus and Alexander, who putting away a
good conscience, concerning Faith 1 Timothy 1. 20.
made shipwreck, and again Hymenaeus and Philetus, 2 Timothy ii. 17.
who fell off so far, as to the denial of any future Resurrection, of whom the
Apostle there speaking, says, if God peradventure will give them repentance,
and they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil] looking on their
estate as that of lapsed believers, and though not utterly hopeless, yet
extremely dangerous, And this exemplified in whole Churches, Apoc. ii. and iii.
which are therefore threatened present destruction, if they do not speedily
return.

. 96. To which purpose the Texts in the sixth and tenth to the Hebrews are
unanswerable, In the sixth, that it is impossible, i. e. extremely difficult,
for those that were once enlightened, etc. if they fall away, to renew them
again unto repentance, adding the similitude of the reprobate earth, whose end
is to be burned. From which how distant is the Doctrine of those, that either
imagine it impossible for such to fall away totally, or if they are fallen
away, not to be renewed again to repentance? In the tenth also, twere vain to
make so severe interminations against those who sin wilfully after receiving
the knowledge of the truth, (as we read v. 26.) if there were no possibility of
so sinning, but especially the 38. verse is remarkable, The just shall live by
faith, (...), And if he (the just) shall draw back, my soul has no pleasure in
him] explicating v. 39. what drawing back he speaks of, even drawing back unto
perdition, and that is final, as well as total, and both, it seems, very
possible, as every where appears by the exhortations to him that thinks he
stands, to take heed lest he fall, when if he do, It had been better never to
have known 1 Cor. x. 12. 2 Pet. ii. 21.
the way of righteousness, then after he has known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment, and this in such a degree, as is expressed by returning to the
vomit, and wallowing in the mire, the acts and habits of the foulest sins, in
forsaking of which their conversion consisted.

. 97. The Testimonies of the Fathers are too long to be set down, and indeed
unnecessary to the confirmation of that, to which the Scripture has testified
so plentifully, especially since it is not (it cannot be) denied by the
contrary-minded, that Saint Augustine, the only fautor of their cause, in the
point of decrees, and effectual Grace, grants S. Augustine.
possibility of falling, both totally and finally, from a justified estate, and
uses it as a means to prove his absolute Decrees.

I now proceed to your third and last proposition in these words,

. 98. Yet I believe we may securely admit the Of perseverance of the elect.
doctrine of perseverance of Gods elect, and the certainty thereof, so as it be
understood. 1. Of their final perseverance only, leaving room for great
(perhaps total) interruptions and intercisions in the mean time. 2. Of the
certainty of the thing, (certitudo objecti,) in regard of the knowledge, and
purpose of God, but, not of any undoubted assurance, that the elect themselves
have thereof, (certitudo subjecti, as we use to distinguish them,) there being
a great deal of difference between these two propositions, it is certain that
the elect shall not fall away finally, and the elect are certain that they
shall not fall away finally.]

. 99. In this proposition I can fully yield my concurrence, if by rendering my
reasons for my consent, I may be allowed to express what I mean by it. This I
shall do through the several branches of it.

1. I believe not only that securely we may, but that of necessity (and under
the pain of contradiction in adjecto,) we must admit the doctrine of
Perseverance of Gods Elect, and the certainty, (most unquestionable certainty)
thereof, Gods Election of any person to the reward of the covenant, being
undoubtedly founded in the perseverance of that person in the faith, this
perseverance being the express condition of the covenant, He that endures to
the end, the same shall be savea, he and Mat. 24. 30.
none but he, but if he draw back, Gods soul has no pleasure in him. Heb. 10.
30.


. 100. Which that it is nothing available toward concluding that they which can
fall totally from their justified state, may not yet fall finally also, I infer
to be your sense from your great dislike to the Calvinists Salvo, taken from
the distinction of a true and temporary faith, which Temporary faith may be
true.
assures me, you take that faith for true, which yet is but temporary, then
which nothing is more contrary to the establishing the perseverance of all the
faithful, unless there be some promise that all temporaries shall so recover
again before their death, as finally to persevere, (which as I think, 'twill
not be pretended, so if it be, they are no longer temporaries,) or unless it
cease to be in their power to continue in their sins, into which they are
fallen, which sure it cannot, unless the grace of perseverance be
irresistible, which if it were, there is no reason, why that of conversion, to
all that are converted, should not be irresistible also.

. 101. 2. For their great, (perhaps total) interruptions and intercisions in
the mean time, The elect subject to intercisions.
I can no way doubt, but those are subject to them, who yet upon Gods foresight
of their return, and persevering constancy at length, are elected to
salvation. It is certain, which the Article of our Church says, that as they
which have received the holy Ghost may depart from grace given and fall away,
so by the same grace of God they may return again, and then returning they may
no doubt persevere, and then it is certain they are elected to salvation, the
mercy and pardon in Christ extending not only to the sins of an unregenerate
state, and the infirmities and frailties of the regenerate; but also to all the
wilful sins and falls of those that do timely return again by repentance, as
David and Peter did (but Judas certainly, Solomon possibly did not,) and then
continue steadfast unto the end. And so it is only the final perseverance that
is required indispensably of the elect, which is reconcilable with their
great, perhaps total intercisions.

. 102. But it is not amiss here to advert, that this does no more suppose or
include the reconciliation The falls of those that have been once regenerate no
more reconcilable with Gods favor then of the unregenerate.
or favor of God, to those that have been once regenerate, when they are
fallen into gross sins, then to the unregenerate remaining in the same or
greater sins, it being as possible in respect of us, (perhaps more probable in
respect of God,) that the unregenerate may convert and persevere, (and then
they are approved to be the elect,) as that they that were once regenerate, but
now fallen, may return again. It is as certain from before Paul's birth, and
from all eternity, that he was elected, as that David or Peter was, and then
either his blasphemous persecuting the name of Christ must have been at the
time when he was guilty of that, reconcilable with Gods favor, viz. before
his conversion, (and then for the gaining of Gods savor what needed his
conversion?) or else Peter's denying and abjuring of Christ, David's adultery
and murder must not be reconcilable, notwithstanding their supposed Election.
For as to the sonship of their former life, that will no more excuse their
contrary wasting sins, then the future Nay the advantage is on the
unregenerates part.
sonship of the other, nay it will set the advantage on the other side, the
unconverted Saul obtaines 1 Timothy 1. 13.
mercy, because he did it ignorantly, in unbelief, Whilst their sins have the
aggravation of being sins against grace, and forsaking, and departing from God,
which respect makes the state of Apostates as the most unexcusable, so the most
desperately dangerous state.

. 103. 3. That there is a Certitudo Objecti to Certainty of the object.
all the Elect, cannot be doubted, for if they be elected to salvation, they
will finally persevere, if they persevere not, they were not elected. Again
this certainty of the object, is a certainty in regard of the knowledge and
purpose of God, 1. Of his knowledge that either they will not fall, or if they
do, that they will rise again, and then finally persevere. 2. Of his purpose or
decree of election, that every such, finally persevering, though formerly
lapsed Christian, shall be saved.

. 104. 4. For the Certitudo subjecti; as I consent Certatinty of the subject.
to you fully in disclaiming any necessity of that, so I suppose it is wholly
extrinsecall to this subject, devolving to this other question, not whether
every one that is elect, be sure he shall not fall away, but whether every
believer be or ought to be sure of his election? Of which if he were sure, I
could not resist his being obliged to believe himself certain of his final
Perseverance; Election and final failing being incompetible.

. 105. Having given you this interpretation of my sense, and so consent to each
branch of your proposition, I have no more to add, but that if you mean it in a
farther sense, proportionable to your former conjecture on the head of decrees,
of Bishop Overall's opinion, I shall no otherwise debate or question it, then I
did that, and so the fate of this and that, are folded up the one in the other,
and if the Scripture shall be found favorable to the one, it shall be yielded,
and then there will be no controversy of the other.

. 106. Only I desire to add, that it will deserve (...).
our special care and wariness, so to deliver our thoughts in this matter,
that we leave no man any ground of hope, that in case he depart from his duty,
and so fall from Grace, or into any willful act or habit of sin, he shall yet
be so preserved, whether by Gods Grace, or by his power, and providence, that
he shall not finally dye without repentance: for as there is no promise of God
to found that hope, so in time of temptation to any pleasurable, transporting
sin, etc. it will be in danger to betray and ruin him, that has a good
opinion of himself, especially if he has been taught, that faith is a full
assurance of his Election.

. 107. The same I say of Grace, as it signifies Of Gods favor to rebellious
children
the paternall favor of God to his Elect children, which is thought by some to
be only clouded, and, as to their sense and present experience and comfort,
darkened by their most wilful sins, so as God may be highly displeased with
them, as David with his son Absalom, and yet continue his paternall Love and
favor to them, as David did his to that ungracious son, in the height of his
Rebellion.

. 108. It Is possible this Example of David may have some Rhetorical Energy in
it, to persuade and deceive some. If it have, then 1. I may not unfitly ask
this question, whether they think God had then that kindness to Absalom that
David had? If he had not, how can it be drawn into example to God? If he had,
how then can it agree with it, to cut him off in the midst of his Rebellion,
which it is manifest David would not have done. But omitting that, I answer 2.
that it is visible, that this in David was passionate indulgence, such as men
(as Joab tells him) disliked, and to this kind of humane passionate, I oppose
that other kind of Divine dispassionate love, producing in God bowels of pity,
frequent admonitions and warnings, powerful Messages, strong and earnest
calls, and proposition of all rational motives to repentance. But if those
prevail not, the just still continuing to draw back, Gods soul has no pleasure
in him, and the greater obligations of Love and Grace they are, against which
he has sinned, the greater the provocations are in the sight of God, and
nothing consequently but the greater degree of punishment to be expected. How
God is affected toward rebellious sons is set down Is. 1. 2, 10, 11, 12, etc.

. 109. And then to put any man in hope, that what is not ordinarily revealed in
the Gospel, may yet be laid up for him in the cabinet of Gods secret counsels
with this seal upon it, The Lord knows those that are his, as if they might
be his still in No comfort for such from 2 Timothy ii. 19.
Gods acceptance, which walk most contrarily to him, this may prove a most
dangerous snare of souls, and it is strange it should seek shelter in that Text
2. Tim. 2. 19. which was most expressly designed to the contrary, as is evident
both by the notation of the (...) in the beginning of the verse, which in all
probability signifies the Covenant of God, the (...) stability whereof, there
pressed, must assure us that there is no salvation to be expected, but according
to the contents of that great indenture, once for all sealed in the blood of
Christ, of which as that indeed is one part, which is inscribed on one side of
the seal [The Lord knows those that are his] i. e. he will never fail to own
those that continue faithful to him; so the other, on the other side, is most
emphatical, [Let every man that names the name of Christ, depart from
iniquity] which if he do not, he has forfeited all the Privileges of his
Christianity.

. 110. The Gnostick heresy, one branch of it especially, noted in Marcus's
Scholars, in Irenaeus, is a seasonable warning to all sober Christians The
Marcusians heresy in this point, a good warning.
in this matter, He told them of an (...), a redemption, or kind of Baptism,
which rendered them (...), naturally and immutably spiritual, no more to be
polluted by sin, then gold by lying in the mire, or the Sun beams by lighting
on a dunghill, and that whatever they did, they should (as with the helmet of
the mother of the Gods) be rendered (...), invisible to the Judge, The effects
whereof, as to all carnality, etc. were so detestable, that it becomes every
man most sollicitously to guard and secure his Schemes of Election and Doctrine
of Perseverance of the Elect, from all probability, if not possibility, of
ministering to the like, and that cannot well be by any other method of
resolution, but this, that those that persevere unto the end shall be saved,
and none else; our tenure in all the Privileges of Election, 1. Gods favor, 2.
the continual assistance of his Grace, and 3. the inheritance of sons, being
inseparably relative and annexed to the constant filial obedience, which he
indispensably requires of us, under the Gospel of conditional promises.

. 111. Thus have I past through all your Letter and given my self the liberty
of these strictures, The Conclusion.
by way of reflection on all and every passage therein, which belonged to this
subject of God's Decrees and his Grace; And without the addition of any
unnecessary recapitulation of the severalls, it is already evident, how perfect
the agreement is between us in all that you in any degree positively assert, or
own as your opinion: And if in one particular which you are so careful to
propose, as a bare conjecture, and not allow it your favor in any other
quality, it should happen that we finally dissent (though in propriety of
speech conjectures are not sentiments) yet it were strange the dispute betwixt
us should be of any length. And so you discern the utmost of uneasiness, which
is likely to be given you by this address of

Dear Sir Your most affectionate brother and servant H. HAMMOND.

A Second LETTER, BEING A View of two Emergent Difficultyes.
Dear Sir,
THe very freindly reception which my larger trouble found from you, is my full
encouragement to proceed to the conclusion of my importunity and your exercise,
which cannot now be far off, if I may judge by your Letter.

. 2. Two difficultyes, you say, you have sprung Two difficultyes.
by farther entering into the consideration of this matter, the first occasioned
by my distinction betwixt the work of Grace and of Providence, the second
arising from the Concessions of Scripture of Gods withdrawing his grace from
those that reject it.

. 3. To those I shall make these returns, which I doubt not will prove
satisfactory. The first seems to favor an (...) or suspense, and to avert
all defining in these points: For, say you, since the efficacy of Divine grace
follows the An argument from the unfathomableness of Gods providence.
acts of his Providence, so as it may seem in a manner to depend chiefly
thereupon, and the ways of his providence are abyssus multa, deep and
unfathomable, it seems to you to conclude strongly that the manner how God
effectually works by his grace to the conversion of a sinner is also to our
understandings incomprehensible.] To this you cannot but foresee The
distinction between providence and grace.
my reply, that the proposal of that distinction was by me designed as a
prejudice to Bishop Overal's way, which you had then mentioned as your
conjecture. And if it shall have indeed that influence upon you or any man, as
you speak of, to increase the difficulty, and to conclude strongly, that the
manner of Gods working, etc. is incomprehensible; yet you know this cannot in
justice be applied farther then to that particular Scheme, against which The
force thereof against the forementioned conjecture.
peculiarly this disadvantage was proposed, and then the only regular
conclusion is, that this which you proposed but as a conjecture, should now
grow lower in your esteem, and scarce be thought worthy to be owned as such.

. 4. And the more force there is in this one consideration, thus to incline
you, the less shall Other considerations to prejudice it.
I despair, that two more considerations, which then encompassed this, and the
superadded tender of another way, that the Scripture-grounds, especially
Christ's parables in the Gospel, suggested, will in some degree prevail with
you, to deposite this conjecture, which (beside other prejudices against it,)
has no grounds of Scripture to pretend to, in exchange for that other, that
has, and pretends no further, then it shall approve it self to be thus
founded.

. 5. This is all that I may say to an objection which I was to cherish and
strengthen, (rather then answer.) But I shall not think that needful, only I
leave it to have that force with you, which you shall see fit to give it,
remembering only that it ought not to have force with him, that accepts not
that Scheme, that alone is concerned in it.

. 6. Which Scheme having been proposed by you with perfect wariness, and
profession of allowing it to be no more then a conjecture, one such difficulty
as this, is, I acknowledge, sufficient to remove you from it, and in that case
it will not be unseasonable again to tender that which you may find better
qualified for your acceptance, having without question an advantage, from the
The other way confirmed from the parable of the sower.
parable of the sower, to recommend it. I shall endeavor to make this clear
to you. Your supposed intricacy, or unfathomable question, is, what it is that
makes sufficient grace to be effectual to The question what makes sufficient
grace effectual.
any? I say the parable of the sower was intended by Christ on purpose to
answer that question, which it has competently performed, for here we see,
the seed being the same, (whether that Punctually answered by Christ.
were the word, or grace, it matters not, as long as it is remembered that the
word is the vehicle of grace, and the instrument of conveighing it to the
heart,) all the difference taken notice of, is only in the soil, viz: some
trodden down, and crusted; The fourfold difference of soil.
some stony; some thorny; some good, and mellow. Proportionably to this
fourfold difference of the ground, the several fates of the seed are
described, and your one question divided into four, and answer exactly
accommodated to each.

. 7. The first question is this, what is it that The one question divided into
four. The first.
makes sufficient grace, uneffectuall, to some men, so that though it be on
Gods part freely afforded them, and as freely as to any other, yet it has not
the least effect upon them? And the answer is evident in the explanation of
that parable, Mat. XIII. 19. because he is (...), one that hears the word, to
which that grace is annexed, but either understands it not, or minds it not;
and so the Divil comes and catches away that which was sown, (and in that case
there is no great need of that Divil toward the obstructing effectuallness,
let the seed ly there never so long, if it be not minded, it can signify
nothing toward an harvest.)

. 8. The second question is, what is it that makes The second.
sufficient Grace, after it is received, and that with joy, (great forwardness
and alacrity at the first) to become so uneffectuall to the supporting a man in
time of temptation, that rather then endure any smart for piety, he falls into
any the grossest sins? And the answer follows v. 21. because such a man is of a
temper that yields not Grace any depth to root in, he has some stonyness at
the bottom, some pleasure, or passion, or other remains of resistance rooted
in him, which he has not divested himself of, and when duty begins any way to
check that, he is impatient, and throws off Piety, of which he made very fair
professions, and such as had, as far as his trialls formerly went, reality in
them, till this last signal trial was made of him, for which, it seems by the
effect, he was not qualified.

. 9. The third question is, what is the reason The third.
that sufficient Grace, once received and bringing forth fruits, though it come
not to combat with any sharp trials, does yet many times decay and perish
after a while? And the answer is v. 22. that there remained in the heart of
such some piece of ill temper unreformed, which in time prolified, and sent out
great and wasting sins (though not so generally decryed in the world) viz.
worldly sollicitudes, and such as the wealth of the world is apt to beget in
men that have or seek it, and these being permitted to thrive in the soul, it is
regular that Grace, which cannot consist with such (you cannot serve God and
Mammon) should be overrun, and choked, and at length destroyed by that means,
which had it not been for this cause of abortion, as it was sufficient, and
effectual for a while, so it would have prosper'd to perseverance.

. 10. And this introduces the fourth and last The fourth.
question, What then is it that renders sufficient Grace Effectual both to
Conversion and Perseverance? And the Answer is v. 23. the goodness of the
soil, probity of the heart, wherein that sufficient Grace is received, and
what that is, is best discerned by the opposition to all the former three, The
Character of the honest heart.
1. it is a sincerely pliable, ductile temper, that neglects not to make use of
any grain of Grace, 2. it has an uniform Courage to combat with difficulties,
and is not enslaved to pleasures. 3. it utterly despises the world, the
allurements and the terrors of it, and uses it, as if it used it not. The
former part of this temper renders it effectual to conversion, the two latter
to perseverance also. And considering that parable is set down by Christ to
give account of the various successes of the word of the kingdom, i. e. of the
Gospel among all those to whom it is made known, who with you are the adaequate
object of the Scripture-election, and reprobation, what can be farther required
to the clear satisfaction of your whole difficulty?

. 11. And then remembering that the only remaining question, viz. whence is
this probity? has The Conjecture compared with this other way.
been fully answered in the former papers, I appeal to no other then your self,
whether this be not both a perspicuous, and authorized stating, having so
weighty a passage of Gospel to found it, and therefore in all justice
preferrable to your bare Conjecture, which, besides that it is pressed with
difficulties (as your self acknowledge) which to you seem unanswerable, is not
provided of any pretense of a foundation, has no authority from holy Scripture
to recommend it.

. 12. If it have any, it is most probably that One pretension for the
Conjecture, From the finding the hidden treasure.
other short parable in the same Chapter, v. 44. where the kingdom of God is
compared to a treasure hid in the field, the which when a man has found, he
hides, etc. There the man, which found the treasure, is not supposed to seek
it (for that makes another parable v. 45.) but by the mere providence of God
(which the heathen Philosophers were wont to style chance, and commonly give
this very instance of it the treasure found in the field,) happily to fall upon
it, when he passes by on some other errand; And this indeed is matter of
frequent observation, Augustine is converted The conversion of Augustine. Of
Saul.
by S. Ambrose's Sermon, when he came to it on no such design, Saul is called
to from heaven, and converted to Christianity, when he was going to Damascus on
the most distant design of persecuting it. And to omit the many more examples
of those of whom it has been literally true, that they have found God, when
they sought him not, asked not after him, one eminent story our books give us,
of two young children brought to a city to be sold, at a time when a devout Nun
had vowed to take some The distant fate of two children.
young child, and bestow her whole life, and utmost industry to bring it up in
strict piety, and accordingly came and bought one of them, and as soon as she
had bought her, a bawd came in her presence and bought the other, by which
means these two, which were so lately in the very same indifferent condition,
by this act of Divine providence (to which this was to be attributed) were
strangely discriminated, the one brought up and early engaged, and so
persevering to the lives end in all piety, and the other by the contrary
discipline debauched, and educated to the trade of harlotry, wherein she lived
and persevered. In which it is visible how signal an influence this one act of
Divine Providence had on so distant eternal fates of these two, and how
eminent an ingredient it was in the saving the one and damning the other.

. 13. But from all these and innumerable the Answered.
like, (which are freely granted, and allowed to be competent to confirm your
main conclusion, that the Providence of God is Abyssus multa) you will soon
discern, that there comes in no least advantage to that Learned Bishops Scheme,
which is the matter of your Conjecture, and our only present enquiry. The
whole weight of that (as far as I, or any man questions it) being laid, not on
the superabundance afforded to one above the other, (which is willingly
granted) but on the foreseen universal inefficaciousness of the barely
sufficient The point of the difficulty Whether the barely sufficient Grace be
universally inefficacious.
Grace, acknowledged to be given to all, till that superadded advantage
administered by Gods providence in the choice of the congruous timing, come in,
as the work of Gods Election, to make the discrimination.

. 14. Now seeing in all these examples, and in No pretense for this.
that parable, nothing like this is to be found, no evidence, or intimation of
Gods foreseeing, 1. that that man that found the treasure, would never have
been wrought on by that measure of sufficient Grace, which that opinion allows
God formerly to have afforded him, unless by that seasonable act of Providence
he had thus fallen on the treasure in the parable, or 2. that Augustine would
never have been converted, if he had not been surprised by S. Ambrose's Sermon,
or 3. that Saul would not have been converted at another time, without, or even
with that vision, and voice from heaven, or lastly that that fortunate child,
that fell into the Nun's, instead of the bawd's hands, would never have been
brought to heaven any other way, and could not have miscarried under this
method: Through all these instances, I say, it is still apparent, that nothing
is gained toward the approving the Conjecture, these advantageous turns of
providence afforded one man and not another, and the signal efficacy of such,
being most freely granted by those who deem the Conjecture improbable.

. 15. And indeed, if it be well considered, all that these, and a myriad of the
like instances infer, is no more then this, the great and admirable variety of
Gods providentiall acts, not as those are all one with, but as in his hands
they are isntrumental and subservient to his Grace, whereby in diverse manners
grace is advantageously assisted by providence, to one in this wise, and
admirable manner, to another in that; No man, who is allowed the sufficient
Grace, being denied some benefit or Providence allowed to assist Grace.
other of Providence to assist Grace, and make it more then probable to become
effectual to him, if he does not betray and frustrate the opportunities of the
one, as well as the power and efficacy of the other.

. 16. So that still acknowledging most willingly, and admiring the abyss of
Providence, this no But is of no force to the Question.
way obstructs the comprehending the manner (or perplexes the doctrine) of the
cooperation of the Grace of God with the will of man, but leaves it where the
Parable of the Sower set it, that the efficacy of Grace, and successfulness,
whether to conversion, or perseverance proceeds from the mellowness, and
preparedness of the soil, from the advantages which it meets with in the
honest heart, as that again is wholly due to Gods preventing Graces, which have
thus fitted the soil for the kindly seeds-time, planted pliableness, humility
in the heart, where Grace may be deeply and durably rooted, but this still
resistibly in both parts, as has formerly been expressed.

. 17. One fancy I know there is, which has A Fancy of Gods giving the
Elect ipsam nonresistentiam
pleased some men in this matter, that God gives sufficient Grace to those who
do not make use of it, but resist it, and yet more then so, the power of using,
or accepting, or not resisting it, but gives to the Elect and only to the
Elect, ipsam non resistentiam, the very not resisting, and this they will have
to be the signal discriminating Grace.

. 18. Of these I shall demand 1. whether in those which have not this ipsam
non-resistentiam given them, this be an effect of God's Decree, which Examined,
and found weak.
has determined the certain infallible giving it to some peculiar persons, and
so the not giving it to all others? If it be not, then this is no foundation of
discriminating Grace, or consequently fruit of Election and Reprobation, and so
is still impertinent to the matter for which it is brought.

. 19. But if it be the effect of Gods Decree, determining the giving it to
some, and denying it to others, I then 2. demand, whether all they to whom it
is not given, do therefore infallibly receive the grace of God in vain, because
they have not this ipsa non-resistentia (which is more then the power of not
resisting) given them?

. 20. If this be not affirmed, then, as before, this comes not home to
discriminating Grace, nor consequently to the business of Election and
Reprobation, which it was meant to assist. But if it shall be said, that they
therefore infallibly resist, or receive in vain, because this ipsa
non-resistentia is not given them, then it seems this gift of ipsa
non-resistentia is such, as that they who have it not, want somewhat which is
necessary to their effectual receiving, or not-resisting Grace, and if this be
the condition of the far greatest part of the world, then how can it with any
sincerity be affirmed (as by those that make use of this expedient, it is
professed) that God has to all mankind given Christ, and in him all things, and
particularly Grace sufficient, and the power of not-resisting Grace, which
according to this fancy, none can choose but resist, who have not the ipsam
non-resistentiam given them, which yet they affirm to be given but to a few, i.
e. to none but the elect?

. 21. This were (by interpretation, and in effect) for God to give to all men a
power to an act, which yet the greatest part of those which have it given them,
can never make use of to that act, for want of somewhat else which is not given
them, which to all them which have not that somewhat else given (and those the
far greatest number of men for whom Christ dyed) is not a power to that act,
viz. of not-resisting; which what is it other then a direct contradiction, a
power and not a power to the same act? and withal so far from being a favor
to them, that it is in event infallibly and inevitably the greatest curse, that
could have befaln them, viz. the heightening and extremely aggravating of their
guilt and punishment, proportionably to their sin of resisting such sufficient
grace, of standing out against Christ, which as it is the height of guilt, (and
awarded the dregs of Gods wrath,) now under the Gospel, and makes their
condition in the world to come, much worse, then it would have been, if Christ
had never been borne, or preached to them, so it had never been thus direfully
charged upon them, if they had not had the power of not resisting given them by
Christ.

. 22. This is a competent prejudice and discouragement Considered in relation
to this fancy.
to this phansy, of founding discriminating grace and the doctrine of
unconditionate decrees in this difference betwixt the power of resisting, and
the ipsa non-resistentia, the latter given only to the Elect.

. 23. But it will farther be defeated, if we reflect on that place of
Scripture, wherein Gods giving the ipsa non-resistentia chiefly seems to be
mentioned, Phil. II. 13. under the style of (...), Phil. ii. 13.
working in us to do, or work, which that it tends not to the support or
advantage of this phansy may be evident by these three considerations.

. 24. First, by the importance of the phrase, [working in us to do, as before
to will,] which (as was formerly noted, in passing,) will best be understood by
other parallel phrases, as (...), Gods giving to serve, Luke. 1. 72. Which is
evidently his giving grace, or power, or supernatural abilities to serve, not
only furnishing him with a remote, and fundamental power, or faculty, but
withal having a particular immediate influence on the effect, actuating that
power, when it is actuated, and so properly causing, or making him actually to
serve, yet so as to leave him power also to neglect, and receive that power in
vain, as the Scripture elsewhere says; Thus Revel. xi. 3. (...) I will give,
we render, I will give power, viz. power to the subsequent act, prophesying
there, as in Luke, serving in holiness. By which analogy it is evident, that
Gods working in us to do, or work, is not interpretable to any more, then his
giving supernatural power, or sufficient grace to do, or work, and causing
him actually, though not irresistibly to work, and then here is no pretense
whereon to found the foresaid difference, between God's giving the power of not
resisting, and the ipsa non-resistentia, these two being equivalent in this
Text.

. 25. Secondly, the same appears by the Apostles exhortation foregoing in
this Text, to work and work out our own salvation with fear and trembling,
for the enforcing whereof this reason is given, for it is God that works,
etc. Here our own working is under Apostolical exhortation and precept, we are
commanded to work, as elsewhere (...) to cooperate, and work together with
God, which could not have place, if God alone, (and not we,) did work in us
the very working, whereas interpreting it of Gods giving us the power of
working, or doing, as well as of willing, and withal engaging us to make use
of that power, and cooperating with us in the very act, and so causing us
actually to work, yet so as to leave us a power of resisting, and frustrating,
and receiving this power or grace in vain, this is a most proper and effectual
inforcement of the exhortation addressed to us, to work and work out our own
salvation.

. 26. This farther and most irrefragably appears by the persons, to whom both
the exhortation, and this enforcement thereof is tendered, viz: the brethren
indefinitely, or beloved, verse. 12. the whole Church of Professors at Philippi
to whom he writes, which being not made up wholly of the elect, sincere, and
persevering Christians, but like the net, in Christ's parable, that caught both
good and bad, and had no doubt some insincere persons, hypocrites, and
temporaryes in it, the affirmation notwithstanding is indiscriminately of all,
God works in them to work, which could not hold, if by this phrase were meant
his giving the ipsa non-resistentia, and that as an evidence of discriminating
grace, and an effect of his Election, for this is not supposable to have
belonged to that whole Church, any more then it then did, or now is believed to
do to all Christians.

. 27. I have enlarged thus far, because I was not willing to omit, but rather
to prevent whatsoever I could foresee might probably be objected in this
business. And so this may suffice to have returned to your first difficulty.

. 28. The second difficulty you thus propose, The second difficultye.
Concerning Gods withdrawing sufficient grace.
Whereas it is said, and that, (as you conceive,) most truly and agreably to
plain evidence of Scripture, that God withdraws his grace from such as
rejecting it when it is offered to them by the preaching of the Gospel, do
thereby frustrate the Counsel of God against themselves, it seems hard to
conceive how the grace of God should be so withdrawn from them, that so do, but
that, so long as they are not deprived of the outward means, the same
sufficient grace that was offered to them at the first hearing of the Gospel,
is offered to them still; which if it was then sufficient on God's part, to do
the work, is also still sufficient, and that in the same degree, and how then
can it be said to be withdrawn? It is true that the conversion of such a
person, after so long obstinacy and refusal is more difficult then before,
which may arise from the greater indisposition of the person to be wrought
upon, but how it can be imputed in the least, to the withdrawing of the divine
grace, (to which yet undoubtedly it may and ought to be imputed,) upon the
former supposall on the like sufficiency remaining, I must profess my self not
able to understand.]

. 29. To this I shall not doubt to apply a satisfactory answer, and such as you
will acknowledge to be such, by distinguishing of Gods withdrawing his grace.
For, 1. it being Gods method to give The several ways of Gods withdrawing
grace. The first rather withholding.
more grace to those that walk worthy of it, the humble obedient children of
grace, when he on our provocations stops that current, this may be called
withdrawing. God's smitings are his admonitions, (hear ye the Rod,) his
admonitions, as any other dispensation of his word are vehicles of grace, and
when these prevail not, they are thus withdrawn, i. e. not farther increased,
(why should ye be smitten any more, etc. Is. 1.) Yet is this withdrawing
consistent with Gods affording sufficient Consists with his affording
sufficient.
grace, either by instruments of some other kind, or even of the same kind,
the continuance of that proportion, which was formerly afforded; as he that
gives a competency, and would if he saw it well used, daily make additions to
it, though he see cause to withold those additions, yet he may continue that
competency. But in propriety of speech, (the truth is,) this is rather
withholding, then withdrawing, yet because the not giving what was promised to
be given is tantamount to withdrawing, I therefore place this in the first
rank, supposing it clear, that this does not only leave sufficient grace;
but is it self designed to awaken and quicken those that did not formerly make
good use of it, Lest a worse thing yet befall them.

. 30. Secondly, then withdrawing being taken The second.
in the proper sense, for taking away from and diminishing the stock, before
afforded, that may yet be but in part, not total, and there being a Not total.
latitude in sufficient grace, some degrees of that may be taken away, and yet
that which remains be sufficient, an image of which is that degree of
Church Censures, which cutting off from the participation of the Eucharist, or
suspending from it, allows the hearing of the word, and partaking in the
prayers of the faithful, And this act of Gods withdrawing, again is so far
from denying sufficient grace, that it is purposely used and designed, as the
most probable means to make that sufficient grace effectual, which formerly
had not been so.

. 31. There may yet be a third, and yet further degree of withdrawing, which at
the present, The third total, but only for the time, and neither simply total.
and as to sufficient grace, may be said to be total, i. e. such a withdrawing
of grace at the present, that it shall truly be said such a man is not now
allowed sufficient for his necessities, whether it be that his necessities are
grown greater, and so the former competency will not suffice, or be it also,
that some of that which he had is withdrawn, as when he that for some time had
no violent temptations, and was furnished with strength proportionable to what
he had, upon his betraying this strength, and sinning wilfully against it, is
by God called out to sharper combats, having been foiled with the weaker, and
perhaps some part of his former strength withdrawn from him also, when he has
most need of succors, and should certainly have had them, had he not thus
provoked the withholding them. In this case the aim of this punishment of Gods
is yet most wise and merciful, thus to convince such a man of his guilts, and
impotence, (the effect of them,) and so as by turning Nebuchadnezzar into the
field, thoroughly to humble him, to excite ardency of prayers, both for pardon,
and grace, which God in that case fails not to give, and so to restore such a
man to a greater stability of his former state.

. 32. And so still this is neither final, nor simply total, as that signifies
withdrawing all grace, but only total for a time in the sense declared, as it
signified the withdrawing what was necessary to their present state.

. 33. And I need not show you how far this is reconcilable with sufficient
grace, any farther then thus, that such an one though severely mulcted has yet
time for repentance and grace to make some use of it, which if he fails not
in, he has assurance of more grace, and this demonstrated to be so, by his not
being cut off in his sins, (Gods long-suffering leading him to repentance,) and
by Romans li. 4.
the light of Gods word, and articulation of his calls daily continued to him,
which are not void of that grace, which is sufficient to work conviction, and
has the promise of more, (upon asking,) made to him that is thus qualified for
it.

. 34. Fourthly, there is the removing the candlestick, The fourth total, yet it
self designed as a Grace, most effectual of any.
the withdrawing all the outward ordinary means of Grace, the preaching of the
Word and Sacraments, which if it be done by the censures of the Church, is
called the delivering up to Satan, or if it be done by Gods judgments,
invasion of barbarians, etc. it is yet to those persons that are thus punished,
perfectly proportionable to that of the Church Censures. And yet of those it is
said expressly by the Apostle, that the end of inflicting them is for
edification, that they may be disciplined, 2 Cor. xiii. 10.
taught not to blaspheme. This supposes continuance 1 Timothy i. 20.
of Grace to them that are thus punished, and that sufficient to make use of
this punishment to their amendment, nay the punishment, though it be the
withdrawing of one instrument of Grace, is it self another, and therefore
purposely chosen and allowed in exchange for the former, because it is looked
on as the more probable to produce the Effect.

. 35. They that see so great a benefit withdrawn from them for their
unworthiness, will be thereby excited to reflect on their provocations, and
bewail them, and contend by all regular means to regain what they have
forfeited, and to repair their defects some other way, and this being the very
end to which this punishment is by God designed, it is not imaginable, he does
yet (till this method also be despised) withold that degree of Grace from such
which is necessary for the producing of the Effect.

. 36. All the ordinances of God, we know (and such are the Censures) yea and
all the wise dispensations Gods punishments instruments of his Grace.
of his providence, particularly his punishments of this life (and therefore
this, as the last, beside excision) are instruments of Grace in the hands of
his wisdom, as well as the preaching of the word is, and therefore in all
reason to be resolved to be the vehicles of Grace also, and so neither is this
any objection against Gods giving sufficient Grace to those, whom he thus
punishes, in case they begin to make use of it. If they do not, but continue
still obstinate, it is just it should at length be withdrawn from them.

, 37. But this must be understood only of those persons to whom the light of
the Gospel had formerly shined, not to their distant posterity, which never
have had any gleames of it, though their Ancestors had the fullest Sunshine.
These are to be reckoned with the heathen, with whom you know we undertook not
to meddle, treating only of the Scripture-Election, terminated in those to
whom the Scripture is revealed.

. 38. Fifthly there is a total and final withdrawing of all grace, as well as
the means of it, The fifth total and final withdrawing of all Grace by
excision.
which is visible in the cutting off such an one in his sins, and when this
comes, our former supposall of sufficient grace, as of the preaching of the
word, and God's calls, are utterly at an end, but this breeds no show of
difficulty, that man having enjoyed and misspent his time of sufficient grace,
and now the storehouses are shut up.

. 39. But there is yet possibly a sixth state of withdrawing, when before
either cutting off, or The sixth before excision.
withdrawing Gods outward calls, whilst life, and the preaching of the word is
continued, the obdurate sinner, that has long hardened his own heart against
God, thereby provokes him totally to withdraw all inward Grace from him, as
much as if he were already in hell; This seems to be Pharaoh's case after the
sixth judgment, and was designed by God to very excellent ends, to make him an
example to all those that should be inclined to harden their hearts against
God; And though we know not that God thus deals with any others, yet it is sure
he justly may with all whom he may justly cut off in their sins. And in this
case I acknowledge the non-conversion of such a man is not only imputable to
the indisposition of the person to be wrought on, but also to the withdrawing
of the divine grace, for then, as I said, the former supposal (of the like
sufficiency remaining) cease, and is outdated.

. 40. What fresh difficulties can arise from this concession, I cannot divine,
unless 1. it should be objected, that then, it seems, the word is not always
the vehicle of Grace, and then 2. who knows when it is so, when not? And how
then is this reconcilable with the doctrine of sufficient grace always
accompanying the word? And to these the answers are obvious, 1. that it is
granted that the The word is not accompanied with Grace to the damned, or the
highest degree of obdurate.
Word is not the vehicle of Grace to the Divils who believe and tremble, to the
damned who have received their sentence, nay nor to those that are thus arrived
to the highest degree of obduration in this life, and have, as Pharaoh, this
exterminating sentence passed upon them. It is sufficient if it be so to them
that are in a capacity to make use of it, and have not utterly hardened
themselves against it, the Scripture-expression being, that the Gospel is the
power of God to salvation to every one that believes Romans 1. 1^.
it, and this is enough to establish our pretensions, the doctrine of
sufficient grace. There is a competent time allowed every man, and it is
certain, death is the conclusion of it, it is possible some space before death.

. 41. As for the second, if it were on the premised grounds granted, that
sometimes it cannot be known whether or no the preaching of the Word do then
bring this Grace with it, yet the one regular consequence would be that we
should all be the more careful to make use of Grace, when it is afforded: But
when to this is added, that this barren season is always the reward of
obstinate obduration (and of nothing less then that) As long as Where any
softness, none of that.
we have any softness left, that is our assurance that this sad time is not yet
come upon us. They that go on in their obdurate course, have reason to expect
this fatal period every hour, but they that have remorse, and any degree of
sincere relenting, may know by this, that this state of spiritual death has
not yet seized them, and that is sufficient to guard this doctrine from all
noxious consequences, having provided that none shall hereby think his state
desperate, that is willing to reform it.

. 42. But then it is farther to be remembered, that there appears not in the
word of God, any other example of this total spiritual dereliction finally
Pharaoh the only example of it in Scripture.
inflicted, before death, but only that of Pharaoh, after the time that God is
said to have hardened his heart; and the reason of this is set down, God keeps
him alive, after the time due to his excision, that he might show in him his
power. And such singular examples ought no farther to be Romans ix. 17.
taken into consideration by us at this distance from them, then to warn us,
that we keep as far as it is possible from the like provocations, And then
there remains not, that I discern, any farther appearance of difficulty in this
matter.

. 43. As for any others that shall be apt to occur, when men set themselves to
consider of these points, not divining what they are, I may not pretend to
speak to them, any farther then thus, that in all probability they may be
measured by these, which you have chosen to mention, and by nearer approach to
them be likewise found not to be so deep, as at the distance they are conceited
to be. This then concludes your trouble; It remains that according to my
promise I now only annex the Letters of Praescience, and hasten to subscribe
my self

Your most affectionate brother and servant H. HAMMOND.

The Extracts of three LETTERS Concerning Gods Praescience reconciled with
Liberty and Contingency, referred to, and promised in the first Letter to D.
Sanderson,. 8.
THE FIRST LETTER.
. 1. AS to the distinction betwixt inevitably and infallibly, (of which you
desire my sense) it is certain you must understand no more by the
infallibility, then is vulgarly meant by Necessitas Necessitas ex hypothesi.
ex hypothesi, which is no more then that whatsoever is, cannot not be, or,
omne quod est, eo ipso quod est, necessario est. For so whatsoever is seen, or
(which is all one in an infinite Deity) foreseen by God, is thereby supposed to
have, in that science of his, an objective being; If it were not, or did not
come to pass, it should have no such objective being, if it Objective being.
have, it is thereby evidenced to be seen by him, who was, is, and is to come,
and so (being infinite) is equally present to all, and equally sees, and knows
all from all eternity. What therefore you conclude (as it is most agreeable to
this, so it) is most true, that God knows all things as they are, such as come
to pass contingently, he knows to come contingently, and from thence I
undeniably conclude, therefore they are contingent; As for Socinus's resolution
Socinus's doctrine.
that he foresees only what are foreseeable, and that contingents are not
such, but only those that come to pass by his decree, I conceive it as
dangerous as M. Calvin's, that he predetermines all things, Calvin's.
and it is visibly as false. For it is evident by the prophecies of Judas etc.
that God long (before) foresees sins, which are as certainly contingent, and
not decreed or decreeable by God. If therefore any Gods foresight of sins.
that writes against the Remonstrants go about to retort their arguments, and
conclude from their acknowledgements of Gods praescience, what is charged on
their adversaries doctrine of praedetermination, I conceive it is but a boast,
that has no least force in it, praedetermination having a visible influence
and causality on the object, but eternal vision, Difference betwixt
Praedetermination and Praevision.
or praevision being so far from imposing necessity on the thing to be, that it
supposes it to be already, from the free choice of the Agent, and that being of
it is, in order of nature, before its being seen. Gods seeing, or foreseeing
has no more operation or causality of any kind on the object, then my seeing
your letter has caused your letter. You wrote freely, and now I see it, and
that being supposed, it is infallibly certain that you have written, and that
you cannot not have written. And just so it is in respect of God. Only I am
finite, and so is my sight, I see few things, and those only which are
present, but God being infinite sees all ab infinito, that are never so long
hence future. -- At Cambridge they have lately printed Origin contra Celsum,
and Philocalia Gr. and Lat. (which were rarely had and dear) the latter of
which has good Chapters on this subject.

. 2. This Letter met with some prepossessions, so far advanced, as to cause a
Reply of some length, and that necessitated my larger endeavors to remove
them, which I shall here add also; His Reply, to which this referres, is none
of my goods, and therefore I may not take that liberty in disposing of that,
but you will discern the force of it, in my returns, which were as follows.

The Second LETTER.
SIR.
. 3. I received your Letter, and in it your sense of that difficult point,
which I cannot approve of, but on the contrary assure my self, that as
Omnipotence is not only the power of doing all Omniscience proportionable to
Omnipotence.
things that any or all creatures can do, but more then so, the doing all
things that imply not a contradiction, (as the same thing at once to be and not
to be, the doing of those being as impossible to God, as it is to lie,) so the
Omniscience of God is the knowing all things which any creature can know, and
not only so, but the knowing all things which implye not a contradiction to be
known, and then that will be extensible to all things that are past, present,
or to come, of what sort soever they are; what is past, or present, or being
future is decreed by him, or comes to pass by some necessary cause in nature,
which he decrees not to hinder, Gods knowledge of these will not, I suppose, be
doubted of. All the question will be of future contingents, which before they
are done, Future contingents with in Gods reach.
are possible to be, or not to be, but whenever they come to pass, are as
determinately in being; as is any thing else, (the most necessary,) that is
already done. Unless then, what by being future is out of my reach, is also
by being future, out of Gods reach, there can be no pretense that any such
future contingent should not be objicible to Gods all seeing knowledge.

. 4. And that nothing that ever shall be, or will come to pass, is thus out of
Gods reach, must sure be yielded to Gods immensity, which relating Proved by
Gods immensity.
to time, as well as place, it will be equally derogatory to it to limit it to
the present time, in opposition to the future, and to the present, (be it
whatsoever finite,) place. This therefore I take to be the one thing fit to be
considered in this matter, whether Gods immensity comprehend not a
commensuration to all time, and somewhat beyond that, as much as infinite is
beyond finite.

. 5. This I suppose cannot be denied to the Notion which is due to a Deity, and
if so, then God was immense from all eternity, and cannot be imagined to
advance or arrive to this by any (...), proficiency, or improvement, by
continuing or enduring from the beginning to this time, or to the end of the
world, but in every imaginable point of time, even before time was, he was thus
immense, and if so, his knowledge being as immense as himself, all that he was
from eternity present to, (i. e. all things that ever were or shall be,) must
needs be objected to his knowledge.

. 6. Against this, your prime argument is, that it is no more derogatory to his
omniscience not to know that which is in nature unintelligible, then to his
Omnipotence, not to do things impossible.] This is expressly Socinus's grand
argument, and to it I Socinus's argument answered.
answer. 1. That the phrase, (in nature unintelligible,) may be set to signify
no more then what no natural, i. e. created power can know, and then there is
no truth in the proposition, unless proportionably [impossible] signify what
no finite natural created power can do: and if both those phrases be meant so,
there is nothing gained by it, because a Deity may both do and know more, then
any creature can. But then secondly, the phrase [in nature unintelligible] may
also signify that which in the nature of things, whether finite or infinite,
created or uncreated, is not possible to be understood; And thus I suppose you
mean it, and then the interpretation of the phrase must be, that for such a
thing to be objicible to any, though infinite, understanding, implies a
contradiction, (for nothing else is simply impossible:) And Of the
contradiction.
this being your meaning, I absolutely deny, that for God to be by his
immensity present to all time, (and all that he is present to, he may see,)
implies a contradiction, or has any appearance, (to him that considers what
infinite is,) of so implying. And if you will make trial and attempt to prove
it does, it must be by proceeding on the known definition of contradictoryes, a
repugnance in terminis, as idem eodem respectu esse and non esse, and then you
will soon discern the unquestionable truth of my denial. For Gods seeing all
future contingents, will neither imply God to be, and not to be, to see, and
not to see, to see certainly, and not to see certainly, nor the future
contingent to be, and not to be, or to be necessarily and not to be
necessarily, or to be future, and not to be future. For the thing being future,
and contingent now, and so continuing till it comes to pass, and when it comes
to pass, coming to pass contingently, and so as it might not come to pass
also, but when it actually is done, it implying a contradiction, (and so being
impossible,) not to be done, and so being necessary necessitate hypothetica, i.
e. supposing that it is, all this God sees and knows by the several acts of
his intellect, answerable to the several notions of the thing.

. 7. From all eternity, and so in every point of time, before it comes to
pass, God sees it both as future, and as contingent, and so, as that, which
till it is, may be or may not be; and when it comes to pass, in ipso fieri, he
sees the man that does it, act freely, having power to the contrary, and the
thing never necessary, but as being done, and that only by that necessity,
whereof that proposition in logic is to be understood, Omne quod est, eo quod
est, necessario est. All which is very obvious to be conceived, and there is
not the least contradiction, or show thereof in it.

. 8. This one would think you readily granted, when you say, God infallibly
knows all that is past, present, or possible to be, (for no man demands any
more,) yet you deny it again in these words, [meer contingents which with
equal possibility may be, or may not be, have no being in act, and therefore
can cast no reflection, or objective being into the mind of God.] To which I
reply, First, that you ought to advert. 1. That what may be, or may not be, may
be. 2. What may be, is possible, and 3. You your self confess that God knows
all that is possible. Secondly that the having no being in act, (which seems
to be your stumbling block,) is a phrase proportioned to the thing, and to our
finite understandings, to which the thing is future only, and so has no being
yet: but when God is considered as infinite, then whatsoever shall ever be in
act, that actual being of it, is the object of Gods sight, and has been so
from all eternity, and is no more removed from him, then that is removed from
me, which is present with me; And if you say, God sees before, what in after
time shall hang in the balance of humane indetermination, i e. what he may do,
deliberates, and is free to do, or not to do, but has not yet done, I demand,
why may he not also foresee which end of the balance does at length overpoise?
(Is not one of these as truly future, as the other, when the man is not yet
borne?) And so again, which end does not overpoise, and never will, although he
see it might, if the man should choose so, and that the man may so choose, but
still that he does not. This is it, wherein you say the contradiction is, and
now it is visible there is none, nor the least approach toward any.

. 9. Here you add, (which is your second main objection,) that it is a mistake
to call that A second objection.
possible, which God foresees shall never be, for if God foresees the contrary,
(i. e. that it shall never be,) it is indeed impossible. But, 1. I pray, is
nothing possible to come to pass, but what actually comes to pass? If so,
nothing that is, is contingent. But if some things be possible to come to
pass, which yet do not come to pass, why may not God see they will not come
to pass? And if he can, then that is no mistake, which you say is. 2. Do but
change the word foresight into (which is the same,) seeing from all eternity,
and then it is plain, that God from all eternity may see that thing will never
actually be, which yet is free for the agent to do, or not to do, (and God sees
that too,) and so is possible every way, save only ex hypothesi, on
supposition that it will never be; And as the bare hypotheticall necessity is
no absolute necessity, so the bare hypotheticall impossibility is no absolute
impossibility. 3. God sees every thing as it is, and it is being or not being
such, is in order of nature antecedent to Gods seeing it; Therefore it
infallibly follows, that if it be possible to be, though it shall never be,
God sees it is possible to be, and if God sees it possible, it unavoidably
follows that it is possible.

. 10. And it is not fit here to interpose, that though it seem to us possible,
in respect of second causes, yet if God foresee the contrary, it is indeed
impossible;] For what I am by God left free to do, or not to do, that, not
only seems, but is indeed possible, and so it is, though in event I never do
it, and being so in it self, God's seeing it will never be, has no least
influence upon it, so as to make the least change in it, (for that is the work
of his will, not of his knowledge,) and so it cannot from possible convert it
into impossible.

. 11. When therefore you say, no cause can effect that which God sees shall
never be, this is only true in sensu composito, that, in case it shall never
be, and so God sees it shall never be, no cause shall effect it, but in sensu
diviso it is most false, for I am truly able to write more lines to you then I
shall ever write, or consequently then God foresees I shall write, and even
this, that I am thus able, God equally foresees.

, 12. By this you see how far I am from being convinced, or by any reason
forced to grant, that future determinations of free agents are not foreseeable,
and what the inconvenience is of affirming they are not, even no less then
derogating from Gods Immensity, and Infinity, and judging the perceptions of an
infinite Creator by our finite, created measures, his more then unfathomed
Ocean by my span, and feigning contradictions, where there are none.

. 13. Now to the Inconveniences which you enumerate, Inconveniences enumerated
and answered. The first.
I shall reply also, as often as I perceive I have not prevented, or answered
them already. The first is, that the sight can be no more certain then the
things are which are seen, and therefore there cannot be a certain knowledge of
those things, which in their causes are uncertain,] I answer that all the
certainty of the knowledge of any thing depends upon its being first, and then
of its being known to be, and not only upon the certainty of its causes; I do
now as certainly know that I have written nine pages to you, as I know that the
fire burns, therefore that may be known certainly, which is not certain in its
causes. And as that which is present to me is certainly known by me, so are all
things to come from all eternity, present to an immense Creator, be they
contingent, or not. And in this case there is not more in the effect then in
the cause, for what is contingently come to pass, being done, is certain, and
cannot be undone, and God sees it, as it is, therefore he sees it as done, and
so certain, yet as done contingently, and so as that which might not have been,
the being, certain, the manner of its coming to act, uncertain. The being then
being the cause of the seeing, or in nature antecedent to it, and the seeing
the effect or consequent of the being, the certainty of the effect is but
proportionable to, and exceeds not the cause.

. 14. The second Inconvenience is, that of saying The second.
that every thing that happens was certain to be, before it happens] But I say
not so, unless by certain you mean ex hypothesi, certain to be, in case it be;
for in case it should not be, God should see it would not be, and then it
should be as certainly otherwise.

. 15. The short is, All Exhortations, Industry, Preaching, etc. are founded in
the liberty of our actions, and if they be free till they be actually
determined, and then are past freedom, and become necessary, so consequently
must Exhortations, etc. be all useful, till the thing be done, (and then
indeed, as to the doing, or not doing that, they are not useful, but their
second season of usefulness comes in, in case it were a sin, Exhortation to
Repentance, etc.) and that is as much, as can be or need be pretended to, and
this is fully competible with Gods seeing certainly from all eternity,
whatsoever shall come to pass in time; His seeing it supposing it done, though
for the manner of its being done, that were contingent, and if so, then is it
not certain to be, before it happens, but it is certain to be, when it is, and
it first is, in order of nature, before it is seen, and its being already seen,
before it be done, depends only on the immensity of Gods presence, and sight,
which reaches out to all that ever shall be; so that that which is future to
us, he is present to it, and in that sense, though he sees it as future, it is
yet present to him.

. 16. Your third inconvenience is, that, by this, the damnation of such or such
men is as fixed and unalterable, The third.
as though they were reprobated from all eternity, and it is as ill in respect
of me, if I must inevitably be damned by my own free will, as if I had been
sentenced to Hell by Gods decree, and in respect of God worse, for he must be
deprived of the free exercise of his omnipotence, (because he cannot make that
not to be which he foresees will be) and brought under a Stoicall Fatality, and
so be an helpless spectatour of what another will is pleased to effect.] I
answer if by [such and such men] you mean such or such individual entities,
without respect to their qualifications or demeanures, then all your
consequence, as it is inconvenient, so it is false, for from Gods seeing ab
aeterno, that Judas will be reprobated, it follows not, that he sees he will be
reprobated, but for his wilful Treason. But if you mean by such or such men]
men so or so qualified, i. e. finally impenitent, then it is true, but not
inconvenient, that final impenitents, should from all eternity be reprobated.
And speaking of these in this sense, it is true, which you add, that it is as
ill in respect of the person, i. e. final impenitents, meaning by [as ill] as
sad and penal, nay it is more sad, and penal to be reprobated for final
impenitence, which I am guilty of by my own freewill, then it would be to be
only by Gods decree involved in it, my willful culpable guilt being some
addition to my misery, and (as long as God is just) it being expectable that
those punishments will be sharper, which I bring on my self, by the exercise of
my free will, then what comes on me by a decree grounded no way in my actions.
And so still this is no Inconvenience. But if you mean by [as ill] that which
has as little mixture of Gods goodness toward me, then your consequence is
false, for to Gods seeing Judas reprobated, and his seeing it ab aeterno, it is
no way consequent, that he gives him no power to escape Damnation, viz. Grace
to be able to stand and not fall, or Grace to recover if he will make use of
it, but the contrary rather follows; For how can God see him damned for the
betraying Christ, and not repenting and returning, unless this were done
wilfully by him (sins of weakness and ignorance finding mercy, as in the case
of Saul, persecuting the Church) and unless he were first a Disciple of Christ,
and so were illuminated, and assisted by Christ, and if he were so, then he had
this power and Grace, or might have had it, if he were not wanting to himself,
and if so, then this was not so ill to him (in this sense, of which now I
speak) as to have been irrespectively reprobated, and never vouchsafed this
Grace.

. 17. So when you say It is worse in respect of God, and prove that because he
must be deprived of the free exercise of his omnipotence] there is no truth in
that consequence, or the reason of it. For Gods omnipotence consists not in
being able to make both parts of a contradiction true, that were in the very
attempt a departing from veracity, a falseness, a sin, and so the greatest
impotence, and so most contrary to omnipotence. And such is that, which alone
your consequence, and the reason of that supposes, making that not to be, which
he foresees will be, for by the latter part of that expression you mean that
which from eternity he sees to be done, and then to be done and not to be done,
is in terminis contradictory. And this impotence or not being able to cause the
same thing at once to be and not to be, is far from all notions of Stoical
fatality, that I ever heard of (else sure all rational creatures must be
Stoics, for they all resolve that what is, cannot not be) and as far from
making God an idle helpless spectator of what another will is pleased to
effect: for his providence, and assistence, and efficacy belong to other
things, not to the making that not to be, when it is, but to the preventing it
before it came, giving Grace sufficient, preventing, restraining, exciting,
etc. ordering it and disposing of it to his own wise ends, when it is done, and
punishing the doer justly, if he repent not, to which he is also ready to give
Grace, if he humbly ask, and seek and knock for it: All this is supposed to be
done by God, and so God is no helpless spectator, and all this is reconcilable
with the effects being wrought by our free will, as long as Gods grace works
not irresistibly.

. 18. Here I remember that of S. Augustine. de Civ. l. 5. c. 10. Nullo modo
cogimur, aut retenta praescientia Dei, tollere voluntat is arbitrium, aut
retento voluntatis arbitrio, Deum, quod nefas est, negare praescium futurorum,
(this is expressly contrary both to the Calvinists pretension on one side, and
the Socinians on the other.)

. 19. Your fourth inconvenience is, that then God never purposed to save all
mankind.] If by purposing The fourth.
you mean decreeing, and by saving, actually bestowing heaven upon them, then
that consequence is true, but not in the least wise inconvenient, for God never
decreed to save final impenitents, and such are many of mankind, after the
giving of Christ, but on the contrary, has sworn such shall not enter into his
rest. The saving of mankind which God decreed is the redeeming them, and giving
them Christ, and Grace, and making them salvable, and being deficient in
nothing toward that end to those, that will make use of it. As for the other
notion of Salvation, it is no where said that God purposed that in the notion
of decreeing, but only that he so willed as to desire it, and to give
sufficient means of effecting it, but those means proportioned to rational
agents, and so not violent or irresistible, or such as should, by being
contrary to freedom, exclude rewardableness. So when you say, Christ could not
have an intention to dye for them, who he foresees would be nothing advantaged
by it] if by dying for them] you mean so dying, that they should actually be
saved, so it is true, he intended not to dye for those that are finally
impenitent, and so are not advantaged by it, for sure it is no part of his
Covenant or intention in dying, to save such: but if by dying for them you mean
purchasing pardon, upon supposition of repentance, then that he intended thus
to dye for them, that make not this advantage of it, (and so he sees make it
not) appears evidently by many texts, which tell us of his redeeming those that
deny him, that perish, etc. and is intimated by the very style you use of their
being nothing advantaged by it, for if he did not purchase those advantages for
them, why is that phrase used?

. 20. Your fifth Inconvenience is, that on this The fifth.
supposition, God could not seriously call upon such, whom his prescience
points out for Damnation, to repent, more then I could bid him take heed that
he fall not, whom by tumbling down I saw mortally bruised already.] I answer,
1. that if you mean any more by that phrase [his praescience points out to
Damnation] then [he sees ab aeterno, that they will not repent, but dye in
their sins,] I reject the phrase, as not belonging to the question, my
hypothesis being far from yielding, that praescience does any other way, but
this, or in any other sense, point out any to damnation. And therefore changing
that obscurer for this other more perspicuous phrase, I say that Gods
praescience of men's not making use of his call, is very reconcilable with the
seriousness of his call, which I infer from Gods own words, and oath, as I
live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of him that dies, turn you, turn
you, for why will you dye? what can be more serious then this speech, directed
to those that dye, and he sees, obstinately will dye. But this differs widely
from my warning him to take heed of falling, whom I see actually fallen,
because whenever God thus calls not to fall, the man is not fallen: when he
calls him to arise again, being fallen, he is not irreversibly fallen, and
therefore accordingly he calls him (not, not to fall, but) to rise again. And
what God thus does in time, God ab aeterno decreed to do, and his foreseeing it
would not produce the desired effect, was in order of nature after the decree
of doing it, and therefore is in no reason to have any influence on (so as to
change) the decree, and if not so, then the decree standing still in force, it
is most necessary that it should be performed, and so that God should in time
call thus seriously to repentance.

. 21. And indeed, for God to foresee (as he does, or else would not punish for
it,) that his most serious call will be rejected, and yet not to suppose his
call is most serious, is an absolute contradiction, and so cannot possibly be
supposed or imagined.

. 22. To my argument of Judas's sin being foreseen, and foretold by God, from
whence I conclude The foreseeing of Judas's sin.
that that is foreseen which is not caused by God, or to which the man is not
determined by any act of Gods will) which you say is very pressing, you answer
by referring to my judgment 1. whether the Prophecies could not have been
fullfilled, had Judas never been born: 2. whether by listening to his Master he
could not have repented, etc.] The argument from thence defended.
To the first I answer, that the prophecy, as it was terminated in him, could
not possibly have been fullfilled, had he never been born, and that the (...),
or utmost completion of the prophecy Psalm. 41. 9. was terminated in him, the
holy Ghost by S. Peter tells us, Act. 1. To the second, that I doubt not but by
listening to Christ, he might have repented, and then God foresaw that he might,
yet foresaw he would not do what he might, and so foretold this; whereas if he
would have done otherwise, it is as undoubted, that God should have foreseen
that, and might, if he had pleased, have foretold it also, as Christ did not
only his treason, but also S. Peter's denial, and repentance also. As for that
which you suggest, that the prophecy of him might be like that of Jonah,
conditional] 1, there is little probability for it, when the event has so much
otherwise interpreted it, which if it had not done, I should not have resisted
your suggestion, as far as concerned his perishing. But then 2. you know my
Argument was founded in Gods foreseeing his sin (and no his perishing) and to
that his conditional foresight, exemplified in Jonas to Nineveh, is not
applyable,

. 23. That which you cite from Chrysostom, who gives for a reason why Christ
admitted Judas Hom. 83. ^^ Mat.
to the Sacrament, that nothing might be omitted that might conduce to his
amendment] belongs not to your first, but second question, and so I allowed of
it, as you see, and am not prejudiced by it. For to your concluding question I
answer expressly, Christ looked on Judas's not sinning, or repenting, as
possible, till by his repudiating all the means of Grace, and his measure of
iniquity filled up, he withdrew his Grace from him, which whether he did
before, or not till his death, I have no means of desining. Only this I
resolve, that Christ's foreseeing what he would do, had no least influence on
the effect, any more then the effect has on the cause, or the sense on the
object, Gods foresight being in nature consequent to, and caused by his doing
it, not the cause of it. And when you say, that if it were possible, then the
contrary was not certain, I grant it was not certain, till it was done, and
when you infer, then it could not be foreseen, I deny the consequence, for
those things which are not certain, till they are done, may by an immense Deity
be ab aeterno seen to come to pass in time, and so that sight or foresight be
as certain, as a foresight of what is most necessary in its causes: and the
reason is clear, because of that which is done, it is as certain that it is
done, as of that which is in causis, it is certain, that it is in causis, and
being so, it may cast a reflection on the understanding of him that is present
to it, and so is God to futures, as well as to the present.

24, And when you say in your Postscript, that it is a contradiction to say
that things past or future are present, and therefore all things are not, nay
cannot be present to God;] I answer, 1. that you use not the right definition
of a Contradiction, in saying thus, for future does not contradict present, but
present and not present is a contradiction, and so future and not future; 2.
although it be granted of any finite thing, that it cannot be both present and
future, yet God being immense, may and must be present to that which is future,
or else he is bounded and limited. Yet this does not infer God to see what is
future as present (which you say is to be deceived) but to see what is future
as future, which though indeed it be future, yet he by his immensity may be
present to it. And none of the inconveniences, which you add, follow on this;
only let me tell you (on strength of that Proposition, Quicquid est necessario
est id quod est) that as God cannot change what is past, so he cannot change
that which is present, so as to make it, when it is present, not present, and
then no more can he change that which is future, so as to make it not future.
All that can be done is, either 1. to make that which is contingent (and so may
be or may not be) to become necessary, by decreeing it; or 2. to come to pass
really, though but contingently, or else 3. not to come to pass, or finally to
leave it still free, yet to foresee what will freely be done, as much as what
will necessarily be done.

. 25. So that you see the maxim which you mislike, is not so much, that all
things are present to God, i. e. represented to him sub ratione praesentis, as
this, that God by his immensity is present to all things, and his sight being
as infinite as his being, this is as easy to be understood, as the other, or
as any infinite is comprehensible by our finite understandings, which you call
duller apprehensions, for so sure are all ours, when we employ them upon
infinites. You see into what a length I am run, indeed much above mine own
intentions, but shall not repent of it, if it contribute to the disabusing you,
and showing you the way out of this intricacy.

. 26. This second Letter having some enforcements of the old, and addition of
new scruples, returned to it, by the same hand, which I accounted it my duty to
answer at Large, by a third letter, (which I suppose will conclude this
controversy,) I shall here also subjoin it. It was as follows.

The Third LETTER.
SIR.
. 27. THough yours of -- made have to me, yet I found no leisure to afford it
any serious reflections, till this -- and therefore being already guilty of two
long delays, I shall not now increase them by prooeme, but fall immediately to
the view of your reply. And in it, what you first lay down, partly by way of
concession, partly by way of apology for your own Notion, partly by way of
opposition to mine, I must confess I see not what propriety of application it
has to that The ground of our assertion Gods immensity, and the no implicancy
of a contradiction. Gods immensity extends to the knowledge of all things
possible.
which was the groundwork of my Paper, viz: that whatsoever has a being, or
ever shall have a being, (which though by being future it is out of my reach,
yet by being future, is not removed out of Gods reach,) is objicible to Gods
all-seeing eye of knowledge, and this upon the grounds of his infinite
unlimited immensity, by you and by all Christians acknowledged, and the no
contradiction, (which alone renders it impossible to God,) which it implies,
for God thus to reach out immensly, and see all ab aeterno, which (and in the
manner as it) in time comes to pass.

. 28. In stead of showing this implicancy of a contradiction, (which alone was
to have been done,) you have tendered a reason to prove, [that An objection
against that answered.
God's knowledge is not properly said to be immense, in regard he knows all
things possible,] viz: because they conjunctim are not absolutely infinite. But
sure this has no force against my position, which does not prove Gods
immensity of knowledge, Gods immensity supposed not proved.
by this argument of his knowing all things possible, or by any other, but
takes that for granted, and needing no proof, and from thence inferres and
concludes the other, viz: his knowing all things past, present or future, and
against this concluding it is visible your reason is of no kind of force, [for
that these conjunctim are not infinite,] for an immense knowledge may and must
see all finites, though it self be infinite.

. 29. So again, when you say his immensity cannot relate to time, and place,
which are both finite, A second objection.
and you cannot see how any quantitative extension should be subjected in a
purely spiritual essence, and press this with absurdityes, and strange
consequences, (as if it were maintained by them, against whom your debates
lie,) if you consider again, you will see, there was no cause for it, I am sure
in my papers there was none, which when they proposed to your consideration,
whether Gods immensity comprehend not a commensitration to all time,
immediately added, and somewhat beyond that, as much as infinite is beyond
finite. By comprehending a commensuration to all time, if when What is meant by
commensuration to all time.
it had that immediate addition to explain it, it can be misunderstood, I must
then farther express my self, that I meant, no quantitative extension, or
indeed any more then this, that God is, was, and shall be, from, and to all
eternity, and as his essence, so is his Immensity, Omnipresence, Omniscience;
he sees and knows all things, not only that are or have been, but that ever
shall, or will be, i. e. shall ever have an actual being, objicible to
knowledge, and even for possibles, that yet never come to pass, he sees and
knows both parts. 1. That they are possible to be. 2. That they will never be.

. 30. This I have added in relation to those words of yours, on which you seem
to lay weight, [The time to come is now no time, as the things A third
objection.
which merely be possible, are now no things, and therefore to apprehend that
God is in such time, or that such things are present with him, is to conceive
that that is not.]

. 31. Here, First, let me tell you, your comparison, Answered.
or proportion holds not, being laid betwixt the time to come, which is really
future, and the things merely possible, which shall never be; But passing that,
it is certain Secondly, that though the time to come, according to our finite
measures, is now to us no time, i. e. is not the present time, (which holds
equally of the time past, which being past is now to us not present,) yet in
respect of Gods immensity this cannot be said, for What is future is objicible
to God.
that were to encumber him with our sinite rules, and measure infinity by our
span of time, which with me you profess to avert, and abhor.

. 32. So though the things merely possible are So what is merely possible.
now no things, (I shall add, nor ever shall be,) yet even these are objicible
to him as they are, i. e. as things merely possible; which yet never shall
actually be, for he may and does see that they are possible, and also that they
shall not come to pass.

. 33. And when against this you argue, that A fourth objection answered.
this is to conceive that which is not,] If you mean by it, that which is not
actually, I grant it, but find no inconvenience in affirming, that God sees or
conceives that to be possible, which he sees is not, nay shall never be; But if
you mean, that if so, then God conceives contrary to truth, there is then no
show of truth in that consequence, for his conceiving that to be merely
possible, which is merely possible, is to see according, (and that is not
contrary,) to truth. Nazianzen's speech that God (...), always is, but neither
properly (...) Orat. 4^.
was, nor (...), shall be, and that eternity is neither (...) time, nor (...),
part of time, is so far from having any unkind aspect on my notions, that it is
the very thing that I contend, that we No proportion between our finite and
Gods infinite.
must not go about to fathom eternity by our finite lines of time, but lay all
that is done in time, or ever shall be, (...), naked and bare before him, and
still acknowledge that beyond this, there is an infinite abyss, which we
cannot fathom.

. 34. On this what you build, and apply equally to that which is past, and
future, [that which Asist objection answered.
is past vanishing, say you, into nothing, and before it was, being nothing,]
might (me thinks) by being reflected on, extricate you out of your labyrinth.
For can you doubt that God knows what is now past? I presume you do not, can
not; God may know that which actually is not.
And then why may he not as well know what is future? When the only objection
to that, being [because it is not, and he must then know that, that is not,]
you have equally resolved, that that which is past, is not, as that that is
future; and so that your objection, either holds against both, or neither, I
pray consider this.

. 35. Next when you insist, that the acts of his infinite understanding, in
relation to the creature, A sixth objection answered.
must needs be finite, as the creatures are finite.] I cannot apprehend, how
you can reap any the least advantage by it, meaning, as the words import, that
God sees things as they are, for this you know and acknowledge is my ground
also, and to this it is consequent, (and so not strange,) that whatsoever he
sees ab aeterno, he must see, as it is, Gods seeing every thing as it is.
i. e. as it is done in time, whether necessarily, or contingently, but no way
consequent, that he can see nothing ab aeterno, because it is in time that it
comes to pass, for that which comes to pass in time, he that is eternal, and
immense, and omniscient, may (seeing it implies no contradiction,) see ab
aeterno, though I who am finite, and whose sight is limited, and finite, cannot.

. 36. When therefore you argue, that it is no more derogatory to his eternal
wisdom, to say that A seventh objection answered.
he sees or knows this or that in time, and not ab aeterno, then it is to his
infinite power, to say that it works in a finite manner,] Me thinks the
fallacy should be to gross to impose on you, upon a second view: The former
member of your comparison expressly denying his seeing or knowing ab aeterno,
which is the greatest derogation to immensity, and omniscience and eternity,
when the latter has no such negation of his power of working, but affirms
only that he works in a finite manner, (which he may do sometimes, when there
is no need of interposing his infinite power,) but not that he works not ab
aeterno, which the proportion, if it were observed, would exact, and then that
would be as derogatory to his power also.

. 37. The observing of this will I hope clear to you that which you say is so
strange, it being but the same fallacy again in another dress, (which
therefore I shall no farther pursue,) or if the reason which An eigth objection
answered.
you add, from the temporariness of the creature, which ab aeterno had no
being, save only in mere possibility,] have still any force with you, I hope
it will cease to have so, when 1. you consider that an objective being is
sufficient to cause knowledge, and that it is being in time is no hindrance to
an immense Deity to see it ab aeterno, for if he may see it a day before it
comes to pass, why may he not equally ab aeterno? 2. That futures, though
contingent, differ from mere possibilityes, that which is merely possible never
coming to an actual being, and so being not future, and of such I should err
indeed strangely, if I thought God did foresee them Difference between possible
and future.
as future, or see them as having an actual being. It suffices that he sees
them as they are, i. e. as merely possible, and why that which is possible,
though it never be, God may not see ab aeterno to be possible, I neither see,
nor am offered by you any show of reason. How you come to conceive it said by
your adversaryes that the acts of Gods understanding are all necessarily
eternal, (you mean I suppose by your whole discourse ab aeterno,) All Gods
acts are not ab aeterno.
I guess not, when he that says God sees ab aeterno, what now I do, must also
grant that he now, i. e. in time sees me do it, or else could not believe him
Omniscient. It Is the part of immensity to do both, and of Omniscience to know
all things both future, and present, and the affirming one of these is very far
from denying the other.

. 38. You say this is no convincing argument, Gods understanding was infinite
ab aeterno, therefore A ninth objection answered.
whatever he knows, he knew ab aeterno, more then this, Gods power, etc. was
infinite ab aeterno, ergo: what he does now, he does ab aeterno.] But 1. Who
urged that former argument in that form? Not I surely. 2. If I now shall, your
parallel bears no proportion with it, unless the antecedent and consequent be
better suited then they are; For in your antecedent you speak of power, in the
consequent of doing, which belongs to Gods will, not to his power, (for sure
God does only what he wills, not whatsoever he has Gods knowledge suitable to
his power,
power to do, or to will.) But set both to the same, viz. to his power, and
then it will follow inevitably thus, Gods power and ability of doing whatsoever
he pleased was infinite ab aeterno, ergo. Whatsoever he now does he had power
to do ab aeterno; And this is the argument which alone is suitable to the
former, Gods understanding was infinite ab aeterno, ergo. Whatsoever he knows,
(or now sees,) he knew or saw ab aeterno, i. e. Whatsoever now is, or ever
shall be done. Both these are apparently true, though one of those which you
had suited amiss, were false, the other remaining true.

. 39. Having removed these rubs, which you say thus hinder your consent, I
shall hope you will yield to as much as I pretend, which is not, you see, that
God coexists to things that neither are, nor Gods coexistence to all that ever
is, not to what never shall be.
ever will be, i. e. to things only possible, but not future, but that Gods
immensity is such, as that he reaches out and is present, ab aeterno, to all
that is done in time, and so that all that ever shall be, is ab aeterno
objected to his knowledge; Against this nothing that you have said in your five
first pages has any semblance of force, and therefore I hope this now will be
granted by you, and then I have it under your hand at the bottom of your fifth
page, that most of your objections will be easily answered, which therefore I
might leave your self to do; but having a little more leisure then ordinary, I
will a while accompany you in the view of every of them; and begin with your
defense of your first objection.

. 40. And there First, when to prove it to The enforcements of the former
objections answered.
imply a contradiction that a thing that is not, (as, say you, all mere
possibles are,) should be intelligible, you thus argue, it is being intelligible
implies that it is, so it is, and it is not, (which is a contradiction,) the
fallacy is two fold, 1. You confound futures that are, (by being such,)
supposed The first enforcement of the first.
to have an objective being, though not as yet an actual, with mere possibles,
which never shall be, and so are not future, but only possible to be, and
agreeably are seen and known only to be possible, but not to be future, and 2.
You confound an objective being which alone is employed in being intelligible,
with present, or actual being; and now take it out of these ambiguities, and
set it as it is, that God ab aeterno did, or now does see that which to day is
not, but to morrow shall be, and then what is become of that, [is and is not,]
i. e. of the contradiction? or consequently of your whole cause? Nothing being
impossible to God, but what implies a contradiction; which therefore again I
press; show the contradiction, or yield the cause.

. 41. Secondly, when to your saying that all The second.
things past, present, or possible, are known to the divine wisdom, I returned
a parenthesis, [No man demands any more,] and you now reply, that I did not
fully apprehend your meaning, which was that God knew all things possible, not
as future, my rejoinder is, that I well discerned the difference betwixt
possible and future, all things being not future, which are possible; Yet
because all futures are possible, (though all possibles are not future,) I
could not misapprehend your words, which spoke of all things possible,] in
concluding that all futures were comprehended under that style of all things
possible, for sure futures are in that number, and then if all futures were
intelligible to God, and by you granted to be infallibly known by him, this as
I said, was all I demanded. There is difference I conceive, betwixt possible
and Possible and merely possible differ.
merely possible, all futures are possible, but what is merely possible
excludes futurity. Sometimes you speak of mere possibilityes, and then I never
apprehend you to mean futures, as, when you speak of all that is possible, I
am obliged to do.

. 42. Now then if you spoke, or speak of mere possibilityes, and say that God
knew all things merely possible, as merely possible, and not as future, you say
most truly, but then your example of A. B's future marriage is nothing to your
purpose, for if it be considered as future, then though it be yet possible to
be, or not to be, yet it is not merely possible, for by being supposed future,
it is consequent that it shall be, whereas what is merely possible, shall never
be. When therefore you say, both are known by God as possible, (viz: that he
shall marry, and that he shall not,) neither as future, you deceive your self,
for though he sees both as possible, yet he sees one as future, viz: as
contingently future, future when it might be otherwise, and the other as merely
possible, i. e. not future, sees it, I say, as future, not by consequences,
Scientia media.
or per scientiam mediam only, in the ordinary notion of that, viz, if this
be, that will follow, (for which science there is place sometimes in things
merely possible, and not future, as in the example of the Oracle concerning the
men of Keilah, that if David trusted them, they would deliver him up, when yet
he not trusting himself to them, they did not, could not deliver him,) but by
reaching out so far as to see it done, in that other notion of Scientia media,
whereby God sees what man will freely do, and not only conditionally what he
might or would do.

. 43. Your following objections against this, that what is known as future, is
certainly known will be, but A. B's marriage is altogether uncertain,] is of
no more force then the answer of the double necessity, simplex, and ex
hypothesi evacuates, for what is certainly known will be, may be also in
respect of the agent uncertain, as being free for him to do, or not to do,
which notwithstanding when he has done, it is then certainly what it is, and
as so, it is seen by God from all eternity.

. 44. Thirdly, when I said that the having no being in act, is a phrase
proportioned to the thing, and to our finite understandings, it is visible. 1.
That I spoke of the phrase, and nothing else. 2. That my meaning is, that to
our finite understandings that is not present, or in act, which is still
future, but yet God by his immensity may reach out, and be present to it, or
see it, as we do that which is before our eyes.

. 45. And when against my words you argue thus, [if it be proportionable to the
thing, then it is The third
also to Gods understanding which depends thereon,] it is plain again, that you
misapprehend me, for I oppose Gods infinite, to our finite understandings, and
not Gods understanding the thing, to the reality of it; God understands it, as
it is, and so sees that future, and contingent, which is truly so, (as Cicero
says, Vt praeterita ea vera dicimus quorum superiori tempore vera fuerunt
instantia, de Fato.
sic futura, quorum consequenti tempore vera erunt instantia, ea vera dicemus,)
but till it actually be, God sees it by his infinite science, which by our
finite we cannot reach.

. 46. Let it then be granted that Gods understanding depends on the thing, what
follows thence? No more but this, that future contingents having yet no being
in act, and therefore being not visible to our finite faculties, have yet a
being objective, as being really, though contingently future, and Gods
knowledge being proportioned to the things, and depending on them as such, i.
e. as future contingents, and not as actually being, these he knows by his
infinite knowledge.

. 47. But say you, his understanding can be no more actual then the thing is
from whence he derives that understanding,] what truth is there in this? I know
what is past, my knowledge is actual, but the thing past is not so; I know if
the course of nature be not altered, (or, which as to this matter, is
equivalent, I believe,) the Sun will rise to morrow, here my knowledge or
belief, is actual, but the object is future, not yet actual, save only that
it is now actually true, that the Sun will rise then. And then why may not Gods
knowledge be actual either of what is past, or future, (and so now actually is
not,) and yet he see it as it is, i. e. what is past as past, what future, as
future?

. 48. Fourthly, when to my question, [Why, if God sees before, that which in
after time hangs in the balance of humane indetermination, he may not also
foresee which end of the balance will at length overpoise?] You answer, that
the foresight of the former is the foresight of possibles, but the foresight of
the other is the foresight of a contingent future, and that the one is not as
truly future, as the other,] you cannot but see, you do not render any answer
to the question, i. e. any reason why he may not see what is really, though
contingently future, as well as that which is merely possible? It is true, one
is not as truly future, as the other, but what show is there of reason, that
what is less future, or not future at all, shall be seen, and that which is
future, and shall really be, shall yet not be seen by him that is Omniscient?
can it is no kind of being, not so much as in futurition, set the advantage on
that side, and make that most intelligible, which has no being, and that
least, which has? If it do, yet sure it shall be no ground of resolving that
the really future is not at all, even to God foreseeable, or that there is any
contradiction in this, which if you remember was incumbent on you to prove, by
that of hanging in the balance, etc. but is not now attempted by you.

. 49. I proceed to your defense of your second The first nforcement of the
second.
objection. And first when you grant that many things are possible, which will
never be brought to act,] how could you say before, that it was a mistake to
call that possible which God foresees shall never be? Is that a mistake which
is perfectly true? Or is not Gods foresight agreeable to what is?

. 50. But say you now, God that sees all things as they are, sees them as
possible, not the one side of a contradictory proposition as determinately
true, and the other as assuredly false, for so he should see them as they will
be hereafter, but not as they are now,] I answer, 1. God that sees them as they
are, sees them not only as possible, but as future, for they are not only
possible, but future, 2. Of contradictory propositions, as, that I shall kill
my self to morrow, and I shall not kill my self tomorrow,] one is determinately
true, I mean not by determinately true, that God has decreed it shall be, but
it is true on the one side, and not on the other; for if I kill my self
tomorrow, then it is true to day, that I will kill my self tomorrow, and if so,
then it is false, that I shall not kill my self tomorrow. What then is
determinately true, God sees as determinately true, and so sees it as it is. 3.
If he sees them as they will be hereafter, sure this is sufficient, who would
desire any more? Nay this is to see them as they now are, for now they are
future, i. e. things that now are not, but shall hereafter be.

. 51. In your reply to my second answer, it is no way pertinent which you say
of a bare supposition proving nothing, yet being granted proving any The second.
thing that is necessarily deducible from it. For 1. when I speak of a bare
hypotheticall necessity, you speak of a bare hypothesis or supposition, which
is quite another thing, your bare supposition is a supposing, (though no more
then supposing) that to be, which is not, but our bare hypotheticall necessity
is a conditional, as that is opposed to an absolute necessity. How wide are
these one from the other? 2. Then if you review that my second answer, to which
you make this reply, you shall see how little propriety it has to it. It was
this, Change the foresight into seeing from all eternity, and then it is
plain, that God from all eternity may see that will never actually be, which
yet is free for the agent to do or not to do, (and God sees that to,) and so is
possible every way, save only ex hypothesi that it will never be, and as the
bare hypotheticall necessity is no absolute necessity, so this bare
hypothetical impossibility is no absolute impossibility. To this your reply is,
that though a bare supposition prove nothing, yet it being granted, it
infallibly proves any thing necessarily conclusible from it.] You see now how
little this is ad Iphicli boves, and yet, 3. If it were pertinent, it would not
be for your advantage, for supposing, (as I also do,) that God sees the thing
as contingently future, free for the agent to do or not to do, it must by your
rule necessarily follow, that the thing is contingent, and so not absolutely
necessary, or any other ways, then that when it is, it cannot not be, which
was all I had to make good in that answer.

. 52. In my third answer you grant all I ask, only you interpose, that to our
purpose it is all one whether Gods prescience render the object certain, The
third.
or presuppose and find it certain; and, as if this were, upon the mere saying
it, presently granted, as a Maxim clear by it is own light, you add no word of
proof to it. Which how far from reasonable it is, you will now discover. And 1.
to render, and to find, are as far from all one, as to cause Great difference
betwixt rendering and finding certain.
and not to cause, for sure what I render certain, I cause to be so, what I
find certain is caused by another and not by me. And being thus distant in
themselves, it is strange they should to our purpose be all one. Is it all one
to our purpose, whether I commit sin freely, when I had grace to abstain from
it, or God cause or work it in me? What two things can be less all one then
these? and this the one purpose, for which the men, with whom you dispute, do
insist on this subject, and distinguish betwixt Gods foresight and his decree.
And therefore as you are very sollicitous that your opinion should be freed
from the imputation of derogating from the Divine immensity, and Omniscience,
so at this time it concerns you to be as careful, lest you offend against
Gods purity, and other attributes, when you make it all one for his prescience
to find and to render the object certain; i. e. to see all the sins that we
commit, and to cause them. I pray consider this, and it will force you either
to acknowledge that God foresees certainly what we do freely and contingently,
or to The great consequence of this difference.
deny our sins, (i. e. voluntary actions,) to be free, or to deny that Christ
foresaw that Peter would deny, or Judas betray him, both which he foretold to
his Disciples.

. 53. I proceed to your defense of the objected inconveniences against my
answers to them. And first, it breaks no square, whether [in themselves,] The
defense of the objected inconveniences, answered.
be inserted, or omitted, 1. because what is in it is causes utterly uncertain,
is so in it self. 2. because you yield to all I said on this head as The first.
rational and convincing, and only question the truth of my principle, which
you know I was not again to prove in that place, when I was answering the
objections, or inconveniences.

. 54. Your second inconvenience I understood The second.
before in the very sense that your instance now sets it, and accordingly I
rendered answer to it, and showed wherein it was that Exhortations, etc. were
founded, viz. in the liberty of our actions, so long as till they be actually
committed, and no longer. And to this you give no answer at all, nor to ought I
say on that head, but only say over in another Scheme the same thing to which
I answered.

. 55. In this your new Scheme you say, that had it been known aforehand, that
A. B. would obstinately have continued in his wickedness, it had been vain to
have used exhortations, and so for God (supposing his prescience,) it were vain
to enjoyne them.] Here the word [vain] in the obvious notion imports
unprofitable, or useless, and then, 1. I pray consider, whether it be fit to
speak thus Prescience makes not exhortations vain.
of God. It is certain Christ saw Peter would fall, Judas would betray him, yet
he told them both of it before, and that telling them was a timely admonition,
and equivalent to an exhortation, adding of Judas a terrible threat, or
denunciation, that it was better for him, that he had never been borne. Would
you think it tolerable for any Christian to say hereupon, it was vain, for
Christ to do all this? I trow you would not, and therefore will your self think
fit to avoid it.

. 50. Should you have any scruple in this, the story of Pharaoh, and the
passages, Romans IX. referring The example of Pharaoh.
to it, would, a multo majori and fortiori, supersede or answer it. God had
there foretold Moses, that he would harden Pharaoh's heart, which I hope is
much more toward inferring a necessity, then Christ 's foretelling Peter, or
Judas of the fall of the one, and treason of the other. And yet God exhorts
Pharaoh after that, and he that objects against his doing so, Romans IX. that
says (...); Why does he yet, (after that sixth judgment, when God himself has
sent his plagues on his heart, why does he still, or yet) find fault, is
answered, Nay but, O man, who art thou, that disputest against God?

. 57. In the former part of that story, when it was not come to that height,
yet it is most evident that from the beginning of Moses's mission to Pharaoh,
God had foretold that Pharaoh, would harden his own heart, and that (alone) is
perfectly parallel to our case, which is of prescience of future contingent
acts of man's will, yet are all Gods messages and signs by Moses purposely sent
to melt, and persuade him to let the people go. Does any man now want a
perspective to discern that Acts of Gods wisdom not submitted to our censure.
these messages of heaven were not vain? Or that such acts of Divine wisdom,
(his ways, that are not like ours,) are not to be submitted to our tribunal,
but adored and reverenced, and no otherwise approached by us? But then,

. 58. Secondly, if by vain you mean no more, then that which does not finally
obtain the effect principally designed, so there will be no difficulty in
affirming with S. Paul, that Gods grace and so his exhortations, etc. may be
received in vain, for so God knows it is too frequent for us to do, mean while
what through our default becomes fruitless to us, does not return so to God,
but serves Gods subsequent, (though it resists his,) Gods antecedent and
consequent will.
antecedent will, which is also Gods will, viz: to punish the obdurate, as well
as his antecedent is to save the humble and tractable, and the more frequent
the exhortations are, supposing grace annexed to enable to make use of them, (as
you know we suppose,) the more culpable is the obstinacy against such means,
and the more culpable, the more justly punished, and so Gods justice vindicated
from all aspersion, and man's freedom asserted: And the exhortations, that have
contributed to all this, will not be deemed vain, though they attain not the
fruit primarily intended, the salvifick effect or design of them.

. 59. And whereas you compare this to a Physician The uneffectuallness of Gods
acts not chargeable on him;
prescribing a medicine, which he foresees will do him no good.] I must ask by
what means it comes to pass that that medicine will do him no good? By it is
own insufficiency or impropriety to the disease, or by the obstinacy of the
patient, that he will not take it? If by the former, I then acknowledge with
you that Physician were vain; but that is no way applyable to God, whose
medicaments are sufficient, being the power of God to salvation to all that
believe. But if it be by the second only, then the Physician is far from vain,
as doing all that the wit of man can do, or wish toward the recovering of his
patient. For he that will not use his recipe's, seems bent on his own death,
and as guilty of it, as he that cuts his own throat, and it is no disparagement
to the Physician, that when he is prescribing remedies for his fever or
consumption, he does not cure his obstinacy, or that he prescribes to him, as
to a wise man he would prescribe, (though indeed the event be much other, then
it would be in a wise man, but that is not the Physicians fault,) and as little
can the vanity be imputed to Gods operations, when by our defaults only they
prove uneffectuall; God himself, Isa. V. appealing to us in the like case, what
could he have done more to his vineyard which he had not done, when yet pro
uvis labruscas, instead of grapes it brought forth nothing but wild grapes.

. 60. In that place no doubt it was possible for God to have done somewhat
which he did not, Force not competible to a rational vineyard.
viz. to have forced the ground to bring forth good grapes, but to a vineyard
interpreted there to be the house of Israel, to a rational vineyard, and to
that which was to be left in a state of rewardablenesse, of doing and not
doing, of freedom, the dowry of the will of men and Angels, with which they
were created, this was not competible and therefore it is truly said, God could
do no more, then he did, or does, (whatsoever the event be and be foreseen by
him,) and that is as contrary as is possible to the objection of vainness.

. 61. For the enforcing the third inconvenience, you say it seems hard that
final impenitents should The third.
from all eternity be reprobated, unless conditionally,] never considering,
what was most conspicuous in my answer, that final impenitence it self is that
only condition. When therefore you say, It were, as if a person should be
sentenced to death for a fact before it be committed, you fall back into the
two mistakes, which my answer, if adverted to, had prevented. 1. You speak of a
person simply, and abstracted from guilt, when I speak of a final impenitent,
i. e. a person so very ill qualified, and foully guilty. 2. I suppose his
sentence to be founded in his guilt, and his guilt, in order, before his
sentence, but both of them in the mind of God, (who seeing his guilt, awards
that punishment, adapts his revenge to that fact,) seen as past, before ever
that sentence goes out against him.

. 62. Here you say A. B's, Salvation was ab aeterno possible, (which I grant,)
and thence infer, that God did not ab aeterno see his damnation as certain, but
only as possible. But I deny the consequence, for he may see both his
salvation and damnation as possible, and yet see one of them as only possible,
the other being also future, which is somewhat more, then only or barely
possible. Mean while nothing hinders, but what is, (and God sees,) thus
future, he might by his omnipotent power have prevented, (which yet, you say,
by my reason he could not,) only then, he had not seen it as future, but as
that which would have been, if he had not prevented it.

. 63. Again you say, that if God had infallibly foreseen that A. B. living
longer would unavoidably have fallen into sin, and therein have persevered till
death, you verily believe, in regard of his goodness and love to mankind, not
only in general, 1 Timothy II. 4. 2 Peter III. 9. But to A. B. himself, Ez.
XVIII. 32. that God would take him away in his infancy, as soon as baptized,
when he was in the state of grace and salvation.] In this process of yours, I
wonder whence the word unavoidably came. For Wilful falls are not unavoidable.
I that according to your supposition, look on A. B. as one baptized, and in
the state of grace, and salvation, can never grant that he unavoidably falls
and finally perseveres in such sin, as brings damnation; I grant he may fall,
and that finally, but sure not unavoidably, for by that grace he was enabled to
stand, and if he fall, he falls wilfully, but that is not unavoidably.

. 64. And what if Godsees from all eternity that he will thus fall, does that
render his fall unavoidable? Nor made so by Gods prescience.
No, but Gods foreseeing that he would fall wilfully, when he had grace to
stand, (which circumstance he foresaw, as well as the fall it self,) must infer
the quite contrary, that when he falls he might have stood, and so fell not
unavoidably.

. 65. But then leaving out that unseasonable word, [unavoidably,] which in all
reason you might have done, when in relation to the certitude of Gods
prescience you had said, [infallibly foresees,] there will then be no ground of
truth in that proposition, no show of proof of it from the goodness and (...)
of God to all, or to any particular, as those texts or any other express it,
for from none of those it is rendered probable in Gods love to mankind engages
him not to prevent them by death, whose fall be foresees.
any degree, that they which are baptized, and have sufficient grace given
them, and promise of abundance, if they make use of it, shall have violent
restraints, or be taken out of the world, rather then they shall fall into
wilful sin. Consult the places again and you will soon find there is no
propriety in them for the proof of this.

. 66. And yet if even this also were true, it would no way incommodate our
pretensions, for If it did, it is nothing to the case of prescience here.
in that case of Gods taking away such a man, in his infancy, it would follow
by our doctrine, that God foresaw that from all eternity, and so that he
foresaw not A. B. a final impenitent, which is the destroying and voiding your
whole supposition.

. 67. How then this seeming advantage could reasonably incline you, to profess
it your thought, that the doctrine of prescience is very much inconsistent with
the omnipotence and goodness of God, etc. and that it is swallowed without
examination, I now leave you heartily to consider, by your reflections on the
strength of that reed you laid this weight on. Judge I pray, might not God, if
he would, have created a world of men, taken them up into heaven, and crowned
them, (if crowning it could be called,) with everlasting bliss, and so left
none of them in the hazards of this world? Yet did not, (it is evident by the
fact,) his love of mankind oblige him to this, but men are left to vast
dangers, and multitudes fall under them. Must all this now be imputed to Gods
ignorance how all things would frame in the world in this other Adams sin
foreseen by God, yet not prevented.
course, which yet it appears he has chosen? The consequences are too horrid
to insist on. Let us instance once for all in Adam, it is certain he fell, and
in him all his posterity, did not God foresee or know this, till the effect
told it him? Then how was Christ given in decreto divino, before the creation
of the world? I hope you will not say he was not so given, when the Scripture
is in many places so express for it, especially, Ephesians. I. 4. and when Gods
decrees are ab aeterno, and so especially this, the foundation of all the rest,
of those that concern our salvation, Yet can I as little imagine what else you
can say, unless you will forsake your hypothesis.

. 68. For if he decreed Christ before the creation, then he foresaw there would
be need of him, Evidence that it was foreseen,
if so, then he foresaw Adams fall, and then why may he not have foreseen all
other men's sins, all contingent future events, of which he is no more the
author, and of which there is no more necessity The same of all other sins.
that the free agents should act them, then there was that Adam should sin
before he was created. I pray consider this, and it will do your whole
business.

. 69. But let us examine your reasons, by which you will approve your
affirmation, that That prescience derogates not from omnipotence.
prescience ab aeterno derogates from omnipotence. You instance in King
Charls's death, and you might have done the like in the death of Christ,
whereof the sacred writ testifies, that it was by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God. Now prescience being admitted, say you, it was as certain
that King Charles should die, Jan. 30. as now it is that he did die that day,
and to that it is consequent, that it could not have been prevented by
omnipotence it self.] Your consequence I deny, sub hac forma, because he that
saw it would be that day, equally saw, both that he might, and that he would
not prevent it. By his omnipotence it is certain, he might, by his will and
wisdom, (now revealed,) that he would not prevent it, by his Omniscience, that
from all eternity he knew he would not, by his very mercy to him, and for other
most wise ends, that he would actually deliver him up to the wills of the
malicious, able to destroy the body, but no more, which again is founded in his
foresight of their malice, and must suppose it. All which makes it as
infallible, that God might have prevented it, as that he would not, did not,
therefore this is far from derogating from his omnipotence, in this of his not
being able to prevent it, the contrary to which is by this our Scheme expressly
established.

. 70. This (...); for my positive answer, you cannot but know already, all the
necessity consequent to prescience is the necessity ex hypothesi, it is
necessary to be while it is, and because it will be, therefore God foresees it
will be, and if men would have done otherwise, God would have foreseen
otherwise.

. 71. When you take it for mine acknowledgment then, that God cannot change
that which is future, so as to make it not future, I answer, that sensu diviso
it is most false, for whatsoever is future, God can change, and make it not
future, and then foresee it not future. But if you meant Conjunctim, that
remaining future, he could not make it not future, 1. That is a great
impropriety of speech, and most unreasonable, that he that speaks of changing,
should mean keeping it still as it is, unchanged, and 2. You see the fallacy,
that most palpable one, of a been divisis ad male Conjuncta, which I hope will
no longer impose upon you. The ill consequences you fear and exaggerate,
should God be thought not to have been able to have prevented it, I shall not
need insist on, detesting the thought, as much as is possible, and having so
far secured our Scheme from it, that if God foresees not that he could prevent
any future whatsoever, I shall not think he foresees any thing.

. 72. So likewise for his goodness, you cannot Gods prescience derogates not
from his goodness.
doubt but I acknowledge that as fully as you, in relation to our salvation:
Let us see then how I am obliged to deny this again by admitting his
Prescience. Why, say you, if God willingly suffer so many to be damned, whom he
might have saved where is his (...)? etc. I answer, just where you your self
will, and must place it, unless you believe many shall not be damned finally.
For it is most certain, God by his absolute power might have saved all them,
that yet are now damned, and the show of inconvenience is exactly the same,
whether God be believed to foresee all things ab aeterno, or no. For suppose
we, that God foresaw not, but saw in time as we do every thing that happens in
our presence, and suppose we a wicked man filling up the measure of his
iniquityes, or ready to die in his sins, I demand might not God, if he would,
rescue him out of that state, convert him into a Saint, and assume him, as he
did Elias in the sanctified state? Questionless he might, yet without all
controversy he does not thus to every wicked man, for if he did, none should be
damned; Do you now reconcile this with Gods (...), his words and many vehement
asseverations, (as I doubt not but you are well able to do,) and then review
your own question, [If God willingly suffer so many to be damned whom he might
have saved, where is his (...)?] It Is not possible you should need more words
to disintangle this snarle, and in my former papers I showed you in this place
to what Gods (...) belongs, giving sufficient grace, etc.: to which you reply
nothing, and therefore I suppose consent to the truth of it, though it is sure
both that God by his absolute power might do more then he does, (and therefore
I like not your expression, that he does what omnipotence could perform,
citing, Isa. v. 4. In place of it, I should have said, what his covenant,
promise, mercy, justice, equity, wisdom, obliged him to do, or what was
reconcilable with all these, without interesting his absolute power, or
omnipotence in it,) and that obstinate sinners do actually resist, and
frustrate all the methods that are used by him.

. 73. Of the manner of S. Austin's asserting prescience I need not farther
insist, then that by S. Augustine and Lud. Vives their sense of prescience.
the express words of that period I produced, he will have it reconciled with
the free will of man, which if all would do, there were little more to be
required of them. Yet because you have endeavored to take off the force of S.
Austin's words, and from Ludov. Vives's words on Chapter, IX. (Quod si
indignum, etc. Dicamus a providentia voluntateque Dei cognitionem ejus
prosicisci, voluntatem statuere quod futurum sit, scientiam quod volunt as
statuerit, nosse,) to draw him to Calvin's sense, I shall read over that IX.
Chapter, both Text, and Comment, and give you some passages out of it; In the
Text, 1. That they are much more tolerable that bring in Syderea Fata, a
fatality depending on the stars, then they which take away praescientiam
futurorum, foreknowledg of futures: and that it is a most open madness,
confiteri Deum and negare praescium futurorum, to confess God, and to deny his
prescience. 2. Nos ut confitemur summum and verum Deum, it a voluntatem
summamque potestatem and praescientiam ejus consitemur, nec timemus ne ideo
voluntate non faciamus quod voluntate facimus, quia id nos facturos esse
praescivit cujus praescientia falli non potest, as we confess the supreme and
true God, so we confess his will, and supreme power and prescience, neither do
we scare least we should not do voluntarily, what we do voluntarily, because he
foresaw it, whose prescience cannot be deceived, making it the heathen fear of
Cicero, which now is yours, lest the infallibility of the prescience should
impose necessity, and frustrate Laws, exhortations, etc. 3. Nos adversus
sacrilegos ausus and Deum dicimus omnia scire, antequam fiant (mark omnia) and
voluntate nos facere, etc. Contrary to the darings of sacrilegious men, we both
affirm that God knows all things before they are done, and that we do them
voluntarily. 4. Novit incommutabiliter omnia quae futura sunt, and quae ipse
facturus est, he knows unchangeably all things which are to come, and which he
will do, not only the latter, but the former, and all of one as well as the
other. 5. He that foreknew all the causes of things, among them could not be
ignorant of our wills, quas nostrorum operum causas esse praescivit. Which he
foresaw to be the causes of our works. 6. Qui non est praescius omnium
futurorum non est utique Deus, he that foresees not things to come, is not God.
7. Of our liberty, Voluntates nostrae tantum valent, quantum Deus eas valere
voluit, and praescivit, and ideo quicquid valent, certissime valent, and quod
facturae sunt ipsae, omnino facturae sunt, quia valituras atque facturas esse
praescivit cujus praescientia falli non potest, our wills can do as much as God
willed and foreknew they were able, and therefore whatsoever they can do, they
most certainly can do, and what they will do, they altogether will do, because
he foresaw they could and would do it, whose prescience cannot be deceived.
Next in Vives's comments you have, Non res futurae ex scientia Dei manant, sed
scientia potius Dei ex illis, quae tamen futurae non sunt Deo, ut est error
multorum, sed praesentes. Quocirca non recte dicitur praescire, nisi relatione
ad actiones nostras, dicendus est scire, videre, cernere. Quod si indignum
videtur, etc. Things future do not flow from Gods science, but rather Gods
science from them, which yet are not future to God as the error of many is, but
present, wherefore he is not rightly said to foresee unless it be in relation
to our actions, he must be said to know, to see, to perceive, which if it
appear unworthy, etc. There come in the words by you recited, of Gods science
coming from his will, which you say is Calvinism, but is not set by Vives to
interpret S. Augustin's sense that way, no nor to assert it as his own, but to
recite another opinion, that has less impiety in it, then the denying of
prescience would have. Thus you see what that Chapter in the Father, or his
Commentator gains you. Mean while I take you at your word that you grant with
S. Augustine the prescience of God, and if you grant it with him, you must grant
it not only in things which come to pass necessarily, (as all that God
decrees do,) but simply in all things, and particularly in those, wherein
voluntatis arbitrium retentum, freedom of will retained is concerned, for to
those you see he through out the IX. and X. Chapters applies it, and if you
grant prescience in them, you grant as much as I desire, if not, you deny it,
(which yet you again say you do not,) more then S. Augustine.

. 74. What you here add as your conclusion from S. Augustine in his
confessions, lib. II. c. 18. videri non possunt sed praedici possunt ex
praesentibus quae jam sunt and videntur, they cannot be seen but they may be
foretold from those things that are present, and are now seen, and from Origin
(...) Philocal. c. 23.
(...), viz: That Gods knowledge of future contingents is merely hypotheticall,
this being supposed, that will follow, etc.] I shall now proceed to examine, 1.
By a view of your two Testimonies, then of your conclusion from them. And first
for S. Augustin's words, they are not spoken of Gods prescience or predictions,
but of ours, and that of things coming from natural causes, Intucor auroram,
says he, oriturum solemn pronuncio, etc. I behold the morning, I pronounce the
Sun will rise. Look and you will see it manifestly, so then it is nothing to
Gods prescience of future contingents, and you can conclude nothing from it.

. 75. And for the Chapter in Origen's Philocalia, it cannot be, but you must
have noted in it, c. 11.
the weight that he lays on the prediction of Judas's Origens testimony.
treason, the general resolution, that (...), every thing that is future, God
sees it will come to pass, (and yet (...), the foreknower is not cause of all
that are foreknown,) citing from Susanna, 42, 43. That God is (...), the knower
of secrets, that knows all things before they are, then he proposes the
question, (...). (...), how God from all eternity foreknowing those things that
are thought to be done by every man, our free will may be retained. Which he
treats against the heathen that say Gods foreknowledge takes away all praise
and dispraise, etc. and maintain it just as you do, as you will see, if you
compare your, and their arguing. Now to p. 72.
these his answer is, that God from the beginning of the creation of the world,
nothing being without a cause, (...), by the progress of his mind through all
things that are future, sees them, that if this be, that will follow, etc. and
so (...), proceeding to the end of things, he knows what shall be. Which he
does express, to show that he sees the dependence of all things, not from his
own will, who by knowing them, as it follows, causes them not, but in a
concatenation of humane acts and choises, as p. 73.
when by temerity one walks inconsiderately, and meeting with a slippery place
falls, which he that sees, is no way the cause of his fall, says he, adding
that Ibid.
God foreseeing (...), how qualified every one will be, sees also the causes
that he will be so, mean while his foreseeing is not the cause of their being
what they are, but though strange, says he, yet it is true, (...), the thing
future is the cause that Ibid.
such a foreknowledge is had of it, for it does not because it was known come
to pass, but because, ((...),) it was to come to pass, it was known. Then he
comes to a distinction in what Ibid.
sense it is true, that what is foreseen (...) shall altogether be, and states
it just as we do all along. From all which, (that I may now follow, you to your
inferences,) you can with no reason conclude, that it was his and the rest of
the Fathers doctrine, that Gods foreknowledge of future contingents is merely
hypotheticall. You see most evidently from their sayings, every where
scattered, (competently by those which I have now set down,) that this was not
their doctrine. And this one passage, if it were favorable to your conceit,
(as it is not,) yet could in no reason evacuate all others.

. 76. In your conclusion that which I mislike is not the word, [hypothetical]
but [meerly] for that signifies God to have no other foreknowledge but that. I
doubt not but of all things that are, God foresees, as Origen's words were,
that if this be, that will follow, and so I deny not hypothetical
foreknowledge. But I cannot confine Gods foreknowledge Hypothetical.
foreknowledg.
to this one head, for why may he not also see, (and as easily,) that this, and
that will both be? The principal use of hypothetical foreknowledge, is in
things merely possible, which come not to pass, (as before I applied the
example of Keilah, which you now mention.) But what can that have to do with
those things, which do actually come to pass, and that merely by the free will
of man, and by no necessity of consequences? Though, (as I said,) even in
those, God that sees them as they are, both in their causes, and most casual,
or voluntary mutations, and progression, and all circumstances concomitant,
sees one thing following, (though but freely, not necessarily,) out of another,
first this, and then that, and because this, or upon this motive, therefore
that; Which as it is far from asserting any necessary chain of causes, contrary
to the freedom of man's will, which in that very place Origin largely
establishes, so it is far from a knowledge merely hypothetical, for that is not
the knowledge of what is, but what will be, if somewhat else make way for it,
which being uncertain, whether it will be or not, there can be no determinate
knowledge, that the other will be, which is quite contrary to his instances of
Judas's betraying Christ, etc. Which were as really and determinately foreseen
and foretold, as they were really acted. And therefore I must desire you not to
think this favorable to the Socinian's opinion of Gods foreknowledge of future
contingents being only or merely hypothetical, (though God foresee
hypothetically, yet not only so,) or that this key will fit all places of
Scripture, which foretell things to come, because it fits the case of Keilah,
and Jer. 38, 17. and some few others.

. 77. I have the more largely insisted on this, because it seemed so likely to
mislead you, there being some examples of foreknowledge merely hypothetical,
from whence yet to infer that Gods foreknowledge indefinitely, is merely such,
i. e. that he has no other, is the same error as from particular premises,
or from one or two examples to make an universal conclusion.

. 78. On view of your fourth objected inconvenience, you grant all I said in
answer to it, only, The fourth's
say you, the former difficulty seems to recurre, how A. B. may be truly
salvable, when if absolute prescience be granted, his damnation was as certain
before he was borne, as it will be when he is in Hell.] I answer. 1. That in
answer to objected inconveniences all that can be required of any man is, to
show that that inconvenience does not follow, not to establish the principal
doctrine again, (which before had been done by the no implicancy of
contradiction, which left it possible for God to foresee future contingents,
and then by consideration of his omniscience, which qualifies him to know every
thing which is scibile, or the knowing of which implies no contradiction, and
then by the testimonies of the Prophets, who from Gods prescience foretold such
futures,) having therefore done all that was incumbent on me, I had hoped the
difficulty would not still have remained, when all I said was granted. But
seeing it does, I answer, 2. That supposing Gods eternal prescience, it cannot
but as clearly appear, that A. B. not only may be, but is truly salvable,
whilst he is in Via, as that he is damned, or no longer salvable, when he is in
Hell. For supposing A. B. in via, to be one, for whom in Gods decree Christ
dyed, and supposing Gods eternal prescience of all that is, (unquestionably of
all that he himself will do, as he sure will all that is under his decree.) It
must thence necessarily follow, that God foresees him salvable, and supposing
that at length he is damned, it does but follow, that God foresees him damned;
These two things then by force of praescience are equally clear, that he is one
while salvable, another while damned, and so they are equally certain, and if
his having been salvable do not hinder his being damned, then neither will his
being damned hinder his having been salvable. He is truly salvable Salvability
of Judas as conclusible from Prescience, as damnation.
who God foresees will not be saved. How so? because God truly bestows upon him
all means necessary to salvation, and that being all that is required to make
him salvable, this is as truly done, when the effect follows not, as when the
means are most successful. And Gods prescience of the successlessness, makes
no change, has no influence either on the means, or the man, any more then my
seeing a thing done has causality in the doing it. Now if he be salvable,
(though in event he never be saved, but damned,) and Gods praescience that he
is salvable, be as efficacious to conclude him salvable, as his prescience that
he is damned, to infer him damned, what a palpable partiality is it to infer
from prescience, that his damnation is certain before he is borne, and yet not
to infer from the same principle, that his salvability was certain before he
was borne? Nothing can more irrefragably prove the weakness of your inference,
then that it is so obvious to retort it.

. 79. The short is, that which is future only contingently, it is certain that
it is foreseen by God, yet till it is, it may be otherwise, and if it be
otherwise, God sees it to be otherwise, and what may be otherwise, is not
certain to be so, and therefore his damnation is not certain before he is born,
which is the direct contradictory to your inference, and that method which will
equally infer contradictories, of what force it is to establish truth, I leave
you to judge who propounded the difficulty.

. 80. Here then is the error, because God cannot err in his foresight,
therefore you conclude from supposition of his prescience, that the thing,
which you speak of, is certain, when yet it no way appears to you or me, that
God ever foresaw it, but by our supposing that it comes to pass. Hence then
comes all the supposed certainty, from supposing it to come to pass, which is
the certitudo ex hypothesi, a certainty that it is, as long as it is supposed
to be, and then Gods prescience has nothing to do with it, but it would be as
certain without supposing Gods prescience, as now it is by supposing it. And
now would you have me show you how A. B. is truly salvable whilst you retain
your supposition that he is damned? This, if you mark, is your difficulty, for
you have no other ground to suppose that God foresees him damned, but because
you suppose him damned, and seeing it is, you see what a task you have set me,
even to make two members of a contradiction true together. This I confess I
cannot do, and I grant God cannot, yet thus much I will do for you, I will mind
you, that even when A. B. is in Hell, the proposition is still true, that A. B.
when he was on earth was salvable, and if it be true when he is in Hell, I
appeal to you whether it be not true, when God foresees he will be in Hell,
does Gods foreseeing him in hell impede more then his actual being in it? If
not, then notwithstanding Gods prescience, A. B. is salvable, and so now I hope
you see both that, and how he is so.

. 81. In your fifth inconvenience, you still adhere that you think it scarcely
reconcilable with that The fifth.
determinate prescience which I hold, for God seriously to call those whom he
foresees ab aeterno that they will not repent. But you take no heed to the
place of Gods serious call to those who he sees will die.
Scripture, which I demonstrated it by, turn you, turn you, why will you dye?
and, as I live, I delight not in the death of him that dies, where it is
evident, God seriously, (if an oath be a note of seriousness,) calls those who
dye and will dye. Why do you not lay this to heart, when it is so clear, and
(you yet give me your leave to say,) unanswerable?

. 82. I said, when God calls to a man not to fall, he is not fallen, and, you
say true, but he is fallen in Gods prescience.] I now ask you, how you know he
is? Your only possible answer is, that if he be fallen, then by the doctrine
of prescience, God must foresee him fallen, and you now by way of supposition,
(which it is lawful for disputations sake to make,) take it for granted, i. e.
suppose he is fallen. And then, (as even now I said,) to your voluntary
supposition all is due, and with that I cannot reconcile the contradictory, and
so still what is this to prescience?

. 83. Again you conclude, that God sees, A. B. will never rise again, how do
you know, or imagine God sees it, but because you suppose it true, that he will
never rise again? and if it be true, then it is also infallibly true, whether
God see it or no. And so still what have you gained, your supposing it true is
it to which adheres the supposition of Gods foreseeing, and infallibility
consequent to that, but that adds no weight to that which was before supposed
infallible.

. 84. Again you ask, can God seriously call him, who [he sees] will never
repent, seriously do that he sees useless, and absolutely ineffectuall?] I have
often told you, and proved to you, that he may, it is certain he called Pharaoh,
when he had predicted he would not hearken, and he most seriously does things
to salvifick ends, which do not eventually attain those ends, and he foresees
they do not.

. 85. I said that what God does thus in time, he ab aeterno decreed to do, this
(as it is apparent by the antecedent, to which the relative [thus] belongs,) I
spoke of Gods calling men, some not to fall, others to rise again, and you
reply, that it seems to you utterly improbable that God should do whatsoever
he does, by an antecedent decree.] I have no temptation to leave our present
task, which is sufficient for the day, to dispute that question with you in
the latitude, as your, (whatsoever he does,) imports. It will suffice, if God
does any thing by an antecedent decree, or decree any thing before he do it,
for if any thing, then sure his calls and warnings, which are parts of his
covenant of grace, and that is sub decreto, decreed by him. And then what I
said before, is still of full force, Gods foreseeing men's disobediences to his
calls, was in order of nature posteriour and subsequent to his decree of
calling and giving them grace, and being so, cannot move him to change what
went before, or presently to disannull it, and till it be disannulled, it is
certain, and exacted by veracity, that he act according to it, i. e. that he
call those seriously, who yet he foresees resist him. Why you should here
farther enlarge, of the greater improbability, that God should without
consideration decree what afterward he perceives would be useless, I guess
not, being sure no words of mine gave you temptation to think that I affixt
inconsiderate decrees to our God of all wisdom, or counted those calls
useless, which through our obstinacy, (only) fail of their designed good
effect.

. 86. No more did I give you cause for that harsh-sounding phrase of Gods
necessarily pursuing it, because it was decreed.] I should rather have
suggested to you these words, instead of them, that God is faithful, and just,
and veracious, and so performs his part of the covenant of grace with men,
howsoever they are, (and he foresees them,) wanting to their own part.

. 87. What you say you understand not in my last papers, I thus explain; those
calls of God which Gods foresight of man's rejecting his calls and the
criminousness thereof a proof of the seriousnes of them.
the obdurate reject, are most seriously meant by God to their reformation,
else he would not punish them for rejecting them, as he does by withdrawing
them, etc. This God decrees to do ab aeterno, which he could not, unless he
soresaw their rejection of them, and yet neither could he foresee their so
criminal rejecting them, unless he foresaw the seriousness of them, and if he
foresaw that, then it is as certain as any thing, that God foresees that they
are serious, and although God do not actually inflict punishment upon bare
foresight of sin, yet sure he may decree to punish those whom he foresees to
deserve it, and that is all that is necessary to my arguing. Else I might tell
you that God that accepts not a temporary faith, will never accept such a man
as is answerable to the stony, or thorny ground, (who in time of trial would
fall away,) though he should be taken away before temptations approach.

. 88. In that of Judas, you grant that the prophecy, The predictions of Judas
could not be fulfilled in another,
as terminated in him, could not have been fulfilled, had he never been born,
but then your quere remains, say you, whether it might not have been
fullfilled in another?] I answer, 1. it could not have been fullfilled in
another, without some other disciples doing what he did, and it is certain no
other did so, and therefore what was foretold must have been fulfilled in him,
or else, (which may not be believed of a divine Oracle,) had not been
fulfilled. But then, 2. Christ's words to John pointing out Judas for the
Traitor, he that dippeth, etc. was a prediction of God perfectly terminated in
Judas's person, and could not be fulfilled in any other, and so your new quere
is answered also. And that gives you a farther reason, (if what was said before
to your second quere were not sufficient,) that our Saviors prediction was not
conditional, but categorically Not conditional.
enunciative, verily I say unto you that one of you shall or will betray me,
and he that dippeth, at that time when Christ spoke it, deictically, i. e.
Judas, is that person.

. 89. In your view of what I said to your second question, you first insist on
my answer, that the event proved the denunciation against Judas was not like
that against Niniveh conditional, but I foresaw the small force of that, which
I used only (...), and therefore added a second, that the prediction of Judas
was of his sin, as well as punishment, and the prediction of his sin, could not
be conditional, nor the prediction of the Ninivites punishment any way be
applicable to it, leaving therefore the weaker, I adhered only to this, which
when you labor also to evacuate, by interpreting, [one of you will betray me,]
by [unlesse he repent, etc. he will betray me.] You consider not, 1. that
Christ's death, as it was from all eternity decreed by God, so it was often
predicted by Christ, and his resurrection, and many other things depending on
it, and among these still the treachery of one of his disciples is one, and
that is not reconcilable with this interpretation. 2. That foreseeing that he
would be so disposed, as unless he repented he would betray him, is the
foretelling of a future contingent. 3. That one particular prediction, wherein
Judas was deictically signified, was private to S. John, that lay in Jesus his
bosom, as appears, Ioh. XIII. 24, 25, 26. And though the words to Judas
himself, Mat. XXVI. 15. may better bear that sense you assign, yet the words
to John, which Judas heard not, could be no such admonition to Judas, and
therefore were without question absolute, and so those other to Peter verily I
say to thee, before the Cockcrow twice, thou shall deny me thrice, when he had
professed he would So that of Peter's denial.
rather die, then deny him, are not easily healed with this (...), [unlesse
thou repent thou will deny me,] for assuredly Peter meant not now to deny
Christ, but resolved the contrary, and therefore had nothing to repent of in
this behalf. And when you seem to demonstrate it could not be absolute,
because Judas might confessedly have repented, and if he had, then it must have
been interpreted conditionally, I answer according to my hypothesis, that if
Judas had repented, Christ had never foreseen, or declared of him, as he does,
i. e. that he should betray him.

. 90. But, say you, you see not why a conditional prediction may not be
applyable as well to the prevention of sin, as of punishment,] I shall show you
why it may not, because the punishment is Gods work, and for the averting of
that there is force in the Ninivites repentance, which is the condition
required Prediction of sin cannot be conditional.
on their part, on the performance of which God has generally promised to
suspend his punishments, and therefore the threats are conditional, which in
equity will not be inflicted, if the condition be performed. But the sin is
man's work and to the commission of that no other party contributes but
himself, and so neither is the prediction of it a threat, but a downright
enunciation, neither is there any condition imaginable to be performed on the
other party, answerable to the other case, unless God should forcibly
interpose to avert it, (and that cannot be imagined to be the meaning, [except
I restrain Judas he will betray me,] or if it were, it were still an act of
Gods absolute foreknowledge, that he will do so, if not violently restrained)
all probable means to his amendment, and particularly the admitting him to the
Sacrament being, says S. Chrysostom, already used to him, and yet, says
Christ, he will betray me.

91. Now for defense of your Postscript, and the contradiction which that
charged on our hypothesis, I pray mark the Issue of it. If you can prove that
it implies a contradiction for God to foresee future The issue of the whole
question whether prescience of contingents imply a contradiction.
contingents, then you certainly prevail, as on the other side if you succeed
not in this attempt, you must resolve your opinion erroneous, because nothing
being impossible to God but to lie, and so to make good both parts of a
contradiction, if prescience bring not this consequence, it must be possible to
God, how inexplicable or unintelligible soever it be to me, who for want of
facultatem analogam, cannot judge of the actions of an eternal God, and if it
be yielded possible, then the predictions of Scripture will be proofs beyond
question of the truth of it. To this one test then let us come. The
contradiction you assigned was, our saying, that things future are or may be
present to God. I showed you the definition of contradictoryes was not
competible to these, of which est and non est is the known example, The laws
of contradictions.
and present and future are neither present and not present nor future and not
future. And again in contradictions both parts must be considered in the same
respects, whereas future being enunciated in respect of us, and our finite
sight, present is expressed to be in respect of God, whose science is immense,
and infinite.

. 92. Now to this you reply, 1. That present and future, though they are not
formal contradictions, yet really and in sense they are, for future is that
that is not present, but to come, and present and not present are formally
contradictory. 2. That my concession that no finite thing can both be present
and future is enough for you, for God cannot be present to that which is not
present to him.] I now answer to your first, that there is nothing so false,
that I cannot make good by this your arguing. In particular, by this the
doctrine of the Trinity and Unity were equally confuted, The argument, holds
equally against the Trinity, and unity.
for Trinitas in the wonted notion is not one, but three, and one, and not one,
are formally contradictory. This is the direct image and transcript of your
arguing, mutatis mutandis, yet I know you deny not the Tri-unus Deus, how then
can you on no better proof deny prescience? The Socinian's conformably deny
both, but you are partial, and deny but one of them. It is never safe to
despise the ordinary rules of art, but seldom more dangerous then in this,
whereas if Logic were duly revered in it is dictates, and nothing thought
contradictory in sense, but what is an affirmation, and negation of the same
thing, this intricacy would be unfolded, and that which is future to me, be
present to God, without the encumbrance or dread of a contradiction.

. 93. To the second I answer, that it cannot suffice to your pretensions, that
no finite thing is both present and future, meaning, (as it is plain I did,)
in the same respect, present and future to me: When yet what is future to me,
may be present to one that lives a year hence, and so much more to God who
lives for ever. When therefore in your proof you seem to suppose me to hold,
that what is future to me, is not present to God, you did mistake me, for as I
said, that God being immense may and must be present to that which is future,
or else he is bounded and limited, and so not immense, infinite, so I deemed
that, which God is thus present to, to be objectively present to him, and so it
was from all eternity, though to us it be not yet present, but future. So that
the other part of the definition of contradictoryes, if it had been adverted
to, had superseded this part of your answer also, viz. that it is the
affirmation and negation of the same thing in the same respects, as here you
see it was not, and so was not useful to you.

. 94. But say you, if all future contingents are and ab aeterno were all
present to God, then they are all eternal.] I deny that consequence, what is
finite, and in it self yet future, by it is objective presence to God, is not
changed into eternal, nay even What is present to God, is not eternal.
that which really is, and so is really, (and not only objectively,) present
to him, is yet as far from eternal, as Christ's body, by being united to his
infinite divinity is from becoming infinite. This then was but a Sophisme that
you will soon see through.

. 95. And so your other part of the same passage of S. Augustine Confess. L. II.
c. 18, that again you resort to, was in effect formerly answered, by showing
that it belonged only to what is future, and present to us, and so to our
sight, not to Gods. I have now gone through your papers and wearied you, and
almost my self, yet if what is written prove useful to you, to the depositing
that which I cannot but deem an Error, although I lay no Epithets upon it, it
will be far from burthenous to

Your very affectionate friend and servant H. HAMMOND.
POSTSCRIPT.
. 96. TO extricate you finally out of this difficulty, I shall desire you by
way of recapitulation, to consider apart these two propositions, the first that
Gods science being as immense Two propositions.
and infinite, as himself, is not limited to things past or present, or
futures, by him decreed, but extends The first of God immense science.
to all that ever shall be, or may be; to what may be, so as to see it may be,
though it be not, to what shall be, so as to see it come to pass, as in time
it does come to pass, contingent things, contingently, etc. Of which
proposition if there can be any doubt to any man, who steadfastly believes Gods
immensity, let the predictions recorded in the Scripture The proof of it.
be considered, those especially which are of sins, which it is as impossible
for God to decree or predetermine, as to cause, and yet he foresees and
foretells them, witness Christ's foretelling Peter, that he should deny him
thrice, when Peter himself was so far from foreseeing, or purposing it, that he
resolved the contrary. The second proposition, The second of contingency and
liberty.
that there are future contingents, that all the sins (at least) of men are
not decreed, and predetermined by God, or caused by any necessity. Of which no
man can doubt, which believes the Scripture, and therein the procedure of the
judgment to come, the difference in respect of guilt and punishment betwixt
voluntary and involuntary actions, The proof of it.
(the motions of men and of stones,) and again the exhortations and menaces of
God in Scripture, and the great seriousness, expressed, and protestations
prefixed to them.

. 97. If taking these propositions apart, any Christian can doubt of the truth
of either of them, The conclusion.
he sees the shelves he splits upon, and the shipwreck of a great part of the
Faith, whither on this, or that side. But if he cannot but assent to these
truths severally, and only wants the skill of reconciling the seeming
difficulties which they beget, when he attempts to put them together, (of which
sort are all the inconveniences, or objections, produced in this matter,) let
him on that occasion consider, how (more then) credible it is, that he does not
understand all things, that are, having but finite facultyes, and finite
measures, which are not proportioned to infinite powers, or objects; Which
makes it most seasonable to supersede all farther enquiries, and to acquiesce
in an assurance, that God can reconcile his own contradictions, such I mean,
as though by the known rules of Logic they appear to be really no
contradictions, yet by us are conceived to approach nere to such, through
prejudice, or thinking (not too little, but rather) too much upon them. In
which case to restrain our farther searches is the same necessary
mortification, which it is to restrain inordinate appetites, and is a
principal piece of duty owing to the Apostles precept of (...), being wise to
sobriety: God give the world of Christian professors more of it, then is yet
discernible among them.



FINIS.
THE LAST WORDS OF THE Reverend, Pious and Learned Dr. HAMMOND: Being Two
PRAYERS for the Peaceful re-settlement of this Church and State.
Prayer I.
O Blessed Lord, who in thine infinite mercy did vouchsafe to plant a
glorious Church among us, and now in thy just judgment have permitted our sins
and follies to root it up, be pleased at last to resume thoughts of peace
toward us, that we may do the like to one another. Lord, look down from
heaven, the habitation of thy holiness, and behold the ruins of a desolated
Church, and compassionate to see her in the dust. Behold her, O Lord, not only
broken, but crumbled, divided into so many sects and fractions, that she no
longer represents the Ark of the God of Israel, where the Covenant and the
Manna were conserved, but the Ark of Noah, filled with all various sorts of
unclean beasts; and to complete our misery and guilt, the spirit of division
has insinuated it self as well into our affections as our judgments; that
badge of Discipleship which thou recommendedst to us, is cast off, and all the
contrary wrath and bitterness, anger and clamor, called in to maintain and
widen our breaches. O Lord, how long shall we thus violate and defame that
Gospel of peace that we profess? how long shall we thus madly defeat our
selves, lose that Christianity which we pretend to strive for? O thou which
make men to be of one mind in an house, be pleased so to unite us, that we
may be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.
And now that in Civil affairs there seems some aptness to a composure, O let
not our Spiritual differences be more unreconcilable. Lord, let not the
roughest winds blow out of the Sanctuary; let not those which should be thy
Ambassadors for peace still sound a Trumpet for war: but do thou reveal thy
self to all our Eliah's in that still small voice, which may teach them to
echo thee in the like meek treating with others. Lord, let no unseasonable
stiffness of those that are in the right, no perverse obstinacy of those that
are in the wrong, hinder the closing of our wounds; but let the one instruct in
meekness, and be thou pleased to give the other repentance to the
acknowledgment of the Truth. To this end do thou, O Lord, mollify all
exasperated minds, take off all animosities and prejudices, contempt and
heartburnings, and by uniting their hearts prepare for the reconciling their
opinions: and that nothing may intercept the clear sight of thy truth, Lord,
let all private and secular designs be totally deposited, that gain may no
longer be the measure of our Godliness, but that the one great and common
concernment of ruth and peace may be unanimously and vigorously pursued. Lord,
the hearts of all men are in thy hands, O be thou pleased to let thy Spirit of
peace overshadow the minds of all contending parties; and, if it be thy will,
restore this Church to her pristine state, renew her days as of old, let her
escape out of Egypt, be so entire, that not an hoof may be left behind: But if
thy wisdom see it not yet a season for so full a deliverance, Lord, defer not,
we beseech thee, such a degree of it; as may at least secure her a being; if
she cannot recover her beauty, yet, O Lord, grant her health, such a soundness
of constitution as may preserve her from dissolution. Let thy providence find
out some good Samaritans to cure her present wounds: and to whomsoever thou
shall commit that important work, Lord, give them skilful hands and
compassionate hearts; direct them to such applications as may most speedily,
and yet most soundly, heal the hurt of the daughter of Sion; and make them so
advert to the interests both of truth and peace, that no lawful condescension
may be omitted, nor any unlawful made. And do thou, who art both the wonderful
Counselor and Prince of peace, so guide and prosper all pacifick endeavors,
that all our distractions may be composed, and our Jerusalem may again become a
City at unity in it self; that those happy primitive days may at length
revert, wherein Vice was the only heresy; that all our intestine contentions
may be converted into a vigorous opposition of our common enemy, our
unbrotherly feuds into a Christian zeal against all that exalts it self against
the obedience of Christ. Lord, hear us, and ordain peace for us, even for his
sake whom thou have ordained our Peacemaker, Jesus Christ our Lord.

Prayer II.
O Most gracious Lord, who do not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children
of men, who smitest not till the importunity of our sins enforce thee, and
then correctest in measure, we thy unworthy creatures humbly acknowledge that
we have abundantly tasted of this patience and lenity of thine. To what an
enormous height were our sins arrived ere thou beganst to visit them! and when
thou could no longer forbear, yet mastering thy power, thou have not
proportioned thy vengeance to our crimes, but to thy own gracious design of
reducing and reclaiming us. Lord, had the first stroke of thy hand been
exterminating, our guilts had justified the method; but thou have proceeded by
such easy and gentle degrees, as witness how much thou desiredst to be
interrupted, and show us, that all that sad weight we have long groaned under,
has been accumulated only by our own incorrigibleness. It Is now, O Lord,
these many years that this Nation has been in the furnace, and yet our dross
wastes not but increases; and it is owing only to thy unspeakable mercy, that
we, who would not be purified, are not consumed; that we remain a Nation, who
cease not to be a most sinful, and provoking nation. O Lord, let not this
long-suffering of thine serve only to upbraid our obstinacy, and enhanse our
guilt; but let it at last have the proper effect on us, melt our hearts, and
lead us to repentance. And oh, that this may be the day for us thus to discern
the things that belong to our peace! that all who are (yea, and all who are
not) cast down this day in an external humiliation, may by the operation of thy
mighty Spirit have their souls laid prostrate before thee in a sincere
contrition! O thou who can out of the very stones raise up children unto
Abraham, work our stony flinty hearts into such a temper as may be malleable to
the impressions of thy grace, that all the sinners in Sion may tremble; that we
may not by a persevering obstinacy seal to our selves both temporal and eternal
ruin, but instead of our mutinous complaining at the punishments of our sins,
search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. O be thou pleased to grant
us this one grand fundamental mercy, that we who so impatiently thirst after a
change without us, may render that possible and safe by this better and more
necessary change within us; that our sins may not, as they have so often done,
interpose and eclipse that light which now begins to break out upon us. Lord,
thy dove seems to approach us with an olive branch in her mouth, oh let not our
silth and noysomness chase her away; but grant us that true repentance which
may at one thee, and that Christian charity which may reconcile us with one
another. Lord, let not our breach either with thee or among our selves be
incurable, but by making up the first prepare us for the healing of the latter.
And because, O Lord, the way to make us one fold is to have one shepherd, be
pleased to put us all under the conduct of Him to whom that charge belongs; bow
the hearts of this people as of one man, that the only contention may be who
shall be most forward in bringing back our David. O let none reflect on their
past guilts as an argument to persevere, but repent, and to make their return
so sincere as may qualify them not only for his but thy Mercy. And, Lord, be
pleased so to guide the hearts of all who shall be entrusted with that great
concernment of settling this nation, that they may weigh all their deliberations
in the balance of the Sanctuary, that conscience, not interest, may be the
ruling principle, and that they may render to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods; that they may become healers of
our breaches, and happy repairers of the sad ruins both in Church and State:
and grant, O Lord, that as those sins which made them are become National, so
the repentance may be National also, and that evidenced by the proper fruits
of it, by zeal of restoring the rights both of thee and thine Anointed. And do
thou, O Lord, so dispose all hearts, and remove all obstacles, that none may
have the will, much less the power, to hinder his peaceable restitution. And,
Lord, let him bring with him an heart so entirely devoted to thee, that he may
wish his own honor only as a means to advance thine. O let the precepts and
example of his Blessed Father never depart from his mind; and as thou were
pleased to perfect the one by suffering, so perfect the other by acting thy
will; that He may be a blessed instrument of replanting the power instead of
the form of Godliness among us, of restoring Christian virtue in a profane and
almost barbarous Nation. And if any wish him for any distant ends, if any
desire his shadow as a shelter for their riots and licenciousnesse, O let him
come a great but happy defeat to all such, not bring fuel, but cure, to their
inordinate appetites; and by his example as a Christian, and his Authority as a
King, so invite to good, and restrain from evil, that he may not only release
our temporal, but our spiritual bondage, suppress those foul and scandalous
vices which have so long captivated us, and by securing our inward, provide for
the perpetuating our outward peace. Lord, establish thou his throne in
righteousness, make him a signal instrument of thy glory and our happiness,
and let him reap the fruits of it in comfort here, and in bliss hereafter;
that so his earthly Crown may serve to enhanse and enrich his heavenly. Grant
this, O King of Kings, for the sake and intercession of our Blessed Mediator,
Jesus Christ.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1660.


