A COPY OF SOME PAPERS PAST AT OXFORD, BETWIXT The Author of the Practical
Catechism, AND Mr. Chapter

The second Edition

(...) St. Basil. Epist. 63. LONDON, Printed by Ja. Flesher for Richard Royston
at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1650.

For Mr Cheynell.
SIR,
AT my return from London late last night, I met with some scattered reports
of your dealing with the Author of the Practical Catechism, in a late Sermon
or Sermons of yours in this City; within a few days after, I met you at Col.
Hammonds lodgings, and signified my intentions to go out of Town the next
day. Now though the care I have of the reputation of that Author be not so
great or passionate, as to put me upon the least thought or design of working
any proportionable revenge on him, that endeavored publicly to defame him;
or to make you any return, save only of my prayers to God for you, that he
will forgive you all the trespasses that either this, or any other dealing of
yours has been guilty of, and that he will give you a right Judgment in all
things; yet because I would not be in danger to believe any thing of you
causlessly, I thought my self obliged in Justice to you, to desire from you
(who know best what you said) an exact account in writing (as far as your
memory will serve) of all that you said in public, either at St. Mary's, or
Carfax, wherein the Author of that Catechism was concerned. I do much abuse my
self in the notion I have of Christian Justice, if that do not oblige you to
answer this request of

October. 10. 1646. Your Servant H. Hammond.
I shall reinforce my request, that you will send me the sum of what you
said, with as little alteration as is possible.
SIR,
I Return you thanks, and am beforehand with you for Prayers, the Lord
pardon, and lead you into all truth and holiness. Truly Sir, I had said as
much of the Practical Catechism as I did say, though you had been in Town,
nay, had been (where you might learn something of my brethren) at Church.
What I said of the Author of that Catechism, was (your Friends being Judges)
as such as he deserved: some think I spoke too highly in his commendations:
But to the point; first you say you are obliged in Justice to me to desire an
exact account of my Sermons: Sure this is somewhat more then equal Justice to
me, it is to exercise Jurisdiction over me. Secondly, you do much abuse your
self in the notion of Christian justice, if you conceive me obliged in
Christian justice to give you an account this night (being to preach to morrow)
of what I preached about ten days ago.

I will deal plainly with you, I have not said all that I intend to say of
that Catechism, because it seems to evacuate the moral Law, under pretense
of filling up its vacuities, and it does in effect overthrow the sum and
substance of the Gospel. Sir, this is more then I said in either Sermon; But
you shall (in due time, place, and manner, as soon as my weighty occasions
will permit) receive the reasons of this assertion.

From your humble Servant Fr. Cheynell.
Saturday, October. 10. 1646. about 4 of the clock in the afternoon.
Sir,
What I said of the Practical Catechism.

SIR,
I Am sorry I was so mistaken in you, as to make a request to which you do not
by your answer return me one word, nor are so favorable as to promise me any
at your greater leisure. Having had this experience of you, I shall make no
more new questions (to which the former part of your Letter might tempt one
that were curious) as who of my Friends they were, which were so well satisfied
with what you said of the Author of that Catechism; or, who again, that
envyed him the elogy which you affirm your self to have bestowed upon him. I
shall rather take occasion from these two affirmations of yours, to enforce my
one former Petition, that you will commit to paper what you said, and give me
leave to pass a judgment whether the Author be obliged to thank you for
civilities, or (as my present intelligence goes) to clear himself from your
accusations I am willing to flatter my self by the second leaf of your Letter
(begun with a [Sir, what I said of the practical Catechism] and so abruptly
broke off) that you were once in so good humor, as to design me the favor I
petitioned for; and if I am deceived, yet have I now more reason to importune
it; because, first, by your present mistaking of my few Lines: and secondly,
returning an answer very distant from the particular proposed by me, I am
inclined to believe it possible that your exceptions to the Author of the
Catechism might be mistakes also, (and then I would hope I might rectify, and
you retract those mistakes;) Or else, secondly, that your answers might be
somewhat from the matter, and the showing you that might to you be useful
also. And if neither of these should prove true, I shall farther invite you to
that charity by a serious promise, that whatever you to my apprehension justly
object against, or confute in that Author, shall by Gods grace tend to my
edification. And having that preparation of mind, I hope your prayer will be
heard, that God will pardon, and lead me into all truth and holiness. That you
may not think I have been unjust in mentioning such blemishes in your Letter
(and that I may perform to you, what I desire of you) I shall first mention
the mistakes in it. The first is, your interpreting my desire to you for an
exercise of Jurisdiction over you, which that it may appear probable, you say,
I desire an exact account of your Sermons. Where first, Sir, to desire an
account, is not to exercise jurisdiction: Secondly, the account I desired, was
not of your Sermons, or of any part of them, saving only of that wherein the
Author of the Catechism was concerned, and that I then told you I was obliged
(in Justice to you) to desire, and I still conceive I am so, it being but just,
to use this obvious conducible means to keep me from believing you to have
said any thing but what you did say, when perhaps the relations of others may
be unjust to you, (and tempt me to be so also) and no body can well assure
me of either, but your self. What you mean by [more then an equal justice
to you] I shall not demand, because I would make haste to conclude this paper:
yet because I suppose you would intimate by that phrase, that it was not
Justice to you (for if it were more then equal on your side, you would not
complain; and besides you say, it is exercising jurisdiction over you, which
for me to do over you, were I confess injustice) I must further evidence it
were not, by naming you the particulars which are reported to me from your
Sermon, which are such false suggestions, that nothing but your saying, and
saying truly that you said them not, can clear you from a great fault, of
which that I may not charge you untruly, I had no sure way, but to make that
request to you. The particulars are four:

First, That you told your Auditory that there was a Catechism, and never a
word of the Trinity in it. Of this I desire you to inform me whether you said
it or no. For if you did, there was great injustice in it. For 1* if you had
mentioned the full title of the Book, not a Catechism (to which it may seem
proper to treat of the Trinity) but a Catechism with a restriction to one kind
of matter a Practical Catechism, there had then been no great matter of
wonder or complaint, that that speculative mystery had not been handled.

But then 2, the very first lines of that Book would farther have prevented
that objection. For the Scholar there professing himself to have attained in
some measure to the understanding of the principles of Religion proposed by our
Church Catechism (and that by this very Catechists care, who had often done it
in his Parish, and at this time chose to do somewhat else) and the belief of
the Trinity being part of that Catechism, and of those instructions, there is
a clear reason why in the subsequent discourse the Doctrine of the Trinity is
not handled, because it is supposed as a praecognitum before it.

3 This speech if it were yours, would seem to have some design in it, and
(whether meant by you, or not) be thought by others to affix on the Author
either denying of the Trinity, or being guilty of some error in that point,
which he was willing to conceal: and that this Author is guilty of neither, I
believe any man will be convinced by that Catechism, viz. in the last lines of
it, where there is express mention of, and prayer directed to the blessed
Trinity coaeternall, to which one infinite Majesty, etc. In which few words are
disclaimed (though not confuted) as many of the errors of the Antitrinitarian
and Socinian as could be well expected in that matter, I mean the words
Trinity, and Unity, eternity of each Person, and coaeternity.

The second thing that I heard of, was in the matter of Oaths, that the
Catechism had trained up youth very ill, in giving license to vain Oaths,
which you are said to have concluded from these words in the Catechism, where
in answer to this question, Is the third Commandment in Exodus [Thou shall not
take the name of God in vaine] no more then Thou shall not forswear thy self?
It is answered, No more undoubtedly -- for there, I am told, you stopped, and
from thence fell into some expressions against the Doctrine and Book. If this
were so, then were you very unjust to your Auditory, in withholding from them
the consequents, which would certainly have kept them in charity with the
Author. I beseech you, Sir, read on, and you shall find that there is there as
severe an interdiction of all kind of swearing in a Christian (and sure such
are all to whom this Catechism was meant) as can be imagined: in plain
words, a total universal prohibition of swearing it self, making that as
unlawful now, as perjury was before, and a great deal more, so extremely
strict, that I have by learned men been asked whether that Author were not too
severe against all kind of swearing, but (I thank God) never heard it
fancyed, that there was any ground or appearance of liberty to be drawn
thence. All that that Author can differ from you in, is his opinion, that the
words of the third Commandment belong expressly to perjury only; and for that
opinion he brings the plain words of Christ, which reads it (...), thou shall
not forswear, etc. Secondly, the importance of the word in the original,
where to lift up (or take) the name of God, signifies to swear, and [vainely]
signifies [falsely,] and so the very word used in Exodus and there rendered
[vaine] is Deuteronomy. 5. in the ninth commandment rendered [false.] To these
Arguments, if you can give a satisfactory answer, he may chance to change his
opinion in that. But however, the insisting on Christ's direct punctual
prohibition will sure prove it a sufficient calumny in him that shall hence
conclude the Author to have given youth any liberty in this kind. I would no
man were more guilty of vain Oaths, in himself or others, then that Catechist
is, and resolves to be. Having said thus much, I shall add ex abundanti, that
in kindness and submission to the meanest, the Author thought fit to add in a
last edition (intended above a year since, but sold in this Town above a
month ago) after these words [no more undoubtedly] these words, by way of
explication of what before he meant [In the primary intention of the phrase]
for to that only he professes to have designed that speech, never thinking to
deny or doubt, but that vain Oaths (though not swearing simply taken i. e. all
kind of swearing) would there be forbidden also though not primarily, yet by
way of reduction; which you may guess to have been his meaning, because he
adds* that perhaps foolish, wanton using of Gods name (though not in oaths, for
one may use Gods name and not swear) surely profane using of it, is forbidden
by that reduction. And (I pray) do you guess whether it be likely that he
which said, perhaps foolish using of Gods name was in the law forbidden, and
all kind of voluntary swearing under the Gospel, could justly be charged as a
friend to young men, in giving them any of that liberty. If you can think it
possible, yet read on to the end of that matter, and I will be bound you shall
think otherwise.

Your next exception (I am told) was, that in the matter of repentance, the
Author makes inclination to sin an infelicity, not a sin. This, if you
said, you are much to blame. For in the place whereto that refers, it is clear
that under the general words, of [All kinds and sorts of sinnes] the first
kind named is weaknesses, frailties, pollutions of our natures, our pronenesse
and inclination to sin. Which being positively said, would, in the judgment
of any ingenuous man have helped to interpret that which follows [as
infelicities, if not as sinnes] thus not to deny them to be sins, within two
lines after it had been affirmed they were, but that even in their opinion that
took them to be only infelicities, not sins, (as sure some do, when they
are not consented to) they were yet to be to them matter of humiliation, true
sorrow and grief, as the words are clear, no where so much as intimating that
they are not sins, unless when he says they are no actual sins, which I
hope you will not say they are, when not consented to.

Your next exception, (I am told) was about justification, but my relations
differ in the particular. Some say your quarrel was, that he makes faith a
condition, no instrument. If that were it, I pray tell me whether you think
faith a physical instrument of justification, (as for a moral instrument,
that he in terms acknowledges) or when justification is only an act of Gods
through Christ pardoning of sin, and accounting just, you can imagine that
faith has any kind of real though isntrumental efficiency in that work, i.
e. whether faith in any such sense can pardon sin, or pronounce just, or
whether it be not sufficient to acknowledge it an instrument in receiving of
Christ, and all other acts of the man as Christian, and only a condition or
capacity in the subject to make capable of Gods act upon him in justification?
this is the sum of what the Author says in that point, and shall be farther
cleared to you, if that were your exception. Others tell me it was concerning
the priority of sanctification before justification. Which point, as it is
there stated, can be no matter of quarrel to any that affirms the receiving
of Christ to be pre-required to justification. For as that is no more then
that faith is pre-required (in the true notion of faith, and that wherein Dr.
Preston acknowledges it) so is it by that Author said, that only that
sanctification is precedent to justification, which is the cordial assent to
Christ's commands and promises, giving up the heart to him, resolution of
obedience; not the actual performance and practice of those vows, for that is
acknowledged there to be after justification. These are the particulars I have
heard of, and have now reason to believe, that of all them you are not guilty,
especially of the first, though 'twas (even at London) positively told me from
you. And therefore I do by these presents acquit you of that, but yet think
it not amiss to have mentioned that report, that by it you may see (what alone
I have now in hand to prove) how truly I told you, that to avoid the danger of
believing any thing of you causlesly, I thought my self obliged in justice to
you, to beg an exact account of what you said. I have been too long on the
evidencing your first mistake, I would you had answered my request, and then
you had taken away all excuse of that prolixity.

Your second mistake was, that you conceived me to have said that 'twas a
piece of Christian justice in you to have given me an account this night, etc.
wherein you were feign to add to my words [this night] whereas I only
mentioned an answer, but assigned you no time for it, but punctually required
the Messenger to desire to know, when it would be seasonable, and he should
call for it; and accordingly, though I have this evening written this
rejoinder, yet that I may not trouble you, I mean to respite the sending it
till Monday. And yet by the way, I conceive it had been as easy for you to
have given me what I desired, as that Letter in stead of it, unless it be
easier for you to write out of your invention then your memory. I am sure it
had been the savingst way, for then you had escaped this importunity. The
distance of your answer from my proposition I shall not need to put you in
mind of. That which you mean to add more of the Catechism, is not all, nor
(if my intelligence fail me not) any part of what you have said already: and
it is but diversion to tell me you will say more, and give me reason of that
more, when as yet much less is desired of you, and cannot be obtained. I
shall when you are at leisure, desire all your heap of exceptions against that
poor creature, that (I will be deposed for it) meant no man any greater
malice, then to land him safe at heaven the nearest and surest way that the
Author could imagine. But I will not yet importune you for any more then you
have yet delivered publicly in this City. By granting me this uprightly and
heartily, you will make me really rejoice to hear that you shall have taken any
further notice of me; but if you shall persist to deny me this first request,
you will utterly discourage

Your Servant H. Hammond.
October. 20. 1646.
POSTSCRIPT.
YOu are pleased to mention your design of further severity against that
Author in the matter of the moral law, which (say you) it seems to evacuate
under pretense of filling up its vacuities; and add, that it does in effect
overthrow the sum and substance of the Gospel. The latter of these (I
confess) would be a little strange to me, that he that labors to elevate the
Gospel-precepts (as you think, too much) above the Law, should overthrow the
sum or substance of the Gospel. I must profess to believe that whatever
charge can be affixt to that Doctrine, that would not be it, but rather that
it labors to raise the Gospel to a greater height then it would bear, or
indeed to lessen the Law, not to alter any thing in the Gospel. In this
particular I must profess my self posed, and utterly unable to conjecture what
you mean, till you are so kind as to add your reasons. One thing only I meant
to serve you in by this Postscript (because I see that, unless others have
deceived me, you may possibly be deceived in passing judgment on that Book)
and that is, to tell you, that you have a hard task to prove that that Author
does at all evacuate the Law moral (unless you guard your self by that
cautious word, that it seems to evacuate it, and that it may, and not do it
really.) For you may please to mark from me, (who know the sense and spirit
of that Author better then you) that he says not positively that Christ added
to the Law new precepts, but one of these two, either new precepts, or new
light; and concludes that either of these two will serve his turn, and enhance
the Christians obligation; and adds, that he that will acknowledge that
Christ requires more of his Disciples or Christians now, then the Jews by any
clear revelation had been convinced to be necessary before, did grant as much
in effect as he desired to be granted. And yet farther, in the close, that if
any will contend, and show as universal plain obliging precepts under the Law,
as there are in the fifth of St. Matthew, he shall be glad to see them, and
not contend with him, so that he will bring the Jews up to us, and not us
down to the Jews; professing that the only danger which he had used all his
diligence to prevent. Now I have told you this, use your discretion, and let
me hear the worst you can say in this particular also.

For Dr. Hammond.
SIR,
I Was not the first, no nor the last, that endeavored to confute the dangerous
errors of your much admired Catechism, yet I do not hear that you have fallen
foul upon any but on my self. I acknowledge my self the weakest, and yet am
confident that Gods power will be manifested in my weakness, that God may
have all the glory. I received your Rejoinder upon Monday: that day I was
forced to go out of Town to speak with a Gentleman; I was to preach yesterday
morning, and to perform some exercise in the afternoon for the satisfaction of
some that are much seduced, this Friday morning I return you what I can, and
hope it will give you some satisfaction.

Sir, your messenger forgot your charge, and never told me that you expected
an answer when I was at leisure, and therefore I scribled somewhat in haste, as
now I do, for I have not one hour in a day free from disturbance.

Your errors were more solidly refuted by two of my Reverend Brethren, that are
both of them Seniors to you: they would have been able to have given you better
satisfaction.

You desire to know what I said at Carfax. I took notice of that passage page
243. of your last edition, where you speak to this effect [That the holy Ghost
was our advocate in settling a Ministry to pray and intercede for their
several Congregations (and enabling them in the very Apostles time to form a
Liturgy to continue in the Church to that end) and thereby helping our
infirmities, and teaching us to pray as we ought.] I said, I should be glad
to see that Liturgy which you say was then formed; And 2 was to be continued
in the Church. 3 To know whether the Holy Ghost does help our infirmities by
any other Liturgy or not. 4 Whether they do not pray as they ought, who know
not where to procure that very Liturgy, which you say was formed in the
Apostles times, and to be continued in the Church. 5 Whether the
Common Prayer Book be that very Liturgy.

Sir, Mr. Reynolds told me you wanted direction about your first fruits, if
your brother will procure L. Genesis Cromwell to speak to Sir H. Vane junior, it
is in his power to relieve you. Forgive the abruptness of

Your faithful Servant Francis Cheynell.


In this outer Paper was enclosed as follows.

SIR,
I Was not much taken with your notion of Justice, but I shall gratify your
desire, being now invited to charity by your serious promise and preparation of
mind to entertain the truth, if God be pleased to discover it to you by so
weak an instrument as I confess my self to be. You have changed and
mollified your phrase, you did not stoop so low in your Letter, as you do in
your Rejoinder (as you are pleased to term it) to beg an account: Truly Sir, I
did stumble at those hard words, exact account, considering that you have
exercised jurisdiction heretofore in a Country, where I am now seated by the
Parliament. You complain of false suggestions, I pray God forgive them that
suggested so many false accusations against me to you, who have (as I
perceive) more worth in you, then to believe them.

1. It is reported that I complained of you to my Auditory, because you did not
handle the Trinity in your Catechism, nay, that there was not a word of the
Trinity in that Catechism: I believe Mr. Digle will be so candid, as to
assure you that this is a false suggestion. But give me leave, Doctor, to deal
plainly with you, there is an accusation framed against you by your own
Apology, for you speak in the language of you know whom, when you tell me,
that I need not wonder if the speculative mystery of the Trinity be not
handled in a Practical Catechism. Believe it, the Doctrine of the Trinity is
a Practical mystery, the very foundation and groundwork of the mystery of
godliness. The blessed Trinity is not only the object of our faith, but of
our Worship too; nay, the Doctrine of the Trinity has by Gods blessing a
comfortable and quickening influence into the maine passages of the life and
conversation of all Orthodox and judicious Christians. I hope, I need not
remember you of your Baptism, or tell you that a Sacramental Covenant is
Practical. Sir, rectify that mistake, and I will forgive the suggester.

Your next reason concerns the Church-Catechisme, I suppose you mean that
Catechism in the Common Prayer Book: now truly Sir, I must confess that I
like that Catechism far better then your Practical Catechism: and your
Friends will tell you, that you might have contented your self with that
Catechism, unless you could have made a better.

To your third reason I answer, that I did once in London show that passage,
which you cite out of your prayer, to assure a friend of yours, that you did
acknowledge the Trinity, though you maintain many errors, broached by them
that deny the coeternall Trinity in unity. I hasten to your second report.

2. Concerning your exposition of the third Commandment, I said, the youths,
etc. had learnt the Art of swearing as perfect as their Catechism; and added,
that I did not wonder at it, when I read such a passage in a Practical
Catechism printed at Oxford; as you may also read, if you begin at the eighth
Section of the second Book (I add these words now, because I have sent home
the Oxford edition, and cite it according to the last edition,) where the
eloquent Author (to whom for parts, gifts, learning, I acknowledge my self
far inferior) being desired by his Scholar to weed out the vice of swearing,
lest it should take too deep root in young men, and get into fashion, does
assure his Scholar that after this Preface, Ye have heard, etc. the first part
of the Precept, Matthew. 5. 33. [Thou shall not forswear thy selfe] is clearly
the third Commandment: but the latter part [But shall perform, etc.] is taken
out of other places of the Law to explain the meaning of the former, and to
express it to be (as literally it sounds) against perjury or nonperformance
of promissory oaths: where note, there is liberty enough for assertory oaths,
for the third Commandment is not meant of assertory oaths, as is plainly said
afterward. But lest the Scholar should think that this was not the full
meaning of the Law sent by Moses, he is prompted to put the question home,
whether there be no more meant in the third Commandment then [Thou shall not
forswear thy self?] The Catechist answers sadly and peremptorily [No more
undoubtedly.] This is a flat denial indeed, which requires full assurance of
belief in the Scholar, as it does note confidence in the Teacher, no more, and
undoubtedly no more. I fear that the doubtful [perhaps] and imaginary
superaddition following (of which I may have fair opportunity to speak more
hereafter) will not be so effectual to restrain the Youths or Doctors from
swearing, as the unquestionable command of God. I hope, this exposition of the
third Commandment is not generally received in this University, and doubt not
but some will be so ingenuous as to protest against it.

Sit, I have no more then this in my notes concerning that passage in your
Catechism, though I was sufficiently prepared by meditation to have discoursed
at large upon that Argument: whether the clock struck, or what other diversion
there was, I know not; I believe I said not much more, but whether I delivered
more or less at that time, I am not able to give you an exact account, it was
not a business worth a design to pass over such excuses as you allege for
your self.

1 A total universal prohibition of swearing it self, and making it is as
unlawful now as perjury was before, Christus persecit tertium mandatum, nec in
rebus veris nomen Domini invocare permittit, nisi talc quid a nobis exigat dei
gloria. Vide Smalcium de Divinit. Christi, and Catechism. Racoviens.
is a doctrine which you cannot prove, unless you mince your total and
universal with so many qualifications, that at last you lose the total in a
cipher. You say, as Smalcius and the rest do, that I must not take an oath but
for Gods glory and the public good; now this is not to forbid swearing it
self, Non assumes nomen Domini dei tui gratis, frustra, temere, in ullum
vanum, uti viri diffusissimae eruditionis passim. Mendacium prohibetur hoc in
loco, quia mendacium est gratis dictum, vanum, nihil.
but unnecessary swearing: what is become of your total now? Did the perfect
Law of God give men leave to to take vain oaths, so vain as that God should
have no glory, nor men any good by them? Why, sure, it was by this Argument
lawful to lift up the soul to vanity in a sense intolerably bad. 2 Concerning
our difference, it is this: you undertook to prove that by the third
Commandment, there was no more meant, then that a man should not forswear
himself. Can you conclude this out of all your premises in the Catechism?
your ingenuity would not permit you to frame such a conclusion, and therefore
you conclude that answer of yours which begins C. No more undoubtedly, The last
edition at London, page 120.
etc. thus, [By all which it is clear, that to take Gods name in vain is to
forswear ones self.] You do not add, [and no more] which was the point in
question, (...) Aleph est loco He, literae radicalis; est proprie vanitas, tam
verborum quam rerum; saepe adverbialiter sumitur pro frustra, temere.
between the Scholar and the Catechist, and therefore that should have been
proved, and in the conclusion inferred. 3 You appeal to Christ the best Judge.
Christ says; that whatsoever oath is unnecessarily taken (so you must say, as
I have proved before) comes of evil, Matthew. 5. 37. (...), if you will, of
the evil one, Omne mendacium est vanum, sed omne vanum non est mendacium.
or of the Devil. Now Sir, did not the third Commandment forbid all evil; or
all devilish oaths? 4 That the word is rendered [false] sometimes, I grant;
that it is as properly, if not more properly, rendered [vaine] you cannot deny;
and if you consult Aben-Ezra, R. Selomo, etc. they will assure you that we are
not to lift up or take the name of God vainly: (...) expount per Kinnom and
Hebel. R. Sclomo, etc.
I need not go about to prove that the Jews saw this truth as clearly as we
do, but I can prove that they saw and acknowledged it, and that is sufficient
for me to prove against your assertion. 5 Consult the Septuagint, (...). LXX.
and see how they render the word, Exodus 20. 7. Deuteronomy. 5. 11. 6 You know, that
the primary and principal signification of the word is not [false] but
[vaine,] and every man that has looked into the Hebrew, Vide Stegman, Photin.
gives you instances enough. 7 You know, that others tell you, that if the
primary intention had been to forbid forswearing, Non assumes nomen Domini
gratis sive frustra, ut si non jures in ejus nomine nisi ob necessitatem; etiam
veritas non est juranda nisi ob necessitatem. Vide Pagnini thesaurum, cura
Merceri editum, page 2186.
diverse other words or phrases would have been used in all probability, such as
the holy Ghost uses in other places; learned men are bold to name diverse, but I
am not so bold. I might say a great deal more, if I had a mind to wrangle with
you about the primary intention: but that is not the question between you and
me; only, you have acknowledged in a manner that the edition of your book
printed at Oxford, had in the judgment of Learned men somewhat questionable.
You tell me of the last edition of your Book at London. I answer, 1 That I saw
one edition printed at London, and compared it with the Oxford edition; what
difference there is between them, it is your part to show. 2 As for that
edition you talk of, sold in Oxford about a month ago, that was a fortnight
before I preached; truly I bought that edition also. You see I was at some cost
and pains to know your mind. 3 I read this last edition, and saw no
difference between that and the other in this point about the meaning of the
third Commandment. 4 I asked others, and they told me that there were some
additions at the end of this last edition. I perused those additions, and then
concluded that I might take it for granted that was your opinion which was to
be found in all three editions. 5 You now refer me to that last edition,
and tell me that you have added somewhat to those words [No more undoubtedly]
by way of explication; good Sir, say, Retractation. 6. I have looked over those
additions once again, with the best eyes I have, and find nothing about the
primary intention of the phrase; You say, you added it; and where should I
look for an addition, but amongst your additions? you see how hard it is to
find your explication. Your Printer and you may well make a confessing
apology; for the additions to the 120 page, concern nothing but perjury or
sacrilege. 7 I looked on, to see whether it was not inserted afterward, till
I came to the end of your additions, and there I found some alterations, your
last reserve, which (I confess) I did not peruse, before I preached: my reason
was, because you call them [Lesse remarkable alterations] and therefore I
thought very innocently, that you had only corrected some literal mistakes;
but contrary to my conjecture, I there find not only some alteration, but
(what I bless God for) a direct recantation of sundry particulars, and I hope
you will see cause to recant much more. I will continue my prayers for you, and
do what I can to help you to some new light to discern old spiritual rules
which were given by God in the time of Moses. Sir, seriously consider the
carriage of this business, and tell me whether your patience or mine has been
more exercised? Take another Commandment, the sixth if you please, will you
say there is no more, undoubtedly no more meant by that, but the actual taking
away the life of a man? no, you answer more fairly, page 99. and why then
could you not have interpreted the third Commandment as clearly? 3 Consider
that there are three editions of your Book abroad, every man will not be at
the same cost and pains that I have been; do you make the sad and woeful
inference. 4 Look into the Treatises of Learned men; do any say that there is
no more, undoubtedly no more meant in a Commandment but what is directly prima
facie presented? is that which is to be reduced to a command, not meant in
that Commandment, to which it is properly reduced? 5 In these X words or
Commandments, words should not be too much restrained, but taken in their
latitude. 6 Is it proper for a man that has said, No more undoubtedly no more
is meant, to come in with a doubtful perhaps afterward, and say perhaps there
is more meant? 7 Your less remarkable addition is a plain recantation. 8 It
is more for Gods honor and yours, to make a free, noble, solemn recantation,
and (now you have deceived the Kingdom with three editions) to do all things
like your self, ingenuously: a worthy action loses its grace, and our brethren
lose their share of benefit by it, when done with so much reservednesse, that
others cannot well take notice of it for their edification. Pray Sir, let your
recantation be as remarkable as your seduction; do not put it at the fag-end
of some less remarkable alterations, acknowledge that you were seduced by --
into this opinion, and recant with observation, lest others be seduced by so
many hundred Catechismes as are dispersed throughout the Kingdom.

But it may be that you will deny that you have made a recantation. Truly Sir,
first the addition of those words [in the primary intention of the phrase.] 2
The putting in of [Idle] and blotting out of [perhaps] which did much affront
your [No more undoubtedly.] 3 The change of these words [the particular matter
of Moses his Law was of Promissory (nor Assertory) oaths] for these [The matter
was peculiarly of promissory, not only of assertory oaths,] all these three
together will amount to a round recantation, considering that in three editions
you had said, there was No more, and undoubtedly no more forbidden in the third
Commandment, then the breach of promissory oaths.

Ninthly, consider, that if this amendment had been before Oxford had been
taken, or if you would say that it (as well as another edition of your Book)
was intended, before you were in danger to be called to an account for this
and many things of worse consequence, your recantation would be more
satisfactory. I spoke to you as a friend, and speak not out of my own breast,
for I do but repeat the censures of other men. For my own prart, you have
made a solemn profession under your hand to give me satisfaction, but how
will you satisfy other men? 10. Yet I must profess, that I do not like that
expression of yours [Neverthinking to deny or doubt, but that vain oaths would
be forbidden there also.] Do you mean that they were forbidden by God when
Moses published the Law, or would be forbidden afterward by a superaddition?
Would be is not so clear an expression as is desired. 11. I do not
understand that expression of yours, when you say, [That in kindness and
submission to the meanest, the Author thought fit to add.] If you mean it of
me, I take it kindly, for I did speak to your friends at London about you,
and they promised to tell you positively of it, and I spoke for that end; for I
do respect you more then you think I do: and some worthy friends both of
yours and mine know, that near upon ten years ago we did exchange some
Letters about your opinion concerning certain vacuities in the moral Law of
God. 12. But Sir, you should consider that Learned men have told you of this
error, and therefore say, in submission to better Judgments. 13. Say, in
submission to the greatest, even to Jehovah, the God of glory, I will abase my
self, recant my errors, and acknowledge the perfection of his moral
spiritual Law. Surely it is meet to be said to God, etc. Job 34. 31, 32. I
beseech, that you will weep over those two Verses, and then read that passage,
John 6. 38. Christ came down from heaven to do the will of God, etc. Oh, do
you come down from your Criticismes, come down from your notions, your
imaginary superadditions; which you look upon as a kind of heaven, and
endeavor to do the will of your Father, revealed in his perfect and
spiritual Law, and I Will warrant you you will find it so perfect, without any
superadditions, that your Evangelicall obedience shall not excel or transcend
that excellent rule; nay, you will confess that you cannot see an end of its
perfection, and you will hate every false way. Pardon me, if I seem to preach
to you; the Lord set it home upon your heart.

3. The next report is, that you made inclination to sin an infelicity, not a
sin: I said, that the Author of that Catechism did acknowledge that godly
sorrow was to be conceived for all kinds and sorts of sin: but when he
descends to particulars, he speaks with so much irresolution, as if he
doubted whether our aptness to fall into all sin, were an infelicity only
or a sin.

Sir, your expression is inexcusable, and your apology does no way satisfy.
Truly Sir, you must fall down at a Throne of grace, and beg pardon of God, and
you must speak more positively, or else you will not be able to give
satisfaction to impartial men.

1 You speak of pollutions of nature: sure that expression is more proper to
denote actual sins, then original sin, which is one entire, universal,
and natural pollution. 2 Every one that is of age to conceive godly sorrow,
has actually consented to the corruption of his nature, he has cherished it,
and been pleased with it. 3 You seem to imply, that there must needs be some
consent given to every actual sin; Sir, that is yet to be proved on your
part; for you are too magisteriall, and so much given to dictates, that you may
well stand to be perpetual Dictator in Divinity; every point of a Catechism
should be exactly proved. 4 You seem either to recant what you said before,
or at least to doubt whether these pollutions be infelicities only, or sin.
5 The danger is the greater, because you express such a grand point
Sceptically; there are indeed too many that say, The corruption of our nature
is rather an infelicity then a sin; do you express your self thus
doubtfully, that you may comply with them? indeed if you were composing such a
Liturgy as some have wished for, that Protestants, etc. might join together, I
confess you have sufficiently served that design: but sure it was your duty,
especially in a Practical Catechism, to have declared your self freely and
fully against that dangerous error. 6 If you are of their mind who maintain
the corruption of our nature to be only an infelicity, not a sin; it was
not fairly done to blind your Reader with an Orthodox expression in the
beginning of your answer, that you might afterward tempt him into a dangerous
error. 7 It is absurd to say, that godly sorrow is to be conceived for an
infelicity qua sic, merely as an infelicity. 8 There is no doubt but that every
sin should be wailed qua sic, as a sin: an inconformity to a spiritual
Law, and a pronenesse to actual rebellion against God, and all the commands of
God, ought to be bewailed even with tears of blood; you need not speak
timorously or doubtfully in so weighty and clear a point. 9 I found the more
fault with this doubtful expression, because you write a Practical
Catechism, and you know that the corruption of our nature has great influence
into our practice, and therefore you should have been most clear and express
in this point, that by Gods grace this pronenesse to sin might be both
bewailed and mortified. I need not tell you, how many dangerous consequences
have been inferred from some doubtful expressions in Catechismes or
confessions about original sin, but I hasten to your last report, which is
about justification.

4 It seems you are most to seek here, you desire me to help you out. Sir, I
never said that faith was a Physical Instrument of justification; sure
justification is no Physical thing. You do grant* at least in terms, that
faith is a Moral instrument of justification; but if you deny it to be a
Real instrument in receiving Christ, then sure what you grant in terms, you
deny in deed. No man ever dreamt that faith does pardon sin, but a sinner
does by faith receive a pardon: 1 Faith does receive Christ really, but
spiritually, not corporally, or physically. 2 That which you call a sufficient
acknowledgement, is not sufficiently clear, be pleased to explain what you
mean, when you say [that faith is an instrument in receiving of Christ, and
all other acts of the man as Christian, and only a condition or capacity in
the subject to make capable of Gods act upon him in justification.] 3 You
should distinguish, as the Apostle does, between receiving of Christ, and
walking in him. 4 If you mean, that all other acts of a Christian, namely acts
of repentance, charity, and in a word, all acts of Evangelicall or new
obedience, are Moral instruments of justification, I desire a proof of that. 5
Does my receiving of Christ make me capable of Christ, or rather make me
possessed of Christ? 6 I think you will not deny that Gods act in giving Christ,
giving a pardon, etc. is in order of nature before my receiving of Christ, and
a pardon. 7 You have not yet clearly expressed, what is the true notion of
faith in your opinion, and what Dr. Preston says to confirm you in it, and
where he says it. 8. If you conceive that a cordial assent to Christ's
commands has any influence into our justification, be pleased to unfold that
riddle: you know, it is confessed by all, that the true believer does give a
cordial assent to Christ's commands; but is he justified by that assent? 9 How
do you prove, that any soul whilst it remains un justified does cordially
and wholly give up it self to be ruled by Christ? I confess it to be a good
evidence of justification, but not an antecedent to (much less a Condition to
make us capable of) justification. 10 If a cordial assent to Christ's commands,
and a resolution of obedience, are moral instruments of justification, be
pleased to show what efficiency these instruments have in justification;
whether the Terminus of that efficiency be a capacity in the soul, which does
formally make the soul capable of Gods act in pardoning sin, and pronouncing
the person just and righteous? 11 If a resolution or vow of obedience be
sufficient unto justification, without the actual performance of the vow, why
do you wind in all other acts of a man as Christian, into a discourse of the
very first act of faith, in receiving Christ, and forgiveness of sins? 12
If, on the other side, God justifies the ungodly, how does a constellation of
Gospel-graces, and all the acts of grace put a capacity into the subject to
make a man capable of justification?

Sir, that which I took exception at, was your confounding of faith and works
in a discourse of justification. 2 That you do frequently imply, that we are
justified by faithful actions, acts of sincerity and obedience, Your last
Edition, page 28.
that they are the Condition of justification, and that God does absolutely
require them as the only things by which a man is justified, p. 28. you say,
the condition which makes us capable of pardon of sins, is positively the new
creature, or renewed, etc. obedience to the whole Gospel, the performing, etc.
-- and Constellation of Gospel-graces, etc. I need not transcribe your words,
in your last edition they are to be found, in the 8 page. 3 You say, that
faith without the addition of such works, such obedience Evangelicall would
be unsufficient to justification, etc. The words following are as bad or
worse, page 35, 36. and the like you have page 44, 45 Sir, I proved that faith
was sufficient to be an instrument of justification, without the addition of
Evangelicall works unto that purpose, and in that act; and that we were not
justified by a righteousness inherent in us, or any acts of repentance,
charity, or new obedience performed by us. I am not ashamed, yet am not now at
leisure to repeat my arguments to prove that we are justified by the obedience
of Christ alone, freely imputed by God, applied and rested on by faith only.

For Mr. Cheynell.
SIR,
I Received your returns, and the Letter that enclosed them; and shall (as
briefly as I can) give you my sense of both. And first to your letter, I shall
tell you truly that you are the only man in the world that ever I knew to have
endeavored the confuting one syllable of that Catechism; and therefore the
address I made to you, I acknowledge to have made to you only. If by your
reverend brethren you mean those which are here with you employed at this
time, I suppose your periphrasis has told me who they are, and then I am
confident they are persons which would have communicated to me any such
advertisements, wherein I am so nearly concerned (to discern whether their
dislikes were causlesse or no) before they had publicly accused me for them:
which because they have not done, I must not yet believe that refutation was
public, or such as could be capable of my notice; though I must acknowledge
to expect from either of them that which is, as you say, much more solid then
yours, and heartily wish it were either of those to whom I am now writing: for
then I should make no question, but the satisfaction (mutually) would be much
greater. But as it is, I must undergo my fate, and cannot be deceived in the
success of this paper, more then I now find my self to have been in the
reception of my former, which when I had kept my self within those limits,
which I suppose far from all motion toward distemper, and only asked (and as
you say begged) an exact account of what you had said of that Author, and given
you the plain reasons of my request, is yet charged by you to have fallen
foully on you: To this reproach of yours I reply not one word (being not so
much in love with that part of your spirit as to imitate it; which yet both
here and hereafter I beseech you not to mistake for a no-sense of it) but
conceive it as true that I have done so, as that the errors, so styled by you,
are either errors, or dangerous. I will not doubt of your employments or
disturbances, nor think your returns are too slow, I wish you had more
leisure, and more perfect tranquillity of thoughts at all times, especially
when I have the luck to discourse with you. In the mean, I beseech you to
believe, that what question soever may depend concerning the Messengers
delivering his errand (whom yet, upon his asseveration that he did it aright, I
must believe) there can be none of the words in my letter, or consequently of
the addition in yours, viz. of the [this night] wherein I conceived you obliged
to give me that account, when you have my paper by you to assure you, that I
did not.

The words which you affirm to have taken notice of in your Carfax-Sermon, I
acknowledge to be in the Catechism, and must set them down again in this
paper, that you may judge, while I advise with you, whether you mistook them,
or no. [The holy Ghost was our advocate in settling a Ministry to pray and
intercede for their several congregations (and enabling them in the very
Apostles times to form a Liturgy to continue in the Church to that end) and
thereby helping our infirmities, and teaching us to pray as we ought.] You see
Sir, and must acknowledge, the parenthesis in the midst of the sentence; and (I
suppose) know the meaning of that, that it is so set, that it may unite the
words after to the words before it, not pretend to join them to it self; So
that the sentence without the parenthesis is this (and not altered by it) That
the holy Ghost was our advocate in settling a Ministry to pray and intercede
for their several congregations, and thereby helping our infirmities, and
teaching us to pray as we ought. Only it is added by the by, that the holy
Ghost that thus settled that Ministry, enabled them in the Apostles times to
form a Liturgy to continue in the Church to that end, viz. of praying and
interceding for their several congregations. To either of these thus set (as
only these words can be set in construction) your questions are wholly
impertinent, i. e. do no way engage him that had said these words, to satisfy
your severalls, (and I am not over willing now to engage my self to answer any
more then the matter requires of me.) For first, the saying that the holy
Ghost enabled the Ministry in the very Apostles times to form a Liturgy to
continue in the Church, does not conclude that that very Liturgy was to be
continued, as in the second and fourth question you change the words, which you
needed not have done, unless you meant to get advantage by it, and from thence
to conclude it my opinion, that there was some necessity, that that Liturgy
formed in the Apostles times should be continued in the Church, as I am told
you collected thence: but, you see, I said not, and profess not to have meant
in those words [to continue] but only that it might continue (i. e. if the
Church thought good) either so as it was, or with such additions or alterations
as the Church should think sit; as he that leaves lands to continue to his
heirs, obliges not them from ever alienating them, or exchanging. You see, the
utmost that these words [to continue] on which all the weight of your
exceptions lie, can be extended. And that comes not home to your [was to be
continued,] nor to your questions, which are built upon it. I need say no more
to your second quaere; And yet if I thought you sought for any thing but
exceptions in my Papers, I would add freely, as to a Scholar, or friend, my
whole sense of this matter, as a little conversation with ancient Writers has
made it up to me. For once, it is this; That the Apostles, and those that were
by the holy Ghost consecrated to the planting of the Church, had the gifts of
miracles; not every one all, but one one, another another, powered on them;
that, among these, in those first times, there was (...), the gift of prayer,
(that gift a miracle, as the gift of healing, prophesying, etc.) that this was
bestowed (...), that did pray for the rest, and ask those things that were
useful for them, and teach others how to pray; that some of the prayers thus
conceived by them, which were fit for the common perpetual uses of all
Christians, were received and kept by those whom they thus taught; that those
are they which the Ancients mean by Liturgies of St. James, St. Mark, etc.
Though I believe not, that either all these are in those Liturgies which now
we have under their names, nor that all that are under their names are those,
That in the celebration of the Sacrament, which they daily used, some forms
were constantly observed by them, no new occasion making it fit to alter them:
Of which sort I little doubt of the Lords prayer, the (...) anon mentioned,
from [lift up your hearts,] to [therefore with Angels, etc.] inclusive; after
that a prayer, called (...), after which, (...) etc. ^yr. Cat. 4.
(...); then the words of consecration, taken from the Gospel: These, I
suppose, I have good authority to think constantly used among them, and the
blessing of God has brought them down to us. Beside these, I make no question
but variety of other prayers according to the exercise of that (...) were
powered out by him that was so endowed, and those I call not (as I would do the
other, and whatever else there was of that nature) set forms in the Apostles
times, but plainly exercises of that gift. But then as those forms were
preserved and continued, so when those extraordinary (...) ceased, there was
need of somewhat else to supply that place; and that would not be in any
reason to permit every man to pray as he would (for that was the thing for the
preventing of which, and the unhappinesses consequent to it, the (...) had
before been given, which but in that respect had not before been useful) but
set prepared forms for the daily constant wants, and those provided by the
Governors of the Church, Apostolical men, which had so benefitted under the
prayers of those that had the (...), or perhaps remembered some forms of
theirs, at least the method and manner used by them, that their forms might
well deserve to be heeded by, and so continue in the Church, at least were
likely to be fitter for the turn then the unpremeditated effusions of them
that now had not the extraordinary (...), and of all whom it cannot be
presumed that they have the ordinary wisdom to pray always as they ought. I
conceive, I can satisfy any reasonable man for the maine of what I have now
said, upon those grounds that are fit for a matter of this kind. I mean it
not for a new ball of contention between us; I shall satisfy your exceptions
to the Author without it* And that is all my answer to your second quaere. And
for your first, I say, that speech concludes me no undertaker, nor obliges me
to show you that Liturgy, any more then my telling you, that as Christ taught
his Disciples to pray; so John Baptist before him taught his, will oblige me
to tell you what the Baptists form was: The Disciples tell me, the Baptist
did teach his Disciples to pray, and it is possible they could not, I am sure
they did not help you to the sight of that prayer: and the Authors meannesse,
or his being so far less authentical then those Disciples, though it may
make it more fit for you to dis-beleeve his report that they formed a Liturgy;
yet will it not, to think him more obliged to give you a copy of it, or to
acknowledge it temerarious to have said that they did form one, because he
has it not ready to show. Other reasons, beside that of clear ocular
demonstration, may be thought worthy our heeding in matters of fact; the
testimony of men nearer those times then we are: And under that head I
conceive there are many things to be produced; for whether the Liturgies that
go now under the name of St. Mark and St. James are the very Copies compiled
by them or no, it is to me no improbable argument that that age which first
acknowledged them to be theirs, had been taught by Story that there were some
written by them, upon which they thought fit to father those upon them. Besides
this, you have been showed in another place from 1 Cor. 14. 26. that in the
Apostles times some of the Psalms of David or Asaph were used ordinarily in
their devotions, View of Dir. page 14.
and that St. Paul found fault that they did not all join in the same Psalm
at the same time, which would, says he, be best for edification: and if it
were mended upon St. Paul's admonition, the use of those very Psalms were (at
least a part of) a public divine service, which is the English of Liturgy.
Secondly, that, if we believe Stories, St. James made choice of some special
prayers most frequently used by the Apostles, shortened again by St. Basil and
Saint Chrysostom; all which the Greek Church, which is fitter to judge (in
this matter done among them) then we, do still retain, and make no doubt of
the Authors of them. Thirdly, that there is famous mention of a short form of
St. Peter's, used alone, they say, for a great while in the Roman Church.
Fourthly, that it is clear, that St. Augustine speaking of Sursum corda, etc.
says, that they are verba ab ipsis Apostolorum temporibus petita, and so the
compiler of the Apostles Constitutions, which imitates that antiquity, and
makes use of that form, must be thought to have believed, or else he had been
much mistaken in his imitation, and had put off his disguise, even by putting
it on. 5 That the same words with those in out Liturgy, are not only in the
Liturgy which is said to be St. James's, and those other of St. Basil, and St.
Chrysostom, but are recited by St. Cyrill of Jerusalem (in his Catechism) one
of the Ancientest Authors we have. If it may be with your leisure (though, as I
said, I undertake not to demonstrate, yet) to offer to your judgment; not to
breed you more controversies or disturbances, I shall not only refer you to
Cassander to prove that to Christ's words in the Lords Supper, the Apostles
added the use of the Lords prayer, (which though it were not much, is more then
nothing of set form, or Liturgy, and might doubtless have been accompanied
with much more, though I am not able to show it you) but also go a little
farther with you, upon occasion of that last mentioned form, and that Father.

The form of doxology, following those versicles of sursum corda, etc. in our
Book, is, you may remember, this; [therefore with Angels, etc.] of which there
is little question, but that it is the form which was called by the Greeks
(...), by the Latins Praeparatio (viz. of the Sacrament, as it is still in our
Church) that (...), which, says Just. Mar. precedeth the Eucharist, or
blessing of the elements, i. e. prayer of consecration; (...), by Cyrill of
Jerusalem, which as it is there placed after the (...), i. e. (not the
Sacrament, but) the giving of thanks, (as with us it is after the [Let us give
thanks to our Lord God]) so it is before the prayer of consecration; (which
other where, as even now in Justin, is called by that title, and the Sacrament
(...)) as with us also, and is the very (...), which, says that ancient
Author, under the Apostolical disguise of Dionysius, the whole Church professed
before the Sacrament. All this I have said, to show you (if you delight in it)
some part of that Liturgy (and being in our book you may yet see it) which was
by those Ancients used: And to bring it yet nearer home to the point in hand,
it is that ancient Cyrills affirmation of this very form, that it was (...);
which words; in the use of those Ancients, most commonly note the thing they
speak of to be delivered them from the Apostles, or Apostolical men; and being
spoken by Cyrill who was not long after those times, and S. August. saying
expressly of sursum corda (which may very probably extend to this whole (...)
after it) that they were delivered down from the very Apostles times: I
conceive this, with the other precedent testimonies of it, may amount to a
proof tolerably sufficient to persuade a prudent man that they were so. I will
prevent a mistake in this matter of Cyrills words, which I do not think
probable you would fall into, but yet am willing to serve you by preventing it,
that the Greek [(...)] imports not, as I conceive, that it was delivered by the
Seraphim, (for then it would be (...); and though that were more then an
Apostolical, even an Angelical tradition; yet it would rather look to the
[Glory to God on high] etc. (but that it is an hymn taking in the Angels to
join in lauds with us, (to which I conceive S. Chrysostom referred in his
(...), and the Greeks that call it (...), and Amalarius, when he styles it
hymnus refertus laudibus Angelorum,) and this hymn delivered down (...) by
(our i. e.) that Cyrills ancestors at least, which who they were likely to be,
I before gave you reason to conjecture. That this thus mentioned by St. Cyrill,
is that very part of our Liturgy, which I noted it to be, is clear enough by
the words that follow in him [(...),] compared with our [With all the the
company of heaven we laud and praise, etc.] and that they are placed as we
place them, by the (...), etc. noting this Hymn to be immediately before the
Or that Prayer that I told you was called (...), wherein they prayed for the
(...), or (...). An ancient form of which we have in St. Basils Liturgy,
(...), etc. (...).
consecration; and to prepare men for it, which the Liturgick Writers mean by
calling it praefatio actionis, and hymnatio praecedens confirmationem
sacramenti, and so with us it is continued. If I should proceed to give you any
more arguments, to persuade you that the Apostles did use set forms of
public divine Service, and mention those forms to you, I should hope but for
little thanks from you, and therefore shall abstain from that profusion,
remembering that all that I am this* minute about to prove, is, that I am not
bound to show you that Liturgy which was said to be formed in the Apostles
times. And having said this, I suppose you will discern what my answer would
be, (if I were obliged by my former words, to give you any as you see I am
not) to your other questions; or for fear you should mistake again, I will,
ex abundanti, return you my opinion; To the third, that he does; To the
fourth, that they may; (I wish I could add, they always do; but I am not
obliged to that;) To the fifth, that it is not, if you mean by [that very] the
same without any change: but yet in the sense that Theseus his ship came home
the same that it went out, and is an instance in Logic of one notion of idem
numero, I conceive it, if possible, more then the very same, having some of the
same ribs remaining in it (as even now I instanced, and profess to be
persuaded by those Authorities,) when that is supposed to have never a one. I
have no occasion to add any more in answer to the Letter, but to thank Mr.
Reynolds and you for your willingness to give me directions about my first
fruits; though the truth is, I am returned from London, and did speak to my
Brother to ask L. Genesis Cromwels assistance; but Sir Henry Vane junior is not
of that Committee. Sir Henry Vane senior was in the Chair, and I delivered my
case to him, and he fully consented to the justice of my request: and then
your saying, Sir Henry Vane has power to relieve me, shall be ground of hope
to me that he will.

NOw for the longer, and so sadder part of my task, wherein you are not so
courteous to me, as you were in that concluding line of your Letter, I must
proceed to that.

In the entrance I must have leave to be sorry, that I have to deal with a
man that will profess himself not much taken with that notion of Justice
(which I said obliged me to desire an exact account in writing from you, of
that wherein that Author was nearly concerned, and could no otherwise be sure
not to think any thing of you causelessly.) If this were not justice to you, or
may not yet be believed so by you, I despair of ever doing any thing
acceptable in your presence. Our humors, or our principles, will be so
contrary, that whatever I shall say, I shall have reason to suspect you will
not be much taken with it; yet I shall farther adventure to give you one
relation, which will not only clear my former notion of justice to you, but
offer to your consideration whether there be not somewhat due from you by that
notion of justice (or some other) to that Author, to others, yea and to your
self.

There fell out in some Lay-company in this Town, since your Sermon
forementioned, a discourse, Whether it were not lawful to swear, so that
that which was sworn were exactly true; one of the company insisted rightly,
that it was not, the other was confident it was, and produced for it the
Authority of that Author; and to prove that again, said, that the Preacher at
St. Mary's read it out of that Book. Of the truth of this he was so confident,
that he presently resolved to make use of that liberty, which he believed from
your citation to be the opinion of that Author, more then his carnal heart
did permit him to believe the truth of what you added (if you did any thing
besides the reproaching of that Author) in confutation of that Doctrine, and
thereupon he swore a great Oath, that that which was before him was a
candlestick, and persuaded himself that he had done no hurt in doing so.

Now Sir, when I have again told you, and all the world; that that Author has
written most strictly against swearing, (and only differs from you in that
question concerning the primary intention of the words of the old Commandment)
and said in plain words, 1 That idle, foolish, wanton using of Gods name,
(which if it be not in oaths, is less then swearing) sure profane using of it,
(which in all the editions was in, and absolutely belonged to all kind of
unlawful oaths) might be resolved to be forbidden there by reduction: And 2
That under Christ (which again I tell you, belonged to all to whom that
Catechism could speak,) there is a total universal prohibition of swearing
it self, making that as unlawful now, as perjury was before. 3 That to swear
in ordinary conversation is utterly unlawful. 4 That all voluntary, especially
promissory oaths, are now utterly unlawful for a Christian. And 5 those
voluntaries defined, to be those that have their impellent or principle from my
self; when I have, I say, told you all this, then for Gods sake ponder sadly
with your own heart, in case that poor soul be ever tormented in hell for
that vain oath, (as, without Gods mercy upon repentance, undoubtedly he will)
how much you have to charge upon your self for giving him confidence that that
Author had said what he learnt from you: especially seeing your Sarcasme in
that phrase of the much admired Catechism, might tell you that it was possible
some poor, passionate, sinful creature, might thus unhappily admire it. I
conjure you, not to think there is any jest in this, but believe from me,
that I am able to produce the person that heard it, (and that had that care and
love of piety and of truth, and that particular knowledge of my detesting all
oaths, as to come in some passion to me for satisfaction,) and that I have
already seriously sent to disabuse the offender, lest that sin should be
laid to his charge, which you have made that Book be the occasion of; and when
you have laid this to your heart, the God of all grace direct you to do your
duty in this particular.

I will not confute your opinion, that I have stooped lower in my Rejoinder
then I was in my Letter, by begging what I did before but desire, (I will be
very willing to do so always, and shall yet be more vile then so, if that may
persuade you to do me justice;) and yet it may be observed, that in your
judgment to desire and request (which I did before) is so much lower then to
beg, (which is but a nicety,) that until I did beg, as well as desire and
request, and again reinforce my request, you did not think fit to grant me
the least crumbe of that justice which I desired from you.

At the phrase [exact account] you affirm your self to have stumbled, and
call it [those hard words.] If this be so, I cannot tell how to behave my
self so cautiously, as either to speak plainly enough to you, or to keep you
from stumbling. For [axact account] is so plain to be understood, and so
unlike jurisdiction, unless you mistook it for exacting an account, (which
you are too subtle to do, when the word desire went before it,) that if ever I
had exercised jurisdiction over you, or any other, (which I never was in place
to do the Office for which my first fruits are required, being without a
jurisdiction annexed to it;) yet you could not have been tempted by that to this
mistake. I suppose you were pleased to be merry, when you imply you were; and
therefore must friendly admonish you, that there is a shrewd disease, in which
Irenaeus had so much skill as to pronounce (...), and therefore I shall briefly
desire you, that hereafter you speak, 1 So properly as not to say desiring, is
exercising jurisdiction. And 2 Seriously, (for truly I am not in jest, when I
write to you,) and that would have kept you safe from stumbling. Yet because
you are at such leisure as to remember I had an Office in your now Country, I
shall tell you that there is a seal belonging to that Office, from which, if
you had induction to that Living, you may read in your Wax, (...), and then you
will soon discern how many men, as well as me, you have helped to make happy.
I bless God, (and will never curse you,) that I am one of that number.

In your next Section, you pray for them that suggested so many false
accusations against you to me. But first, you affirm not above one to have
been false; and that I confess to be so, and need not to be told so back
again. As for your new accusation, which you are resolved to pay me in stead
of that former, I desire you to know that I defy it, and know no danger or ill
sound in the language of Speculative mystery, nor acknowledge any Author of it
whom you can suspect; particularly, not him whose name you blotted out, so that
I might read; I mean, neither Smalcius nor Socinus, whose doctrines in the
business of the Trinity I do heartily disclaim; and am so far from being
tainted or tempted by them, that I cannot say I ever permitted my self to read
any Tract in them, or any other of that set, (unless in the Racovian
Catechism) on that subject. And you will never repair the injury, if you use
arts to fasten it on me, or to persuade any man, that I was ever inclined
toward it. For your nicety by which you except against my calling the doctrine
of the Trinity a speculative mystery, saying that it is practical, and giving
your reason, [because the blessed Trinity is the object of our worship, as well
as of our faith;] I shall make no scruple to acknowledge the Trinity to be the
object of our worship, (and to that end I directed that concluding act of my
worship to that blessed object) and every point of that which in the Catechism
is made due to God, I supposed there, and now profess to be perfectly due to
the Trinity. But then you might remember, that you acknowledge it the object of
our faith; and of that there be many parts which will not be disparaged by
being styled mysteries and depths of speculation, and in that sense, or as they
are so, I then spoke, and only so, and need not acknowledge any impropriety in
that speech; because though a speculative doctrine may be also practical in
another respect, as the knowledge of the causes of diseases is a practical
knowledge in respect of the cures it will help to work, yet as that is
ordinarily called the Theory of Physic, and is presumed before Students ascend
to the practical; so I told you the Author supposed the speculative
understanding of that mystery in the Church-Catechisme, before he came to the
Doctrines in this Book, which are the practical. You remember me, that a
Sacramental Covenant is practical; and I may as well remember you that there
are credenda proposed to the vower in that Sacrament, as well as facienda.

On occasion of mention of the Church-Catechisme, you say, you like that better
then my Practical, and I confess my self to do so too; so vehemently, that
I believe 'twill be long ere we see a better in its stead. But yet I
conceive, that he that has learnt that, may be capable of more, at least of
directions to make use of that knowledge imbibed to the amendment of his life:
else, most of our preaching were in vain; nay else, both that Catechism ought
never to have been expounded, and every one that has written any thing else
for the benefitting of youth or men, must lie under the prejudice of that
insolence of thinking himself able to make a better, as well as this Author.

For your justice in that answer to the third reason, I am not to thank you,
nor can I think that any man that was in any measure my friend, needed to be
told by you or any, that I acknowledged the Trinity. If he did, examine your
own heart, whether you know not some body, who had helped to defame me in
that particular, by saying I was a Socinian or the like, or by saying I
maintain many errors broached by such; If you do not, I will thank you for
the good office you mention; and so hasten also, (and wish heartily I could
make more haste to get into some more delightful employment) to the second
report.

In that, I see, I met with no false accusation of you, but in you enough of
injury to that Author, by picking out what might make him odious, and present
him an eloquent learned disciple of yours, to be taught, that swearing is a
sin; or rather a profane designer and corrupter of the Nation, that has
given Boys a liberty of swearing in their Catechism. I have sufficiently told
you, and all men, that that Author is most guiltless of that charge, and if
you will not yet acknowledge it, I must leave it to God to judge betwixt us; as
also, whether he produce not the unquestionable command of God against all
swearing, assertory or promissory; and whether you do not imply, that he does
so, in saying against him that [the perhaps imaginary superaddition] (which you
know are no other then the words of Christ) will not be so effectual to
restrain, as the unquestionable command of God. Sir, does he question the
Command of God to be against swearing? does he not say that all profane use
of Gods name is sure forbidden under the third Commandment of the Law by
reduction? (or is not all unlawful swearing, assertory as well as promissory,
a profane using of his name?) that I may not add that he produces, and
earnestly insists on the direct clear command of Christ against all voluntary
oaths, which is unquestionably a Command of God to any that is not worse then a
Socinian, and denies Christ to be God at all. And whereas you observe by the
way, that there is liberty given by this Author for assertory oaths, do you
think there was not that liberty for some sort of them? or does the Author say
there was for all sorts of them? or for any that were voluntary? He supposes
the primary intention of the third Commandment (and of these words, thou shall
perform, etc. against nonperformance of promissory oaths) to be against
perjury; Under that, by reduction, to be forbidden (not swearing simply taken,
and so not all assertory oaths, but) all profane using of Gods name, which sure
contains assertory oaths, though not them only, or all of that sort, because
some others do profane Gods name; and of these, all do not, but only those
that use it unnecessarily. This is sufficient indeed to conclude all kind of
assertory oaths, not to be the particular matter of Moses Law, and indeed no
sort of them to be so much as reducible thither, but only those where his name
is unnecessarily used; but sure those that are such, it does not give any
liberty to, nor can you think it did, without pronouncing at the same time,
that 'twas contradicted in the next page, which I must suppose you were able to
see, because you looked so narrowly here to find this hole, which I am
persuaded never any the most carnal man ever took notice of, to encourage
himself in his sin, till you directed him to it. By which you may see, that
some men are more industrious in finding faults to accuse their brethren, then
others in seeking pretenses to excuse themselves.

To your Arguments I shall endeavor to say little, partly as not apprehending
the force of them, partly supposing that we now talk of a matter of fact,
which may be tried by evidence; the Book being ready to prove the truth of
what I affirm from it; and then it is not in the power of a 1000 probable
arguments (much less of a few dis-joynted) to wrest any man out of such a
certainty. I should willingly venture them to any Reader to do their worst on
him, especially your first, whereby you would show that he cannot prove the
Doctrine of a total universal prohibition of swearing it self, and making it
as unlawful now, as perjury was before, unless he lose the total in cipher.
Where sure, Sir, 1 If a man would bind you to your words, you are now much
less an enemy to swearing in universum, then the Author was: for otherwise
that would not be objected, that he prohibits more of that kind then he can
prove. And 2 for mincing the total into a cipher, you will have no reason to
fear, for though he should mince the total somewhat, and say with (I assure
you not from) Smalcius (for who does not say so too?) that I must not swear,
but for Gods glory, and the public good; yet is not that all cipher, I hope,
for it prohibits all swearing in communication, as utterly unlawful; all
voluntary, especially promissory oaths. But then, Sir, you must know that a
total prohibition of swearing it self, contains all swearing by any
creature, as well as by God, and that is no cipher neither.

As for your question, Whether the perfect Law of God did give men leave to
take vain oaths? he is willing most clearly to satisfy that, and assure you
of his opinion, that it did not; and because by the whole period I cannot
possibly conclude any thing but only this, that you know not why I used the
word Total, (a total universal prohibition of swearing) I will tell you that
too; because Christ had said, (...), swear not at all; which what it signifies,
is here sufficiently explained; thus, not only not by God, but not by any
creature of God neither.

2 In the difference, as you state it, betwixt us, you are very unjust, in
saying I undertook to prove, that by the third Commandment there was no more
meant, then that a man should not forswear himself. This is false; I never
undertook it, but profess that what is forbidden by reduction, is meant as
truly, though not so evidently proposed, as what is expressed, and therefore you
must be content to open your eyes, and see what is the question between the
Scholar and the Catechist, (and the same also is the conclusion) viz. not what
is meant, i.e. what is the full adequate importance of that Commandment, or
what it contains under it; but what that is, i.e. what the words strictly
signify, or, as it is now expressed, what is the primary intention of the phrase;
and to that question the answer is made [no more undoubtedly but forswearing;]
as if the question were asked of [(...)] is that no more then that thou shall
not commit adultery? I should answer, no more undoubtedly; yet never fear that
any man would think that I affirmed, that fornication, and all other villainy
was not there forbidden, especially when I had also added, that it were by
reduction; and so in like manner, to take the question that you after set,
whether I will say there is no more meant by the Commandment then taking away
the life of a man; I answer, that the word killing is no more, and that was all
the Author said of the third Commandment, viz. that the Commandment in Exodus
(that is, the words of the Commandment (which are there set down) Thou shall
not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain) is no more then forswearing;
that the words were the subject spoken of, it is plain by the proofs produced
of it, from the use of those words in other places. This is so probable a
truth, that I could not have thought it needful to have given it illustration
to any man else.

3. When I appealed to Christ as Judge, and thought I had made good may appeal
by producing his words whereby he renders that Commandment, (...) [thou shall
not forswear;] you attempt to argue and prove against me, but never take
notice of my proof, which is absolutely against law of pleading or disputing.
And for the argument you confront to it, I assure you it persuades me nothing,
but that you thought (...) was to be written with (...). For though I shall
tell you that all oaths, that come from the evil or from the Devil, are not
from thence concluded to be evil or devilish, because the oath that I take
lawfully in Judicature may come originally from evil or from the devil in
another, and must not needs be from evil in the taker, so I have no need to
answer you with that, but plainly confess, that all evil and devilish oaths
are forbidden in the third Commandment.

4 I need not deny but that (...) may sometimes be rendered vain, and so
sometimes it is, even when it signifies a Lie, (as (...) in the Bible has a
peculiarity sometimes to denote Idols, those greatest lies in the world.) All
that I was to conclude was, that Christ having expressed it by a word which St.
Matthew here reads (...), there was nothing in that Hebrew phrase, but what was
agreeable to this, and that is true, though it should be granted to signify
vanum, because it does falsum also. But you say, you need not go about to
prove that the Jews saw this truth as clearly as we do, but you can prove
that they saw and acknowledged it, and that that is sufficient for you, and
then let me tell you, you have fought blind all this while, and now you may
see, if you will, that forasmuch as concerns this Author (unless you will
fight on, when you say you need not) your great quarrel is at an end, for he
that said in general of all this Sermon in the mount, that Christ added either
new precepts, or new light, promised to be satisfied with either of them: and
though he conceives the Sea the testimonies of the Fathers both Greek and
Latin, in the Catechism page 106. not thought fit then to swell up this
Letter.
Greek Fathers to have generally affirmed the former, and the Latin also, for
the first 400 years, (particularly in this matter of swearing, Theophylact,
(...): expressing his opinion to be, that some swearing was (...) under
Christ, which had not been so before) yet he has obliged himself to be
content with the latter, which now, you say, you need not deny, (I would you
had never needed to oppose one so violently, that asserted no more, then what
you need not to deny;) and therefore I will now add only thus much, that. 1
This is the meaning and effect of affirming it [forbidden there, not by the
primary intention of the word] for from thence it is that the clearness
arises; that which is forbidden by reduction only, being not so clear, nor
consequently so deeply obliging those to whom it is not (supposing still that
it is not their fault, that it is not) so clear. 2 That if it were granted,
that Christ gave a new precept here, it would not yet follow, that all
unlawful swearing by Gods name was not forbidden before: because there is
another thing which he may have added to the third Commandment, the not
swearing by any thing else, as well as not by God. But, you see, I need not now
affirm this; I will give you leave to think that I am so awed by you, that I
am not willing to spring you any new game of controversies. I confess I like
not the sport so well, as to solicit your company any further.

For the Septuagints (...), I gave you an hint by the way, that that will gain
you but little.

For my knowledge of the primary signification of (...) you must not judge, for
he that shall but look into Schindler (as venerable an Author sure as Pagnin)
will find that he says it is used de re falsa; vana; First falsa; but if you
had pleased, my argument of the use of the word in the ninth Commandment (as
fit to expound the Second as any) might have been thought as fit to be
considered, as what you have insisted on in stead of it.

You do well to abstain from the negative argument of [hee might but did
not.] But then it is not true that the question betwixt you and me is not
about the primary intention of the phrase: for whosoever reads that Catechism,
these letters, or even many of your arguments, will know it is; or if not, I
make no scruple to pronounce, what I have done so often, that I have no other
quarrel to you in this matter, save only the injuries you did me at St.
Mary's, and every one that believed ought of it from you. But sure, Sir, I have
not acknowledged in any manner, that the first edition of that Book had any
thing in it questionable in the judgment of learned men; I told you it was [in
kindness and submission to the meanest,] and that kindness and submission
intimates no more acknowledgement of questionablenesse, then the word meanest
intimates the learned. I would now add, that I might have done it to prevent
causeless quarrelling, but that I now see that it will not do that neither.

As for your long deduction and magnifying of your cost and travail through
the additions, etc. of that Catechism, you might have been less Playsome in re
seria. If you do not already know that you have prevaricated herein, you may
read and remember the Printers Postscript (which I think you cite also, and so
have read, I shall now but advise you to remember it) and you cannot choose but
see, (and, I hope, acknowledge) that all your Fable vanishes, and your History
ends in this plain brief, that will bring no scorn on the Author, viz. that
he prepared a new edition of the Catechism; added a third part more; and, to
serve the meanest, explained every thing that by any advice or hint he
observed to need explaining; call it altering, if you will, for to alter from
worse to better he professes himself to think an amiable, imitable quality,
and will never be ashamed of it: yet must not now assume it to himself,
having, I assure you, no right to it, any further then it signifies explaining.
This edition had long since been Printed in Oxford, could the Printer have
gotten down so much paper. When the City was rendered it was carried to London to
that end, where against the Authors will or knowledge three editions had been
made by the first Copy, one of which was just then ended; and by that means
the Printer had been at greater loss then I was willing to be cause of to an
enemy, if another new impression had been then made of it. This, God knows, was
the cause it is now set out so troubledly (the Printer being willing to put out
the additions thus, rather then not at all; and to put this inconvenience on
the Reader, then loss upon himself) for which, though I was very sorry, yet I
never foresaw that I should be thus chid and reproacht, and triumphed over for
it. I hope some of the (...) in Christ's Sermon may be the portion of them that
suffer without a cause, though it be not upon that excellent style [for
righteousness sake:] I am sure, this of mine is not for unrighteousness. And
now as seriously you shall judge of the thing called exercising of patience,
and never expect to be thankt for your charges, unless it had brought in to
me more justice (I need not say charity) from you. And if after this, nothing
will satisfy you but recantation, so often repeated recantation (O that this
(...) might be changed into that of the Apostles, of the (...)) get me but
some Expedient that lying shall be no sin, and that no other sin in you or
others shall be consequent to it in this, and for the other part of it, if it
can delight you more then the calling for it has done already, you shall have
my most willing consent toward it. For the latter end of the sheet, of
deceiving the Kingdom, of seduction, etc. and what follows in the next, to
the end of the report, I am sensible of it, and I thank God I have received
grace from him to pray that I may make the same use of it, that David does in
the story of Shimei's reviling, 2 Samuel 16. 10. I pray also, and desire the
prayers of all good men, that God would show me the sin which has now brought
this portion of calumny upon me, and that is all I would say to it. And yet,
after this resolved silence to that part, I shall again answer to you some few
things. 1 That when in your fourth consideration you say [meant in a
Commandement] you should say, signified by the words of a Commandment. 2 That
which you call, taking in a latitude, I call reduction. 3 That my explications
were designed by me to be as remarkable, nay much more then the first edition
was: for I designed a full impression, and many other things to make them so. 4
I never had any thing to do (not so much as the knowledge, at that time) with
the setting out any edition of that book, save only of those additions, and of
printing the first few copies at Oxford, for the use of those that were more
willing to be at that charge, then at a greater in transcribing it. 5 I say
most distinctly, that every emendation in that Book, that to my utmost
remembrance I can speak of, was intended long before ever the Town was near
taking: and for danger of being called to an account of any thing said in it,
God knows my simplicity, I was never near dreaming or thinking of it, and am
now in courage enough to fear neither men nor Angels in that particular. 6
That I know not, that ever I have made you a solemn poofession under my hand
to give you satisfaction; and my most careful recollecting what I have wrote,
cannot bring it to my remembrance: certainly you dreamt of that together with
the round recantation. If it were any thing above endeavoring it, certainly it
was a very rash promise; and if so, I beseech you remit it to me, for I would
not willingly take any more pains about it. For other men, I am more secure:
and if you once be satisfied, I shall suppose all men, that know it, will
think it time for them to give over quarrelling. 7 That by [would] I did in
effect mean, were forbidden also by God, when Moses published the Law; and
have often told you how I meant so. 8 I have already told you, that you came not
into my heart, when I thought or spoke of submission to the meanest: and wonder
as much, that you should think the alterations were made in submission to you,
as that you should now rank your self with the meanest, who have not
supererogated in humility since I met with you. Truly, Sir, I do not think,
meannesse is the cause of your mis-understandings, nor did I ever from any
friend at London hear of any particular you disliked in it: or if I had, by
any such message, I would have found out some way to have offered you or any
man living a friendly debate about it. For your respects, I find little signs
of them now, and by the subjects do believe that there were little expressed in
those letters of yours ten years ago about me, I can, and do freely forgive
you all: but know not that I am bound to thank you, till some body else tell
me so. 9 If any learned men ever told me of that opinion about Christ
improving the Law, and expressed themselves to think it were an error, I am
confident I have given them such a state of my opinion in that matter, that no
good Christian can find fault with, or lay any charge on it of hurt or danger
to any man's manners, if it were supposed false. And besides, you may know, that
as Learned as any this age now has, both of Ancients and others, are fully of
my opinion: And let me tell you, that ten years ago I had no objection
against my opinion, but that it was by some men fathered on Socinus: but
knowing, that I believed it long before I ever saw one word (I think, had
heard the name) of Socinus; and that the Scripture and Fathers, and other the
like means, which taught me all my other Divinity, taught me that too; and saw,
that if it were a mistake, it could make no man live worse, (as the contrary
opinion might do, if it were so) I resolved to deny my self in that fantasy
rather then objection; and speak what I thought might edify what diminution of
credit soever it brought after it. I shall add my thanks for your counsel,
which I would feign think to be in great earnest, but that I suppose you
cannot believe that I look upon Criticismes as a kind of heaven, nor that you
would think fit to send out in the same breath true Christian earnest, (for,
above all things, I account admonitions so) and Sarcasmes. I shall only desire,
that I may study the Moral Law, as I find it delivered from that second
Mount: and I will obey you in all other motions, and (as you desire) not
censure you for this part of your Sermon, how bitter soever it is, but thank
you for all the good you meant by it. But whatever you say of the Moral Laws
perfection, I hope it must not so be understood as to deny that Christ (as he
gave more grace then was ever allowed in the state of nature, or by the Law,
so) might, if he pleased, improve the obligations which either the natural
Law, or that given by God through Moses had laid on men; and whether by new
precepts, or new lights call us to a higher degree of perfection (and oblige us
to it) then others had by any particular precept thought themselves obliged to.
As for the imaginary super additions you talk of, you will I hope consider,
that it is as dangerous to detract from the World of God, as to add to it; and
to deny Christ to have added, if he have, as to affirm him, if he have not, I
am sure, the consequences may be more dangerous. As for your style of perfect
and spiritual Law, I shall in the plain word acknowledge it, that it was both
perfect (in respect of the state of men to whom it was given, whether by Moses
to the Jews, or by the God of nature to all men) and spiritual also,
extending to the spirit or soul of man, and not only to the outward actions.
But this, I am persuaded, hinders not but that Christ that gives more grace
then was brought into the world by the Law of Moses or Nature, and that
disburdned all men of that sad yoke that lay on the Jews, and that is content
to accept of sincere without not-sinning obedience, may have leave to advance
his disciples to an higher pitch of spiritual perfection (whether by new laws,
or new light) then the Law in the former delivery of it had advanced them: And
to set up this pitch, whatever it is, as a precept, (not only a counsel of
perfection) to us Christians, was the utmost of my design and endeavors in
that Sermon you speak of 10 years ago, and is of this Author now; and I
never imagined it possible that this doctrine could give any man liberty to
think worse of the Law of God, or practice less of it; but have reason to
think (and could give an experimental account of what I say) that the not
teaching it, might flatter men ignorantly to believe that there was less
required of them then I conceive (and desire, they should conceive) there is.
And do you consider also, that he which is (...), and most cunningly resists
all the restraints that obstruct or undermine his temptations, is (...) and
(...) also; can plead against, accuse, and calumniate any man or doctrines that
are contrary to him. And so I humbly take leave of the second report, the Lord
forgive you for it.

In the third report it seems I was not mistaken neither, nor in my
expectation, that plain positive affirming the things you would have affirmed,
would not satisfy you. I told you, that the Author under the general phrase
of all kinds and sorts of sin, sets in the front the weakness, frailties,
and pollutions of our nature, our pronenesse and inclination to sin. This
your Sermon said was speaking with irresolution, as if he doubted etc. I tell
you once again this is no irresolution; and he does not doubt but that this
aptness to fall into all sin is a sin, to wit, an aversion of our
faculties from God, which ought wholly to be converted to him; will this
satisfy you? I have reason from your former carriage not to be over confident
that yet it will; for if it does, you ought in all reason to have been
satisfied before, where it was set down as a first species of sin. You say,
my expression is inexcusable of [as infelicities, if not as sins,] you, it
seems, are resolved it shall not be excused to you, and therefore will not
interpret it by the words that went next before it, or so as it may be
reconciled with them, but will force it to a sense directly contradictory to
what went just before it, and so must suppose me mad (for so is he that can
affirm contradictions at once) only because you will not be just; any thing
that is most irrational must be believed of another man* rather then an
expression be excused by you. But, Sir, I do not yet think it inexcusable,
if I desired to bring all those men on their knees (in humiliation and godly
sorrow for their inclinations to evil) which do not believe them when they
are not consented to, to be other then infelicities. Men that will not be of
my opinion in all things, I can be content to serve and minister unto, and
labor to do them good upon their own (if they will not permit me upon my)
principles. But then 1 it seems I must not say, pollutions of nature (I said,
of our nature, and you seldom leave out the least word by chance, or but when
you have some design in it,) or if I do, that expression is more proper to
denote actual sins* then original sin, which is one entire, etc. I shall
put it to the question, whether pollutions of our nature be at all proper to
denote actual sins, which are pollutions of our persons; whether not most
proper to our natural aversions from God, or inclinations to evil: If the
wisest or meanest would have that better expressed, I desire to hear from them,
and it shall be considered against another edition, which will again (after
all your triumph on that occasion) stoop to serve the meanest in explaining.

2 For him that (as you say) has consented to the corruption of his nature,
that has cherished and been pleased with it, I shall suppose him to have
committed an actual sin, and then sure his evil inclination was not the
thing which could be capable of the title of infelicity in any man's sense, for
that title supposes positively that they are not consented to. And though every
man that is of age has sometimes so consented, yet sometimes, and in some one
act, I shall by Gods grace suppose it possible that he has not; and then, that
his act of non-consenting will be a piece of Christian victory over that
sinful inclination; and the sinful inclination, though it shall still
continue a sin, and be matter of humiliation, yet sure will not pass with
you for a sin cherished at that time, and consented to.

Your third quarrel grounded on the conceit that I seem to imply, that there
must needs be some consent given to every actual sin, did make a very hard
shift to be a quarrel; and in stead of being managed with blows, stands
still, and falls out into contumelies; and concludes that I should prove, but
it self ventures not to disprove any thing: otherwise (if I saw your grounds
of scruple) it may possibly be believed, that this Divinity might be cleared
to you, without pretending, as you say, to Dictatorships.

4 I do neither recant what was said before, nor doubt whether inclinations to
sin be sins, i. e. aversions from God, and then it matters not what you
say I seem to do: I said this before, and so I say still, and (how humble
soever the dislike of your behaviors toward me may by Gods grace help me
to be) this is not recanting.

5 For the danger, I shall acknowledge it, when I acknowledge the thing, but to
set down inclinations to sin in the front of the species of the general
phrase [all sorts of sinne] is not to speak sceptically. How many soever there
be that teach otherwise, you see I am not one of them; And why that Author used
the word [if not,] you have been told so often already, that you could have no
excuse to ask the reason of it again, but your desire to lay a new accusation
on me of complying with the Socinians. Which Sir is, as your accusation, so
your calumny again, if you meant any other thing by compliance then the
desiring more to bring all to humble themselves before God for their
inclinations to sin (on what principles soever they went) then at that time,
in the midst of a Practical Catechism, in the matter of Repentance, to fall a
disputing with all comers about original sin. For the Liturgy you speak of,
if you know not my mind, let me tell you, 1 That I would have the Letany
continued in the Church, the first part of which is sufficiently contrary to
your [etc.] and this you may guess by a Book which I profess to subscribe to
in that particular, viz. The view of the Dir. page 25, and 26. Then secondly,
that I would have the Doxologies continued, and how that would become such a
Liturgy you may see, View of the Dir. page 32, and 33. yet farther, that I
would have the Creed continued, yea, and kneeling at the Sacrament, among other
reasons for this, (on which the Protestants in Poland forbad sitting,) because
I would not comply with the ancient or modern Arians, or any other that make
our Savior a mere creature. For which I shall direct you also to that View of
the Dir. page 28. I shall not now ask you which is more complyant to your
[etc.] the New Directory, or Old Liturgy; nor whether a Socinian may not more
conveniently officiate now (and so, in that case, those of his opinions join
with him) then they could six years ago, when the whole Church service was
appointed to be read constantly in every Church. I am not willing to trouble
you with any new questions, but only to be satisfied by you in matter of fact
what wrong you have done that Author in your Sermons, and to show you that it
is wrong. As for reparations from you, I now know you better then vehemently to
expect any, and by your carriage in this particular, and your [If I were
composing such a Liturgy,] I am for the future armed to be content with what
now I find, and to expect that when you want even words in the Author to
cavil at (as it will be long before those will be wanting, and I remember to
have seen an art of cavilling that turned every word of the Creed into heresy,
or blasphemy, or Atheism, and then what shall become of this poor mortal
frail Catechism, when such an artificer is resolved to triumph over it?)
possibilities, and jealousies, such as the [If you were composing, etc.] shall
be sufficient to rob that Author of his little reputation. That that [if]
could have no ground but in your design quocunque modo to defame him for a
Socinian, you will guess, when again I tell you that the placing inclinations
in the front of sins, was a declaration free and full against that error.

6. I am, you see, neither of their mind that think inclination to ill no
sin, nor therefore did I blind, but instruct my Reader with that Orthodox
expression, as you call it; and it is hard that a man cannot use Orthodox
expressions, but he must be accused for doing it, upon supposition that he did
it to this end that he might afterward tempt others to an error. God knows
our hearts, and must only judge that of me: and till he have done so, and
revealed it to you, it is want of charity in you to say I have not done fairly.

7. If it were never so absurd, to say that godly sorrow were to be conceived
for an infelicity qua sic, merely as an infelicity, yet it might be conceived
for it [as an infelicity if not a sin;] i. e. by them who doubt whether it
be a sin or no, or who, though they are not certainly persuaded that it is a
sin, when unconsented to, yet acknowledge it so, when it is consented to, and
then grieve for it as for a sin; and when it is not, acknowledge it to be an
infelicity, and grieve for that also. Besides, an infelicity may be such an
infelicity, that it may be matter of godly sorrow, though not qua sic, merely
as an infelicity: as, in this point, I may have sorrow that I have a vicious
impure nature about me, which is justly thought by me an infelicity,
especially in comparison with that pure state of them that are with Christ; and
this sorrow is (...), a sorrow according to God; and the interpretation of
desiring or loving the appearance of Christ, and so a godly sorrow: and he
that does not positively resolve that this having a vicious nature is more then
a pollution and an infelicity, taking neither of them for a sin, may yet mourn
for it qua a pollution, not qua an infelicity; and make good that he does so,
by professing sincerely, that he would undergo any infelicity, on condition
to get rid of this pollution. And yet lastly, (which is the only answer
necessary for you to consider to this point) if that which you say is absurd,
were so indeed, it would rather prove, that what is called [an infelicity, if
not a sinne] were indeed a sin, when it is said of if in that very place, that
it must be matter of contrition or godly sorrow, then that it is taken to be
no sin, when it is both affirmed to be one, and to be matter of contrition.
If I should say, that I may have sorrow for somewhat that is an infelicity, and
call that a godly sorrow, an error this might be, but I hope not a dangerous
one; or if it were, not such an infectious one as to turn every other
affirmation of mine into a non-affirmation, or make me guilty of other
errors, of which I profess (and it is clear at that time by other evidences)
that I am not guilty. Thus hard is it for flesh and blood to lay down a
quarrel or a jealousy, when it is once engaged. Otherwise, plain words might
deserve to be heeded to prove a man Orthodox, as well as supposed consequences
to arraigne publicly, and condemn him for errors. In how much more
quietness have poor creatures possessed their souls, that have learnt from
those words (and ever since daily practiced) the humbling of themselves for
their very inclinations to sin, then you that have thus used your skill
unhappily to limbeck, extract, and force poison out of them?

8. I acknowledge, that every sin ought to be bewailed as a sin, and that
inclinations to sin ought to be so bewailed; and I meant by contrition, or
breaking of the heart to pieces, as much as your tears of blood amount to: And
of this I neither doubt, nor fear to profess my sense. Yet sure they that do
not agree with me in that particular, may be advised to have true grief and
sorrow for them and their own principles.

9. That the corruption of our nature has special influence on our practice,
I am as confident, and have considered as ponderingly as you: and this whole
Catechism was designed to obstruct those fountains, as much as was possible,
and to help to purify unto Christ a peculiar people zealous of good works;
and according to my best understanding, I designed a scheme that might be
isntrumental to that end: and whatever your method would have been, and what
your commands for the particulars that might be more expressly cleared, I could
not divine, and had liberty to use my own method. This only I know, that
inclinations to sin are there expressed to be sins, and that clearly enough,
that he may discern it who has so much leisure from quarrelling as to
bewail them. And indeed you need not tell me what dangerous consequences have
been inferred from doubtful expressions in Catechismes, etc. For I have an
example before mine eyes of one that will infer those consequences from one
word in such a Book, that the whole sense of the place contradicts directly,
as much as sin and no sin are contradictories, and then it is but reason a man
were allowed pardon (and not triumphed over presently) for being willing (when
it is by another fault become so necessary) to explain. And so much for the
third report.

The fourth (that about faiths being, whether a condition, or instrument of
Justification:) I cannot observe by your words that you have at all insisted on
in either assembly; for though you deny it not, yet also you affirm nothing,
as in the two former, which you own; and as in the last you are pleased to
do. Either then you spoke to this particular, and then although it be a fault
in you not to acknowledge it, yet till I am sure of it, and that my reputation
is concerned in it, I have no reason farther to importune you; or else you did
not speak to it, and consequently did me no injury in that particular, and
then I truly cannot accuse you, having no authority that you did, worth my
depending on, and that which I had, contradicted by others, as the other of the
Trinity which proved untrue, and so the rather inclines me to believe that
this is so also: On these grounds I have no temptation to add more to this
matter, because the whole business which brought us now together, was to
vindicate my self from (and that made it necessary for me to know what had
been) your accusations, and not to render you at this time (which I can spend
much more profitably to my self and others) an account of my faith, save only
where you have calumniated it. Yet because it is possible that the questions
here proposed by you, may through some mistake or ignorance of the grounds that
I go on, be matter of some scruple to you, and it may be my duty to prevent
those mistakings, I have now thought fit to tell you, what is the general
ground that I build on in this matter, by analogy to which you may form an
answer to those questions, and reconcile those seeming differences which you
may have taken notice of. My grounds are these, 1 That justification is divine
acceptance, and pardon of sin. 2 That the mercy of God, through the
satisfaction and merits of Christ, is the sole cause of this justification. 3
This work of justification is of such a nature, consisting merely in Gods
pronouncing us just, accepting and pardoning, a work of God without us, upon
us, concerning us, but not within us, that consequently nothing within us can
have any real proper efficiency in this work: for then that, whatever it is,
must be said to justify, i. e. to accept, and pardon, which nothing in us can
be said to do, though but minus principaliter, secundario, or realiter
instrumentaliter; for if it had any such efficiency, there might in strict
speaking be some real virtue or force in that thing, and that proportionable
to the effect in some measure, at least it must act virtute primae causae, and
by the impulsion of that might immediately produce the effect; which any even
grace, as it is in us, has not force enough to do. For either it must do it
as an inferior meritorious cause, subordinate to Christ's merits, or as an
inferior efficient cause, subordinate to Gods pardoning and accepting; and
then, as I said, that must pardon and accept also immediately, though not
principally; as the knife cuts immediately, though the hand or the man
principally. 4 This work of grace in God through Christ thus justifying, is not
every man's portion, some qualification or condition there is required in the
subject, in the person whose sins God will thus pardon in Christ, or without
which God that justifies the sinner, will not yet justify the impenitent
infidel: the promises of God, though general, being yet conditional
promises, and the promise of pardon being one of them, as shall be proved at
large if you think fit. 5 This condition is set down in several phrases in
the Scripture, Conversion, Repentance, Regeneration, but especially receiving
of Christ, faith in the heart, an embracing of Christ, the whole Christ, taking
him as our Priest, whose sacrifice, and whose intercession to depend on; as our
King, whose throne to be set up in our hearts; as our Prophet, to submit our
understandings to his doctrines, and captivate them to the obedience of faith.
6 This grace of faith has mauy excellent offices and efficiencies; one
principal one, laying hold on the promises, laying hold on the (...); others
also of subduing the passions, mortifying lusts, overcomming the world. In all
these, being works wrought in us, by God principally, instrumentally by this
grace, Faith is an efficient. But all this does not at all conclude it to be
in any propriety of speech an efficient, or any kind of logical proper cause
in the act of justification: because there is no need of any such, God being
ready to do his work, to perform his promise, i. e. to justify the penitent
believer; and whenever by his grace that qualification is wrought in the
heart, or there but truly rooted, God pronounces that man just.

I have out of my heart set down my sense, which I suppose, you will find
every where scattered in the Book. I desire not that it may prove a (...)
between us, (in case there be any word hastily let fall, which though to me,
that understood my own meaning, it be plain, to you, especially if you
delight to be captious, may want explication;) but yet I would be glad to
hear, if there be any poison in any of these propositions; and whether, and
wherein I am mistaken: If not, I suppose you will be able to answer all your
twelve quaeries out of these premises, or discern that it was impertinent to
ask them, these grounds being thus supposed. I shall I think, only need to
add, that as soon as ever this new creature has life in him, at the first
cordial receiving the whole Christ in vow, or resolution sincere, i. e. at the
first minute of conversion thus to God, the person is justified; not one of
those in time after the other, but in order of nature, as naturally the
condition must be undertaken, before the Covenant belongs to me: but at what
minute soever this is done, God puts away his wickedness, etc. I have sinned,
says David, and the Lord has put away thy sin, says Nathan; I said I have
sinned unto the Lord, and thou put away the iniquity of my sin. This thus
pre-required I call sanctification in semine, or (...), (the direct Greek for
that word) without which no man shall see God; and consequently, without which
no man is justified; for whosoever is so, is in that condition at that minute,
that, if he dye in it, he cannot miss of glory. Beside this notion of
sanctification: there is another for the acts, and fruits, and state of
sanctification: and that I acknowledge a consequent of justification, and an
effect of that grace that justifies the ungodly. And having added this, I
conceive I have cleared the way to your last particular.

In which, it seems, you took some exceptions, which, by what has been said,
will appear to be your fault, not the Authors of the Catechism. For 1 faith
and works are not confounded in the discourse of justification, any otherwise
then St. James and St. Paul confound them; St. Paul saying, Abraham was
justified by faith, and St. James by works, and the way of the reconciling
them punctually set down there. 2 What he does say of being justified by
faithful actions, as it is after the very style of St. James [Abraham was
justified by works;] so does the word [by] signify only a condition, not an
efficient. And whereas you mention obedience to the whole Gospel, constellation
of Gospel-graces, etc. and think strange that they should be affirmed the
condition of justification, you must remember that those phrases denote them
only in the seed, or first life of all these proportionably to the first
notion of sanctification, and then I suppose you can make no scruple of that
affirmation. 3 You scruple that faith without the addition of such works, such
obedience Evangelicall, would be affirmed unsufficient to justification.
Wherein perhaps you think [workes] signifies actual performances: but that is
not the meaning of it in that place, but the word is taken in another
Scripture-acception of it, for such obedience as the Gospel now requires, and
for that which the Story of Abraham once makes the thing on which he was
justified, i. e. resolution to obey God in the sacrificing his Son, not the
actual sacrificing of him: this is there called in the Catech. page 35.
Evangelicall obedience, and is set as the explication of works; and without
this, I acknowledge to believe that faith would be unsufficient to justify;
meaning faith in any other notion but that which does contain this receiving
him as a King, and giving up the obedience of the heart to him. And you must
give me leave a little to wonder why you should add, that the words following
(in that place) are as bad or worse then the former, (and yet 'twas but
civility and prudence not to name them) when they are but a direct citation of
a place of Scripture. Thus [the same is called in a parallel place, Faith
consummate by love, Gal. 5. 6.] (for so the Greek (...) is rendered by the
Syriack.) The truth is, the last thing by you excepted against, was in effect a
place of Scripture also. Iam. 2. 22. [Faith made perfect by works,] set down
in some words of paraphrase; and then this in the Galatians might be as bad or
worse then that, (I shall mollify the harsh phrase for you, and add) more
contrary to the Antinomians and Fiduciaries. As for your disproving that
doctrine, I shall not need consider that, because the doctrine is new set when
it comes to be disproved, and in those terms which you see I acknowledge not:
for I do not suppose the necessity of adding Evangelicall works unto that
purpose, and in that act, to make faith the instrument of justification. For 1
I acknowledge not faith an instrument of that, any other then a moral
instrument, by which I express my self to mean a condition accepted by God
to justification; and a logical or proper instrument of receiving Christ,
(which Christ, not which Faith, justifies.) 2 Evangelicall works, in the
notion wherein I surpose you now take them, for fruits of faith, performances
of obedience, I affirm not to be either instrument or condition in the act of
justification, or to that purpose; but I require them afterward when occasions
and opportunities of exercising that faith, of performing those resolutions,
do call for them. And therefore 3 I make no scruple to acknowledge that we
are not justified by any righteousness inherent in us, as I often have said, but
only by the righteousness of Christ imputed: Only that infusion of new
righteousness (which when it is infused and rooted, is inherent in us) is the
condition without which we shall not be justified; not taking it again for
the actual performances, or acts of righteousness. Yet in the three last
lines you have now again changed your question, and made it such an one, that
I cannot blame you not to be ashamed to repeat your arguments, or to maintain;
For I shall most joyfully conclude with you in the very words, the truth of
that you say you used those arguments to prove, viz. That we are justified by
the obedience of Christ alone, freely imputed by God, applied and rested on by
Faith only. For whatever other qualifications be required as conditions in the
subject, it is the work only of faith to apply in that sense, i. e. to rest on
Christ. And having so well agreed in the conclusion, one would wonder how we
should so differ in the premises. Certainly there was some fault some where.
Was not it a willingness to find faults in that Book that made it appear so
full of errors, and a heat (that might have been spared) which turned the
pulpit into a Pasquin, or Morforius, on which that Author was to be defamed?

That which I have now affirmed, I am confident is the sum of what is said on
that Point in more words, and with more proofs and clearings in that
Catechism; and not now minced or dressed anew by your directions, or for your
palate. Yet if it may now please you, and you will ask God forgiveness for
your slandering of me, and consider me so much, as to think that that
reputation was valuable to the Author which you unjustly labored to rob him
of, I shall most heartily (as I do already forgive you the injury, so) conclude
this Paper, and take leave of you, and continue

Monday night, Oct. 19. 1646. Your Servant H. Hammond.
I desire to hear what opinion you have of this large trouble, thus
unexpectedly multiplied upon my hands.
SIR,
I Am sent for away from hence in great haste to my dear Mother, who is very
sick, and so am forced to dictate to an ill Amanuensis; if greater Letters
then an e be mistaken I must crave your pardon. If you think fit to reply, be
pleased to seal up your notes, and Mr. Wilkinson (who lodges at Merton
College) will convey them to

Your Servant Fr. Cheynell.
October. 30. 1646.
SIR,
I Conceive your Letters are meant, (as they are by the superscription
directed) to me only: yet I thought it my duty to direct you to some that are
equally engaged, and able to give you better satisfaction. You will not believe
me, and I have done. As for your discourse about desiring an exact account,
truly Sir, I do seriously believe, that when you were at highest, you would
show as much civility toward any Minister of Christ, as you did toward me.
It may stand with the state of an Archdeacon to desire an account, if he
add, exact account. The greatest General will give Orders to his Officers in
as homble a style; These are to desire. But enough, if not too much of that. If
your challenge made me smile gravely, yet sure you are too angry when you say,
I have reproached and slandered you; you endeavor to make me as happy, as you
conceive your self to be. Sir, I never thought that there had been so much
advantage to be made of a Parenthesis; I do not desire to mistake your
meaning, and am sorry to read your uncharitableness. Your judgment is, that I
seek for nothing in your Papers but exceptions; you intimate that I am no
Scholar, and to your self no friend; yet you are so courteous as to communicate
some part of your mind to your unlearned enemy: but you profess, that you do
not cast up a ball of new contention between us, only you are pleased to
refer me to another Book called the View of the new Directory.

I acknowledge that I have heard, what I now begin to believe, that that Book
is yours, because you smile upon it, as Fathers use to do upon their pretty
Babes.

The Author of that view of the new Directory lays down this rule, page 2.
[Nothing is necessary in the worship of God, but what God has prescribed;]
Pray, Sir, let us know how many severalls of the Common Prayer Book that are
purposely left out in the Directory, are prescribed by God.

2 The said Author abuses both Presbyterians and Independents; but whether he
does answer the several Arguments propounded by either, I leave to you to
consider. Sir, if you have any thing to say against our Learned and Reverend
brethren of Scotland, they are of age to answer you, try their strength.

3 If you please to undertake the answer of Mr. Cottons arguments against set
Forms, you may have liberty to speak your mind; but truly Sir, till you have
performed this task (I mean, till you have shown how many things are
prescribed by God, and rejected by us in this Directory: 2 Till you have
answered our brethren of Scotland, and Mr. Cotton, (to say nothing of others)
you have no temptation to triumph, unless you mean to triumph before the
victory, as that Author does. You should not refer us to Mr. Hooker, now the
state of the question is so much varied.

4 If it be granted to you, that some set Form may, by some persons, at least
for some time, be lawfully used; how will you prove it necessary that any
whole entire set Platform of Liturgy should be rigorously imposed upon all
the Ministers of these three Kingdoms of England, etc? is not that the thing
which you do so passionately long after, and earnestly contend for? if it be
not, I confess I am much mistaken; and if it be, let it be clearly and
undeniably proved.

5 In this last return, I do not find you willing to own what your words
seemed to import, [That there is some necessity, that the Liturgy formed in the
Apostles times should be continued in the Church.] For you give the present
Church leave to judge of the Liturgy composed in the time of the Apostles (as
you pretend) and to make what alterations or additions, alienation or exchange
shall seem fit to the present Church. But Sir, if those Apostolical men were
extraordinarily assisted by the Spirit in composing that Liturgy, shall men of
ordinary gifts take upon them to pass a peremptory sentence for altering,
alienating, exchanging what was (as you conceive) composed by the extraordinary
assistance of the Spirit, and is by a more then ordinary blessing and
providence preserved and transmitted to posterity? Sir, take your words
according to your own interpretation, that the holy Ghost who settled a
Ministry, enabled them in the Apostles time to form a Liturgy to continue in
the Church, to the end that the Ministers might pray and intercede for their
several Congregations; and you do certainly decline, if not studiously, the
maintaining of what you are engaged to maintain by your View of the Directory;
if a Minister may pray as he ought in a congregation, without the use of the
Liturgy, which you say was formed in the Apostles time to continue in the
Church, then sure a Minister may pray as he ought in the Congregation, without
the help of the late Common Prayer Book.

6 You name several Liturgies; which will you stand to, and avouch that it is
without any interpolation or corruption?

7 Not to spend time about the miraculous gift of prayer, you say there were
some exercises of that gift, and confess those exercises to be different from
the set Forms you contend for. Sir, is there no ordinary gift of Prayer
vouchsafed to the Ministers of Christ? should not this ordinary gift be stirred
up by meditation, and exercised in prayer? should not Ministers of Christ give
themselves to pray, and study how to pray seasonably, according to the several
occasions administered by the various turns of God providence? How do you
prove, that a man that has not ordinary wisdom to pray as he ought, is
called by Christ to be a Minister of the Gospel? Surely Sir, I think a
Minister should study to pray seasonably, as well as preach seasonably, and if
the Primitive method and manner of prayer be to be observed, it does not
follow that the Liturgies, which go under the name of St. James and Mark, and
have constantly been suspected by Learned men, should be rigorously imposed
upon the Ministers of the New Testament, who have an ordinary gift of prayer,
nay, are endued with the spirit of prayer.

8 You mention the use of Psalms, and the Lords prayer. Why sure Sir, you did
view the Directory very slightly, if you took no notice of the Order about the
public reading of the holy Scriptures, and the frequent reading of the Book
of Psalms. We acknowledge the prayer which Christ taught his Disciples to be
of it self a most comprehensive prayer, and not only a pattern of prayer;
And it is specially recommended to be used in the prayers of the Church; if
you please to call this a Liturgy (and, it seems, you can demonstrate no more)
do not complain that you are deprived of all manner of Liturgy; for now you
have told me that public divine Service is the English of Liturgy. Sure I am,
the Parliament desires that our public service of God should be most divine
and orderly; for their care has been to hold forth such things as are of
divine institution in every Ordinance, and to set forth other things according
to the rules of Christian prudence, agreeable to the general rules of the Word
of God: and for the consent and harmony of the Churches, there are general
heads propounded, and if you observe the general heads, the sense and scope of
the prayers, and other parts of public worship, you will have no cause to
complain of disorder and confusion in our public worship. But you tell me
that we may pray as we ought, without the help of that Liturgy, which you
conceive was formed in the Apostles time; and therefore I think I may proceed
to the sadder part of your task.

1 Concerning your sad Story, I need say no more, but that I am glad you have
disabused one offender, I could wish that you would disabuse all those whom you
have abused with three or four editions of your Book, by a remarkable
Recantation of your error. Sir, venture my arguments to any Reader, I fear
none; let your Book be witness whether I charge you justly or no: I mean
your Book printed at Oxford, and all printed after that Copy; I except nothing,
but your less remarkable alteration, which was not remarkable enough for me
to take notice of in so short a time; and therefore you must blame your self,
that your Recantation was no more remarkable; for when you told me that you
added these words [In the primary intention of the phrase.] I looked over your
additions more heedfully, and could not find it: and I did at last read even
your less remarkable alterations, and the Printers Postscript, or yours, for
the excuse of your self and him.

Sir, your first answer in the eighth Section of your Catechism, explains the
meaning of the third Commandment to be according to the literal sound,
against perjury or nonperformance of promisory oaths; mark that [Promissory
oaths.] Whereupon your Scholar is immediately prompted to ask whether the
third Commandment, [Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain,] be no more (mark that, no more) then [thou shall not forswear thy
self?) your answer is, No more undoubtedly. The God of heaven judge between
us; nay, your several editions do judge; there being not a syllable of the
primary intention to be found in three or four editions.

2 I say, the question is, what is meant in the third Commandment? Your first
answer being an explication of the meaning of the Commandment: The second
question is, whether the third Commandment be no more? that is, whether the
meaning of it be no more, then that thou shall not forswear thy self? this is
most clear to me.

3 The question is not of the intention of a phrase; that is but a harsh
expression, which must be explained to be meant of the intention of the
Lawgiver; and it was Gods intention to forbid foolish and wanton swearing, as
well as forswearing.

4 We had not best dispute what is primary and secundary in Gods intention;
one intention is sufficient, and that is to forbid both.

5 You are not able to make it good that that is the primary intention of the
phrase: and therefore I glanced at that by the way.

6 Your doubtful perhaps was that which troubled me: and surely Sir, you do
see what reason you have to blot out perhaps.

7 Why do you say, perhaps foolish and wanton, sure profane using of Gods
Name is forbidden? is it not as sure that foolish and wanton using of Gods Name
is forbidden as profane using of it? or is not all foolish and wanton using of
Gods name profane?

8 Your remarkable alterations assure me, that you are convinced that you had
not said enough against vain assertory oaths, in any of your editions: for the
words run thus in them all, the particular matter of Moses his Law, [was of
promissory (not assertory) oaths,] which you alter thus, [peculiarly of
promissory, not only of assertory oaths:] and if that be not a recantation, I
do not know what a recantation means.

9 I said truly that a doubtful perhaps would not restrain youths from
foolish and wanton using of the Name of God; if Preachers be so timorous to
cry, Perhaps it is forbidden, and that but by reduction neither, swearers will
grow bold. I do not like your instance in this last Paper, when you say, that
fornication is forbidden in the seventh Commandment by reduction; surely Sir,
there needs no reduction to evince that fornication is forbidden.

10 You talk of the words of the Commandment; the question is, of the meaning
of God in the Commandment. Gods mind is to forbid foolish swearing in the
third Commandment, and fornication in the seventh.

11 I did not take notice of your argument to prove that forswearing is
forbidden in the third Commandment, because you prove what I never denied.

12 You say, the Oath which you take lawfully in Judicature, may come from the
Devil in another. You are mistaken; it is not the oath, but the vanity of the
oath which comes from the Devil.

13 You come not off with honor, when you say, First, that the superaddition
(which I call imaginary) is a command of Christ, and afterward say, if it was
not a superaddition by a new precept, yet there is a superaddition of new
light. Your Catechism is, it seems, like the Tridentine Canons, capable not
only of several but contrary interpretations. I appeal to your Book again,
Lib. 2. Sect. 3. page 93. First, your interpretation that Christ came to fill
up the Law, as a vessel that had some water in it before, but now is filled up
to the brim; and that which is worse, of a picture, etc. Sir, was there but a
rude draught of moral perfection in the perfect Law of God? was it drawn in
colors to the life, or as it were with a coal? Take heed, be not too busy in
imitating any Father in a dangerous expression, or in excusing the great
evacuators of the Law. Secondly, though you pretend often to be very careless
whether you prove a superaddition or improvement of the Law to have been made
by Christ, yet you confess that it is the foundation of a weighty
superstructure, page 94. Pray Sir, declare what that superstructure is. Is it
that you may be justified by obedience to these new superadded precepts, and
yet say that you are justified by a righteousness without the Law? say
honestly, is that the superstructure, or is it not? 3 Do you not tell us, that
light is the state and doctrine of Christianity, darkness of sin and
imperfection? observe how untowardly that comparison runs; though you do not
bring it round, yet you go too far; you say, that before Christ, there was
some mixture of imperfection, and some vacuities in the Commandments of God;
you are speaking of the moral Law; you say, These vacuities are filled by
Christ, page 94. These expressions sure have reference to new precepts, and not
only to new light; if not, read page 96. to show that Christ came to fill up
the Law, say you; first he rehearses the old Law, and thereby confirms it,
and then annexes his new Law to it. What say you, who is blindfold now? is not
this undeniable? 4 You speak too doubtfully, page 95. when you say, that Christ
under the Gospel gives higher or plainer promises: you should speak with more
resolution in a Practical Catechism. 1 There was Gospel under the Law, and
the Spirit was ministered to all the elect then, during the time of legal
administrations; diverse Jews were penitent believers, and therefore under the
second Covenant before Christ came in the flesh. 2 The promises were plain
enough to them that were endued with the Spirit, as is evident by the Apostles
discourse in the 11 Chap. to the Hebrews, they were so plain that they saw
them, were persuaded of them, and embraced them; though the thing promised, the
Incarnation of Christ, was far off, yet their light was so clear, and eye of
faith so strong, that they beheld Christ afar off. 3 We have no higher
promise then that of being heirs and co-heires with Christ in glory, and they
had the promise of eternal life, the promise of being blessed for ever in
Jesus Christ. 4 The ceremonies which you say had nothing good in them, did
direct to Christ, and therefore there was this good in them, that they did by
Gods ordinance and blessing direct the elect of God under that dispensation
unto Christ, in whom they were to enjoy all-sufficient and everlasting good
things in glory. 5 No sin was able actually to damn penitent believers
during the time of legal administrations. And therefore I wonder at your
discourse in the 95 page. Pray Sir, is there any venial sin? 6 You speak
too faintly, when you call the Evangelicall discoveries before Christ,
glimmerings of light, and insert the scepticall perhaps, page 95. of your
Pract. Catech. Sir, there is no perhaps, no hap-hazard in this business; Jesus
Christ was sufficiently discovered during the time of Leviticall
administrations to all the elect for their everlasting salvation. 7 When you
speak of the glimmerings of the Gospel, you say these things were not
universally commanded to all under threat of eternal punishment, but only
recommended to them that will do that which is best, and so see good days,
etc. Observe 1 That you do here by consequence assert, that there were
counsels of perfection under the Law: I will not say works of supererogation,
but the Jews were (it seems) encouraged to do somewhat more then was
commanded. 2 Will you say, that to believe in the promised seed, to circumcise
their hearts, mortify their lusts, reform their lives, walk in new
obedience, was more then was commanded in the time of the Leviticall
dispensation? 3 Will you say, that the Jews were not obliged to believe in the
promised seed, circumcise their hearts, and the like, under threat of eternal
punishment? I might enlarge, but by your answer to these few proposalls, I
shall be able to understand your obscure Catechism; do not say, that there is
a Sarcasme in the Epithet. I hope, you will now confess that you did contend
for new precepts; and therefore you recant once more, if you will be satisfied
with new light. Sir, counsels give new light, but you say the superadditions
in the fifth of Matthew are all commands, and not counsels only; and you
endeavor to prove it ex profess, page 96. Surely the same things were
commanded of old; then these are but imaginary superadditions, as I called
them: but if they be superadditions, and not only counsels but commands,
they are new precepts, and therefore you did not contend for new light only,
but for new precepts. By this little that has been said, it is clear that you
had some weighty superstructure to lay upon this ample foundation of new
precepts, or else you did but sweat and toil in laying the foundation that you
might have your labor for your pains, which you are too wise to do. Sicnotus
Ulysses?

All that I desire is, that you would alter from worse to better; for I join
with you in professing that such an alteration does declare amiable and
imitable qualities. Finally, if you contend not for new precepts, then
acknowledge that the super-additions you dreamt of were, as I said, imaginary;
and I must remember you that the third Commandment, which is out of question
the command of God, and Christ, and the holy Ghost, will by Gods blessing be
most prevalent to restrain men from foolish or wanton using of the name of God
in assertory oaths, or any other idle using of Gods name when they do not
swear. What I said of Criticismes was no Sarcasme: I did but remember you that
Critiques are apt to think themselves so far above other men, that they do
usually contemn the serious admonitions of poor Country Preachers. But as
high as the Critiques think themselves, I hoped that you would not think them
mounted to the highest heaven, and therefore called it a lower heaven.

You tell me, [That you do only desire to study the moral Law, as you find
it delivered from the second Mount] in your last return, page 14. So say the
men whom you cry out upon, the Antinomians; and they give this for a reason,
because the Law of God published on mount Sinai does not in their opinion
oblige believers.

But you go beyond them in the next page, page 15. and imply, that no
unbeleever is obliged under pain of damnation, to observe the moral Law. Your
words are to this effect, [That Christ, who gives more grace then was brought
into the world by the Law of Moses or nature, has disburdened all men of that
sad yoke that lay on the Jews, and is content to accept of sincere, without
not-sinning obedience.]

1 I desire to know what grace was brought into the world by the Law of Moses?
Does not the Apostle say that grace came not by Moses, but by Christ only? 2
How do you prove that all men, I mean, every one of mankind, is put under
the second Covenant? I suppose that is your meaning, because in your Pract.
Catech. page 5. you affirm [That Christ did satisfy for all the sins of all
mankind, and that all other parts of the second Covenant are consequent and
dependent on that] And therefore I conceive that in your opinion there is a
revelation of the Law of faith made, a pardon granted, and sufficient grace
given to every one of mankind to perform what is necessary now under the
second Covenant; because you acknowledge that these are mercies made over in
Christ by the second Covenant, in the self same page; and to whom are the
mercies made over, but to them for whose sins Christ has satisfied? 3 I
desire to know how Christ could disburthen any man, or satisfy for the sins
of any one, according to your opinion, if he did only exercise the office of
an Aaronicall Priest by his sacrifice? For it is certain that no Aaronicall
Priest did ever make any more then a Typical satisfaction by the exercise of
his office; and you add, that when the Scripture speaks indefinitely of
Christ's Priesthood, or his eternal Priesthood, or of his blessing us and
turning of us from our iniquities, these expressions have no reference to his
[single, finite, unrepeated sacrifice upon the cross, which belongs to his
Aaronicall Priesthood,] but they must be understood of his Melchisedechian
Priesthood, to which he was consecrated by his death, which you term an
Aaronicall sacrifice, and look upon it as a rite and ceremony for the
consecrating of Christ to be our eternal High Priest, page 17, 18, 19. You
think you have gone far beyond the Socinians in this point; but hear what
Smalcius says, Non est autem dissimulandum nos non negare Christimortem ad
ejus sacrificium pertinere, Refutat. Smiglec. de erroribus nov. Arianorum, lib.
2. page 282. a word is enough to a wise man. Our case stands thus then, 1 Your
doubtful perhaps will not restrain men from foolish wanton swearing; you did
well to blot out that. 2 Your new precepts will not do it, and you do well to
rest satisfied without them. 3 Your total prohibition of swearing it self
will not do the deed; because Christ does only prohibit false swearing and
vain swearing, he does not prohibit swearing it self; for if swearing it self
were prohibited, it would never be lawful to swear in any case; even as
adultery it self is prohibited, and therefore it is not lawful to commit
adultery in any case.

I hope you will distinguish between vain swearing, and swearing it self; if
swearing it self be prohibited, I must not swear for the public good,
because I must not do any thing that is prohibited, though it tend to the
public good. You wonder to hear me speak of Smalcius, and demand who is not
of that opinion? Sir, remember that you say, [Christ has superadded to the old
Commandment a total universal prohibition of swearing it self, making that
as unlawful now, as perjury was before,] page 120. Now for a man that
maintains this, to say likewise that it is lawful to swear for the public
good, is to speak like Smalcius, etc. Examine well whether you be not guilty of
the sin of dogmatizing: for I know if you did not condescend too passively to
take up both opinions, you have reason enough to discern that these opinions
do fight with one another. Sir, I have proved it already; take one argument
more. If swearing it self be as unlawful now, as perjury was before Christ
came in the flesh, then it is as unlawful to swear for the public good, as
for a man to forswear himself for the public good, which I hope you will
not affirm. A man may be lawfully called to swear, but no man can be lawfully
called to forswear himself; Ergo swearing it self is not as unlawful as
perjury. If you wonder that rational men should contradict themselves, I
answer they seldom do it but upon a design; and I could easily guess at the
design, but you have taught me to be more reserved.

In the 12 page of your last Answer, you say, That what is forbidden by
reduction is not so deeply obliging; and therefore I stumble at your notion of
reduction, considering that you say, Fornication is forbidden by reduction in
the seventh Commandment. Sir, I think my self as deeply obliged to abstain
from fornication as from adultery, I mean, by the same Authority. Moreover you
plead there, that Christ may be said to have added to the third Commandment,
because he forbids swearing by any thing else as well as by God. 1 Were men at
liberty before Christ came to swear by any creature? 2 We may now in some
cases swear by God, but in no case by the creature; and therefore swearing by
God is not totally and universally forbidden, as swearing by the creature is.
You tell me that Schindler is as venerable an Author as Pagnine; truly Sir, I
am not ashamed to profess that I have profited by that edition of Pagnine
which Mercer put forth. If you conceive Grotius more venerable then Mercer, he
will assure you that (...) proprie significat vanum. R. Isaac Abarbinel on the
20 of Exodus says, the word is taken so largely in the third Commandment as to
comprehend both vain and false oaths. If I had said, false oaths had not been
prohibited in the third Commandment, I would have considered your argument
drawn from the signification of the word in the ninth Commandment. If you
please to consult R. David Kimchi in libro Radicum, he will prove by the
Talmud Ierusal* and Onkelos, that the word signifies frustra, and sine causa;
and that he who swears that figs are figs, is to be punished for swearing
in vain; he cites the 1 Samuel 25. 21. to prove that the word signifies vain,
[surely in vain have I kept.] David does not say he kept Nabals cattle
falsely, but in vain; nay, you will find, that they tell you that a false
oath is forbidden, because what is false is vanity, and Tohu, and nothing. I
cited R. Abraham Aben-Ezra on the the third Commandment; and he will tell you,
that one that has accustomed himself to swear vainly, will swear in one day
oaths without number; and if you reprove him for swearing, he will swear that
he did not swear, and much more to this purpose. See R. Solomon Iarchi, if
you please; you will find, they all come to this, non assumes nomen Domini
gratis, frustra, in vanum; and therefore you need not reject, what was humbly
tendered to you, with so much scorn and indignation. You say, by [would be
forbidden] you did in effect mean were forbidden. I do not understand what
you mean, when you say you did in effect mean it: but let that pass. I
understand you better when you talk of (...): I forgive you: and if that be
part of your Rhetorique, I do not envy you, and will not imitate you.

I pass on to your scanning of the third Report. 1 Sir, if you did not doubt,
you did ill to speak doubtfully; for your doubtful expressions may help to
make or keep others doubtful. 2 You acknowledge something worse then that I
charged you with, namely, that you used that expression to serve them, [Who
think our natural aversion from God, and inclination to all sin, to be no
sin, but an infelicity, unless actually consented to,] by laboring to do
them good upon their own principles. Sir, men cannot be brought to true
repentance upon false principles; if men's principles are corrupt, refute their
principles, and instruct them better, that they may be better principled;
Otherwise if you build upon a false foundation, your building cannot stand, and
they will be hardened in their impenitence by your connivence. Be pleased to
take notice, that this corrupt opinion is not a fouleabasing principle, but
rather a selfe-exalting error; and therefore the pressing of such a principle
upon them, will never humble them. If you had told them, that we are all by
nature spiritually dead, in a polluted and cursed condition, this might humble
them; but if you serve men upon their own proud principles, they will take it
for granted that their principles are good, and grow the prouder. No man can
conceive true godly sorrow for his actual sins, who does deny the very root
and fountain of all his sins to be a sin. 3 You suppose, that corruption is
not cherished in some act, and conclude, ergo, in that act it is not cherished;
just idem per idem. 4 You are desired to prove what you take for granted: is
not that equal? I say, that original sin is truly and properly a sin in
them that are not of age to consent to it; and that every actual sin in men of
ripe years, is not actually and formally consented to; corruption is so strong
in us, that it does many times break forth without our consent; and I am ready
to prove both propositions, if you doubt of them. 5 You were ill advised to
pass a complement in a Practical Catechism, with men of corrupt opinions,
contrary to your own principles. 6 You mention the Socinians very often; but
let me entreat you to be wiser: do not provoke me to make a parallel between
your expressions and theirs. I take not upon me to know any man's opinion, or
his heart, any further then his words declare both. 7 When I spoke of a Liturgy
that was in design, you know I did not mean the Common Prayer Book. 8 For
your View of the Directory, do not magnify it till you have finished your
task; never talk of the suffrages of the Jews, Heathens, or Mahometans, but
speak to the point; I have shown you the point in question. 9 You would have
Doxologies and Creeds: is this worth answering? does not the Directory take in
the whole Scripture for a Liturgy? and are there not Doxologies enough, and
Creed enough (even all things necessary to salvation) in the holy Scripture?
When the confession of faith is published to the world, you will find this
Reverend Assembly (so much scorned in that Book you subscribe to) be no
enemies to any Orthodox Creed: and you may, amongst the rules and directions
about the Sacrament, in the Ordinance of October. 20. 1645. see that we have not
forgot our Creed. 10 I am not at leisure to dispute with you about sitting at
Sacrament; the Parliament is not guilty of your illogicall conclusions, though
you would feign expose them to contempt in your View of the Dirictory, View
Dir. ca. 1. p. 1. If it please you, we will put it to the question, Whether the
Directory (in which there is the wisdom of two Parliaments, two Assemblies,
which I oppose to your wisdom) or your Pract. Catechism give more countenance
to Socinian errors and practices? I will dispute this question with you where
you please, and when you please. 1 Show me where the Directory does enjoyne
all communicants to sit in the act of receiving. 2 Tell me whether all
familiarity with Jesus Christ does infer an equality. 3 Does any Socinian
think himself equal with Christ, or conceive that there is no more honor
due to Christ, then to a mere man? Pray, do the Socinians no wrong, they will
say as you say, That Christ did not bless us till after his resurrection, till
he became an everlasting Priest; and ever since he was such a Priest, he has
all power in heaven and earth, a power equal to Gods power, and therefore
Divine honor is due to him. Sed tum cultum qui nunc Christo debetur postquam
in coelis esse coepit, qui est, ut ipsi tanquam Deo confidamus, and omnia ab
illo speremus, and petamus quae ad salutem aeternam pertinent, adeoque ipsam
aeternam salutem dicimus ei deberi, non propter qualemcunque, sed talem and
tantam potestatem quae par sit Dei potestati, Smalcius refutat. prim. lib.
Smig. de erroribus Arianorum, cap. 11. p. 109. Sir, I will give you a better
Argument against the Directory, and for the Common-prayer-booke; you may read
it, View of the Directory, page 27 [It is not necessary to exchange the
pleasant easy course of our Liturgy, for the tedious, toylsome,
lesse-profitable course in the Directory.] Tell Prelates and Courtiers of ease
and pleasure, and you win their hearts. This was a good Argument for an
University Orator to urge, but this same word Ergo spoils all such Rhetorical
arguments. I hasten to your discourse about godly sorrow: This is your first
assertion. 1 Godly sorrow may be conceived for the pollutions of our nature, as
infelicities, if not as sins. Be pleased to prove this proposition; and I
will abide by it, and maintain the negative. 2 He which doubts whether
original sin be a sin, may conceive godly sorrow for it, this is the
second dictate. But your third Dictate is admirable. 3 He that thinks
inclination to sin no sin, but when he actually consents to it, may when
he does not consent to it, grieve for it as an infelicity. Sir, the question
is of Godly sorrow: is it godly sorrow, or is it not, for a man, to grieve for
an infelicity, which, as he conceives, is no way sinful? 4 You say, If a man
look upon original sin as a pollution, though not as a sin, he may grieve
for it with a godly sorrow. I had thought that all pollution of the soul of
man had been by sin only, Mar. 7. 23.

You are much mistaken, when you say, that they who think original sin no
sin, may be advised to true grief and sorrow for it on their own
principles. If by true grief you mean a godly sorrow, no man mournes for
sin after a godly manners but he that grieves for it as a sin against God.
Sir, in a Practical Catechism, you should have laid undeniable grounds of
repentance; and therefore either plainly proved, or at least resolutely
asserted original sin to be a sin, without any ifs or ands: For where
shall a man begin in his repentance, if he be not convinced that original
sin is a sin? should he not lay the axe to the root of corruption, and
bewail the fountain of pollution? will not he be apt to doubt whether
actual sins be sins, who doubts whether an inclination to all sin be a
sin? surely such an acute wretch will say, My inclination to such and such an
act is natural, and not evil. Ergo this and the like acts, to which I am
naturally inclined, are not evil. You know that I could add; let me beseech
you to consider what has been said, and I will pass on to your fourth report.

Your fourth Report concerns Justification. Sir, I did not desire you to give
an account of your faith, but I should have been glad that you would have
vouchsafed an answer to my quaeres. I thank you for your second
acknowledgement that you were misinformed, and I thank you for your endeavor
to prevent mistakes. Truly Sir, I do not wilfully mistake your sense, nor do
I desire to take any advantage of an hasty expression.

Your first Proposition is, that justification is divine acceptance and pardon
of sin. I will not stand to ask you why you put acceptance before pardon;
it is likely that was not done de industria; but I would know why you speak of
remission and acceptance, and leave out imputation? I observe, that in your
second proposition you do affirm that [The mercy of God, through the
satisfaction and merits of Christ, is the sole cause of this justification.]
Do not think me too curious, since you desire me to give my opinion of
these propositions; you know, there are some that distinguish between a first
and second justification; and they do express themselves warily, and they
will grant what you say, so you will give them leave to choose which they mean,
this, or that justification. But I will judge charitably of you, hoping that by
this justification you intend not to imply that there is another justification;
and so, as they say, a first and second justification. Give me leave to ask
you a question or two about the second proposition, compared with the fourth,
and with some passages in your Practical Catechism, that by a clear answer
to a few quaeres, many mistakes may be prevented.

In your second proposition you say, The mercy of God, through the satisfaction
and merits of Christ, is the sole cause of justification. In your Catechism
you say, Pract. Cat. p. 5.
That Christ did sacrifice himself for all the sin of all mankind; and yet in
your fourth proposition in this last return you say [That this work of grace
in God through Christ, is not every man's portion.] Sir, if Christ's satisfaction
be the sole cause, and he has made satisfaction for every man, the grace of
God (which extends as far as Christ's satisfaction) must be the portion of
every man for his justification by the obedience of Christ alone. My first
quaere then is, 1 Why the grace of God in justifying those for whom Christ has
satisfied, does not extend to every man for whom he has satisfied? 2 Whether
the qualification and condition, which you require in the subject be bestowed
upon the elect absolutely or conditionally? Regeneration you say is a condition
which does dispose the subject for justification, that is, for acceptance and
pardon, as I conceive, and you express. Pray Sir, show me what condition God
requires unregenerate persons to perform, that they may attain unto
regeneration, which you take to be the condition of justification. I
acknowledge, that God does never justify an impenitent infidel in sensu
composito, that is, the infidel does not remain an impenitent infidel; but
then you must grant on the other side, that God does justify the ungodly. 3
Whether there be any condition which does so qualify the subject, as that you
can say, by these habits, acts, vows, and these only I am justified? Pract.
Catech. page 28. Sir, Learned men say that there is no condition required to
dispose the subject for justification; but there is a condition, namely Faith,
bestowed upon none but the elect, to receive the object of justification,
Christ, and his complete obedience, perfect righteousness; and hence (as I
conceive) some men (that meant well) say, there is a condition required, that
is, to receive the object; and others say, there is no condition required, that
is, to dispose or qualify the subject, so as that the subject shall be
constituted righteous by that disposition or qualification. I speak as
plainly as I can devise, that there may be no mistake. God does by his free
and effectual grace work the hearts of his elect to receive Christ, that they
may be justified; not by their own obedience, or vow of obedience, but by the
obedience of Christ alone, freely imputed by God, and rested on by faith only.

Moreover, Learned men do distinguish between disposing of the subject to
salvation (which is the last part of the excution of Gods decree of election)
and disposing the subject unto justification: though they grant that there is a
condition to enable the subject to receive the object Jesus Christ, who is
Jehovah our righteousness. And therefore Protestants do maintain, that all
the habits and acts of grace which are in the best of men concurring together,
are not sufficient to justify a man before God, and therefore faith concurring
with a vow of obedience, or any faithful actions, cannot justify us: Though
faith alone be said to justify us Relatively, that is, in regard of the
object received by faith. I acknowledge with you, that justification is Gods
act, we cannot pardon out selves, and God sitting as a fatherly Judge upon a
throne of grace, does justify us (...), as Chrysostom upon the 8. of Romans 33.
verse. Sir, let me entreat you not to wonder, that I find fault with some
passages in your Book, which you say are in effect places of Scripture. Sir, to
abuse the Scripture for the maintenance of any error, is to my apprehension a
great deal worse then to deliver any erroneous conceits in our own language.
The Papists say as you do* that they say no more then St. James himself
says. I did not dream that you thought Abraham was justified by the actual
sacrificing of his son: Socinus says, Abraham was justified by offering up
of Isaac. I do not think he means it in any other sense then that which you
repeat; namely, that Abraham was justified by a resolution to obey God in the
sacrificing of his Son, not by the actual sacrificing of him.

Sir, I am heartily glad to hear you acknowledge that you agree with me in the
conclusion: be pleased to retract all that is contrary to that conclusion in
your Pract. Catechism, and then I am sure you must retract what I complained
of. Pray Sir, do you not think that we are justified by a sincere vow of
obedience, as truly as we are by faith? that is, that our vow of obedience is
a condition of Justification; I do not say an instrument, for you deny faith
to be an instrument of justification. And therefore if a sincere vow of
obedience be the condition of justification, we are justified as truly by
that, as by faith. 2 Consider that you say in this last return, p. 20. [The
condition must be undertaken before the Covenant belongs to me.] This vow or
resolution of obedience is, as I conceive, that which you call the undertaking
of the condition; why then surely obedience is the condition of the Covenant of
justification, for obedience is that which is undertaken in a vow of obedience.
3 If by Covenant you mean the whole Covenant of grace, you must make some
condition go before our regeneration also. 4 You know the Papists speak as
fully as you do any where for the meritorious satisfaction of Christ: but you
know what they say of the praevious dispositions, to dispose and qualify the
subject for justification; and you know what others say of the vow of
obedience. 5 Though to give a pardon be Gods act, yet to receive forgiveness
is an act of faith. Acts. 26. 18. We do not receive a pardon by an act of
charity, or by a vow of obedience, or receiving of Christ as King, and giving
up the obedience of the heart to him; I believe you have not forgotten these
expressions which are scattered up and down in your Catechism and Papers. If
faithful actions be the only thing whereby a man is justified, as you
affirm page 28. then are we not justified only by a vow of obedience. If
faith be unsufficient to our justification, unless it be consummate by love,
that is, by acts of Christian charity, or keeping the Commandments of God, as
you expound that phrase, page 35. then sure you cannot say you plead only for
justification by a vow of obedience. Unless you will make a first and second
justification, I do not see how you can come off. On the other side, if we
are justified by a vow of personal obedience, then we are not justified by
the obedience of Christ alone, or by faith only; I mean, by the obedience of
Christ, as that obedience whereby we are constituted righteous; nor by faith
only, as that whereby we receive a pardon; receive Christ as Jehovah our
righteousness; and therefore truly Sir, I do not yet see how you can agree
with me in my conclusion; namely, that we are justified by the obedience of
Christ alone, freely imputed by God, applied and rested on by faith only,
unless you will retract those passages in your Book, which were justly
complained of, for the good of you, and this whole University. I speak
plainly and freely, as it becomes

October. 30. 1646. Your Friend to serve you Fr. Cheynell.

SIR,
ON Saturday, October 31. I received your Papers (dated the day before) by way
of return to mine of October 20. That night I got a liberty from other
avocations to read them over, and am now on Monday at the beginning of the
week following on preparation to give you some account of them. Your letter
which conducted them was but brief, yet was willing to take notice of one
particular, that of your having written (...) with (...), which though it be
only a grammatical (...), and very extrinsecal to the matter in hand, yet
seeing you are pleased to make it the only subject of those few lines, I must
in civility tell you somewhat of your manner of excusing it. 1 That literal
mistake you know you were guilty of, and I only told you that you were so, and
added not one word more. Instead of excusing or confessing it, you now desire
me only to pardon the mistakes of an ill Amanuensis, and add your reasons
that forced you to make use of him. Sir, I will do more then you desire.
First, I will pardon that former mistake in your self also; and tell you, that
in one that undertakes to be a Scholar, (and to be very severe to those
writings of other men, which many pious persons have been willing to receive
with some kindness, and now profess to see no kind of ground for your
quarrels in them,) the not spelling so plain a word of Greek, would by very
many men be hardly excused; I mean, it would take off from their opinion of
your learning, as much as if you had written impius with a [y,] that is, more
then many faults of a higher nature could be fit to do. Secondly, I will
believe (or excuse) your saying, that your haste forced you to dictate to an
ill Amanuensis, when I have some reasons to think it did not. 1 Because you
had had my last Return in your hands ten days, and I suppose the occasion
that caused your haste, was not known to you all that time, or more days then
one or two of them: for I profess to think your avocation so very urgent, and
should be sorry to hear that I was the occasion of detaining you one minute;
but then before you knew of it, I suppose that did not force you to choose this
shorter way. This was my first reason. 2 Because the Amanuensis was so far
from being an ill one, that in the whole paper I know but of one failing in the
kind forementioned: and that is in the word Sacrifice, where in stead of the
letter c. there is s, which is in effect to write facio with s. But then upon
the first sight this plainly appears to be your own hand, interposing this
word in stead of another blotted out, as you know I can discern both by your
former Letters, and by the like alterations in other places of these Papers.
This again inclines me to believe, that the dictating you mention, might be
designed a little to conceal such slips which might possibly fall from you,
and that it was not forced by your haste only. My third Reason is; because I
conceive it far more speedy way to write from my own fancy or
understanding, (which may be done without any stay but that of inventing and
writing,) then to dictate to another, wherein much longer time is required for
me to dictate articulately, and for him after that to write, then again to
recite to me what he has written, before I can proceed to dictate. In this I
can speak but mine own, and some others sense, and the common notion that I
have of it; but considering how far my notions are wont to be from pleasing
you, and that it is possible you might mean dictating out of your Note-booke,
where you may have thrown together all your exceptions against that Author
(for that your Amanuensis transcribed what you had formerly writ, I suppose you
do not mean that by dictating,) on these grounds, I say, it is possible here
may be some difference in judgment between us also. And therefore if again
you tell me, that you have spoken your full sense in this particular, I shall
make all haste to believe you, and ask you pardon for this importunity: Yet in
the mean time I will tell you my reasons also for my being so free with you in
materia non gravi. 1 Because I discerned so little in your future discourse
which would be more pertinent to the matter of my last return; having found,
that after my having answered or laid grounds of answering near twenty
questions in your last Paper, more then the matter in hand, or my leisure
engaged me to, you have thought fit to spring new matters of controversy, and
to that purpose (that you may never fail of the like matter) to catechize me
in a strange number of questions more; when the whole intention of my Paper
was, that it might be considered, whether you had not wronged that Author in
your first quarrels at that Book; and not to engage my self in discourse for
ever with him that had so little pleasure in any thing of mine. 2 Because by
some such infirmities as these being represented to you, you might think it
possible for you to mistake in greater matters. For truly, I think it far
more possible for a Scholar (that reads hastily, and is intent to note and
number faults) to impose causelessely upon his Author, then to commit such
slips, (and not mend them at the review) when he writes as hastily. And truly
if I did not believe that this which I have written were fit to persuade you
that this were possible; and did I not hope, that being calmely mentioned to
you, it would persuade you, I would not venture it to your eyes; and if I am
mistaken in my belief or hope, do but tell me so, and I promise you to
retract my error, to ask you pardon in my next, and (to repair all the
injury that can be possibly consequent to the error) to throw thus much of
the Paper into the fire, and not to permit it to the eyes of any other judge or
witness, when you have thus signified your pleasure to me.

I shall now proceed to your enclosed; and for your first period, [where you
repeat only, and say you have done;] I answer, that I have done also.

In the repetition of the discourse of exact account, etc. there is a great
mistake, viz. That, because when I was at highest I would have showed as much
civility toward any Minister of Christ, as I did toward you, therefore my
present desiring an exact account of your speeches concerning the Author of the
Catechism was the exercising jurisdiction over you. I must needs tell you that
in my opinion height and dignity in the Church, is not a proper ground of
lessening civility, but an obligation to increase it to all Ministers of
Christ, from that example of our Savior, who when he acknowledges the title of
Lord from the Disciples to be well bestowed on him, Ioh. 13. 13. does yet wash
their feet, and give them an example of doing the like, (v. 14.) when they are
at the highest also, and so Matthew. 20. 27. and in the parallel places, he
requires them to express their greatness in the (...), and sets them his own
copy of the (...), and you shall have my opinion (and I should be glad to be
told of it, if my practice has not been agreeable to it) that (as he that is
not the more liberal and extensively charitable for having received the
benefit of Ecclesiastical preferments, so) he that is not the more civil and
truly humble for having received any dignity in the Church, has somewhat of
the Gentiles (...) and (...) in him, and has no countenance from Christ, or
Apostolical institution or practice, for that misbehaviour in his dignity.
From hence Sir, I will leave (and not help) you to conclude, that how civil
soever I would have been to any Minister in any degree of greatness, or how
civil soever any General may be, if he please, to his soldiers, my being
thus civil now, (and no more) is not exercising jurisdiction over you, (...),
the only thing which I had then to demonstrate; and so I have said enough (and
shall consent to the truth of your [too much]) of that also.

Next for your grave smile, I shall not question it, or deny you those
delights, so the ridentem dicere verum may go along with it, but sure the
graver the smile was, the more it became you not to impose on me the
exercising jurisdiction over you then, or challenging you now, while I only
desired and begged, requested and reinforced my request, (that you would give
me an exact account of what you had publicly said of that Author) on purpose
that I might think no ill of you causelessly; Certainly Sir, such a carriage as
this, thus grounded and designed, will neither provoke a grave smile, nor pass
either for act of jurisdiction or for challenge; or if it must, no man shall
ever be admonished for having trespassed against a brother, and so be brought
to repentance for it, Matthew. 18. 15. nor shall he that hears (or has matter
of suspicion) that any injury has been done him by another, have means of
knowing surely whether he hears or suspects with cause, or no. As for your
affirmation, That sure I am too angry when I say you have reproached and
slandered me, from whence you conceive, I endeavor to make you happy. Sir, it
is a heap of mistakes. For, 1 by the grace which I meekly acknowledge to have
received from God, I have been enabled (and I conceive, in some measure made
use of the ability, by the help of the same grace) to hear that I have been
reproacht by you, and to tell you so, without being too angry, and therefore
you are not sure. 2 I did not say you had reproacht and slandered me (your
additions are always to some advantage of your own;) I only said [to this
reproach of yours] which I conceive was not said without cause; For [to say,
that my desiring an exact account of you, and not of others, (when I knew not
of any other) was to fall foul on you,] cannot be less then a reproach; nay,
your addition was true, (though then I did not say it, and now I transcribe it
from your Paper, without any passion,) it was a slander also. 3 He that is too
angry, does not at all (by that act) endeavor to make him happy with whom he
is too angry; at least, not by the importance of that Text, Matthew. 5. 11.
unless the (...) or (...) be added to it; and that you do not in this
pretend I was guilty of: of which yet I confess to have been as guilty in
those words, as of the too much anger. 4 It ought to be proved, that my
calling your words a reproach was without a cause also (which you do not
attempt to do,) or else from thence your conclusion had no right to he induced.

In the next business, concerning my return to the passage read out of the
Catechism in your Carfax-Sermon, you are in great haste, passing through all
the many pages which I had sent you to satisfy you about that matter, till you
meet with a citation of the View of the Directory: and then you think you have
an occasion to leap into a new field, and presently tell me of my fatherly
smile upon that pretty babe; (I beseech you, be more solemn, and impose not
on me either smiles or fondness to any creature of mine; or however, do not
first feign smiles, and then build conclusions upon them) and without more ado
you spend four Sections in asking me questions, and setting me taskes about
that View of the Directory, and several passages in that Author. I cannot
think this is the way of replying; it is certainly at the best, diverting to
another matter.

But Sir, in your speedy passage to this other field you scattered something
which I shall not despise so far as not to take up after you; and tell you, 1
That (whatever you did) you ought to have believed, from the very nature and
importance of the word (...), that the advantage which I made of it was very
proper to be made: and why you tell me you never thought it, and neither
answer my reason, nor give me any to the contrary, I cannot imagine; in your
haste, that unimportant speech of yours might have been omitted as well as any
other. 2 For those speeches of mine (whereon you judge my uncharitableness,
and are pleased to express your sorrow for it,) I must profess you have
wholly mistaken them; and I think that is done by you very unseasonably, at the
very minute when you had said you desire not to mistake my meaning, and are so
kind as to be sorry for me. For let me tell you, that such mistakings are
least incident to them that are such lovers of truth, and so sorry to see
others uncharitable. Now for your mistakes, I conceive they will be clear to
any man that reads the words; I am sure they are to me, that know my sense: I
said, That if I thought you sought for any thing but exceptions, I would add
as to a Scholar and a friend, etc. This no way intimates my looking on you as
no Scholar, or no Friend to me, much less as on my unlearned enemy (which
again you add supra computum;) I beseech you, do so no more, for there is
difference betwixt no friend and an enemy, as betwixt positive hating and
negative not-loving) but rather that I did look on you (and meant to deal
with you) as both a Scholar and a Friend, if that only third thing, my thought
that you did not seek for any thing but exceptions] did not interpose and
hinder me. From this it is clear, that the utmost that could be charged upon
that speech, was my thought that you sought not for any thing but exceptions;
which if I had been guilty of, I do not yet discern it had been
uncharitable, because in all the passages between you and me at this time,
exceptions at that Author, and at my words, have been the whole affair
discernible by me, and so there was no ground to oblige my charity to think
(whatsoever possibility might be, on which to hope) any other of you. But I
shall not need grant you that my former speech intimated this neither; for my
words, taken and joined with what follows, do not so much as intimate that I
did positively think, etc. (for beside that suppositio non ponit, and [if] is
but a mark of a supposition) my doing the contrary to that which would have
regularly been superstructed on that thought, (as it is apparent I do, by my
freely adding my whole sense in the words immediately following) makes that
[if] to be far from an intimation by which you might conclude that I did
think what is there mentioned. He that proposes hypothetically [if a man were
any better then a stone, then he would learn something] and then assume not
that he learnes nothing, but contrariwise within few lines affirms that he
does learn very aptly, does certainly not so much as intimate by that [if]
that he is no better then a stone, but rather clearly affirms the contrary.
Be pleased to apply it to the case in hand, and you will find you were too
hasty to conclude me uncharitable, as before you were too willing to conclude
me angry.

In the next place; whereas you add, That I profess, not to cast up a ball of
new contention, but only am pleased to refer you to another Book, the view
of the Direct. This, I suppose, was a product of your haste also, for the
former part of that speech was by me delivered of one thing, viz. of that
account given you ex abundanti of my sense of that whole matter about Liturgy,
among the Apostles, which therefore was not in any reason to become matter of
new contention, for then there would be no end. But the second thing (my
reference to the View of the Direct.) came in afterward, in my answer to your
first question, and that too with a [besides] a note of an ex abundanti also,
when I had before sufficiently answered your question, at least so answered as
that you reply not to it. What you meant by making this change, and mixing of
things so distant, you will (I hope) upon examination of your self remember.
And I beseech you, for my sake to do it, that there may hereafter be some few
less material passages in your discourse, which may be pas't over by me
without occasion of confuting: For as yet you see there has been nothing of
any deep consideration, and yet nothing that deserved not some animadversion.

Sir, I come now to the new field you desire to lead me to, the several
passages which you now newly mention in the View of the Directory, and the
taskes and questions that you offer me on that new occasion, without any the
least temptation offered by me to bring you to it (for they are not those
places which I had referred you to, to which you make these exceptions,) and
which is most unreasonable, before you had either said one word in answer to
what I had now produced on that matter, or confess your self satisfied with
it: I must leave you again to pass sentence on your self for this behavior;
and to consider, that you have no way encouraged me to undertake all your
commands, or defend at this time every part of every Book which you shall have
leisure to except against. Yet Sir, I am resolved to fail you in nothing that
you can vouchsafe to think reasonable for you to expect, on condition that for
the future you will weigh your scruples better before you throw them into your
Papers.

First you say, the Author of that View lays down this rule, page 2. Nothing
is necessary in the worship of God, but what God has prescribed.] and from
thence demand how many severalls of the Common-Prayer-Booke, that are purposely
left out in the Directory, are prescribed by God?

This will be very admirable to him that looks on that 2 page of that View.
For first, that which you say, that lays down for a rule, is there produced
only as a ground of the adversary with whom the Author of the View, there
disputes, in these plain words [I shall suppose it granted by them with whom I
now dispute, that nothing is necessary, etc.] If I shall labor at any time to
confute or answer you by an argumant or answer ad hominem, by urging somewhat
against you, that you take for a principle, and mention it as a thing which I
suppose granted by you, would you ever think fit to impose this principle of
yours as a rule laid down by me? If you will offer to do this, or now
conceal that you do it, and make advantage of it, there is no disputing with
you. But then secondly, you must take notice what 'twas that the Author of the
View was there a proving, not any necessity of retaining all or any of the
severalls of our Liturgy, but that there was no necessity of abolishing the
Book, etc. That was the easy task he had to prove against them that
affirmed to think it necessary to abolish it: and you must not set that
inanimate book new tasks (as you do me;) or if you do, you must not thus
expect to be obeyed. Now I have gone thus far; I do remember to have heard
that you objected some such thing to the Author of that View (under the title
of the same person who was the Author of the Catechism) in your Carfax-Sermon,
and challenged him to prove that our Liturgy was necessary. If the having said
it there, and having concealed it when you were pleased to give me an account
of that Sermon, caused or occasioned your inserting it in this place, then
though it be now a kind of restitution to give it me here, which then you
were willing to keep from me, (of which nature I have heard of more, which I
shall anon mention to you,) yet shall I not thank you for it, because you do
it under another species; but shall only complain, that both there and here
you were either very unkind in not observing the maine argument of that whole
first part of that Book, or else very unjust, if you did discern it, and were
willing to impose so distant a theme upon that Author.

To your second accusation, I must as briefly say, that that Author abuses
neither Presbyterian nor Independent; only mentions the several influences
which he professes himself forced to believe that they had, the one sort into
the premises, the other into the conclusion; and renders his reasons for it,
because the conclusion is very distant from what the premises would necessarily
infer (viz. a necessity of abolishing our Book, when none of the three
premises ascended near so high) and that which the Presbyterians, as he
conceives, would not affirm, (for sure all of that persuasion do not, or have
not always thought it necessary to abolish set Forms:) and I now demand of
you, whether in this thought he did abuse them; or if not, what else he did
say of them that can deserve that phrase from you. For the arguments proposed
by either] as far as the Book with which he undertook to deal did propose
or intimate them, you know he has answered them; and till those answers are
disproved, they may pass for good ones. For your challenge in the name of your
Reverend Brethren of Scotland, I know not what occasioned it, unless some
citations out of Mr. Knox's Liturgy: and if those were not rightly cited, the
pages are noted in the margent, and will presently enable you to disprove them.

To your third of Mr. Cottons arguments against set Forms, the business of
that View tempted not that Author, nor does our present matter of debate
incline me to think them necessary to be taken in. It is not every man's
work to do every thing at every time: yet perhaps it might be answer
sufficient to you, to tell you that it appears not to me by any thing that
here you say, that you believe set Forms unlawful; and till you profess you
do, you are perhaps as much obliged to answer Mr. Cottons arguments, as that
Author; I am sure, as much as he is obliged to show how many things are
prescribed by God, and rejected by you in the Directory, when he looks not on
the Liturgy which he defends, as any of Gods prescribing, but only presses
the no-necessity (from thence or from other grounds) of abolishing it, and
after proceeds to some other particulars about it; but no where to the divine
prescription of it. If by the answering your Brethren of Scotland, you mean
any arguments of theirs against set Forms (as you seem to do by joining them
with Mr. Cotton) I am persuaded by some part of that View (viz. by the Authors
producing the practice of the Scots for set Forms) that he never dreamt they
had appeared against them, at least so far as to think abolishing necessary
(which was his only point in hand,) and then you must excuse him that he did
not know first, and then not answer them. Yet after all this, what occasion you
had to accuse him of triumphing, or of doing it before victory, (when you bring
no objection against that victory, but only his not-answering Mr. Cotton, etc.
(which were things to which his present task obliged him not, nor so much as
intimated that it did;) and when you object not one word against his answers to
that which he did undertake) I can no more guess, then at the reason why that
Author might not (for some things which he had so particularly defended, and
was never confuted by any) refer you to Mr. Hooker, or why the state of the
question is so varyed, as you say it is.

For the fourth charge and question [How it will be proved necessary, that any
whole set Form of Liturgy should be rigorously imposed, etc.] all that I
shall need to say in vindication of that Author is, that he is never forced by
the task before him to prove any such thing; if it be not necessary to be
abolished, it is enough for his turn against his adversary. And then for your
opinion of the matter or object of my passionate longing, or earnest contention
(who, I thank God, am at this time neither passionate, nor longing, nor
earnest, nor contentious for any thing but that you would permit me to to be
quiet) I shall not need be much concerned, because all that you bring to prove
all this against me, is, that if it be not true, you are much mistaken: in
which you cannot blame me, if I grant the conclusion, because it is easier
far then the other member, which you have left me, [viz. to prove clearly
and undeniably*] which sure is not every man's task, especially when you are
the person I must approve these proofs to. Only I must desire you to
remember, that to make it unlawful to use this set Form, is much more then to
relaxate or forbid a rigorous imposing; and the former of these had been
possible to have been done, without the latter.

5 For my not owning a necessity, that the Liturgy formed in the Apostles times
should be continued in the Church, i. e. (as I there express) that that very
Liturgy should be continued without any alteration or additions, I am content
to join with you; but wish you had not mangled my words; 1 by putting in
alienation and exchange (which is there applied to lands, not to Liturgy; and
only used as a resemblance to show that he that says, [The holy Ghost enabled
a Ministry to form a Liturgy to continue] does not affirm that it was
necessary to continue, any more then he that leaves land to continue to his
heirs, obliges them from ever alienating, etc. which similitude will enforce a
majore, what I conclude from it, the no-necessity of not adding or altering
that Liturgy; but (whatsoever it might do) is not there brought home to that
of alienating, etc. because it is not by him that brought it, applied so far,
(as you will see in the place.) 2 By saying, That I give the present Church
leave to judge of the Liturgy composed in the time of the Apostles, and to make
(as what alterations and additions, which only I did say, so) what alienation
or exchange shall seem fit to the present Church. Wherein you have inserted
and imposed on me almost every word recited particularly [the present Church,
etc.] in stead of [the Church] (which signified quite another matter, viz. the
Church either of those Apostolical men, or those next following them,) and the
Church again not only in order to adding or altering as they should think
fit, but (which differs much from it) of abolishing, as the affair now stands;
or, as you there say, alienating and exchanging: (not to mention, that I no
where have yet given that Church leave indefinitely to judge of the Liturgy,
much less the present Church to judge so far as to alienate.) Certainly a
man may affirm, that the Church next after the Apostles times may have leave
to alter somewhat, (as occasions might alter,) and to add somewhat (as they
thought fit) to the constant Forms used by the Apostles, and so to settle
somewhat in the Church (by that adding) which might supply the place of the
(...) which the Apostles had above the succeeding Church, and yet not give the
present Church of England, or any persons in it, which are not the present
Church in any notion of it, leave to cast out all set Forms, particularly those
which without any alteration, those first ages of the Church had delivered
down to us from the Apostles. So again afterward, you much vary the state,
when you talk of men of ordinary gifts taking upon them to pass a peremptory
sentence for alienation or exchange. Who would think that [the Primitive
Churches thinking fit to add or alter,] should be so improved under your
hands? (I beseech you once more never to alter one word in the period with
which you are displeased; for other men that are in any degree credulous, or
not very wary, may be deceived by your doing so; though you see I am not
altogether so ignorant of my own sense, or of your wont, as to depend on you
without examining.) You see now how little right your conclusion of that fifth
Sect. had to be induced upon any words of mine: and yet let me tell you, that
if it were granted you possible, That a Minister may pray as in a Congregation
without the use of the Liturgy formed in the Apostles times, etc. nay, without
the help of the late Common-prayer-booke, yet will it not follow from thence,
that it is well done to abolish (with this Liturgy) all set Forms, much less
that it was necessary to abolish this.

To your sixth you already discern my answer, that neither I nor the Author of
the View are obliged to show you any Liturgy, and avouch that it is (I suppose
you mean) that formed in the Apostles times without any interpolation, etc.

In your seventh you will not spend time about the miraculous gift of prayer,
(which if you had done, and observed the use that I there made of that doctrine
to the present purpose, it would have stood you in some stead, at least kept
you from being ignorant of my sense, and (the consequent of it) your asking of
more questions,) and I will not spend any more time about your several
questions then to tell you, that all that I now, or the Author of the View
contend for, does not prove us concerned in those new quaeres: for were it
granted, that there were an ordinary gift of prayer, and that to be stirred up
and exercised, that Ministers should study to pray seasonably, (which I suppose
is not to pray ex tempore because you say study) that he that has not ordinary
wisdom to pray as he ought, is not called by Christ to be a Minister of the
Gospel, (and yet sure he that has that ordinary wisdom to pray as he ought
upon premeditation, may pray as he ought not, upon sudden effusion; and the
Liturgy would a little prevent that, and perhaps enable him to pray more to the
edification of the people, then he is able to do, who yet is able in some
degree to pray as he ought) and that it does not follow that the Liturgies
under the name of St. James and St. Mark should be rigorously imposed, nay,
that it were true that there are some endewed with the spirit of prayer, (as
that is by you set, for somewhat more then the ordinary gift, and which it will
be heard for any man to demonstrate to others that he is truly possessed of)
were, I say, all this granted to you, yet sure from all this heap of data (if
they were concessa too) it would not follow that it was necessary, or so much
as tolerably well done, to abolish all set Forms in the public service of
God, which was the prime thing by that View insisted on.

To your eight [about Psalms and use of the Lords prayer,] I was not to be
accused for too slight a view of the Direct. but you for not observing to what
purpose I now mentioned these. It was to show the use of set Forms in the
Apostles times, and then 1 You must mark, that the using of some set Psalms
by all the people as a part of prayer or thanksgiving, differs somewhat from
reading them as any other piece of Scripture; and let me tell you by the way,
that either the singing of them, or the manner of reading them alternatim, is a
mark (though not inseparable) of that difference. 2 That the recommending the
Lords Prayer is not so much as the Apostles constant using it in their service,
(especially of the Eucharist) nor proportionable to our Saviors [When you
pray, say, Our Father,] and yet I suppose you will not doubt to observe with
me, that there are many that acknowledge it recommended in the Directory, that
constantly abstain from using it in their Pulpits. 3 That I conceive my self
to have demonstrated more then the use of Psalms and the Lords Prayer (if by
demonstrating you mean proving by the authority of Witnesses fide digni,
(which is the highest way of demonstration, that matters of fact are capable
of.) 4 That [for your rule of holding forth such things as are of divine
institution in every ordinance, and setting forth other things according to the
rules of Christian Prudence agreeable to the general rules of the Word of God;
this is not the first time you have been told, that it is an excellent rule,
and that it is far from concluding any necessity of abolishing all set
Forms; or even all or any part of our present Liturgy. As for the cause I have
of complaining of discord and confusion in your public Worship, I am not
engaged by any thing I have said to give you any answer; having not ventured on
such a degree of boldness, to speak so grossly either against the general
use of the Directory, or against any of your particular exercises of your
gifts. Lastly, I acknowledge I did tell you, that we may pray as we ought
without the very Liturgy formed in the Apostles times, and so nothing hinders
but that I may go on also to the next particular; which you will give me
leave to have called the then sadder part of my task, because it was then the
longest, not because it had any thing else beside the length, and other things
of that nature, (supposing still that you mean not any solid exception, or any
strength of argument to be repelled) which might make it either task, or sad
to me. In that I shall not find any fault that the business of the Trinity
is at length dismiss't, but suppose that you have received satisfaction in that
point. Only it had not been any great matter if you had vouchsafed to tell me
you were so satisfied. But I must not expect those acts of grace from you. I
shall therefore follow as you lead me. And 1 Sir, concerning the sad story,
(as you please to call it) I am much tempted to wonder (but that I have for
some time a little resolved to give over that innocent quality, and learn with
Numicius that prope rem unam, Nil admirari) that it should produce but one
thing in you, and that should be gladness. For though the gladness, as you
have fastened it, I shall not think a fault in you, but be also glad with you,
that I have disabused one offender, (whose sin no man but you, and his own
soul was guilty of;) yet that it should not be matter of some sorrow or regret
to you, to have been the occasion of that offense in him, (which is certainly
to scandalize your weak brother and leave it still possible for many other,
through that scandal to stumble and fall in like manner;) this must be matter
of wonder and admiration to me, but withal of advertisement what I am to
expect from you by way of return to any act of Christian admonition, and for
that you shall give me leave to be heartily sorry, though you will not.

For you command, [That I should venture your arguments to any Reader, etc.] I
profess my self ready to obey you: and therefore shall now take boldness to
tell you, that I do expect from you, according to the purport of this speech
of yours, that you will give your consent that this whole matter be referred to
others judgment; and to that end, that all that has thus past between us be
straightway Printed; and I will then desire no further satisfaction for the
injury which I conceive my self to have received from you. As for the witness
you desire the matter shall depend on, viz. that Book as it was printed at
Oxford, I shall be as ready as you to stand to it, and by that to have it
tried, whether the Author of that Catechism in that first edition gave any
Christian man any degree of liberty (more then you your self confess is his
due) of swearing. This way of trial I shall never refuse, but profess to you
(what before I told you) that the advertising you of the addition in the last
edition was perfectly ex abundanti, and that the Author was justified
sufficiently from the main part of that charge (viz. giving youth liberty to
swear) without it. And therefore by the way let me tell you, that when that
Author had in the simplicity of his heart put in those words of the primary
intention to prevent all mistake in the most ignorant, (not questioning but
that all ordinarily learned or intelligent would understand without it,) for
you to fasten peculiarly upon that one supernumerary answer of mine, and to
make such shows of triumph, and impute clancular dealing to that Author, and a
great deal more, (on so no manner of grounds or probabilities, when all is
laid together) is that, which you ought to lay to your heart, though you will
not the sad Story. What you add again to the same purpose, after so full an
answer, is like all the rest; and as I must not think that strange neither, so
I despair that my repeating my former answers will provoke or invite any
better dealing from you.

In your next Section beginning with, [Sir, your first answer, etc.] you have,
I conceive, one new mistake. For by your [mark that] twice repeated, I suppose
you would have it marked that that Cat. affirms no more to be forbidden by the
third Commandment, then the nonperformance of promissory oaths. If you mean
thus, you are much mistaken. All that is toward that sense is only this, that
the second part of the words cited by Christ, [Thou shall pay unto the Lord thy
vows,] explaines the meaning of the third Commandment to be against perjury
or nonperformance of promissory oaths. Do you now please to mark, [against
perjury] not denying but that the falsenesse of assertory oaths, which is also
perjury, is there meant by the words of the third Commandment; but giving the
nonperformance of promissory oaths, a special right to the negative part of
that Commandment, as it is there looked on by Christ. And I beseech you
consider, and pass your conjecture, what did, or could move that Author to
add that distinct mention of promissory oaths in that place, but those words
which there Christ recites, [Thou shall pay, etc.] and do you tell me, if they
do not peculiarly (nay, only belong to promissory, (for sure assertory oaths
are not capable of being thus paid) and if the Author thus strictly desired to
follow Christ's method, ought this to be imputed to him? Certainly not, when
he never made question but that assertory oaths were meant also by the third
Commandment, and distinctly affirmed that perjury (which sure contains that)
was there forbidden. The considering of this might rather have suggested to you
this truth, that that Author was careful to make it his first task, or part
of his method, to weigh the literal importance of each part of the Text, and
gain as much from each part, against the sin, as he was sure it would
necessarily import, and then to build upon it, what by reduction, (i. e. by any
thing but the primary literal importance) what by Christ's superadditions, i.
e. by the words induced with a [But I say unto you] whether they note new
precepts, or only new light) would be as firmly superstructed. And your want
of observing this method, this design of that Author, is the likelist thing,
that in charity I can pitch on for the occasion of your mistake in any part of
this matter; though for your affirming that this Catechism gave any Christian
liberty of swearing, I cannot be just if I speak so favorably. To this, which
I conceived a new mistake in you, I must add another old one in that Section,
viz. that you will still talk of my several Editions, (and not mean that last
where the additions are set;) when you have been so often assured of this truth
(of which I can produce the confirmation of several oaths) that I never had
the least knowledge of, or gave consent to any other but the first Oxford
printing of those few Copies, and those last additions.

For the second thing, which is so clear to you, 'twill be acknowledged far
from being so, if I again tell you that the meaning of those words of the
second question, [Whether the third Commandment is no more, etc.] is most
precisely this, whether the literal importance, (or if you will, the literal
meaning) of the third Commandment be no more, etc. and that will well agree
with the first question, what is the meaning of the old Commandment, (viz. as
it is delivered by Christ in these words (...), and the consequents out of other
places, Thou shall perform, etc.) that is again the literal meaning, or the
necessary importance of the words produced by Christ, agreeable to which is the
answer, that it is set to express it to be, as literally it sounds, against
perjury, etc.

3 It Is not very reasonable for you to overruled all others, by saying the
question is not, when I have as much reason to know as you, (being so well
known to him that set the question) and affirm it is, or (because with you the
intention of a phrase is a hard expression) to conclude from thence, that it
must be explained by the intention of the Lawgiver, whereas I again tell you
that the literal notation of the phrase is the thing that was meant by it, and
not the intention (I mean, the total full intention) of the Lawgiver.

4 For the question of what is primary and secondary in Gods intention, [which
you would not have disputed,] that you ought to have spared also: for again I
say, it is about the primary or secondary notation of the phrase. But you by
drawing in (before) the intention of the Lawgiver, found it an easy change
into the intention of God; but neither of those is the thing here spoken of.

5 I conceive, Christ's rendering the third Commandment by (...), is, as I was
then confident, (beside others) a sufficient proof that that is the primary
intention of the phrase: and I have reason to continue in that opinion, because
you have not dropped any word of answer to it, in all your tale of rejoynders.

6 For the doubtful [perhaps,] if I had reason to blot it out, you need not
challenge me for doing what was rational: the truth is, I was not confident
that every body was persuaded or could be convinced, that all foolish, wanton
using of Gods name (if without any kind of swearing) was forbidden in that
Commandment, which only speaks of taking, or lifting up Gods name, which
with the Hebrews signifies swearing, and (if wisemen may be believed) nothing
else: and therefore I was (according to my judgment) more willing to put in
[perhaps,] then to venture a quarrel with any body in that matter; but
afterward, conceiving (reduction) would bear it, and willing to be as strict
in this matter as I could possibly any way justify (God knows, far from any
thought of being accused for giving liberty of swearing) I put in (idle) in
stead of the word (perhaps:) and so you have, you see, the fate of shrifting
me. I am not permitted to keep any thing from you; and yet desire not to
burden you with a secret, or to deliver this my confession under the restraint
of any seal to you.

7 I have given you grounds to discern that it is not so sure that foolish and
wanton using of Gods name is forbidden by that Commandment (in case that
foolish using it be without oaths) as profane or blasphemous using it; the
former of which you were told, I conceived to belong to oaths, and those
unlawful oaths, (and when not to such oaths, then to something else which was
equivalent to them) as [to profane,] signifies to use that commonly or
unworthily, which is only to be used in holy matters, and such are oaths
resolved to be, and therefore called sacramenta; and the using them in common
talk, or to any but that sacred use, is to profane them; and so you see, that
was a causeless exception also. For though some foolish and wanton using of
Gods name may be profaning it, i.e. profaning Gods name, or using it less
solemnly, yet is it not the profaning of a sacramentum or oath, which sure is
greater then the former.

8 Your conclusion, truly, is not true; all that can be justly concluded of
me from those alterations, is this, that I began to conceive that what I had
said against assertory oaths, might be made more clear to all; though 'twere
to me, that knew my own sense, said clearly enough before; and I ought to be
thanked for this care, (especially by you, if to you it was not clear) and not
so often to be reproacht for it. And I will once more profess, that to my best
remembrance I made no one alteration in that Book, but only on design to
explain, not to alter or retract any thing; or to alter the words that they
might more fully speak my sense. I wish there were any thing would content you,
but speaking against my conscience; I would not much care then, if you still
called it recantation.

9 You still mistake [foolish and wanton using of Gods name] for swearing: (and
I will be so charitable to you, as to think this is it makes you so hard to
be satisfied in this matter.) But I have often told yon, Gods name may be used
without swearing, and that (not using, but) taking or lifting up his name
signifies that. And then why should the [perhaps] which is not affixt to
swearing, but to something else, contribute any thing toward the swearers
boldness? I beseech you discern what is so manifest and so often repeated to
you. The words there are, Profane etc. is surely there forbidden] and that, I
have often showed you, contains every unholy, unlawful oath under it. For your
dislike of my instance of fornication in the seventh Commandment, there is no
remedy; you will not like any thing that comes from me; and yet it is sure
enough, adultery cannot signify fornication in the primary sense, or save by
reduction; and besides, if to the particular of fornication you had a propriety
of dislike, the other instance of killing would serve the turn, and that you
might possibly have either liked or confuted also.

Your 10 is but a recitation of what was often said before, particularly in the
first, and second, and ninth, and there you will find it answered.

Your 11 is no fair passage, for though the proving perjury to be forbidden
in the third Commandment, be the proving a thing that you never denied, yet
the inference of the argument there used being this, that to take Gods name in
vain is no more in the prime sense, or propriety of speech, then to forswear,
that you know was the only thing denied by you, and therefore the argument in
any reason ought to have been taken notice of.

In the 12 I pray be not too confident that other men are mistaken; it is in
this more possible that you may be. For when the incredulity of another man is
the only thing that calls for my oath from me in a matter which is not materia
legitima juramenti, there the Devil having to do in the incredulousnesse, the
oath may be said to come from the Devil also.

13 My honor will sufficiently be provided for in this particular also, after
all your scoffs; for which soever the superaddition is, of new precept, or of
new light, the super-addition i. e. the thing thus inferred by Christ [But I
say unto you] or Christ superadding these words, Swear not at all (either of
which is a frequent ordinary meaning of the word superaddition) is a command of
Christ without question. And therefore your simile of the Tridentine Canons
must lie upon your hands: for this is not a place for you to put it off upon
your Reader, or your servant (that takes all this pains and drudgery for you,
for no other pay but of reproachful simile's) the Author of the Catechism.

But, O, that this so slight an occasion should, in the midst of another
engagement, give you hint or excuse to break out from hence into that other
large field concerning that whole matter of Christ's adding to the Law! I wish
you could have satisfied your self with 13 degrees of confutation (which sure
you would have done, if any one of them had been solid, and if number had not
been necessary to supply for weight) and not have thought it necessary thus to
expatiate. But, Sir, I must not neglect you, or let you pass unattended in any
your most casual notions; But clearly tell you to that whole matter, that I do
produce the authorities of, and reasons out of the Fathers (and confess my
self so weak as to be inclined, if not convinced by them) to confirm Christ
to have improved the Law; and shall not count this to be imitating a Father in
a dangerous expression, but a full current of Fathers for many years, in a
clear pronouncing. And whenever I shall understand that those testimonies,
or those reasons may be likely to persuade with you, I shall (out of a very
ill topicall memory, being far distant from my Books) be ready to produce
you some of them. But then thongh in the Catechism this be done, yet it is as
clearly there said that no man shall be contended with in this matter (a
little practice of piety with peace, being valuable above a great deal of this
kind of disputing) so he acknowledge that Christ brought more light, and
clearly convinced men of the unlawfulness of some things, which by nature or
Moses men had not been convinced to be unlawful. Thus much for the Doctrine
once again. As for the superstructure that the Author meant to lay upon it, I
shall satisfy your importunity, if it be but to get you into ordinary charity
with him. It Is plainly and briefly this; A serious and hearty desire that the
utmost that Christ's words in that Sermon can safely and properly extend to, may
be now thought by men the duty of every Christian; and that it may not either
be put off (as a counsel of perfection, or a precept for Clergymen only,
under the style of Disciples) or be brought down again to the old Law of
Moses, or the fundamental of nature, (and being then either not conceived, or
not found to be so severely prescribed there, be thought fit to be removed
from the Christians shoulders) or else be taken with some (...), which by
reconciling it with the latitude thought to be allowed under Moses, may take it
off from all strictness, and so from that height which I conceive now to be
required, and which I desired very earnestly that all men would look on as
their necessary duty, and so try by Gods help (and the force of the old
pythagorean hemistichium (...)) whether they might not possibly be able to
perform it. This was the utmost of the superstructure by that Author designed
or thought on, and that made me so wonder (from knowledge of my own sense, and
conscience of my innocent intentions) that any man should say, That this
Doctrine could destroy the sum and substance of the Gospel; and yet I
confess, I have heard of one other man that has said that, and perhaps from
him you may remember it, and not have pondered the truth of it. And so by my
honest saying, which you call for, you see what spirit of jealousy possessed
you, when you fancied such an aereall superstructure for me, which I profess
never to have dreamt of, and to wonder at the sharpness of your invention,
that could be so prompt for me, I plainly confess, That Christ and his
merits is the only cause on which I depend, and expect to be justified,
without the righteousness of the Law; and the most obedient submission to his
most elevated precepts can no more contribute toward justifying me then the
like obedience to the law of nature of Moses would have done, if Christ were
not conceived to have heightened that Law. When we have done the highest that
Christ requires of us, we are but unprofitable servants; and by our new
obedience have been far from doing more then was required of us, or making
expiation thereby for that which we have not done.

In your third Section of that matter, I grant that which you would infer
from page 94. that the Author there produces arguments to confirm that part of
the opinion for new precepts, and therefore I shall spare reviewing your
proofs that he does so: but in stead of it, tell you, that after he has
confirmed it both by a remarkable Scripture, and the reasons given for it by
the Fathers, (which concludes their opinion also) yet he confesses to be
content with the acknowledgement of more light; and that he will not contend
with any that is contrary minded, so he will bring the Jews up to us, and not
us down to the Jews. Which that it is the express doctrine of that Book, you
have often enough been admonished, and can never persuade any man to the
contrary, that shall after the places cited by you, have patience to proceed to
the rest of that matter.

But now Sir, you begin again, and would seem to say somewhat against that
doctrine;

As 1 that there was Gospel under the Law, and the Spirit, etc. and diverse
Jews penitent believers, and therefore under the second Covenant. Sir, all
this is granted most willingly, and yet Christ's coming in the flesh did bring
more light, more plentiful effusions of the Spirit, and so might possibly be
allowed to give new precepts also.

2 For the promises, how plain they were to the Jews, needed not to be
disputed by him who speaks only of precepts (save only as the height or
plainness of the promises is, amongst other arguments, apt to make higher
precepts more seasonable:) and yet that the promises might be cleared by
Christ, and made more universally known, you will hardly deny or disprove
also. For though they were so plain that they saw them, yet 'twas afar off,
in your own citation of Hebrews 11, and they that were present to Christ,
(who was one of the promises) might sure have a clearer sight of them.

The same will be answer to your third argument, for that concerns the
promises again: and in that respect it is sufficient to add, that the promises
were they never so high before, were now sure clearer under Christ; and that is
all that is affirmed by that Author, and will suffice to infer his concluded
obligation to higher obedience.

And so likewise the fourth will be answered, concerning the Ceremonies, which
I acknowledge to have had some good in them, in order to Christ whom they
prefigured; but yet many of them had none in themselves, I am sure none when
Christ is come, and has removed the obligation of them, and so may be allowed
to have added some new precepts in lieu of them: and I am as sure they have not
so much of goodness or easiness, the (...) or (...), as now is in the very
highest and strictest precepts that are given us under Christ, and therefore
there is nothing like unreasonable in the change.

In your fifth, sure it is not so strange that I should mention the pardoning of
sin now under Christ; for though that was to be had for the penitent
believer under the time of the Law of Moses, yet was it 1. Not by the power or
purport of the Law, but only by Christ; And 2 'twas not at all to be had in
the state of nature, or first Covenant, which required unsinning obedience; and
to the Law of nature that law of Christ was said to super-add, as well as to
the Law of Moses; and therefore that particular in the 95 page, was not
impertinent neither, or capable of your sad wonder. But how I am obliged to
think your question [Whether there is any venial sin?] tolerably pertinent,
or fit to expect any return from me at this time, I cannot guess, yet shall
(...), and answer that also; that though no sin have any title to pardon
under the first Covenant, yet under or by the purport of the second, many
sins not gotten out of infirmities, etc. shall be washed in Christ's blood,
and so be actually pardoned, (which is more then venial or pardonable in that
sense) whereas many other shall never be capable of that washing, or that
pardon, without particular forsaking, but bring them that lie under them
(impenitent unbeleevers) into condemnation. This were abundantly enough,
considering the call I have to the answering of that question at this time. Yet
to demonstrate to you that I am not over shy of answering you a question
(though it be of some nicety) when you think fit to ask it me, I will go a
little farther to serve you, and give you the state of this question (if you
please, by way of supposition at large) in such a manner possibily that no
party will find much to object to it. Thus;

What is the meaning of this ordinary question, [an aliquod peccatum sit sua
natura veniale?] will appear by the answer that must be given (if it be
satisfactory) to this argument, which I shall imagine produced against it; [No
sin is in its own nature mortal;] for that sin should be the cause of
damning any, or that punishment eternal should be due to sin, is but an
accident that the Law or Covenant of God brought in, either to Adam, Quo die
comeder is morte morieris, or after, Behold I set before you life and death,
etc. for sure had it not been for that Law of prohibition (that Covenant with
that penalty, on breach of conditions) sin had never damned any one; and
therefore those irrational creatures to whom no such Law is made, and Covenant
given, though they should be supposed to sin against the Law of their
creation, they shall not be punished eternally for that. Now it is an old rule
in Logic, that Accident advenit enti in actu existenti, and is not de natura
subjecti, though sometimes so ingraffed into it, that it becomes inseparable
from it, therefore this [being mortal or damning] being an accident that came
in by Gods Covenant or Law, cannot be of the nature of sin, what ever that
sin be: For if it were so, then God who cannot make contradictions true, nor
consequently take away the nature of the thing and preserve the thing, could
not take away the damningnesse of sin from sin (any more then quantity from
a body) manente peccato realiter, which yet we know God can do, and
ordinarily does, by pardoning of sin: for however it may be said by way of
answer to that part of the Argument, that Christ suffered and satisfied for
sin, or else God could not pardon any, (not to dispute the truth of that,
whether he could or no) it still remains that the damningnesse of sin is then
taken from sin, by what means it now matters not.

This is the Argument I meant to suppose made against that plain granted
truth; and to this argument, he that had proposed the maine question, and held
it negative, if he will ever answer, must say that the Law and Covenant of God
(whether that signify the eternal Law, or even the eternal will of God, who
wills holiness as he is God, or in any other motion of Law) is a maine
ingredient in the constituting of sin, the very formalis ratio, that makes that
which is of its self materially an act, to become formaliter a sinful act;
that makes the killing of a man, which is materially murder, to be also
formally the sin of murder; and therefore if by the Law or Covenant of God all
sin be made mortal, then may it truly be said in this other notion or
respect, or for this reason, that all sin is so of its own nature.

This answer must be acknowledged to be pertinent and satisfactory, and so
any Protestant will receive it: and in stead of excepting against it, I desire
to strike in and close with both Disputer and Answerer, and infer that then
it seems this is resolved on by that party that holds all sins in their own
nature mortal, that that is all one with this other proposition [All sins
which are by the Law prohibited under pain of damnation, are by that Law
damning sins, and noneveniall;] this being so, I ask the opposite party,
that disputed even now, what he thinks of this proposition [All sins which by
the Law, or first Covenant were prohibited under pain of damnation, are by the
tenure of that Law all damning sins, none veniall] I am verily persuaded he
will consent to it too. And having done so, what hinders now but that this
controversy may be accommodated between disputers, being once rightly
explained and understood? For that under the Law, or first Covenant every the
least sin was sufficient to forbid a man's justification, and consequently to
damn, is apparently the words of Scripture, Gal. 3. 9. Cursed is every one
that continues not in all. As for the Gospel, or state of Christianity, or
second Covenant, stricken with us in Christ, we know there is pardon for sin
by the very tenure of the Covenant, and every sin is not now such, as that it
shall either damn hereafter, or exclude every one that commits it from the
present favor of God, but may be competible with a justified estate, and a
hope of heaven. Gospel-obedience is not perfect, exact, without sinning at all,
but only faithful, sincere, impartial, without hypocrisy, or indulgence in
any known sin; not the righteousness of him that never sinned, but of him that
believes on Christ, that repents and amendeth his life, that of the new
creature, [Hee that confesses and forsakes shall have mercy] and the like.
This was so far seen and acknowledged by some Papists of the Learneder sort,
Tertia part de vit. spirit. Sect. 1.
Gerson, Opusc. tr. 3. c. 10.
Almain, and Refut. 32. ^tio. Luther.
Io. Ep. Roffensis, that they have left their opinion in those words to which
no moderate Protestant will refuse to subscribe. The two former thus, Peccatum
mortale and veniale in esse tali non distinguuntur intrinsece, and
essentialiter, sed solum per respectum ad divinam gratiam que peccatum istud
imputat etc. The third, Peccatum veniale solum ex Dei misericordia veniale est.
I have now need to add no more but this, that if this do not prove acceptable
to you, I have lost my labor, especially if it should be matter of any new
contention, thus to have been willing to pacify contenders.

As for your sixth of the [glimmerings] and the [perhaps] it was a little
unlucky, not only because it is said of Christ in Scripture, in terminis, that
he was the dayspring to give light to them which sit in darkness, which is
certainly as much as the [glimmerings] or the [perhaps] can be imagined to
import, but also, because those glimmerings are mentioned by that Author
clearly in order to the commands in that place (as appears by the question
that induced that answer) and you talk of the discovering of Christ to all the
elect for their everlasting salvation, which seems to me still to respect the
promises; or if it do also refer to the commands sufficiently discovered
under the Law, etc. yet that is nothing against our doctrine, which supposes
the former light (for precepts) sufficient pro statu, and that men were then
saved non obstante this want of greater light; and only require higher
obediences now from those that are allowed higher light.

To your seventh, which again breaks asunder into three under-charges or
examinations, there will be little scruple to tell you, that though the things
you mention were required of the Jews sub periculo animae, Viz. belief,
mortifying lusts, etc.) yet some other things, viz. some of the things proposed
by Job in his speeches to his friends, by David in his Psalms, especially by
the Wiseman in his Proverbs, etc. might be but glimmerings of the
Gospel-precepts, (...) to this (...), and being 1 Not so strictly and
manifestly required of all as the commands of the Decalogue, etc. 2 Not
delivered by these as Lawgivers, but as wise men. And 3 being not by way of
particular precept proposed to all, they might then not oblige them (to whom
they were not manifest, or not delivered sub praecepto) under those hazards
under which now the knowledge of our Fathers will by Christ involves us.
Besides, I suppose it is no news to you, that there were voluntary oblations
among the Jews in Moses his time, and many acts of strictness after, wherein
they that obliged all men to perform them, were said to dogmatize: and though
for so doing the Pharisees (that did impose them as necessary) were condemned,
yet the (...) or Asidaei, that practiced them, and yet not conceived them
necessary, and so never so imposed them on others, were never condemned, but
thought fit to be commended and rewarded: and though the Jews were encouraged
to the performance of these (...) or (...), yet is nothing of the doctrine of
super-erogation inferred by this neither. But it is now impertinent to enlarge
on this subject; when all other difficulties that now depend are satisfied. I
may chance be able to give you a justifiable account of that also. And so how
far soever the Author of the Cat. contended for new precepts, yet having
expressed what he would be content with in that matter by way of composition,
rather then contend, and saying the very words that I have in that matter
transcribed thence, I must be no more said to recant this second time then
that Author did even at the first edition. Who by that one willingness to live
peaceably with you and all men, must it seems, be condemned to that reproach of
having recanted; and be triumphed over, only because he would not quarrel with
every man that is contentious.

And to go on with you, what if counsels give new light? may not commands do
so too? or must I be reprehended because I am no Papist? I mean, because I
conceive these in St. Matthew to be no counsels, but precepts? I hope, that
which I have said will sufficiently rescue me from any more of your jealousies
concerning my weighty superstructures. I have told you my whole heart; you need
not use any optic glass of your own providing to see that which is so naked,
and (...) before you.

For the second page of your sixth leaf, where you are pleased to mention the
[All that you desire] it is too wanton for me to return any thing to it; I
have no leisure to be playsome, or to consider how poor you are, or how the
Critiques have offended you, or what lower heaven they converse in. Only I
hope, I shall not now at last be condemned for an Antinomian, (because I only
think the whole Law of the Jews does not now oblige us) much less to go
beyond them, to be a hyper-Antinomian, for no more then these two plain
assertions, that Christ has rid us from the sad yoke of ceremonies Judaicall,
and will now accept of sincere, though it be not unsinning obedience. If this
Divinity will not please you in any measure, I shall never approve my self to
you; but yet hope that you do not think in earnest that the Antinomians
error is that Christ added higher precepts, or by more light increased the
obligation to obedience above that which the Law required. I suppose you meant
that name only as a mormo to fright me; not that now, because I am no
Socinian, I must be an Antinomian presently.

After the setting down the [All that you desire] and that closed as I
conceived with a [finally] it seems you have two desires more (and one of them
has many more in it also:) and when your desires do so increase upon you, I
can scarce hope to give you satisfaction; and therefore shall desire to be
excused, if I proceed not to them, because some parts of those desires I cannot
imagine how I am obliged to answer at all, (as to tell you what grace was
brought into the world by the Law of Moses, when I make no doubt to acknowledge
that grace came by Christ, and* as I remember 'twas you (not I) that seemed to
say the contrary, in the top of the second page of your fifth leaf of this
last return, [The Spirit was administered, etc. during the time of legal
administrations] which yet I would not there quarrel with neither, but think
them reconcilable by a commodious interpretation) and other parts are utterly
impertinent to any part of our point in hand; as that, Of all mankind's being
under the second Covenant, Of Christ's satisfying for all, and so of pardon and
revelation of the Law of faith to all, (which if it were the thing which
brought in all the former, will be easily satisfied, by saying, that what was
before so revealed sufficiently pro statu, was not yet so fully and clearly as
now by the coming of Christ) and so that also of the Aaronicall Priesthood,
wherein yet I perceive you conclude strangely against that Author. For sure he
can very well think (what he does) that Christ can satisfy for sins,
notwithstanding that the exercise of his Aaronicall Priesthood consists in his
sacrifice. For though that sacrifice be a ceremony of his consecration to his
Melchisedechian Priesthood in one respect, yet as a sacrifice (not in the
shadow, but) of the substance, as a sacrifice not of the bullock or goat, which
indeed can make but a typical satisfaction, but of the Lamb and eternal
Son of God, this sacrifice may well expiate and satisfy, and so did indeed.
And if you can get the Socinians to affirm this also, I shall never quarrel
with you, I should be glad you could thus make them your converts. But sure
Smalciu's [Non est dissimulandum nos non negare Christi mortem ad ejus
sacrificium pertinere] will not come home to it: For they can say this
frequently, and yet not think that any satisfaction for sin was made by any
sacrifice of Christ; not that that sacrifice consisted in Christ's death, or was
offered by his dying; but express the meaning of those words sufficiently,
that the death of Christ did only pertinere to that sacrifice which was not
offered up in his death. Which you see is not my sense but that the death it
self was a sacrifice, and in it satisfaction made for sin by the sacrificer.
I was afraid a word would not be enough to every wise man, and therefore I
have been forced to add this also.

As for your (...) of your conquests, you have liberty to use it (...), and
triumph as much as you please. For though the [perhaps foolish wanton using of
Gods name] (which is not always in oaths) would not restrain from foolish
wanton swearing, (and yet me thinks a majori it might) yet sure the [sure all
profane, etc.] and the exposition of Christ's (...), may be allowed to do it;
and so all had been safe, and to that matter altogether as clear, if the
[perhaps] had never been blotted out. 2 Christ's new precepts will do it,
(whether they signify superaddition of more precept, or more light, which
inferres increase of obligation) and if they would not, I should not by that
be obliged to rest satisfied without them. However, you see I do not rest so
satisfied, but only tell you what you are to understand by them, and that just
agreeably (or in terminis the same) to what had been said before in that
Catechism. 3 For [Christs not forbidding swearing it selfe] you will give me
leave to have been long since of that opinion with you, meaning by it, that
swearing for Gods glory or the public good is not forbidden by Christ: and
therefore sure the meaning of the answer [A total universal prohibition of
swearing it selfe] was something else, viz. of swearing at all by the name of
any other beside God, which formerly you might have believed, if you had
pleased, But I am afraid Sir, you are fallen upon some new notion of [the sin
of dogmatizing.] For to the notion that I always have had of it (viz. teaching
for doctrines or necessary duties the Traditions of men, or imposing things as
doctrines of God, which are not such) it is impossible your words can belong.
Do not you mean by the sin of dogmatizing [transire in dogmata vel
sententias aliorum?] I suppose you do, by what follows, of my condescending too
passively to take up both opinions. This may possibly be a slip in you; I
shall not upbraid you with it. By what has now twice or thrice been said, your
new argument is superseded; and I am for all my assent to the answer in the
Catechism, verily persuaded that forswearing my self for the publque good
were a far greater sin then swearing truly in order to that end. But that
that Author must still be forced to have contradicted himself, is very hard,
when the clear account of his not having done so has so often been given, and
cannot yet get a little audience from you. I would, you would be but so well
natured as to tell me the meaning of your sic notus Ulysses? and what the
design is that you could so easily guess at; This plain dealing would
deserve far more thanks (but indeed not set me out for so dangerous an
undermining designer) then your suspicious speakings, and then affected
reservation. Speak out the deepest of your heart; 'twill be as seasonable,
and as just, I suppose, and in all reason as well taken as your question about
the weighty superstructure, or your collections in either Sermon.

For your stumbling at my 12 page about reduction, I am sorry, and shall labor
to keep you from falling down right. By telling you, 1 That sins forbidden
by the same authority, may yet more or less clearly be forbidden by that
authority, and under the second of those (viz. those that are less clearly
forbidden) that of reduction may come. 2 That the less the clearenesse of
forbidding is, the less deep is the obligation to them to whom they are (and
it is not their fault that they are) less clear: yet of things forbidden by
reduction, some are much more clearly forbidden then others; and so
fornication, then some other sins forbidden by that Commandment: and I
suppose you, to whom it is as clear that fornication is there forbidden as
adultery, are as deeply obliged to abstain from one as other; But then still
in other particulars, which are not by the light of the words, nor by any other
means made thus equally clear to some men, to them they are not equally or so
deeply obliging.

Then for your [moreover] about Christ's forbidding swearing by any creature,
(which if you had vouchsafed to have taken notice of, you might have left out
much that went before) you will sufficiently be answered: 1 That swearing by
any creature will hardly be thought to be forbidden by the Command against
taking the name of the Lord in vain, (because he that swears by the creature
does not directly any such thing) but might perhaps be better reduced to the
former Commandments of not worshipping the creature. 2 I do not believe that
any command under the Law of nature, or of the Jews, will be produced so
clear, or be acknowledged so convincing to those that lived before the Law,
or to the Jews, against swearing by some creature, that Joseph which is brought
in frequently in the story swearing by the life of Pharaoh, without any mark
of sin on that form of speech, shall be resolved to have sinned against
conscience in it. And therefore it may at least be granted, that this was of
that nature that it might be matter of Christ's [(...)] and of the Fathers
(...). And therefore, 4 I must willingly acknowledge, what the Author does,
that a Christian may in no case swear by the creature, and have told you that
that was the meaning of that Authors phrase of total universal prohibition,
answerable verbatim to Christ (...).

You are next pleased to proceed to the strife about the word (...), and 1 to
change Pagnin or Mercer for Grotius, and tell me that he will assure me that
(...) proprie significat vanum. Where he so says, you tell me not, nor will
I deny it, because I know not what in that place he may mean by proprie: but
yet I must tell you, that it was a little unlucky, that I should examine but one
Author of your citing; and that should prove so contrary. For I have looked on
that Commandment in Grotius his Notes on Ex. 20. 7. and there thus you may
read, In vanum] i. e. falso. Non peierabis. Idem n. e. (...) and (...) ut in
praecepto nono apparet, collato hoc Exodi capite cum altero Deuteronomii, ubi
Graeci ponunt utroque loco (...). This is as plain a testimony as you could
have suggested for my turn; and I hope you will now pardon me, if I abstain
from examining the rest of your citations, being so sure that the granting them
all will not prove that Christ said any thing which I may be ashamed to say
after him, when he rendered the third Commandment (...), and when I
acknowledge vain swearing by Gods name forbidden by that Commandment, and
that (...) as it is sometimes rendered falsum (as by the Targum, Ex. 21. 1. it is
paraphrased by (...) mendacii, and by our English rendered false, and so in
other places) so it is often rendered vain also; which is the utmost can be
proved by them. Whereas indeed the word, even when it signifies vain, has a
peculiar notation of vanity proper to this matter, viz. of a fair empty show,
when in words I seem to oblige my self, but really do not; which fault is
observable in some kinds of swearing, which are therefore clearly forbidden in
that Commandment.

As for any scorn and indignation expressed by me about this matter in my last,
though I wondered to see it objected, yet because my memory was frail, I looked
over those papers (which truly I keep for the like purposes, to decide such
differences, that may be incident) and there can I not find one word that looks
that way, or that I can imagine could bear that accusation.

For the sense of [did in effect mean it] I shall satisfy you; it was that I
did mean that which is in effect all one with that other phrase [were
forbidden.] This you are so kind to let pass, and with it some few sides
more, which I may therefore suppose had no greater difficulties in them, but am
far from taking it ill that you let them pass, but shall assure you that you
might as well have past by that also of: (...) and (...), which by saying you
understand, and by forgiving me, I suppose you think meant by me against
your self, to fasten some strange ill character upon you. This I suppose you
did by occasion of the meaning of those two words, which are not only titles
of the Devil, but have a significancy proper to them; the one to express a
calumniator, the other a plaintiff or adversary (...), The former (I confess)
of these, you might with some reason think I might apply to you, and persuade
your self that I can not but believe you to have been guilty of calumniating
me, i. e. accusing me falsely. But truly Sir, whatsoever I might think in
that matter, I never meant to say any such thing to you, nor to manage a
discourse (designed to a better end) with any passion or asperity, though it
were in saying of truth only. And therefore let me assure you, I was far
from meaning or saying any such thing of you; and was so little guilty in my
own conscience, that when I found it in your paper, I was a little troubled,
till I had somewhat satisfied my self with confidering that you might possibly
be mistaken, and then by looking on the place in my Papers where I find the
passage most clear from looking toward you. The truth is, I was a speaking of
the hurt that might come by teaching that Christ improved not the Law, and told
you that I could give you an experimental account of it (Truly that referred
to a particular person that was then in my mind, and is now in my memory,
ready to be named to you, if you please) in one that by urging that doctrine,
and so bringing down Christ to the perfect law of Moses, became an advocate
for a vile unchristian sin. This I made no question was a stratagem of the
Devils, accusing to him that Doctrine of Christ's superadditions for a false and
dangerous Doctrine, and to that end calumniating all Authors for Socinians,
etc. that were for that Doctrine, and by that means fitting him to the
jnstifying of that his vile sin, which otherwise he had not probably been
guilty of. This is in more words the plain of what I then said in those few
words, not of Rhetorique, but of plain sense, and might (if you would) have
been excused from the addition and length of this paraphrase.

You lead me on now to the reviewing of what was said on occasion of the third
report.

In that, I see, I have not yet the luck to please you neither, but have
offended you more by my excuse then I had done by the first crime; thus
unskilful am I in conversation with men of your temper. This is, it seems, an
error in me; I am sure, an infelicity. Well, I shall again endeavor to
satisfy you in the reasonableness of what I designed, in not disputing with
them that thought not all inclinations to evil unconsented to, to be sins;
but only affirming that they were, and rather bringing them to godly sorrow
upon their own principles, then falling to disputation about it. The reason
was, and still is, because I foresaw every godly man (I mean, those of whose
piety I have no reason to doubt, and that in other things are very orthodox, I
am confident, truly humbled for their evil inclinations consented to) was not
of your opinion in this matter. 2 Because it is a very nice point, which
perhaps for wanting of clear stating may be misapprehended between men of
distant persuasions. I will set you a brief state of it, and leave it to your
judgment, whether I speak reason or no. There is in a man a double faculty,
to which this inclination may possibly be applied, either the sensitive
appetite common to men with beasts, or the humane will. The sensitive faculty
naturally inclines to the pleasurable object. viz. to that which is agreeable
to the flesh; that this inclination unconsented to by the man, uncherished,
unliked, should be a sin, would be hard to affirm, though you mean by it
but original sin; because original sin is a consequent of Adams fall, and
this was certainly in our first Parents in the time and state of innocence
before the fall: as when the apple was so fair to the eye, sweet to the taste,
etc. it is clear, the eye and taste were then inclined to it; and nothing but
the command of God to the contrary could quell that inclination. Suppose then,
they had not eaten after this inclination of the carnal appetite to that
forbidden fruit, had that inclination in that appetite only been a sin in
them? It Is very probable it had not; the consent, or somewhat else, of the will
being necessarily required to make them thus guilty, and I now speak
abstracting from any thing of that. Besides this, there is another inclination,
viz. of the will, (not a full consent of the will (or a mixed) to the carnal
proposal, but) a bending of the will rather that way then the other; not a
weighing down of the balance to that side, but an (...) (as that word is
contrary to an (...), from the word (...)) a pendulousnesse betwixt the good
and the evil, but rather bending toward the evil. This is it that I conceived
to be an aversion from God; not fully, but so far as that it did rather bend
to the carnal object; and this was it that I called a sin: though being but
the inclination of our corrupt nature, and not confented to, I could not call
it an actual sin. Now the word pronenesse, or inclination to evil, being
thus an equivocall phrase, I thought not fit to be severe or importunate upon
them who perhaps did not know how to distinguish it, nor again to trouble a
Catechism with too much nice discourse; but more grossly to bind the Scholar
to humble himself for all sins, distinctly for his evil inclinations, (to
that purpose affirming plainly that they were sins) or if he would be apt
to dispute, which might hinder his being humbled,) I mean* dispute upon such a
nicety as was mentioned) yet still to call for the conclusion, humiliation,
upon his own principles, if he would not allow it upon mine. This I conceive,
will clear that Author from any crime in his doubtful expressions, or
connivence. For 1 the words are clear, that inclinations to evil are sins;
and (if he will be taught) that will instruct him in true principles; if he
will not, yet will not the [if] following be a means to harden him in
impenitence. Nor indeed can I consent to you, that no man can conceive true
godly sorrow for his actual sins, who does deny the fountain of all his sins
to be a sin, if you mean by that fountain, the natural inclination: For I
make no question but he that sees, and fully discernes all his actual sins,
and looks upon them all as progenies of his will, and so his [(...)] that sees
nothing of nature, or necessity, or fault of others in it, but all his own
villainy, may have as true godly sorrow for his actual sins, as he would have
if he were sensible of that other also. I say not, that he would have as much
true godly sorrow absolutely, or for all sins; (for supposing, as now I do,
that he has not sorrow for those inclinations as for sins* you must not
conceive that I say he has it save only as for infelicities) but I or he
may have as true godly sorrow for actual sins, as the other would be likely
to have for actual sins. To which purpose I shall farther venture this one
example and proof to you; Our first parents certainly might conceive true
godly sorrow for their first sin, which was in them actual, yet must needs
deny the fountain of that, and (consequent to that) of all their sins (their
own free will) to have been a sin or sinful, unless they will accuse their
creator, which will be no proper companion or effect of godly sorrow, and I
suppose will not by you be expected from them. And so I had more reason for my
expressions then perhaps you thought of. And so much for your two first
objections in that point.

3 For your [idem per idem] which you impute to me, you are much mistaken.
For, supposing some inclinations to evil to be not cherished, the thing that
I concluded is, 1 That in that case it is victory, not sin; And 2 that in that
case, I hope you will not say, it is a sin cherisht or consented to: which,
if you mark, was passing an opinion how you must be feign to conclude (and
that, a thing quite contrary to your former concluding) and not making any such
conclusion for my self. You were at great leisure when you observed that
illogicall probation.

4 For that [which it seems, I supposed and proved not] I must now give you an
account. And it was, that I seemed to imply that there must needs be some
consent given to actual sin, I confess I then proved it not, but promised
to give you an account of it when I had your grounds of scruples, you have now
mentioned them to me, 1 That Original sin is truly and properly a sin in
them that are not of age to consent to it. 2 That corruption is so strong in us
that it does many times break forth without our consent. To the first I shall
but need remember you, that 'twas every actual sin to which I employed that
consent necessary, and I hope you are not ready to prove that original sin
in children (as you call it) is truly and properly actual sin; and for the
second [the breaking forth of corruption in adultis] that does (if again it be
an actual sin) certainly suppose some kind of consent obtained, whether by
sudden surreption, passion, etc. or by something sometimes that is worse then
one act of consent, viz. by the custom of sin, and glibnesse toward it,
contracted by many precedaneous acts of consent to it, or the like. Besides,
there are two kinds of sin, omissions as well as commissions, and there is a
criminous consent required to either of them; and he that is bound to use all
diligence to subdue his corruptions, at least to repress them, if he do not
so, this indiligence of his has some of his consent: and that is a prime
ingredient in the breaking forth of corruptions; which consequently do not
break forth without all consent. And for me now to undertake the proof of
that, that the Schoolmen upon Thomas have so fully proved, that every thing is
so far sinful or criminous (meaning still actual sin) as it is voluntary,
the yielding of the will to the sensitive appetite being necessary to the
conception of lust, and that again to the bringing forth sin, I shall
venture the worst of your censure, that I do not now proceed to demonstrate
more largely. For indeed actual sin being a transgression of the Law, will
hardly belong to that faculty, or appetite, which is not capable of receiving
the Law: and such is that appetite that has nothing of the consent of the will
in it.

For the complement you charge me with in the fifth, you had answer in mine to
your first and second of this subject.

[For my mentioning of Socinians] I confess I have been guilty of it in these
Papers, and I think you know who was the cause of it; and therefore what want
of wisdom, or degree of folly soever that is, you should not be the Author of
it in me, and the punisher also. As for any parallel Doctrines you can find
between me and them, any farther then is agreeable to sound doctrine, and
analogy of Faith, I am not so humble, or so guilty, as to deprecate your
threats. As for parallels between our expression, it is possible you may do
somewhat; and so perhaps with some study I could do the like between the
Scripture and the Talmud: and to this I would not provoke you (though, I
profess I know not yet of any one such) because it seems in your opinion
[calling the Trinity a speculative mystery] was one of that kind, (and I doubt
not but at the same rate there are many more to be met with) and then the
provoking you, might let open another sluice or treasure of your Animadversions,
wherein the sins of your brethren are laid up, and among them one bundle of
these parallels; and I tell you truly, I shall take little joy in spending so
many sheets more in proving those (whatsoever you shall produce under that
title) to be unfit parallels. Yet by the law it is not so well, that you will
do any thing upon a provocation, which you would not do otherwise: but I
confess this sets no such character upon you, that I should be willing to
provoke you.

In your seventh I confess to believe, that you meant not the
Common-prayer-booke by the designed Liturgy, (and cannot imagine why you should
think I did believe you meant it.) And therefore I conceive I inferred
regularly, that I had nothing to do with that design, because I desired the
continuing of the Common-prayer-booke, and particularly those parts of it which
were most incompatible with that design; such were the Doxologies, Creeds,
Letany, etc. which no Arian or Socinian would join in. And I wonder you should
thus mistake so plain an arguing.

In the eight, where you take care that I magnify not the View of the
Directory; you might have spared your pains, for I can cite a Book for a
matter of fact (and that is all that I do in that place, by referring you to
those places in it, my consent to which testifies my dislike of the design you
speak of) without any kind of magnifying it. But for the matter so fit for my
humiliation, which you observe in that Author, [The using the suffrage of the
Jews, Heathens, and Mahometans] that sure will not much tend to your purpose,
not only because those very particulars you pitch on are transcribed (and so
professed to be) out of a Book of a Learned member of the House of Commons and
your Assembly, viz. Mr. Io. Seldom, but also for these two considerable reasons
more; First, because the suffrage of the Jews (from whence the other two are
affirmed to have proceeded) does carry some divine characters upon it, that
whole Church and State having peculiar relation to the Theocraty, and so Gods
judgment of the lawfulness employed in their practice. And secondly, because
the Liturgy of the Jews was by the Apostles and Christ himself made use of,
and out of it with some increases and alterations the Christian Liturgies
framed in the first age of the Church. If I thought it might be acceptable to
you, I would serve you here also, and give you some observations to this
purpose (very perfectly and easily reconcilable with what has been formerly
said, but yet) which are not in the View of the Directory, nor yet mentioned in
the haste of my former Papers.

It Is the observation of a noble and a learned French Protestant, Du Pless. de
Miss. l. 1. c. 3.
that the Apostles were sent, not to destroy but establish that pure worship or
service of God which was in the synagogues of the Jews, which they therefore
retained (after Christ's example) as far as did not contradict the economy or
dispensation of things under Christ: and therefore though they changed the
sacrifices, and the Sabbath, (Christ being the substance adumbrated by one, and
the Lords day being appointed to take the place of the other) yet the service
it self in other particulars they did continue. The grounds of this
observation you have in the Scripture: Christ himself goes into their
synagogues, and the Apostles ordinarily at the hours of Prayers, and
certainly joined with them in their service, as far as agreed with their
present state. And by this means some sympathy has been observable between
the Jewish and Christian services. This is clear by the Jewish forms; for
some of which, and for the rites of using them, we are beholding to a most
excellent man (a Protestant also) P. Fagius, and to some others since, who have
made use of his collections. The first part of their service was a confession
of the sins of their people, (which was always solemnly used in their
sacrifices) a rule for which we have in the sacred Writers, and in the Jewish
Books the very verba concepta, the set constant forms mentioned by that
Worthy on the Targum, Lev. 16. This they called confessio (...) or verbalis;
After that followed some Psalms of David, etc. which were sung the whole
Psalms together, as also some (...) hymns or giving of thanks, which, say
the Jews, were instituted by Esdras, who after the Babylonish captivity
restored the service of God. After that they had their lessons out of the Law,
which were divided into 54 Sedarim, or Parascoth, i.e. Sections, as also the
lessons of the Prophets distributed into as many haphtaroth, or Aperturae, or,
as some render it, Dimissions, so divided that there may be one for every
Sabbath in an intercalary year. Then again was the whole action concluded with
prayer, viz. a general prayer for the necessities of the Church and State,
public and private, and in that many particulars. After these prayers the
Archisynagogus blessed the people, and dismissed them. Save only that on any
great festival solemnity, the Passover, etc. there followed Benedictions
particular to the occasion, which on the Passover were pronounced by the mouth
of the master of the family; a form of which, Miserere Domine, etc. we have in
P. Fagius on the Targ. Deuteronomy. 8.

Some vestigia of this practice of theirs, in each part, we have in the New
Testament; Of their confession (says that noble learned man) Mat. 3. 6. Mar.
1. 5. Acts 13. 38. Of their lessons Acts 15. 21. Acts 13. 14. Luke 4. 18. Of
their psalmodies and hymns, Ephesians. 5. Col. 3. where it is observable that the
three words of Greek used by the Apostle are the very same which are used by
the Septuagint to render the three Hebrew words used in the Old Testament, and
so refer particularly to the practice of the Jews. Of their prayer for
necessities (says he) in the Lords prayer Mat. 6. which, with him, some other
very learned men conceive to have had special reference to the formulae
solennes then among the Jews; Of their prayer for the Commonwealth, and all
that were in place of power over them, 1 Timothy 2. 1. which words there in St.
Paul ('it was St. Augustines affirmation) were nominatim intelligenda de
solennibus Ecclesiastici officii precibus, etc.

4 For the practice of the first Primi Christiani huic officio se accomodarunt.
Morn. de miss. l. 1. ca. 4.
Christians, how agreeable 'twas to this practice of the Jews, will be easily
discerned. St. Basil in the description of a Clergyman officiating, ad Cler.
Caesar. Ep. 63. They go, says he, to the house of prayer, and after the
confession, they prepare for the (...), singing of Psalms, (speaking of the
first Apostolical times; for now, says he, we sing the Psalms in parts, or
by turns: it seems they had not done so before, but all together) and by the
intermixing of prayers, and interchange or variety of Psalms, and hymns, they
overcome or spend a great part of the night speaking of the antelucani
conventus) and as soon as the day breaks, they offer to God the Psalm of
confession, and so dismiss the Assembly. Besides the lessons out of the Old
Testament, the Christians (you will believe) added also others out of the new;
and (says Morney) ejus particulam aliquam Antistes interpretari solitus.

After Sermon they proceeded to the celebration of the Eucharist (parallel to
their customs on the great Festivities of the Passover, etc.) In it, I the
words of the institution were recited, with a thanksgiving or blessing, (as in
Iustine Martyr it is described) then the bread and wine (before received by the
offertory of the people) was distributed to the people; after which a Psalm was
sung, etc. Before the Sacrament, says St. Ambrose, was the prayer for Kings,
Et haec regula ecclesiastica tradita a magistro gentilium, says he, de Sacra.
l. 4. c. 4. and of the use of that also Tertul. is express, Apol. c. 39. After
the Lords Supper the (...) or Doxology was taken up in imitation of Christ, who
after Supper sung an hymn with his Disciples, not disdaining to make use of the
ancient Jewish custom. One testimony more I shall only add out of St.
Cyprian de Orat. Dom. Ser. 8. Publica nobis est and communis oration, etc.
[Publike common Prayer] pro toto populo oramus, for all the people, (as among
the Jews for all Israel* and we for the whole Church, especially for Kings.)
And that men may mind nothing but that their present employment, Ideo sacerdos
praefatione parat fratrum mentes, dicendo, Sursum corda, ut dum respondet
plebs, Habemus ad Dominum, moneatur nil se nisi Dominum cogitare debere. I
shall trouble you no longer then to desire that the Liturgy lately used in this
Church may be compared with the severalls here mentioned, from the Jews first;
and after, the Apostolical Christians: and as you will find the general
form exactly continued in Confession, Psalms, Lessons, Hymns, Prayers for
all the Church, especially for Kings, etc. (and no reason to doubt but that
sometimes the very words were continued also; assuredly set Forms then, as now,
as appears by the Sursum corda, and Habemus ad Dominum; Lift up your hearts,
We lift them up unto the Lord) So it was not without reason that the Author of
the View thought fit to draw one argument of many from the practice of the
Jews; to which the other two of the Mahometans and Heathens come in ex
naturali sequela, but as rivulets and derivations from that fountain.

But then besides these suffrages, you know there are in that View many other
arguments produced which may chance to be more concluding to you. And though a
man's arguments (as our own prayers) may serve the turn, yet the suffrages of
others will do no hurt also. If the point in question, which you say you have
showed me, be that which in this Paper you formerly mentioned, you may in my
answer to that satisfy your self that you were not very lucky in showing.
Before I part with this section, let me beseech you to tell me, whether 'twere
only a fault in your memory; that when you were pleased to tell me what you
said at Carfax against the Author of the Catechism, you did not please to name
this particular of the Mahometans, etc. especially when I am told that you
cited it as a work of that Authors who made the Catechism, and spoke pretty
tragically about that subject.

9 For your contempt of my mention of Doxologies and Creeds, it is not so very
seasonable, because being mentioned only in order to prove that I was none of
the designers of the new complying Liturgy, you cannot but say that they were
pertinent to that purpose. And for your proof, That Doxologies and Creeds may
be left out, because the Directory takes in the whole Scripture for a Liturgy,
and there are Doxologies and Creeds enough in the holy Scripture] it is a kind
of arguing that I confess I understand not; for sure for all that, (or
granting the Scripture to contain, as you say truly, all necessaries to
salvation) it will still remain true, that serving of God and worshipping him
by praises, confessions, and professions of our Faith, may be allowed to be
duties of such a value, that if they do not deserve to be brought in, yet
it is not necessary they should utterly be cast out from the service of God.
For your Confession of Faith which you say shall be published by your
Assemblers, if that be to be used in the service of God, then must there be
some new direction for it put into the Directory, and then perhaps the Creeds
of the Ancient Church might have continued there as well. If it be only for
other uses, you know it belongs not to the point in hand. And which way soever,
you know it concludes not against any thing that I was about to infer from
Creeds, etc.

10 For the question you there put, you do it I suppose but sportingly. For if
you will needs have a question the only one that can be pertinent to the matter
there in hand (or which will be betwixt things of any like nature) is that
which is there set, betwixt the using the Common Prayer Book in each part of it
and the putting it wholly (or in those so many mentioned parts of it) out of
the Church: and then sure the so many obstacles to Socinian errors being
retained in one, and turned out in the other, the vote will be quickly resolved
on. As for your desired parallel, the Cat. or the Directory, I suppose you do
not expect I should speak to that, yet that which countenances no one Socinian
error, and I think either profestly, or (...) discountenances every Socinian
error, will be able to compare (in that matter of countenancing them) with any
other Wirter in the world. For though it were granted, that it does not so much
discountenance them as other Books that are written particularly against them,
yet not countenancing them at all, it does as much not countenance them, as any
other thing can be imagined to do. But

Now it is a little wearisome to me to see this 10 Sect. again breaking
asunder into questions, which you might so very well have spared. For sure Sir,
1 I no where had said in these Papers, That the Direct. had commanded all to
sit at the Sacrament; I had only spoken of the Protestants in Poland
forbidding sitting, because it complied with the Arians. 2 I had also no need
to say, That all familiarity inferred an equality; it is enough to me, that
humility and distance, kneeling, etc. is more like to be an argument of
inequality, and an expression of it. 3 [That Socinians think themselves equal
with Christ, etc.] I have no need to affirm, having only urged a matter of
fact, which stands good without it, because that familiarity in sitting at the
Sacrament will be more agreeable to their notion of Christ as a mere
creature, then kneeling will be; and that is all was to be proved from it, and
not that the Socinians equal themselves with Christ. As for my saying, That
Christ did not bless us till after his resurrection, (which perhaps you
repeat out of the way, to set some ill mark upon it) 1 I pray remember that
they are the plain words of Scripture, having raised his Son Jesus, he sent him
to bless us, etc. and I hope 'twill be no huge fault to say what Socinus
does, when if he do say it, he says the same with Scripture. 2 That you may
mistake the meaning of that phrase; and think, as some do, that for Christ
then to begin to bless, is for him then to begin to have divine power: but
sure you know that is not my meaning; but that Christ may be considered in
respect of his natures, or of his offices, i.e. in respect of the (...) or
(...), as the Fathers use it; and that it is only in that latter respect that
all power is then said to be given unto him, and so this of blessing, and at
last to be resigned up to the Father: which will not at all hinder the
renouncing of all Socinian or Arian heresies in the business of Christ's
eternal Divinity, or of the Trinity. By this you see what an ill parallel you
had fetched out of Smalcius, and I must supppose most of your others are such.

For your argument offered me for the Liturgy, I am not merry enough to
receive, or reward you for it, (and you know, my business in hand is not to
assert the Liturgy; that is (...); but the demonstrating that I was none of the
men for the new designed Liturgy) only let me tell you, that the easiness
and pleasantness of the Liturgy was not thought to consist in the easiness of
the task for the Minister, (for I do not perceive that the Directory-way, as
it is exercised, has any whit less of that ease in it) but in respect of the
Auditors, who can go on in their duty with more ease and pleasure: and sure
duty is not naturally so acceptable to all men that there is any necessity of
making it more tedious, toylsome, (especially if it be added, as you say it
is) and less profitable, then was necessary. And therefore you may perceive
for all your scoffs, that Orators arguments (if the author of that View were
guilty of that faculty) even those that you pick out for the very worst, may
have somewhat beside Rhetorique in them. I am sure this which you mention, is
more proper and effectual to infer the conclusion, then the fetching that
argument out of that Book, to expose and show it openly, was to the question in
hand, whether I was in the design for the new complying Liturgy. But I have
learnt to pass by all such Sacrasmes and impertinences, I hope, with some
tolerable patience.

Now then you say you hasten to my discourse of Godly sorrow, I beseech God to
give each of us our part of it.

In that, you begin with a challenge to me, to prove that which you know was
proved already, if explaining a thing, and laying it before you in such a
manner that you do not (I conceive, cannot) deny any part of it, may be
called the proving of it. Your second is but a repetition of what was said by
me; yet has some art in it, depriving it of the proof that was brought for
it, that it might look the more naked, and despicable. Your third was
discreetly ordered to scoff at what was said, for a dictate and admirable,
(which was neither, but a plain evident truth, that the impurity of our humane
condition, may be matter of godly sorrow to any, though not merely qua an
infelicity) and you ask again whether it be godly sorrow to grieve for an
infelicity? I say again, such the infelicity may be (particularly that now
spoken of) that it may be matter of Godly sorrow, or (...) (and be otherwise
described in a gracious style of loving the appearance of Christ, which may rid
us of our impurities) and yet not be this qua sic, merely as an infelicity;
which was all that was needful there to be inferred.

In your fourth you mention your opinion, that all pollution of the soul of
man has been by sin only. But sure Sir, this does not prove every pollution
to be a sin; but, as your words import, an effect or consequent of sin.

Next, you pronounce that I am much mistaken: and your proof of it is petitio
principii, a begging, i.e. not proving, yet assuming the thing before in
question (and proved on the other side by me, both before and now in the last
Sect.) viz. That no man grieves for a sin after a godly manner, but he that
grieves for it as a sin against God. When you know, that by that one instance
of the impurity of our nature mourned for by him that took it not for a sin,
but only a thing that rendered him 1 imperfect; then 2 prone to sin; and 3
less amiable in Gods sight, etc. (with an addition of wishing and praying to
be dissolved, and be with Christ as far better) the contrary was undeniably
inferred; and no answer offered by you to these premises. For the undeniable
grounds of repentance, I suppose they are laid in that Cat. both by requiring
it for all sin, and by naming inclinations to evil in the front of sins,
without [ifs or [ands] or any dubious expressions. But yet after all your
severity in giving your advice for the designing of a Catechism, I conceive
your inference, in the name of the Acute wretch, was far from any acuteness:
for sure whatever were resolved about inclinations being no sins when
unconsented to, 'twould never follow for your Client, Ergo, the like acts, to
which he is naturally inclined, are not evil. For sure Sir, the acts may be
allowed sins (and not be excused by our being naturally inclined to them)
whatever were conceived of the inclinations. The conclusion from your premises
could only be this, Ergo this and that act, being natural also, are not
evil. And if you wretch should conclude so, you would soon be able to inform
him that his acts are not natural, and therefore may be allowed to be evil
though he be naturally inclined to them, because it is very evil not to resist
and deny those inclinations.

You then go off in triumph with a [You know what I could add.] Truly Sir, I
profess I do not: and yet whatever it is, if it be like this you have allowed
me, I should consider it perhaps in obedience to you, but never be much
wrought on by it. Yet shall I excuse this for the good news it brings with it,
being a transition to the fourth report, another stage toward the end of my
very wearisome journey.

In that, you have begun with many little particulars which want of truth;
particularly, that I make a second acknowledgement that I was misinformed,
when I only profess that by your discourse I cannot discern whether I was in
this misinformed or no. It seems you are willing to receive acknowledgements
of mistakes: you would otherwise think it more pertinent to tell me whether
in either Assembly you insisted on that particular or no. For an answer to your
quaere's, you sure perceive (though you complain for want of it) that I gave
you that whole sense of my soul in that point, not only by that means to be
sure to tell you my opinion of your then present quaere's, but also of all
others of that subject that 'twere possible for you to ask. And by this time I
conceive you do discern that I am neither very forward to make quaere's to
divert, etc. nor to deny answer to them, when they are made.

About the first proposition you mention, though you stand not to ask [why
acceptance is put for pardon?] 'Twere no great matter if I said 'twere de
industria, on this head, because God first accepts the penitent person in
Christ, and then after (in order of nature, though not of time) he pardons his
sins: though indeed it is true again, that the sins are pardoned in order
of nature before the acceptance of the actions; I mean, of all the actions of
the subsequent life. But then there is a double acceptance, of the person
first, and then of the actions; of Abel first (as the Fathers observe) and then
of his offerings. Which yet I hope, will not pass with you for the double
justification; but this ex abundanti also.

But to your maine question (for I must now wholly deal in the old trade of
answering questions: which I have been told is the far easiest way for him
that wants other provision, and yet would feign not make an end of disputing)
Why I speak of remission and acceptance, and leave out imputation? Sure it is,
partly because acceptance of the person, and so pardon also, includes
imputation of Christ's righteousness, as the formal cause of our
justification; God accepting of Christ's (...) or payment (which is imputation
of his sufferings by way of (...) for us) and then accepting our persons, and
pardoning our sins; partly, because one kind of imputation is after our
pardon of sin in order of nature, a distinct thing from it, and so needed not
to be there spoken of, as belonging rather to our sanctification, for the
completing or filling up the imperfections of that; I mean now the imputation
of Christ's perfect obedience to that penitent believer whose sins are
pardoned by the sufferings of Christ: for to such a one Christ's perfect obeying
the Law may so far be imputed as to give a gloss or tincture to his still
imperfect obediences, so far as that they shall be accepted by God; Which
imputation therefore may be antecedent to, and have to do with that
acceptance of actions, but yet in order of nature be after the acceptance of
persons, and forgiveness of sins. But the truth is, I then meant to give you
plain grosser propositions to prevent mistakes and disputes, and not to
descend to such nicer distinctions as these.

But truly you were very wary, when you laid such an observation on the [This]
in the second proposition, which sure was an innocent particle of reference
looking back to the Antecedent [justification] in the former proposition, and
meaning it in the very same latitude that thereit had been used, for the
entire, not partial (or first, or one part of) justification. To let this
pass, when you had taken notice of it, was not an act of charity, but justice
in you, yet that whirh would have been very welcome to me many times. For
just from as true or solid ground as this, have many of your other exceptions
sprang up, and have not so heartily been laid down by you.

To your next questions, which you profess to ask, that mistakes may be
prevented, upon that account, I profess to answer most cheerfully; for I see
how wearisome a thing it is to have been mistaken.

To your first quaere [Why the grace of God in justifying, etc. does not extend
to every man for whom Christ has satisfied?] I answer clearly, because
Christ's satisfaction is not absolutely for all, or that they may be pardoned
whatever they do, how infidel or impenitent soever they continue; but
conditionally for all, and thereupon that grace of justification extends to
none but those who perform the Condition.

For your second it is very nice (and might sure have been spared in this
business) That because God has been affirmed by me to require regeneration as
a condition to justification, therefore I must tell you what condition God
requires unregenerate persons to perform, that they may attain unto
regeneration. To question thus were infinite, and to this matter of
justification utterly unnecessary. But yet I shall not fail you in any thing;
I Will satisfy you in that also. God requires in the unregenerate man (...), as
the Ancients express it, a readiness to obey his call; not to resist, but
receive his grace, when he bestows it on him; and having received it, what
degree soever it be, to cherish, and make use of it; and this by his grace,
God enables him to do.

As for your demand of me, by way of retribution, that I must grant that God
does justify the ungodly, i. e. the man that is guilty of many sins, I make
no question of that, if he be a penitent, and so may he be, and yet be
called (...) still, in the sense that I conceive belongs to that word, Romans 4.
5. that is, (...); not one that continues impenitent in sin, but one that
neither has nor does perform exact, perfect, legal obedience: which is very
reconcilable, if not the same, with what you confess, [That God never
justifies an impenitent infidel in sensu composito, i. e. never any that is
then infidel or remains impenitent.

To your third I answer, that there is such a condition, which does so qualify
the subject, that I can say, by it, and only by it I am justified, i. e. by it
only as a condition, not including any causality in it. And if you will know,
what that condition is, you have been often told already, and I now tell you,
Faith in the nation wherein it signifies a receiving the whole Christ, and
contains in it a resolution of obeying Christ's Commands, as well as of
depending on him for mercy. And on supposition, or condition that you grant
that, and so speak of faith as (...), and (...), I will speak with you in the
dialect of the first sort of the men you mention, and say that faith is
required to receive the object of justification, Christ, etc. but withal add,
that it is required as a condition too, to dispose or qualify the subject, and
that without this condition, no man living shall be justified. Which being
premised, it shall not yet follow from thence that by this he shall be, sa you
say, constituted righteous, if by [constituted by] you attribute any causality
to this qualification, or any thing but that of being a condition by which he
is justified, i. e. is not jnstified without it. And so this is as plain as I
can devise too; and me thinks there should be no mistake. For in the sense
wherein I have now expressed my self, I do again consent to your conclusion,
that God does by his free and effectual grace work in the hearts of his elect
to receive Christ, (that is, the Whole Christ) that they may be justified, not
by their own obedience, or vow of obedience (as by a cause) but by obedience
of Christ alone freely imputed by God, and rested on by faith only: It being
one act of that faith by which the just do live, to have affiance, or rest on
Christ.

In your [moreover] it may also be true, that there may be some difference
between disposing the subject to salvation and to justification: as the
cordial habit of faith, and sincere vow, may dispose to justification; and, in
case of living to occasions and opportunities, the acts of faith and actual
performances will be required; yet so that he that is disposed for
justification, if he should then presently dye, were disposed to salvation
also. Which notwithstanding I shall also add with you, 1 That there is faith
required, to receive the object, Christ, Iehova our righteousness; and grace
prerequired, to enable thus to believe; and obedience to, or making use of that
grace (the (...), Heb. 12. 28.) a condition required in us, to that end that
grace may have its perfect work on us, And 2 that all the acts and habits of
grace, which are in the best men concurring together, are not sufficient to
justify a man before God. And therefore faith concurring so, with such a vow,
or with faithful actions, cannot justify us. This I write out of your Paper,
as fast as I can drive, (and, by the way, you see some difference between our
tempers; I consent to as much of yours as possibly I can, and labor to take as
few exceptions; you on the contrary have another method in reading them that
you are not kind to) and consent to it most fully at first sight, and never
remember to have doubted of it, since I considered Divinity. But for your
addition, [Of faiths justifying relatively] you must give me leave not to take
that into my form of Doctrine (being not very intelligible) but to use my own
expressions, as conceiving them more perspicuous, and commodious to the notions
I have of this matter, viz. Thus, that Christ only justifies, Faith receives
Christ, but yet still by no way of causality justifies; is causall indeed in
receiving Christ, but only the condition in justifying; because, though
receiving is an act of ours, and in us, yet justification is an act only of
Gods upon us, and concerning us. Which in effect you yield also, when you say,
that [Faith cannot pardon sins or accept.] For then it cannot justify. At
this time me thinks we are excellently well agreed, I wish it may long continue.

But then in the next words, we are out again; I am now looked on as one that
abuses Scripture for the maintenance of errors, whereas God knows 'twas no more
but citing the words in St. James, faith consummate by works, as a parallel
place to faith (...) in St. Paul, and let the Papists say what they will, (and
abuse that or any other place) sure this is no abusing Scripture for
maintenance of errors. But then what you mean by your not dreaming, that I
thought Abraham was justified by the actual sacrificing of his Son, I cannot
dream or imagine; certainly I never said any such thing; or if you thought I
meant that by works, you are much mistaken: but only I conceived the
resolution of sacrificing to have been accepted by God, to his justification,
without actual sacrificing him.

But then Sir, in that which follows, when it is resolved that we are agreed in
the conclusion, it is very strange that that will not satisfy you without some
retraction. O how much a more pleasant thing is victory then peace! Sir, I must
tell you confidently, all that that Author ever has said in the Catechism is
perfectly reconcilable with this conclusion; (and he may chance to be as fit
to judge of the importance of his own words, as any man else) and therefore
still retraction must be spared, unless you please to retract causeless
displeasures. But that it seems you will not suddenly do: for again you
are deep in a questioning over again, what has been so often answered, and
profestly acknowledged. I shall proceed to do it over again once more. 1 I
say, that we are not jnstified by any thing in us, i. e. either by vow of
obedience, or faith, save only as by a condition, or causa sine qua non; and
in that sense, by both of them together we are justified. But then you have an
objection to those words of mine [The condition must be undertaken before the
the Covenant belongs to mee] and say in your third, That if by Covenant I mean
the whole Covenant of grace, I must make some condition go before our
regeneration also. I answer, that the word Covenant there in that place,
signifies any one part of the whole Covenant, which depends on the performance
of any proportionable part of the condition, and so needs not belong in that
place to regeneration also, but may be restrained only to that of
justification. Yet for the condition praerequired to regeneration also, I have
given you my sense formerly, and need not so soon repeat it to you.

4 For the third [you know] I profess not to know how they belong to me, or
any interests of mine.

5 That to receive forgiveness is an act of faith, I shall again acknowledge,
so you conclude not from thence that it justifies by so doing. But that I ever
said, That we receive a pardon by an act of charity, etc. I shall not yet be
persuaded, nor can that proposition have any truth, any otherwise then that
charity is part of the condition, without which that Pardon shall not belong to
me, (which were a very ridiculous ground of saying, that we receive our pardon
by that act; because [receiving by] notes an efficiency, and of that there is
none in a mere condition.) Sir, I am confident I never said these words, and
therefore I cannot well forget them.

As for your citation out of the page 28. of the Cat. That a man is justified
by faithful actions, and by them only. That you must understand (as it is
there clearly set in the case of Abraham) in case there be a present
opportunity to exercise the faith. For though when such occasions are not
present, the faith which consists in voto, the full resolution, the cordial
receiving the whole Christ, will serve the turn, without any actions; yet when
the occasion is present, the action must be ready, or else the faith will not
justify. And therefore though in this case of such opportunities, I plead for
more then the bare vow, as necessary to justification, yet still it is true that
I plead for no more in any other case; and even in this I can content my self
with this vow, if it be sincere; nor will God acknowledge it so, if it act not
in time of trial; when the opportunity is offered. And so, sure I am well
enough off from a first and second justification. For all, that I require by
way of condition, is the sincere receiving of Christ in heart and resolution;
which if it be sincere, will fructify in its due season; and if it be not
such as will do so, it is not fit to be accepted by God to our justification.

But for your arguing on the other side, That if we are justified by a vow of
personal obedience, then we are not justified by Christ alone, or by faith
only; that is but the old Sophisme, so often laid open, by our confessing
nothing to have to do with our justification but Christ, as the cause of our
justification, or that which constitutes us righteous; and for our vow of
obedience and faith, that is only as the condition: granting still faith to
receive the pardon, but not thereby to justify.

And so once more I will agree with you, that is, with that concluding
proposition of yours, whether you will permit me, or no; and do it now again
without any need of the least syllable of retraction.

Thus have I attended you a most wearisome journey, being scarce permitted to
pass over any line in your Papers without answering some either mistake, or
question of yours. And truly I have served you freely and faithfully, and that
has swelled it to a bulk beyond what in any reason I was bound to pay you.
And if you do not please that there shall arise to me some fruit by all this
by your discerning and acknowledging the causlesnesse of your exceptions, yet
if you please, let us put it to others to judge between us; for it is possible
we may judge amiss of our own performances. And therefore by your good leave
(as before I told you) I shall be willing the world shall judge between us, or
as many of them as shall be fitted with great patience to sit out the hearing
of so mean an Act. If this course will not please you, but you think good to
write back again. I shall take confidence to expect (what is most just) that
you return ad punctum, or ad carceres from whence we set out: and which soever
of your public charges upon that Author seems to you to remain unsatisfied
by my returns, let it be specified, and your reasons joined with your
expressions of dislike, such as you think will destroy the grounds and be
directly and clearly opposite to the state of the question on which I build.
And having now twice submitted to such punctual answering of so long a
catalogue of questions, let me, I pray, be freed from any more of that task.
For I know when all other things are at an end, there will never be any end of
them. There is a very unhandsome English proverb to that purpose; Let me
beseech you, not to fall under any suspicion of being guilty of it: and as you
might justly accuse me, if I applied it to you, so I beseech you to see that
it be not applyable. Yet let me tell you, When these controversies now
depending are at an end, there is no one question concerning any line in those
Books so paradigmatized by you, or in any piece of Divinity, wherein I
understand ought, but you or any man shall for the least asking have the full
sense of

Wednesday Nov. 4. Your Servant H. Hammond.

SIR,
YOU have sent me many sheets: and the only conclusion that I can pick out of
them, is an English Proverb; and that but intimated; truly Sir, if I being a
fool have asked more questions then you in your wisdom are able to answer, I
am ashamed of my folly, and you need not glory in your wisdom; yet such, it
seems, is your high conceit of your own wisdom, that you do passionately long
to publish your wisdom to the world in print. Sir, I shall not license any
Papers of yours that I have as yet received; and you may see cause hereafter to
thank me for it: nor will I desire you to license so much as an ^. of mine.
But it seems you cannot think of any other way of satisfaction for that
injury which you conceive has been offered to you by your Friend (for so I
call every man that deals plainly with me,) and give me leave as a friend to
advise you to be ware lest the satisfaction which you gain by getting into
Print, benot as imaginary as the injury which has been offered to you, by the
repeated yet necessary admonitions of

Nov. 15. 1646, Your humble Servant Francis Cheynell.
If you think fit to object any thing against me in Print, I doubt not but by
Gods help to give all that are impartial full satisfaction, as soon as my
more weighty employments will permit.
SIR,
YOur Letter of return to my last I received not till this morning (though it
were dated on the Lords day was sevennight:) and with it an advertisement that
Mr. W. whom you appointed to convey my former to you, was gone to London before
it came to me. So that, although I know not how this paper will make shift to
find out the way, yet can I not but address it toward you, if it be but to
take the leave of you a little solemnly, and to profess that I design not any
farther trouble to you on this matter, having been assured by you of the
unprofitablenesse of my former pains; and having little hopes, that any more
will prove more fortunate then those eight or nine sheets, out of which you
tell me you can pick but one conclusion, viz. an English proverb, and that but
intimated. Sir, I am very unhappy if I have written so much so unconcludingly:
but cannot be so severe to my self, and those papers, as to imagine that it
was not in your power to have picked out some others, (had they been for your
turn to take notice of them) as easily as that one which you acknowledge was
but intimated. It seems, your notes tend all to finding of faults; and so this
came into your observation. I shall not from hence conclude that this was the
only thing you had reason to dislike in those papers; Only I must say that
your reasons of disliking this particular of the English* proverb, as far as
it was mentioned by me, are by no means concluding; and to make them appear
such, you are feign to affix a sense on my words very distant from that which
the contexture of them is capable of. For Sir, that you have yet appeared to
be a fool, or that I undertake to have any wisdom, or have any need to do
so (the innocence of the cause which I have in hand being sufficient to supply
that place) or that you have asked me more questions then I am able to answer,
I had no way so much as intimated; but on the contrary, had for the time past
answered all your very many questions, or showed you (as in some few) how
unnecessary it was to the matter in hand, to answer them; and yet promised you
farther, That when the controversies now depending betwixt us were at an end,
there should be no question concerning any line in those books, or any piece
of Divinity wherein I understood ought, but you should for the least asking
have my full sense or answer. All that that mention of the proverb could
signify, was this, that I desired you would take care hereafter not to fall
under any suspicion of being guilty of it; which was but a circumlocution of
this plain sense, that if you returned any thing to those sheets, I desired it
might be ad punctum, without asking any unnecessary questions, because that
would be a way unworthy of any Scholar, and would be infinite. And if I
should have told you plainly, that if you should do this, you would, by the
force of that proverb, be found guilty of folly, and possibly pose a man
wiser much then my self, this would not have amounted to any of the three
things by you concluded from my Letter. Yet is all this as truly said by you as
what you next add, That I passionately long to publish my wisdom to the world
in print. The rudeness of this scoff shall be pardoned by me. I shall only
speak to the truth of it. I had no such opinion of the worth of any thing,
that would be pertinent answer to your exceptions, as to have any passion or
longing to have it printed; I only told you, That if you could not yet
acknowledge the causlesnesse of your exceptions, by your leave I should be
willing the world should judge betwixt us: and in one other place, When you had
bid me venture your arguments to any reader, affirming that you feared none, I
thought it seasonable to tell you that I expected according to the purport of
your speech, that you would give your consent that this whole matter should be
referred to others judgment, and to that end Printed. I suppose, neither of
these speeches imply either passion or longing after the press; And truly Sir,
as long as there are such Readers abroad as you, I think a man in prudence
ought beforehand to be assured of their kindness, ere he have much appetite
to be in print. The short is, I was and am most willing to submit the dispute
between you and me, and the truth of this question [Whether you have wronged
me or no,] to any or all reasonable men: and having offered it successelesly
to you, I am still ready, if you consent, to make it more public; and shall
not consider any interests of my own so much, as to retract my offer. You say,
You shall not license any papers of mine which you have yet received: and then,
I suppose, you are confident they will not now be licensed in this place; and
it will only be in my power to take care that this be the last you shall
receive. Only I shall add (without expressing any longing) that if you will
license your own, you shall not need to trouble your self in desiring me to
license mine, or to give my consent that they be licensed. As for your advice
to the contrary, I know not from what degree of kindness it proceeds: and
having some reason to believe that there is nothing in them against piety, or
charity, perhaps you may be mistaken, if you think your not licensing them
will ever deserve thanks from me; any more then that which you call an act of
friendship, does, viz. your having dealt plainly with me. To which give me
leave to answer, that friendship is a strange thing, and very distant from
Christian charity, if it be any thing like those public reproaches which you
laid most causlesly upon the Author of the Catechism in your Sermons. Assure
your self, if I were now in the temper of mind, in which you were when you
did that, (and it seems, now continue to be) I would presently send all your
papers to the Press with my answer to them; and tell you, I was in this your
friend. But I have other employments for my thoughts, and other motives and
principles of not revenging injuries, then those which you offer me by way of
friendly advice to beware, etc. Which perhaps may intimate something of terror.
I shall for the present sit down with full patience and satisfaction of mind,
that I have driven this business thus far: and till your more weighty
employments permit you to consider me, as my pains to serve and satisfy you
deserve from you, I take my leave of you, and rest

Nov. 23. 1646. Your very loving Friend H. Hammond.
I would you had signified your pleasure positively, that I should not permit
to any man's eyes, what you only say, you do not desire me, etc. I should
then think my self obliged to burn that first part of my last answer: but as
yet, wanting your directions, I have not done it.
The end.

