A DETECTION OR, DISCOVERY OF A NOTABLE FRAVD Committed by R. B. a Seminary
Priest of ROME, upon Two of the Articles of the Church of ENGLAND.

In a Book Imprinted in Anno 1632.

Entitled, The Judgment of the APOSTLES, and of Those of the first Age, in all
points of Doctrine, questioned between the Catholics and Protestants of
England, as they are set down in the nine and thirty Articles of their
RELIGION.

With an Appendix, concerning Episcopacy.

By a Lay Gentleman.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for William Leake, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Chancery Lane, near the Rowles. 1641.

To the right Honorable, HENRY Earl of Manchester, Lord Privy Seal, and one
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My most honored Lord,
SEeing it is a Maxim of divine and humane Law, most infallibly true, Suum
cuiq. reddere, I hold my self obliged in Obedience to it, to dedicate unto
your honorable Patronage the ensuing Tract, most truly and humbly
acknowledging Tam me, quam omne meum, to be your Lordships Creature, made
fortunate by the Rays of those sweet Influences which have issued from your
Lorships ever Candide Aspect, which Bounty (my inability wanting means of any
Requital or other Retribution) does claim this my poor Infant-worke,
together with all other Services, both as a duty of Tribute unto your Lordships
high Merit, and as a signal or testimonial Badge of that ever bounden
Gratitude and Recognition which my Heart and Tongue renders unto your
Lordships goodness. Your honorable Greatness [as able] and your gracious
Benignity (as willing) to protect it, has Encourag^d my humble Boldness, to
beseech your noble acceptance of it. I neither will nor can presume it worthy
your Lordships Perusal, not daring to arrogate so high as to invite so great a
Judgment to descend beneath it is proper Sphere, to behold A thing so mean
and low: It Is sufficient that your Lordship vouchsafe the loan of your
honorable name, to give it credit unto others of the lesser Orb. For though
this Tract (as I am somewhat confident) contains in it nothing but what is
justifiable by the evidence of Truth; yet it is likely to meet with opposition,
Quia veritas odium parit; but it being quitted from harms by such as are
Friends to the virtue of truth (splendent as light radiated from the Sun) it
may serve ut fragmentum in Cophinis Christi, Mat. 14.20. Marc. 12.42.
or otherwise, ut minutumi: Gazophylacio Ecclesiae: how ever your Lordship and
the world may find, that Inter res seculares, I have spared some time for
sacred designs, taught to do so well by the rare President of your Lordships
divine Enchyridion de contemplatione mortis et immortalitatis, a piece of such
admirable excellence, as would exse (without your honorable name or dignity)
protect it self. But my Modicum (lesser than a mere shadow to that perfect
substance) implores both your honorable regard to the Author and work, and
also Front serena to entertain this humble duty of him, whose perpetual suit
unto the Supremest is, for all successful blessings on the Person and state
of your honorable Lordship, and noble Posterity both in stock and branches,
as well for health and life, to be happily lengthned here, as for Eternity, to
be enjoyed hereafter; and for some manifestation of his Cordial meaning (the
soul of verbal expressions) he really wishes for such Employment as may
testify him to be

Your Lordships most faithful and humble Servant; PEDAELL HARLOWE.

To the READER.
IN Lent 1639, there came to my hands commended, and esteemed by some (as a
choice piece) a Book entitled, The judgment of the Apostles, and of those of
the first Age in all points of doctrine, questioned between Catholics and
Protestants of England, as they are set down in the Nine and thirty Articles
of their religion, by an old Student in Divinity, Dedicated to her most
excellent Majesty Queen Mary, subscribed R. B. Which Book opening about the
midst of it, with intent to read such part of it, as first offered it seife
to my view, I casually lighted on the Ninth Chapter thereto the six and
twentieth Chapter has reference, both which chapters do treat of the
Consecration of our Bishops, and the Ordination of our Priests, Ministers, and
Deacons, wherein (as it is there delivered) is concerned the Standing or ruin
of our whole Religion: Hereat making some pause as morthy the reading, which
being perusid, me thought it was a point not to be slighted, jam securis ad
radicem, Mat. 3.10.
'its aim was to strike at the root for the utter overthrow and razing up the
Basis and foundation of the visible Entity of that Church (whereof my self is
an unworthy Member) and consequently as it concerned the general, so it
concerned me in particular: how much my soul was afflicted and troubled at it,
cannot be expressed, because the particulars urged by the Adversary are chiefly
or altogether matters of Fact and Record, not matter of Dispute, Reasoning, or
argumentation, so as nothing could be had from the reach of Reason, or my onne
understanding on which I presume not, nor from literature whereof my portion is
but small, how to be brought out of the Briars: and for that purpose applying
my self to the learned of our Church in Print, especially Master Francis
Mason, late Archdeacon of Norfolk now with God, who have most exactly and
gravely, to their eternal praise and renown, vindicated our Church in the
matter of Consecration and Ordination, against a great company of virulent,
cunning and subtle adversaries, I could not meet with any of those particulars
alleged in these Two chapters of this Author's Book, any where objected,
treated of, or answered, which happened as I believe, because this Book came
either under the Press since those works were finished, or else it lurk't so
close, as it came not to the view of those brave Defendors of our Church:
whereupon being become restless in my self, and holding it too supine
negligence, to continue still ignorant in so weighty a matter, without some
endeavor to be satisfied in so real a Concernment, I became resolved to make
such search into it my self, as my weak abilities could attain unto, which
having in some poor measure achieved, it was originally intended for my own
selfe-satisfaction; but thereof, some of my friends having view, they became
very desirous to be pleasured with Copies of it, which being found to be too
tedious and over-chargeable, it was earnestly desired to be made vnlgar by the
Press, but being loath to be read in Print, it has lain by me by the space of
a year, in which time it having gotten approbation by some of Eminent
learning, I am become obedient to the desires of others, in that behalf,
holding it better to Communicate a brown morsel, than to be totally
uncharitable, being pers^aded it can dot no hurt, but to the Adversary by
detection of his Fraud, and hoping that this piece of plainness may at
present, give some content and satisfaction, if not to all, yet to such as
think it better to have a little light, than none at all, until an abler Pen,
as meaner than mine cannot be, should vouchsafe a more polite and exact
Vindication of our afflicted Church, from this Aversaries false Accusation,
wherenith it has stood charged unhappily these eight years, which will (in my
simple opinion) be worth the undertaking, to the end the Foul mouth of this
Romish Adversary may be as fully stopped in the particulars now in question,
as other like Underminers of our Churches foundation, have been already,
concerning all other their vain plots and devices against our Episcopal
Consecration, and Sacerdotall Ordination, to their utter shame and perpetual
silence, which brave work concerning these parpiculars had ere this time (I
believe) showed it self Conspicuous to the world, if this Book of R. B. had
in all this time come to the viem (before me) of any of our brave and able
Champions of our Israel; In the mean season if this shall (as a taste) yield
any relish, or product any profit at all, it is a blessing far beyond my
deserts; and if Errors in it be remitted, or passed over in gentle silence, it
is a favor of grace heartily Supplicated; Howsoever my meaning is good; Ultra
non --: And although this work is concerning Church affairs, and consequently
lay-hands may be said, arr not Sacred enough to handle it; Yet upon perusal
it will appear to be so dependant on temporal Laws and Acts municipall, as
will I trust, take off the Censure, Mittendi Falcem in Messem alienam. And for
the accommodation of the vulgar, who understand not the Latin tongue, such
Latin sentences as are produced out of Authors, are translated into our vulgar
tongue, for their ease and satisfaction, save only a few Scriptures, for which
they may turn to in their English Bibles; all which nevertheless is humbly
submitted to the correction of Superiors, and to the judgment of those, who
can judge, what it is to take pains without hope of gains, accounting my
Reward very great, if what I have done shall be in any sort accepted, or can
do any Service. Hoping you will not blame him, who has thus labored for your
sakes, and would if he could, do more, to be,

Your ready and faithful friend, PEDAELL HARLOWE.

To R. B. or to such other Pontifician as shall assume to be his Vindicatour.
THough the Proverb be (Good wine needs no Bush) yet where both good wine is
within the house, and also a fair Bush or brave sign without at the door, it
is the more complete and suitable, and so giving full content, it increases
custom, and advances credit to the owner: But let the sign be never so brave
and fine without, if corrupt wine be within, that house soon looses custom,
falls to neglect, and becomes contemptible. Such (Sir) is your Book, whose
Title is so fair, (having the Apostolic image in Front) as meriteth (eo
nomine) highest Reverence, honor, and esteem in all Christendom over: The
work of an old Student in Divinity, bears with it a double portion of
reverence amongst all men for Sagenesse of Age, and also among the best sort of
Men, for Divinities sake. And it being dedicated to our most Royal Queen
Mary, Consort to our most dread Sovereign Lord King Charles, of ever renouned
memory, it draws another parcel of honorable regard unto it; which brave and
fine outside requires the inside to be suitable in the beauty of Truth, honesty,
and goodnesses otherwise howsoever your Favorers may flatter your wit, for
putting on a fair and rich garment, on an ugly and foul carcass, to make it
pass the better with such as will be easily cozened with shadows, your
judgment nevertheless must needs suffer, for presuming such brave and rich
Furniture to deck an unworthy and base creature withal, for a present, for
such as can discover her Deformity, as soon as they see her; If your Book be
such (as such indeed it is) then those glorious Titles and attributes of
Apostolic judgment, Divinity, and royal Majesty, must be taken from it, as
too much profaned and Presumptuously taken in vain: Whereas if your Book
were correspondent unto, and justifyable by that Title, it would be a Volumne
of Truths, Veritas in tolo, et veritas in qualibet part, even the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but truth, according to the constant custom of the
holy Apostics of Jesus Christ, in delivering heavenly Doctrines purely and
sincerely without fraud or deceit, as by St. Paul is protested, not only to
the Church of Rome, Sec ndum Vulgatem translationem, Rom 9.1. 1 Cor. 11.31.
Gal. 1 20.1 Tim. 2.7.
Veritatem dico, non mentior, testimonium mihi perbibente conscientia mea in
Spiritu Sancto: But also to the Church of Corinth, Deus, et pater Domini nostri
Jesus Christi scit, quod non mentior: And likewise to the Church of Galatia,
Ecce, coram Deo non mentior, And so also for the Church of Ephesians veritatem
dico, non mentior; But contrarily lying and Fraud punctually suites and agrees
with the judgment and practice of Apostataes and Apostaticall men, ( Builders
and upholders of the Church malignant whose doom is Destruction) Qui in
temporibus novissimis discedent a fide, 1 Timothy 4.1.2.
attendentes spiritibus Erroris, et Doctrinis Daemoniorum, in hypocrisi
loquentium mendacium, et cauteriatam habentium conscientiam suam: So as the
judgment of the Apostles is Verities Dialect; The judgment of Apostataes is
Errors Rhetoric: Now unto which of these two judgments ( Apostalicall, or
Apostaticall) this Adversary of ours R. B. and his Book do properly belong,
let the Sequel determine it; Whereby it will evidently appear (I trust) that
R. B. very well deserves the sign of the Whetstone, to be prefixed to the
Front of his Book, -- In perpetuan rei memoriam.

Your Tell-troth-Friend. P. H.

A direction for the Quotations.
HAving with great industry, difficulty, and pains, had a visible knowledge
(not trusting to second helps) concerning all the Authorities and Quotations
cited in this Tract, (save only one which I could find neither among the
Stationers or Booksellers, nor the Libraries at Westminster, or Sion College,
nor private Studies) I have for the accommodation of the searching Reader, set
down each Quotation so direct and certain in the marginall notes, as the same
may be found with ease; so as the several Impressions of each Book, be also
here set down; which are as follows. viz.

Names of the Authors. The times and places of Impression.
Augustinus. Basilia. 1542. Archidiaconus. Venctiis. 1601. Antiquitates
Britannicae. Hanoviae. 1605. Bellarminus. Coloniae Agrippinae. 1628. Baronius.
Coloniae Agrippinae. 1624. Binius. Coloniae Agrippinae. 1618. Budaus. Parisiis.
1541. Biel. In epistola. 1620. Dominicus Soto. Salmantica. 1568. Franciscus de
victoria. Lugduni. 1588. Gregorius de valentia. Lutetiae. 1609. Godwinus Episc.
Londavens. Londini (anglice) 1615. Historia Ecclesiastica per Basiliae. 1611.
Eusebium, Socratem, Zozomenum etc. Basiliae. 1611. Iohannis Reignolds. Londini.
1602. Mercellus. Venetiis. 1582. Optatus Milevitanus. Parisiis. 1631. Petrus
Paludanus. Panormitarms. 1527. Ruewardus Tapperus. Coloniae. 1577. Registrum
Cantuariense, in libris pergamenis, in officina Registrarii principalis
Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, in vico vocato (Doctors Comous) Lon, Sleidonnis.
Argeotorari. 1558.
A DISCOVERY OF A notable Fraud and Deceit committed by R. B. a Seminary
Priest, upon Two of the Articles of the Church of England.
SECT. I.
Adversary R. B. raises his Engines for undermining of our Church upon these
two several Articles of ours, to wit, the Three and twentieth Articles, and
the six and thirtieth Article following.

Article 23. R. B. pa. 206.
It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public preaching
in the Congregation, before he be lawfully called and sent to execute the same;
and those we ought to judge lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and
called to this work by men, who have public authority given them in the
Congregation to call, and send Ministors in the Lords Vineyard.

Article. 36. R. B. pa 346.
The book of Consecration of Archbishops, and ordering of Priests and Deacons,
lately set forth in the time of K. Edward the sixth, and confirmed the same time
by authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary to such
Consecration and ordering, neither had it any thing that of it self is
superstitious or ungodly, and therefore whosoever are consecrated or ordered
according to the Rites of that Book, since the second year of the aforenamed
King Edward unto this time, or shall be hereafter consecrated or Ordered
according to the same Rites, we decree all such to be rightly and lawfully
consecrated, and ordered.

Upon these Two Articles, are Three such Engines devised by R. B. for overthrow
of the Foundation of the visible and outward Entity of our Church of England in
point of Consecration and Ordination, (here delivered in his own words) as are
novell, and consequently unconfuted; The particulars whereof, are as follows.

R. B. OBJECTION. I.
Page 209. 210.
This new Protestant Queen Elizabeth (her Reign beginning here in the year
1558. and 1559. in her first Parliament) never had any known, public, allowed
square, Rule, form, manner, order or fashion whatsoever, for any to have
public authority to call, make, send, or set forth any pretended Minister
until the year 1562. when their Religion was four years old, and these
Articles were made, and in them the Book of King Edward the sixth about ten or
eleven years old, when he set it forth by Parliament, was first called from
Death, wherewith it perished in the first year of Queen, Mary: It has been
pretended -- that Matthew Parker was made a Bishop -- on the seventeenth day of
December; But (alas) they had then no form or Order to do such a business --
until four years after this pretended admittance, alleged to have been the
seventeenth of December 1559. Page 346.
Here I have proved demonstratively, that they neither have any lawful
Jurisdiction or Ordination among them: But to do a work of Supererogation, in
this so much concerning the standing or overthrow of our Frotestants whole
Religion, quite overthrown by this one dispute, if they have no rightly
orderly and lawfully consecrated Bishops, Priests or Deacons; I thus further
demonstrate.

Page 347.
First then, if the Decree of this (later) Article (as they term it) were to
be accepted and received for a just and law, full Decree, yet the first --
Protestant -- Bishops, Priests and Deacons in Queen Elizabeth's time, (from
which all that now be in England, or have been since then,) cannot be said to
be rightly, orderly and lawfully consecrated by this very Article it self: For
that supposed Book of King Edward the sixth being abrogated and taken away by
Queen Mary's Laws, and not afterward revived by the Protestant -- Laws of
Queen Elizabeth, until in those Articles, in the year of Christ 1562. (as
their date is) Queen Elizabeth beginning her Reign the 17 of November 1558,
all their first pretended Bishops, Priests and Deacons, must needs be
unrightly, unorderly and unlawfully made, though by that Book of King Edward,
because there was no Protestant right order or Law to make or admit any into
such places by that Book not approved or allowed by any Protestant -- right,
order or Law all that time.

P. H. ANSWER.
objection (more then once repeated) is nothing but a litigious and impertinent
quarrel for want of matter: For posito, That Archbishop Parker wanted in his
consecration some Punctilioes of outward Order for me or fashion according to
the prescript tenor of our Laws or Rules, or that there was not any law, or
public Rule of our Common-meale prescribing an outward for me of Consecration
then in ^cre, yet such want or Fayler did not nor could vitiate, destroy, or
annibilate his Consecration, celebrated in a sufficient Church manner, in esse
and substance good and valide, in regard regal Laws and Ecclesiastical
Canons are but circumstantiall and ad been ^sse, fitting and directing
(quatenus ad nos) the Ceremony and outward form thereof, which Order and
form, if it hap at any time upon just or reasonable occasion, not to be
pursued, the same is not destructive to such Consecration to make it invalide
or fruitless.

But of all others this objection becomes not R. B. nor any Romanist: First
because the Coneil. Parisi. 3 bin. Tom. 2. page 207. col. 2. nu 8 B. Synod 7.
Act. 8. can. 3. Bin Tom. 3 part. 1. sect 1 page 701. E. F. Synod. 8. cap. 22.
Bin. Tom. 3 part 1 Scot. 2 p. 647. col 1. A. and page 676 col a C. D. Council.
^ar. sub Gre Pop. 7. Bin. Tom 3 sas. 2. pa. 4^7 col. 1. F. baron Tom. 12 Ann.
1103. paragr. 8. page 33. Ft Ann. 111^. para 29.30.34. Et Ann. 1106. par. 33.
page 55. Et Ann. 1108. par. 25 page 67. Et Ann. 1119. paragr. 10. page 143. Et
^nno. 1139. parag. 5. page 89. nu. 25. Et. 1169. par. ^ 29. page 623.
Pontificians do exclude all civil and municipall Laws of Princes and
Republikes from Intermedling with those Ecclesiastical Affairs: wherein your
Romish rote is like the bold Optat afrie. milevit. lb. 3. page 64. August.
contr. liter. Pet. lb. 2.1.
Protest of the Donatists against Insperiall authority in Church business:
Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? What have Emperors, Kings and Princes to dowith
Ecclesiastical affairs? whereas seeing Kingsare both tosua 24.23. ad 28 and
34.31.22 33. Isay 47.23. S. August. contr. Cresc. li. 3.c.51. page 272. A. B.
and contr. Gaudent. lib. 2.c.11. col. 341. A. B. and Epist. 50. col. 207. ad
203.
Custodes utriusque Tabulae and Nutritii Ecclesiae Keepers, of both Tables, and
Nursing Fathers and Nursing Mothers of the Christian Church, it belongs unto,
and is a Duty of Regality, to constitute and ordeine laws concerning
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and the Regiment of the Church, and per potestatem
coactivam, by power coactive to enforce the due execution of the duties of
Religion, and to cause punishments to be inflicted on the Delinquents, to
succor the oppressed, and to cherish the good, both among Priests and Laikes,
as well in Church as Commonweal: But indeed the immediate Acts of the
Episcopal, Priestly and ministerial office, as Preaching, Administration of
Sacraments, and the Actual consecration of Bishops and ordination, of Priests,
Ministers and Deacons, belongs properly to the Pastoral charge.

Romish Church is guilty of violation both of Canons, and it is own
Pontifical, being content to derive succession from many incanonicall and
irregular Consecrations: For contrary to the tenor of the first general
Council. Nice. I. can. 4. Bin. Tom 1. page 297. col. 1. B. Epistdehan. pap. 3.
Bin. Tom. 2. part. 2. page 205. col. 2. D.
Council of Nice, and their own Iurists and Archidiac. super Dec part. I.
did. 66 pog. 88. Bellarm. Tom. 2. de mil. Eccles. lib. 4 cap. 8. p 189. B.
Quantum. Cardin. Turtecr. in Gratian. Tom. 1. part. 1. did. 66. Porro page 88.
Doctors, determining, that Consecration of a Bishop ought to be by Three
Bishops at the least, the Romish Church has not only consecrated some Bishops
by Bellar. Tom. 2. Not. Eccles. li 4. cap. 8 col 189. B.C.
one only Bishop and two mitred Abots, but has permitted Boy Johan. Reynolds
Apol. These. 26. page 292. cites many authorities for these Boyish heads.
-- Priests, Boy -- Bishops, Boy -- Cardinals: and Boy -- Pope too. And where,
by the sixth Council of Council Calced. genesis 4. Act. 15. can. 6. Bin. Tom. 2.
par ^^ page 327 col. 2. C.
Calcedon each Bishop ought to be designed to some particular Diccesse, your
Panormit. de offic. ordinar. cap Quoniam nu. 4.
Panormitan says, Multi sunt Episcopi sine administratione Episcopatuum, ut
sunt illi qui vulgariter Nullatenenses appellantur, There are many Bishops
without administration of a Bishopric, and they are those who are commonly
called Nullatenenses, Mere Titulary Bishops without profit or substance; Such
was Olaus Sleidon. Commom. lib 17 page 248. a.
Magnus, styled Vpsalensis, and Rokertus Venantius, styled Armachanus, who
(being Bishops in conceit) were sent to the Council of Trent to fill up the
number, and to make voices: And such (I say) was your Doctor Smith your late
Bishop of Chalcedon, commorant therefore here in England, and now or late in
France; Such Vtopian No -- Bishops have passed for current in your Church of
Rome, Where all Regularities, Formalities, Canons, and Legalities have suffered
most shameful violation, as testifies your own Baronius, Baron. Tom. 10 Anne
912, na. 8 col, 685.
speaking of the State of your Church in ages long since past: Quae tunc facies
sanctae Ecclesiae Romanae? quam foedissima? Cum Romae dominarentur
potentissimae aeque ac sordidissimae meretrices? quatum arbitrio mutarentur
Seeds, darentur Episcopi, Et (quod auditu horrendum, and intandum est)
intruderentur in Sedem Petri earum Amasii Pseudopontifices, qui non sunt
(nisiad consignanda tantrum tempora) in Catalogo Romanorum Pontificum scripti;
Quis enim a Scortis hujusmodi intrusos sine lege legitimos dicere possit
Romanos fuisse Pontifices? Nusquam Cleri eligentis, vel postea consentientis
aliqua mentio: Canones omnes pressi silentio, Decreta Pontificum suffocata,
proscriptae antiquae Traditiones veteresque in eligendo Summo Pontifice
consuetudines, sacrique Ritus, and pristinus usus prorsits extincti: What then
was the Face of the holy Roman Church? how filthy? seeing most potent and
filthy whores did govern and Rule at Rome, at whose pleasure Sees were
changed, Bishops appointed, and (which is horrid to be heard and heinous) their
Lovers false -- Popes were thrust into Peter's -- Seat, who are not (unless
only for designing the times) written in the Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome:
For who can say that these who were put in by such Strumpets without Law, were
lawful Bishops of Rome? No mention is made of the Clergy electing or
afterward consenting; All Canons were silenced, Pontifical Decrces choked,
ancient Traditions proscribed, and the old Customs and holy Rites and ancient
usage in electing the High Bishop, utterly extinct. Was not this a very bad
time, think you? Budaeus de asset lib. 5. sol. 199.
What was the latter age better? your- Budeus will tell you, Sacrosanctos
Canones melioribus annis factos, ut iis velut Regulis vita Clericorum
dirigeretur, and velut Patrum praescriptis posteri formarentur; jam in amusses
plumbeas'evasisse (quis non videt?) quales olim fuisse Canones Lesbiae
structurae tradit Aristoteles: Nam ut Canones plumbei and molles non structuram
operum tenore aequabili dirigunt, sed exstructorum commodo and libidine
stexiles structurae accommodantur: Sic Canones Pontificil excusu Ecclesiae
antistitum flexibiles plumbei and cerei facti sunt, ut jam diu instituta
Majorum, and Sanctiones Pontificiae non moribus regendis ^^sui esse, sed
(propemo^um dixeram) argentariae factitandae authoritatem accommodare
videantur; the holy Canons made in better Ages, that thereby as by Rules, the
life of the Clergy should be directed, and posierity be formed as by
Praescripts of the Fathers, are now turned into leaden Rules (who see's not?)
such as Aristotle says the Lesbian Ru'es-for building were in times past: For
now as leaden and soft Rules do not direct the structure with an equal tenor;
but are accommodated and bended unto the building at the will of the Builders:
So the Pope's Canons are by practice of the Prelates of the Church made
flexible as lead and wax, as that now along time our ancestors Decrees, and
Popes Canons serve not for guiding our manners, but (as I may say) seem to be
employed for Money -- Banks. And also let your Jesuit Franciscus de victoria
Doctor of the Chair at Sa^mani^e, Franc. de Victor. Rel 4. de potest. Papae
propos 6, page 39. and 48.
in Spain, tell you his knowledge herein, Videmus quotidie a Roman a Curia tam
largas, imo omnino dissolutas Dispensationes prosect is, ur Orbis far non
posset, nec solum in scandalum pusillorum, sed Majorum; and also he says,
Nullus quaerit Dispensationem quin obtineat: we see such large, yea such
dissolute Dispensations to come daily from the Count of Rome, as the world
cannot bear it, not only in scandal and offense of little ones; but of the
Great-ones also -- no man seeks a dispensation out he obtaineat: Ra ward Topp.
oral. 10. Anno 1552. page 199. and 200.
This is further consirmed by your Ruardus Tappesus Chancellor of Lovame,
Abusus Romanae Curiae inexcusabiles agnosci oportere, totum Ecclesrae corpus
contaminatum lapsu disciplinae, venalia esse omnia per monstrosas provisions,
regressus, and retrogressus, per commendationes Abbatiarum, and Episcopat number,
per Dispensations super Pluralitate Beneficiorum, and super aliis plurimis,
super quibus nec Christus ipse dispensare posset. The abuses of the Court of
Rome we must acknowledge to be inexcusable, the whole Body of the Church is
contaminated by the decay of Discipline, all things are sold by mastrens
provisions, R. turns outgoings, by besi^^ing Abbathies and Bishoprics by
Dispon sations in plurality of Benefices, and on many other things wherewith
Christ himself cannot distense:

Now seeing your Roman Church (not withstanding she has Canons and Rules
enough.) has nevertheless departed foully therefrom, does it not ill become
R. B. (a child of that Church) to cast dirt most causelessely on the beautiful
face of our purer Church. (yea I say) so pure and perfect as no Church this day
can parallel her for Doctrine and Discipline, so conformable to the Primitive
Church) and unjustly to traduce Her for supposed want of legal Form of
Consecration at the time of Doctors Parkers Consecration?

No legal outward Form or fashion prescribed for Episcopal Consecration,
then was not Doctor Parkers Consecration any Transgression of our Laws, and so
the less peccant or offensive: But indeed, neither Peccant, nor offensive at
all either to God, or Man; Not to God, in regard it was performed in
Apostolical manner by Imposition of hands, by apt words of the Gospel, accipe
Spiritum Sanctum (which is essential) done by men having power from God to
Consecrate, and with all essential Requisits whatsoever, and with fit
Circumstances, as holy Prayer, learned Sermon, and holy Communion, as indeed
nothing is therein urged by R. B. to the contrary: Not to man, being done by
the consent, approbation and command of Royal power signified by Letters
Patents, under the great Seal of England, after orderly and due election;
Whereby the Tenor of the former of the Decrecs of our Church cited by R. B.
before mentioned, (even before those nine and thirty Artieles of our Church
were established) was accomplished; So as he did not assume on himself that
Office, but was thereunto called by lawful Authority: And as for the latter of
our Decrees before mentioned, cited by R.B. (whereby it is ordained, that those
who be consecrated according to the Tenor of King Edwards Book, are thereby
adjudged to be lawsully consecrated) if it were true (as R. B. affirms it)
that King Edwards Book of Consecration was dead at the very time of Archbishop
Parkers consecration, or if he were not consecrated in all particulars
according to the Tenor and prescript of that Book, yet it does not follow that
his Consecration must be utterly void and invalid, as R. B. resolutely affirms
it, pretending that the Standing or overthrow of our Protestants whole religion
depends thereon; R B. page 346. 3. 7.
for if so, it would go very far for overthrow of the ancient Church, or at
least it would receive a deadly wound thereby: For notwithstanding the Council
of Sardica ordained: -- Episcopus -- non prius ordinaretur, nisi et ante
Lectoris munere et officio Diaconi et Presbyteri fuerit perfunctus, Council
Sardicenscap. 3 Bn. ^om 1. page 434. col. 2. F.
et ita per singulos gradus (sidignus fuerit) ascendat in Culmen Episcopatus;
potest enim per has promotiones (quae habent utiq. prolixum tempus) probari qua
fide sit, quave modestia, et gravitate, et verecundia A bishop may not be
ordained unless he has first performed the duty of a Reader, and the office
of a Deacon, and Presoyter, and so through each degree (if he shall be found
worthy) let him ascend the height of Episcopacy; for by these promotions (which
verily require long time), He may be tried of what faith, modesty, gravity, and
reverence he is: yet nevertheless Eusebius Baron Tom. 2. Anmo. 260. paragr 29.
col. 580.
Deacon of Alexandria was immediately made Bishop of Laodicea, and Zozom. Hist.
eccl lib. 4. cap. 8. Bin. Tom. 1 part. 1. sect. page 521. and Tom 3. part. 2.
sect. 2. page 423. co. 2. E. Council. Constanti. Ep. vel. hist. cons. B n. Tom.
1. page 521.
Nectarius, a neophyte and unbaptized, Catechumene was elected Patriarch of
Constantinople Bin Tom. 3 par. 2. sect. 2. page 4^4. col. 1. A. B.
and presently made Bishop in the second general Counsel, held at
Constantinople: Baron To. 4. Anno 375 paragr. 21.22.23. col. 395. 396.
And St. Ambrose of a consul was baptized and Consecrated Bishop of Millaine.
(d) And Eusebius a Magistrate, was baptized and made Archbishop of Cesarea.
Baron Tom. 4. An. 362. para. 50 page 29.
And also Saint Tharasius being a layman, was consecrated a Bishop: And
Marcell. correct. Sacr. Cerl 1. sect. 2 fol. 13.
in like sort Petrus Moronaeus, of a layman was made Pope of Rome. And (I
believe) nether R. B. nor any well advised Romanist will, or dare say, their
Consecrations were void:much less can R. B. irritate or make void the
Consecration of Archbishop Parker if it were true, that King Edwards Book of
Consecration was indeed atterly dead at the time of his Consecration, Socrat.
bist. eccles. lib 4 cap. 25. page 282. E.
because our Decree concerning that Book (before ricited) does not ordain that
if any Consecration be Celebrated, not in all and every Punctilio of that Book,
that such Consecration is judged, deemed, and decreed, to be utterly void and
of none effect; No, that Article is utterly Silent therein, it only
affirmatively says that such as are Consecrated according to the tenor of that
Book, are deemed and decreed to be rightly and lawfully Consecrated: so as the
Conclusion inferred by R. B. cannot be supported by the premises: try it
syllogistically, and it will be most manifest.

Whosoever is Consecrated Bishop according to the rites of King Edwards Book
of Consecration, is rightly and lawfully Consecrated, so says our Article;

But Doctor Parker was not Consecrated according to the tenor of King Edwords
Book of Consecration, so says R. B. in regard it was then dead, and not
m^rerum natura, as he alleges; ergo --

Doctor Parker was not rightly and lawfully Consecrated; so is the Conclusion
of R B. which is a false syllogism, being in no figure nor mood, nor any way
consonane to the rules of dialectical argumentation, if the little skill I have
in that Learning does not misguide me very much: For it were necessary for
maintenance of this Conclusion of R. B. (That Doctor Parker was not rightly and
lawfully Consecrated, and thereby our whole Religion overthrown) that our
Decree should have bin of this Tenor, (viz) Such as are Consecrated Bishops in
an other manner than is prescribed by K. Edwards Book of Consecration, we
decree him to be unrightly and unlawfully Consecrated; and thereon R. B.
mighthave had some color, or matter to infer his Conclusion, with this
manner of argument;

Whenever is consecrated Bishop in any other manner. form, or fashion, thou
is prescribed by King Edwards Book of Consecration, be is not rightly orderly
or lawfully comsecrated;

But Doctor Parker was consecrated in an other mammer, sorme, and fashion, than
is preseribed by King Edwards Book of consecration; Ergo, Doctor Parker was not
rightly, orderly, or lawfully, consecrated.

And yet this would not directly maintain this Pontifician's Conclusion,
unless it went more directly thus, Whosoever is consecrated Bishop in other
manner, than according to King Edwards Book, his Consecration is irruat; and
void.

But Doctor Parker was consecrated in other manner than is prescribed by King
Edwards book, Ergo Doctor Parkers Consecration is irruate and void: But this
matter being already most learnedly handled, and most soundly cleared by such
Heroes of our Church, as I am unworthy to hold the candle unto, I have been too
long on this point, because the thing undertaken by me here, is not to consider
how well and sufficiently R. B. has disputed, but how truly he has spoken,
in the matters by him brought into question; wherein the issue is whether King
Edwards Book of Consecration (being put to Death by Queen Mary's laws) was
never revived to life, till the making of our Nine and thirty Articles in Anno
1562, in the fourth year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth?

viz. Statute 2. and 3. Edw. 6. cap. 1. The Kings Majesty has appointed the
Archbishop of Canterbury and certain of the most learned and discreet Bishops,
and other learned men of this Real me to -- draw and make one convenient and
meet order, rite, and fashion, of common and open Prayer, and administration of
the Sacraments, to be had and used in England and Wales; The which -- with one
uniforme agreement is of them concluded -- in a Book entitled The Book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments and other Rites and
Ceremonies, after the use of the Church of England; wherefore it -- be --
ordained and enacted that -- all -- Ministers -- shall -- be bounden to say,
and use the Mattens, Evensong, Celebration of the Lords Supper, and all their
Common and open Prayer, in such Order and Form, as is mentioned in the same
Book, and none other, nor otherwise.

Form of Common Prayer, Adminisiration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and
Ceremonies established; But the Form of Consecration of Bishops, and
Ordination of Priests and Deacons was not thereby settled or established: And
therefore afterward there was made The Statute of 5. and 6. of King Edward the
fixed, Cap. 1.

The Kings most excellent Majesty has caused the aforesaid Order of Common
Service (entitled, The Book of Common Prayer) to be faithfully and godly
perus^d, explained and made fully perfect, and -- has Adjoined it to this
present Statute, adding also a Form and manner of making and Consecrating of
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; to be of like force, authority and
value, as the same like aforesaid Book (entitled, The Book of Common Prayer)
was before, and to be accepted, received, used and esteemed in like sort and
manner -- as by the said Act -- of the second year of the Kings Majesty's
reign was ordained -- for uniformity of Service and administration of the
Sacraments --; And the aforesaid Act to stand in full force -- to and for the
establishing the Book of Common Prayer now explained and hereunto annexed: And
also the said Form of making Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and Deacons
hereunto annexe, is it was for the former Book: And -- Be it further enacted
that if any person shall wittingly or wilfully hear or be present at any other
-- form of Common Prayer, Administration of Sacraments, making of Ministers,
and -- other Rites then are mentioned -- in the said Book -- shall suffer,
etc. -- Hereby (as is manifest) the form both of Common Prayer and Celebration
of the S^^am^n^s, and also Ordination and Consecration of Bishops Priests and
Deacons, was made One entire Book or volume: And afterward Queen Marie
ha^ing attained the Crown, did (as R. B. says) make an Act of Repeal in Anno
primo regni sui cap. 2. Thus: It is enacted and established, that one -- Act --
of Parliament -- in 2. Edward. 6. entitled an Act for the uniformity of
Service and Administration of the Sacraments throughout the Realm, and also
one other Act made 5. Edward. 6. entitled An Act for the uniformity of Common
Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments -- shall be from henceforth utterly
Repealed, -- and of none effect. --

This being that Act of Parliament, which R. R. says, killed King Edwards
Book of Consecration, it is to be observed, that this Act of Repeal does
expressly neither mention any thing in particular, nor in precise words
repeal any Law made for preseribing the sorme of Consecration, etc. -- But it
does repeal and mention only the foresaid Laws, entitled, Acts for the
uniformity of Common Prayer and Administration of Sacraments; which particular
is not here urged to gainesay it, but that thereby The authority for that
manner of Consecration and Ordination was repealed and annihilated, but it is
here offered for removal of a weak objection, which peradventure may be made
upon the Statute of Revier (hereafter mentioned) made in the very beginning of
the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Royal Queen Elizabeth (of ever most famous memory) as that (notwithstanding
the confident affirmation of R. B.) there was not in her reign (for preventing
of all scruples doubts and quarrels) any Consecration, Begun 22. Ianu. 1558. 1.
Eliz. and ended 8. May following 1559.
till Queen Mary's Law therein was repealed, and made utterly void by Stat. 1.
Eliz. cap. 2. thus, Whereas at the death of our late Sovereign Lord King Edward
the sixth, there remained one uniforme Order of Common Service and Prayer and
administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of
England, authorized by Act of Parliament holden in the sift and sixth years of
our said late Sovereign King Edward the sixth, entitled an Act for the
uniformioy of Common Prayer and Administration of Sacraments, the which was
repealed and taken away by Act of Parliament in the first year of the reign
of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Mary, to the great decay of the honor of
God and discomfort to the Professors of the Truth of Christ's -- Religion -- Be
it enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, that the Estatute of
Repeal and every thing therein contained, only concerning the said Book, and
the Service, Administration of the Sacraments, rites, and Ceremonies cont eyned
or appointed in or by the said Book, shall be void and of none effect, from
and after the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next coming: And
that the said Book with the Order of Service, Administration of the Sacraments
Rites and Ceremonies, with the Alterations and Additions therein added and
appointed by this Statute shall stand and be from and after the said Feast of
the Nativity of Saint John Baptist in full force and effect according to the
tenor and effect of this Statute, any thing in the foresaid Estature of Repeal
to the contrary not withstanding: Now by this Act of Parliament the aforesaid
Act of Queen Mary being repealed as concerning this very Book which
comprised in it as well the Consecration of Bishorps and Ordination of Priests
and Deacons, as the Celebration of Divine Servic: and administration of the
Sacraments; And from and after Mid-Summer then following, in Anno 1559. The
same Book being in all things become again in full vigor and force, then
afterward was Doctor Parker (our first Protestant Bishop, which was made in
Queen Elizabeth's Reign) elected, and consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury
(for ought by R.B. urged to the contrary) rightly, orderly and lawfully
according to public known and allowed Square, rule, form, order and fashion:
which Book and all Consecrations ab initio regni Elizabethae Reginae, were
again Confirmed by Act of Parliament 8. Elizab. cap. 1. not for any need of
it, but to satisfy some causeless scrupulofities; If it be objected, That in
this last Act there is no express mention of Consecration, then it is answered
(as before touched,) That Queen Mary's Law made no express mention of
Consecration neither: But to make it Sans doubt, by this Law is Queen Mary's
Law made utterly void, Whereby King Edwards Laws therein became in force, And
more-over, by this Law of Queen Elizabeth that Book (which is but one Totum)
is recontinued and set in it is full strength and virtue: Hereby it appears
what little regard R. B. had either to the force of truth, or to his own
Reputation and credit, by affirming with bold considence, that this Book was
first called from Death to life, by the nine and thirty Articles only, and that
the Church of England had not for the space of four years any public
allowed form of consecration of Bishops or Ordination of Priests and Deacons.

SECT. II.
R.B. OBJECTION. II.
Page 343.
Again the first Protestant Censecration or admittance of any to be a Bishop
by that Book or Order in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, was on the 17 day of
December in her second year (as they pretend from the Register of Marthew
Parker) But their own both private and public Authorities prove, Godwyn Catal
of bishop Durbam 58. Cath. Tunsto'l Stow hist Queen. Fliz. an. 1. Injun. Eli.
Reginae. Injunct. 8.28.40.51.53. R.B. page 348. 1.
that both Matthew Parker (their first pretended Archbishop) and others were
received and allowed for Archbishops, and Bishops about 6 months before their
first pretended Consecration on the 17 of December; -- For Parker Barlow,
Scory, and Grindall, were allowed and received for Bishops in the month of
August before in public S^emniti^s: -- None can say; these were only Bishops
Elect, and not perfectly allowed or admitted for the true Bishops; For by the
Statute of Hen. 8. Anno 25. revived by Queen Elizabeth in her first Parliament
Anno 1. cap. 1. it is ordained that Consecration must be within twenty days of
Election.

P. H. ANSWER.
Doctor Parker not our first Protestant Archbishop, seeing ( Archbishop
Cranmer was his Predecessor, but our first in Queen Elizabeth's time) was
allowed Archbishop of Canterbury five or six months before the 17 of
December 1559, which is the time ascribed for his Consecration; And also
Barlow; Scory, and Grindall were allowed, and acknowledged Bishops before; But
what use you would make of it I know not, unless it be to the end, that the
Reg^ster which Records the Consecration of Archbishop Parker on the 17 of
December 1559. should be thereby conceived to be fictitious and untrue, such (I
think) is your meaning, because you elsewhere call that Register (a newborn
Register) which is contraryed by the outhenticke Register of Canterbury, R. B.
page 209.
whereby it so appears to be a true and faithful Register as nothing needs to
be said for it: But be your meaning there in what it will, I had upon the first
reading of the former part of this Objection, this ready! Answer That Doctor
Parker might be Bishop elect all that time. But R. B. well foreseeing the
readiness of that kind of Answer, did immediately take that help from me (as he
thought) by trumping in my way his Statute of Consecration within twenty days
after election, so as it cannot (as he says) be alleged that He stood Bishop
only elect for the space of five or six months together: But shall R. B. be
so gently used, As to say, He in mistaken? If I should so deal with him, I
shall (in good sooth) be mistaken then too. For I cannot conceive that an old
Student can be so mistaken in such a matter as ordinary Schoole-boyes may
easily know by mere reading, without help of Tutor or Expositor; I pray God
it was not wilfully done, contra dictamen conscientia suae, against his own
particular knowledge per bypocrism.

Here are the words of the Statute.

Statut.25. Hen. 8.cap.20.
Be it enacted that if any Archbishop or Bishop within the Kings Dominions
after Election -- shall be signified unto them by the Kings Letters Patents,
shall refuse and do not confirm, invest and consecrate with all due
circumstance -- such person as shall be elected-and to them signified -- within
twenty days next after the Kings Letters of such signification -- shall come
to their hands -- That then -- every Archbishop, Bishop and other persons so
offending -- shall run into the dangers, pains, and penalties of the
Estatute of provision and Praemunire. It it not most evidently obvious to every
Reader, that This, Act does not ordain that Consecration shall be within
Twenty days next after Election, but within twenty days next after the
Kings Letters signifying such Election, shall come to those who are by his
Majesty appointed to be Consecrators of the New-Bishop? And the very troth is,
Register Parker. Lib. 1. fol. 2. a.b. and fol. 3. a and fol. 9. b.
That Matthew Parker was elected to be Archbishop of Canterbury on the first
day of August 1559. But the Queens Letters Patents signifying his Election
were dated not before the sixth of December following, and be was confirmed the
ninth, and Consecrated the seventeenth of December aforesaid: So as his
consecration was celebrated within the time limited by the Law, And on the 21
of the same December was Edmond Grindall consecrated Bishop of London, and from
the time of their Elections, they stood all the while Lord Bishop elect: And
Barlow and Scory were Bishops consecrated long before Q Elizabeth came to the
Crown, as in Answer to the subsequent objection shall evidently appear: But
in the mean time, let it be observed, that where he says in this place, that
Barlow and Scory were allowed Bishops in August 1559; R.B. page 210. 211. Vide
hic infra. Object. 3.
He elsewhere says, the said Barlow and Scory were not allowed for Bishops
till the 20 of December following, And is not that a direct contradiction? But
what cares be or the Iesuited party for contradictions or false-hoods, so as
belief be gained from the simply credulous?

SECT. III.
R. B. OBJECTION III.
Page 350.
NEither was there any One of the pretended Consecratours of Matthew Parker
(from whom all the rest do claim Ordination,) Franc. Mason, book of
Consecrat. lib. 3 ca. 4. page 127.
a true and lawful Bishop by Protestant proceedings: These they name unto us,
William Barlow, John Scory, Mikes Coverdale, John Hodikins; By these was
Matthew Parker consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury the seventeenth of December
in the year 1559. Two of these four (namely) Coverdale and Hodskins were
never allowed for Bishops inall Queen Elizabeth's time, as the pretended
Register, the printed Antiquitates Britamicae, Godwyn, Mason, and others of
them confess, confessing also, That the other Two were but Bishops elect,
Barlow elect Bishop of Chichester, Scory elect of Heresord; But all men grant
both Catholics and Protestants, that Men only elect Bishops, not
consecratedor admitted, cannot consecrate Bishops, much less an Archbishop
Metropolitan.

R.B. page 210. (...), antepenult.
And William Barlow, and John Scory were not allowed by these Protestants for
Bishops or such men, until Matthew Parker was (as they pretend by their
Register) consecrated; Antiquitat, Britan. page 39. Editio Hano v. Anno 1604
by them William Barlow, styled before Doctor of Divinity, or a Priest Regular,
-- And John Scory then styled only Bachelour of Divinity and Priest Regular,
-- were first allowed for Bishops, or such men, the 20 of December 1559, even
three days after Matthew Parker's pretended He means (surely) consecration.
Ordination by them.

P. H. ANSWER.
two former objections were purposely framed for the undermining of the
Consecration of Archbishop Parker and all his Successors, as done without any
Protestant -- Order, rule, form, or fashion, which is (as you see) vindicated
to be regular and formal, according to Protestant-publike right, square,
form, and Order, notwithstanding any thing urged by R. B. to the contrary: Now
the last Objection tends to the destraction of all Episcopal abilities in the
Consecration of Archbishop Parker; First R.B. says, That two of them were
never allowed for Bishops in Queen Elizabeth's Reign: And secondly the other
two were but Bishops elect, and consequently incapable to Consecrate any other;
unto both which I return this Answer.

two, supposed not to be allowed by Queen Elizabeth (to wit) Coverdale and
Hodskins, He says not, that they were not Bishops de facto, but not allowed
to be Bishops, what strength is there in that Proposition? Examine it thus, and
you shall find nothing in it.

Whosoever (though once Consecrated for Bishops) were not by Protestants in
Queen Elizabeth's reign allowed for Bishops, did become in such sort no
Bishops, as that their Episcopal Acts were ipso facto, mere Nullities, and of
no validity.

But Coverdale and Hod kins (though both once consecrated Bishops) were not
allowed for Bishops by Protestants in Queen Elizaboths reign.

Ergo the Episcopal Acts of Coverdale and Hodskins, (though once consecrated
Bishops) were ipso facto me^re Nullities and of no validity.

If R.B. or his vindicatour will grant the Major, then I know what will become
of the Romish Church in England, and of all Episcopal and Sacerdotall Acts by
Romish Bishops and Priests in Consecrations, Ordinations, Marriages,
Sacrifices, absolutions, etc. even to be here in England mere nullities:
Again I perceive R. B. did faint in his Assertion, not adventuring to say,
that Coverdale and Hodskins were either no Bishops at that time de factor,
Council Trid. Sess. 23. can. 4. Bin. Tom 4. part. 2. page 328. Col. 1. ^.
or were disallowed to exercise Episcopacy, which for to do, he ought to
maintain that they were never at all consecrated to be Eishops; and if he
allow them to be once consecrated Bishops, then he ought to produce some Act
or Sentence for unbishoping of them, or for discharge of their exercise of
Episcopacy, which he does not go about to do; But (I say) it was neither the
one, not the other, but it proceeded from themselves whatsoever was wanting
therein, they beingin truth long before consecrated lawful Bishop, neither
they themselves nor the State of the Realm holding or judging them to be no
Bishops here quoad officium, or passing any Sentence against exercise of it,
but they did not exercise of themselves at that time Episcopacy here quoad
Beneficium.

But posito, these two had been excommunicate, deprived, deposed, or degraded,
had they not nevertheless by your own Doctrine continued Bishops, quoad
characterem, and quoad officium, (as well as Priests) having such a Character
by Consecration and ordination imprinted as is indelible? your Council of
Trent determines it for you; Siquis dixerit per sacram Ordinationem non imprimi
Characterem, vel cum (qui Sacerdos semel fuit) Laicum rursus fieri posse,
Anathema sit; if any one shall say that a Character is not imprinted by holy
Orders, or that He which once was a Priest can be made Lay again, let him be
accursed: And such also is the Character of Episcopacy, as according to the
Romish Doctrine, neither by Schism, heresy, excommunication, suspension,
deposition or degradation, it can be obliterated, as your Greg ac Valent. Ies.
Tom. 4. disp 9. qu. 2. punct 1. pa. 894. Secundus effectus. --
Gregory de Valentia, Biel. in 4. sent. did. 25. qu. 1. fol. 31. col. 1. C.
Gabriel Biel, Dam. Soto. in 4 sent. did. 25. qu. 1. page 58 col. 2. contra
hunc. --
Dominicus a Soto, Capreol lib. 4. sent. did. 25. qu. 1. art. 3. page 272.
col. 1. in margin.
Capreohis say. And also your great Bellar. Tom. 3. De effectu Sacrament. lib.
2. cap. 19, 20, 21.22. page 46, 47, 48 Et de Sacra confirmat. lib. 2. cap. 12.
page 92. col. 1. C.
Cardinal Bellarmine says, Observandum est Characterem Episcopalem esse
absolutam perfectam and independentem potestatem conferendi Sacramenta
Confirmationis and Ordinis, ideo non solum posse Episcopum sine alia
Dispensatione confirmare, and Ordinare; sed etiam non potest impediri ab ulla
superiori potestate, quin re vera Sacramenta ista conferat, si velit, licet
pecc^t, si id faciat prohibente Summo Pontifice: It is to be observed, that the
Episcopal Character is an absolute persect and independent Power to confer
the Sacraments of confirmation and Orders, therefore a Bishop may (without any
Dispensation) constitute, and ordain; and not only He cannot be hindered by
any superior power, but also he may confer those Sacraments, if he will,
though he offend if he do it, Petrus de Palude in 4, Sentent. d. 25. p. 1.
art, 1.
the high Bishop prohibiting it: And likewise your Petrus de Palnde says. Si
non omnis Episcopus potest Ordines confer, hoc esset, vel propter Demeritum'
vitae, quia esset malus; vel propter defectum Fidei, quia Haereticus; vel
propter Sententiam Ecclesiae, quia esset excommunicatus, vel suspensus, vel
alias praecisus; vel propter Depositionem ab Ordine, vel quia esset Degradatus,
sed nihil istorum impedit, quin omnis Episcopus possit veros Ordines confer:
if every Bishop cannot confer Orders, it would be either by reason of Demerit
of life, because he is wicked; or by defect of faith, because be is an
Heretic, or else by reason of the Sentence of the Church, because he is
excommunicated, or suspended, or otherwise cut off; or because he is deposed
from Orders, or because he is degraded; but none of these do hinder, but that
every Bishop may confer true orders. So as if Coverdale and Hodskins had
been deposed in Queen Elizabeth's time, yet might they consecrate an other:
And if you say, Fieri non debet it ought not to be done, then I say, Factum
valet, and dissolvi non potest, being done it avails, and cannot be undone:
But here the Consecration of Archbishop Parker by Imposition of their hands was
so far from doing ought therein in Contempt of or against Authority, as that
it was done by Regal Assent and Command comprised in the Queens Letters
Patents directed to them and others to Consecrate Doctor Parker to be
Archbishop of Conterbury: The Letters Patents are thus: Elizabetha Dei gratia,
etc. Reverendis in Christo Patribus -- Miloni Cover dale quondam Exoniensi
Episcopo, Iohanni Suffraganeo Bed etc. Elizabeth by the Grace of God,etc. --
To the Reverend Fathers -- Miles Coverdale late Bishop of Exeter, John
Suffragan of Bedford, etc. whereby it is manifest they were allowed, and also
employed as consecrate Bishops in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign.

posito, they had not been allowed Bishops, yet if Deposition or Degradation
cannot obliterate the Character of Episcopacy, but it is still in force,
quatenus ad officium, as concerning the office, notwithstanding the benefits,
profits, and all that pertaines ad exeroitium jurisdictionis, as concerning the
exercise of jurisdiction be taken away, how little hurt can not-allowance, or
disallowance do? But if I may speak my mind freely, I conceive that when R.
B. said, that Coverdale and Hodskins were not allowed for Bishops, in all.
Queen Elizabeth's time, he did intend, that his Vulgar Reader should believe,
that they were never Consecrated Bishops at all; For I cannot easily be
persuaded, but that this old Student did well know, that Coverdsle and Hodskins
had been long before Consecrated Bishops, and still continued Bishops de jure;
For the Records declare it plaincly, that Hodskins was 9. Masonus de Minister.
Aug. lib. 8.cap.30.page.372.lat. impr anno 1638. Regist.Cran.sol.261.
Decembris 29. Hen. 8. Anno Domini. 1537. Consecrated, and so continued till
his death; from whom the principal Bishops in Queen Mary's reign descended:
By him was Consecrated, Thomas Thurlby, who was one of the Consecrators of your
Cardinal Poole, Arehbishop of Canterbury: and as for Coverdale, he was 30.
August. 1551. An.2. Edw. 6. Regist. Polisol. 3.
Consecrated Bishop of Exeter, who being displaced and imprisoned by Queen
Mary, was at the desire of the King of Denmark, Godwin lat Exeter 32.page 413.
sent to his Majesty by the same Queen; And returning back in the beginning
of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, he being aged, cared not to return to his
Bishopric, but retired to a private life, not allowing himself Episcopacy,
quoad Beneficium, et jurisdictionem, yet he still continued true and perfect
Bishop, de jure, quoad esse, et Titulum; which two, Coverdale and Hodskins did
join with the other two, Barlow and Scory, in the Episcopal Act of
Consecrating of Doctor, Parker, to be Archbishop of Canterbury.

Barlow and Scory, be righted concerning their Episcopacy, whom R. B. pretends,
were but elect Bishops, not Consecrated nor admitted, as by our own Authors is
supposed to be confessed: If this allegation were true, nothing (I think) were
to be said on their behalf: But it is so apparently false, as that it makes me
admire the little regard this R. B. had, to his reputation and credit amongst
men (If there were no divine doom or judgment for Liars) in adventuring to
put in Print, what he could not, but knew to be directly contrary to what he
divulged to the world: For the very same Record and authority of ours, that
informed him, that these two then stood elect Bishops, the one of Chichester,
and the other of Hereford, does also tell him that they were late Bishops, the
one of Bath and Wells, and the other of Chichester: For the Queens Letters,
Patents, to them and others directed, signifying the election of Doctor Parker,
to be Archbishop of Canterbury, requiring them to Consecrate him accordingly,
has these very words (viz) Will'mo Barlow quondam, Bath and Wells Episcopo,
Rigist. Parker Libr.1.fol.3.b.Reman in Recor. Cur. Cancellar.
nunc Cicestrensi Electo; Iohanni Scory quondam Cicestrensi Episcopo, nunc
Herefor densi electo. To William Barlow late Bishop of Bath and Wells, now
elect of Chichester, John Scory, late Bishop of Chichester, now elect of
Hereford etc. Godwin. Catal. Chichester 39.et page 474. Audaxi inscitia.
By which any one having his eyes in his head, might as easily se: quondam
Episcopo late Bishop, as read nunc electo, now Bishop elect: But who is more
blind than he that will not see? and as for Barlow, he was so far from
standing then merely Bishop elect without Consecration or admittance, as that
he had been Consecrated about four and twenty years, before he laid hands on
Archbishop Parker; Regist. Cran. fol. 179. Godwin. Catal. Asaph. page 552. et
St. Davia's 78. et Bath and Wells, 45. et Chichester, 41.
For he being advanced to be Prior of Bisham was thence translated to be Bishop
of Asaph, wherein he was confirmed the 25. of February, 1535. Anno 27. Hen. 8.
and in April 1536. it pleased King Henry to prefer him to the Bishopric of
Saint David's, where he continued till by King Edward the sixth, he was in Anno
1549. Regist. Park. lib. 1. fol. 39. b.
Translated to the Bishopric of Bath and Wells; And in the beginning of
Queen Mary's reign, he was forced to leave his Country, Bishopric and all,
living in exile in Germany, till he was restored by Queen Elizabeth; And at
the time of the Consecration of Archbishop Parker, by the favor of Queen
Elizabeth, he stood elect of Chichester, wherein he was 20 December, 1559.
confirmed; And as for Scory, he was above eight years Consecrated Bishop ere
he imposed hands on Archbishop Parker: Regist. Cranm. fol. a. Godwin. Catal.
Chichester 39 page 474.
For he was 30. Augusti 1551. Anno 5. Edw. 6. Consecrated Bishop of Rochester,
and shortly afterward translated to Chichester; And being displaced by Queen
Mary, Regist. Parker 1. lib. 1. fol 23. a.
he was advanced by Queen Elizabeth; And at the time of the consecration of
Archbishop Parker, he stood elect of Hereford: And the book of Antiquitates
Britannicoe making a Series of the Bishops of that time, distributes it into
eight Columns (viz) 1. Academiae, 2. Diocesis: 3. Nomen: Antiquitates Britan
page 39.
4. Gradus: 5. Ordo: 6. Patriae: 7 Aetas: 8. Consecratio et confirmatio: And it
declares Barlow to be by degree (Doctor in Divinity) and by order (a Priest
regular) and Scory to be by degree (Bachelor of Divinity) and by order (a
Priest regular) And it does express them both to be confirmed on the 20 of
December, 1559. but it does not declare them to be Consecrated that day, nor
the nomination of them by their degrees and orders does intimate them to be
then no-Bishops, as R B. enforces it: for they were long before Consecrated
Bishops as before is declared; But they having forsaken their Bishoprics in
Queen Mary's reign for persecution, remained beyond Seas, till the Crown
fell on Queen Elizabeth, and then being returned home, they were elected to be
Bishops, the one of Chichester, the other of Hereford; and three days after,
Archbishop Parkers Consecration, they were confirmed in those several Seas, as
aforesaid. Wherefore upon these particulars let R. B. recollect himself, with
consideration how he can make it good, that Barlow and Scory either de-facto
were (or else confessed to be) at the Consecration of Bishop Parker no more but
Bishops elect, not Consecrated, nor admitted, and then ingenuously in the name
of God confess his Error, professing that (as Protestants and Papists
acknowledge) Bishops elect being formerly Consecrated may rightly Consecrate
others, before they be confirmed in their new Seas.

modo retrogrado ire, reckoning backward, that Coverdale, Hodskins, Barlow,
and Scory, were all Consecrated Bishops long before, and so continued at the
time of their Consecrating of Archbishop Parker; And forasmuch as Archbishop
Parker was Consecrated according to the law within twenty days after the date
of the Queens Letters Patents, signifying his election (though he was elected
five months before) And forasmuch also as the Protestant order, rule, form,
square, and fashion for a Episcopal Consecration, according to King Edwards
book was then in full vigor, virtue, and force, it must undeniably follows,
that Archbishop Parker and all our first Bishops in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign, and all other our Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, ever since
were and are (notwithstanding the allegations of R. B.) rightly, orderly, and
lawfully made, Consecrated, and ordained, according to public, known, and
allowed square, rule, form, manner, order, and fashion. And it is most
manifest that what R. B. has said against it upon the grounds before
mentioned, are vain and frivolous: (And me thinks) it is strange that in so
few Leaves of that book of R. B. there should be so many untruthes, every of
those particulars being so many several False-hoods, manifestly contrary to
it is Title: The judgments of the Apostles and first age, more consonant rather
unto the Judgment of Apostates and worst age: A shame to the Author (an old
Student in Divinity) more agreeable to the old Serpent, or at best, more fit
for ignorant boys; and most unworthy to be a Present for our sacred Queen
Royal Mary: But indeed what can be expected of those, whose Religion holds
Lying and Equivocation, to be piae Frauds, Godly deceits in the learned
Clergy, and ignorance to be Matter devotionis, the Mother of Devotion, for the
Illiterate Laiety.

For mine own part this parcel of the Book being found to be so faulty, it
causes me justly to mistrust the rest of it, and to hold it not worthy of so
much Expense of time, as to read any more of it, leaving it to your Index
expurgatorius for due Correction; or else to our Purgatory fire in Smithfield,
Fer utter destruction.

The like Martyrdom deserves another lying Brat, begotten by as false a Parent
(not so learned and wise a fellow) as R. B. put abroad into the world, about
ten years ago: For, Sir Humpb Lind Via tuta page 154. 155.
whereas Sir Humphrey Lynd said, that although the Doctors of ancient Church
did rest in Two Sacraments (Baptism and the Lord's Supper) as generally,
Necessary to salvation, yet they called many Rites and Ordinances by the name
of Sacraments, as -- The sign of the Cross, Exorcisme, holy-Bread given to
Catechumeni^s [Novices in the Faith] One Master John Heigham (a Papist) taking
on him to answer that Book, 10. Heigham via vere tuta page 425. 426.
does most unconscio ably turn the word [NOVICES] into [NOVICES] and so very
untruly pretending that Sir Humphrey Lind had thereby yielded, that the Sign
of the Cresse, Exorcisme, holy-bread, holy water and the like, are ( No vices
in the Faith) endeavors most absurdly to make Sir Humphrey dispute against
himself, and the Church of England: And by that silly devise, this Heigham
takes occasion to slide from the point, without any answer at all to it, Hi
sunt Fratres in Malo: Falsehood incorporates it self in Fraternity, against
sacred Truth (walking here desolate a while) Sed magna est veritas, et in die
suo pravalebit, divine and holy Truth will in her season become Victorious and
Tryumphant, with Gloria in excelsis, hurling black and ugly Error and
False-kood, headlong into the Bottomeles Pit, the dark and noisome Cave of that
wicked monster Abaddon, the Father of Lies:

Amen, Amen.
EPILOGVE or APPENDIX.
two sorts of people among us whisper their Conceits; the one, are the Preciser
sort (people of good intents) demanding of me, why I have in this Tract
several times used the word ( Priest and Sacerdotall) rather than the word [
Minister and Ministeriall] does it not savor of Popery? Are you not inclined
( Sir) a little to allow and relish the Mass Priest, Sacrifice and Altar? For
removal of such misconceits, if any such arise, I say, I used the word [
Priest and Sacerdotall] because it is indifferently used with the word [
Minister] sometimes the one, sometimes the other, not only in our public
Lyturgie, but also in these two Articles now in some sort vindicated against
our Romish Antagonist R. B. And in the same sense do I also intend it: And for
mine own part, I conceive that [ Sacrifice, Altar, and Priest] may be all
indifferently used, [as Supper, Table, Minister] even in this present age, as
well as in the Primitive age, and as far it is now, from any just and real
offense unto judgments and consciences rightly informed and disposed, as it
was to the Fathers of ancient Church, and unto the Primitive Christians (being
holy Saints and Martyrs.) But Popery (which came in by Intrusion secretly into
the Church betwixt the Primary and later purity) has caused such a distaste to
words and phrases of aniquity (extremely abused by Romanisme) as that these
terms ( Sacrifice, Altar, Priest, are become edious, or at least scrupulous,
especially unto weak judgments and tender consciences; which may (I suppose)
be easily rectified and sufficiently satisfied with this one Distinction or
Method (for many,) when the Holy Eucharist is spoken of as a Sacrifice, (as
often it is among the Ancients, and so might be by them, and may also by us be
called Sacrifice, to wit, Commemoratory and Sacramental) then may be useed th
word ( Priest and Altar) as words relatively suitable, and convenient: But when
the Eucharist is spoken of, as the Lords Supper, (as so it is according to
Scripture Phrase,) then the words ( Table and Minister) is the meetest adjuncts
for that subject; And thus we may join with Antiquity both in language and
sense without offense, and thereby explode and reject as erroneous, the
doctrine of Sacrifice proper and propitiatory, Mass Priest, and reall-Altar.

Affront to Episcopacy.
The other is Popish Faction, whom (me thinks) I hear say, that although we
Papists must confess that the frauds of our Brother R. B. are now so
discovered and laid open; as that He cannot by any of us be fairly defended
or excused; And therefore the Consecration of Archbishop Parker, and
consequently of all the English Bishops since, and now being, must stand sacred
and valide, notwithstanding any thing produced, pleaded, or proved by R. B. to
the contrary: yet ne-verthelesse let us Romanists cheer up our selves, sparing
our labors and pains to seek the overthrow of the Episcopacy of the Church
of England: For see we not? that a great multitude of the Members of their own
Church, yea of their Clergy too; do lowdly cry down Episcopacy, not only
quoad personas for exorbitancy by personal misdemeanors, and for over large
exercise of jurisdiction in their function, too too bad (as is alleged,) but
also quoad officium. and jus Episcopatus, against the Right of Episcopacy, as
Antichristian and intolerable in the Church, devised by man, and not ordained
by Christ. And therefore they would have it utterly abolished out of their
Church: And instead of it, they would have their new devised Presbytery to be
Consistorially set up for Government of the Church, as that which is indeed de
jure divino, and consequently Presbytery ought to be put into Possession of
the Church, and Episcopacy to be ejected out of it: Howbeit others indeed do
allow of the right of Episcopacy, only desiring moderately some Reformation,
and limitation of the Bounds and exercise of it, to the end it may be brought
into some convement Temper: We Romanists do with great expectation wait upon
the success thereof, not doubting but that this Division will do the
English-Protestant-Church more harm and mischief, than a thousands such as
our R. B. can do with Frauds and lias: and will sooner destroy their Church,
than our Gunpowder plot (had it taken effect) could have done: Mark 3.24, 25,
26.
For Christ's Maxim is infallibly true, Si regnum, aut domus contrasese
dissideat, non potest stare illud Regnum, aut illa domus: A Kingdom or house
at division within it self, cannot stand, but must fall to ruin and
destruction.

P. H.
Now therefore seeing many men have of late vented themselves in this cause,
let me also come in with my vote tco, as an Appendix to this Tract of mine,
conceiving it to be a fruitless work, Episcopacy vindicated by Scripture.
to quit our English Episcopacy from the Batteries raised up against It by
Romesh R. B. (a known and professed enemy of our Church,) if it suffer by
Brethren at home (naturally wounding deepest,) I therefore adventure to say,
That (me thinks) seeing Ordination of our Ministers has hundreds of years
been and is in this Kingdom immediately derived from Episcopacy, this clamor
(specially by Ministers) against Episcopacy (as Antichristian) should be
spared, even for their own sakes; and should be by Ministers more tenderly
handled, least it be retorted upon them, that upon their own grounds, their
own Ordination and Admission into the Church is from Antichristianity, and and
from a Power before God unlawful.

Ejectione firm.
But howsoever, for as much as these Presbyterians have brought an Ejectione
firm against Episcopacy, pressing to have Episcopacy to show forth It Is
Evidence, and to prove it is Title to be Ex Iure Divino, or else to be ejected
out of the Church; I Causidically say in Defense of it, That Episcopacy ought
not (under favor) by leg all proceedings to be compelled thereto, because
Episcopacy has possession in the Church of God, And so has had many hundred
years, Some for it say sixteen hundred years, and upwards, ever since
Christianity was embraced in the World, And it is Adyersaries do either
acknowledge or cannot fairly deny it, to be so for the space of thirteen or
fourteen hundred years, and not in a corner of the Church, but universally
in Christendom; And in such a Case Possidenti conceditur, without
Prescription, Possession is a good right and title a against all men, saving him
only, that can make a good and better title first to appear; And until the
Pretender do make his Right and Title to appear, the Possessour should not be
enforced either to prove, or show forth his Right and Title: Let then the
Consistoriall Presbytery both show and prove that A standing Ecclesiastical
Court consisting of Presbyters, and of twice so many Laikes to be annually
elected to bear Rule, to Govern, Hooker Eccles. Polity, preface, page. 5.
and to be Judges in the Church, were by Christ or his Apostles ordained or
established, and this Consistoriall Power, and it only, and no other, should
for ever bear away this Government Ecclesiastical: which proof onght to be
made (not by Texts stretched from the genuine sense, or by words of equivecall
and double sense or several significations) but by clear and manifest Record
of Scripture, which (I believe) is a task unperformable: I am sure it wants
that prosperous Success and blessing which accompanies Divine Institutions,
according to that divine Axiom truly delivered by Gamaliel, Act. 5.38, 39.
Si est ex hominibus hoc opus, dissolvetur; Sin ex Deo est, non potest
dissolvi: what is of humane invention may perish or come to nothing, what is of
divne Ordination cannot perish, though at some time and in some place be
resisted and persecuted, and so become clouded and eclipsed; yet it will be
resident somewhere or other, and it will in time convenient be disclouded and
become conspicuous and transplendent again; apply to the present Case, The
Blessing has ever gone in an eminent and conspicuous manner with Episcopacie;
But Presbytery Consistoriall, is at the best supposed to have had buta little
entrance in some narrow part of the Church, once in the first -- hundred
years, and again in this last -- hundred years, but has been at an
inter-regnum, at a loss and vacation for many hundred years, How can we then
judge your Presbytery to be of God, and our Episcopacy to be of Antichrist?
Presbytery non surted.
it this be the Evidence on the behalf of Consistoriall Presbytery, as such it
is, (as I conceive clearly) then must it become non suite; and Episcopacy must
keep it is Possession still, amending it self, or else be caused to amend,
what is amiss in it by personal defects. or by bad Customs.

Episcopacies Title.
Although Episcopacy thus prevail upon this Nonsuite, yet nevert helesse ex
abundante, I will produce such evidence as I have found and collected for it,
out of divine Records, to prove Episeopacy to be ex Iure divino, assuring my
self, that others, as well those of ablest parts, as those whom it more
concerns, are provided of other evidence, and also of a way to apply the same
better than I can: But for making good my undertaking, I offer these three
particulars to be considered, concerning Episcopacy.

Ministerial, 2. An office or power merely Episcopal, 3. Exercise of
jurisdiction; Title of Honor and Dignity, and competency of Revenewes:

Ministerial or Sacerdotall, is Authority to preach the Gospel, and to
distribute and give the Sacraments: this power ex Iure divino, it is Christ's
own Ordination, as is agreed on both sides without Contradiction: Wherein
there is indeed a Parity in the Ministry, in so much as such
Ministeriall-acts, done by an inferiour-Minister or Priest, are as valid and
effectual, as if the same were done by the highest Prelate in the Church.

Episcopal, is to ordeine and to admit Ministers into the Clergy: To suspend
or punish such of the Priesthood as become delinquent, or neglect their Cure
or charge; to make use of the Keys in binding and loosing by judicial
sentence, out of, and into the Assemblies of the Church, both Clerkis and
Laics, upon just and weighty causes; and generally to govern the Churches,
for the prevention of the creeping in and growth of Heresy, and Error; for
support and maintenance of Unity, without Schism or Division; And for to Rule,
Govern and Command, and to be ruled, governed, and to obey, in such sort as
Church affairs may be duly and rightly performed, and done in the Churches,
whereof they are Superintendent.

bic non illic, sic et non sic, in this and not in that Dioces or province, in
this and not in that manner, or other than is allowed, prescribed, and
authorized: Title of Honor and Dignity, to be Lords and Piers of Parliament;
and to be endowed with fair Estates and Revenewes annexed, as adjuncts unto
Bishoprics in this Kingdom (to wit) to be Lords and Peers of Parliament; and
to possess and enjoy Lands and Tenements of value correspondent, which are
called Temporalities, etc. These are ex gratia Principis, et Reipublica: So as
of the first, and the last, there is no controversy or doubt, (as I take it)
And therefore the first being ex Iure divino, may not be abolished out of the
Church, it being de esse, of the essence of the Church; and the last, being ex
Iure humano, and de been esse, of accommodation, may be corrected, restrained,
and limited in such Moderation, as shall by Superiors be found and adjudged
most meet and convenient for the welfare, of the Church and Commonweal of
England.

Episcopacy not de jure humano.
whether it be de Iure divino, or humano, of Christ's Institution, Invention?
and (if it be divine) or of man's whether it was conferred upon all the then
Clergy, equally or to some conjunctim or divisim, as Superior over the rest?
I assume in the first place, that this office is not de Iure humano, Reasons.
of man's ordination, for these two Reasons; The one, Christians, so as the
Temporal power could not be the Parent or Founder of this office in the Church:
but when the Emperor Constable intine became Christian, he indeed advanced Bishops
both with honors and Revenewes, and so other good Emperors and Christian
Kings did increase it more and more; But this Episcapail office of
Superintendency, was long before any Advancoment of honor, or Revenew, was
conferred by Princes on Bishoprics; Yea long before the Bishops could enjoy
any assurance of peace for life, or member being generally Martyred and
persecuted for the Gospels sake: Reason is, because this office is Spiritual,
which necessarily requires a Divine hand and Power, to be the Author, Founder,
and Institutor of it, and that must needs be Jesus Christ (the mystical head
of the Church) from whom all divine and spiritual gifts, are derived unto his
mystical Body, and each member thereof: Without all doubt, Christ had in
himself this office and power of government, Mar. 28.18.19.20. Ma^ke 16.15.
John 20.20, 21, 22, 23.
and of binding and loosing; For the divine Text says, All power in heaven and
earth was given to him; And out of his large Stock of power, he after his
Resurrection did confer some parcel of it unto those who should after his
Ascension, be Governors in the Church saying unto them, that, As his Father
sent him, so also he did send them; giving them Command to go unto all
Nations, and to teach what he had commanded, and breathing into them the Holy
Ghost, gave them power to bind and loose: Mat. 20.25, 26.-7, 28. Mark
10.42.43, 44, 45. Luke 22.25. Vos 26, 27.
Which gift of power and authority, was not contrary nor repugnant unto his
pleasure, signified unto them formerly, saying, The Kings of the Gentiles
exercise Lordship over them, but ye shall not d^e so, which Prohibition (
Verum non it a erit inter vos) or ( Vos autem non it a dominabimini) ye shall
not rule or domineere so, (or in such manner as heathen Princes used to do)
was not an absolute Prohibition from use of all manner of Superiority, among
the Clergy; but a Prohibition aliquo modo. a qualified Prohibition, not to
Rule as heathen Princes used to do, tyrannically after their- own wills (with
Stat pro ratione Voluntas) their pleasure to be their Law, for their own ends,
not regarding the welfare of the people; Will. Archbp. of Canterb conference
wub M. F sher. S. 6 pa, 5 et. 247. Mar. 23 8 9, 10.10.13 13.14.15.
which prohibition, aliquo modo, or suomodo, does infer an allowance of ruling
in the Church, aliquo modo, in a temperate and charitable manner, otherwise
what shall be said to a Text containing a stricter Prohibition, than this Text
does, and that is, where Christ forbids his Disciples to be called Masters,
with a strong reason for it, because they were Omnes frat es all Brethren: If a
convenient exposition can be fitt^d to this Text, that Christ did thereby for
bid unto them ambition or Title, ^t forbidding what himself assumed, saying ye
call me Masier and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am, but was so far from
affecting of honorable Titles, as he bears himself so lowly and humbly, as
that He washed their feet, exhorting them to do so likewise, and the chiefest,
and greatest among them to be Servant, tanto altior, tanto submissior, the more
honorable in out ward condition, the more humble in mind, and in submissive
deportment; If this Text (being literaliter of an absolute Tenor of
Prohibition) may receive a benign interpretation; much more may the Text ( Vos
non ita dominsbimini --) being not an absolute, but a qualified Prohibition,
may receive the like exposition, that Christ did thereby for bid such ambitious
and tyrannical Government, as was exercised by Pagan-Princes; and allowed
nevertheless of ruling in the Church by Superiors upon Inferiors; otherwise
the Consistoriall Fresbyters therefore may neither rule, or govern, nor be so
much as called Mastors; but what need of seeking further for Proof? this our
Text affords it sufficiently by our Saviors words, of Maximus and minimus, he
that is greatest among you, Luke 22.26.
let him be least, Qui major est in vobis fiat sicut minor, (maximus erit
Minister) not that he that in authority is made Superio, should be pulled down
by his Inferiors, but still be Superior in authority, and also be humbled in
himself, Mar. 20.28.
to minister unto Inferiors, just as Christ (being most Supreme) came to
minister, as follows there in the next verse.

Binding and loosing, I say not to all the then present Clergy, but to some as
Superiors, to exercise it upon others as Inferiors: episcopaty, ex jure
divino.
For which purpose, it is to be noted, that Christ had a Cler^y of two sorts,
to wit, the Apostles, and Seventy Disciples, the Apostles were first called,
made nearest unto him, and in Communion with him, the Seventy Disciples were
called afterward, and sent out from Christ two by two; to the Apostles and to
the Seventy Disciples equal Commission and power was given. Mar. 4.18, 20, and
10 1, 2, 8. Mark 3.13, 2, 19. Luke 9.1, 2, 10, and10.1, 2, 20.
1. To preach the Gospel, 2. To administer Sacraments, 3 To heal and cure
diseases. 4. To work Miracles: This office they all had in Parity and in
Common among them; but the office and power of Mission or ordination of others;
for the jadiciall use of the Keys, for binding and loosing in the Church, and
of Governing in the Church, to preserve the Doctrine of Faith and order
therein, was conferred on the Apostles conjunctim et divisim, jointly and
severally; to them Christ said, As my Father sent me so I send you, 10.1.4^4,
43, and 3, 22, and 4, 1, 2. Commission corjunction et divisim.
to the end by power of that Mission they might send others, as he had sent
them; Into them he breathed the Spirit of truth, Accipite Spititum Sanctum, for
the establishing of sacred Doctrines, and for prevention of heresies and errors
in matters of Faith; and to them were the Keys of binding and loosing of
Delinquents and Penitents, out of and into the Church, for offenses unto the
Church; and for the absolute confirmation of them in this sacred office, the
Holy Spirit did according to Christ's promise, visibly descend on them at
Pentecost, Luke 24.49. Act. 1.4. Act.2.1.2.3.4.
after Christ's Ascension into heaven: In all or any of which particulars, the
Seaventy Disciples (for ought I read in Scripture) had not any immediate
participation or share; and according to the Power and Authority of this
office, conferred on the Apostles, jointly and severally, they did whiles they
were all at Jerusalem, convene and assemble together, Act.
1.2.6.13.20.23.24.25.26.
and elected Mathias to succeed Iud is in his Bishopric, whereof he was
deprived by his Treason to his Master, and by his Act of Felo de se: And these
Twelve Apostles at another Assembly did ordain (for their ease) Seven Deacons
at a time, Act. 6, 1, 2, 7.
laying Apostolical hands on them; and being afterward met in Council, they
made a Decrce or Canon, for the present deportment of the Churches; and
according as the present number of the Apostles, was either more or less, so
they executed the same power and authority by sewer in number; Act. 8.14.17.
for Peter and John being come to Samaria, they two only executed the same
office by Ordination of others, with imposition of hands, and with Prayer;
which makes it appear, that this Commission was committed to the Apostles,
Conjunction et divisim, and it was necessary to be so, seeing they were to be
dispersed the one from the other for Conversion of the Nations of the world: In
so much as the same office which was executed, Conjunction by all jointly,
whiles they were together, was shortly after only executed by two of them: but
it must be reduced to one alone, or else peradventure it will not satisfy,
though (for my own part) this President of executing it by two, is sufficient
to make it appear, that this Commission and office was given Divisim, to be
executed by any one, as well as by any two of the Twelve, there being no
express direction to authorize two, more than any one, but it being naturally
included; (and so the Apostles rightly understood it) it was sufficient; Nam
expressio eorum, quae tacit insunt, nibil operatur: What is included need not
be expressed.

God willing) be here made apparent, that both before the Apostles were severed
and dispersed among the Gentiles and afterward, Execution by one Episcopally.
this Office and Commission was executed by one of the Apostles alone: whilst
the company of the Apostles were at Jerusalem it pleased God, that Samaria
received the word, and there one Simon Magus, seeing the holy Ghost was given
by Imposition of hands by Peter and John, He would have purchased the
Holy Ghost with money, whereupon Saint Peter alone making use of the Keys,
Acts 8.18, 9, 20, 21
binds Him with this Malediction, That he had no part nor portion in that
matter, and his money perish with him; And how fast it stuck to him, both
Scripture and Ecclesiastical story do relate; And Ananias and Saphyra,
dissembling and lying; were so bound by Saint Peter's sole Act of binding as
(divine Justice smiting at the Cue thereof) both fell down dead to the great
amazement and wonder of the Spectators: Acts 5.1.1010
wherein he exercised this Office of Binding.

And Saint Peter being come to Casarea (at the request of Cornelius) He
commanded that Cornelius and the company should be baptized, which was done
accordingly; by which Act Saint Peter did exercise his Office of Commanding,
Acts. 10 44.4S
and obedience was yielded upon his sole C^mmand: and Saint Paul reasoning in
the Synagagnes of the lowes, and finding them to be opposers of his Doctrine
and Blesphemers of Christ, He sbooke his raiment, and by the Power of the Keys
exercised by himself alone, Acts 18.2.5.6.
He did bind them to hear their blood upon their ^wne h^ads, and so it
afterward succeeded accordingly; And be having summoned at Milet us the Elders
(the Spiritual Governors and Superintendants of the Church) saves [ Spiritus
Sanctus so; Act. 10.17.18.
constituit Episcopos] ye are by the Holy Ghost made Bishops: And rebuking the
Church of Corinth for their Sedition and Division, He tells them, He was a
Master Builder (whose Office is to direct how and in what manor the fabric
shall be framed and erected, i Cor.^.3.10 10.
and to superview the work, and to command the workefolkes to do e their
work, and to place and displace, whom he thinks good for the better ordering
of the Business:) And then Saint Faul after some reprooses, does give them
warning, 1 Cor. 4.14,15,
(which carries in it the Sense of Authority) telling them, that though they
had ten thousand Teachers, yet he was their Father; which imports awe,
reverence, and Power: And for that cause He sent unto them Timothy, Ib. ver.
17.
which manifests Saint Paul to be Superior Mittendo, by the Act of Mission,
and Timothy to be Inferior and under obedience, cundo by Going: And moreover
Saint Paul reproving them about the Inecstuous person, does behave himself
therein as their chief Bishop exercising this Office both of Government and
Ruling, and also of Judgment, Doom and censure by Power of the Keys in
binding and loosing; For concerning that Offendour, 1 Cor. 5. per totum.
he says I have judged already; and then He commands them, That in their
Assembly, they should In the Name of Jesus Christ and Saint Paul's spirit (to
wit) of binding Power, Deliver him unto Satan, by casting him out of the
Communion of that Church for castigation of the flesh, that the spirit might be
saved; And then He gives them command, Not to associate themselves with
Fornicatours, covetous persons, extortioners, or Idolatours, and this he did
do in the Spirit or Power of judging, For a minore ad majus he says, They
themselves did pass judgment on them within, as for those without the Pale of
the Church, He says, He judged not, but leaves them to the judgment of God,
and then in the power of that Office of Judging and Commanding, He requires
them, to put from among themselves ( or excommunicate) that wicked incestuous
person: Cor. 2.6. to 10.
And as Saint Paul had by the power of the Keys caused that incestuous person
to be excommunicated; So be afterward absolves him, saying, I forgive him, and
willed the Corinthians to forgive him too, and to restore him, his punishment
being sufficient, and to confirm their love to him, and so he tried An in
omunibus obedientes, their obedience by it: And those Corinthians having had
suits in Law one against another in the Courts of Iusti^e among Pagans, 1 Cor.
6.1. to 9.
how does Saint Paul handle them for it? even as a man of authority and awful
power, Audet aliquis vestrum? Dare any of you do it? And concerning the matter
of Marriage, and single life, he gives Rules or Canons as a Supreme Governor,
To azoyd Fornication, Let every man have his own wife, and every woman her
own husband; the unmarried and widows, (if they could not abstain) to marry;
And to the married, He gave command, let not the wife depart from her husband,
And putting them in mind of his Ordinances (or Canons) in these and other
things. He praise them for keeping his Ordinances and then He makes more
Canons, 1 Cor. 11.2. to 15. and 28.1 Cor. 14.34, 39.
laws, and Ecelesiasticall Ordinances, for receiving the Communion in both
kinds; For uncovering Men's heads, and covering woment heads in the Church, And
for silence to be kept by women in Church, assemblies and all things to be done
with Decency, and Order: And as concerning Collections for the Saints, he
commands them, that look what Order he had given at Galatia, even so they
should do, and repeates it to them, 1 Cor. 16.1.2.
what that Order was: were it not a folly (think you) that Saint Paul should
take on him to make Orders, Rules and Canons, it he did not know, He had Power
and authority both to create them, and also to put them in execution in those
several Churches? And the same Saint Paul writing to the Church of Galatia
complains, that some had endeavored to pervert them from the Gospel, He by
the Power of the Keys does accurse with Anathema such False Teachers: Si quis
whis evangel zazerit praterid, quod accepistis, Gal. 1.7, 8, 9.
Anathema sit; And to the Church of Thessalonica, He gives his Commands to
withdraw themselves from such as walk disorderly and not after the Traditions
(or Ordinances) by them received from Him, 2 These. 3.6.10, 12.14.
commanding, that he that would not work should not eat, and that with
quietness they should work and eat their own bread, and requiring, that
they which obeyed not his word, they should not associate or keep company with
them: And as for Hymenaeus and Alexander, who were retrograde in the Faith,
Saint Paul by power of the Keys, did deliver to Satan, and in particular He
binds Alexander the Copper-smith (who had done him much Evil) to be rewarded
by the Lord according to his works: Thus it is manifest, that Saint Paul alone
as Metropolitan and Superintendent of several Churches or Diocesses, did
exercise this Office of Government; of making Canons, Rules and Ordinances; of
Mission and Ordination; and of censures by Binding and Leosing: which He did
do without Conjunction with, or assistance of any Consistory or Presbytery, or
any other with Him as I conceive.

Episcopacy delegated unto successors.
And now finally, least it should be alleged that though this office was in
the Apostles, as well divisim, as anjunction equally, yet it ended with them,
as to the execution of it by one alone; and then it fell into the Church
promiscuously, or into the Consistory, which if any shall say, Let it be
proved, and take it; But the contrary appears evidently, for Saint Paul
delegated it unto Timothy, and Titus, the one instituted Bishop of Ephesus, and
the other Bishop of Crete, as is evidenced by these Scripture-particulars:
Saint Paul tells Timothy, that he had disposed of him for Ephesus, to the end
he should charge others, that they should teach no other Doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.3^
which carries in it matter of power and Authority, not to permit false
Doctrine: And the Apostle as Metropolitan gives Timothy his charge and rules,
how he should govern and order the Ephesian Church, willing and appointing how
men should pray with hands erected, 1 Timothy 1.18. and 2 Timothy 2.8.0.
and women to be adorned with modest apparel, with shamefastness and modesty,
learning in silence with subjection, nottaking on them to teach, or to usurp
authority ower the man: And then the Apostle declares as an undoubted truth, 2 Timothy 3.1.4.9.11.
that the desire of the office of a Bishop is a good work, whose care ought to
be to rule his own Family well, that he may rule the Church the better; and he
having given Timothy several instructions, he appoints him, to command and
teach them, not only teach them, as a Presbyter, but also command as a
Superintendent and Superior; otherwise he might command and do it himself:
and concerning Elders, Widows, and Children, he appoints Timothy, to give
them in charge to be blameless, and gives him powor of receiving and rejecting
of Widows, into and out of the care of the Church, which is a parcel of
authority surely; and as for the Elders, he appoints Timothy to let them be
counted worthy of double honor; 1 Timothy 5.17.19.22.
surely then Timothy was a person of greater honor and authority, other wife
he could not confer honor on others: and as for the power of
Ecclesiasticall-judic^ture, Timothy must not receive an accusation against an
E^der, but before two or three witnesses: Which informs me, that Timothy had
power as an Ecclesiastical Judge to hear and determine complaints, and to
examine witnesses, and to give Sentence: and Elder being Presbyter shows that
he was Judge of Presbyters and Teachers, And as for Mission and Ordination, it
is clear as the Sun; that Timothy had that power to Execute it alone; for he
is exhorted, suddenly to lay hands on no man, and Timothy himself was
ordained and consecrated to this Office per prophetion aforehand eum
impositione manuum presbytery, 1 Timothy 1.18 and 4.14.
with imposition of hands by the Presbytery (non per Presbiteros, not by the
Presbyters but by the office of the Presbytery) which may be done by one, as if
I say, I receive Baptism at the bands of Priesthood, I say true, though it be
always done by one Minister only, 2. Tim. 1.8.
and so it appears this was; For Saint Paul says it was perimpositionem
Manuum mearum, by imposition of my hands, which adds confirmation to the
former point, that one Apostle did and might execute this office of Episcopacy;
and so a Bishop might then be consecraeted by one, as Timothy then was,
Council. Nicen. 1. can. 4. Bin. 10. p^. 161. col. 1. P.
though afterward (when the stock of Bishops was stored) it was Decreed, that
Conseeration should be done by three at the least; And never thelesse for the
point in hand, our Apostle here appoints Timothy that what he had heard from
Saint Paul, he should commit to faithful men, able to teach, which is the
Power of Ordination of Ephesus, 2 Timothy.2.2.14.
which Ministers he was to charge, that they should not strive about words
tending to the subversion of the Auditory, which comprises in it matter of
Episcopal Authority. And as for Titus, the Apostle tells him, Tit.1.5..
that he also left him in Creet, aini corrigea qua desunt, to the end that he
should set in Order things wanting, and constituat, per Civitates Presbyteros,
and ordain Elders in every City, which plainly declares that Titus was
ordained Bishop of Crete by Saint Paul alone; and that Titus had power
delegated to him to rule and govern, otherwise he could not set things in
Order, and had power to ordain teaching Elders, (to wit) Presbyters and
Ministers, which Jurisdiction and power was not to be Exercised in one Parish
only, but the Text says, in every City; whereby Titus had a large Dixes or
Territory. And at the end of these Epistles of Saint Paul to Timothy and Titus,
it is recorded (though peradventure not Scripture, yet exceeding ancient, and
(next Scripture) the Church of the Ephesians; and Titus ordained the first
Bishop of the Cretians, I shall conclude with that of the Spirit of God to the
Angels of the seven Churches in Asia. Reve. 2.
These were not indeed Angels, or spiritual Essences, for real Angels are not
partly'good, and partly evil, nor to be chargedwith good things and with had
things too, as the best nun are: For Angels are either totally good without any
mixture of finne, as are the blessed Cherubins and Seraphins, and other
heavenly Spirits, or else totally deformed and wicked, as Diabolical spirits
be; The word (Angel) in this piece of Scripture must needs be borrowed to
express somegreat men and glorious in those Churches, as Kings are for
Majestic and power called Gods, So Bishops and Superintendants are here called
Angels, being persons eminent, and glorious for Ecclefiasticall honor and
piety: And as there were in Asia just seyen Churches mentioned, so the Angels
or Superintendants are reckoned to be only Seven, one for each Church; to
whom in particular is directed the Message of the Spirit of God, on behalf of
themselves, and the Church under each of their Governments; like the Message of
an Emperor to his several Princes and Governors of his several Cities
concerning detention of Tribute, it is delivered and directed unto the several
Princes and Governors only, but it is for and on the behalf of them selves
and the people under each of their Principalitieis: And that there were then
indeed Superintendents or Bishops over those Seven Churches of Asia is
manifested by Ecclesiastical History; But what is comprised in sacred
Scripture is so ample and clear to this purpose, as there is no need of
Authorities or proofs out of History: Howbeit ancient and authenticke
Ecclesisticall Histories do declare, how that as Cities and Common-ireales
were converted to the Faith, Bishops were (even in the Apostles days)
ordained, to be Superintendents over those Cities and Countries, and of the
Apostles and Disciples were ordained Bishops of some of those Seas, Eusebiu.
lib. 2. cap. 1. Anto. Cron. part. 1. ccp. 8. paragr. 1.
as James (called Brother of our Lord Jesus) was immediately after Christ's
Ascension ordained by the Apostles Peter, James and John to be Bishops of
Jerusalem: where He continued thirty years, and then suffered Martyrdom;
Saint Peter was first Bishop of Antioch, where he continued seven years; and
Mark the Evangelist, was the first Bishop of Alexandria; and as the Churches
in several Provinces increased, so the number of Bishops increased, where they
had Successors for many hundred years: And this Office of Episcopacy bath
ever continued in the Catholic Church hitherto, And therefore if Scripture
were dark, and not clear in this point, yet if there be but a print or
shadow of Episcopacy there, seeing the same was immediately after our S^^^^^^
Ascension put in practice by the Apostles, and has had penpetuall continuance
and Succession in the Church of God ever since, the same is a sufficient
Exposition of the meaning of Scripture, if it were obscure in it; but seeing
the Scripture is (in my opinion) clear in it, and continual Succession has
blessed it, my judgment is captivated and convinced, and my conscience is fully
satisfied, That this Office Episcopal is exjure divino, and that this
Episcopal office was sometimes executed by one Bishop alone, and sometimes by
one Bishop as Supreme Superintendent with others Presbyters as Assistants,
bearing this mind nevertheless, to be corrected by Superiors, and to be
informed by more forcible prooses, and to be reformed in whatsoever is
mistaken, professing ingennously, than this is not thus presented on any
supposall, that these Records of Scripture have not beenc already produced; it
ia truly acknowledged that this point has bin both long since, and also of
fate by several learned Doctors and Divines famous in our Church most solidly
and soundly vindicated; But seeing old Arguments on the Presbyterian party,
some in the same old clothes, and some with new apparel, have been of late
revived, and come abroad without any notice taken of the clear Defenses made
on the Episcopal party by the learned in those times, I think I may thus
petere petita, sing an old song too: which was never before (I think) thus
dressed. Sure I am, I being no way engaged to either party, in particular
profit orinterest, am the more impartial, being only swayed with the Power
and Evidence (I think) of perfect and unconquerable Truth out of Gods --
Book, not professing these all the Scripture proofs for it, nor that every
singular Text here vouched do clearly prove the point, but hoping that each
Text does render somewhat toward it, and some and many of them direct, and all
connexed, do together become (I believe) invincible, conjunct, vincunt, si
singula prosint And what I have here presumed is merely my own conceptions
(without address to any promptuary or other belpe) which is intended (not for
disputation or controversy, but) as a Corolarium to my Tract against R. B. for
declaratum of mine Opinion (backed with Scripture prose) which strongly inclines
my Heart to cleave, with all filial duty, submissive Obedience, and:humble
reverence unto our holy Mother, our sacred Church of England, long blessed with
the use and honor of Episcpacy and (I trust in God) shall ever be to the end
of the world. And now whiles our Romish Adversaries are (according to Divine
providence) by One or other utterly ejected and convinced, let not, O let not
any unhappy schism, division or fruitless Contention distract us at Home (the
high way to loose all; which the great God of Peace, by the high; merit of our
Sacrifice of Peace, with sweetest influences of the blessed Spirit of Peace
prevent in time, firmly and strongly binding with the Triple-Cord of Peace
(Truth, unity and Love) all our unhappy breaches in a solid and perpetual
Conjunction of Christion Amity in Church and Common-weak. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
April 22. 1641.

Imprimatur, THO. WYKES.
Errata.
p. stands for page. l. stands for line of that page. m. stands for margen. l.
stands for lim of that margen p. 4. m. l. 12. read (230.) for 203.) m. l. 17.
read (276.) for (297.) p. 5. l. 3. read (beretofore) for (therefore.) p. 17. l.
17. read (conscerators) for (consecration.) m. l. 14. read (1605.) for (1604.)
p. 23. l. 15. read (most) for (must.) l. 24. read (place it.) l. 28. read
(apply it.) p. 29. l. 17. read (power is.) p. 30. l. 4. blot out (to wit, to be
Lords and Piers of Parliament and to possess and enjoy lands and tenements of
value correspondent.) l. 20. read (conjunction and divisim.) p. 32. m. l. 7.
read (and 10. unto 8.) l. 10. read (Luke 9. 1. to 10.) p. 33. m. l. 13. read
(Act. 6. 1. to 7.) l. 34. put in the margen (1 Timothy 1. 20.) and Tim. 4. 14.)

