The Happy Lovers Pastime:
Showing how a Nymph and Shepherd vowed to love,
As long as they had life and strength to move;
They count all pleasure else but a toy,
To that of Love, it is the life of joy:
They constant prove, in all things do agree,
To Lovers all I wish the like may be.
To a Pleasant new Tune, called: On the Bank of a Brook.


ON the bank of a brook as I sat Fishing,
hid in the Oziers that grew on the side,
I overheard a Nymph and Shepherd wishing,
no time nor fortune their love might divide;
To Cupid and Venus each offered a vow,
For to love ever as t hey loved now.
Oh! s^id the Shepherd, and sighed! what a pleasure,
is love concealed betwixt Lovers alone*
Love must be secret, and like fayry treasure,
when once discovered, 'twill quickly be gone*
So envy and jealousy where they do stay,
Oh! too soon, alas, will make a decay.
Then let us leave the World and care behind us,
said the Nymph smiling, and gave me her hand,
All alone, all alone, where none can find us,
in some far Desert we will seek a new Land.
And there live from invy and jealousy free,
And a whole world to each other we will be.
Up rose the Shepherd, and said that a blessing,
more sweet no Lover could ever enjoy,
Were I departing, these words then expressing,
would fetch me to life, and sorrow destroy,
Nay, add but a Kiss, and grim death will soon say,
I will never take such a Lover away*
The Second Part, To the same Tune.


THen said the Nymph, if they have so enflamed,
wh^^ would those do which I do conceal*
They wo^ld far exceed what has been yet named,
but has not power them yet to revea^*
For when I do think for to utter them plain,
They back from my tongue do soon sl^p again.
But shepherd i will tell thee how long I Have loved thee
and where thou at first did kindle my flame,
'Twas in the month of May that you first moved me,
but with what charms I need not to name;
And '^was near a River that run by a Grove,
You tried to taste the pleasure of Love.
But under a shady Tree Cupid did wound me,
and in my kind breast he fixed his Dart.
But oh! the t^me was too short when he crowned me,
I wished that sweet minute might never depart.
And I long to be crowned with the pleasure again,
For all our long wishes to that is but vain.
My dearest I hope I ^an't gained thy displeasure,
for what my kind tongue has uttered now,
Oh! think, it is my love that burns without measure,
making me keep to the words of my vow,
But think what we promised loves Queen and her son,
'Twas to love ever as when we begun.
Fair nymph, said the youth, thou do not offend (...)
you banish my grief, and pleases my mind,
I Will venture my life in fight to defend thee,
and think i am happy such honor to ^^nd.
And if ever I prove dis^o^al to thee,
Blind Cupid I wish to sacrifice me.
But my dear do not ever once fear me,
for I adore all thy beauties ^iv^ne,
And that for the true love I do now have thee,
i would make thee a Dutch^ss were power but mine
But si^ce that such honor I cannot bestow,
I Will give you such gifts you never did know.
Now on thy Rosy lips i will give thee sweet kisses,
whilst my arms shall most loving embrace;
But if thou art disposed to have thy sweet wishes,
then let us depart to some other place,
Then said the fair Nymph, let us have to a Grove,
And there we will enjoy the pleasure of Love.
So then they kissed and embraced each other,
but they resolved there no longer to stay;
They w^sh't no misfortunes their joys might smother,
and sung this as they past on their way,
My dear let us join both together and try,
Which can love the most my dearest or I.
Printed for Charles Passinger, at the Seven Stars, on London Bridge,


