SAFETY IN THE MIDST OF DANGER.

A SERMON Preached in the Church of Alhallowes Barkin, Jan. 4. 1655.

Upon the Anniversary Commemoration of that dismal Fire which happened in the
said Parish, on Jan: 4. 1649.

By NATH: HARDY Minister of the Parish of Saint Dionis Back-Church.

Sedul. Carm. lib. 1: Ignibus innocuis flagrans apparuit olim
Non ardens ardere rubus, nec juncta calori
Materies alimenta dabat, nec torrida virens
Sensit damna frutex, sed amici fomitis aestu.
Frondea blanditae lambebant robora flammae.
LONDON, Printed by J. G. for John Clark, and are to be sold at his Shop under
St. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1656.

To the Worshipful Henry Hunter, Esquire. Mr. James Man, Merchant. Mr.
AbrahamPerret, Gent. Mr. John Wood;Merchant. Mr. Thomas Salmon. Mr. Henry
Merchant, and Mr. Samuel Burrell, Gent.

Worthy Friends,
IT is the Psalmists assertion concerning God, Psalm. 111. 4.
He has made his wonderful works to be remembered, Ainsw. ibid.
or (as Ainsworth tracing the footsteps of the Original more closely, reads
it) He has made a memorial of his mavelous works. Indeed as God expects
that men should, so (knowing our dullness) he has taken care himself that the
remarkable dispensations of his providence shall not be forgotten.

Divine works are of two sorts, either blazing Comets, or shining Stars,
blustering Storms, or gentle Showers, woeful Desolations* or merciful
Preservations. Those are acts of Justice, these of Mercy, both of Power, and
God has made memorialls of both.

That his exemplary justice on seditious Corah and his accomplices might be
perpetually remembered, Number. 16. 38.
he commands their Censers to be made broad plates for a covering of the Altar,
(for so it follows) and they shall be a sign (to wit, rememorative, and
thereby commonitory) to the children of Israel.

That his eminent Mercy to the Israelites in the Wilderness, (...)hem 9. 15.
when raining bread out of Heaven, he give them (to use the Psalmists language)
Angels food, Psalm. 78. 15.
might be recorded to posterity. Moses (as the Lord commanded) bid Aaron take a
pot, (...)xod. 16. 33.
and put an Omer full of Manna therein, and lay it up before the Lord (for so
the reason is expressed in the next words) to be kept for their Generations.

This extraordinary event which happened, was doubtless a special effect of
Providence, and that such as was mingled with severity and clemency, severity
to them who were consumed in, clemency to you (my Honored friends) and the
rest who were delivered from, or snatched out of the flames. And surely your
Anniversary Commemoration of so notable a work, deserves singular
commendation, that being thankfulness indeed which consults for renewed
praises, by repeated memorialls.

In pursuance of this pious design, I conceive it is, you have desired this
Sermon to be made public, that being (according to Gods command concerning
Isreal's deliverance, Exodus 17. 11.
and Amelek's discomfiture) written (yea Printed) in a Book, Time (which is so
great a devourer) might not consume the memory of this consumption. And
Printing (which is so faithful a Register) might preserve the memorial of
this preservation.

In order to this end, I have concurred with your desires, and caused this
imperfect piece to see the light. Commending it to Gods benediction, You and
yours to his protection, I subscribe my self, as your many favors oblige me,

Your faithful Servant NATH: HARDY.

Exodus 3. 2. the latter part. And behold the Bush burned with fire, and the
Bush was not consumed.
THe Text you see presents us with a sight, and a sight, it is which this day
minds us of. That in the Text was of a fire, a burning fire, such was this of
the day. That in the Text such a fire as never was before, nor has been since;
This of the day such as the like every way has seldom been before, and as yet
has not been (God grant it may never be again.) Finally, that in the Text,
was of a fire burning, but not consuming; and this of the day of many, who were
plucked out of the burning, and not consumed: I will now turn aside (says
Moses in the next verse, Ver. 4.
to wit, from the flock which he was feeding) and see this great sight. The
like Soliloqute I believe you here present had every one with himself this
morning, I will now turn aside for one hour from my secular employments, to
hear of that great sight which was beheld this day, at once both with sorrow
and joy. Welcome good Christians, I trust your expectation will not be
disappointed, I shall (God assisting) set both sights before you, the miracle
of the one, the wonder of the other, but first begin we with this in the Text;
And behold the Bush burned with fire, etc.

The words offer two Generals to our view, here is A miraculous preservation
described, The Bush burned with fire, and the Bush was not consumed, And A
serious observation required, Behold.

The miraculous preservation of the Bush, Genesis 1.
is that which would first be handled, the Object being in order of nature
before the Act, for the better discussing whereof, we shall consider: The
strange Event which happened. And The choice intent for which it was designed.

The event is, Consid. 1.
that a Bush burning with fire was not consumed. This phrase, the Bush burned,
is not to be taken strictly, for then it must have been pabulum ignis, fuel
for, and so consumed by the fire; thus wood is said to burn when (the fire
having taken full hold of it) it sends forth flames from it self, till it be
wholly turned to ashes: we must know therefore, that the holy Scripture (as
Lapide well observes) oft-times speaks of things, S. Scriptura saepe,
praesertim in phoenomenis loquitur de iis, non ut in se a part rei sunt, sed
prout apparent. Lap in Loc.
not as they are in themselves, but as they appear to outward view, and so
this Bush is said to burn, because whosoever had seen it, would have thought it
to burn, and though the burning was only in appearance, yet the fire was no
doubt real (else it had been no miracle) and was within, and round about the
Bush, notwithstanding which, it was not consumed.

That so it was, is plainly asserted, and therefore not to be doubted; how it
came to be so is concealed, and therefore not to be curiously inquired. When
God divided the Red Sea, Exodus 14. 21.
the Scripture tells us, it was by a great Eastwinde, Josh. 3. 22.
but when Jordan was divided, we only read that it was done, but not how it
came to pass, and so here, in which respect, though the means of effecting it
may be conjectured, yet it cannot be determined. Certain it is, it was an
effect of Omnipotency, besides, above, against the ordinary course. A thing to
reason incredible, because to nature impossible, and such as since neither our
power can accomplish, nor our knowledge comprehend, it is but just we should
admire.

The more to raise our admiration, and withal the better to inform our
apprehension of this miracle, be pleased to consider it in a double reference
to the fire, and to the bush.

1. To the fire, Omne agens natural agit necessario, cause naturalis agit ad
extremum potentiae suae.
They are known Maxims in Philosophy, all natural agents produce their effects
necessarily. and therefore act with their utmost vtgor: hence it is, that fire
naturally cannot but burn, and burning (if the matter be capable) consume;
surely then that this fire should be in a bush (which is so easily capable) and
not consume, it was not only super, Cyr. glaph. ib. ^bod.
but contra-naturall, (...), to use S. Cyrils phrase, a matter indeed of
astonishment; the fire forgets its natural quality, and sitting upon the bush,
instead of consuming, cherishes it. Doubtless it was no other then the first
and supreme cause, which did as it were inhibit and lay a restraint upon the
fire, that it should not act according to its proper and natural instinct,
Psalm. 29. 7.
The voice of the Lord (says the Psalmist) divides the flames of fire, yea,
here the voice of the Lord divides the flame from the fire, and hinders its
consumptive operation. As in that fiery Furnace, God did as it were lay a
charge upon the fire, that it should not so much as scorch those three
Salamanders, so here that it should not consume the bush.

If any shall further inquire, how God did restrain the fire, Desistendo ab
influentia in ignem. etc Vide Tostat. in loc.
I answer with Tostatus, that it was by withholding his providentiall
concourse. It is a received maxim in the Schools, that the continuance of
second causes in their Being and working, depends upon the renewed influxe of
conserving providence, Greg. Mor. l. 16.
in which regard Saint Gregory is express, that all creatures would return to
their first nothing (nisi operatione divinae virtutis conservarentur in esse)
were they not preserved in their Being by the influence of Divine Power. Nor is
it less true in regard of working then Being, if the first wheel stand still,
the rest cannot move. True, there is in every creature implanted a natural
power which it receives, together with its existence of producing its proper
effect, but it cannot exerere aut exercere, Ger. ^. com. de provid.
(to use Gerards phrase) put forth and exercise that power, unless actuated by
God; what more natural to the Sun then to arise? and yet our Blessed Saviors
words are express, Math 5. 45.
he makes his Sun to rise: what more natural to man then to move? Act. 17. 18.
and yet Saint Paul says, in him we move. I cannot better illustrate it, then
by Aquinas his comparison, Aquin. Part. 1. Q* 104. Art. 1.
Sic se habet omnis creatura ad Deum, sicut aer ad solemn illuminantem; As it is
with the Air, in regard of the Sun, so is it with every creature in regard of
God; and as the Air can no longer communicate light to the world, then the Sun
does communicate light to the Air, no more can any creature any further put
forth its effecting virtue, then it partaketh of Divine influence, and hence it
is, that as when the Sun withdraws its light, the Air becomes dark, so when
God is pleased to suspend his influence, the creature becomes unable to
produce its effect; for this cause our Blessed Savior asserteth, Mat. 4. 4.
Man lives not by Bread only, but by every word which proceeds from the
mouth of God, hereby intimating, that though the Bread have in it self
nutritive virtue, yet it cannot be exerted for the sustaining of man's life,
unless a word proceed from Gods mouth. The suspension then of this word, the
withholding of Divine concourse, may very fitly be looked upon as that which
did restrain and hinder the fire from its natural operation of burning, Vide
Tostat. l d.
so as to consume. Nor yet (as Tostatus well observes) did it cease to be
fire, since the form and the operation of a thing are really distinct, and
though the operation cannot be continued without the form, yet the form may
be conserved without the operation.

I cannot let this go without taking notice, 1. On the one hand, of that
Authority and Sovereignty which God has over all creatures, as being Monarch
of the Earth, and Possessor of Heaven, supreme Prince of the Fire, the Air,
and Lord high Admiral of the Seas, yea, so absolute in his dominion over all,
that he has a negative voice. He commands the Sun and it rises not, Job.
19. 7.
and seals up the Stars, says Job, if he forbid, the glorious luminaries
veil their brightness, and hide their splendour. He rebukes the Wind and the
Seas, Math. 8. 26.
says the Evangelist concerning Christ as God, and there was a great calm, the
roaring waves, and impetuous blasts ceasing their noise and rage at his word.
Finally he commands the fire and it burns not, it consumes not, its
merciless heat being kept in by his merciful power. Oh what a God do we
serve, in whose hands are all the corners of the Earth, and things in the
World! whence should the servants of God fear destruction, where need they
doubt protection, as being under his arms, who is over all?

2. On the other hand, of that Obedience and subjection which all creatures
give to God, and that not only according to, but against their natural
instinct. The Psalmist says, Psalm. 148. 8.
that the fire, hail, snow, and vapor, and stormy winds fulfill his word;
yea, even then when his word is contrary to their nature: thus the Sun stands
still, nay, goes backwards, the Waters divide, the Iron swimmeth, finally, the
Lions devour not, the Whale swalloweth and kills not, and the Ass opens
his mouth to speak at his command. Oh what shame may sit upon our faces, who
though of all creatures we are most obliged to, yet are least forward in
serving God. Orig. Hom. 6. in diverse.
Excellently Origin to this purpose, Hi, qui prudentiae and intellectus
expertes sunt, inclinantur jubenti, etc. These creatures which are void of
wisdom and understanding, that have neither speech nor language observe his
Commandments. He chideth the winds and they are still, he speaks to the Sea
and it obeyth, only men who are made after Gods image, to whom he has given
both reason and language are contumacious and rebel against him. How shall the
Whale, the Lions and the Ass unreasonable creatures, the Fire, the Water, and
the Sun inanimate creatures, one day condemn men for their disobedience! Yea I
would to God the best of us might not justly accuse our selves as below them in
subjection to that God, who has dignified us so much above them in our
creation, whilst though we obey God in some things, yet in those which are
contrary to our Reason and Will, we resist him, making his Law our rule, no
farther then it may consist with our will. Surely as Solomon sends the sluggard
to the Ant to learn diligence, Prove. 6. 6.
so may we be sent to School to the fire to learn obedience.

2. But further, this miracle is no less considerable in regard of the Bush,
it being a thing deservedly admirable, that a Bush should have a fire in the
midst of it, and yet not be consumed by it. Of all materials, wood is most
susceptible of the impressions of fire, and is far more easily consumed then
stone, Eo majus erat miraculum, quod spinae facilius flammas conc ipiunt, etc.
River. in Exodus
brass, brick, or such like things. Of all wood, none more easily combustible
then bushes, the fire is far longer in taking hold of an Oak, and such like
Trees, then Bushes, which are so much the more easily burned, because even in
our, much more in those hotter Countries, they have dry sticks among the
green, which quickly take fire; Nay, yet further, of all Bushes a bush of
Thorns is most apt to be consumed, and yet behold, a Bush, yea (as the word
signifies) a thorny Bush burns with fire, is not consumed. Indeed as if the
Holy Ghost would point to us wherein the greatness of the miracle lies, this
word Bush is twice mentioned, the Bush burned, and the Bush was not consumed.

What more probable, then that a Bush on fire should be turned into ashes? how
nigh is a flaming bush in every man's opinion to consuming! but Divine power
preserves the Bush in the midst of the burning. When destruction may be to the
eye of man very near, and most likely, Gods power can, and many times his
providence does prevent it. Indeed every deliverance is so much the more, both
honorable and amiable, by how much the danger seems more unavoidable, See
this Doctrine enlarged upon, in my Sermon, called Mercy in her Beauty.
to be at the pits brink, and yet saved from falling in, to be under the Lions
paw, and yet kept from the devouring of his teeth; finally, to be snatched as a
brand out of the very fire, are glorious preservations, and such, as well
beseem the greatness and goodness of a Deity to effect. When therefore
danger approaches, and desolution is at hand, probabilities of ruin are
greatest, and troubles nearest, take courage, by remembering and believing the
good will of him who dwelt in the Bush.

If any shall be curiously inquisitive by what means the Bush was thus
preserved? it may not unfitly be conceived, that there was, as a restraint of
the fire, so a consolidation the Bush, whereby the fire could not work upon it;
look as when Peter walked upon the water, Mat. 14 29.
it is rationally conjectured, that miracle was wrought by congealing, (as it
were) the water whereby (as any water when frozen) it did bear up his body, Tu
praecipe and illico solidabuntur aequae. Hier. in Math. Vide and Just. Mart
Resp. ad qu^^ 117.
so might it here, the Bush by Divine Power was so coroborated, that it was
able to withstand the violence of the fire. Indeed Philo goes further, and
seems to assert, as if there were a transmutation of natures; that the Bush
did burn as if it had been fire, and the fire was burned and consumed as if it
had been the Bush, but Moses asserts not that the fire was consumed by the
Bush, only that the Bush was not consumed by the fire, and accordingly we may
probably imagine, (...). Philo de vita. Moys. lib. 1.
that the Bush was so strengthened, that the fire could not pierce it. Natural
histories report of the Salamander living in the flames, and of a stone which
is therefore called (...), because the fire has no power to dissolve it.
Experience tells us that Gold though cast into, is not wasted by the fire (for
this cause not doubt) as being of all metals the most solid, and surely then
it is not incredible, that by supernatural strength the Bush should be so
consolidated as that though burning in the fire, it was not consumed.

I end this with a short note, what God might do to this Bush no doubt he does
to his servants, so steel and harden them as it were with aequanimity, nay
magnanimity, that their fiery trialls which befall them, have no power over
them. Hence it is that Martyrs have been so courageous in the fire, and
triumphant at the stake, whilst that fire which consumed their flesh, could not
daunt their spirits. Indeed it is that which is very strange, and admirable to
consider, with what contentedness, nay cheerfulness, Christians have endured
the worst of torments, how like impregnable forts they have withstood fiery
assaults, like Mount Aetna, Pind. Ode 1.
(which therefore Pindar calls an heavenly pillar) they have not been consumed
in flames; In a word (to use Saint Bernards phrase) with what exultation they
have beheld their blood gushing forth out of those wounds which the Iron has
made in their bodies. Stat Martyr intrepidus and triumphans toto licet lacero
corpore. etc. Bern. Sermon 61. in Cant.
It were easy to instance what pleasant smiles have set upon the faces, yea
what resolute words have flowed from the lips of tortured Christians: Among
many others, that challenge which Aldhelmus tells us was made by Jocunda a
Virgin Martyr to her tormentor, would not be passed by, Aldhelm. de Verg. c. 26.
Applica ignes, saxa, gladios, flagella, fustes and virgas, quot tu paenas
intuleris, tot ego glorias numerabo, Make use of rods, clubs, whips, swords,
stones, fire to torment me with. How many punishments thou do inflict upon
me, I shall number them as so many glories.

And would you know the reason of all this? that prayer of S. Paul for the
Colossians renders it, Strengthened with all might, Colos. 11.
according to his glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering with
joyfulnesse; therefore the Christians have suffered so much, so long, so
joyfully, because Divine power has strengthened them with all might. Fear we
then none of those things which we may be called to undergo; if it be
permitted to our enemies to molest, it shall be given to us to suffer, as here,
he that sent the fire into the bush, preserved the bush from being consumed in
the fire; and if the burden be laid upon our backs, we shall be so fortified,
as not to sink but stand under it; as here it is conceived, the bush was so
consolidated, that the fire could not penetrate it: And so much be spoken of
the first thing proposed to be handled, the strange event which happened, pass
we on to

The choice intent for which it was designed, that as we have beheld the kind
and nature, so we may take a view also of the end and scope of this miracle,
and having taken notice of the quid, what was done, or rather not done, we may
find out an answer to the quare, why it thus came to pass.

I am not ignorant that the Ancients have allegorized this History many ways,
nor shall I wholly bury their allusions in silence, since (at least) they may
afford profitable meditations, those I meet with are of two sorts, some
mystical, others moral.

1. Mystically, This miracle is applied both to Christ and the Virgin Mary; It
is not unfitly made an emblem of Christ in his Incarnation, Passion, and
Resurrection. The bush (says Saint Ambrose) is Christ as man, Ambros. in cap.
6. Aporal.
the flaming fire represents his divinity, and the Bush burning but not
consumed, figureth the assumption of the humane nature, into unity of person
with the divine, yet so as that neither was changed into the other, nor was his
humanity swallowed up by his Divinity. To the same purpose Saint Cyrill, Cyr.
Gleph. in Exodus l 1.
the holy Scripture (says he) frequently compares the Divine nature to fire,
and men to trees, grass, thorns, and as the thorns cannot endure the fire,
no more can Man to approach the Deity; but in Christ this was effected, the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, humanity becomes capable of an
union with the Deity, and so the bush was not consumed by the flaming fire.
Vide Porrect. in pentat.
Besides the incarnation, we may observe in this burning bush, a representation
of the Passion. Those manifold sorrows and sufferings which Christ underwent
in the Garden, Aquin. Ps. 130. Q. ^6. Art. 8.
on the Cross, notwithstanding all which, he was not consumed, whilst none of
his miseries drew him to the least iniquity, yea (as Aquinas his phrase is)
sum patiebatur and sum fruebatur, he had in his greatest extremity a sweet
serenity. Nor does this miracle less aptly shadow forth the resurrection of
Christ, as that forementioned Father hints in the same place, Cyril d.
for as the combustible bush burned in the fire, and was not consumed, so
Christ's corruptible body, lay in the grave and was not corrupted, according to
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 16. 10. Quid rubus ille quondam Mosaic^^
portendebat, etc. Bern. Hom. 2. super Missus est. Possumus per rubum qui
flammas ex se producebat and non comburebatur, etc. Ambros. in c 6. Apocal.
(...), etc. Gr. Nys. in Natal.
Thou will not suffer thy holy one to see corruption. And as this burning bush
is made a figure of Christ, so likewise it is not incongruously applied to the
blessed Virgin, that bush of Moses sending forth flames and not consuming, what
did it portend (says Saint Bernard) but Mary bringing forth without sorrow?
More appositely Gregory Nyssen and Saint Ambrose, We may (says the Latin
Father) by the Bush burning and not consuming, understand the blessed Virgin
Mary, which brought the Son of God forth of her womb, and yet lost not her
Virginity. And to the same purpose the Greek Father as there, a Bush burned but
was not consumed, so here, a Virgin brings forth a child and is not deflowred,
that a miracle, this a greater, the Holy Ghost who is as fire over shadowing
her, she conceives and bears a Son, whereby she became a Mother, and yet
remained a Virgin.

Besides these mystical, there wants not a moral application of this miracle,
Aug. Sermon. de Temp. 86. Divinum rubus pertavit non concepit incendium, etc.
Chrysol.
S. Austin makes it a resemblance of the Ungrateful Israelites. As the Bush
(though the fire was in the midst of it) did not take fire, so notwithstanding
God strove with them by his spirit, yet their sin was not destroyed. S.
Gregory, (with whom accords Chrysologus) understands likewise by the Bush the
people of Isreal, Greg. in Ezekiel. Hom. 7.
but by that fire the Law, which is called a fiery Law, and as the fire could
not consume the Bush, no more could the Law of God consume the thorns of their
sins. De la Hay conceives the Bush and the Fire to be Emblems of Mercy and
severity, De la Hay Lapid. in loc.
both which ought to meet together in every good Ruler, so as that pity may
not consume justice. Once more, Lapide compares original concupiscence in the
regenerate to the Bush, for as that burned but was not consumed, so this is
weakened, but not destroyed, subdued, but not extirpated.

But to beat that bush no longer. The design of God, no doubt, in working this
miracle, was partly in respect of Moses, and chiefly in regard of Israel, for
the confirmation of Moses his Faith, and the representation of Isreal's
deliverance.

1. It is not unworthy our observation, that Almighty God intending to send
Moses as a deliverer of his people out of Egypt, confirms him before hand
with a manifest sign, and that not only in respect of the people,
representing their rescue out of Pharoahs hand, but himself assuring him, that
though he might be cast into many, he should not be overwhelmed by any
straits. Indeed the end of this glorious apparition was partly to beget in this
holy man, Hoc viso Deus ipsum Mosen, initio vocationis suae confirmare voluit.
River. in loc.
an awful reverence of that Divine Majesty which appeared to him. But chiefly
to strengthen his confidence, in accomplishing the work about which God was
pleased to send him, that neither he nor it should miscarry.

And surely we have herein great cause to take notice of Gods gracious
condescension to his servants, who is pleased by visible signs to support the
weakness of their Faith. Genesis 15. 17.
This was the course he took with Abraham, to whom he gave not only a promise
but a sign of that mercy, he had intended to his posterity, and the like is
evident in his dealing with Gideon, to whom he gave the choice, Judge. 6. 7.
of what sign he pleased to desire, for the encouragement of him in that
service to which he called him. It were easy to multiply instances in this
kind, which run parallel with this in the Text. Indeed it is that which though
not in the same miraculous, yet in no less gracious a way, God is still
pleased to do whilst he has given us those visible signs of Water in
Baptism, of Bread and Wine in the Supper of the Lord, to strengthen our Faith
in Christ.

The truth is, we are at best slow of Faith, especially if we want the help of
sense. With Thomas we know not how to believe unless we see, and therefore
Divine wisdom and goodness has made provision for our weakness, that by the
obviousnesse of the signs to sense, the things may be more manifest to faith.
Besides the imbecility of our faith, there is often times a difficulty in the
objects, they being of such a nature, as it is very hard to believe the
accomplishment of them. How incredible was it that such miserable slaves as the
Israelites were in Egypt, should be set free and enstated in a land flowing
with milk and honey! nay yet more incredible, that so weak an instrument as
Moses, should bring to pass so glorious a work as Isreal's deliverance; no
wonder if to prevent the staggering of his faith, he gives him this eminent
sign. And truly to a wounded sinner, the belief of an interest in Christ's
merits is very difficult, so that it is well if he can believe when those
external elements are offered to, or taken by him as pledges of his Redeemers
love; oh let us with thankfulness acknowledge that mercy of divine
dispensation, which provideth as it were a staff to uphold our feeble knees, a
pair of Spectacles to strengthen our weak eyes, and a stone to put under our
heavy hands, for such was this bush to Moses his faith.

2. But doubtless the primary intention of this miracle was to represent that
glorious deliverance, which was now to be wrought for the children of Israel;
to this purpose Philo has well observed, (...), Philo de vita Moys. l. 1.
etc. The bush was a symbol of the oppressed Israelites, the fire of the
oppressing Egyptians, and the not consuming of the bush, the not perishing of
the Israelites; not much unlike is Junius his interpretation, The sign fitly
correspondeth to the thing signified, Jun. Analyt. expl. in Exodus:
for Flamma ignis, afflictiones Israelitarum, rubus Israelitarum corpus,
integritas rubi in media flamma, stabilitatem populi ex veritate promissionum
Dei adumbravit. The bush shadowed forth the body of the people, the fire their
affliction in Egypt, and the not consuming of the bush in the fire, their
preservation in, liberation out of Egypt. To illustrate each briefly.

1. The people of Israel are shadowed by the Bush, and not unfitly upon a
double account;

1. A thorny bush wounds with its prickles those who handle it, so does Gods
Israel, or rather the God of Israel those who persecute her. Oleast. in loc.
To this purpose is Oleasters note, observe (says he) why Israel (that is the
Church of God) is signified by a bush, Ut scilicet ostendat omnes, qui tangent
eam a spinis pungendos, to intimate, that she has thorns wherewith justly to
vex those who injuriously touch her. Certainly never any offered wrong, or
acted evil against the Church, who did not sooner or later meet with
proportionable sufferings. It was our Saviors Item to furious Saul, Acts 9. 5.
It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks, to wit, and not hurt thy
self. The angry Boar running his head against the tree wounded it, so do
wicked men by persecuting the Church, bring mischief upon their own heads;
what got Pharaoh by pursuing Israel through the red Sea, when the waters
overtook and overwhelmed both him and his host? It is a maxim in Phylosophie,
omne agens agendo repatitur, in every action there is a passion, and that as
well in respect of the agent, as the object: It is a truth in Divinity, every
persecution at last reflects ruin on the persecutor. As no man can touch
pitch, and not be defiled, be friendly with the wicked, and not be infected, so
no man can handle thorns and not be pricked, exercise enmity against the godly
and not be recompensed.

2. But though this allusion be true and ingenuous, yet that which I conceive
more congruous to the design of the miracle, is to understand this thorny
bush, as an emblem of the mean, and despicable estate of the people of Israel
in Egypt; a bush is low in stature, so was Israel low in estate, Isa. 41. 14.
a bush is barren in fruits, so was Israel of outward comforts, the bush is
easily trodden down, so was Israel trampled under foot. Parallel to this is
that Metaphor of a worm, which God himself is pleased to use by the Prophet
Isaiah, Fear not thou worm Jacob, which creature more vile and contemptible
then a worm? every foot treads upon it, every bird picketh it up. It lets us
see what is many times the estate of Gods Church in this world. Our Blessed
Savior calls his flock a little flock, Luke 12. 32.
a word not only of quantity because the number is small, but of quality,
because their condition is mean. Indeed for the most part the wicked are lofty
Pines, tall Cedars, whilst the godly are as low shrubs, and thorny bushes. It
is a strange fancy of the Romanists, who would entayle outward splendour upon
the true Church, it is that indeed which conduces to the well-being, but is no
way essential to her being. It is her honor, when she is as a City upon a
hill, conspicuously visible, but it is often her lot to be as a village in a
valley, scarce discernable; let us not be discouraged by, or scandalized at it,
ever remembering that she is not the less amiable in Gods, because so
despicable in men's eyes, as if she were no better then a thorny bush,

2. The fire with which this bush burned, sets forth the oppression which the
Israelites endured in Egypt from Pharaoh and his taskmasters, when they imposed
upon them heavy burdens, and doubled their labors. Indeed it is an usual
metaphor to represent, as love, so anger, by fire, the Hebrew word (...), and
the latin excandescere, signify to burn with anger, and especially that
rage, which is in the minds of wicked men against the godly, is compared to
fire, among other reasons, chiefly for this, because it is insatiable, for as
the fire never goes out, so long as there is any fuel, nor (unless
restrained as here) does it cease burning, till it have consumed all to ashes,
so does the wrath which is kindled in wicked persecutors break forth upon all
occasions, and that to utter ruin, whilst nothing less then blood can quench
it.

With this fire the bush of the Church oft-times burns. It is her complaint
in the Psalm, We went through fire and water. Psalm. 66. 12.
S. Peter speaks of a fiery trial, which happened to the believers in his
time. 1 Pet. 1. 9.
The Spouse says of her self in the Canticles, I am black because the Sun
has looked upon me, Cant. 1. 6.
thereby intimating that she was scorched with the heat of persecution. When
the trial was made between Jehovah the true God and Baal, it was by the coming
down of fire upon the Altar; if we would know which is the true Church, it is
that (for the most) on which the fire of tribulation comes.

Let then the people of God continually make account of, prudently prepare for,
and patiently undergo this fire, it was the antidote our Savior prescribed to
his Disciples against the Cross, Mat. 5. 12.
So persecuted they the Prophets which were before you; why should that which
is common to the Saints seem strange to us? Sometimes indeed this fire is as it
were hid in the Embers, and then the Saints have a little refreshment; but the
Devil has his bellows still in readiness, and watches all occasions to
blow the sparks, till they come to a flame; yet let us not be dismayed, ever
remembering, that though Satan and his instruments are malicious to destroy, God
is gracious to preserve. For,

3. The bush burned with fire, and was not consumed. The Israelites, though
oppressed in Egypt, could not be suppressed, notwithstanding all the projects
and endeavors of their enemies to crush them, they were preserved, and at the
due season delivered. With this holy exultation the Psalmist brings in Israel
triumphing, Psalm. 129. 1.
Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth (may Israel now say) many a
time have they afflicted me from my youth, but they have not prevailed against
me; and with this meditation the Prophet Micah brings in the Church, quelling
the surious insultation of her adversaries, Micah 8. 9.
Rejoice not against me oh mine enemy, though I fall, I shall arise, and though
I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light to me. This vine may be cut down,
and the branches burnt with fire, but the root cannot be plucked up. This house
which is built upon a rock may be moved and shaken by the wind, but it cannot
be blown down: Finally, this Ship may be covered over with the waves, but it
cannot sink into the bottom. Daniel is cast into the den, but not torn in
pieces; Jonah is swallowed by the Whale, but not drowned; and though crosses
may encompasse, they shall not overwhelme the people of God. Look as wicked
men, though spared by Gods patience for a time, are not exempted from the
destructive stroke of his vengeance, so good men, though vexed by men's rage for
a while, are yet preserved by Divine goodness.

Indeed this fire which seizes upon the Church, is not consumens, but
separans, to consume, but separate the dross from the Gold, the hypocrites
from the sincere, that it may appear who are true, and who are false-hearted.
What Saint Paul says of Heresies, is true of Persecutions, 1 Cor. 11. 19.
they are for this only, that they which are approved may be made manifest. It
is not consumens, but purgans, consuming but refining, to destroy, not the
persons, but their corruptions; O God thou have tried us as silver, says the
Church, Ps. 66. 10.
Non sicut foenum, Aug. ibid.
sed argentum; So Saint Austin, not as stubble which is burnt to ashes, but as
silver which is melted and purified in the fire. Finally, it is not consumens,
but consummans, to perfect their graces, and make them fit for glory.

And now if you shall ask the reason of this, the answer is in the former part
of the verse, The Angel of the Lord was in the midst of the bush, therefore the
bush burned with fire, Psalm. 14 5.
and was not consumed. There were they in great fear (says the Psalmist
meaning the wicked for God is in the Generation of the righteous, and surely
the same For which puts the wicked in fear, puts the righteous out of fear,
even when they may be in the midst of troubles. It is the promise of God to his
Church, (alluding no doubt to this miracle* When thou walk^st in the fire, thou
shall not be burnt, Isa. 43. 2.
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, and no wonder, since he assures
her, in the beginning of the verse, I will be with thee. This is the implicit
acknowledgement of the Church, where she says, We went through fire and
watter, but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place. Thereby insinuating,
that when they went into the fire of adversity, God as it were, went with them,
carried them on, and at length brought them forth into a sunshine of
prosperity. Indeed (as the Psalmist excellently) The wrath of man shall praise
God, Psalm. 76. 10.
and the remainder thereof he will restrain, what ever fire of rage is more
then will tend to the glory of God, that is, to the injury of his Church, God
will restrain that it shall not take effect, no mervaile if the Bush burn and
be not consumed.

And surely the consideration hereof is that which should both abate the fury
of the enemies, and mitigate the sorrow of the Church; Philo l. d.
Philo the Jew, dilating upon this Scripture, frames a speech which this
miracle as it were made, both to the Israelites, and the Egyptians, Do not
faint (oh Israelites) this your weakness is your power whereby many shall be
pierced and wounded. They who desire to destroy you, against their wills shall
save you, you shall escape safe out of all their wiles, and when your
destruction shall seem the nearest, your glory shall be the greatest. You also
(to wit Egyptians) who for cruelty are like to the devouring fire, boast not
too much of, trust not too much in your strength, and considering how the
mightiest forces have been subdued; learn to be wise.

Why then (on the one hand) do the Heathen rage? that which they imagine is
but a vain thing, because such as they cannot effect, their design is to root
out Religion, and ruin the Church, but it shall prove abortive; God may suffer
them to grow big with hopes of accomplishment; yea, and to go out the time
they prefix, but when they are come to the birth, there shall be no strength to
bring forth that monster of total destruction to Sion and her friends.

Why (on the other hand) should the Israel of God despond? John 11. 4.
as Christ said to Lazarus, This sickness is not to death, but to the glory of
God; So may I say of the Churches sufferings, they are not to her destruction,
but Gods exaltation. He that permits the fire to burn, will not permit it to
consume; it is Gods wisdom which brings his servants into, and his goodness
which brings them out of their distresses. How well do those courageous
expressions befit the mouth of Saint Paul, and not of him only, but of all
Gods faithful ones! We are troubled on every side, 1 Cor. 4. 8, 9.
but not destressed, we are perplexed, but not in despair, persecuted, but not
forsaken, cast down, but not destroyed. Let us then never, oh never cast away
our confidence, but in our saddest streights, and greatest storms expect a
providence to bring us safe to shore. To this end, let us often remember what
Moses saw, and though he alone, by the eye of Sense, yet let us as well as he,
by the eye of Faith, behold this miracle to our comfort, The Bush burned with
fire, and the Bush was not consumed; and so I am fallen upon the

Second part of the Text, Genesis 2d.
to wit, A serious observation required in the first word, Behold.

This word Behold is such as deserves a Behold, as being always like John the
Baptist a forerunner of, or like the Star to the Magi, a guide to something
that is excellent. If we observe the use of it in Scripture, we shall find it
to be always in things that are both certain and weighty; sometimes in things
that are sudden, joyful, and wonderful.

1. When ever this Ecce is used it is, 1. In certis, In things of
unquestionable verity, and is an Ecce of Faith, and credence to that which
follows, whether it be an assertion of something already done, Mat. 23. 38.
or a prediction of something to be done. Thus when Christ would terrify the
Jews, with the certainty of the approaching desolation, he prefixeth a Behold,
your house is left to you desolate, Cant. 1. 14.
and when Solomon would gain belief to his positive doctrine of the worlds
vanity, he ushereth it in with a Behold all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

2. In seriis, in things of weighty importance, and serious concernment, and is
an Ecce of attention. To this purpose it was, that our blessed Savior began
his parable of the sower, Mat. 13. 3.
with Behold a sower went forth to sow, and Saint Paul speaking of the time of
the Gospel, which God affords, prefixeth a Behold now is the acceptable time,
Behold now is the day of Salvation. 2 Cor. 6. 2.


2. This Ecce is sometimes used, 1. In subitis, in things that are sudden and
unexpected, and is an Ecce of observation; So Jephtahs unlooked for, Judge. 11.
34.
meeting of his Daughter, Math. 2. 21. 8. 24.
the Angels unwonted appearing to Joseph, and the unexpected storm which
befell the Disciples at Sea, are all attended with a Behold.

2. In laetis, in things that are matter of joy and comfort, and is an Ecce of
exultation, so the Prophet foretelling and the Angel proclaiming Christ's
joyful advent, Zech. 9. 9.
do both speak of it with a Behold. Luke 2. 11.


3. Finally, In miris, in things that are great and wonderful, and is an Ecce
of admiration. Thus the strangers at Jerusalem being amazed to hear the
Apostles speak every man in his own language, Act. 2. 7. 9. 11.
cry out, Behold, are not all these which speak Galtleans? and the Lord Christ
appearing to Ananias, and acquainting him with Saul's devotion tells him, Behold
he prays, as a thing greatly to be wondered at, that he who was so lately
cursing should now be praying.

And truly in all these respects may the Ecce in the Text be taken. The miracle
being such as was in it self certain, and yet strange, to Moses unexpected,
but comfortable, and the signification of it very important.

The useful note which this word prompts us to, is, That the wonderful works
of Gods hand, ought to be the singular objects of our eye, when God speaks;
it is reason we should hear, and when he acts, that we should behold. All Gods
actions deserve our observation, but his eminent works are specially
remarkable. Though common people go along the streets unregarded, yet if a
Royal Prince pass by with his noble train, every one runs to his door to
behold him; and if we be so careless as to take little or no notice of Gods
daily administrations, yet surely when he is pleased to pass before us in
glorious manifestations of his power, or justice, or mercy, we should be
spectators of them. Nor is it enough for us to cast a glance, to view in
transitu, but we must sit down to draw the pictures of Gods works before our
eyes in their several lineaments. It is the Psalmists call, come and see (not
only see as you go, but come on purpose to see) the works of the Lord, Psalm.
46. 11.
what desolations he has wrought in the earth; and to this purpose is Samuels
advice, consider what great things the Lord has done for you. 1 Samuel 12. 24.


Indeed it is that to which there is great need we should be excited, the most
of us being so apt to neglect this duty. It was the Prophets complaint of the
wicked in his time; Isa. 26. 11.
Lord when thy hand is lifted up they will not see, were it only Gods finger,
we should regard it, so did David, I consider thy Heavens the work of thy
fingers; but much more when it is his hand. Psalm. 8. 3.
Every stretching forth of his hand should be observed, but much more the
lifting of it up, it being so much the more visible, by how much the higher it
is lifted up. Well does the Prophet say of them, they will not see, since they
could not but see, did they not wilfully blind their eyes? Oh that this charge
might not too truly be drawn up against us, Gods hand is lifted up sometimes in
wrath, and sometimes in love, now upon others, and then upon our selves, and
yet who is a diligent observer of it? we cast, as his word, so his works
behind our backs, and set light by his dispensations. Let then this Behold
serve as a Bell, to awake our sluggish drowsinesse, that we may open our eyes
to see and consider Divine operations. Indeed this is that whereby we shall
manifest our selves to be both grateful and prudent. Beholding puts upon
thankfulness, and thankfulness puts upon beholding; the grateful soul being
so enamoured, especially with choice mercies, that it knows not how to look
off; and withal, this is no small piece of prudence, since it engages God to
do grea^er things; Micah. 6. 9.
no wonder if the Prophet assert, The man of wisdom shall see thy name. I end
this with that sweet close of the Psalmist, after his enumeration of various
providentiall works, Ps. 107. 43.
Who so is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand, (to
wit, experimentally) the loving kindness of the Lord.

And thus the Text leads us to the duty of the day; which is to behold that
work of God, which some years ago, on this day of the month, was wrought in
this Parish. A work in some respects unlike, and in some respects like to this
in the Text. Indeed if we take a view of what then fell out, we shall find
there was both a burning and a consuming, and in that a dissimilitude; there
was a burning, but not a consuming, and in that a similitude, and both call for
an Ecce, Behold.

1. There was a burning and consuming, and that both of ehings and persons.

Barrells of Gunpowder casually taking fire, blew up houses, burn up goods,
consume much substance to ashes, by which means many families are
impoverished, and they who before had but little, had then nothing left,
neither house to cover them, nor garments to cloth them, nor necessaries to
relieve them, and truly this sad event calls for a Behold of commiseration and
relief; Blessed is he (says the Psalmist) who considers the poor, Psalm. 41.
1.
that is, so as to pity and succor: Indeed, if the eye affect the heart, the
heart will open the hand; and what poor should be thus considered, if not those
whom providence is pleased to make so, by such a sudden accident. Where God
shows severity, there he expects men should have pity, and whilst he
exercises with correction, he would have us express compassion.

Nor did this fires consuming stay here; not only houses and goods, but men,
women and children, are burnt to ashes; some siting in their own houses,
others met together in public houses, all probably about their secular
occasions, are unexpectedly snatched out of this world, their souls separate
from their bodies, their members rent one from another, their flesh and bones a
prey to the merciless flames; and surely this doleful stroke calls for a
Behold of expectation and preparation. What then befell them, may by the like,
or any other accident happen to us. Alas how little did any of them imagine,
when they rose in the morning, that they should before the next day make their
beds in the dust, and become an heap of ashes? Oh what need is there (though we
cannot foresee the time, means, and manner of our death yet) at all times to
make account of, and provide for death, which may come in that time, by that
means, and after that manner, whereof we are least aware! How should every one
of us upon the hearing of this sad blow, entertain these or the like serious
thoughts? This day six years a fire devoured my neighbors houses, perhaps a
like may this day burn down mine. This day, was then the last day of life to
many, who might else in probability have been now alive; and why may not this
day be my last? they perished by fire, so may I, or be drowned in the water, or
killed by a thousand other accidents; why should I live a day, an hour, a
moment, in that state wherein I would not dye, since in a day, an hour, a
moment, death may seize upon me?

2. I have showed you the dark side of that cloud of sulpheurous smoke which
then covered this Parish, yea, this place where we are now assembled, I mean
the hurt and mischief which came to pass by this terrible fire. But withal
let me set before you the light side, that merciful preservation from this
desperate danger, which many of you here present experienced.

Some there are among you, who very probably might have been in this burning,
but providence prevented it. You who not long before were passing by this place
upon your employments, you who intended at that very time to have been in some
of those houses upon several businesses, but were diverted, cannot but
acknowledge you escaped a great danger. Some of you were in the burning, and
yet so far from being consumed, that you were not scorched, the fire flaming
over your heads, the timber and other materials encompassing about your
bodies, and yet not the least hurt in any part, and surely you must needs be
sensible of a great deliverance. Finally, Some of you were scorched, burnt,
wounded and bruised in your bodies, who yet were not consumed, but have
recovered your former strength and health, and certainly you cannot but
confess you were wonderfully preserved.

And surely beloved, all of you have great reason to be put in mind of this
Ecce, Behold, and again I say, Behold with joyful gratulation this signal
goodness of God toward you. That passage of our Savior in his Prophetical
Sermon, Math 24. 40. 41.
Two shall be in the field, the one shall be taken, the other left, two women
shall be grinding at the Mill, the one shall be taken, the other left, may very
fitly be applied to this present subject, two were in one house, in one room,
in one bed, the one taken, the other left, the one preserved, the other
destroyed; and shall such a mercy be forgotten? It may be thou who did escape
that danger, were then in a very unfit posture for death, nor would that
stroke, had it seized on thee, have given thee the time of saying, Lord have
mercy on me; and then alas the consuming would too probably at once have seized
on Soul and Body, and should such a preservation be slighted? God forbid. Tell
me (I beseech you) when you heard that dismal noise of the Gunpowder, beheld
the dreadful flashings of the flames, felt the heavy load of the rubbish, so
that you were buried (as it were) alive, and had no part to help you, only
your tongues to call for help, what were then your thoughts, your purposes,
your promises? did you not vow to God (if he would rescue you out of that
danger) thankfulness, repentance, obedience, and shall such obligations be
cancelled? far be it from us. Me thinks every one concerned in this days
deliverance should now break forth into these or the like expressions, Lord who
am I, that my house was only shaken, whilst my neighbors was blown up, my
goods were only removed, whilst my neighbors were consumed? what did I
deserve more then my friend, my companion, my Husband, my servant, that he was
thus suddenly snatched away, and I still survive, an unworthy monument of thy
mercy? Have thou Oh God given me my life as a prey, and shall not I give it
thee as a sacrifice? In great love to my Soul thou did deliver me from the
dreadful burning, and shall I still tempt thy patience by grievous sinning?
Surely my tongue shall bless thee, my heart shall love thee, my life shall
magnify thee, I will call upon thy name as long as I live, and I will praise
thee whilst I have a Being.

To end all. The Behold in the Text is that, which not only you, who were more
immediately concerned, but every one here present ought to put in practice,
partly in reference to this providentiall occurrence, so as to weep with them
that weep, and rejoice with them that rejoice, to commiserate them that were
impoverished, and congratulate them that were delivered, and partly by way of
reflection upon Gods former providence toward our selves, either in
preventing such dangers that they have not come near us, or preserving us when
we have been near to, and enclosed in the like dangers, every one of us
gratefully acknowledging in the words of the Church, It is of the Lords mercies
that we are not consumed, Lam. 3. 24.
because his compassions fail not.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 7. lin. 11. read and (...). p. 8. l. 4. Marg. ^ aqua. p. 13. l. 27. r.
and taken. p. 14. l. 31. r. wounds it. p. 16. l. 30. r. most part.


