THE MARINE MERCURY.

OR, A true relation of the strange appearance of a Man-fish about three miles
within the River of Thames, having a Musket in one hand, and a Petition in the
other.

Credibly Reported by six Saylors, who both saw and talked with the Monster,
whose names here following are inserted.

Whereunto is added A Relation how Sir Simon Heartley with his Company gave
battle to a company of Rebels, and slew 500. took 4. Colors, and routed
1500* more: this being performed on the 6. of January. 1641.

The Saylors names.
Nicholas Treadcrow. Josias Otter. Humfrey Hearnshaw. Alexander Waterrat. Sim.
Seamaule. Tim. Bywater.
Written by John Hare, Gent.

Printed in the year, 1642.

The strange Relation of the appearance of a Man-fish, armed, coming toward
LONDON.
Reported by six Saylors, who conversed with him the best part of an hour.
THere is scarce any man of noble and generous quality, (if they would strive
to be complete in the highest degree) but may be perfected by travel, which is
the true salt and season of a Gentleman. Now there is none so qualified, and
has seenthe wonders of the deep, that can think this story impossible, for
there are not so many strange creatures by land, but there are far stranger
by water; nor any resemblance of any beast upon earth, but the sea produces the
like for shape and lineaments, which cannot admit of the least contradiction,
but to the ignorant, and those that will believe no further then their weak
sight can discern.

This story was written by a Gentleman from the mouths of those men, which
certainly could not be deluded by any shadow or phantasme, being hardy and
spiritfull persons, tho^^^^ of a coorse and rough conversation; the sense and
truth of the relation is not altered: as they did deliver it, it is here set
down, only dressed in better language for the delight of the Reader: which was
thus.

The third day after the guarding of the worthy Members to Westminster, being
the 14. of this instant month, after the City by land, and the Sailors by water
had expressed their dear affection to the noblest of Assemblies, the Saylors
coming off with good approbation, and having satisfaction in the business
they expected, departed to their several employments. Now six of them being in
a shipboat some league and a half within the mouth of the river of Thames, this
Monster appeared. At the first sight they were much dismayed, but afterward they
taking heart (some of them having been at seasights) made them the more
adventurous: for the approach of this Monster was very terrible; having broad
fiery eyes, hair black and curled, his breast armed with shining skales, so
that by the reflection of the Sun they became so blind and dazzled, that he
might have taken or slain every man of them, he having a musket in one hand,
and a large paper in the otherhand, which seemed to them a Petition.

By which posture they did imagine that what he could not get by entreaty, he
would by force or fear attain, but after they had passed some words with this
man-fish, he seemed rather an Angel sent to guard this Kingdom, then an enemy
to hurt us, for he showed himself so debonarie and full of courtesy as if he
had been tutored in the absolutest Court in Christendom; telling them he came
inspired by providence for the good and flourishing estate of this Kingdom,
and the armed hand he advanced, was to put us in mind of our security, which
has been the overthrow of the famous Monarchies, and in the other hand was
the intelligence of all the dangers and plots of foreign Princes against us;
they being illiterate men could not understand many other high expressions that
he pleased to deliver himself in, which here is lost because they understood
not bracagraphy, yet they humbly confessed their ignorance, and withal their
occupation, and told him they were sailors, but they humbly entreated him to
keep on his course toward London, with his Embassy to the Worthies of the
land, for they did not think themselves worthy to give him audience; he with a
serene and cheerful humility answered, we are all Courtiers to N^ptune, and as
the cavalleers to land Princes do ride great horses to show the generosity of
their spirit, and activity of body, so do we mount the equatick beast of our
elements, as the whale, swordlish and thrasher, which last are kept on purpose
to ride our sea stages; at which word (by the motion of his lower parts) he
sprang from them with that violence, that no artificial motion could be so
swift, for by some strange fish he was carried under water which they could not
perceive, he went from them about a league, and returned in less then two
minutes, telling them that our barbarey Roebuck and Heart were but mere
Dromedaries to that he rode on, and that within half an hour he could be in
the remotest parts of the Ocean for the discovery of the most intricate
designs that were in agitation: they being all of them in a deep silence, did
not know what to say or think of him, whether he were a deity or a mortal
creature, he perceived them astonished, gently lifted up himself, and with a
smiling countenance, said he would deliver us something for our instruction,
then he read to them out of his paper this news.

That within six minutes he came from the narrow seas from the French fleet
which was intended for Catalonia in the Spanish dominions, but they had rather
come for little England if once these botches of distractions would run and
burst into confusion.

He told them also of a letter he had to show from the French General, to the
King of France, of his hopes of the enterprise, with the doubts and
encoragements, but because it was in the original, and they no linguists, he
spared his further relation till his coming to London.

That a mighty fleet of Turks had lately met with a Spanish fleet that came
for Ireland, which had beaten the Spaniard, and hindered them in that
expedition; so that if a timely aid be sent, the kingdom may be easily
recovered from those bloody rebels.

Having ended this news, he sprang from us as before, steering his course
directly toward London.

A Relation how Sir Simon Heartly with his Company, gave battle to a company
of Rebels and slew 500. took 4. Colors, and rooted 1500. more, this being
performed on the 6. of Ian. 1641.
ON our Epiphany last, being 6. Ian. 1641. Sir Simon Heartley with his company
chasing a parcel of Rebels near Monno, his spies giving him intelligence no
aid could suddenly assist them, set upon the Rebels, where for four hours
there was a hot skirmish, and on both sides many men fell; but Sir Simon so
bravely behaved himself that day, that his men played so hot on the Rebels
having the advantage of the wind, that in the end they forced the Rebels to
leave their works, and at that time there was 500. of the Rebels slain and
taken, and about the number of 1500. utterly routed, also 4. of the Rebels
Colors taken in this fight; this by the providence of God was performed to the
damage of the Rebels, and the encouragement of the Protestants.

FINIS.

