CARDUUS BENEDICTUS, THE Advantage of Affliction, OR THE Reward of
Patience.Unfolded in a SERMON Preached at the Funerals of Mr Thomas Bowyer
Merchant, who died the 8th day of February 1659, and was buried the 22th of the
same month, In the Parish Church of St Olaves Jewry.

By NATH. HARDY Minister of St Dionys. Back-Church.

Job 5. 17. Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects, therefore despise not
thou the chastening of the Almighty.

James 5. 11. Behold we count them happy which endure. You have heard of the
patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord.

Ambros. de Offic. Quae putantur mala, non solum impedimenta non sunt ad vitam
beatam, sed etiam ad meritum adjuvant.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Cranford at the Sign of the Castle and Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

To his much respected Friend Mr Henry Bowyer Merchant.
THe memory of the Just (says the Wise man) is blessed, or Prove. 10. 7. (...)
in benedictionem.
more sutably to the Original) for a blessing: and that in regard of

God, whom we are excited to bless and praise, by remembering the virtues of the
just;

Us, to whom the remembrance of his good example (if attended with Imitation)
is a blessing, and will lead us to blessedness;

Him, on whom this is conferrd as a blessing, that though his body rot, his
name shall not, but be remembered (...). Sept. Cum laudibus. Vulg.
(according to the vulgar Latin from the 70) with praise and honor.

That the memorial of your dead Brother's exemplary life might be kept alive
and perpetuated to succeeding Generations, the publication of this plain Piece
was earnestly desired by your self with many of his friends, and readily
yielded to by me since; though I do not judge the Sermon worthy to be printed,
yet I am sure he is worthy to be remembered.

To this end I have endeavored in the close of the Sermon, to draw his
picture, not to the length (I confess) but (I hope) to the life, so truly, that
I dare say, whoever well knew him, and shall view this portraiture, will
acknowledge it to be like, and not at all flattering; which that it may be the
more publicly beheld, I have by the Printers help, hung it in a convenient
light;

And now (worthy Friend) before I take pen from paper, give me leave to annex a
word of

Gratulation, in a thankful acknowledgment of those many undeserved kindnesses
which were vouchsafed to me by the deceased, and are continued by your self;

Exhortation, which concerns as well my self and all who shall peruse this
discourse, as you, that (to allude to the Philosophers phrase) we would all
bear Zeno.
the color of this dead servant of God, by following his excellent pattern.

Supplication to the great God, for You, your virtuous Consort, and Posterity.
That Divine bounty may continually pour upon you all these graces and blessings
which conduce to your present and future well being, is and shall be the prayer
of

Your very Real Friend NATH. HARDY.

THE Reward of Patience.
James 1. Ver. 12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for when he is
tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them
that love him.


CHristian Religion is a volume of Paradoxes, and its Oracles (though not like
Apollos ambiguous, yet) aenigmaticall; whether you view matters of faith or
practice, of promise or precept, you shall find the most of them to be so many
Riddles; and yet though they be not verisimilia, seeming probabilities, they
are vera, real verities; yea, those contradictions to carnal reason are
excellent sense to faith.

If you cast your eyes upon this Scripture which I have now read, what else
does it appear at the first aspect, but a strange and dark saying? Some of the
Learned have enumerated several centuries of opinions amongst the Philosophers
concerning blessedness; but not one amongst them all pitcheth upon this. The
mere moralists would as soon place the element of fire in the water, or the Sun
in a cloud, as happiness in affliction, blessedness in enduring: but if you
view the Text again, and read it throughout, you will find it an undeniable
truth, such as though carnal reason knows not how to understand, yet it can
not gainsay; in which respect I may well call it an Orthodox Paradox, well
worthy my discussion and your attention; Blessed is the man that endures
temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of life, which the
Lord has promised to them that love him.

If you well observe the Text, you will find it consists of two Generals;

A strange affirmation, and

A strong confirmation: Or, if you will,

An obscure proposition, and

A clear exposition.

The former in those words, Blessed is the man that endures temptation.

The latter in these, for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of life,
which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

I Begin with the affirmative proposition, wherein Genesis 1.
there are three principal words which constitute so many particulars;
Temptation, Enduring, Blessedness.

The first informs us in the quality of affliction, it is a temptation.

The second minds us of the duty of a Christian, which is to endure.

The third assures us of advantage by enduring temptation, and that no less
then felicity, Blessed.

1. Affliction is a temptation, not seductionis, seducing Ver. 13.
to badness, of which our Apostle speaks in the very next verse, and in our
English language is most frequently so styled; but probationis, proving our
goodness, of which our Apostle speaks at the second verse of this Chapter,
and best agrees with the signification of the Greek word (...), which comes
from (...), experimentum.

That kind of affliction which St James seems here more especially to intend,
is persecution from wicked men for Righteousness sake: but diverse temptations
at the second verse, and temptations here set Ver. 2.
down indesinitely, may take in all sorts of afflictions, as well corrections
from God, as persecutions from men.

Temptation, in its proper notion, is exploratio instituta ad eliciendam rei
ignotae notitiam, any trial made for discovery of what was unknown; thus every
affliction is a temptation, manifesting what was before unknown; not to God,
who knows what is within us, but to our selves and others.

That which affliction discovers, is both evil and good, sin and grace.

Much evil of sin which lay hid in the heart is brought to light by
affliction: It is a known saying, Magistratus indicat virum, Magistracy shows
the man in his colors; that pride and haughtiness then appearing, which was
not before to be discerned; and as prosperity makes known that pride, so does
adversity that impatiency which is in us. When the Corn is winnowed, that chaff
which being mingled with it was hid, is severed from it and discovered. The
mud, which whilst the water is quiet, lies at the bottom, is manifest when it
is stirred. Neither we nor others oft-times think there is so much frowardness
in our spirits, as we and they find when affliction stirs and sifteth us.

But that which affliction principally makes trial and discovery of, is our
grace, and that in its truth and strength.

The soundness of the foundation is tried by the wind, the health of the body
by hard weather, the rightness of the metal by the touchstone, and the
sincerity of our graces by affliction. The reality of a Friend is seen in
adversity; the faithfulness of the Wife, when her chastity is assaulted; and,
the truth of our Christianity, when we are tempted by affliction. The noune
(...), (from whence the word in my text comes) is nearer in sound with the
verb (...), which signifies transfodere, to pierce through. And as by piercing
through a thing, it is tried whether it be substantial or hollow; so are we
pierced through with sorrows and troubles, to try whether we are sincere or
hypocrites.

Nor does only the truth, but the measure of grace then manifests it self. The
Soldiers valor is shown in the battle, the Pilots skill in the tempest, and
the vigor of a Christians grace in temptations. Pro: 24.10.
If thou faint (says Solomon) in the day of adversity, thy strength is small.
Every Cockboat can swim in the narrow river, but it is the strong vessel which
holds out in the main ocean. The strength of our grace is at once both
manifested and increased by troubles.

Yet more particularly, Affliction tries our faith, whither it be only a
willow or an oak; our hope, whither it be only a reed or an anchor; our love,
whither it be only a blaze of thorns, or a Vestall flame; and our patience,
whither it be only a fading flower, or a flourishing laurel. Pet.
St Peter calls affliction the trial of our faith: here is the faith and
patience of the Saints, says St. John, in suffering times:

And surely the consideration hereof should teach us this point of divine
wisdom; as to make account that troubles will come upon us, so that when they
come they will be trials, and accordingly so to stablish our hearts with grace,
that when they befall us we may be able to

2. Endure, which is the next particular. Enduring temptation.

1. On the one hand is not

1. A needless bringing it upon our selves; it is one thing far, to bear, and
another infer, to bring the Cross upon our backs; Ius legionis, facile non
sequi, nec fugere; the military Law is not cowardly to run away, nor rashly to
fall on: if affliction meet us in our way we must not run from it, but withal
we must not stir out of our way to meet i^.

2. Nor is it a stupid despising of a temptation when it befalls us; it is
one (...) thing to lie under a burden as a stone, and another to stand under
it as a man; he that does not feel, cannot be said to endure: Stoicall Apathy
is far distant from Christian patience.

2. On the other hand, that enduring which is truly Christian, and here
intended by the Apostle,

1. In the extent, reaches to diverse, manifold temptations; the Syriack word
here is in the plural number; our shoulder should be as broad as the burden;
we must not only endure a few drops, but many showers; a single gust, but
renewed storms.

2. In the duration, holds out to the last, (...) is added by our Savior, He
that endures to the end, Let patience have its perfect work, is our Apostles
advice, at the 3d verse of this Chapter; Ver. 3.
our patience must be dyed in grain, such as will hold color.

3. As to the manner, is voluntary without compulsion, quiet without struggling,
cheerful without repining, and magnanimous without fainting. Our Saviors
injunction is, to take up the Cross; when Mat. 16. 24.
God lays it before us we must take it up willingly: the Greek word (...)
here used, signifies irruentem host is impetum viriliter sustinere, to receive
a fierce onset from the enemy, and not to stir: afflictions fall upon a
Christian as hail stones upon the tiles, which instead of breaking the tiles,
are broken themselves; a good man is neither lifted up with prosperity, nor
cast down by adversity.

4. As to the motive, by which truly Christian patience is distinguished from
that which is merely moral, it arises from a placid submission to Gods will,
and aims at the exaltation of Gods glory. Right obedience is chiefly because
God wills to enjoin, and right patience because he wills to inflict, and in
both, whatsoever he does or suffers, the true Christian seeks Gods honor.

And now as Christ once said to his Disciples, (...), where is your faith? let
me say to you, where is your patience? We are all Philosophers till we come to
dispute, and Soldiers till we are engaged to sight, and Christians till we are
called to endure; but alas are we not then like bad stuff, that shrinketh in
the wetting? do we not like froward children, cry when we are crossed? like
wooden vessels, we break if we come near the fire; and like earthen pots, we
crack, nay fall in pieces, when we are dashed against the stones; if we endure
for a while, yet are we not soon weary? if our first onset be (as it is said of
French men) more then manly, is not our second less then womanly? so soon are
we out of heart. Finally, Is our patience founded upon divine principles? are
we acted by spiritual enducements in all our sufferings? Oh let us learn to
show our selves Christians, by our readiness to endure; and let our enduring be
such as is truly Christian.

I end this with that short memento, which though borrowed from a Heathen, is
well worthy the ear and practice of a Christian, (...), abstine Epict^^.
and sustine, abstein from the evil of transgression, and sustein the evil of
affliction; forgo thy sinful pleasures, and undergo sorrowful pains; not
under the power of any sin, and stand under the weight of whatsoever suffering
may befall thee, so shall thou be

3. Blessed, which is the last particular in the first general. Blessedness in
its proper and adaequate notion, consists in a freedom from whatsoever is
evil, and a fruition of all good. But he that endures temptation, is deprived
of good and afflicted with evil, how then can he be blessed?

This objection will be sufficiently answered by a double distinction.

He that endures temptation, though he is not blessed consummatively, yet he
is blessed inchoatively. For

1. Though he is not altogether free from evil, yet he is free from the evil
of the evil, and that is a beginning of happiness. Christian patience plucketh
out the sting of every temptation, whereby it becomes in stead of a curse, a
blessing. Affliction to him that endures it as he ought, is not sickness but
physic; and so not evil to, but good for him.

2. Though he wants a fullness, yet he enjoys so much as may well be called a
taste of bliss, namely the favor of God, and the peace of conscience.

1. He that endures temptation has a quiet mind in the midst of all his
troubles; and his soul, like the upper region of the air, is without any
clouds of distraction. It was the counsel of our Savior to his Disciples, In
your patience possess your souls; the patient Christian even when he is
bereaved of his estate, his liberty, his health, his credit, possesses his
soul in a calm and serene tranquillity.

2. Nay, which is yet far more, he that endures temptation, enjoys his God;
and whilst the rain of affliction falls, he beholds the Sun shining on him.
To the upright (says the Psalmist) there arises Psalm 111.
light in darkness, even the light of Gods countenance in the darkness of
trouble. What a glorious sight had St Steven, when through a shower of stones
he beheld the Heaven open and Jesus standing at the right hand of God! and yet
the like vision, though Acts 7.
not after the same manner is vouchsafed to every Christian endurer; to whom,
as it were, Heaven is opened, whilst he beholds God through Christ propitious
toward him. It is in love, that God does exercise any of his with temptations;
and to those that endure them he is pleased to manifest his love; kissing them
with the kisses of his mouth, who kiss the rod of his hand. And surely there is
no happiness on this side Heaven, to the sense of Divine favor, and the quiet
of our own spirit: indeed it is an Heaven upon earth, an anticipation of
Heaven, the first fruits of glory, and an inchoation of blessedness.

2. He that endures temptation, though he is not blessed positively, yet he is
dispositively; he is not actually possessed with bliss, but he is in a certain
expectation of, and ready preparation for it; (though he be not at the journeys
end, he is way that leads to it.) When the Ship is in the haven, it is past all
storms; but by enduring storms, it at last arriveth at the haven. When we come
to Heaven, there will be no more temptation to endure, but by enduring
temptation it is, that we come to Heaven. So true is that of St Paul, These
light afflictions which 2 Cor. 4.
are but for a moment, work for us (to wit not of themselves, but being
patiently undergone) an exceeding eternal weight of glory. Indeed the
temptation in it self is an evil, and tends to make us miserable; but the
enduring it, is a virtue, a grace which makes us fit for blessedness.

To close up this, and with this the first general part of my Text:

1. How grossly is the world deceived in their opinion concerning the godly,
whilst they judge them of all men most miserable, by reason of those
temptations, to which they are exposed; whereas the truth is, that wicked men
in the midst of all their prosperity, by abusing it are infaeliciter faelices,
unhappily happy; and good men in the midst of adversity, by enduring it, are
faeliciter infaelices, happily unhappy? The enjoyments of the one are but
golden chains and silken halters, whereas the sufferings of the other, are as
fiery chariots to carry them to Heaven.

2. How great an encouragement is this to aequanimity, nay magnanimity of
spirit in all our trial? what traveller does not cheerfully ride through dirty
and watery lanes, when he considers it is his way home? what Merchant does not
willingly dispense with a troublesome tedious voyage, when he considers it is
to advance his fortune? why should we think much at any trials, when they are
designed for this end, to prepare us for glory? for (says our Apostle
concerning the patient endurer) when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of
life, which he has promised to them that love him. Which is the

Second and main part of the Text, and now comes Genesis 2.
to be discussed; It is that which I call an expository confirmation. That it
is a confirmation, the causall particle for implies; and that it is an
exposition, the following words demonstrate. The design of the argument is, to
prove the man that endures temptation blessed, because he shall receive a
Crown of life; by which it appears to be a confirmation. The strength of the
argument is, because blessedness consists in the receiving of that Crown; in
which respect it is an exposition.

If yet more particularly you look into the words, you will find in them an
answer to three questions, concerning the blessedness of the enduring Saint:

Quid, What it is he shall receive? a Crown of life.

Quando, When he shall receive it? when he is tried.

Quare, Wherefore he shall receive it? because the Lord has promised it.

Or if you will, observe here a double confirmation; the one, whereof is
principal, and the other collateral. Here is a reason of the Doctrine, why he
that endures temptation is blessed, because when he is tried, he shall receive
a Crown of life. And then here is a reason of that reason, why when he is tried
he shall receive a Crown of life, because it is that which the Lord has
promised to them that love him.

Our Apostle well knew how hardly this Doctrine would be received in the world.
Were it, blessed is the man that lives in power and splendor, in pleasure and
jollity, enjoys health, wealth, commands Countries and Kingdoms; it would
have found an unanimous assent. But blessed is the man that endures
temptation; quis credit, who believes this report? No wonder that St James
provideth so strongly for the proof of it, that none but an atheist can deny
it. Here is rota in rota, one proof within another.

That he which shall receive a Crown of life is a blessed man, is
unquestionable; all the doubt is, whether there be any such Crown of life; and
this our Apostle puts out of doubt by this strong medium, that the Lord, to wit
Dominus Deus, the Lord God has promised it. Since the Lord has promised it,
he must perform it, or he can not be faithful; if he be not faithful, he
cease to be God, it being impossible for God to lie. So that whosoever
questioneth the blessedness of this man, must doubt the reception of the Crown,
and whosoever doubts the reception of the Crown; must question the truth of the
promise; and whosoever questions the trath of the promise, must suppose that
God can be false in his word; which is in effect to deny a Deity, and so to be
in plain terms no better then an atheist.

1. Begin we with the principal confirmation, to wit the reason of the
Doctrine, in those words, for when he is tried, he shall receive a Crown of
life.

Wherein more particularly observe,

The excellency of the benefit, he shall receive a Crown of life: and

The opportunity of the time, when he is tried.

1. He that endures temptation, shall receive a Crown of life.

If you enquire, what is intended by this Crown of life? the answer is easily
returned, it is no other then the estate of happiness which is enjoyed in
Heaven.

That which would more particularly be inquired, is, why this state is called a
Crown, and why a Crown of life?

1. The metaphore of a Crown, serves very fitly to illustrate that future
estate in several particulars;

1. A Crown is set upon the head in token of honor; for this reason
Conquerours, and especially Kings had Crowns put upon their heads. There are
several Regalia insignia, ornaments belong to Kings and Emperors, a Throne, a
Robe, a Scepter, a Crown; and amongst them, this last is the chief. When Ring
Ahasuerus asked Haman, What shall be done to the man, the King delights to
honor? one part of the answer is, Let the royal apparel be brought forth
which the King uses to wear; and the Crown Royal which is set upon his head:
Such honor have all his Saints, they are as so many Conquerours, Psalm 1 49.
yea Kings. What was said of Rome, is much more true of Heaven, it is
Respublica Regum, a society of Kings; according to that of St John, He has
made us Kings. That we may Rev. 1.
see how honorable that estate is, it is not only here resembled to a Crown,
but by St Peter it is called a 1 Pet. 5. 4.
Crown of Glory: as if whereas glory is an appendix to other Crowns, it were
the matter of this; parallel to which it is, that we read elsewhere of a weight
of glory. And as a Crown encompasseth the whole head, so shall this Crown the
whole man, soul and body, whilst each shall have that glory, which is suitable
to it.

2. A Crown, especially a Royal Crown, is made of Gold, set with Jewels and
Pearls; by which is represented the wealth of that estate, wherein there shall
be no want, but a fullness of all enjoyments. To this purpose it is, that it is
elsewhere compared to an inheritance, and a Kingdom; it is set forth by a City,
the streets whereof are of pure gold, the gates were of pearls, the building of
the wall of jasper, and the foundation garnished with all manner of precious
stones; indeed the opulencie of that state is so great, that it can not be
measured, so much that it can not be numbered, and so precious that it can not
be valued.

3. A Crown, is an emblem of joy; days of Coronation, are days of
exaltation; the day wherein King Solomon's mother Crowned him, is said to be the
day of gladness of his heart: yea at that time, all the people piped with pipes
and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of them.
Suitable thereunto it is that St Paul puts these together, my joy and my Crown,
speaking to the Philippians; and Phil. 4 1. 1 These. 2. 20.
that he calls the Thessalonians his Crown of rejoicing. Such a Crown shall be
set upon the heads of glorified Saints, which shall fill them with joy and
gladness of heart; for this reason it is called by our blessed Savior, gaudium
domini, the joy of the Mat. 25. 21.
Lord, which because it cannot enter into us, we shall enter into it. Then it
is, those prophecies shall be fully accomplished, The Lord God shall wipe away
tears from off their faces; that the ransomed of the Isa. 53. 10.
Lord shall come to Zion, with songs and joy upon their heads, they shall have
joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighings shall flee away. Thus whereas honor,
wealth and pleasure, are the three grand objects of men's desires, all of these
meet together in that estate, and are as it were encircled by this metaphor of
a Crown.

2. But our Apostle contents not himself only to assure a Crown, for that would
not have proved his Doctrine, since many that receive Crowns are not blessed;
yea notwithstanding the honor, wealth and joy of a Crown, there is also envy,
care, trouble, which follows that honor, accompanies that wealth, and
attends that joy. Oh nobilem potius quam felicem pannum, said he truly of the
Royal Robe, it is rather noble, then happy; and it is not seldom seen, that
Crowns are unfortunate to those who wear them. That therefore we might not
think that our Apostle intended an earthly Crown, it is said to be a Crown of
life, by which it is distinguished from, and far advanced above other Crowns.
By the Apostle Peter it is called (...), a Crown made as it were of the flower
(...) which never fades: and to 1 Pet. 5. 3.
this notion the phrase in the text may be referd; it is a Crown of life, that
is such a Crown which can not die, nor wither. To this Crown that Motto refers,
of a Nobleman giving three Crowns in his Arms, Quarta perennis erit; the fourth
shall never perish.

Indeed this is that which denominateth it a state of blessedness; for were
there never so great a confluence of pleasure, riches, honor, yet if this were
but only for a time, it could not make a man happy. The Crown of this Crown is,
that it is of an eternal duration, and that not only in respect of it self,
but those that wear it; for which reason I conceive it is especially called a
Crown of life, as being such a Crown which confers life, so that they who enjoy
it never die. There is a fabulous story of a Shepherd, which having a Crown
of thorns upon his head, fought with a Basilisk and was not killed by it; but
it is a certain truth, that the Saints having this Crown upon their heads, are
not longer subject to the poison of death. Earthly Crowns though they confer
honor, they cannot life; nay sometimes they hasten death, and occasion the
ruin of their owners; but this Crown makes the possessors of it as long lived
as eternity.

Nor is it barely a life, but a Crown of life; that is, an honorable,
pleasant, joyful life, a life attended with whatsoever may make it desirable,
which is here ascertained; for that is the import of these two words joined
together, and both these must concur to make a man happy. There is a kind of
life which even the damned may be said to have, but it is not a Crown of life,
a life attended with dignity and prosperity: indeed neither the Crown without
life, nor life without the Crown, but the Crown of life makes the complete
happiness.

And as these words conjoined, best describe bliss, so this description of
bliss, was most suitable in this place. For where as the temptation which a man
may be called to endure, is such as touches him in his estate, or credit, or
body, or life; and to bereave him of this last, is the worst which any
temptation can do; here is abundant recompense for shame, pain, poverty, yea
death it self; to wit a Crown of life.

Learn we therefore when we are called to endure, to call to mind what we shall
receive. It is a true saying of St Gregory, Mala vitae praesentis tanto durius
Greg. M.
sentimus, quanto bonum, quod sequitur, pensare negligimus; the true reason why
we so unwillingly endure present evils, is, because we neglect to consider the
future good. All who endure chastisings (says the Apostle) are sons, and being
sons, are heirs of this Crown, Noli attendere quam poenam habes a Hieron.
flagello, sed quem locum in Testamento, Consider not so much what strokes thou
have from thy fathers rod, as what place in his will, which bequeatheth to thee
no less then a Crown. The first Christian sufferer Stephen had a Crown in his
name, and every one that endures, though not to that extremity, which he did,
shall have a Crown upon his head. Virtue (says Seneca divinely) quo tendit,
non quid passura est recogitat; recounts not what it now suffers, but Sen. Ep.
what it shall enjoy. While a Crown of thorns is put into thy hand, let a Crown
of life be in thy eye.

Indeed this Crown of life duly pondered, will serve on the one hand to darken
the glories, and on the other to lessen the miseries of this present life; and
accordingly cannot but enable us to contemn the one, and endure the other.

1. What is the glimmering of the candle to the shining of the Sun? the value
of brass and iron, to the worth of gold and silver? Infinitely far less is the
highest dignity here below, to the glory above. The woman in the Revelation
having a Crown upon Rev. 12 1.
her head, has the Moon under her feet; terram despicit, qui coelum aspicit;
he who beholds the Stars of Heaven, despises the flowers of the earth; all the
excellencies of this world are so far from being desirable, that-they are
contemptible to him who expects this Crown of life.

2. Nor is there less efficacy in this Crown, to render this worlds miseries
tolerable, then its delights despicable. The sufferings of this present life
(says St Paul) are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed. How light is a dram of Romans 8.
reproach to a weight of glory? how short is a minute of pain to an eternity of
pleasure? no wonder if upon this account the Apostle calls them light
afflictions, 2 Cor. 4.
which are but for a moment. Been fertur calumnia cum acquiritur corona, he
need not be weary of the Cross, who is sure of the Crown. We faint not (says
St Paul) in that very place, whilst we look not on the things that are seen,
but on the things that are not seen, meaning the things of glory which are not
seen by the eye of sense; and yet being looked on by the eye of faith,
preserves us from fainting in the greatest trials. Moses having respect to the
recompense of reward, made choice of afflictions; well may we be contented to
endure them. This joy being set before Heb^. 11.
Christ, caused him to endure the Cross and despise the shame; and therefore
having this price in our eye, let us run with patience the race which is set
before us: So much the rather, considering

1. The usual priority of enduring in order to this Crown. St Austin long
since said, and truly, tota Aug.
vita humana tentatio, man's life on earth is a continued temptation. There are
temptations we must resist, and there are temptations we must endure; and who
almost more or less, in some kind or other, does not experience both these? The
way to Heaven is sometimes bloody, frequently watery; per angust a pervenitur
ad augusta; the way to bliss is straight, no passing through with our sins, and
seldom without suffering. This Crown is not for any but conquerours, nor is
there any conquest without fighting, and that many times a sharp fight of
affliction. He who is the Captain of our salvation, obtained his Crown by this
means, and surely those that are the soldiers, must not think to have theirs
upon other terms.

2. The probable proportionality of this Crown to our enduring: Amongst the
Romans there were several sorts of Crowns appointed, according to the several
services, which had been done: and Divines Aug. medit.
generally affirm different degrees of glory, according to what we do or suffer
in this world: as one Star, so one Crown differs from another in glory;
indeed communis laetitia, the joy is common; but dispar gloria, the glory is
different. It is St Paul's assertion, As the sufferings of Christ abound in us,
so our consolation 1 Cor. 1.
abounds by Christ; and it is probably true, that as our afflictions abound,
so shall our remuneration abound also. The same Apostle says, If we suffer
with him, 2 Timothy 2.
we shall reign with him: I, and the more we suffer for him, the more glory we
shall receive from him, whilst that every new cross adds a new pearl to this
Crown of life which is conferred on the Christian endurer.

I end this: It is storied of Alexander, that having invited many of his
Courtiers to supper, he provided a Crown of near 200lb value, which was to be
given to him who drank most; upon which several of them drank so long, till in
stead of gaining the Crown they lost their lives. Lo here (my brethren) a Crown
of life tendered to all who willingly drink the cup of affliction; let us not
refuse although we lose our lives, since we shall be sure to win the Crown.
Pericula non respicit Martyr, sed Coronam; plagas non horret, praemium numerat,
says Chrysologus excellently. Chrysol.
Whenever thou art called to suffer, look off from the danger to the Crovn,
and numbering the riches of the one, thou will not fear the other. That was but
a foolish mother, who would not let her son put off his night cap to put on a
Crown: and he is a foolish Christian, whom this Crown cannot persuade to part
with these worldly comforts, and to endure worldly crosses. Oh let us ask that
wisdom of God, whereby we may learn to set a true aestimate on this benefit,
and then we shall know, that however whilst we endure temptation, we seem to
be miserable, when we receive this Crown we shall be really blessed: And if you
desire to know when this Crown shall be received, the answer is

2. When he is tried, which is the next particular to be handled. The Greek
words are (...), and may best be rendered, being found approved: Look as the
gold when upon trial it is approved, is then employed for some vessel of
honor; the Scholar when upon examination he is approved, is advanced to some
preferment; the wrestler or runner, when having performed his service, he is
adjudged conqueror, obtains the prize; so the Christian having been tried by
temptation, and being approved for his enduring, receives the Crown.

That which would be more particularly inquired, is, when the Christian that
endures, is tried and approved? The answer to which is returned, when he has
endured to the end of his life. The truth is

1. So long as we are in this world, we are under trial, nor are we tried and
approved till we go out of it, and then we receive the Crown. The whole day of
life is the time of laboring in the vineyard until the evening of death, when
we receive our wages; we are not fully tried in the Christian race, till we
come to the goal of death, and then if we be found worthy we shall obtain the
prize. There are too many who endure for a time, and then fall away, thereby
manifesting themselves to be, not gold but dross, which melts away in the heat
of the fire; and therefore it is our Saviors counsel to the Angel of the
Church of Smyrna, Be thou faithful unto the death, Rev. 2. 10.
and I will give thee a Crown of life.

2. When we are sufficiently tried, we shall be called out of this world to the
fruition of our Crown. This world is the field, wherein the good corn stands so
long till it be ripe, and then it is cut down by death, to be carried into the
barn of glory. It is the school of the Cross wherein it pleases God to train
us, and then by death he takes us to the Academy of Heaven: our heavenly
Physician will keep us no longer in physic, but till we are thoroughly purged;
our merciful refiner will no longer detain us in the furnace, but till we are
sufficiently purified: when once by enduring temptation we are tried and fitted
for Heaven, death does come to put an end to all our troubles, and put us into
a partial possession of that Crown, which in the day of Judgment the Righteous
Judge shall plenarily confer upon us.

Let then the Christian endurer be content to wait, and not repine at the delay
of his reward: The thing is certain, he shall receive; I and the time is set
too, when he is tried; nor can it be long, since it is only during the short
time of life. It may perhaps seem long to thee, and so much the longer, because
of the temptations which befall thee; but surely a Crown, and especially a
Crown of life is worth the waiting for, and when it is received, thou will
acknowledge thy self abundantly recompensed for the greatness and length of thy
sufferings. And if at any time distrustful thoughts arise in thy mind
concerning this Crown, whether it shall be conferd; fix thy eyes on the last
clause of the Text, which now remains to be discussed; it is the Crown of
life,

2. Which the Lord has promised to them that love him; it is that which I call
the collateral confirmation, as being a strong argument, assuring the
reception of that Crown, which denominateth the suffering Christian blessed.

Wherein more particularly there are two things observable:

The means of conveiance, in those words, which the Lord has promised,

The subject of reception, in those, to them that love him.

1. The Crown of life is that, which the Lord has promised.

The title of Lord here used, is very frequently throughout the new Testament
given to Christ, and that upon a double account.

1. Quatenus Deus, Inasmuch as he is God, the Lordship belongs to him, Iure
naturali, by natural right. He is the Son of God by eternal generation, and
being so, he is equal with the Father, and God over Romans 9.
all, blessed for ever.

2. Quatenus Mediator, Inasmuch as he is God man, this Lordship belongs to him,
Iure donativo by deed of gift. All power (says our blessed Savior) Mat. 28.
is committed to him in Heaven and earth, namely by God the Father, to him as
Mediator. And thus

1. He is Lord of the whole world, having power ad dominandum, to rule over all
his creatures.

2. He is Lord of his enemies ad domandum, to subdue and vanquish them.

3. He is Lord of his Church ad donandum, to confer gifts upon her, especially
this Crown^ And knowing, to how manifold temptations she would be subject in
this life, he is pleased to vouchsafe, the promise of this Grown, to be as it
were a bit to stay her stomach, till the full meal.

It were easy to multiply instances, how this Lord promised this reward viva
voce to his Disciples, whilst he was on earth, and that though not expressly
(as we read) under this very metaphor of a Crown, yet frequently under the
resemblance of a Kingdom, to which a Crown relates. Indeed though Luke 12. 32.
this bliss was promised before, to wit in the old Testament by Moses and the
Prophets, yet it was not so clearly and fully revealed by them, as it was
afterward See my 2d part on St John's first Epistle the 33th Lecture.
by this Lord and his Apostles; so that now we have (to allude to St Peter's
phrase) a more sure, or at least a more plain word of promise, to which we
shall do well to take heed, as to a light shining in a dark 1 Pet. 1. 25.
place; to revive our hearts with a confident expectation, even when we are
involved in the darkness of affliction.

That which may the more excite our faith, encourage our hope, and thereby
strengthen our patience in enduring, is the consideration of this Lord who has
promised this Crown. Inasmuch as

1. In general, this Lord never fails in whatsoever he promises. St Paul
faith, All the promises are in him yea and Amen; surely then all his promises
are yea and Amen; and as they are made, so they are made good. In the preface
of the Epistle to the Angel of the Philadelphians, he is called the Amen, the
faithful witness, as being true in all his sayings, and more especially in his
promises. The words of the Lord (says David) are pure words, as silver tried
in Psalm. 12. 7.
the fire purified seven times. It is true of all, but principally meant of
the words of promise, which are said to be as silver purified seven times,
because they are free from the least dross of deceit. This Lord never
promises, but what he really intends, and effectually performs.

2. In special as to this promise, he who promises is fully able and willing
to fulfill it: He is called by this Apostle the Lord of glory, and therefore
can James 2. 1.
confer the glory of a Crown: by St Paul the Lord of life, and therefore can
bestow a Crown of life. There cannot be a clearer title to any thing, then that
which a man has by a lawful purchase from the right owner. This Lord has
purchased this Crown of his Father at a dear rate, not with corruptible gold
and silver, but his own most precious blood: yea he is gone into Heaven to take
possession of his purchase, whereby it is now fully in his hands to bestow: nay
which is yet more, he has purchased it in our name, and possesses it in our
behalf; no wonder if he has promised it to us, nor need we doubt at all of his
power or will to confer it on us.

The Devil once took our blessed Lord up to an exceeding high mountain, and
showed him all the Matthew. 4.
Kingdoms of the world and the glory of them; yea not only showed, but promised
them saying, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.
But in this he was a gross liar, since they were none of his to give, but only
by the permission of him to whom he was so impudent as to promise them. And as
he would have dealt with Christ, so he deals with foolish mortals, promising
them what he cannot, nay never means to perform. But far be it from this
Lord, the Righteous Judge to deal so with his servants: he has showed, nay he
has promised us the Kingdom, not of earth, but Heaven and the glory thereof;
and we are as sure to receive it, as if we did already enjoy it; and therefore
ought with says to believe, with hope to expect, and with constancy to wait
for the accomplishment of it; remembering what he says himself, though on
another account, Heaven and earth shall Matthew. 5. 17.
pass away, but my word shall not pass away.

I shut up this with this useful gloss, It is not the the Crown of life, quam
ille meruit, which he who endured has deserved, but quam Dominus promisit,
which the Lord has promised, to wit of his mere grace and mercy. A Duke waging
war with his enemy, bore in his shield the Eagle (resembling Jupiter) having a
Crown in his beak, with this Motto, Jupiter merentibus offert, Jupiter offers
it to them who doserve it. It is not so with this Crown of life, for then who
should receive it! not our best doings, nor yet worst sufferings can merit this
Crown. It is called indeed by St Paul, a Crown of righteousness, to ^ Tim. 4.
wit in respect of Christ's promise (for so it follows,) which the righteous
Judge (to wit upon the account of his own word, which if he should not perform
he were unrighteous) but not in respect of our merit; and therefore it is
added, shall give (not pay) me in that day. Let us not then proudly challenge
this Crown, as if it were that which we have merited, but withal let us be
confidently assured of it, since it is that which the Lord has promised.

2. To them that love him; which is the last particular of the Text, and shall
in a few words be dispatched. For the explication hereof, there are two
Questions to be resolved;

What it is to love this Lord? and Why the qualification is changed, from
enduring to loving?

In answer to the first Quaery, be pleased to know, Quest. 1.
that the love of Christ in its utmost latitude, includes an esteem of a
desire after, and a delight in him: Esteem is as the foundation, Desire as the
wall, and Delight as the Roof of this fabric of love: Esteem is the beginning,
Desire is the progress, and Delight is the consummation of love. Finally,
Esteem is as the ballast to make the Ship steady, Desire as the sayls, by which
it passes through the Ocean, and Delight is the music, which welcometh it to
the shore.

1. To love the Lord Christ, is to set an high rate and value upon him, so as
to reject all things in comparison of him. Judgment is the source and spring of
affection, from whence it proceeds, and according to which it is proportioned.
He that has an equal esteem of a base lust, a brutish pleasure as of Christ,
cannot be said to love him; he only has a right affection to him, who (with
St Paul) accounts all things loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge
of him. What is thy beloved more Phil. 3.
then another beloved? said those blind daughters of Jerusalem, who being
ignorant of his excellency, knew not how to judge of his worth; but the spouse
of Christ having her eyes opened to see him, knows how to value him; and
therefore returns this answer, he is the chiefest among ten thousands.

2. To love this Lord, is earnestly to long after union and communion with him.
As Samuel told Saul, that all the desires of the Israelites were upon him; so
is it with the Christian in respect of Christ, who is the center in which all
the lines of his desire meet; Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none
on earth I desire besides thee, is the language of Love. As those two friends
begd of Vulcan, that he would new make them into one; so does the Christian
desire to be one with Christ, and Christ with him, to dwell in Christ, and
Christ in him.

3. To love this Lord, is to take a sweet complacency in the presence and
enjoyment of him: The Hebrew word which signifies to love, ends in litera
quiescenti, in a quiescent letter; the acquiescency of the soul in the object
beloved, is the perfection of love. When the desire comes (says Solomon) it
is a Tree of life; so it is when Christ comes to the soul which loves him. It
is observable how these two are joined together; my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased, the latter unfolding Matthew. 3. 17.
the former; and then is Christ our beloved, when we are well pleased with him.
Good old Jacob having seen his darling Joseph, says It is enough: Good old
Simeon having embraced Christ in his arms, says, Lord now let thou thy
servant depart. Luke 2. 29. 3
The Christian enjoying the presence of Christ is fully satisfied, not
regarding the best delights this world can afford him.

By this time you see what it is to love Christ: That Quest. 2.
which would next be inquired is, Why our Aposile changes the qualification?
It had been more proper and agreeable with his precedent discourse to have
said, which the Lord has promised to them that endure; and no doubt this is
intended to be included: But if you duly weigh, you shall find very good reason
for the alteration, and that in a threefold respect; since we may probably
conceive, that our Apostle hereby intended a restriction, a direction, and an
enlargment.

1. Them that love him, implies a restriction, letting us see to what kind of
endurers this Crown belongs, namely to such as endure out of a love to Christ:
Oramus, jejunamus (says an Ancient) we pray, we fast, I may add, toleramus, we
suffer; sed quid sine charitate, but what is all without love? though I bestow
all my goods on the poor (says St Paul) yea though I give my body to be burned
1 Cor. 13. 3.
and have not charity, I am nothing: and though the charity there intended be
love to the brethren, yet it may be applied to the love of Christ, without
which the greatest sufferings are of no value in Gods esteem. There is an
enduring out of necessity, because we cannot help it; there is an enduring out
of vain glory, that we may gain the repute of courage; and there is an enduring
out of charity, to which our love to this Lord induces, when we suffer for his
sake; and it is only this enduring which entituleth us to the Crown.

2. Them that love him, involveth in it a direction, whereby we may be enabled
to endure, namely by this grace of love. That challenge of St. Paul is very
apposite to this purpose, if with some Expositors we construe it of our love to
Christ: Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, Romans
8.
or disiress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?
Whilst love to Christ will enable us to endure all these for Christ's sake?
Hence it is that the holy Scriptures compare it to death, not only because it
separateth as it were the soul from the body, to join it with its beloved
object; but likewise (as St Austin observes) because Aug.
as there is no opposition to be made against death, so neither against Love,
which overcomes all difficulties, even death it self; and in that respect is
not only strong as, but stronger then death.

3. Once more: Them that love him, carries with it an enlargement of this
remuneration, as belonging not only to them who actually endure, but to all
who love Christ. All Christians are not called to endure temptation; and if
they be not called to it, they ought not to put themselves upon it, To you
(says the Apostle) it is given, not only to believe, but to suffer; ability of
suffering, especially Phil. 1.
death, is a gift not conferred on all Christians; and this Lord only calls
them to suffer whom he fits for it. But least those Christians who were not put
upon such eminent service, might think that therefore they had no part in the
Crown, the Apostle enlarges the qualification to all who love Christ. Indeed
every Christian ought to have a mind in some measure ready to endure what
Christ shall require, and where there is this love of Christ, there will be
this readiness. But if it please this Lord that thy Lot fall in halcyion
days, when the Church enjoys rest and prosperity; or if in suffering times,
by his providence thou art not called to endure, yet be not discouraged, this
Crown is promised by this Lord, not only to them that endure, but to them that
love him.

I end all therefore with that exhortation of the Psalmist; Oh love the Lord
all you his Saints! Love Psalm. 31.
him for his own sake, that is amor amicitiae, a love of friendship, and most
acceptable. Indeed if you look upon him, you cannot choose but love him, for he
is altogether lovely to a spiritual eye. And show the reality of your love, by
your sorrow for his absence, and joy in his presence; fear to offend him, care
to please him, by avoiding what he forbids, and performing what he requires;
by your willingness to hate Father and Mother, goods and lands; to endure
reproach and shame, losses and crosses for his sake; and then quid non speramus
amantes? what may not Christ's friends hope for? If you love him he will love
you, nay he loved you before you loved him, and by that so much the more
obliges you to love him: he loved you so as to do, nay so as to die, not
only by acting, but enduring: let your love answer his, and if nothing else
will prevail, love him for your own sakes, for the Crowns sake which he has
promised to (and will in due time confer on all) them that love him.

And thus I have finished the Text; wherein you have beheld the bliss of the
man that endures temptation and loves the Lord. But perhaps you will ask,
Where is this man to be found? The truth is, such an one (like those Pearls
called Unions, because found one by one) is very rare, but yet such there have
been in all ages; and lo here the liveless dust of such a man, Mr Thomas
Bowyer Merchant, of whom I can truly say, whilst he lived he loved the Lord,
and endured temptation; and now he is dead, I justly hope, he is blessed with a
Crown of life.

If you peruse the sacred Writ, you will find the blessed man described by
several characters; the Ladder which reaches to Heaven, consisting of many
steps; nor do I know any of them which might not in some measure be applied to
him. Indeed he was not only a Star but a Constellation, or rather an Heaven
bespangled with many Stars: his life was not a single leaf, but a book of
many leaves, and those filled with the lines of good works. Finally, he was not
only Flower, but a Garden adorned with the choice flowers of many excellent
Virtues: To gather them all, would ask more time then can be spared, and
therefore passing over his Temperance, Justice, Prudence, with many others, I
shall only cull out four choice Flowers to strew upon his Hearse, and then I
shall commit him to the ground, and you to God.

1. The first is the Marygold of Piety, which is called in my Text, the love of
the Lord; a grace whereof he gave manifest evidence, by his due regard of Gods
worship, affectionate love to Christ's Ministers, constant adherence to the
Truth, and passionate sympathy with the Church.

1. He was a man much given to Religious exercises, and as he made choice of a
single life, so for some years before his death, he sequestered himself from
secular affairs, that he might have more opportunity of conversing with God. So
long as he had ability of going and hearing, he duly waited on the public
administrations, where I have several times been an eye witness of his
reverend and devout attention. Nor was he (as I fear too many are) negligent of
family duties, in praying with, and giving instructions to them, withal
allotting much time to his closet devotions; so that I may truly say of him, in
the words of David concerning the blessed man, His delight was in the Law of
the Lord, and therein he did exercise himself day and night. Psalm. 2.


2. He was an entire and cordial friend to the Orthodox and faithful
dispensers of the Word of Christ; he delighted to hear them, joyed to see them,
desired their prayers, their company, and was never better then when he had
them at his Table; yea their very feet were beautiful in his eyes.

3. The truly Reformed Religion of the Church of England, in which he had been
educated, he steadfastly adhered to, and according to his knowledge (which was
not small, in Divine as well as other matters) he zealously asserted her
Doctrine and Discipline, against heretical and schismatic Antagonists.

Finally, He was one of the mourners in Sion, for the heinous sins of the
Nation, and grievous calamities of the Church; oftimes sending up cries and
groans to Heaven in secret, for the forgiveness of the one, and redress of the
other: Upon all which considerations, I suppose none will deny him the title of
Religious man.

2. A second Flower is the Rose of Charity, a Virtue which ever attends upon
the former, the Lov^ of God, and of our neighbor being inseparable. The
Charity of this our Brother, was though extended to all, yet especially
directed toward the poor and needy, whom (according to another character of
David's blessed man) he considered, and that so Psalm. 41.
as to relieve, answerable to that estate wherewith God had blessed him. In his
last Will and Testament, he has remembered the poor of this, with some other
Parishes; and has taken care for the putting of Ten poor youths forth to
Apprentiships. Being a Citizen, he has not forgotten Christ's Hospital. Being
a Merchant, he has made provision for Ten Seamen, maimed in Merchants service:
and being; (as I have already told you) a true Fiend to the Clergy; he has
given an Hundred pounds to be distributed among Ten poor Ministers, and Ten
poor Ministers Widows, whom (being very well acquainted with their persons and
necessities) he has nominated himself. Nor must I omit to tell you (that I
wish all rich men would practice*) that the charity of his life was far more
then that of his death. He gave when it was in his power to have kept, he
scattered his alms with both hands, and yet the one hand must not know what
the other did; by all which it appears he was a truly charitable man.

3. A third Flower is the Violet of Humility, that grace which is the first
step in the scale of blessedness, erected by our Savior: This worthy man,
though rich in grace was poor in spirit; though (to use St Paul's phrase) he
labored more abundantly then many others in doing good; yet (as I have often
heard him say) he thought he could do nothing, looking upon himself as an
useless branch, an unprofitable servant: and so far was he from being one of
those Pharisees, who trusted to themselves, that they were righteous and
despised others, that he judged others better then himself, and trusted only
to the mercy of his God, and Righteousness of his Redeemer.

The last Flower is the Camamile of his Patience, a Virtue wherein this our
Brother was most exemplary, for which reason I made choice of this Scripture,
to be the subject of my discourse at his Funeral. It pleased the All- wise God
to visit him several years before his death, with the tormenting pain of the
Stone; he was scarce at any time wholly free, and sometimes exceedingly
tortured as it were upon the Rack; and as if God intended him to be another
Job, he gave him a great measure of patience, being never heard, no not in his
sharpest fits, to charge God foolishly, or break forth into any repining
language. He sometimes desired to die, not out of a fretting impatience at the
miseries and pains he endured, but (as his own words were) because he longed to
be with God, with whom I doubt not but he now is in case, in rest, in joy and
falicity.

And now they who knew not this worthy Person, will be ready to think I have
said too much, but they who knew him, know I have said too little, since I
cannot say enough. The commendation of this our Brother is, (...), not the work
of one tongue, especial one so unskilful as mine. In whatsoever I have said,
I have only born witness to the grace of God bestowed upon him; and though I
am sure I have not spoken all the truth, I am no less sure I have spoken
nothing but the truth; nor do I doubt but many tongues are ready to attest the
verity of what has been spoken.

It will I suppose be needless now to tell you, how great a loss to the Clergy
(my self in particular) the Parish, his near Relations, this City, nay the
whole Church, the loss of this good man is; nor dare I here enlarge, least
sorrow put a stop to my speech. My design in his commendation, is, our
consolation, that considering on the one hand the good works which he did, and
on the other, the many pains which he endured, all who knew and loved him may
be comforted, in that he is released of his miseries, and has in part received
the recompense of his virtues.

I have but one word to add, to my worthy friend his surviving Brother, that
the virtues of the dead may still live in him, to the glory of God, the comfort
of himself, the Honor of the Family, which has for many years been of good
repute in this City, and the welfare of his posterity, who I am confident will
fare the better for the prayers and piety of their deceased Uncle; especially
those prayers being (as I hope they will be) renewed, and that piety imitated
by their living Father.

Nothing now remains, but that we all join together in giving God thanks for
the Excellant Example of this good man, and express that thankfullness in our
lives by following his piety, charity, humility, patience, with all those
graces which did shine forth in him, that in due time, together with him, and
all others departed in the faith and love of Christ, we may receive that Crown
of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

Amen.
FINIS.
Errata. Page 2. line 30. after begin read we. p. 4. l. 22. r. near. p. 9. l.
30. dele one. p. 12, l. 32. dele e. p. 14. l. 7. for all. r. ul.

A Catalogue of those Sermons that have been Printed since the Sermon Preached
at St. Paul's Church, to the Native Citizens of London, May the 27th 1658. at
the end of which, there is a Catalogue of all his other Sermons formerly
Printed.
THe first General Epistle of St John the Apostle, Unfolded and Applied; the
second Part: In thirty seven Lectures on the second Chapter, from the third
verse to the last.

A sad Prognostic of approaching Judgment; or, The happy misery of good men in
bad times. A Sermon Preached at St Gregory's, June the 13th 1658. for the
Funerals of the Reverend John Hewit, D. D.

Man's last Journey to his long Home. A Sermon Preached at the Funerals of the
Right Honorable Robert Earl of Warwick, June the 9th 1659.

The Pilgrims Wish; or, The Saints Longing. Discussed in a Sermon Preached in
St Bennets Grace-Church, at the Funerals of Mr, Anne Dudson, late Wife of Mr
Edward Dudson of London Draper, January 11th 1658.

A Looking-glass of Humane Frailty set before us. In a Sermon Preached at the
Funerals of Mrs Anne Calquit, late Wife of Mr Nicholas Calquit Draper, at
Alhallows the less, in Thames Street London, April, the 19th 1659.

Carduus Benedictus, the Advantage of Affliction; or, The Reward of Patience.
Unfolded in a Sermon preached at the Funerals of Mr Thomas Bowyer Merchant, at
St Olaves Iew^y, February the 22th 1659.

All Printed for Joseph Cranford, and are to be Sold at his Shop, at the Sign
of the Castle and Lion in St Paul's Churchyard.


