THE HISTORY OF POLINDOR AND FLOSTELLA: WITH OTHER POEMS.

By I. H. Esquire

The third Edition, Revised and much Enlarged.

LONDON, Printed, by T. R. for Thomas Dring, at the George in Fleetstreet near
Cliffords-Inne, 1657.

To the READER.
Judicious Reader,
I Present Thee here with an Historical POEM, the Plot being all mine own;
whose Groundwork partly laid in very young years, though Reviewed since, much
Enlarged: It Is of no great bulk, yet various, and I hope the Style and Matter
both may please Thee; As for mere Verse, Ryme (though those should add their
Grace) Compared to the First, I thought them still but as the Tinckling part of
Poetry. There were some reasons for the Printing it, though chief, thy
Recreation, as 'twas mine in the Composing; and, if Please, I have my Wishes;
for Applause, I think not ont, having outlived that Vanity. There follow some
adjoined POEMS (different forms) cull^d out from many others, wherewithal I
could have swelled the Book much greater, but thought these enough; since,
wishing to present thee with some thing of higher Consequence; hoping I have
not much erred, beating this Road thus far, wherein so many Others (great Parts
too) have gone far more Voluminously before me. But, for close; 'twas meant a
Youthful Fancy (gentle Reader) and so take it; view it at idle hours: Nor,
lastly, suck thou Ill from what my Self meant Well, and harmless, for, though
profit not, I would not Prejudice thee.

John Harington.

POLINDOR, AND FLOSTELLA.
THE FIRST BOOK.
THat gaudy'st Time of year, when Mother-Earth
Seems new lyen-in of various Flowery Birth:
When prancks her jolly Cheeks, like tempting Bride,
As though her former Youths Created Pride
Strove thence to intimate: when Goddess of flowers.
CLORIS traces
Curtisan-like the Plains, with all her graces,
Choice Jewels, sweets of Essence; whilst the Sun
(Her Lover) smiles in Beams, does have to run
Near course, to court her still; whilst leavy Groves
Resound with chirping Consorts of their Loves,
By the small Plumed Minstrelsie: when cheerful show
(Dim cloudy Vizars gone) pleased Heavens, bestow
On the fragrant Earth those Cordiall-showr's, which cherish*
Sweet, suck'ling, milky Dewes: when all things flourish.
No sooner had the Larks shrill mounting Waits
Called forth their Lady Morn her Eastern Gates
Of Roses, Violets, to take the air,
That still might seem to SOL more lovely, fair;
Dropping her molten Pearls as favors on
The under-gazing Mortal: when anon
Behold upon those fair Eoian Plains
Two hundred Nymphs, two hundred Shepheard-Swains
(Those Activ'st of the ARCADIAN youth, prime flower)
Each tracing from their several Country- Bower,
Quick Risers all: Nymphs on that solemn day
Proved early Houswifes too, but loytring, play
Was all (intruth) they rose for; and to grace
God of Shepherds.
PAN'S Festival the more, each Rural face
Comes in its moving'st best Dress, beautified
(To the view) with most fine, witty, careless Pride:
*All Is Quaint and neat, those curious Freaks thought vain;
Skin, wounding feature's here; True Beauty, plain:
As Nature would to the erring World be known
Not fond profuse to gayer Courts alone.
Let it suffice, Some were transcendent-faire,
And might please liquorish Princes taste: Nor are
Those lovely Shepheard-boyes at all behind
In Natures flowing Bounties, who, to find
Their bright-cheek'd Virgin-loves, with wandering joy
O're-rang'd the silken Vale: when, those less coy
(Some gentler She Is) by cunning Ignorance,
Or willing kind of stray, like purposed Chance
First light on them: Met, both did jointly prove
All those delights Ingenious, yet chaste, Love
Could think on, Youths repast of mirth and pleasure:
Played, talked, kissed wooed, or danced around by Measure
The fair, green Plushy Soil, which Carpet seemed
With Flowers, as Heaven with Stars enriched, begem'd.
But here, Record, amidst this Rustic pile
(...) chanted one to Fame, one, whom they style
(Thoughout) The Youth POLINDOR, who excelled;
As their Swains Prince, unmatched, unparalleled:
ARCADIAS sparkling Di'mon, then whose Cheek,
The Rose less choicely fair, less soft and sleek
Might prove the downy'st Peach. His conquering Eyes
Seemed born to Victory, ordained their Prize
Troops of captived Virgins; lovely'st Blazes
There shone, bright Beauty- mint, whose worth surpasses
That common vulgar crowd, Beams, more out-going
Young Court-bred Stars: Lips, meet for VENUS wooing:
Each feature, limb, would Love-dart shower affoar'd,
Shamed the Moons Endimion.
Darling-shepheard, in a word.
His bright-brown Locks, and full, in many a Curl
(Their waggish Anticks those) like trembling Purl
Played on his comely'st Shoulders; whom the Wind
Used often, as Play fellow, to twine untwin'd
In loytring sport, whilst kissed them Nymphy train:
These were Heart-guives, to view, though sadly enchain
The o're-yeilding Females, some whereof have near
Pined to the mournful Urne: Mayds vainly here
Vowed gentle Homage, since the unamorous Youth
Shunned those weak-passion'd flames, in sober truth
Would not brook Love, rebelled: though else of Soul
Brave, nobly'st-ray'd; that lofty aspiring Scroul
Of Honor, Virtue, never worthier bore,
Nor ere Young years more radiant luster wore:
In brief, the Rural, Grecian wonder crowned.
Green Tafty-role, like wreathed Shash, went round
His gallant head, whose Top raised towering, high;
Whilst from that Role (more careless, gracefully)
Both ends made dangling Flap: The Robe he wore
(Buskins) green Taffaty, clasped down before
With long, but flowr'd Plate-buttons; and, where faced,
That Spring-like green, joined Isabella graced.
Such was the Swain: Of all those Youngsters, gone
For past-time, sports. He, Mat^less found alone
(Since so Reserved, desired none) steals away,
In part offended with their loving Play,
Towered VESTA-vale, remote from whence there blew
Fine, pleasant, spicy-breathing Gales, to view
Choice Madam spring: whose Champaign-tresses, face
How (wandering) seemed to approve beyond the grace
Of Woman's daintier cheek, best Lip or Eye!
Could glance upon May-flowers cheaper die,
Field-beauties, whilst appeared but blind to those
True, living, speaking ones, whose Arms enclose
Grand Joys of life. Gaze past one pleasing while
He Would prove his silvered Bow, then, to beguile
Slow-footed hours, some Philosophic Book
Holds friendly wise discourse; then, by the curled Brook
Couched down in sobrest Musings, till again
Trod Court-lik'st Measures over the flowery Plain.
Last, Sung; best-tuned Voice! whilst wanton part
Chants the Ayr-bred Echo, mocked him (or his art
Would fond-ly'st imitate) at which he smiles:
Ah, lovely'st Youth, by some styled churl the Whiles!
To shun fair beauteous Maids, although invited,
With the Echo, thine own Shade, Brooks, Trees delighted!
Ensuing years may make thee wish declined
This sereous Coyness, and then weep thee Blind;
When the angered CUPIDS Justice liv'st to see.
Those whom thou Love, in the end may not love thee.
By this, the All-circling Sun had posted over
His Morning-stage, those fi'ry-breathed Four
Well slak'd, his wing'd-foot Steeds; when Southern bait
Of Nectar took, drives on his Chariot strait.
What time our young POLINDOR, faintish grown
Through Noons ore-bounteous blazings, glanced on
From VESTAS Vale, the adjoining Vestall Grove;
Fresh-plumed, fair, with whose tall Shades in Love
(Since seemed thick Leavy Fortress, braved (to the eye)
Whole Storms of darted Beams) the Youth draws nigh
And entered strait: 'twas bold attempt, if found,
High Crime determined; yet the fenced Bound
O're-past, he enters: when, what various store
Of Beauties thronged his Eye (which seemed before
Bulk-lost as 'twere, over clouded) ravishing;
It shone chief Bower plantation for the Spring.
On Youth, refresh thy senses, since a Grove,
Flower, pearly-cheeked Fount ingross thy Love.
The Form was thus: 'T was neatly'st all cut out
In fine, green, mossie Roads; some seemed to flout
The Daylight, covered close, whilst others show
Skies prospect, open-roof'd; straight pointing go
All toward the Midst, that meant their Center-station,
Save what went winding round, Theatrick-fashion:
Between, small Thicks reposed; though here and there,
Wild Flowery spaces left, which seemed to appear
With petty Garden-pride. He viewed (transported)
The Bowry Maze; whilst round (as though the had courted
Dull Shades to mirth) joy'd Silvan Songsters ring.
Birds thanked, with gloomy Trees, whose courteous wing
Mocked PHOEBUS growing Choler, on he pries;
Till (lastly) in the midst small dainty'st Plain descries;
Composed most Orb-like round, where Riv'let wanders,
Dancing in Figures still (rare strange Meanders)
To overlook the Spring, some two Foot broad;
Whose purest Crystal Golden Sands or'e-flow'd,
With Shells of Mother of Pearl; art so designing:
In The midst was Temple, beauteous Mansion shining:
Though here and there, fine Prospect-bower, Stand
Thin- tufted over the Place, whose next, attained,
He pausing breathed awhile, beheld the Court
Where Goddess of chastity.
VESTAS vowed Heathen Nuns
Train, Mayds of honor sport.
The partly intranced Youth, whose Soul through's eye
Seemed strayed awhile (as 'twere) some churlish Spy
Now feared, Awaks; and scouts again from hence
Back towered the adjoining Grove, with heedy sense,
As liked best clouds of shelter, wanton Air
Whilst sporting t^y'd with his Beloved hair,
Would fan his Rosy cheeks: when softest Noise
Stole to his curious Ear, whether 'twas Voice
That talked, that sung, complained, or what, not knowing;
Thus follows it; till now, much dearer growing,
'T was tuned to sound of Pleasure, brought thus far,
And dandled nicely'st by the ore-joyed Air
Since loath to lose. POLINDOR hugged it close
Like the Ears chief darling, Jewel, listening goes;
Till now far stronger, sweeter those Shades passing:
Have, might spoil all, undo; when softly'st tracing,
Least hurt Leaf should complain, has timely found
The Place, thin-planted Hedge, whence floated round
This sovereign Music, of Lute Voice composed:
Where conjured often to Faith (least be disclosed)
Those Twilight glim'ring Shades, does lie and hear;
Chained all his idler Senses fast to's Ear,
That crowned the worthy'st. What e're stirring spies
He thinks Inspired (just then) with the Harmonies
Of that Voice, heavenly Lute; or if at pause
Leaves quiver'd, 'twas their kinder Clap, applause.
He wondered often, to hear the whole shady Round
So whist and silent, not the least bold sound
From any o're-sawcy chirping Bird, the are dumb,
Pearch'd like her Scholars close; to sweetest whom
Best Sounds migh't seem but rude-noys'd; whilst the Swain
Same powerful Voice intranc'd, revived again.
The Song was thus:
1.
Away, toyish Love-delights,
Fancy showers,
Fleeting as the air, or hours,
Wherein soothed Girls appetites:
Froathy bubbles,
Thralls, though fair,
False sweets they are;
Dreamed Joys, waking whiles their Troubles.
2.
Life's abuse, and Reasons too,
Cheats they be:
Fondlings, Bruits your partners see
In The same sensual Mess with you;
Which discovers
As does prove
Your Boy-god Love,
You are Blind, before turned Lovers.
3.
Welcome dearest Maiden state,
Let my Soul
Here all other Loves control,
Court by beateous Union, that:
Pure, untainted,
Free alone
Your Bliss is known,
Whilst our Selves nor Wills transplanted.
Let Us then twine,
Fold, embrace before VESTAS Shrine;
Joys the Issue be, Divine.
This done, Birds practice seemed, in warbling Song
Thanked their fair Teacher, Mistress: whilst thus long
Our Youth o're-hears, admires, is grieved at his
Short-lived Sweet, concludes chaste Heathen Nun.
Vestall it is.
Seemed now with new Desires possessed, inflamed,
To view those very Lips, those Hands that framed
These choice refined sounds; thinks, she must be Fair,
Whose voice and touch so powerful charming are.
Beware fond Youth (of seeing more coy) be wise;
If so enamored with her Voice, the Eyes,
Lips, Hands will kill thee. Thus with gentlest paces
Like foft Air round he goes, through thinnest places
Darting his Beamy sight, till (O blessed chance!)
Finding the Door, first fortunatest glance
Soothed his Hearts big-swoln longings, saved his Eyes:
Most glorious Form, divine, he there espies;
Best Face might cheap, but Sunburned to it appear:
Natures whole Beauty-stock seemed lavisht there,
And she undone; of whom be it boldly said,
Fame might turn gasping, breathless, Poets mad
Ere sound her Praises forth: The Sight would move
Gods to cross pensive Arms (he thought) to love,
And court like fondest Suitors, whilst weak Men
Wondered themselves to Stones: no marvel then,
If our changed Youth so dearly magnifies
His lovely'st Object, now is become all Eyes.
But take heed bold presumptuous Youth, least find
Through longer Gaze, thou do prove stupid blind.
She plainly appeared a Vestall, one of those
Wilfully ruined Mayds, whose tempers chose
That Virgin-thraldome, chain, past all relief;
Cold frozen Girls (though know thus much, in brief,
Her Mind out-ray'd her Body, beauteous Heaven
That last might seem, this first, divine Spark even
Oth' great Heaven dweller.) one of that nere-woo'd
Coy Sisterhood, the rare FLOSTELLA showed.
Who 'midst those beams of Noon, had lonely strayed
To VESTAS silver Fount, there (purest Maid)
Naught fearing Ambush'd Eyes from head to foot
Disrobed her dainty'st Limbs, seeming to shoot
New light into those gloomy Shades, as though
Some other Morn were risen, from below
('Bout Noon) though this more fair: or you would have thought her
Some bright-cheek'd, pearly-skin'd Nymph of the water.
Close by, with gold and silver Tufts, intwin'd,
Lower silk R^be, Purple Sa^tin Mantle shined.
The Fount was thus; 'twas formed large long-square;
Over the midst whereof Gold massy pillars bare
Carved Cov^ring, frame (though the ends left open wide)
On the top sat crowned NEPTUNE, drawn with pride
In's grand Shell-Chariot, Sea-horses both*
And so the unquiet water, vexed to froath
By rare Art, passed their slucy mouths, as though
Foam knawing the churlish Bit. Beneath did flow
Fine, little, wavie Ocean; and at those
Four several corners, four curled Tritons rose
On Dolphins backs, whence spouted all below
Streams from their Trumps, and mouths, 'twas heightened show,
Through lively'st colors, Gold. At either end,
Forth of the Fount, Rocks wildly did ascend,
Arts rugged Fabrics; Same with Vesta.
D^AN placed in one
Bathing, with coyest troop; ACTEON grown
Fair-fork'd (behind) for his presumptuous Prying.
Mermayds that other Rock seemed beautifying,
Playing on Harps; whilst 'bove the Crysta^^ stream
Fish from those hollowed Crags did sprouting seem
Their heads and bodies forth; thin watery Shower
Thrown from their Cliffie tops, like A^ched Bower.
Quite over those Nymphy persons. Round the place
Went smaller-fashion'd Rayl, where, more to grace,
Stood lively'st carved Beasts, rampant Guard to the Fount.
Without, on either side, green lovely Mount
O're-peer'd the Grove, whose stayres were beautify
With dainty'st gilded Rayls, where perching spied
Carved Fowl; though, smaller Birds, whole plumed throng
The top showed Bowr'd in Consort. Who not long
Survay'd the copious Place, might think it some new
Small-coyn'd Creation, and the Goddess view
Bathing in the Fount: whose beauteous World one while
Our Youth beholds with wanton, pleasing smile,
Then, looks of boundless Wonder; strong persuasion,
If any ere, this Flesh claym'd Adoration.
Eyes, colored black, whose pure Life-rayes
Mocked the poor Di'monds sickly blaze,
As gaspings to 'em, dull to Sense;
Joy, Vital spirits sparkling thence,
And shot into the Beholders show:
Bright'st rouling Worlds! how mistick too!
In whose full Globes, Night, Day's intwining;
All-black, all-faire at once, combining:
On Earth so much of Heaven espied,
They seemed already Glorified.
Whose Black can shame the Eye of Noon,
And dazzle that all-dazeling Sun
(At least with Loving wonder) so
Thought the rapt Amorist: when grow
New thoughts, that these fair Shades by Heaven
As dark Veyles, mild allays were given,
Least else their Glories blind our Sight;
Though kill most sweetly through this Night:
For who is so struck by that fair Eye
(Unblessed, blessed) wish still so to Dye.
Light's Fountains (only) the are, whose Ray
Kindles the Morn, recruit the Day.
Eyes whom the whole World can naught present
Choice like themselves, though Prospect lent
Natures whole Picture-house, grand Scean;
Past, present Eyes, Sun, Stars, but mean
Types of this Beauty, coorse Draughts; the one
Since modeled the others Peer alone:
Which Nature shows her but by Glass,
To prompt thanks for so rare a Grace;
And that, as blessing Men, they might
Themselves too with themselves delight.
In brief, sweet'st Maps of Heaven bestowing;
Vi^ions oth' future glory showing.
He thought, there Loves Artil'ry lay,
Choice Magazin, whence the Ordnance play
With bright'st Looks, lightnings: Virtue there
Shone too; but O! these Blazings were
To burn, not warm: Who (silly Fly)
Plays with these Fires too long, must dye
Their Martyr; for, though in each Part
Love sits, yet, has forgot her Heart.
Unhappy'st, Fairest ones! Eyes, ever
Made to be Loved, but to Love never!
Her Forehead, high-rays'd, even, 'twas Sky
Spread most majestic; Throne (to the Eye)
Of State to Beauty: Bar to arraign
O're-saucy bolder thoughts, must feign
Frown though, Smile lightning through't: Good Heaven!
So lovely part, for Cloystring given!
Then strait, his New world wandering Ey^
Coasts on her Cheek, or so rich Die,
Prime colors, pure, as Nature chose
The height, Transcendent part of those
In common Cheeks; had planted there
Fresh, lasting, sweet Spring: Lillies where,
With bashful Roses ever blowing;
Her Eyes their Sunny beams bestowing.
Here the Graces, and here often would lie
Love's Wag, made wanton by her Eye,
Tumbling himself. O, that such Roses
Should never grow to make Love-poses!
Then pleased those rare-shap'd Lips, that bury
Loves first Repast, first joys; the Cherry
Looked but pale to 'em, the Rubie too:
Prime Modells, closed, transporting view;
But when, through Smiles disclosed to Sense,
What new-coyn'd Graces ravished thence!
New shapes! their Beauties multiplying
Through Speech, though Death then spoke, Denying.
Choice Heav'n-preserves, whose Sweetmeats lasting,
Unspent; nor Surfeit fears the Tasting;
One would for ever Kiss, seal sweet
Heart-pledges: Their Live-marmulet
So cordial thought, our Youth'^ of mind
One Kiss, were Seav'n days food refi^'d:
Nay more, Conceits, 'twould give new Fire
To frozen, num'd Old Age; inspire
Souls into Dead men; Spice, perfumes
Cheap to their Breath, which near presumes
Would purge away Plagues. Las! that none
Must kiss such Lips, save Mayds alone!
Her dainty'st-rising Nose, so white,
Fine-shap'd, 'twas modeled to Delight;
^ompos'd to the wish: Chin! rare the Grace!
'Twas Chin most fit for such a Face;
Yet both Live-bury'd though: Ill cost!
Such precious Works made to be lost!
Her silken Hair in many a Bread,
Coronet-like, adorned her Head;
Some loose Curles wantonized though,
Cheek, Neck, and Shoulders heightning so^
No gaudy Beamings, these, nor Wire
Of Gold, which some chief Poets admire
(And love to gild their Verse withal)
'Twas Brown; The noblest, best of all;
Most comely, sweet: POLINDOR swears
'Twas Best, if only 'cause 'twas Hers:
Dim Shadow by that fair Sun made,
Yet lovely too though but a Shade.
Upon whose Top rich Phoenix sho^^
(Like Vestals chaste Badge) diamon.
Loves Ambush, lo; O, never be 't told,
Such Hayrs should wither and grow old,
Under chaste Virgin- vow; since Strings
For CUPID'S Bow: fit breads for Kings.
Low'st stands her Neck, Love's stately'st Fort;
Fit gallant Pillar to support
That breathing Heaven: so purely white,
Bow hers, to this great JUNO might,
With LEDA: Clime, where Lillyes, Snow
Showed Summer-winter, mistick so.
Upon this glorious Machine moved
All those prime Graces Mortals loved.
Di'mons, there blessed (to the Fancies eye)
Showed sparkling Joy since placed so nigh,
Whilst Men excluded are. Ill done,
Fond Nature, gav'st this to a Nun!
Next shone those Breasts, which sweetly aspire,
As still would nurse that Babe Desire,
So swelling, plump; how waving flow,
Like Streams when gentlest Gale does blow,
Dimpling their Cheek! These he supposes
The Love-god's loved Mounts, whence loses
His Arrows often in wanton play
At random: Milkie path there lay,
Love's walk of Pleasure: if again
In's Swadling-cloaths, sure he would have layn
There Cradled, and have slumber'd on
Those Pillowes, downy-smooth; else none:
For, coldest Greenland- mounts they prove,
Snow- regions, which still frieze to Love.
Her Arms like Twins, in loving fold,
Played with each other often; of Mold
Excelling, purest-white; where spied
Pearl, Envie-pale, by the Wrists out-vy'd.
So lovely, that all Praise dispraises;
Sure Nature meant them for Embraces:
Arms fit to squeeze forth Souls (as 'twere)
Through rapture-joyes, Intrance them there:
Who would not ever Prisoner live
Within these Arms? his freedom give
For so fair Keepers, fairest Grate?
But not to Kings belongs this Fate:
For these dear Arms never any other
Seem born to embrace, but one another.
Her dainty'st curious Hands (a Payr
Love's Mother envied) matchless are;
Queens nicer hands seemed ^oule to these
And unwash'd: Azure Veins, he sees,
Like beauteous Founts still wandering over
White banks of Lillies, or some floar
Of Alablaster: These Hands, framed,
Natures Mold lost he deems, or maimed.
Thinks, their Diviner touch would rout
Diseases, raise both Palsy, Gout
To Gallyards (Frenzies charmed down) stroke
The Panther tame, so fair a Yoke.
Las! that such Hands should ere desire,
To bear about chaste Vestall fire!
Now, lower-wading still, discovered
Her fine-composed Wast, where ^over'd
The enamored Stream; does wreath't as 'twere
In sportive loving folds; so clear,
Dainty-shap'd, silken, Happy those
So wealthy an Arm-full born to enclose!
Zodiac that blisfull World, with more
Prime worth, then the Great one held before.
O CUPID let not such a Wast
Be only by cold Maids embraced.
Our Youth's transforming, scarce thus far, till now,
E're contemplated Woman; on thy Brow
Worse fate's ingrav'd; better that poisonous skill,
She-worlds discovery the had waved still,
Then never to ore-come by Conquest, quench thy fires:
Though not seen All, the Youth all loves, desires.
Dire, saddest Truth! too spightfull'st Destiny!
Vexed CUPID long since from her flaming Eye
(Love's-forts) had split his Heart, although of stone;
Behold a Rock most eager Lover grown;
And, which stupendous Miracle would prove
To the wondering Plains, POLINDOR now in love.
He thought, he never saw Heavens wisdom, power,
Earths glory truly Blaze, before that hour;
Never Woman saw worth Sighing-breath, or passion,
Till viewed this Princess, Queen of the creation.
That Man deemed Favorite, minion of his Stars,
Who Is marked for these transcendent Blessings, shares
The Love-god's inmost heart, whom he had scorned;
Though now (too late Repentant) sighing mourned:
Yet hopes, Shape so divine, his After-story
Might yet make blessed, Pitty's great Heaven's glory.
But what could this new hopeful Fancy give,
Strangled (alas) soon as 't begun to live?
He pondered she is a Sacred Sw^rn chaste.
VESTAL, who
Never must stoop to Love. Go, rather woo
Some marble, female Statue, love a Tree;
Or court the Northern Ice, then stupid she
Far, far more supple, melting: sigh to the Wind,
To the deaf, tumultuous Wave, they will echo kind
Of sad noise, Mourn again; weep, melt thee over
The hard Adamantine rock, 'twill pity more.
And thus, our Love-transfixed Youth's half slain
By CUPID's wounding Wrath, must love in pain:
Could tug Seav'n years at the Oar, as Gally-slave;
Sweat, grind their Horses Mills; or in some Cave
Lie chained from PHoeBUS Light; as many days
Like wandering Goat on the bleakest Mountains graze:
Racks kissed, Strapadoes smiled on, Ten deaths pain,
If but to enjoy this Fair might live again.
Could curse those Traytor-eyes, did first conspire
To his undoing, let in Ravenous fire
To burn his Tinder-heart; yet, dares not though,
Least he should curse the Heavenly Object so.
He blamed her sadly'st often, since, so abused
Kind Nature's bounteous love, such Gifts unused
She Would wilful Vestalls servitude prefer
(Las! poor, distressed, Forlorn! thou chid'st in her
What proved thine own Crime) still, the more he gazes,
More wonders strike, new Beauteous hoord amazes;
And the more Viewed, the more each deadly kills:
Thinks These those former Sweets, impossibles
TO obtain; like plundring the heavenly Stars to wear
For Gems, or the silver Moon snatched from her sphere:
Who can arrest the Thunder? tamely ride
SOL's Burning Steeds? the hot-womb'd Granades bestride!
Or grasp coy-bosom'd Lightning? Thus, grown stiff,
He drooping faints, and through Despairing grief
(Such Grief, as seemed to confound, devour
All Joy;, life-spirits both, that Fatal hour)
Falls deadly Intranced on the Hallowed ground.
See (gentle Reader) prostrate here is found
Great Beauties, and great Loves joined triumph too;
That petty, boyish God, whose single Bow
Can humble proudest Kings, and which alone
Awes the Universe; it self o're-aw'd by None:
Sight dismal, nor o're-strange, Rare mistick prove
The effects of Young, transporting, hopeless Love.
The moved Leaves russl'd, when the unarmed Maid
(Soon frighted) starts withal, thinks she is betrayed
By some close-lurking Eye; through modest shame
Fear, hasting forth those^watry Bounds; does blame
Those busy, troublous Streams, since hold too long:
Who, more she strives against, in Amorous throng
Clung 'bout her danty'st Wast, and shackled Feet;
Too hasty Fear (alas) while caused forget
What most she wished to hide: turned, off the Blushes,
And (lowest Garment slipped on) forth rushes
The enclosing, leavy Fence: Fain would she see
What 'twas, yet fears beholding: Thus, as she
Nigh the very Entrance glanced, she spi^s indeed
One lying there, which gave wings to her speed;
But Fear soon causing her glance sweetly back,
Sh' observed him lie still, quiet. Prithee slack
Thy course, Coy Girl, what needs this squeamish have?
Return; las! here are None pursue so fast.
Looking yet more, the Face upwards, she perceived
Him wondrous wan and Pale, like one bereaved
Of life, Souls dearest guest; now frighted more,
She thought to trip it faster then before:
Till strongest pious Charity again
Set her at gentle Gaze, since not to Men
(At all) but Lovers cruel; pitties Throne
Blazed in her heavenly Eye; she looked upon
The mournful, prostrate Object, and conceives
'Twas but some slumbring Trance, for amongst the leaves
She heard one tumbling fall; and should he Perish,
Whom Wholesome-breathing pains (perhaps) might cherish
To active Life again? she observed him Young,
And therefore to base Furies, lustful wrong
Unpracticed, innocent: thinks now, if e're,
Her dainty'st Modesty might venture here.
Thus, backward traced the Girl, often sweetly dying
Her Cheeks (best Blushing paint) till now espying
Newer fears, she turned about; wind-shaken Leaf,
Her own Foot, silken Garment scared, as if
He then stirred, roused for Action: till again
Pity surpised her Steps (nor now in vain)
Pleads, brings her quite back. Doubtful Nymph, thou must;
For here is thy Love slain Martyr, and it is just,
He live again, but by thy powerful Hand,
Whose Eye first wounding killed, if truly scanned:
Though, if thou knew'st so much, I shreudly fear,
Timorous Disdain would leave him Dying there.
Fain would she have veyl'd her silver Waste, within,
But Cruelty, hard Heart's ignobler sin
Then naked Waste, Life loudly summon, on
Therefore (though trembling, pale, least thus alone
Found with a Man) She comes, she comes: discryes
Much sweetness even in Death, whose gloomy eyes
Though Curtain'd, closed, yet his fair Cheek and Lips
Flashed glim'ring Beauty forth, in this Eclipse:
His Graces still would hold triumphant station,
Still lovely show, though changed their former Fashion.
She liked her ventured Pains the better now,
With pritty'st Motion, slight does wreathing bow
The o're-stubborn Body often; then rubbed his Cheeks,
And chafed his Temples, all kind Magic seeks
To rouse Lethargick life: would now and then
Give him smart wakening Box, till rubbed again
His drowsy Temples, sprinkling over the face
(Charm-like) cold Fountain Water, near the place.
Stout, female Task: till now did seem to appear
Soft Motion in each part, by turns, as 'twere
Some freshly Inspired, Raised; such sort, as though
The new Soul-Tenant, wandering to and fro,
Traversed its beauteous Lodgings, she the Power
Infusing it. Or like some Watch (what hour
Won up) those choicest Wheels, how nicely move
In punctual order! so Life seemed to improve
This rare shaped Engine, body, roused it so.
Blood comes in have, with Tide-like overflow
Entered his crimsoned Cheeks, as 'twere to view
This fair Physician thence; fresh Roses grew
Strait on his June-like Lips: And now, behold,
Those mournful Ivory lids begun to unfold
Their cloystred Lights; as if the ore-joyed Soul
Knew 'twas FLOSTELLA's face, so, gently stole
TO enform his slumbering Eyes, that else had never
Awoke; nor deigned to view the Heavenly Sphere.
O Love's strange powerful Influence, divine!
FLOSTELLA might observe from thence to shine
Ten thousand beauties, such, as would imply
The Love-god's play-fellow, or boldly'st vye
For VENUS curled Minion, in the place
Of young ADONIS slain: Prime model 'twas
For male-perfection, lo; The Nymph approved*
Liked all (intruth) she saw, though nothing loved.
And now, her Business done, seeing revived
Her hopeful Patient, yet, as 'twere Dream-liv'd;
She makes no curious Prattling stay, to know
What, whence he was; how came surprised so;
Or beg poor vulgar Thanks, but strait was flying.
When, lo, the amazed Youth (as soon espying
That 'twas FLOSTELLA, that one beauteous Maid
'Bove all the World he loved) prevented, stayed
Her subtle flight, as if indeed with her
His vaporous Soul had fled: with loving Fear
Inthrall'd, detained, and such mild, gentle force
As nice young Fondlings often do (by course)
Their caught Birds; rapt, transported much, to see
His regent Star so near, that only She,
Sweet killer, should sweet, sweetest Saver prove*
Rare, signal Omen! Thus then breaths his Love.
Beauties fair Queen, or of those awful Powers
Hant Rivers, plumed Groves; of sweetest Flowers
Sweet'st, fragrant Goddess; or, what style's your due
(More then Earth-lovely, good) I humbly s^e,
You Will not leave charged with foul ignoblest Crime
Your bounden Patient thus; but deign some time,
To thank you for an Alms so obliging great
As was my precious Life: I beg, entreat
You Will not yet go. The chaste FLOSTELLA could
Have shown some Virgin- anger here, controlled
With higher check, disdain her new-sprung Lover,
But that she is rarely Sweet; nor little move her
Mild countenance, garb, her Young Surprizer sees
So humble and Vassayl- like, upon his knees,
When he might force: yet (prone to Maiden fear)
Desist, rash, ventrous Youth (said she) forbear
To court your pleasing Ruin; do you know
Whom hold inthralled Prisoner thus? let go;
For I Am of the Virgin-troop, that never must
Be soyl'd by man: Touch often's Baud to Lust.
For Thanks, those trifling Scruples spare, remove;
What boldness 'twas to range this hallowed Grove,
Place sacred? mock, provoke the angry Brow
Of Heaven-born VESTA thus? though jointly now
My self stand deeply exposed. The sadder Swain
Pleads ignorance; does strongly beg again.
When, dressed with frownings now, She prayed, Forbear;
Or she will cry out aloud, A Ravisher.
Who now can think, what dismal Gulphy straits
Seized our pale Amorist? on each hand waits
Dire Ruin: if holds his beloved Fair,
And she cry out for help, the Ravisher
By Law must Dye; if 'lets her go, bereaven
Of his Soul's vital bliss, his joy, his heaven,
Like Doom would follow: Grieved he seems to lose
So rich a Magazin, yet scarcely knows
How safe to hold it though, least thence should prove
Blown up: Hold (whispring cries) despairing Love
Like some poor Wretch, whom general Wrack has given
To the boisterous greedy Wave, in that swarm even
Of fears, deaths, horrors, if but hap'ly chanced
On some kind broken Board, by billows danced,
Some floating wooden Shore (as 'twere) full dearly
Hugs that new Rescuer: as close, as nearly
This to FLOSTELLA^clave: her precious Feet
How kissed! her flowing Garment! does omit
No piteous, moving spell. My cruel Fair
(Said he) I am no lustful Ravisher,
Your humblest Bondman, lo; far be it you should
Suffer the least Thought- rape, much less be foul'd
By looser Act of his a Virgin-mind
As truly Chaste as yours, although more kind.
I love, so Brothers also; but protest,
Pure heats of Turtles warm inflame this Breast:
And if such sin to love, Gods themselves were
Famed often Sinners; nay, what is more, severe
They Will prove, unwise to boot, since sweetest This
Chief Joy and Being both to the Creature is:
Their Worlds supporting prop; Spears kindly infold
Each other, the Earth 'bout dearest Center roul'd:
Nay, your Sweet'st heavenly Self part-guilty deemed,
Whose Eyes (with pardon) the Angel-tempters seemed;
Cheeks, Lips so charm-like fair, divine, All-moving:
O blame those (Dearest) blame not me for Loving!
One kiss he begged, which coyer She denies,
Chaste virtuous anger in her globy Eyes
Often sweetly Lightning; then, faint, piteous Look
Seemed Dawning forth, as though unkindness took
To be so used: Cried, He was most ingrate,
Thus to hold encumbered her that proved so late
Te him so kind. The heart-wounded Youth replied;
'Twas fairest, sweetest She, for whom he Died;
And now should Dye again, if coyer she
So soon Abandoned him: what Cruelty
To kill what is her own Creature! with delight
( As 'twere) destroy her first Work! Rare the sight,
Had you be held! Both seemed Peremptory,
Both in part yield: The Nymph would go, though sorry
Loath to exclaim; The Youth would hold his Hold,
Yet feared she might so: Sadness, to unfold!
Strange curse of Fate! yet begged he She Would bestow
But one Salute: the more she strived to go,
(Since that Salute might (seen) caused dangerous Ire,
Offense, breed wanton Spawn at least, desire)
The more he pleaded still, since growing now
To the utmost Point; sad speech, with saddest Brow!
Many a Plump, mournful, solitary Tear
(By turns) whilst rouled forth, the Eyes Blood (as 'twere)
Late Wounded, struck by hers; Pale-colour'd though:
Or nimble, harmless Stratagem, if so
By suppling Tears could melt, what prayers could not,
Her Marble tempered hard heart. True-love Grot
The whole Cheeks appeared, whilst thus be-pearled over,
Or drooping Rose-buds when some Sunny shower
Has christall'd them; for why (though seemed of late
Full-spread) those Roses through disastrous Fate
Now shrunk to Buds appeared. At length, dumb grown
Through swelling sorrow, Sighs were blindly blown
In stead of words, Grief (as 'twere) throng-like breaking
The half-framed Breath; till Sighs their Language speaking
(Strange View!) with such, so pretty kind of sad
Languishing Eye (by turns) the too coy Maid,
Then Heaven next, beholding, as if He
Accused both; said, Fairest, can it be
You are so monstrous cruel? does even move
Close pantings in her Breast, since so rare Love
So wretch'd to boot; which She the unhappy cause,
Could not then well redress: Thus, without pause
(So timerously chaste) She bids let go,
Or swears she will cry out. When, with throngs of Woe
Heart-storm'd at once, as if Skie-cannon struck,
Heard Mandrakes killing Groans (unused to brook
Such stranger Love-fits) down he falls again
Like battered Fortress, ruin, whilst Disdain
Crowned Victor proved: his faintest Spirits, breath
Seemed Plundered, sacked; Face bore those Arms of Death
(Sad, dire Relapse!) whose mournful Banner now
Set up blazed perfect Conquest on his Brow.
Alas! that nicer she (too Cruel-chast)
Had rather precious Life then one Kiss wast!
Be styled a Murtheress, then once be said
Sh' had kissed a Man! the Nymph though sadly weighed,
Worse Ills might follow it. Her bolder stay,
That Wrong's revenged full, now, now she may
Go when she please (alas) for here are None
TO affront, save fixed Trees; and such an One,
Who slumbering (prostrate) with Death-closed Eyes,
Still, cold, as the Earthy Couch that bears him, lies.
Come gentle Hearts, this mournful Corpse surround
With Quire of Fun'rall groans; take; strew't, the ground
Yields you Herbs, Flowers; sad, palest Cheeks bedew:
Prime True-love piece, as primely hapless, view.
Though no Hot Cordial waters, warm Tears bring
To mourn, embalm; whilst doleful Turtles sing
His Souls rest: this dear, precious Clay supplying
With breath in Sighs, at least, whilst life's breath flying.
But (ay-me!) where is the vanished Nymph? there, there
She grows a rooted Pla^t through dismal fear;
Grief's Statue turned; how truly'st Corpse (to the eye)
Though standing, as that other lying by!
Seemed Pitty-charmed too, since gentler Heart
(Intruth) never Panted, lo, she will try her art
Once more, draws hasty near. 'Twere pretty sight
TO have but beheld, with what poor looked Delight
Her Beauties mournful, unsought Conquest there
Sh' eyed at her Ivory Feet; when forth a Tear
(How precious) steals; strait followed kind Another;
Dearest Pearl-mint (why, Reader, should we smother?)
Last breathed most fragrant Sigh: O, were this told
POLINDOR's grieved Ghost, no doubt it would
Departwell-pleas'd, with so rich Obsequies
From his beloved Mistress Lips and Eyes.
Whose fair Hands now, like boystring rushing Tide
(Mark of more Interest, as 'twere) applied
Their Last relief, showing Self-welfare in it;
With what life strove for fleeting Life, to win't
Yet gently Home again! often glanced at Heaven
For aid from thence, on murmuring Trees, as even
Craved those, or wished some sturdy one Inspired
TO assist her work, since now (twice forced, retired)
The wandering Soul grown Sullen, more stiff-bent,
'T would not be charmed back to its Earthly Tent,
Frayl lodging: when (behold) Sighs louder grow;
Tears Crystal riv'lets proved; O Heavens, so slow?
Hard, hardest Fate! she cries: till, though in vain,
Her Corps-like Youth's at length revived again:
For know, so often as Coyer She but flies,
So often must he fall, so often Swooning Dies.
That wanton Boy, love's Archer, all this while
Close-ambush'd sat, aloft, with many a Smile
Plump-grown (as 'twere) to see this amorous Duel;
Rare Love-maze, passion'd Scean; how hugged his cruel
Wrought vengeance, clapped his little Hands, as though
Had plainly said; There Is he blasphemed our Bow;
Look, look! Who convert grown, Love's self was sorry;
And of the Nymph now makes his Triumph, glory.
Sweet'st, gentlest Soul! she sees how rare Affection
With most rare Beauty joined, unmatched Perfection;
Love in most lovely Person sweetly'st placed,
With radiant Virtues circling Beams enchas'd;
Strange, noblest Blaze of honor (such did spy
That Youth first, mounted in her gallant Eye)
Besides some secret Grounds (whereof anon)
More hardening, coy resolves, like Clouds o're-blown:
Words, Actions (last) portray'd the excelling Mind:
These were all powerful Charms, did strongly'st bind
The enamored Virgins love-captived Heart;
FLOSTELLA loves, she loves: keen flaming Dart
Ranges her frozen Breast, sets all a glowing;
She melting yields, thus new Love-wonder showing.
Nymph, fix thy constant Choice; for 'bove all other,
This peerless Swain seems CUPIDS eldest brother.
The rouzed Youth soon snatched (just as before)
The All-valu'd, fleeting Prize, pleads over and over
His former suit; discerned in's Stars of late
(Her Eyes) sweet'st Hope-dawn glimmering, gentler fate
Break forth those duskie Orbs; her cloudy'd brow
Turned Sky more clear, serene, towered Sunshine now;
Lightening his Heart: Beseech'd her bless his Eyes
But some few minutes more. When she replies
(Stolen Sigh) Alas! she cannot; yet, would stay;
Thus gives the Youth but an unwilling Nay:
Strives, when intruth would yield; if chanced to unloose
His Active hold here, gives him leave to choose
Much better there: with same transporting Eye
Lowr'd, smiled at once; does Grant, though seemed deny.
The rallied Youth charged home, again desires
One kiss: O fie, those are the wanton Fires
To lust (she cried) 'twas dangerous Crime to kiss*
She dared not: yet could part Dispense with This,
If full assured he pacified with one
His sob'rer Appetite, and so have done.
The joy'd, over ravished Youth soon promised there,
Though strange reluctance; loath to observe however;
From the Hand leaped to her Lips, snatching his food
Like some starved TANTALUS, as though he would
Devour those Cherries quite, come off no more
(O dearly'st earned Sweets!) tells that one over
How often! Prayers joined still! neglecting neither,
Begged, kissed; yea, jointly kissed and begged together
(Charms powerful, past o're-coming) seemed as though
He would there Plant himself, entirely grow
To those life-giving Fruits; recover soon
Lost Eden thus. Had coyer She begun
To tune some Quainter chiding, Active he
Would kiss her Silent strait; as modest she
Often Blushed, so often the officious ready Swain
Would hide her Blushing Guilt, and kiss again
(Whence shrouded, hides his own too) you would have thought
Her Lips too sweetly Blushed, being kissed so often:
All kindly forced as 'twere. And now again
The Worlds glory entreats to go, though even then
Could pardon, if Denied, forbear Releasing:
She tells, what rockie Gulphes, strange hazards, pressing
Her honor welfare both, sh' had for his sake
Run, sailed through; how suffered Modest Wrack
However; and all to please his fonder mind,
Vain, Fancy, humor. When, the unmatched POLIND
Bowing to the ground, what Thankful breathings are
(Sighs mixed) paid the humble Incence to so rare
Divine a goodness! Twice she had restored
His dearest Being, now further Life implored;
If she yet go, Heart breaks, the whole Work's undone:
And, truly, if POLINDOR part so soon,
She drooping faints too: yet seemed agoniz'd,
Fear-qualm'd enough, some Ranger least surpised
Their harmless dalliance; Panting, rouls about
Her black Eyes (each whereof how pretty Scout!)
Before, behind, and sides; although 'twas fear
Their own Light would betray them (happily there
Some Bird, some babbling Leaf scares, here a Blast
Though whispering) lastly on him more piteous Cast,
As craved his Succor. When the o're-comber'd Maid
He cordializing cheered, points to thick Shade,
Whence Sun did frighted seem; where Noon, midday
Proved wholly damped, did Twilight-dawn display:
He pointing sighed; when strait (pale, blushing) She
All Rose or Lilly turned; till stouter He
Must lovingly enforce, Male-spirits showing:
Lute, clothes fetched from the Fount, they are onward going:
She blushed again, stands Pausing, still, as though
Were loath, looked Glancing back; yet thither (lo)
The unwilling-willing Maid was brought at last.
There they might, closely Skreen'd, at pleasure taste
Loves harmless blisses, feast them without spying;
No churlish Vestall feared, not PHoeBUS eying
(The Sable-curtain'd place sworn secret) when,
Our Gem-like payr new practiced Love again.
POLINDOR prints on her soft Lip (the Spring's
Wood-gods invoak'd) many kind Welcomings;
Yea, kissed so feirce, as though would Rifling spoil
That wealthy'st Box of treasure, fairest Soil
All Rubie, ranged Pearl: as would (less nice)
Plunder those Fruits oth' living Paradise.
Then, sob'rer Lover grown, draws out his Bliss
How dear a while! as 'twere (so Children kiss
Sweetmeats) Extatick-waies: you would have thought
Their Souls then bill'd too, silent Pearly sought
Just at their Lips. Our young POLINDOR showing
So rapt with his la^t Joys (grand tide, o're-flowing)
That he beleives, were the holy'st Anchor^t
Fixed there awhile, recluse, he would soon forget
His contemplated Heaven; or else allow
Those Lips for Heaven. The Eyes, turned Gazers now,
Must sporting Tilt with hers, when un'wares spied
His dimmer Picture there (how great joy, pride!)
In that All-fair, black, sunny'st Tablet shining;
Whence, that it was Drawn in the Heart, with mirth divining.
Had that self-loving Swain, who often courted
His Shade in Crystal Streams, till drowned (transported)
Still Glass'd him here (he thought) though truly fired;
'T had proved less Fondless far, as though admired
His Face, but for the bright-look'd Tablets sake,
So, loved her Eyes (indeed) by that mistake.
Then, the amorous Wanderer takes gentle leave
To dance her whitest Hand, would pret'ly weave
Her dainty'st fingers (Loves engenious play)
Often kindly pressing them. Next, Progress lay
To her transporting towry Neck, where kissed
So long, but nimbly done, no place left missed
Least Lips grew envied ought. Then, lower, between
Those Down-brests nuzzled strait, where felt and seen
Warm Snow, soft Ivory, 'twas kind of wonder;
He seemed ^ull'd there, and dreams of Maiden plunder,
Rare (knows not what) strange Sweets, new love-alarms;
So, roused: for 'midst those Delicates, first charms
The Banquets still in store; POLINDOR thought;
Would breath his mind, but paused, and blushes often:
When she Blushed too. POLINDOR asked her, Why
She Blushed: the fair FLOSTELLA shaped reply,
'Cause he Blushed first. POLINDOR asked then,
What 'twas she thought he blushed for: Sober when
She said, She knew not. The Amorist replied,
'Twas something in her precious Gift, denied,
Would break his True-love Heart; if granted, be
His, Souls joy, glory: when (her modesty
Not further questioning) skulk'd down between
Those shrouding Breasts again, revealed unseen
His grand o're-charging Longings: which she took
At first, with sudden mixed, Coy-bashfull look
(True Maidens shyer blushing) said, Though she
Had passed those stricter bounds of Modesty,
Yet those of Honor, Chastity, she would never;
But keep unstained still and white, for ever,
Her Virgin- fame. When the worthy'st-minded Youth,
Part-dampt, Craved gentle Pardon (though intruth
Meant nobly'st) if his rash, o're-hasty Tongue
Ought erred; the Heart most guiltless was ( ere-long
Growing pale withal) and on her soft hand, Lip
Sealed pow'rfull'st Marriage-vowes, which swore to keep
Inviolate. FLOSTELLA strait replied,
Such solemn Vows could hardly be denied,
If pure and real; but (new griefs arise)
What if more paused upon it? Harsh Doom (he cries)
One Night might ruin, blast all. She again;
Then He, then sob'rest She, though but in vain:
For ('las!) how could FLOSTELLA long deny
POLINDOR ought? what if he Swoonding dye?
Does therefore sweetly'st, on her Female part,
Melt in kind odrous V^w^s; gives Heart for heart:
Though till confirmed those Marriage-bonds (she says)
He must lo^k for more: Who yields, obayes.
First also, Each had mutually made known
(In brief) what, who they were: of which anon.
But stay my wan ^ring Muse, least (happily) here
Any unkinder Breast should charge the dear
FLOSTELLA with lost Fame, or broken Vow
(Fly hence that foulest Breath) desire them know
She never was Real Vestall, nor (forlorn)
Tied to the chaste Virgin-yoak, since yet Vnsworn:
We said, Sh' appeared such; though (all that while)
But Nun of Choice indeed, her proper style:
Which kind of Free and unsworn Nuns (alas!)
Unknown to the desperate swoonding Lover was:
Which thus we will clear. There was set Number stood
Inrol'd sworn Vestall Nuns, whose daily Food,
Clothes, necessaries, all by the Foundress will;
Their Chambers also, their Tables severed still,
Distinct: to change the estate once having vowed,
Proved death. That other Virgin-rank, allowed,
Styled Nuns of Choice, themselves to the full maintained,
Might stay their year complete, well used, trained
(Or Quarter, if they please) as Maiden Boorder.
Sworn Vestall Nun if died, that Place by order
Was offered first (as gift) to the Senior Nun
Of choice, who if Refused, 'twas likewise done
To the Next; so falling down, to the very Last:
Although, Whoever refused thus, if past
Their complete Year, must strait depart the Grove,
Be gone, as showing but faint Maiden love
To VESTA; else (perhaps) might stay Ten year,
No void Place offered them: and the Priestess here
Might, All refusing round, elect a Stranger.
But yet, FLOSTELLA had that Swearing danger
Escaped, nor was her Perfect year (required
For Choice) as yet by full Three weeks expired:
Though probably she would have Sworn, so Chaste,
Joined griefs, some strong retiring Grounds; which past,
Not Earth nor Hells black witchcraft, charms could e're
Have shook those Vows, or made that Breast forswear.
Nor blame POLINDOR's coyer Soul, whose Merit
Too high for the vulgar Plains, Hero^ck spirit
(Mind, Body matched, crowned both Planetick) who,
When saw true splendid Worth, loved truly too.
The Contract's over now; Thrice happy Payr
Through loves First chaste fruitions! now they are
More wise, Kind natured both, know to improve
Life's peerless blessing, since best life's in Love;
Man, Woman the best of Creatures; and by this
(Chaste Love conjugall) still maintained is
That Best of Creatures: else Men come to gaze,
Eat, drink, and sleep, so vanished gone; Youth's blaze
Ere long extinct, the are Coughs then, aching bones;
Earths, their own toylsome Burdens, breath in Gro^ne^^
CUPID? or squeamish VESTA? ask them now
Before whose awful Shrine they would rather bow.
Long may you flourish, Natures well-joyn'd Glory,
Virtues chief sparkling Gems, Loves dearest Story,
Proud'st triumph too; grand Universal wonder;
Heavens choice Care lastly, Guarded with the Thunder.
Long live, admired; and by your Virtues hold
Task'd Fates as 'twere your Bond-mayds; love, grown old
In sweet'st Embraces thus, until Time snowes
(Though late) upon your Heads: at length, when grows
The Earth burdenous, may you then turn Stars, mount higher
Two True-love Souls at once (conjoined) expire.
The Daylight burning lower, Wisdom checked
Our cautious Lovers, roused; bid glance, reflect
On the blisfull Future, how might hold Life-breath
Their late-born Union, since parting's Death.
'Twas solemn weighty Business; when it seemed
As though some sudden faint O'recast had dimmed
Their first Joys splendour, like to gloomy Cloud
In some fair gaudy Day: Their faces shroud
A twinkling Pleasure, mixed with kind of Sadness;
'Twas troubled Joy as 'twere, or heavy gladness;
In brief, such changed, so sorrowful Delight
As, All went not so well: The pretty sight
Would have transported some, since in their Eyes
(Mean while) most noble Beaming seemed to arise
And shine through all. First, it was justly feared,
POLINDOR's Father here (if weighed, referred
To reasons scan) would leave them Vagrants, lost
To all shrouding Shelter, prove but cruel Host.
And, as the Case then stood, her changed Father
Appeared more doubtful, worse, that she had rather
Trust to the common Road for Alms: does so,
In briefest terms, chant forth a Story of woe
To the young POLINDOR's ear; so pret'ly laying
Unkindness to her Stars, in words (displaying
Most bright-coyn'd looks the while) that thence might show
Sad tale sweet; Sorrow tunefull, lovely grow.
Her Father was a Duke, by splendid birth
And fortune Great, owned plenteous store of Earth
(Though royal Heir to ancient foreign Crown,
As we shall show) seemed Great in worth, renown
For many years, most Noble minded, trained;
But one last Blot eclipsed all, Inchain'd
To stolen fleshly Lust (nor much stolen neither)
Whence Byas'd more to ill; like ayery Feather
Tossed by his wanton Females humorous blast
(Bright Virtue thus through Vices cloud o're-cast)
And who checked that the least, might Thunder move:
Extreme his Hate was grown, as was his Love:
ARPLASTUS called. Her Mother, the honored Niece
To the Macedonian Queen, famed through all GREECE
For beauty, virtue, rare-found Gems in one;
Fit Mother for FLOSTELLAS self alone:
ORANTHE this. Through Sickness envious spite
Whose Cheeks late partly changed, besides delight
Of wanton Ranging, fond ARPLASTUS keeps
His close-lov'd Concubine, one, eats and sleeps
Still under's gorgeous Roof (far off Allied)
COMANDRA called by name, his Houshold-guide,
Chief Governess; or if mean-styl'd she be
(Since Table-guest) ORANTHES Deputy.
Young, Proper, Handsome, but as Foul within
As without lovely, Fair; wise to all Sin
Black Mystery; yea, fit for the Practick too,
Did Spite, ambition closely call, might show
Fates Governess (as 'twere) the whole Three in one:
Rare boldness, Carriage Garb transporting won,
Dropped amorous Spells; smooth-tongu'd, most haughty spirit*
This Minion fearing much, Wives dearer merit
Might chance to unbosome her, in time, estrange
ARPLASTUS glewed heart; so, wither change
Her Full-moon'd fortunes to the consuming Wane:
High dreams besides, what honor, glory, gain
Could she become his Wife, rule all at least
In The wisely stead: ORANTHE sick, o're-prest
Through certain Malady (unhappy'st Ill!
Caused primely through her inbred griefs, though still
Hushing their mournful Noyce, for three years space)
Confined to the Chamber now, strong Poisonous Glass
Soon frighted her fair Soul (by stealth) to Heaven:
FLOSTELLA aged Twelve, that blackest Even:
Although two Sons, three Daughters more, her Womb
Had brought him forth; each couched in slumbring Tomb,
Since when (some Years expired, gone) though yet
Her main Mark, project missed, forbidden Sweet
Since pleased his Lordships pallat best, however
She Is Mistress grown; The all-pow'rfull Planet there.
Servants feared, flattered round most strangely of late,
Run, winged fly, like her mere Motions strait;
Nor question durst if ought ARPLASTUS will:
Her Nod saved speaking breath, and her Frown still
Doomed them for lost, cashiered. His Treasure lies
Open to'er as Day, bleeds for her Masqueries,
Pomp, gaudy furnishings, whose Golden tide
She Moon-like seemed to rule; drained thence beside
As through close Trench, to her own private store:
What marvail, the inmost Heart filch'd long before?
All which (her Female World made his, resigned)
He saw not, would not see, become Lust-blind.
One Son she had, a well grown Sixteen-Youth
(Not full Fifteen she bare him though) intruth
Most forward manly Sprout; whose Soul in shape
Less vile then the Mother's seemed, but (foul mishap!)
Her Brain-juice, councell-milk long Sucked so,
That plump'd and thrived full well upon it, might show
Her Creature-son: whose secret Whisper, smile
Confirmed for worst Exploit (by Named style
(ORDELLAN) taught to sooth, o're-reach, aspire,
His Person, Parts, or Garb if you enquire,
Handsome, Court-stamp'd; preferred to the Dukes own Table.
This Sprig to make more mounting, great (if able)
She felt new Childbed Throws, falls roundly upon
New plot, his Wife's FLOSTELLA marked alone.
And thus, no day, wherein her subtle Art
Played not some quainter Scean, bold, stage-l^ke part
On poor FLOSTELLA's weakness; first, she awes
With her new Greatness, State (forsooth) to cause
More reverent thoughts of her from thence, Esteem;
Yea, make more prized Coin, inhaunced seem
Her following Kindnesses: then, stooping lower,
By loving Favors (these) ere long does woo'er;
Choice Birdlime, spells. Called forth to the bowry Grot,
Walked, chats it with her often; the^, as forgot
The height more, Familiar grown (though seldom) plays
The Wanton, toy'd with her; meant especial Grace.
Then, Gifts, close Baits; no tempting knack, device
Too costly, if but ravished Younger eyes,
Or moved FLOSTELS: Bravest Clothes too, the Father
Turned lavish-free (so Rich) to claw the rather
Good, sweet COMANDRA; fine Shows, Masquings, Sports,
By which (intruth) that young ORDELLAN courts,
Chief ord'rer, Revel-master: holds her train;
How sprightly, did she want but ought! does strain
Ere she has fully spoke, as in that Air
Of her commandings breathed! then (soft Love-pray'r)
Small Sigh he dropped for close. Thus, having won
Her self first Love (she thought) her active Son
Kind Favor, liking, she might pass the better
To her main Plot; FLOSTELLA grown her Debtor ^
Since deeply implanted Love betrays the mind
To poorer, ba^er Motions often, struck Blind.
As busy's He to raise, endear his Merit
About ARPLASTUS still, like's Ayery Spirit,
Page, Shadow; in each fancied humor, sport
How served him! deemed his Breast the second Fort:
Not Seasons more the all ruling Sun obey,
Bodies Stars, nor the own Souls our fleshly Clay.
Thus, five months vanished, gone, thick Summer bower
COMANDRA entered, where that pleasing hour
The sweet FLOSTELLA blazed, and, after Look,
Salute, kind spoken both, though jointly struck
Both gloomy sadness too; more Sollem Smile
( Ligtning before Thunder, being set awhile)
Ushered her strong-tun'd words: when, subtlely bold
(Naught loosing State) She thus began to unfold
Her own, and Son's diastrous fortune there
(Choice, early-blasted Bud) thin dewy Tear
Nigh sweating forth: How C^PID's poisonous dart
( Then sighs) had (...) his over-tender Heart,
Slain by that dainty'st flaming Black, her Eye;
H^w sadly languish'd, how often vowed to dye
Her constant suffering Martyr: she displaies
His watchful, pensive Nights, his loathsome Days
(Poor gentle Youth!) informed discreetly still
More Glory 'twas by far to Save, then kill,
Besides, her special self should owe a Son
TO her sweetest Goodness: If offensive grown,
'Twas for the Morning-light of her own Eye*
And next, the Ladies heart-pin'd Votary;
Her Son, that others Servant, let not so
Fair Innocence (thus) foul Murdress show.
Nor moved she strange injurious thing, ought jars
With kindness, Friendship; what though^s harsher Sta^
Gave him less Turfy Earth? he is rich within,
Whose Breast appeared young Vi^tue-magazin.
For Carriage, Person, rival to the best,
Prime piece; if Mothers did not dote at least;
Well task'd Dame Nature played not while she made him:
And her Alliance, Blood might (last) persuade him
Noble enough, for Birth, if the heaven-born Mind
Made him not so. For Wealth (Dirt more refined)
She had Estate for both; let sordid Moales
Root where they buried are, to virtuous Souls
All Is in that Term, Enough: besides, 'twould prove
Rare Tie, obli^e her Son to honor, love.
The Lady, first, this Amorous Motion heard
With kind of startling wonder, then appeared
With dainty'st Blushings stain^d* o're-flow'd* as though
Would silent check, upbrayd (since ^lush less show)
COMANDRAS clearer Cheeks: though Young, descried
Thing base, unworthy through that Gloss'd outside,
Fair varnish: strongest Avarice conceived
(Joined proud Ambition) lurking in it, though weay'd
With Silken Love: nor was so close Heart-chain'd
To the Mother, fond (intruth) as to be strained
Beyond her Self, fit bounds of honor; though
Perplexed used fewer words, not daring go
Cross-tide as 'twere; this Modest breath alone:
She no such Beauties treasure claimed, could own;
Nor could believe, such Amorous Passion sorted
With so Young, greener years, who rather Courted
Fondly Sports, pleasures still; estranged to Love:
Thus, suckled Hope. This done, forth strait they move
Their gentle Paces to most gallant Grot,
Choice Summer house (to the view) with Gloomy knot
Of Trees environed round; near the Arched Shade
(Space left) purl'd dainty'st Crystal Founts, displayed
Quite round too, carved work; Birds chirping there
Through liquid Art, 'twas streaming Theater;
Fine Statues mixed: what various wanton sport
Through murmuring Spouts! like THETIS watery Court:
Though the House with curious Imagery shined,
Paintings, Rock-work. Where placed (thing so designed)
Rare Musick-strains, those lower earthly Spears,
In parts saluted her, flowed to her ears
Like well-conjoyned Streams in one full Tide
Of Heaven-born Sweetness; or the air did glide,
As would to Storms prove hushing Lullabies,
Charm down cares; Souls prime Minion, dearest This,
Which hugs her often to pleasing Ecstasy:
Best, purest Image too, since Harmony
Makes up the Admired Soul. Lo, how each Passion
Those tuned forth, how Languag'd various fashion!
Joy, sprightfull mirth, complaint! How lastly prove
Soul-melters, soften the Heart (as 'twere) to Love!
These curious Hands were followed by Voyce-quires,
From artfull'st, well-tuned Breasts (those Speaking fires)
Yet more to inflame; cherish sweet Love-desires.
First Song was thus:
What is Beauty without Love?
Dainty'st Mixtures fruitless prove,
Unless by others Tasted:
Those Riches poor felicity
Give the Owner, till employed they be,
And seasonably wasted.
Like Shadows, Rainbow-cloudes they are gone
Your Red and White; it is dear fruition
Heightens all; most Active known,
When it is most Passive, your Condition,
Thus, lost Kisses prove your owr.
Whilst Youth, Beauty, Summers Gem
Do vaunt thee growing,
Ripe and luscious as yet showing;
Hang not till thou rot'st oth' Stem.
Hasty Autum scatters all
Your pride, and well-pearch'd Glory;
Those to Earth despised fall,
When you too late are sorry.
Froward Coyness then remove;
Reap Beauties end,
Reap Beauties dearest end, Sweet'st sweets of Love.
Next, walking forth, strait warbled through the Grove
Clear sprightfully'st Cornets, which for mast'ry strove,
Pearch'd amongst the Boughs, a loft; now Single-sounding
Each others various Noats while seemed rebounding
Lik dandling Echoes; quaintly florish^d over
Their last strains, adding newer Points to the store
(Circle wise lodged) still answering round, by course;
Till roused from her deep Marble Cell (perforce)
Nymph ECHO, turned wanton pratler too.
Then, joining all in O^e, seemed Ravish now
The Air with their vigorous shrill Sounds, fright the (Shades;
Whilst horrid fear those Plumed Fry invades
Through their green bowry Cabins. These, for close,
Seemed swallowed up by Sackboats (joined with those
Wild goblin-throats) Recorders, big-mouth'd Shalms;
To which (ere-long) an Antic of Wood-dames,
Satyrs rushed nimbly forth (those ruder Lovers)
In sprightfully'st, frisking Dance; with Leavy covers,
Flow'r-wreath'd the Nymphs, whilst tayl'd and hayry-skin'd
The Men; their Horns and Hoofes to each assigned;
Pipes too, though Hunting darts the Women brought.
What wanton postures, Liquorish kissings often!
Strange giddy freaks! whilst, mounted 'bove all eyes,
Their Music seemed the Olimpick Waits oth' skies.
In all these Feats ORDELLAN with best skill
Paid his observance-tribute, homage still,
Duty-devotions, as his vital Being
Given chiefly for that end; Love-poem fleeing
( Since most Ingenious-fancy'd brain, as could
Stand with those years, best Education's mould)
Sometime by's Mother to his Mistress ear:
At length Sick chamber kept, does slily there
Befool his Nightcap, health, whilst former Road
(Gifts, favors still) the good COMANDRA trod.
And when, more rarely though, her Suit renewed,
FLOSTELLA still would ward it thus, delude
With gentle fence: Her Son's approved desert
Naught questioning, but doubtful fickle Heart
Through wavering Youth; her own much Greeness too
She pleads, nor that (intruth) her Fancy knew,
Whom yet could well affect, more Mayden-cold:
Her Father's dangerous frown, last. When the o're-bold
COMANDRA smiled, look careless; thus replied:
That, were they once Betrothed by Vows, and tied,
Wedding-time come, when fit to make the relation,
Discovery; her powerful Breath, persuasion,
FLOSTELLA'S fixed Love, her Son's gained Favor
Should easily mould the Duke. Yet seemed to waver
The doubtful Lady, cried, She feared; some rare
Change hoping still, event: such the amorous War,
Siege lingered on, with no small Battery,
Till three complete Years progres'd through the Sky.
Wherein the o're-bold ORDELLAN had so long
Played Loves part, torturings, more powerful, strong
Those amorous Heats, desires, grown Elder now;
Heightened through Hope (the improved FLOSTELLA (too
Showing all Ravishment as 'twere, a Beauty
Dressed round with dart-like Flames, commanding duty)
That he plain felt the Rack (just, sollemn curse!)
True, sober Fires: which vexed COMANDRA worse.
Thus had she her precious time, cost, Magick-brain
Strow'd fondly on, the expected Crop to gain,
Though reaped but whirling Wind; until she saw
FLOSTELLA now (Ripe-grown) past childish awe,
Woman arrived: more Years caused germinate
More wisdom too: much slighter Answers sat
Pearch'd on her tongue, she deemed; does therefore now
Wholly give over, despair: her furrowed Brow
Hides couched Ruin in it. Though deadly'st fashion
Raised, heightened all, that scornful Indignation
To be ere long o're-top'd, much shorter rein'd
(Yet chief, grand Lady-regent oth' Boords end)
Thing Fatal, loathsome; thus, Hell she are trying
Black, surer ways, The poor FLOSTELLA'S dying.
And then she could more closely Ingraft her Son
To ARPLASTUS heart (she thought) much easier won,
Plant him the Heir; since nearest blood could boast
But one lost Uncle, long since thought a Ghost.
Nor carried she her Spleen so deeply interred,
But that FLOSTELLA saw it Flash, and feared.
Thus then, some few Weeks after (to be brief)
The Ladies Head and Side much pained through Grief,
Joined watchings; Broth bespoke, at length espied,
And the Maid asked, why so long? Who quick replied,
COMANDRA seasoned it: most jealous Qualm
Strait seized her Breast; when clozing doors, oth' same
Small part her little Dog she gives, who lies
Pining some half an hour, then rouls and Dies.
Death honored! first, his Sovereign Ladies Taster,
Then, dearest life's Reprive. This Object cast her
So deeply intranced, that she doubted nigh
Whether yet lived; whose mournful Corpse lay by,
Hers, or that little Dog's (beloved so)
Damped with Griefs sudden rising (...), as though
'Twere not the Dog's, but mere her Ghostly Dream;
And all but Cheat, imagined Life did seem,
Gaspings at best: as Heavens loathed Eyesore,
Earths troublous Burden, now, she seemed deplore.
Naught but death's ghostly Masque, tombs, fables, shrouds
(Knells, groans the dismal Music to it) o're-clouds
Her sickly Brain, her thoughts seemed t'over-cast.
Nor durst she' midst these fears, this Stormy blast
Mutter at all, complain, such The others power
Over her charmed Father known, first very hour
She should but Liar seem, as merely checked
O're-saucy his Delights; the sad effect
Through whose dire hellish hate, but Hell-life mere;
COMANDRAS rage thence doubled: staying however.
She surely died too: Tenant grown at will
Her doubtful poor Soul seemed, that Fatal wheel
The Whore wanton ord'ring. Thus, like Sorrow's Spouse,
Death's mournful Bride she sat (though then allows
Those Two such amiablest sweetest Grace,
Triumphant both appeared) dark round's the Place
As Night (she thought) except kind Beam from Heaven,
Close Voice; FLOSTELLA, Hope: when as 'twere given
New spirit (Young years were never more discreet)
She roused for speedy Flight, and, strait up-knit
Small Linen pile, with precious Iewell-box
In her large-compast Skarf, with have sh' unlocks
Backdoor, to the Gardens shaded side well leading
(What sweet-cast Lightnings round, espialls dreading!)
So through long arched Bower (where, if descried,
Sh' had then but Walking seemed) does smoothly glide
(Often glancings back) to the Gardens Postern-door.
Thence, muffled strait, the fields she traversed over
Toward her dearest Nurse ARDINAS Farm,
Some Mile remote; whom straggling took by the arm
(By blessed chance) hales to the shrouding Hedge, runs over
Her sad Tale, weepingly (whose full Tear score
Nurse dropped again as fast) conjured that hour
Sh'd lead her toward the admired Vestall Bower
(PLEDORA called her name) as Orphan there
Procured her entered Nun of Choice for the year
Of liking; whose Expense to undergo
Gold-coynd she nimbly shows, for Future though
Jewels, two thousand pound low-rated price;
Mothers last Blessing, Milk as 'twere (the all-wise
Heaven prompting so) against some such needy hour
TO uphold poor drooping Life: these to her power
ARDINA still should vent: Thus, forth they rash'd
Like loosed Winds* postingly. Least also crushed
(Ere long) her hop'd-for Fortunes into air,
Strong-grounded thought (COMANDRA'S busy care
No doubt) that she was Dead, Surpised or lost
(No Poison, flights cause, mentioned though, 'twould cost
But more Hate thence from Both) next Rural stray,
Well-see'd, bore this t'her Father, penned by the way.
My Lord, your poor FLOSTELLA far
Is wandered, why, Time may declare:
Heavnn knows the Reasons, yet nor Place,
Time, Grief, shall filial thoughts deface:
She Is living, safe; Fates kinder doom
(Returned) may make your House her Tomb
FLOSTELLA.

Thus, Coach'd ere long, Both lodged the second Night
In The Vestall Grove; where (lo) with sad Delight
Sh' had strow'd her Mayde^ hours (Recluse) till now,
What Joy such churlish Fate would yield, allow.
This Story told, with many a Sigh, those grief
Perfumes, whose nimblest Echo still (as if
Then doing) kind POLINDOR seemed; t'umbraid
Stars crosness too, his cloudier Map's displayed.
His Father was a Duke, of highest Blood,
Fortune, estate to boot, though jointly showed
More high Parts spirit (whose royal Ancestor
Wore THRACIAS Crown, till over-powr'd by war
Fleld hither) one, those weighty Affairs of State
Could bear, as well as burly Honors weight,
Mere load of Titles; brave, transcendent Mind,
Free, courteous, popular; with which combined
Well-languag'd Travayler's deserved praise:
ORTHERIS called. Who, the old King's peaceful days,
Shone Glorious, lofty'st prime Court-constellation
For fourteen years; till foul Eclipse, privation
Caused through that Young ignoblest King, at last:
Who soon o're-clouding him, with others, placed
Fond Minions circling Stars about his Throne;
Base Mete^r-souls, could sooth and fawn upon
His humorous Vices, flash their seeming Worth:
Whereas ORTHERIS truly Blazed, shone forth
To the Grecian world. But hence his Honored brows
Blowed deeply'st, the Heart to boot, endeared Spouse
Clouded by churlish Death, KALASPE fair;
In whose Breath seemed to breath, his Bosome-star
Shot low as the earthy Vrn; whose ga^lant June
For years, for splendid beauty, goodly'st Noon
Not yet over past: though fearfull'st Aggravation
(To the utmost Height) the strange and dismal fashion.
Since thus it was: ORTHERIS being retired
For some few weeks, with his most Beloved, admired
(What time her Paint, and gaudy'st Springtide-dress
The Earth wore) for quiets calm, repose, and ease
To small Park lodge; surmounting ^ox of pleasure
For Deer, moist sk^led Fry, outlandish treasure
Of strangest tame Beasts, Fowl (convoyed plantation
From diverse Shores) that 'twas the accomplished Station
Of Solace, those Five Senses Sommer-bow'r:
Through change of Prospect moved, enticed one hour
(Natures prime Picture-draught, the Eyes Second-course
Repast, as 'twere, for Hills, Dales, Fountain-scource,
Crystal cheek'd Rivers too, Woods shady-lin'd
(Choice, curious Maze as 'twere forth, Seeing designed)
Both Dove-like roved forth beyond the pale
To planted Myrtle-walk, cool whispering Gal^
Invighting, little Dog their only Train.
Where, walking closely linked, scoured up the Plain
Behind their backs (strong Whirlwind-like to the ears)
Coach and six horse, with Five armed Cavaliers:
All which, like Thunderbolts, to the shaded ground
Leaped rushing forth; Two with their Chief surround
The brave ORTHERIS strait whose Poyniard warded
Many dire killing thrust, his back Oak-guarded
(Through Heavens wise providence) often fenced with death;
Though fought much more for sweet KALASPES (breath
Then for his own: Ah, Caytiff, villain (crying
That Chief) defray the old mortal Score; the art Dying.
Now gaped his Wounds, wide Ports resembling so
For Life's sad marching forth, displaying though
His crimson Colors round; whilst the other bore
Mouth-stop'd KALASPE, glancing back, still more
With dismall'st eyes her ghastly Lord pursuing
(As would those dear Love-token Balls, with viewing,
Toss on his Breast, though the Body seized, denied)
To their Coach-den: which by their Chief espied,
Those Three, ORTHERIS couched left for dead,
Death's prostrate Prisoner; back the Tigres fled
To their secured Prey, drove, hurried on.
(...) Soon after, taught both Rocks and Woods to groan
Loud Page, shrill Woman both (at once arriving)
With their Laments; forth strait the Keeper driving
Through the horrid Summons noise to the gloomy place
Strange View, strange mournful outcry, Consort 'twas.
The Woman, wildly roaming here and there,
Called to her Lady round, whose grieved Ear
Meets only still her Tongues redoubled voice;
Back-eccho'd Moans: Those others nimbly hoyse
To the Lodge their Herse-like postur'd, dying Lord;
Whose Soul and Bodies dearest joined accord
Best care preserves, till skilfull'st Surgeon came:
Meanwhile, Horse scoured the Plains, KALASPES name
Hills, Woods rebounded often, most pleased to chant
That loved Tone, though senseless, ignorant
Where she is become: All parties feigning still
To the languishing ORTHERIS, that she is ill
Through fright-bred Fever; but Recovered, found;
Asked, talked of him: yea suttlest Letters crowned
Report, Fordg'd by her Woman's Mimick hand.
Thus, Hopeful strength (at last) good spirits gained,
Couched most broad awake, one solemn Night;
When plump-cheekd CINTHIAS flaring Beauty, light
Tinssell'd as 'twere the Room; 'bout Midnights hour;
His Curtain (lo) was open rash'd, by power
Horrid, unseen; when strait before him stands
KALASP^S truest Shape, those very Hands,
Those Cheeks, Lips, Eyes (those richer clothes to boot)
But such transformed, piteous Lump to the foot
Of quondam Beauty, lamentable Mass,
Best known to the poor ORTHERIS sure it was;
Himself worse Ghost become: Heaven darkened there
Might seem (to the view) small doomsdaies draught appear^
Such monstrous cloudy Eclipse. The mournful B^est
Her Hand first beating (lo) to the injured Rest
Then sadly points, the whole Crimson Body round
(Clothes torn) what Bruises, gashings there abound
(Strange, dismal Fate!) whilst bleaker-cheeked Moon
Turned Qualmish at the sight, Stars seemed to shun
The horror, Winked, He Is merely raging, wild;
Called to her, Roused to grasp, though then beguild
His trembling Hand, like Vapor, fume she fled:
Concludes for certain now she is butchered, Dead:
Who vanishing strait shrunk to thinnest Air,
To the room Men frighted (Goblin-like) repair.
The ground of all was thus: That Captain-mate
Oth' surly Crew, for point of Rank, estate
Might once seem partly Eminent; beside,
Had sought the Fair KALASPE for his Bride
(LURGANOR called by name) but Base of Soul:
Who soon discharged, rejected grown, as Moal,
Blind Son oth' Earth; deboistest lump for vice
(Foul, ugly'st Quarrels too, ere lost this Prize,
'Tween him and the young ORTHERIS) both he hates
How deadly! prayed to the Goddess Vegeance, Fates.
Thus, almost melted quite through Riot, now,
He Mints the whole Remnant-store (to the very Plow)
All into current Cash, good Horse-command
Late got by Bribes in Foraign CIPRUS Land;
So jog'd with those well matched Comrades, to the next
Port-town, for Sea: though humorous, heart-vext,
Bade the Coachman drive some half-mile wide, below,
He Would view that Quaintest Lodge, far off, bestow
Some fresh-stamp'd Cursing Coin on it, and them
At final parting: where that double Gem
For Love, perfections Worth (ere long) descried,
Walking Intwin'd, how rare those odds beside!
He Fiend-like roused himself, ^s 'twere, against Heaven,
Belched forth strange Stratagem (that very Even
All leaving too the Realm) thus, up they drive;
ORTHERIS laid for Dead, She Is seized alive:
Whom hurried post beyond the ARCADIAN bound
(Ere long) to bordring LACE DEMON ground,
Wild woody Rock, culled out, for savage Heart
Meet dismal Skaffold, Stage; where (foremost part
Of studied vengeance) Grim LURGANOR sought,
Mouth stopped, to Ravish her: these words full often
Belched forth, He Would make hers paultry Whore, at least,
Though not his Wife: same vowed the Assistant rest.
Now, near the Act, when wandering almost flies
Her poor Soul forth, in sighing Gale, to Skies;
Loud Huntsmen scared his Lust, came drawing nigh t^em:
Her death was vowed, least blood though, corpse delcry them,
Confirmed, that Towering Rock (to the full) would make
Death's batt'ring riddance, safe triumphant Wrack;
Her dainty'st Body, Blood (as of no price)
Trash-like thrown down, Rich-dy'd the Precipice.
Their Hackney-man, that former Vision over,
Drove by the Lodge, and the keeper's Boy (met lower)
Informed how he saw her mangled, slain;
Whence sadly told to ORTHERIS ear again.
Her followed too (prime Curse) his only Daughter,
Gem, bright DORISBE, Corpse become soon after;
Though the early-blowing Rose of GREECE allowed,
Aged Fifteen. Through Sorrows blackest Cloud
Lost, overwhelmed, Live-bury'd thus awhile,
Recluse; much crazed Mind and Body still
(Besides that wondrous Humor of Extremes,
TO one leaps to the other often, like PHoeBUS Beams
Slunk down to the Vnder-earth) from State he falls;
Seeks out, the World deadly loathed, those homely Walls
Of Swains, for gilded Pomp and vast, a Nook;
Soft Springs, 'lone pensive Shades, and murmuring Brook
(That Life most quiet, plain, and harmless praised)
Took pretty smaller Grange, where only grazed
For's household, pleasure: Nor this Life must shun
(This mean Outworld) as yet, his Darling-son
The Lord POLINDOR, though had still allowed
Prime Tutors for best Arts; his Breast endowed
With various Science, Tongues, for the warbling Lute,
Galland Great-horse both of admired repute:
Those Tutors from TREGOR (great Town befriending,
Not six miles off) three days each Week attending.
Thus, Four years over. Like Shepheard-fortune steered
More of the Gentries rank; so strongly endeared
To Two whereof, by name FERGOND, C^ARROON
(Turned Brother-swains oth' Vale) that is only Son
Must mix bloods with them; bound, precisely ty^d
To choose, of their Two Daughters, which his Bride:
DULCENZA the one, MARPESA the other called;
Deserving Nymphs for Person, Parts, though failed
To please his special Fancy; yet averse
To worldly Marriage too: thus (Cloudy'd, fierce)
He Would often perplex with wounding taunts POLIND,
Since flinched back; showed (briefly) but sick Mind:
Cross-winds if raised, big, swelling Storm his passion:
Fixed for one of those Girls, and Shepheard-station.
FLOSTELIA here, eyed with like Sympathy
Her sober, gallant Spouse, whose gloomy Eye
Tilted at hers again; Both thought-rapt, mute,
That thus Wise Providence should strangely suit
Their grand Illustrious Births, unhappy Fortunes,
As well as gentle Loves; which claym'd, importunes
Sigh, Smile from both: Till strait from flashy Looks
Both fall to serious Councels; like two Brooks
Ranging their busy Maze: their best Props showing
Faint Reeds turned ayery; Those, first life bestowing,
Scarce now would cherish Life. The sweet FLOSTEL
Durst not for Harbourage (as then) appeal
'T her Fathers house; besides her solemn Vo^
Made not to VESTA only (sober, now
Told her POLINDOR'S ear) but unto All
The immortal Court of Gods, that Virgin-hall
When first she entered, fixed to perform;
That, as through their Joint mercies, cruel Storm
Threatening Life's wrack, decease, sh' had shunned so late,
And here found blisfull Anchor, Shelters fate:
She Would spend the whole Year (at least) in the Vestall bower,
Offering her thanks and praises to each Power
In Oraisons: next, leave the Grove a Maid,
As entered first; Three Weeks being yet unstay'd.
Nor durst POLINDOR too his Father's rage
Trust those Three Weeks alone, so urged to Engage
Contract (at least) with one oth' Nymphy Pair;
Now come to the utmost Clozing point, or Jar:
Besides (howere) '^was strangest Lovers Hell
So long to hazard, loose the dear FLOSTEL.
Thus, solemn thoughts, Have, Fear their minds assayling,
Now this way (^o) then the other seemed prevayling:
Stout, burdenous Task! till lastly (shrewd Ado,
Modest reluctance, Maiden doubtings too
Oth' fearful Woman's part) both jointly chose
His strongly'st urged De^^gn, kind Channels cloze.
Which, though it may (...) seem, and rasher too,
Yet gav't to both (...) ^ent Shelter though;
Eager Desire besides all Bars disclaims,
And young Loves often court adventrous Aims:
Sweet'st stoln-sweets (lastly) prove: Thus, up they rise;
And being a while to part; their speaking Eyes
Shoot Farwell-flames, Souls as 'twere modellize.
As her Fames worthy'st Guardian, chastest She
Viewed him, how sweet! Joys only Guardian, He
Viewed her again; Both Heaven next, the implored
Guardian (as 'twere) to both: worth Love's Record.
What Sighs like Cross-gales breathed! what fervent Kisses!
Close pantings, folds! as to their Amorous blisses
That Night an Ever were! till, showing One-hearted,
Both jointly Kissed, sighed, smiled, and so they parted.
POLINDOR AND FLOSTELLA. The SECOND BOOK.
THus, having viewed the lofty Bower again,
Let Us Glance upon the lowly Shepherds Plain,
With that days solemn Festival, and sports,
Devote to the great God PAN, of various sorts;
Though damped much since young POLINDOR gone:
Who^e Morn dissolved in friendly'st mirth, anon
By eleven, they offered thus on grassie Mount
To the rural God, beneath his sacred Fount.
Twelve milk-white chosen Kids, twelve snowy Lambs,
Fine trimmed their necks with Garlands (whilst their Dams
Went sadly'st bleating often) with Milk and Wine:
Then, round the Altar all did strait combine
To rustick-tuned sounds, in jolly Dance,
As thus, both Hearts and Heels would join, to advance
Their burning Sacrifice: grand Feast ensuing.
That done, as the Even-game^, their sports renewing,
These Pannick Strifes for Prizes were ordained:
First, nimblest Run^i^g proved, who chiefly attained
The flow'r-de^k'd Goal, through wind-like Footmanship:
Next, who in manly Wrestling could outstrip,
By strength, or slight over throw the Adversary:
Third, who could Musicks special honor carry,
Like some quaint-curl'd APOLLO, mounted on
Raised Skaffold, Stage; prove eminent alone
For the sweet-tongu'd Harp, Recorder, Lute and voyce^
Each goodly Prize surrendered by their choice
May-Ladies hand; though sundry Judges still
Sat by, conjoined Commissioners, whose skill
Determined all. For close, whoever in Verse
Could from Star-soaring Muse, to the height, rehearse
God PAN'S, or their own Loves exalted praises,
Those Poet's name, with crown of Laurel, graces.
The proper Ground, grand Theater for this,
Large flowery Plain; whose sides most sweetly riss
With small, thin-planted Hills, from fruitful whom
(Like beauteous Offsprings issued forth their Womb)
Silver-cheek'd Founts seemed ayering view the World,
Till into wanton Bro^k ^ar off they purl'd
In rural dance; turned Nymphy combination;
As joined for ^east, some Shrovetides celebration.
Though Apiece Plot there was, surrounded near
(Three parts) with Trees, for the gazing Eye and Ear,
Plank'd Gallery beneath with Seats; enclosed
Bowr'd top; for better Swains and Nymphs composed.
As all passed home from these, our noble Lover
Crossing the Vale, does joy'd (by chance) discover
Uncle of his, Beloved, by name RUFIN;
Turned Swain with his Father (both joined Brothers (...)
That Shepherds life) though distant-hous'd, apart:
Rich, childless, Widdower, of frankest Heart
And True; for sprightly exploits, sincerely'st loving;
TO whom opened all, such well steeled Faith approving.
As first, his Noblest virtuous Choice; profou^d,
Hard Wooing task, to boot, that double Swoon'd;
Her vowed Years stay (three weeks behind) in the Grove:
Lastly, his new Stratagem, enforced through love,
And's Fathers high-swo^n humor, Nuptial rage
For those two Nymphs gentile. Does strongly engage,
That, Masq^'d disguised in Woman's robes, he would
Procure him strait ways Nun of choice enrolled
In The Vestall Bower; three places being known
Yet void FLOSTELLA too yet lodged ^lone
(ALTHUSA called his Name, said her Ally)
Whose vowed Year not yet expired (lets fly
Much passion strait) how blisfull thus he might,
The whole three Weeks remnant, steal more chaste Delight
First Fruits in her arms dearest Cloister often.
Those done, since full Conjugall pleasures sought,
RU^IN the ensuing Day should fetch them thence
As friend, or Guardian; feigned some Pretense
For going; but conjured his Love by them,
He would provide some Lurking-place, though mean,
For their Retreat till blustering Storms were over:
For the present charge, Gold-coyn he had in store,
Years late-payd Maintenance; being full and good.
RUFIN transported, pleased with this Love-mood,
Chief, gallant Choice too, strikes a friendly Cloze;
Love Gods themselves transformed, churl-stars be those
That thwart thy Love-designs (young Lord) he cried:
Then, roundly asked him, if he ever eyed
That Delphick Oracle, long since displaying
His Fortune, lot: No, strait POLINDOR saying.
Not? (said RUFIN) that time when Death's arrest
Seizing the old Duke, your Fathers youthful Breast
Greedy of Travayl (though found honored Room
^th' King's regard) entrustin me at home,
Spent years in forain Climes with danger, t^yl;
Till, turning back, resolved on DELPHOS soil
(Kind neighbor Country, as his choice rest, Repose;
Thanks given to powerful PHoeBUS there, for Cloze:
Where spied your worthy'st Mother, wooed, espoused;
With whose Indulgent Parents first year housed,
You, Infant, viewed the World. When, Message come
From the good old King, to call your Father home
For mighty'st Honor, power, most urgent Have;
Those narrow Seas, as then, with Storms o're-cast;
Your Going, next your precious Mothers, there
Much questioned, scrupleliz'd; Vows, Offerings were
By both performed in PHoeBUS Temple, as due:
You then in the Mothers arms. All this for true
I Have heard expressed (replied POLIND anon)
But what is that Oracle, to me's unknown.
Indeed? (said wondering much the joy'd RUFIN)
Bot^'s passed Lives and Loves, this Nuns design
It points most strangely forth; your Father's sure
Was lost, when Body, Soul did both endure
That tedious Anguish, grief: at Home you may
(If found) survay't, long lockd up, skreen'd from Day.
Arriving there, whilst held discourse POLIN
With Nymph called MIND, Lass gentile and kind.
His Houskeeper (by the Wife more near Allied)
RUFIN walked up; ere long again, discry'd
With certain Paper- relick in his hand,
Comes down, the Scroul these Mistick words contained.
ORACLE.
Return All safe; both Seas and Wind,
To serve you as you would wish, combined:
At home, the whole Kingdoms Honors wear:
That Child shall prove your Gloryes Heyr:
He Is Shepheard-Swain, yet None; and She
He loves a Nun, yet None, shall be:
He Dies twice for her, lives; She Dies,
Till in his Arms quick-bury'd lies:
All Is in the bowry Grove, awhile
Where Both must bear like Sex, and style
Two now made jointly One) that Place
Shows Both against Fortunes Storms a grace:
No wrong to the Maiden train, nor crime;
By this First step to Bliss they clime.
This strange Prophetic Scroul, as then produced
By good RUFIN, such powerful thoughts infused
(His Life and hers, things passed now, foretelling,
His double Swoond, her Love, new Plot revealing)
That, what before o're-sway'd through Reason, love,
Now Stamped with fatal Destiny did prove:
Thus, proper MINDS Silken clothes, 'twas soon
Resolved by all, should fit the intended Nun.
Here, gentler rapping Larum's heard at Door;
When looking forth, O blessed mysterious Hour!
More seems Accomplished still [Two now made one]
Cried out RUFIN) There stands that Priest alone,
My ancient Friend, shall do the Uniting Feat;
Fed late by me, relieved; who, when that great
PHoeBEAN Temple sunk in Martial flame
Through Wars in THRACE, to's native Country came,
Fled hither; now in the next great Town TREGOR:
Nor need this Priest to share your Secret more
Then that oth' Marriage-part. Much joy'd POLIN,
Who thus, their Priest withdrawn, the whole Plot designed
South Side, there joined small Outlet to the Grove,
As part* divided yet (by chance his Love
At first had so informed him) not deemed
Sacred by the Nuns, nor Hallowed ground esteemed
As was that Grovy Plot; 'twas ample Bower,
Tall-fenced round; to the Grove one bolted door
Belonged, whilst the other passed into the Field:
Free place to the Nuns, who rarely'st though would yield
This Bower their visitings, save once the Year,
When solemn Feasts to the Foundress honor were;
Since here she entered first, her Limbs reposed
First here, first Vowings in this Plot disclosed.
Thus, useful MIND, should next morn, by eight,
Move with FLOSTELLAS help the Priestess strait
For Nun of choyces place (that Oracle
First shown his Love) conjure her then to the full,
That, as kind civil Partner on the way,
Both tracing forth, she would winding-fashion stray
To the Outlets sculking bower (Himself, RUFIN
Lodged in the next Cops, with PHoeBUS Priest, unseen)
Where Married, thence she might most safe retire:
Next Morn he would join himself to the Vestall qui^e.
This told he closely to RUFIN, besought
Kind MIND (of council too) as the only Plot;
Since, Vestall grove for the Act FLOSTELLA nere
Would yield; foul danger too, grand Crime it were:
Priest then for cloze (since promised nobler Wages)
Being called for the Marriage-part most strongly engages.
Thus, next Morn, MIND reached the Vestall Grove
(Two long miles off) by seven, her work of love
Discreetly ply'd^ performed; in the Maiden Bower
Gained Nuns desired place, and 'bout the hour
Stole to that Outlet with the dear FLOSTEL:
Whose door to the Grove unbolted first, and well
Secured again, unbolting the outward Door,
POLINDOR with RUFIN, Sign past (no more)
Entered the place (Priest left without, atten^ing)
And now drawn near, to the foot most lowly be^d^ng
Ioy-crown'd POLINDOR strait (as worshipped thus
Blessed ^oyl she trod, those shades all-glorious)
Kissing the Hands, Lips, he thus true love did vye.
Dear, dearest Maddam, how obliged am I,
Raised near the Gods themselves, through this high Favor!
Whole Life conjoined, though now Tongue, breath should waver,
Shall speak my Active Thanks. My noble Lord
(Said she again) You see my prompt Accord
To serve and please you; nor can I this Hour,
But blushingly* inform, in the Vestall (...)
Your Will's accomplished grown; the immortal Voice
Of Gods if for it, I then might seem Rejoice:
Hoping (however) you will bind this Justice to it,
That 'bove my Fonder vein, your earnest Suit
Over balanced in it. Sweet, sweetest Madam (says
POLINDOR then) should meaner thoughts debase,
I were unworthy of that Highest Room,
So vast a goodness thence vouchsafed. I Am come
Besides, my Lord (said she again) to cloze
With your main Motion here, at once dispose
Of all I am, by Marriage-resignation;
Though (truly) had you chose for Bridal station
That hallowed Grove, I deeply had scrupled it:
Hoping (my Lord) you will not withal forget
That years strong Maiden Vow I Have made to Heav^
For which (three weeks thereof behind) was given
Your noble Assent. Supreme Joy of my Soul
(Said he) it was. Nor can discharge, control
(My Lord) said she again) that former Vow
This later, made, confirmed through Marriage now
(You Will Grant me sure) nor least dispense the same;
Wherefore your Lordships second Oath I claym
Before these and Heaven, that you will not force me break it:
Before these and all the Court of Gods, I speak it;
Replied POLIND. Nor thence be cherished, sown
Vnkinder thoughts, my Lord (said she) since none
Can wish your dearest satisfaction more,
Heaven truly knows my Heart; that season over,
I shall conform to your Imperial pleasure.
Madam (said he) be from Love's Mintage, treasure
Those first-coyn'd gentle Favors, Sweets allowed,
I mutter not. This fruit, the Lady vowed,
Besides would follow thence; that, guiltless she
To the main Conjugall act, more boldly Free,
Should less through bashful Fears in looks betray them;
Over bleeding Qualm should those offend, display them.
This said, the reverend Priest through warning-sign
Comes stealing in, that Nuptial Knot to twine,
Whom gracefull'st Both approached: And now (behold)
Those Hands were linked in Hymenean fold,
Mi^^ick for the inmost Hearts; with Dove-like eyes
Vows made, exchanged, the eternal Deities
Called Witness to it: their mutual Names (beside)
Each strait by course to the other did divide
(Through have in Parchment written) sweetly'st gave them;
Though most in Gold or brass did use t'engrave them;
Thus spoke, With this my Heart and all is given:
As I am true to thee, so bless me Heaven:
Then, Rings exchanged; last, embrace and kiss;
The old formal Priest pronouncing after this
Both Man and Wife, with short though solemn Blessing:
Poor gentle MINDS Heart so strangely o're-pressing
(Kind, melting Soul! with strongst conceit of that
Dear Union so over-powred strait)
She downright sob'd again, whilst wept RUFIN.
Skies pleased, more Azure smiling-cheek'd, were seen;
Bright PHoeBUS gilding round the verdent Bower
With gaudy'^t blazing Beams, as shun that hour
Grand heavenly Witness; meant t'adorn the Pla^e
His leavy Temple turned: for Anthem-grace
(Wood-quire ith'cloze) conjoined chirping Throng;
Seemed Warble forth their Hymenean Song.
Thus, speaking half in fearful Looks their last,
Quick, short Farwells, the Lady now in have
Shut all forth; back to the Vestall Mansion stealing,
True Maid and Wife: POLINDOR'S joys excelling
The whole earth, since gained thus the All-wealthy Prize.
Next Morn, as mounting PHoeBUS should not rise
Eagrer to view's half globy World, then he
More-worth FLOSTELLA far, he is gone, does flee
By daybreak to RUFIN, his Uncles place,
Where calling MIND^ strait (that proper Lass
Kept the house) they soon Vnsex'd him for a while
With her best Silken clothes, small linnen-pile
For shift, though couched his Taff'ty-robes within;
This short salute to's Father, left RUFIN:
Which Scroul, that Even to his hand convay'd,
Smooth quallifying cause of Flight displayed.
My Lord, being Noble, Young, and tired
With Swains life, breast to travail fired;
View more oth' World, that Box of wonder,
Map of his praise that rules the thunder;
I Am gone for new Climes, forain Airs:
Heaven guard me back; your pardon, prayers.
POLINDOR.
Thus dressed, transformed, forth traced our proper Nun;
RUFIN with cheerful MIND followed soon,
Just within view, till drawing near the Grove,
Joined all for the Vestall Mansion; where to's Love
The esteemed FLOSTEL (though called PLEDORA there,
Himself ALTHUSA named, her Cousin, near
In Blood respect to boot) as Night-comrade
He Is entered, Nun of choice: though grown (as said)
Ill rester lately, through distempered head
(Such her Injunction) had his Trundle-bed.
Proud Chamber-fellow (at least) becoming so,
Truest Brides-groom; first Quartridge paid: but, O,
The Hearts inward conflicts, checks! least Lovers eyes
Blab'd more then Friend, what suited mere Allies,
Or the female same Sex; whilst those Virgin crew
Flocked round to welcome all, did fondly'st view.
TO one praised the Sun-like radiance of her Eye,
Where sat enthroned sweet pleasing Majesty;
Persuading, yet just then commanding Love:
The Other her Cheek, and Lips, where seemed to move
Graces transporting, wondrous those extolls;
How lovely, choice! The third for prime inrolls
Her Forehead, Hair, what gallant, courtly'st Pace!
How Princess-like! whilst her especial grace,
Acquaintance, all with kind of secret Passion
( Close-charm'd as 'twere) desired, to emulation.
Indeed, PLEDORAS Person wave, decline,
To whom all prostrate Beauties, as divine,
Must stoop in Vassaylage, the Imperial she;
That House, nor GREECE could equal wonder see:
Both whom, by their la^t-coyned Names, we shall
For the time ALTHUSA and PLEDORA call.
Bless (HYMEN) bless thy Gems, since these implore
Thy Name 'bove VESTAS, powerfull'st thee Adore.
Mean while, no petty troublous Storm arose
About POLINDORS flight, whose Father shows
One while all Fire through vexing passion grown,
As formed of that Element alone;
And then all drowsy Earth, dull, lumpish; whether
Through grief produced, or rage, grief both together
Since quashed those Matches quite: till good RUFIN,
With others, fought by powerfull'st ways, Design
To cool, allay; fair-glossing the Action over
As Youthful trick, by's Elders played before;
Wherein but Copied had his own Grandfather.
Thus, stroak'd his Rage. But gloomier Clouds did gather
'Bout one oth' mentioned Gentile Nymphs (alas!)
DULCENZA named, whose no decitfull Glass
Boasting oth' Two chief Beauties stock (the Pearl
Prime Tulip of those Plains (indeed) a Girl
Lovely enough) t'whose Face conjoined beside,
Some higher Parts; and (as she thought) discry'd
Most kindness, least neglect from the Lord POLIND,
Sh' had fed more hopes: till (sadly'st-breathed wind!)
Maid whispring forth the news, Hearts qualm begun;
Hope's gasping 'twas; worse Souls Convulsion
Seized now then ever, Sighed, she mourned, she wept.
Griefe's truest draught: till sick Bed lastly kept.
Friends, pleasures, food, yea Life it self's distasting;
The World burdenous become; her sad eyes casting
On naught, but there is behel'd POLINDOR'S Face,
Haunting her still, strong Fancies Ghost alas?
There last she eyed his Person (thinks) and there
Last heard him speak (goes on) such his Looks were,
All flames and wounding Darts; such, such his Words,
Love's Notes of Music, tunefullest accords:
There (lastly) spoke to her, gave Kiss-salute
(O Heavens!) What Sighs, what Groans to each did suit?
As those should prove joined Fun'rall knels to all.
O wondrous Rarity (said she) oth' Vale,
Of Greece, the whole ample World! O most refined
Choicest of Men (confessed) but too Unkind!
Building thy Glorious Trophies (to our smarts)
On Maiden ruins, captived Broken Hearts!
I sent thee Mine, which, though not gently took,
Nere back returned Home (alas) 'twas Broke,
Shivered, or lost: My Heart, once Ayre-like free,
But now in Fetters, Chains: loathed Destiny!
Nor wonder, Chained, since grew Love-mad, distracted;
Too much I Hoped, through those hopes strongly acted,
To much I looked (alas) too much I Loved
(Fond, easy Soul!) till freedoms Ruin proved.
Weep, weep my traiterous Eyes, in kindness now
O're-flow and Drown me quite; sigh Breast, till you
Grow Stifled thence; break Credulous Heart outright:
But live POLINDOR still, enjoy this Light.
O Love, thou worst of Tyrant-Lords, to whom
Death's smiled, as pastime! lingring-sad's thy Doom!
Lovers dye ten-fold, ten-fold (only) alas!
Wretch'd, wretched Lovers, how sh' extolled each Grace:
(Now lost) by the Body were that worn, or Mind!
New-rating them! her Spirits languish'd, pined,
The Head, Stomach drooped through mere Heart- sympathy
( Sleep fled her cloudy'd eyes) whilst slaps apply
Posed Physick-doctors, vainly tired their skills.
Lo (Reader) one oth' Worlds transcendent Ills,
Grand curses, Love, where not again Beloved:
Till glean^ng in short time (which wonder proved)
Good vigorous Spirits, strange Resolves possessed
(Of which ere long) her pensive, wavy Breast.
Meanwhile, the fainter-hop'd MARPESA (though^
More private, calmly Mourned; by stealth would so
Sigh, weep her sorrows forth, in gloomy Bowers,
Like Aprils gentler-breathed Blasts, and ^howers.
This for that Nymphy Payr; though partly now
Young spruce MENANDERS heart, by faithful Vow
DULCENZAS bounden Slave, began to feed
Cherish more hopes; such did SIRENUS breed,
MARPESAS too; Both, fine gentile-born Swains
(Whose Fathers with the Duke chose Shepheard-plains)
Prime Sparks indeed, accomplished Youths, though most
Seemed through POLINDOR'S Splendour darkened, lost:
Thus, secret Burned, o're-powerfull Rival fearing:
Their Loves discovered though, Looks glass-like wearing
The Hearts inward blaz^ng fires, Heart-panting, groans
Sighs speaking plainly'^t forth; thus, seemed at once
Mute Spokesmen, as live Pictures of their loves:
So strong through the Bodies organ Passion moves.
Yea, viewed Poetic strains of theirs, where shined
Those Nymphs as Stars. To these two were assigned
(As Victor-youths) that Running, wrestling Prize
Last Festival, before their Mistress eyes;
Both Laurell-crowned too, for Verse. The last
For Music FLORIS won, Youth unsurpast
By gallant those, extolled for Lute and Voice:
Which Swain, though might in CUPID'S wars rejoice
Since conquered CRESSAS Heart, yet here became old
Most captive, wretch'd, through rancorous grudge
Lodged in her Fathers breast, from sight restraining: ( fl^me)
Fort yielded, won, but Keys denied, complaining:
By order that resigned, shut up though be
The Gates by the Churl Lieutenant, deputy.
Though heightened all this woe High burning Feav^r,
Which lately seized the Nymph, would seem (however)
Through Vengeance, Spite, to Fire the all beauteous Fort;
Worse-feaver'd grown his Mind; such dismal sort
Both dangerous. And now to the Pastoral plain
This travayling resolve oth' Lordly Swain
Seemed blazed forth; your courteous view transfer
To Sonnet next, by special Honourer
Of young POLINDORS framed, to whose Glory, praise
'Twas chanted forth ere long, with Rural grace:
Choice quite of Shepheard-youths, with crowns of Roses.
M^sque robbed to boot, conjoyning in the clozes.
1.
Gem of Honor, Worth, farewell
From thy Cell;
Changed these snowy bleating Flocks,
Ecchoing Rocks,
For those Climes where wonders dwell:
CHORUS. Mildest ZEPHIRS fan thee over,
Chief Wonder, to what ever Shore.
2.
Thou, that was it our lovelyer PAN,
Star oth' Plain,
Whose rare Influence rude frize
Did Civillize;
And sublimed the Rustic brain:
CHORUS. Nor did more enoble, then
Improve this Desert, Herd of me^*
3.
Rarest young Compound for sweet
Virtue, Wit;
Heightened through forms excellence,
More by Sense;
Sin, these Shades should cloud thee yet:
CHORUSThough the Plains, Fame shall record,
Held once POLINDOR, v^'d a Lord
Next (All for the heel) their activ'st youth and art,
To Hobois, Flutes, in Dance they did impart;
What lofty'st friskings, Ayre-born motions there^
As each would chiefly Inspired thus appear
From his Beloved's Eye; would strongly boast
To the fonder World, gay Courts not all ingrost.
Then strait POLINDORS Health went dancing round
To the Cornet, Flute, with shouts triumphant crowned;
Whilst rocky Hills and Woods, in eccho-fashion,
Seemed joviall Partners joined ^th' celebration:
Last, Nymphs, gentilest Swains (to double pleasure)
Combined for cloze in sprightfull'st country Measure:
Whilst nodding Grandsires (chanted over and over)
Bragged this Themselves had done, times past, and More.
Thus, on the flowery Soil, these pleased Consorts
We lea^e again, joined in their Shepherd- sports;
Kind Brothers of the flock, to gentle whom,
As Sojourners, for constant dwelling come
Peace, sober Quiet, harmless Innocence,
There seek protecting Roofs, find shelter thence
If any where. O praised, contented Life!
Fr^'d from those envious Heats, that boiling strife
Of proud and h^ughty Courts! their Luxury,
Vain gorgeous Pomp, to boot! Projection-free!
No painted Vizards worn, but the inmost Heart
And Brow stamped both alike! shunned glosing art!
Kings have Vnthr^n'd them for your pleasing Bliss,
As Kings from you to mounted Thrones have riss.
Here back to the Cloistered Mansion, Vest^ll air
Let Us turn our Flight, salute that noblest Pair
In their conjoined abode; Nun-life, estate.
We shall not here set forth to the full, dilate
Those pleasant Cabins, Garden-founts, those Bowers,
Choice shady Walks; their evening Sports, their hours
For burning Incence, Vestall Robes, attires;
Their Musick-consorts often, with their Voyce-quire^,
Rare Pencils art, their Needles wonders, glory:
Nor shall we number out in formal story
Our spoused Nuns day-stoln Delights. and kisses;
Their private Walks to the first-view'd Fount of blisses,
With that first Dear, adjoining, faithful Shade,
Where new Loves sober Sweets, love-vowes repaid
(All heightened much through former Doubts and fear,
Now rouzed up by Both, recounted there)
Last, the Outlets Bower: those conscious, loving Places
Thanked kindly still, as Capable oth' graces
(So sweetly over-flowing's gentle Love
Toward Founts and Trees) though rarest this, least prove
Observed; ALTHUSE by the fonder Nuns, beside,
So haunted still. Nor shall be blab'd, descried
Nights pleasures much; conformed ALTHUSA though
(The undressing Hand-mayds part who joy'd to show)
PLEDORA being chouch'd, earths glorious Mine,
Would but, laid down on the blisfull clothes, intwi^^
Her dainty'st Body still, Heart-fires revealing;
Thousand Goodnights in balmy kisses sealing
(Thousand Goodmorr^wes too) Sighs joined for cloz^)
As Fancy should sublimed Spirits of those
Raise (Chymick-like) to smaller dear fru^tion:
So, goes to's Trundle-bed: Dreams blessed condition
Often Cordiall-friend to the pining hungry Lover,
Kind alms, relief. Soul soothed still, 'twould over
^his Fast ere long, mean while participated
those Joys, preserves once swoonded for, high'st-rated
^hus at her feet, like the sturdy Guardian kept
That Orchard rich in Golden fruit, he slept.
VVondrous Self-conquest (lo) both sides Renowned
(Sweet'st, worthy'st Payr!) that Mansion, grovy round
Virgin-lodge still, though turned to loving Bowers!
None Witness day nor night, save (...) amorous Pow'^^.
SOL, LUNA alone, whose first his DAPHNE chose,
The other her Darling-swain; no Tell-tales those:
Choice sports, converse, with first Love-fruits unblasted,
ALTHUSA and the fair PLEDORA tasted.
But yet, we shall not least neglect, o'r-pass
That yearly grand Solemnity, which was
Ere long performed to the Goddess VESTA there,
To which, Spectators, none admitted were
But neighboring Virgins; joined also none
For Actor's in it, but vowed sworn Nuns alone:
Those Nuns of choice their Room above possessed,
No small contentment to ALTHUSAS Breast;
Since else, beneath, some Shepheardesses eye
Might have betrayed her thence (worst treachery!)
Nor to PLEDORAS too, since freed, excused
By this (turned Wife) naught VESTAS Rites abused.
The whole Form thereof was thus: In The upper end
Oth' Temples quire, which did with steps ascend,
Great Goddess VESTAS Image stood, inshrin'd
Somewhat aloft; the one hand oth' Wall (designed
On Arras, costly'st work) in verdant Shad^s
Same with Diana.
She seemed beheld, with all her Quiver'd Mayds
Hunting the Deer; how lively'st real Chase!
On the other hand, with Tempting, naked Grace
Dabling in silver Streams, proportioned.
At foot oth' Shrine, their hallowed ground was spread
With Damask carpet, broad, of purest white
And green in bordered Panes; before which (to sight)
Small Table stood, like Silken adornment wearing.
First marched for^h the old Reverend Priestess, bearing
Largest white Lawn^ upon whose midst displayed
Fair Chaplet wreath, of beauteous Lillies made
Green Laurel, mixed, froath'd both in spots, like Snow;
Fit emblems all: those Lillies seemed to show
Ch^st Pureness there; Laurels did Freshness boast,
Loves powerful conquest, with green Shades^ wh^re most
VESTA delights; Snow figured Virgin-cold.
Next after her Marched single Nymph, did hold
Small Baskets, open-work, of white and green;
Like-ribbon'd, trimmed; through which (perspective-seen)
Shined store of Lillies, Laurell-branches fair.
Last, came the whole Virgin-train, by comely Pair,
In long Lawn-vails, with towred lofty dressing,
Mixed white and green, puffed Diadem expressing;
By each born in own hand small China dish
Of pure^white, trembling Ielly (shrouded this
Chaste Emblem too) whilst in their other showing
Bright hallowed Censer, Incence round bestowing;
Whose fragrant, costly Mists, the whole ample place
Endeard, enriched at once: with solemn Grace
Thus all Marched up (performed their Treble bow)
Toward those Mounting steps, beneath whose brow
Their Altar stood; where strait did hands divide,
Falling off partly thus to either side.
When up those steps the Priestess slowly advanced
To the hallowed Table, where a while Intranc'd
She kneeling seemed; then, rouzing, spread thereon
(Devout obeisance made) that milk-white Lawn
With purest Wreath; next, from the attendant Maid
Those fine-wrought Lilly-baskets, took, displayed
And ranked them all beneath that Table, round
(Present to VESTA) on the Marble ground:
Then, further stepped to the Carpet strow'd that over
With Lillies Laurell-branches mixed store
(Those white, green Damask panes) set forth each part
Unlike; thus doubly Flowr'd, by Nature, art.
Last, all those Nymphs stepped up, advanced bowing
By single turns, and, each their Dish bestowing
That mentioned Table round, beneath retired:
During which while, those late dead walls inspired
Through soft concealed, harmonious Music seemed*
Whence earthly Heaven turned, by some esteemed
Which Music ceased, forth lanching from the side,
The comely Priestess brought of Laurel dried
(Mixed Juniper) small Faggot, girdled bound
With Ribbons white, wherewith she stooping crowned
Their Altar; fired the same with Spice and Gums:
That Hand-mayd (Wayting-Nymph) soon after comes,
Two beauteous Crystal Vialls sweetly bearing,
Like-formed, largest-bulk'd; through the one appearing
White Wine to view, pure Milk that other showed;
From whose transparant Wombs distilling flowed
Like Founts, poured forth to VESTA, as Oblation:
During which latter Rites, in Anthem-fashion
Those several Nymphs conjoined from either side,
Did seem to Quire of Ch^r^^ins allied.
The Song was thus:
1.
Goddess, Silver-bow adorned,
Golden-quiver'd, on whose Brow
Silver Crescent; be not scorned
Maiden Votaries, which Bow
Here before thy Shrine of price;
Hearts with Incence sacrifice:
Gentler fashion
Smell our Vows and our Oblation.
2.
Fairest Deity of shades,
Purest-cheek'd and purest Breast;
Whom Fond Passion nere invades,
Still over Love Triumphant, blessed;
Deign thy Servants but to s^roud,
Amongst thy Nymphy Train allowed*
Greater Honor
None here wishes heaped upon her.
3.
Brighter then these Lillies, Snow,
Which are offered up (...) thee,
Yea, more Chaste and spotless too;
Shine propitious, grant that We
Like our Goddess (though less fair)
May be purely'st Chaste as Air:
Thus we even
Chant thy Praise from Earth to Heaven.
Thus, the Anthem past, those Nymphs joined all anew,
That Senior Nun and Priestess first in view;
So, falling backwards all, in Payrs, with those
First Treble bows made up their solemn Cloze.
All this while sat PLEDORA as Star, on high,
Clothed with such beauteous rays, divinity,
As though their Goddess VESTAS self (less nice)
Were then come down to grace their Sacrifice
(As truly Virgin too that gaudy day)
Behind whom, closely skulk'd, ALTHUSA lay.
There might she view one well-known Shepheardess,
And there Another 'midst the gazing press;
MARPESA (last) who late for him had Pined:
Whom showed to the dear PLEDORA, jog'd behind:
Triumphant grown, since thus viewed all to the full,
From her Moon-world, self though invisible.
We must not (Reader) here neglect, ore-run
What good while past (more memorable) done
By the Duke ARPLASTUS proved, the fair FLOSTEL
When grown a Wanderer, short mild Farewell
Sent him in writing, as we said; whose lines
His Lordship viewed not without troublous signs,
Sad, Grief^ressenting thoughts, though secret Qualm
Which thus he turned more lightly off, ore-came:
Since, She withdrawn, no dangerous Clashings thence,
(...) jars with the only Minion of his sense
Beloved COMANDRA, or his own Lust-vice;
Dear above all: though more severely Wise,
The Duk^ unriddled in the worse sense her going,
As but foul Grud^e against mere COMANDRA showing
Of whom still Fond as ere: nor (heightened Fate!)
Wanted that Whoor spite, art, to aggravate.
Well knowing the dismal cause (black, guilty Soul!)
Since, spent some little while, up closely stole
Those backward-stayrs, there listening for some Groan;
Fine Gasping Sigh; which horrid Music done
(As she conceived) she hoped to bless her Eyes
With fairest, dainty'st Coorse beneath the Skies:
She hoped, looked, till starting wildly round,
Dead little Dog found Proxy on the ground:
Though soon poured forth that Poisonous, Stygian ^broath
To PLUTO Sacrifice, discreetly loath
Her devilish Stratagem should thence be known;
Chafed, beat her Breast, though wondrous joy'd she is gone.
Strong thoughts, the Officious friendly Fates would do it
(Ere long) through Hunger, deep despair to boot.
Thus, three months wandered over, the Duke ARPLAST
More thoughtfull grown, devout reflections cast
On's loved, lascivious Crime; the ignoble stain
Foul Blur thereof; conscentred lastly in the Vein
Of salving all by Marriage, counting this
Honors Restorative, chief Virtue-peice:
Least kinder Hints whereof what heightning Charms
Found, dearly'st Suckl'd still, between her armes^
Nor could he lose this matchless Gem; besides,
Wanting Male-jewell, Son, the Duke confides
Heaven would more succeed him in those chaste
Fruitions (Rich and fertile Soil, nor past
Youths prime, COMANDRA deemed) thus the honest Road
His thoughts approve, though rough and hardly trod;
Wedding gears, Cables; joined both together
Now the are, indeed, no, Pompous business neither:
'T was Secret stolen, bate some few Household eyes,
Since no great Glorying in the unworthy Prize:
Whight honest loves, transcendent Fortunes most
Become those Gayer forms, such gaudy boast.
Thus had she mounted now that losty Tower,
Those Star-like heights she aimed at; happy hour,
FLOSTELLA since so far remote those Walls
Thus Pest infected round! though wisely fails
ARDINA to inform her ought, 'twould borrow
More Coin (she deemed) to improve her stock of Sorrow.
But (lo) our fond and eager Muse of relong
Cannot from that matchless Payr, amidst the throng
Of Virgin^sisterhood, be over-sway'd;
Much time (however) Deceased, since last survay'd:
ALTHUSA, proving in the Evens cool
Double-retir'd at once (through thoughtfull Soul)
To her own Breast, and to her Chamber too,
Whilst most oth' Nymphy train abroad did woo
Choice Evening-sports (some treading round their Ma^^,
Or 'bout their Founts, some breathed with Running plays,
For Fishing, gathering Flowers) sat musing on
Her pretty strange Life, fortunes, all alone;
Sad-pleasant state, since Loves main youthful fire
Unquenched yet, checked in her dear Desire:
Oil poured still upon the Flame, while tasting
Love-sallets, sweets, preserves, still hungry, Fasting.
PL^DORA her Consort too, the more she is known,
Beheld, still more divine-stamp'd Object shone
To the sounder Reason, beauteous more to the Sense;
Grieved thus, till Union'd with such excellence;
Her Body, through her lovely Soul, made more
Attractive, strong, though Charmed enough before:
Yea, through her Windows too, that moment viewed,
The Gardens clasping Woodbines, Vines renewed
Conjugall folds resemblances; their Young
Birds chaunted over, as Loves effects they sung.
Cloyed through these solemn thoughts, conceits, to those
More Sportive strait she falls, survaying goes
Her Female dress, in smiles, as if sh' had said,
And ca^such Fires these Virgin-robes invade?
What, lurking here? though Masque-like toys (alas)
She-cobwebs, Mists, which naught could Sex deface,
Damp lusty Manhood; nights especially,
When with their sorry Spells cashir'd, laid by.
Next, Cheers up, since her bli^full Freedoms hour
Drawn nigh, and those delays in the Vestall Bower
('T was thought) would primely Sweeten full Fruition;
Recompense all with Ravishing condition.
Thus, Sober, pleased, took down PLEDORAS Lut^
(At which with learned Masters could dispute)
Then, gently kissing it (which seemed as 'twere
Ambitious with ALTHUSAS Passions there,
To warble forth at once its Mistress praises,
Joyful, complying) thus he gladsome chases
Dull moody Fogs from thence, in sweetest tones
But soft withal, AMPHION so charmed Stones.
Song.
1.
Come thou gentle Hand and Voice
Ease my Heart,
Let your art
Teach even Mystic griefs rejoice;
Riddles showing:
Time stands bound
To cure the Wound;
Mean while Reason's Balm bestowing.
2.
Mistress of my Joys I am,
Want them though;
Having (lo)
My dear Wish, am barred the same:
Boast with pleasure
That I Own
The Mine alone,
Yet not Grasp the Hoord and treasure.
3.
Ripest, wealthy Field possess,
Golden-ear'd;
Yet, detered
From due Crop, Pine neretheless:
Fancy eases,
Dreams afford
Sweet crop and hoord;
Waking though new Sorrow seizes.
This, scarcely cloz'd, when strait comes in the sweet
PLEDORA, wilder-look'd (changed Visage, meet
For flying DAPHNE turned) Ah my ALTHUSE,
Said she, We Are both undo^e. Worst, saddest news
though softly breathed! Why? strait ALTHUSE replied,
Startling; her Languag'd looks since much descried,
Tongue more: We Are both betrayed (said she again)
Lost, ruined Startled more ALTHUSA when,
Speak't plainly out ( replied) leave thus tormenting:
That Nymph, said she, that Maid DUCENZA (fainting)
What, what of her? ALTHUS A strait replies;
Comes here tomorrow early, by Sunrise
(Said she again) enrolled Nun of choice
ALTHUS A flushing strait) the admitting Voice
(...) pass^d (went further on) my self but now
OF re-heard the old Priestess, down by the Founts, allow
Grant all to the Ancient Maid, employed by'er:
How sighing cloze! which tunefull Breath, raised higher,
PLFDORAS too, might Sweeten seem Misfortune.
The Case seemed wondrous hard, would doubts importune;
For first, the whole Maiden train obliged were
To welcome strait (as one) New-comer there
With Kiss salute; nor left their Virgin-cell
Any, but gave to all last kind Farewell.
What Is more, sworn Vestall just as then (that Even)
Died suddenly; next Morn 'twixt ten, eleven,
The whole Virgin-troop were bound to attend upon
Her mournful Corpse, DULCENZA being one,
All duly payr'd; PLEDORA thus, her Love
ALTHUSE with joined DULCENZA last would prove:
Which Body being interred, Assembled all
Those Nuns of choice from thence in the open Hall
(Each seated to their proper time) that place
Of Vestall Nun being offered first (in grace)
To the Senior Virgin; who if chanced refuse,
Down lower still, till reached PLEDORA, ALTHUSE,
DULCENZA last) (ALTHUSA next above 'er)
Who thus POLINDOR soon must needs discover
Thorough ALTHUSE; since Lovers Eagle-eyes
See tenfold, pierce those Vapour-sprinkled Skies
More then SOL'S conquering beams, would open lay him:
To the Priestess and ORTHERIS both betray him.
This, sadly told, ALTHUS A cheered her strait
With best coined looks, and words; Their gloomy Fate
Happy in this (alleged) her Maiden vow
Since almost out, full Year expiring now
That very Night, O, but RUFIN (she cried)
Too tardy Guardian, would not there be spied,
Nor fetch them thence next day till the Afternoon.
What though? (replied ALTHUSE) since, e're the Sun
Be roused, awoke, for Flight their freedom given,
From whose Backdoor close Passage (deigned by Heaven)
Did lead to the Gardens bolted Postern door;
Whence no long Walk for them to reach TREGOR
Next Burrough-town, RUFIN informed from thence:
The old Priestess with her Nuns (most strange pretense
Forged by him for their going) that mean while
Feigned Paper, left oth' Table, should begu^le:
N^r criminous Plot, convinced that Vesta, she,
Was now no true but false Mock-deity.
But if (sighed the other then) No more of those
Pr^saging If^ (ALTHUSE replied) the cloze
Transmit to Heaven; Earth and fates though cruel,
Yet, Gods would guard however their dearest Jewel.
Thus, firm-resolv'd, and that whole Starry night
Watched out, Both in their clothes, till faint Dawn-light
Peeped smiling on them; All how slumbring, close!
Lulled like Sleeps drowsy Babes! the whole ample house
Turned Charnell, mere Tomb! eithers Linnen-store,
POLINDOR'S robes, her Iewell-box (no more)
Were nimbly took, and left oth' open Board
Large Paper, did this feigned device afford,
Great VESTA charged this present Night,
By Vision, we should take winged flight
T'her THRACIAN Temple (whispring nere
Least word) so, wait her pleasure there:
And what those awful Powers command
Frayl Mortals must not dare withstand.
PLEDORA, ALTHUSA.
Then, stealing gently forth Backdoor oth' room,
All night left open wide (thus, silent dumb
That Is bolt appeared) through small joined Wilderness;
Seemed planted for their flight, Both did address
Their Ghost-like ^^eps to the Gardens postern-door
(There seemed a Fount all tears, the solemn Bower
There quivering Sighed, Herbs, Flowers drooping round
At parting) from that Door free Passage, ground
To the mentioned Plain beneath; which nicely'st touch
Like softer Gales, coy silvan Nymphs, or such,
Payr'd sportive Goddesses, when, left their Skies,
Over the mossie, Silken Lawns do wantonize:
Whilst splendid PHOEBES cheek, but lately shining,
Seemed now Cloud vayl'd as 'twere, in love combining
To shelter wandering Virtue, as it flies:
O may not the own fair Rays, FLOSTELLAS Eyes,
May not their own most Violet-like Scent
Those Feet betray. Thus, passed the Plain, they bent
Their steps to the green Roads, which, trod lightly through
Both joyful bad to the Maiden Grove Adien,
So toward TREGOR, great Town four miles off lying,
Far distant from the Vale, whence quick Pos^ flying,
Should fully inform RUFIN, their Lifeguard friend,
Whose able Freeness would supply to the end
With generous Maint'nance, saved her Jewels so;
And make him's Heir. Thus, whilst they panting go
(TO whom also their first worthyer Names we now,
POLINDOR and FLOSTELLA, shall allow)
Much gentler-pac'd, advanced further on;
Loud Voice amazed them both, FLOSTELLA soon
Startling through fear, least horrid stop, Surprise;
The Heart quaked: POLINDOR roul'd fierce, gazing eyes:
Till spied (by chance) thick leavy Fence, between,
Both pausing harken'd there, when strait again
It loudly spoke; to which did answering prove
Shrill Echo, thus:
FLORIS and the ECHO,
-- FLO. No wanderer no, Mad love
(...) M^tt^ is, palc Death the Impressa;
Ay-me!

EC. Ay-me!

FLO. Hark* there is thy CRESSA.

EC. Thy CRESSA

FLO. '^is she.

EC. ^Tis she.

FLO. My j^y the more is:
O do'^ yet pit^y thy poor FLORIS?

EC. Poor FLORIS!

FLO. Indeed?

EC. Indeed?

FLO. Sweet, sweet'st- Love-ditty!
Say'^ once again, is 't a true Pi^^y?

EC. Pi^^y.

FLO. Dearest Dear!

EC. Dear!

FLO. Thus then renew Love
My Heart, assuage; CRESSA'S thy true-love.

EC. Thy t^ue-love.

FLO. False never.

EC. Never

FLO. cease to importune
Then more, she Pitties thy hard fortune.

EC. Hard fortune.

FLO. Sighs, gro^ns.

EC Sighs, groans.

FLO. O gentlest-hearted.
Ill fare those Hands that first us parted.

EC. Us parted.

FLO. Accursed.

EC. Accursed.

FLO. Who did un^old it.
That I was here? was 't ^oarce Winds told it?

EC. Winds told it.

FLO. 'T was kind.

EC. 'T was kind.

FLO. O do not pass me
Dear Ghostess, sweet; but first embrace me.

EC. Embrace me.

FLO. (...) low'st shades?

EC. Shades.

FLO. Where none shall sever,
But we shall Love, twine there for ever.

EC. Forever.

FLO. I come then.

EC. I come the^.

This Voice POLINDOR knew, by the names above,
For FLORIS Swain gentile, whose dearest Love
(Friends crossing still) through Fevers burning rape
Dead See 9. Poem.
Corpse become (fair Nymph, though foul mishap)
Had turned him frantic near; Tru'st hearted Swain!
Thus (Twilight-ghost he would rove the distant plain
With loud lamenting Noise, where gladly sound
Kind Fccho moan him ought, upon that ground
He Would Parlying stand (deep-charm'd) sick Fancy pleasing,
As heard fair CRESSAS Voice. Whom, scarcely ceasing,
Our Pilgrim-lovers left to's fonder play
With His ayr-born Mistress, thus, resumed their way,
(Much pitty'd though) till now, Three Miles oth' four
Travayl'd, dispatched, both chanced to progress over
Fine Velvet-plain with flowery crop Bege^d;
Thorough whose midst small Crystal River seemed
To sport it self about, in wanton Mazes:
Trees, Natures Em'rald-bowrs, their verdant graces
Joined from both sides the bank, Sun-fans (as 'twere)
To the Pearl-cheek'd dancing Nymph; or seemed there
To stand at gaze, like her intranced Lovers.
Close by these Palms and plumed Myrtle-covers
Their Journey proved some while, chief walks delight;
When (lo) the thundering Noise did ^oth affright
Of H^rses hoofs, with six tall armed Men
(Down went their Veyles in have) heard balling then
Loud throats, to boot: Those, those are they, they said,
Take, nimbly seize 'em. O, we are both betrayed
(Cried the Aspine-trembling Lady) lost, undone:
Sweet'st-utter'd words, though breathed with mournful tone,
Nigh swoonding. He Is become Tempestuous too,
Soul-tortur'd, agoniz'd, her single Woe
Though deeply'st Stabbed enraged his manly Breast
(Through self-enlightning ^uilt both charged, confessed
Prime-dismall Author on it) endured such Passion
As felt the Load of all Mankinds vexation,
The whole Globe of grief: wants useful Arms, beside^
Wherewith he might or there have bravely Died,
Or cut her Passage through them; no escape
(Least glimps) unless by wily force and Rape
He could disarm some one, so gained a Sword:
Though all the rest with murdering Pistolls stored:
Yet seemed this dangerous Project fixed upon,
Freedom, or Death; these words sighed forth alone,
Dear, hope still. Galloped up the Rout, they cried,
Yield, or the art dead; when from 's beloved side
She Is rudely seized, Five tumbling strait on him
Like pond' rous falling Towers, as thus would seem
By the Press to execute, ere sentenced so:
Their Leaders words, Here Is that Male She, the Shrow,
Fine femall Youth* All, Bind him, bind him (crying)
Quick, have; worst doom it was, seemed next to Dying:
Since being once Bound, his main Plot's frivolous.
Sore galled Heart, sad-glancing Eyes, since thus
Snatched from his Chief (how dearly'st-earned) Treasure*
Neer-grasp'd Delights; one Moments plundring seizure
Robbed all, like Gem stored Indian Vessel, split
In The blisfull Harbors mouth; or, nearer yet,
Stronger portrait, like one from Heaven hurled
To the Hells Abiss. Unvayled both to the world,
Oth' cooz'ning Fates! This is not He (they cried)
Nor is this She; as Bugbears, charms espied:
Glad sounds to the drooping (...), jointly thus
Wonder-reviv'd; though (Mayd-like timorous)
Shrewd Qualm still seized the dear FLOSTEELA'S breast,
Whilst those continued on their rambling Quest.
The ground was thus; ere Dawn peeped on the Globe,
Wild, sharking, handsome Youth, through woman's Robe
Nights shades befriended round, had stolen a Girl
From her strickt Guardian (most wealthy Pearl)
Coming acquaintance-like 'bout noon to Chat,
As School-fellow, great Wedding there till late,
When slunk forth (busied, dancing all) for flight:
Though followed soon that spruce Hermophrodite
Stout Horsemen, strongly informd they passd these Downs;
Both wearing too same colored Skarfs, and Gowns,
Like-statur'd Both; whence all this coyl descending:
FLOSTELS close Panting-fit not easily ending.
As for DULC^NZA though, prime cause that hour
Of all, she came not to the Vestall Bower;
Though had (indeed) with older Maid combined
To sally forth that Night, whilst PHOEBE shined
Her Virgin-guardian; so reach the Grove
'Bout break of day: since, toiled through Tyrant-love,
As worst of Slaveries her heart began
To loath it, and the World; against thoughts of Man
That closer Bower. Nuns chaste converse, would give
Best charms (she deemed) prove sweet'st Restorative:
Tossed with Loves blustering Storms, her Bark-like breast
Sought there for Anchorage, chief harbor of rest:
Portion by the Uncle left, which would maintain
Her Nun of choice, til sworn oth' Vestall train.
Whose Stratagem both Parents dear descrying,
They stopped her course, with Friends best means applying
Mild gentlest Salves, to cure those thoughts anew;
MENANDER whilst for Love did strongly sue;
Much furthered by her Friends, thereby to tame
Both this last M^od, and the old unhappy Flame.
As close SIRENUS su'd, MARPESAS Lover.
Thus, much rejoiced this blacker Clouds blown over
(Though caused, as were those Vestall frights of late,
Through vain fear, Lovers hanting Ghost, sad fate)
On walked the enlivened Payr to the further side,
Large spreading Wood, where smaller Path espied.
When (lo) the Lady faintish grown through late
Long watching, journey, frights, cool Liquor's bait
Much wished, desired, they thought awhile to tread
That Path, which would perhaps more friendly lead
To some refreshing Cell or Lodge; much lower
(Enticed on) they found, unlatch'd a Door:
Whence passed large squared Plot, strong lofty-fenc'd*
Part open, part shaded ground, 'twas place dispensed
Much rarity for the woods; Art, Nature where
So linked combined, that well dressed Rudeness there
Both might present to the eye; or seem to express
Pert Loneness, cheerful, sprightly Solemness:
As that its chief Grace meant, delight, the easier
To poize light Fancy grave, yield jocund Pleasure
Sober allay; transformed to Solid, wise
Quick Sanguin-temper, whilst dull Phlegm dries.
The whole plot some Spirit Philosophic showed,
Or as 'twould suit that working Soul; the Mode
Such briefly, as if, with Princes daintier way
Cloyed, tired, slunk'd Art had hither stole to Play.
Anon, much more: crossed smaller Green, in the Nook
Fine, pretty, larger Cell their fancy took;
Which being approached, 'twas formed all, cut out
Oth' main entire Rock, thunder proof, as stout
The Iron Doors appeared; the Walls with Vines ore-clad,
Resembling civil Wildness, pensive, sad,
Dampt Pleasantness; as if the Owner there
Had thought to steal some Comfort, joy (as 'twere)
From the World and his own spightfull Grief, would so
Play the walking Ghost (ELIZIUM-plains below
Map'd in this Plot) till, the Actour's part laid by,
Turn real true Ghost, fold his arms and Dye.
Entering, they met with None, yet all was Neat;
Furnished though Plain, as seemed to acknowledge yet
Some Master; Table, Stool, with Chayr and Bed,
Trunk, Linnen-chest, Time's Hower-glass, Death's head:
Wall bench'd, where Silver Chain^ belt, Faulchion hung;
Coorse wooden Plate, uncobweb'd Books a throng:
Large Cubbord too, where such Cheese, Butter, store
O^ cold Baked meats, as fortnight full (or more)
Would serve their Host, Weeks plenteous food for Two,
New-lay'd in (constant Party brought it so
Each Fornight still, from the neibouring Town, DERVISE)
Close Corner lastly cabin'd Roots discries:
Drink too, though pleased the Owner Natures stray
Fount-celler often. Upon the Table lay
Broad Paper, being entitled thus; The Poor
HERMONUS Will: which thus POLIND read ore.
What e're here enter'st, know I stood
Once ASTORIN, of noblest blood
Highest fortunes too; but Uncle base
(Whose Name would fright down Daylight, raise
Storms, Devils) BRUNDESCAR, learned in all
Court-mischiefs, crimes, my Fathers fall
Caused through forged Treason (rare Brothers part!
Worth Hells record) thus, through damned art
Begged all is Lands, got him banished far:
Though soon changed life with his Country-ayre,
Small stock bequeathed me: though prim'd
The Cross, my Beggars curse sublimed
This cloze; That loss much fairer Prize
Snatched from me, a Lady, in whose eyes
Blazed Beauties Noon; t'whom the Indies poor,
The whole world mere Atome seemed, no more.
Thus then, some Jewels took, I strayed
Earths Maze as Pilgrim (Wind's comrade,
Sun's fellow-travailler) that Round,
TO outrun my dogging Griefs, or hound
A Grave forth: Heats, Frosts vexed by turn:
Till this Globe-pageant, lo, grand Urn
Of all flesh viewed, with weary soles
(Like fortunes tossed Ball 'tween the Poles)
My own Shore I trod; now grown Frost-bearded:
Where spying this Nook of rest, thus guarded
From the Worlds noise, I bought it mine;
Was called HARMONUS still; SOL'S s^ine
Here many a Summers progress cher'd.
My Body, found, see kindly interred
In its last bed, whose Tomb to the Cave
Close joins; with this short Epitaph:
Who three Worlds ranged has, here lies;
Love's, Sorrow's, That of Vanities.
And in return slip down that board
Oth' wall, ^there's twenty pound (Gold-hoord)
Take it, and the whole Freehold dispose
As thine; but keep Conditions; close
The poor HARMONUS in his Tomb,
As hop'st to tread Elizeum.
This read, Both wondered more, since could discry
No Creature yet; till in the Root-plot by
(Walked forth) did handsome Tomb (yet open) view,
Lodged in the side oth' Cave; what stranger too,
One lying in it, all-cloath'd, as newly Dead:
Most reverend Lump of Age, whose hoary Head,
Beard snowy Alps appeared, stiff, frozen-limb'd;
Being that HARMONUS Corpse, the which (it seemed)
(As Both by Covenant were strongly tied)
Death softly whispering, had layn down and Died.
Which viewed, our Noblest Couple, after some
Kind Tears, meet pious duties closed the Tomb
Of their old Father strait; reciv'd as given
This pretty small Love-grange a Boon from Heaven,
Sweet'st sheltring Fort; although Light Horse were bound
To Scour these Parts, that Vestall coast often round
Calm as the quiet Spears, so that a Girl
Might wander safe, unrifled, bearing Pearl:
So Close reserved besides, no Shepheard-swains
Hanted this Coast, nor trod the Neighboring Plains,
How various (lo) those Mystic folds of Fate!
Blessed happy love succeeds Unfortunate.
Wood-bordring Woman too there was, did look
To the Cell sometimes, dead Palsy whom then struck.
Thus, entering Cell again, ALTHUSA strait
Vanished for Sex to air, full manly State
POLINDOR reassumes (in the open Chest
Found comely Robe, which long since did invest
Young, generous ASTORIN) whilst smiled FLOSTEL;
Whose Man's robes, Faulchion, that Chain-belt so well
Bedecked his Person round, there seemed to move
In one (she thought) both God of War and Love.
Next, Cordial waters drunk, took good Repast
Oth' Hermits pleasing food, which when did wast
RUFIN would all supply; perhaps procured
No Place by him as yet, thing unassur'd
(Nor would he Wonder more, but deem some Fright
Caused this Concealment, as their former flight)
Mean while on Heaven themselves, their faith they roll.
This Breakfast done, POLINDORS craving Soul
Tongue both (since tossed as yet in the Lover's Ocean)
Were 'bout to ask new Sweets; though damped that Motion
The faint, ore-drooping Ladies Appetite
To rest (Himself but drowsy too, scarce right)
Her Watch, sore frights, and journey thought in reason
Bad Friends to Loves more advantageous season:
Thus, the Iron-door being fast, securely closed,
Both down upon that Hermits Bed reposed
Joint sleeping Partners thus, their arms intwin'd;
More wealth then in SOL'S circuit there confined.
Come gentlest God of sleep, most fair behold
Of all thy drowsy Empire, bind, infold
Their yiedling Senses (silken Cordialls are
Those pleasing Bands) come, Kiss this lovely'st Payr
To downy Quiet, Bathing first their Eyes
In slumbers Essence, Soul whilst waking lies;
Through Dreams in part those Joys to come portraying:
No Noise cause Rapes upon their Rest, dismaying.
Thus, each (bright living Coorse) paid Natures due;
Thus slept they, glorious whilst they slept (to view)
Sweet'st Innocences Twofold Picture there:
POLINDOR (cloyed) if chanced to waken ere,
Her Eye lids closed, would Wink again, as he
Wooed, courted Sleep, to bear her company;
Not stealing softest Kiss, least, Guilty so
(Love-crime howere) of Sin, disturbance show.
Thus slumber'd they, till flown through Signs of heaven
Many winged posting Hours, to six in the even
When both Awoke. The joy'd POLINDOR now
Most blithe and fresh (transported through that Vow
Cloud-like blown over) with dear Imbracings, kisses,
Begun to claim (indeed) Conjugall blisses:
To which again, how sweetly'st blushing, she
(Smiles mixed) replied; My Lord, I now am free
('It Is true) from shackling Vows confessed beside
By Marriage Yours; thus, shall not least provide
Coy shifts, gainsay your Pleasure; yet my Suit
Would move Once more (part faintish still to boot)
That you would Grant me but three Hours alone,
Till sh^dy Night, this Bed we slumber'd on,
Might shroud my Bashfulness: my dearest Lord,
Shall I obtain this? smiled, each sugared word.
Which answered then POLIND; Thus still you do
Torment a Lover, Sweet: If It should be so,
My Lord (said she again) I Have done; no more*
But dearest, then said he (withal forbore
Scarce smiles) shall not that Grant be censured, thought
Dull coldness in my Blood? or styled ought
Want of Affection in me? Loathsome, either:
O no, my Lord (she cried) I vow, thought neither,
But rather deemed your Love, through wished complying
With my Girls humor thus: To which replying
Naught more, but sigh, strait leapt he from the Bed,
As from that Gorgon, snake, Temptation fled
(Though much convinced indeed by Fancies power,
Her special Mood, kind daintier Garb that hour
In Bed, would give Compleatest satisfaction)
When she rose too: Thus, Roused and fresh for action,
Both Walked forth, pleased with their new Prospect, air;
Where we must leave awhile this Hermit-payr.
Now glance we back upon the Vestall Bower,
And what there passed: Next morn, that solemn Hour
For the Vestall Nun dispatched, the Interment-rites
(Next business being for Choice) whilst to all Sights
(Though called) ALTHUSA and PLEDORA lost;
Some n^mbler Nymphs by the way were hurried post
To the Chamber Door; where calmest Silence found,
Naught Whisperings, they jointly progress'd round
To their Backdoor; wide Yauning that did show
Two chaste Birds fled, the Air left their Tenant, lo.
All wondered; when the old Priestess comes, espies
Oth' board that Paper, reads with all four eyes*
(Those glistring glazed Recruits) often roul'd at heaven;
Ill^fac'd devotion 'twas, whilst jointly given
No small heed, reverence by the younger Crew,
Flocked round about her then, as though there blew
Some sacred Whirlwind; just like Charmed things
She the old Inchantress proved. Grief, sorrow stings
Most Maiden breasts (alas) yea so far were
Some junior Nuns of choice, grand Zelots there
(Unsworn to the Place yet) moved therewith, transported,
That, what through jealous thoughts their Goddess sor^ted
More Honors, favors to that THRACIAN Bower
(In part withdrawn from hence) so Dear that hour
PLEDORA also esteemed, ALTHUSA too;
Those Girls would needs like Lady-errants go
For the THRACIAN realm: Till loud the old Priestess cried
(Joined with more settled Nuns) That this implied
(Well-weigh'd) but mere their own fantastic Dream,
No heaven-born Vision: Next, informed them,
How Fond these thoughts, since VESTAS Deity
Filled all her Bowers alike; nor could they spy,
For pleasures choice Map, such transcendent Piece,
Like Virgin- mansion though they travayl'd Greece:
Whose Foundress with the lasting glory died
Of Queen and Maid; now doubtless Stellify'd.
So, progress'd ore the whole; which, since so much
Concerns FLOSTELLAS Blood, descent, we will touch.
This Princess, Queen, great heir to the CIPRIAN Crown
Times past was born, whose Scepter with renown
Often Femalls swayed, enjoyed; PERSANDRA named:
One Sister more there was, by nature claimed
Her part in the royal Blood, royal record,
BERCINTHE this: But vile usurping Lord
Oth' Blood, called PHORBAN, Stain to the Kingly race
(Though huge in Factions power and Wealth did blaze)
Reached at the Throne; and, having slain through Treason
Their gallant'st Father first (choice fittest season)
PERSANDRA then 'bout year and quarter old,
Soon grasped the Crown; that Circle of thorny Gold,
Royal Head-guive: though next in bloody chase
Her Life appeard, this Blossom nip'd (alas)
By frosty Death, must raise advance his Spring.
Which Mischief justly feared (since Brooding thing
Vile Treason found, one Crime but spawns another)
By the wretch'd and most indulgent Queen, her Mother,
CLARVESIA called; she suddenly convays
This elder Femall Comfort of her days,
Chief princely CYPRIAN branch from Tyrants Sword
(The half dearest Remnant of her murdered Lord)
Nurse privy to it, to most transcendent Peer,
Styled good LORELE. What bowels yernings there,
Tears, mixed Sighs! what clasping folds and Kisses!
How called she back again her parting Blisses,
Wept sobrest new Farwells! till, at the last,
Cried, Take It away; though followed then in have
To the Threshold, Door, how Kissed, embraced it there!
Forth then Nurse slily stole, as Voyage 'twere!
For the air that Evening, with her Infant-gem
To woody Plain adjoined, where stayed for them
Both Coach and six tall Horses from LORELE;
Which comely'st Matron bare, known Party well
To him (since proved his Keepers Wife indeed)
Who, gently cheering it, with trusty speed
Received that Royal charge, by joint accord:
Informed though, 'twas Orphan, kin to the Lord:
So, toward strait her shady Lodge she flies
Far off remote; where full Commands, supplies
Were given her by LORELE, for choycest trayning,
Though now new-stampd, CHLORINDAS Name retaining.
Nurse back to the Castle again (as was desired)
Unseen, secure, through Gloomy walks retired;
Where, fitly joined her Fellow nurse, that Night
Small mournful Coffin (lo) by Torches light
Was carried forth, as though the Babe had died
Of some strange Pest, by the royal Mothers side:
The Queen much heightning all through grief sick-browd,
Locked up upon it; thus, speedy'st Grave allowed:
Whose faithfull'st Nurse soon after (plot unknown)
To the mentioned Lodge* and little Lady's gone:
Next Morn, her Infant-sister, last eyesore
To the wakefull Tyrant, was packed down to Shore,
With second Storm of dismal Sighs and Tears,
Woes second part; like Mothers yernings, fears,
Close foldings, kisses, secret heart-bemoanings,
Since thus given up to the Wind and Wave; what groanings,
Vows, prayers made! that sweetest Innocence
Might (charmed Sea-tyrants too) escape from thence.
Thus, down the Havens stream with tendrest Nurse
She Is Lanched forth, as though some shorter course
(For ayering, health) to country Grange below;
Where GRECIAN Merchant, being ordered so
By the Lord LORELE his friend, took both aboard
For ARCADY; where Brother to that Lord
(Lines sent) as then become chief Favorite,
Her faithful Guardian proved, she his Delight:
Called CHLORIFLEUR: which Infant not returning,
'Twas noys'd, conceived, some Pirat-theeves (that morning
Did scour in truth those Watery Roads) had drowned.
As for this Last, from rich ARCADIN bound
K^nd Sails and winds glad News transported often
To the Lord LORELE; yea, sweet'st Epistles brought
(So soon as CHLORIFLEURS small daintyer hand
Could Limb but letters forth, small Pen command)
Wrapped up in his; her Mothers highest degree
But Baroness, informed, called MELIDE:
Nor knew that Merchant more (least blab'd, descried)
But that some noble Orphan 'twas, Allied.
As for CHLORINDA though, Fates, milder grown,
Gave her often private V^^ws, in clouds unknown
(Stolen joys delightful too, most dear to thought)
Since visiting by fits that Lady often
Of good LORELE as friend (SICAMBE named)
Whole Month sometimes (whose Council not disclaimed)
They two would frequently to the Park repair
Mile's distance off, as though for the Evening air
(Choice gallant Prospect 'twas beside) well Coach'd;
Which having pranced round, their Lodge approached,
They Would enter still for easefull Bait, the Queen
Her small CHLORINDA thus (brought always in
By the Nurse, as for SICAMBES only view)
Fondlily'st enjoyed. First glance on it it is true,
Just cross the Court she spied it Didling go,
Whence inmost bowels seemed to roll; but O,
The Mothers tendrest Garb and meltings ore
Her harmless Babe (Nurse standing by, no more)
What Joy-grief-medley there! what tears and smiles!
Shower, mixed Sunshine! how embraced the whiles,
Hugged, kiss^d it often! when clasping her again
The gentle Babe, now sober-temper'd, then
Smiling as much, till Wept (poor heart) at last
For solemn Company; full sorrows blast
When Sighed forth the dear ore-charged Mother:
What Bablings (last) begun from the one to the other,
'Twas pretty rare Sight, caused thence to rise
Sad pleasure in the Beholders dewed eyes.
She Wept, yet weeping though she blesses Heaven,
Since lives and safties both at once were given
To her poor Orphan-brood; what is more, so Kind,
That The One of them's in the Arms just then intwin'd.
The Girl as elder grew, discerning more,
Reverse the Queen her cautious Passions wore,
Turned inward; strove by secret art to smoother;
Though when must play the fondly indulgent Mother,
Such Buddings seen of Wit, and choice perfection,
As well as Beauty, growth, then, sad reflection
On the murdered Father, injured Child's estate,
She Would whisper gentle Sighs; or, turning strait,
Weep forth kind hasty Shower (as 'twere) by stealth,
Often in some corner dropped the Liquid wealth,
Those molten Pearls: then, having cleared the Sky,
Toy'd, Chatting-game renewed, till the busy eye
Of sweet CHORINDA marked at length, perceived:
Who asked her Nurse (though whimperingly grieved)
What was the Cause that Lady wept for so.
Nurse told; Her murdered Lord enforced that Woe;
Two little Daughters also lately dead,
The one much resembling her, which likewise bred
Strange Love, affection to her. Said the Child;
I know not, but methinks (then sweetly smiled)
I love her ( Nurse) far more then she loves me,
Nor can I rest least sat^^fy'd, till she
New hugs me, till she kisses me anew;
Fain would I dwell with her. The good DORU,
Y' are not yet old nor big enough, replies.
Ah, said the Child again with beaming eyes,
But I could talk with her, and find her Play
Howere, I hope: Thus passed that part oth' day.
Though, growing bigger yet, the enlarged Queen
Her self would say, whilst kissed embraced between,
Your Mother (pretty one) intruth was crowned
Dear to me, Sister-like, the especial ground
You share this kinder Love; although you do
Revive to the thoughts my buried Daughter too
Most like the First (twain once this Womb producing)
Thus, Love with Sorrow both at once infusing.
To which replied that royal Bud (anon)
With pleasing'st grace; Would heaven that she alone
( Madam) survived yet, that I might prove
Her humble Handmayd. Showring tears of love
In smiles, No sweet (replied CLARVESIA then)
Youl'd Maid of honor prove perhaps to the Queen.
'Bout eight years old, to the Lord's own house transplanted
(As near of Blood) she was, which Court-like vanted,
Since made this Princely'st Jewels Cabinet;
Now seemed CLARVESIAS Joy almost complete.
Thus, growing on, at full Ten years (no more)
Choice Aprils early Blooms her Cheeks they wore:
Till, mounted up to the gallant pitch, Fifteen,
Grown Woman-ripe as then, true Princess, Queen
Blazed in her sunny eye, Breathed from her breast,
Both Coined as 'twere for empire; Beauties crest
Her brow presents, with Honors glorious Throne:
When strait her Mystic Birth's discovered, shown
In private room, LORELE, CLARVESIA by
(Fit'st time) But O the various Ecstasy,
Bosome-intrancements, folds that very hour!
Smiles, kisses, tears! Joy showed its sovereign power
In the One, at first; Joy, wonder in the Other;
Grief shortly both in Daughter though and Mot^er
Proved equal rule, through the envious wrongs of Fate,
The Virtue, worthy'st Passion shown in that
Prime Scean of nature (Reader) fancy may,
Much nimbler then my Pen, to the full Portray.
And now the good LORELE begun to groan,
Till saw PERSANDRA deck her Fathers Throne;
His Soul grown Pregnant, big (as 'twere) did prove
With loyal thoughts of equity and love
Towered so bright Innocence: as meetly just,
To the Queen erelong, some greater Peers of trust
Unclasp'd his inmost Breast (took solemn Oath)
Then, private Views of her, conversings both
Afforded them; so Prince-like those esteemed,
All Wept, they wept; at once transported seemed
Their eyes and ears, Engaged too their Hearts.
Wise Agents felt (as 'twere) by secret arts
The People pulse (propound, What if alive
Their Princess, Queen? found quick and strong, they drive
Most boldly and undaunted on, took field;
Next following Year that barbrous Tyrant killed
In Battle, sunk through ease and weakening pleasure:
Won's proud Metropolis, chief hoord of treasure,
Three parts oth' Kingdoms four, whilst still the rest
(Some Haven-towns) his sturdy Heir possessed.
Thus reigned PERSANDRA as the Cyprian Sun,
Till PHOEBUS too his yearly course had run;
What time the worthy'st Queen CLARUESIA dies,
Gave up her Soul to heaven, whose drousie eyes
(Their lids fair Curtains to this worldly Light)
Both Daughters closed in death; her Young'st delight
Late come from ARCADY, where gallant Lord
Espoused had: she, back returned aboard
(Of whom more shall be said anon) Behold,
CLARUESIA being set, dark Clouds unfold.
That Tyrant's haughty Heir, most Lion-stout
As subtle, boldly staked at one last bout
His utmost All; took field, pitched Battle tries;
Through churlish Fates, or humane treacheries
Shattered ere long, disjoynted all her Power:
PERSANDRA flying to Port-town, that hour:
Whence with a monstrous Mass of treasure, there
Laid up against thundering Storm, of late (the Peer
LORELE her Guardian) trusts to foaming Seas,
Since Land unkindest proved; through gentlest these
Soon reached the Arcadian shelter, thither came:
Purchased this goodly Place, this Grove of fame,
Tall Temple (lastly) Mansion-bow'r admired
Gave up to VESTAS honor, use; retired,
Weary of earths soon-fading Tinsell glory,
As VESTAL Nun she closed her Royal Story.
Here Sister, here trained up, did Morn-like rise
The unequalled Joy and wonder of all eyes,
Monopolizer of all Manly hearts
As woman's beauty, Courtier turned (choice parts)
Crowned there She-miracle, was Sty^'d alone
Lovely, excelling: whether being gone,
Placed 'bout the Queen, she took a mighty Lord
Love's Prisoner, joined both by chaste ^ccord;
From whence ARPLASTUS and FLOSTELLA sprung:
And thus true Royal heir the Ladies sung,
As from BERCINTHE to that CYPRIAN Crown.
Thus to PERSANDRA (her Aunt far off) renown
To the femall Sex had raised as 'twere this Place
(In part) through gentlest Providentiall grace
For her exposed Neice, as shelter, duty
To lost forsaken Virtue, wandering Beauty.
POLINDOR, AND FLOSTELLA. The THIRD BOOK.
THe Reader now does seem (methinks) to accuse
And charge with heavy Guilt my bashful Muse;
Since his, with poor POLINDORS Longing fit
Less Pitty'd by me, unrelieved yet:
The Hour's near at hand, as though betimes befriended
Nights shades the Bridesgroom's wish; whose Supper ended*
Both walking forth for second bout, awhile;
POLINDOR strait with pleasing Task and smile,
Undrest those Flowery banks (which seemed grown proud
Their fragrant Tresses the honor were allowed
To serve flowers beauteous Queen) the unspoyled place
Rich-stor'd with them: Whence, with triumphant grace,
He guarded in the All-tempting Bride, at door
Kiss-welcome given her. Then Is ransacked ore
That Linnen-chest, where dainty'st Persian sheets,
With whom for silken braveness sprucely fits
Green Satin Quilt, by the Hermit brought from IND;
Their Bridal Bed's dispatched, the joy'd POLIND
Chief Agent there, still truly'st styled Brides-groom,
Next, strow'd with ^aunseys round the adorned Room,
Pinks, Violets; Rose-deck'd the lovely Bed;
Last, nimble Brides-mayd turned (ith Bower well-bred)
In part undressed her, brisk to uncobweb so
That choycest cased Pearl: disclouded (lo)
Like Shot Star strait into her Bed she glides:
Then he, as though some Harness gaul'd his sides,
Stiff, bu^ly Male, strait vanished forth his clothes,
Which like to Tinder, Vapors, lightly blows
Off from him; seized his gallant Egle's prey,
That divine Ielly, sweet'st AMBROSIA:
Locked in her arms like Earthly Sun and Moon,
Or rather style them Male and Female Sun:
Whose Beauties blessed his Optic sense (through dear
Officious Twilight) partly glim'ring there
Much like the Morn, with sweet and sparkling Graces;
So twinckle Diamons in gloomy places;
Transporting Fancy more through the active Eye,
Touch, both at once, whence doubled extasie^
Both now prepared to practice, real fashion
(What late but Promised, vowed) Self-resignation;
Their true love coupling Souls conjoined too
As well as Bodies modellizing so
In one Compound, all humane excellence.
POLINDOR'S ready now to reap from thence,
For all Loves Toyls, the blisfull Harvest treasure,
Yea, r^^p in One bound up all Bridal Pleasure
Sweet'st ere enjoyed, summed up in her Alone:
Where leave them to those Mystic joys, unknown;
Too High for any else to know, or dare
To comprehend, unless the Immortal Payr
Loves Goddess, VENUS, with her amorous Son,
Which moved these Fires; to those be the honor done:
None else Presume to reach their Height, least be
Confounded through Dispayr'd felicity.
Next, leave them Both for slumbring, soft Reposes,
Till the early Morn her pleasing smiles discloses;
Whose Dreams may those advance, yet heighten more,
Seem Visions of past Sweets, enjoyed before.
And now, AURORA her blushing Cheek reveals
Through the Chrystall-arched Porch, like our FLOSTELS
Saluting Handmayd, strow'd the Morning Sky
With Roses, Violets (which seemed to the eye
Grand Bridal Roof) as to her special Honor;
Shades fume like fled, that Sun might gaze upon'er,
Doing last homage, beg reflection from
Her Royal beams; when wakened the Brides-groom:
And viewed his Bride (still lovely'st) sleeping there
Couched like the Day, all beauty thus (as 'twere)
Interred in slumbers; gentlest spicy Gale
Whilst breathed forth, came Whispring from the Vale
Of Temple (as 'twere) her Paradisian Breast.
Then slunk he down for tedious hour's feigned rest;
She Is sleeping still: when, stolen soft ayery Kiss
(How dainty, nice) with cast-up eyes for this
To Heaven skulk'd down for second Winking fit.
Then, softly roused, sealed gentler Kiss, sealed yet
Kind second, Eagrer third; Sleep Larum Brooks
No more, sh' Awoke; dressed with such new-coyn'd Looks
Of pritty'st, bashful Wonder just then seeming
(Strange-sweet withal) as part transformed, or dreaming:
Then vayl'd within his Conscious Bosom strait
Smiles, blushes both, found best protection, that:
Rare-scean! whilst smiled the ore-joy'd POLIND, grown Proud,
Whole Natures Treasury at once to shroud.
Wood-chanters, wishing Bridal Joy (as 'twere)
Chirp'd forth their shril Goodmorrowes, pearched there
Quite round the Bower; whilst Satyrs nimbly danced.
They Are up Both now, and ready both; advanced
VENUS ADONIS-like (since walking leisure)
Close-arm'd, intwin'd, to take their Morning pleasure.
And here, by parcell-fits, we shall portray
Limb forth the place; That mentioned Ground, which lay
Before the Cell, was formed large Long-square;
^th' midst like formed Pond there stood, most fair,
Glass-cheek'd, as if well pleased grown (to the eye)
Since no Rough-manner'd Wind could enter nigh
To hoyse and vex her Stream. Here often would
POLINDOR Angling sit, ore-reach'd, controlled
With fair false bait (grand cheating-game oth' World)
The ore hasty, credulous Fish, who greedy hurled
Takes himself Prisoner there: the unkind deceit
LOSTELLA smiled at, Such stranger Feat
(Says) caught her Heart; whilst on the embroidered Bank
Sits gathering Flowers, whose ayery moved Rank
Seemed Bowing crave her hand, Pant sweetly (as 'twere)
Till from the coorse under-soyl transplanted were
TO her Breasts fair Eden. These she smiling shows,
And draws often by the loved POLINDOR'S Nose,
TO afford him fragrant part, would to and fro
Play the Wanton with his Smell; who does bestow
Kind Kiss, for thanks, upon the hand did wave them,
Pronouncing, 'Twas her sweetest Touch that gave them
Those choice perfumed Breaths, power 'bove their own:
When she would Box his faulty Cheeks anon,
And say, He mocked her. Throws in tossing sport
Fish at him, pearly scaled, which could not hurt
Because she darted them; though now and then,
Through wilful purposed Error, seized again
Their former moist Abodes, her pity freeing
That poor inthralled Wretch: the which he seeing,
Strait pretty Anger feigns, when Careless she
(Cross) throws in more; then would POLINDOR be
Revenged upon her Lips, and those must do
For the Hands wished penance often. Next the Angle (lo)
Was reached presented to'er, when harmless she
Seemed loath to Learn the unpleasing Treachery:
Yet practiced she, at each unskilful miss
The Forfait was confirmed a Treble Kiss;
Who now, more ignorant, still missed more,
As meant to make such kind Love-forfeits store:
Indeed, how could the Lady choose? for why,
The enamored Fish (most part) still gazing lie
On the fair Angler, toyish grown, forget
To bite the simple Worm, their Pearl-eyes set
On dainty'st Lips: what wonder, these Love-shaken?
The Master-angler (long before) was taken.
Round this long-squared Pond fair Bank was raised,
Like low green Tarras, sides thereof being praised
Through well-set shady Trees, yet ordered so,
As that each Third did beauteous Fruit-tree grow;
The which to the rest like Gem enameled showed:
The Whole Clump might well resemble an Orchard-wood;
'Twas various, Sweet, whose toothsome fruits not wanted
Tempting beholders eyes and taste, like painted
Gay C^rtizans; how plump! though Virgin-brows
Seemed yet forced to wear, on the laden boughs
Kissed but by PHOEBUS Beams (none hither swarving)
It looked like Natures Closet of preserving:
Unless those wandering Fayries now and then,
Borrowed some Dish, to serve their dapper Queen
Her Big-grown longing, Cherry or so; great Pear,
Plump Apricock would furnish the whole Court cheer
(Those nicest Elvish stomachs) often 'twas found,
Where their small Feet had danced some Antic Round.
Lo, here is our blisfull- Couples chosen Walk,
Where they often progrest round intwin'd, would talk
Of their first frosty Moods, ore-coy disdain
(Though several causes heightened much the Vein)
LOVE'S pardon asked; devou^ly'st Sacrifize
How many Ambrosiack Kisses before his eyes!
Those Love's small Offerings! would freely then
Pluck dangling Fruits, then walked, and then again
^luck'd more; when (sportive) out of wanton play,
Th'heart-plundring Amorist would steal away
Some Cherry from her Cherry-mouth, does so
Cozen her fo^der Taste; then would make show
To offer one more choice, but then again
Deludes her whitest Hand reached forth in vain;
Thus, mocks his heavenly Fair; who, to requite,
When he would (sober) give, in pretty spite
Would (Sullen) none; When he must make her Eat,
So, kindly gratified that Taste which yet
Had so Abused. Both cloyed, the Youth would seek
(Compared) to shame the Cherry by her cheek;
And next, those purely'st blushing Corans hold
Nigh to'er, Smiled when, the whole Bunch controld
By her fresh Lip: last flouting business, jests
Upon the silken Peach, felt with her Breasts
Not soft, not sleek at all: here boasting shows
Heav'n-plant, or Tree of Paradise to those.
On either side this Bank, green velvet Flat,
Whose midst bore Thickets smaller maze; 'twixt that
And the Bank Full thorough-view* broad space designed
(Four quarters thus) though linked to the Fence behind:
Form just Half-Ovall framed; in the further part
Lodged Silvan rocky Fount, where Nature, Art
Conjoined, both Founders seemed, but wild, ore-grown
Small carved Wood-nymphs naked (though) clearly shone
By the Streams beneath, with wind-dishevell'd Hayr:
On the top skulk'd leacherous Satyrs seemed to stare,
Acteon like, their horns and hoofs descried;
Though no Coy-brow'd Diana there espied.
Off from their open Flat, too wanton rays
Whilst Sol on fair FLOSTELLA darts, displayes,
TO avoid his hot unpleasing Courtship, hither
She Would fly for Leavy skreen; where both together,
Close-couch'd by the Mossie Rock, took pleasure there
To see their Fount weep forth it self (as 'twere)
With kind of bubling moans: Such for thy sake
Was I once (said the Lord POLIND) did make
Those teary Plaints. Th'heav'n-lov'd FLOSTELLA when
Replied; What pity sh' had not Treasured then
Those drops for Neck-pearl, wrist! When gentlest he
Must kiss for her kind Flout, again, as she
Box'd him before. Then would she sing, rejoice
POLINDOR'S glad Ear with the enchanting Voice;
At which all is glad, seemed Soul'd, inspired anon,
Stones, Statues, Trees; the ORPHAEAN Lyre out-gone*
Th'ayr's Road hushed, yea, though blu^^ring storms had filled
The Whole empty Round, 't had those Ayr-bedlams stilled
Only their Fountain seemed yet weeping more,
As Voice on's pearly-streamed Nymph it bore.
When young POLINDOR strait (grown wanton now)
Mock-passions quaintly framed, with angry brow
Threatened that Voice (as 'twere) that Syren-tongue,
Whom charged with Soul-rapes design: ere long
Quarreled with the Eye, that guilty'st checked, upbraids
With Black-art, dangerous Wildfire, Look-granades;
Challenged LOVE'S throned self, that there did sit,
Though in his heart asked humble Pardon yet.
Her ruby Lips, as Heart-blood stained, accuses,
No smaller Crime, when suttlest Vengeance uses;
As though their Crimson die would fo^ce again,
Kiss-smother them: The admired FLOSTELLA when,
Would sportingly quit Score, most prit'ly Arraign
Each of his Guilty Features ore again:
Yet still their mortall-seeming Difference ends
At kissing-grapple, both made closest Friends.
Here in these gloomy Shades (with the other) o^t
They Dined, they Supped; their warbling Minstrels brought
Those plum'd-coat Songsters, chanting Nightingale,
Shrill Blackbird, jolly Thrush: which should prevail
In favor, straining, round their organ-throats:
Whose Base supplied the Fountains bubling noats:
POLINDOR Butler seemed (Cook useless shows,
Since cold food, Summer) Lips for Sweet-meat cloze.
At either end oth' Bank ith Flat, between
That and the fence (good spaces left) was seen
(Across) short closer Walk; each verdant side
Stood comly'st planted Row, those being beside
All Trees of shade, select, though various found;
Palms, Myrtles, Cipress, thus proved shade Compound:
Yet, taught their ranged-order too, so growing,
That every Third's the same, like formed showing.
Hither would walk sometimes the fair FLOSTEL,
'Midst Noon-day-blazes, from the Adjoining Cell
Or Tarras-mount (whilst, pressing thus the Grass,
'Twould rising seem to Strut again, as 'twas
Proud kissed her Foot) the lowly place Sun-proof:
Both pleased for change beneath that Bow'ry roof*
There often spent the Evening too, POLINDOR'S head
Couched on her dainty'st Lap; when she would bread
His silken longer Locks, then jointly hold
All close to's Head in some conceited Fold,
Much like her own, the faces prospect seen,
Cries out; How well her self the Man had been,
But he the Woman! who with mirth replies,
So one the Man become, blessed Destinies!
The, all her former, busy, pleasing Pains
She soon undoes again, nor Smile refrains;
The enlarged Hair leaped from her hand so quick
To sportive Curls anew, like wanton Trick,
As 'twould again be played with: Stroaking when,
She Would Curl, uncurl by turns; would now and then
Give him light gentler Twich, though then must Kiss
In kind amends, as 'twere: and as for this
Bowed down her Nimble Head, POLINDOR thought
The Skies had fallen to the earth, and two Stars shot:
So heavenly seemed that Face, those sparkling Eyes
So bright, so sudden (lastly) the Surprise.
Love-stories then they would tell; some smaller store
FLOSTELLA had, though Truths, and conn'd before
Knew squeamish Vestalls; these the Lady told
With such choice winning countenance, did unfold
With so kind Sympathy (to please) as though
Her self that Lover were, did sadly'st blow
Those Sighs from her: so musically streamed
Each Passion forth, so true, POLINDOR seemed
Now fallen in Love again, transported so,
Forgetful, he again could Sigh and WOO.
When (last) they would chant their own, whose briefer Story,
Conjoined with others, well might claim a glory
In CUPIDS Chronicle (they thought) so full
Of winding rare chance, pretty Miracle:
With which POLINDOR'S Tongue and fondling Ear^
Seemed so well pleased, by fits, Soul lulled as 'twere
(Her Breast the downy Pillow) glides it now
Into that World of Slumber, knows not how:
Which seen FLOSTELLA strait with Charm-like Song
Bound his Sense faster (double bands) nor long
Sung sweetest Cherubin) thus prime Baloo,
But gentlest Self, that might companion show
To her dear Lord POLINDOR, slumbring bows.
Who (constant Youth) as Love's victorious Vows
Should conquer sleep and Death* dreams of his Fair
FLOSTELLA; thinks h' had lost his sovereign Star
Sometimes, through Cloud; his Dove-mate vanished gone:
Thence grasp her precious Wast, by which alone
Waked both himself and her: Who sober Smiled,
To view her Darling-lord so thought beguiled,
Fancy-fool'd (as she deemed) much joy'd to see
His vehement Love: far more rejoiced he,
She found so safe, secure; and tells her over
His ominous Dream, part-known to her before.
Thus lived they like that first most blessed Payr
Of Innocence, the whole World did jointly share
In this small corner, parcel, shared at least
Love's rich stored Indian world ('it was wedding Feast
Of full and freest sweet now) envied none,
Since they thought they ^ngrossed all Alone.
Here that prime Payr of loving Shepheardesses
Revisit we; 'Twas thus; Friends often addresses,
Kind strongly'st pleaded Suits, being over-past
Seav'n or eight days, such Influentiall taste
Found with D^LCENZA, so (glad, lucky'st season!)
That Fancy vayl'd (at length) in part to Reason,
Gave yiedling way; sh' had eyes and ears again
For solid Counsayl, dreaming though till then.
So that not only gained to her access
Those frequent Amorous Love-embassages,
MENANDER'S Lines; regarded, courting Lute,
Which gave to her windows often sweet Morn-salute;
But likewise Visits too (though meanly graced)
With moody'st tempers, lowering Looks ore-cast:
Such stormy Gusts blew from the Lord POLIND
(Those highest gallant Alps) clouding her mind
And face to boot with doubtfull'st Weather often:
Though else, from the inmost heart, disdaining naught
MENANDER'S person, parts, nor his estate,
Who wooed her Coyness at the painfull'st rate
Of humble and withal enduring Love.
As close gentile SIRENUS too did move
His mild MARPESAS breast, though found the Siege
More happy far, whose often privilege
Kind Summer-looks, with few gained sweetest Kisses.
First Fruits; those earnest to succeeding blisses;
Possessing thence (ere long) the hearts Magazine:
Plowed with more prosperous Gales that foamy Brine
Oth' Lovers Ocean, toward PERU,
That coast of Gold, whilst blustering Tempests blew
MENANDER'S Bark; being thus: MARPESAS breast
Less troubled through vain Hopes, desires, unrest
(More calmly free) could better estimate
True, worthy Love, since found her Own so late
Slighted, refused. Thus (Reader) wings our Pen,
With have, to the noble H^rmit-payr again.
And now their sweetest Week was progress't over;
Fort nigh unvittayl'd grown, but thinnest store
Against Famine-siege, and Storm, unless supplies
From poor HERMONUS Ghost, or showring Skies.
POLINDOR, loath to range TREGORS great Town
As Catarer, least marked; and the hired Clown
That brought the meat might blab; nor was the place
So safe, remote for longer time (alas)
Scanned second Thoughts: 'twas voted, jointly agreed
TO inform RUFIN, their Cordial friend, with speed.
No Messenger though to be got, procured;
Nor, were there one, was the noble Youth assured
For point of Trust, himself must Agent prove;
Four miles and half the way: though tendrest Love
Bred Thoughts of foul dislike, diastrous grown
So long to leave the dear FLOSTEL alone:
Though knew that rocky Cell defensive made
To wonder quiet'st Coast and calm; as said.
Nor was the Lady damped much, or caugh^
Through Selvish fears; the dear POLINDOR'S thought
Most troubled her. Thus then, that very Night.
'Twas Fixed, resolved: which being most Star-bright,
Decked with the fainter Silver of the Moon,
The old Hermits meaner Coat and Faulchion on
(Found false Beard there by chance) by ten's best hour,
He Kisses sealed on his Beloved, whole shower;
With which their Souls exchanged, transferred are:
She wrung his parting Hand, then, dropped a fair
Tear on it (Love's juycy spirits) Charm against ill;
Heaven-preservative; whose Crystal Still,
Her fair Eye, how he gently kissed again,
Sighe's kindest breath repaid! Unlocked when
The door, which locked again; then strait to Heaven
Eyes solemn cast, as if to their charge given
(Those bright e^yd Starry Watch) his dearest All;
As thus had said, O guard from wretched Thrall
Yours, mine, the wealthy Exchequer of the World;
Key thrown within to her, he is dart-like hurled
Toward their Shepherds vale. Way, not unknown,
Since had to the Woods spread gallant Borders gone
With His great-horse often; yet strayed the Pilgrim too:
Roused up good old acquaintance with those few
Kind Marks, for Mute informers; here his Have
Rebuked, chid there his slowness though, till past
Two longer Hours, his Uncle up he rouzes.
RUFIN informed of all, no moment looses;
Bids, Cheer up, cries in mirth, They loved bold feats;
To tread Love-mazes still; Recruit with meats
He could their Fortress strait, but (as desired)
Had gotten long since place more close, retired
For both to Sojourn in: fine shady'st Grange,
Choy^e-bow'r, Elizium-like. Thus, forth they range
Like two Night-spirits, on their tedious way,
Least should be over-took by the Morning-ray.
How prone young Lovers often seem (alas)
To tread on troublous Cliffs, and icy ways,
Shunned safer-beaten Grounds! the Road refuse
For doubtful Bypath! often Circles choose
Prefer before the short directer Line!
As here these seemed, with Vestall Groves design:
How love to Task their painful Selves! as though
Loves precious Sweets should more transcendent grow
Through hardship, Danger! or (intruth) as LOVE
So huge, so prime a Godhead were, 'twould prove
Lord over fate; check Mischiefs surely fry!
Or (lastly) as if conceived so Rare, so high
The exalted Love-life, that it must control
Lower vulgar ways, despise the earthy Moal!
Though freakish humored Fortune often from thence
Makes sportive Game on heedless Innocence.
But here our Pen again to the mateless Dove,
Sweet'st best FLOSTELLA-turns; whose dearest Love,
Thought absent long, sad qualmish Dream besides
Of Tombs, with Ghost-masque, up she rouzes, glides
To the window strait: Moon, Stars did glistering there
Obsequions Hand-mayds shine; Shades seemed to wear
Mild, solemn Brows, her tallest Guard as 'twas;
But naught so lovely did adorn the place
As her POLINDOR'S view: My dearest Dear,
O why so long? she cries. When nimbly here
Pale doubt, desire, to the Iron-door transport her,
She peeped once, twice through the hole, but naught did court her
Like that beloved Shape: when, back retired,
Fallen on her saddest Couch, there strait respir'd
(First) odorous Sigh from her; then, richest Tear
Strained sweetly forth; and then the Arms folded were
As Moan'd her drooping Heart. She mused, computes
His Journeys measure first; time fitly suits
For the Uncles rising too, then, for's return;
Last, counting the hours by the Watch, begun to Mour^
(Her double Scoar cast nimbly up) as though
The Time too long for the labor, Task did show:
Love too the Agent turned. Thus (short Alas
Sighed forth) to the Window proved her second race;
Where faintly looking, What not yet? so bright?
Ay-me! withal she cried: when dismall'st Sight,
That Earth or Hell could belch forth, struck her Eyes.
She viewed that worthy'st Youth, whom she did prize
(Th'own Heart informed) next Heaven, brought between
Two, Corps-like, slain, cross the open part oth' Green;
Born full-length, stripped to's very Shirt (the Moon
Whilst Gazing seemed as sad Spectator on,
Bright'st shining) crimsoned Shirt, with spots distained,
Like bleeding Hearts as 'twere; whilst hung disdained
The affrighted dangling Curls: upon his breast
Smooth Taf'ty-role with pendant flap did rest,
(...) Faulchion near: his Arm held forth to view
(O d^re!) broad gart^i^g Ribbon, well she knew,
Conferred on him first day ith 'Vestall wood,
And worn still wreathed round: whose Corpse bestowed
In The planted Shade, those Men were vanished, gone.
This Object viewed, O Horror, scourge unknown!
Heart's trembling gasps! O my Souls Hell (she cries)
Sight, sight, enough to blast Heavens purer eyes,
And Damp their sparkling Fires! O tenfold death!
Ah Woe! Woe! Woe! why do I fondly breath,
The world, my self Undone? farewell, farewell
All Faith, Worth, lovely'st Grace, what could Excel;
Joys, fly for ever; gones my dearest All,
And I Am no more. The Rock^ re^ounding wall
Groaned here her mournful Echo; Gem-like stream
Of showred Tears, with Hayrs torn wealth, did seem
Lavished on the dusty ground; those whitest Hands
Both wrung, as though, Fates sweetest countermands,
They would Charm back their Orders rage, ore power
Work so prodigious: strangely Eclipsed that hour
Bright beauties World appeared. I come, I com^
(Said she) ere long to share Love's martyrdom,
Dear, dearest Youth, to taste last frozen Kiss
So dye upon thee (once my living Bliss)
Dear Corpse I come. Here with what eager Passion
Key's sought and found! when furious inspiration
As though (wild Priestess-like) her limbs possessing,
She flung to the Iron Door, her fair Hands pressing
The ore-churlish Bolt; hard troublous grapple 'twas;
Being performed, forth hurried she, winged pace,
Loud-voyc'd, Ah my POLIND! when suddenly
Five Cutthroat Villains rushed upon her, nigh
Bruised with their rudest arms sweet'st Innocence,
Heaven in its type; true Dreams both proving thence.
At which scarce startled (^o) since these conceiving
Those ugly Butchers, providence hope giving
They Would soon dispatch her too; fierce Grief's Extreme
Stifling her natural Fear, since died with him
All further Lifes-joy; yet, to the Soul confounded,
They stopped her loving Course, these words she ^ounded
From doleful passion'd breast. Come, welcome you
My dear Lord's murderers, since I shall Sue
For that Death, freely thank you, which so late
You forced upon him; though ( Fiend-like hate!)
Don't Kill me double: Range this smaller Cell,
Whilst I but snatching take last poor Farewell,
Then strike, strike home; I shall confess you are Men.
Here, urged to show with Faulchion naked and keen,
What, where the Prize; that being informed as soon,
(Since all but Chaff, her dear POLINDOR gone)
One Rogue, less iron-brested, rudely leads
To the fatall-curtain'd Shade, whose sullen Beds
Seemed unto her Ghosts talked of Stygian Wood;
Couch of all Ill. That place of true loves blood
(Corpse both) beheld, now blacker Sables lending,
She took her swift Career, her flight though sending
Sad'st mournful Voice before, and on his breast
Falls like shot glistring Meteor. O thou best
Of Men, but late (true Lovers honor, glory)
But now of Ghosts (said she) though dismal Story
Where worst of Fates inrol'd! I Am come, I Am come,
My Dear (fast grasping her Joys fancied Tomb,
His body, neck) thy wretch'd, thy wretch'd FLOST^LLA
(O Sound, composed of mischiefs) thus to pay
My last Farewell! then, break my loving Heart:
Ah cold! cold! Kiss of Death! (small sudden start
Withal, she cries; Quick, have; that Villain crying)
Death's frost, alas! Then, blood-steep'd wounds espying*
Ah! Crimson Founts, that you had clearly flowed
(Said she) from my Heart; various slucy Road!
Sad'st Ports (as 'twere) whence richest Soul convay'd
O, had we not both One? why tardy stayed
My hapless Half behind? tru'st butchery!
Twice, twice (almost) thou Swoonding dy'dst for me,
Now Dead indeed. O monumentall stif!
No voice? Souls breathed whisper? loathsome Life!
Thou Art torment, curse unto me: You, so late
Cruel, now kind become; as your stern Hate
Divorced us here on Earth; so (friendly) now
Ioyn us again in Heaven; thus, I bow:
O Kill me over my dead Lord, and Love.
Here, stooped for death, when, as some Dream did prove,
Amazed she started up, strong thoughts implying
It Was not POLINDOR'S Corpse. O you All-eying,
All-knowing Powers, am I awake? (she cries)
Or are you pleased thus to abuse mine eyes
With soothing, painted Vision? is not this
My Dear? POLINDOR? hah? such cordial Bliss
Own poor FLOSTELLA? whence that Taf'ty-role,
Broad Ribbond, Faulchion then? my anguish'd Soul!
It is not he; torn heart, it is not POLIND:
Ah! liv'st thou, breathe thou yet? some gentler Wind,
Angel inform my doubts. O righteous heaven,
Fain would I how escape the Stroke, but even
For thy sweet sake: still doomfull threats of Fate.
Horrors inviron me (the unhappy Brat
Cast out unto all Ill) Night, Death surround;
Whilst Lost to thee, to mine own Soul, and drowned
In gulf of Sorrows: O, fain would I Live,
(My choycely esteemed) since, those Heart wounds they give,
Thou't Bleed through them to death; my Tragedy
Must brooding cause thine, Both alas must Dye.
Here seized all Five on her: This was in truth
That gentile Swain, called FLORIS (comely'st Youth)
That Midnight-wanderer, by the Vestall Grove
Talked it so late with the Echo, his dead Love
Lamenting unto Ghosts and grie^ly shade,
Where hoped to find her still, ere yet convay'd
To the low'st Elysium: now doubly slain,
In mind and body both; though comfort, gain
That last, whose Hearts wound seemed to cure his heart*
Lanc'd Grief's imposthume thus (most blessed smart)
And Fates were kind in it, since Life might show
His burden, torment: Doo^ much honored too;
Since Mourned, Wept (what higher solemnizing)
By GREECES glory, boast: Thus proved the thing.
These Cutthroat Roagues, far-straglers, most of whom
Were once that false BRUNDESCAR'S Men, the scum
Of that base Villains fry (whom his Moor-slave,
Vexed through his torturings at length, grown brave
Through Fury, chanced to murder, Stab, when lying
In's Summer House (though marked however for dying.
Since should have been that Even as Traitor seized)
These Ruffian-villains, for long time professed
Grim Landlords of the Road, now growing poor,
Sought hunted for, slunk hither the Even before;
Meaning next day, some Port marine attained,
To turn Sea-robbers all, the unfriendly Land
Less favoring them. Thus, greedy of prize and blood
Scouting along they saw where took the Wood
Young FLORIS, out of reach; more silent then
More Mute, by fits; thought-bury'd (Wretch of men*)
Seeking new distant Quarters, dismal Shades
Dark as his cloudy'd Breast: Each roundly invades
That same Path, dogged the Lover, soft as Air
(Still big with Sullen thoughts, Profound dispayr)
For Booty: though conceived, some Lodge close by
Might mend their single Prize. Till now, drawn nigh,
He entering just within the door oth' Gre^n
All leapt upon him, where (swords, hearts too keen)
Thrust forth by Stabs his noysless, musing Soul
Through bleeding Doors: the Corpse then softly stole
(Born fullest length 'twixt two) yet somewhat lower
Cross-green, in the Ladies view, whilst his Breast bore
That Rol'd cap, Faulchion both; there hasty laid,
Whilst carried him to the next entombing Shade.
As for that Role, with dangling flap, 'twas still
Worn by those Shepherd- swains of birth gentile,
As choice distinct Badge; such still wore POLIND;
Although had left (indeed) his own behind
For the Hermits meaner Hat, changed just at door
When going forth, though less observed by her:
That naked Faulchion one oth' Thieves did claim;
And that Arm-ribbon (worn) kind Favor came
Long since from his Beloved, CRESSA the fair.
Through all these Marks his comelyer youth, his hair,
Stature, time, place concurring; sadder Dreams,
Love-fears too, 'twas POLINDOR'S Corpse she deems:
Hid more a while through double Night, her passion,
And that dark Shade to boot. Thus, hasty fashion
Their Corpse thrown down, one spying strait the Cell
(More booty promised whence) conceiving well
This for true Owner; falling back, they All
Wheeled more about (unseen) to the blind side wall
By the shaded Pond; till, just the door open passing,
All seized her Prisoner thus, to the Souls amazing.
The Cell thus rifled, cleared, they haled her strait
Along with them, threatening Deaths dismal fate
If ought refused; Who, though her horrid Fear
(Sweet'st Soul!) proved living Death, chose rather there
Thus to be dragged by them in ^lower fashion,
Since hoping thence more Time for preservation:
What piteons glancings back to the blisfull Cell!
How Sighed to all her Joys in that, farewell!
Thus, passing 'midsts that black and ugly'st Crew,
The first, pure, created Light, when breaking through
Chaos, she seemed; or in some moving Cloud
Wrapped Lightning-flash: then't showed, as if that crowd
Of Nights brats had plucked down the silver Moon
(Which then proved hid, obscured) that Darkness soon
Might choke the whole Earth; as though they would massacre
All Excellence, what is counted perfect, rare.
Dismal death's Progress 'twas, when drowsy Heaven,
Justice, both tranced seemed; and Rapine even
Governed the World. One while her Tongue implores
The arch-villains, then the Heavens highest Powers adores*
Both Equall-deaf; she looked upon Trees, Stars,
Whilst to one, but skreen'd their Ruffians, to other dares
Hold Light to th'barborous work; whose L^mps yet burning,
Should rather (their Skie-sockets over-turning)
Fall on their heads; Naught seemed with hopes to flatter*
All Is quiet, lulled, as Hell had bribed whole Nature
To one grand Villainy. Thus, reached the Path,
That trod some smaller while (though with less faith)
They changed their Course into the right hand Wood
(Her Plaints then doubling) one oth' Cutthroat brood
Sounding small Whistle ^^rait, to which Another
Answered for sign again (being sixth sworn Brother
Did tend their Wardrobe with their prize, far off)
That neerly'st followed they, where, safe enough,
They might first Ravish her, then, slaughtering kill;
'Twas Second-course to the last, daintier blood still.
That month too PLUTO, God of wealth and prize,
They used to please with fair She-sacrifice
(Maid, Widow, Wife, no matter which, so one)
Now far more strict, Devout, more bloody grown;
That PLUTO might, since dangerous fears at hand,
Safe Guard, protect them, whilst were yet on Land.
Ah, poor POLINDOR! little do thou know
The whole smarting Worlds, but most thy fatal Blow:
Does no kind Gale sigh, whisper't in thine ^are?
No Thunder roar it out? nor Earthquake bear
The trembling news? such monstrous Prodigies
Would suit such monstrous foul Acts) do not Skies
Blaze it in flarry text? or's loytring, sleeping
Thy Guardian-angel now? rather, blood weeping,
Gasps not thine own Heart forth their errand? crying,
Fatality! all worth, all beauty's Dying.
H^^'st thou but kept the Key! but 'twas love's Fault,
That overhasty made, forgetful that;
Though (truly) if lost, or forced from thee Death's stroke
If seized by the way, then had she starved in the Rock,
Thy Death she fals^ly mo^rn'd, but hapless Thou
(Part changed) may Mourn hers justly, truely'st now.
Poor Wretch! too late (alas) and yet too soon
Thou come at once, to find thy self Undone.
Those lufty Travaylers, with eager have,
Attained to the bulky Wood at length, and passed
Along the right side, scouting, when a Noys^,
Most Faint surprised them, and saddish voice
That seemed to boot: POLINDOR'S bowels roul'd,
As if's own Flesh, some Spirit did unfold
'Twas his FLOSTELLAS Tongue: When, nearer going,
Mo^^ Like it proved, the very same Voice showing,
Dire, dismal too become: Worst destiny!
Have noblest Youth FLOSTELLA it is, it is She
As gasping Men do snatch at Soul^ (as 'twere)
When on their wing, so seemed his greedy ear
Strait at this precious Voice; it seemed the Knell
To all perfection, last dying Peal
To the Universe. Strait both their nimble paces
Were doubled, yet withal each lightly traces,
Least Noise dispatched her soon; now heard they more,
It brokenly (strength spent) called on POLINDOR --
LINDOR -- DOR; as resolved that Name should sweet
Her dying last Breath, and convey in it,
Hug forth her gentle Soul; one Medley almost
That name, sighs, groans become; till now, all is lost ^
S^d, dreadfull'st Silence following, whilst of Death
Thence showed, through latest gasps, ex^iring breath.
When Tiger-like rushed in, there strait appeared
To the nimble glance, small rude Turf-altar reared;
With Flowers, bright Faulchion glistring on it; the one side
^im Taper sickly burned, oth' other spied
Long, prostrate, Woman's Corpse (lower half) displayed
On the sadly enriched ground: whose Sight portray'd
Some new done Sacrifice, Snatched jointly there
(By chance) two Targets up, which scattered were
On the idle soil, POLINDOR made the First
(Partly unwares) to Vomit forth the accursed
Foul Soul (most active, strong, of spirit undaunted
Love-fir'd to boot) then, churlish Second granted
Deaths, hells joined Pass-sport^; whilst RUFIN the Thir^
Sent to fright Ghosts: POLINDORS hungry Sword
(Wrist scratched) unkennell'd Soul oth' sturdy Fourth*
Next, with RUFIN (found closely'st grappled, wor^^
Timely aid) dispatched the damned Fifth; Sixth fled
Then, running to the Worlds wonder (once) earth sprea^
Half-nak'd FLOSTEL, he found her Corps-like lying;
Cheeks rufull'st-pale, Death's Scutcheon, more then dying.
At which turned raging, furious, Hour of doom!
Strange, horrid'st Spectacle, that Midnights Womb
Ere swelled with; cries: called on her fairest Clay,
Cried, 'Twas POLINDOR called. Each needful way
Mean while RUFIN, long skilfull'st Artist, used;
Begged heavens Aid, hot, powerfull'st Spirits infused
For the brain (glass born about him) since appeared
Yet no Deaths wound, nor bruise; most strangling (...)
(And strangled still those Offsprings proved, it seems*
To Pluto, quart'ring next their prostrate Limbs)
Rubbed, bowed her body often. Ab horror! (crying
The ore-whelm'd POLINDOR here) you never-(...)
Pow^rs, O blast me too, my Life, since take
My Souls Joy comfort from me; rack! Souls Rack!
All worth, sweet's vanished. Thoroughly bathed RUFI^
Her Breast with sovereign Cordial ^uyce ('it was sin
Conceived, when found without it) chafed her bow^^
Whilst the Other; though, grand chance cold Water (...)
(Thieves pitcher by) some drops were thrown upon (...)
Dire task! POLINDOR still, still calling on her,
Loud'st voice, FLOSTELLA, dear FLOSTELLA; O,
Why tread'st thou this vile earthly Mass below?
Its Gem, choice treasure gone, she soared above!
Sweet'st, fairest Soul! when now, discerned to move;
He calling still, FLOSTELLA, Dearest: Rare
The Whole prospect, sight to have seen that World of fair,
Of sweet, and lovely as 'twere new-created,
New beauteous- Soul'd; each wonder, grace restated
In Cheeks, Lips, gallant'st Forhead; those Sun-eyes
Break forth their Morning-lids, while the eastern Skies
SOL brake as 'twere to view't, just then; though glanced
That Daybreak but from these, POLINDOR fancied
(His day of joys at least) most fresh and warm
Ere long she grows: Heavens goodness, and that Charm
POLINDOR'S Voice have crowned, reblest the World.
When strait into her dearest bosom hurled,
With strictest Folds, with warm but eager Kisses
He new endangered her; 'midst which Love-blisses
Both seemed awhile Intranc'd, their mutual kind
Souls whispring thus sad Tales (as 'twere) intwin'd,
Moaning each other. How through dismal fear,
Spent Spirits (loathsome Rape and Death so near)
That Swoonding seized, one gasping Rogue confessed;
Ore-heard by glad POLINDOR: There did rest
The whole Booty, prize, with hundred pounds beside
Oth' Thieves in gold (that lately was Blood-dy'd)
Ranged by RUFIN; who both with voice awaking,
POLINDOR (lo) first silence breaks, Love making
Hi^ Joys thus sweetly'st known. And, O you Skies,
You Powers of lasting Daylight, do these eyes
Behold sent back my dearest Dear (as 'twere)
Froms shades of Death? from your own blisfull Sphere
Rather, where meant some Star-bestudded Throne:
Blessed Flight, return! These also the Ho^our done
(These Hands) to bleed some purple for her sake!
Some drops! thereby redeeming her from Wrack,
From double Death of Ravishm^nt and slaughter
(As she twice reskew'd me) the unequalled Daughter
Of all your glory, praise! O mercy adored!
When she, again; And has kind Heaven restored
As 'twere from Field of ghosts, my dearest Gem?
So long lamented in that dismal Dream
As Dead, though in the shape of wretch'd another?
My lifes-guard, Champion too conjoined to the other
(Whose blood might Kisses stanch! to beauteous skars
Tears balm improve! the hurts bound with mine own (...)*)
Blessed change of Fate! how precious sweets Reprive!
Now only do I Live, since thou Alive!
Take thy Swords conquered Prize, and be that kind
Trance thanked, which made me to thy Danger blind.
Thus holds he all Earths lovely'st wealth re-given;
Chief providentiall Favor deigned, next Heaven.
Whilst round the Place, waked with her former Groans,
Fight, Break of day to boot, their warbling tones
Chirp'd loudly forth those Wood-inhabitants
(Prime Morning-consort) each how frolic vaunts
Their joy, their skill! seemed thus Congratulate
To both at once, FLOSTELS revived fate;
With Reuniting of this worthy Payr;
Thus, streamed with Caroll'd mirth both Wood and Ayr^
So strangely powerful, influentiall proves
True noble Lov^, that Brutes themselves it moves.
And here, most jealous grown the fair FLOSTEL,
Through late unhappy Fright oth' lonely Cell
(Though Singular event, strange wonder '^was)
Nor seemed so distant, safe, secure the Place
As wished, indeed; 'twas voyced over and over
For the dainty'st private Grange: next Town TREGO^
Would Coach them for their Voyage fitly too:
Thus, Both intwin'd, they softly'st traversed through
Those twinkling Shades to the bord'ring Medows sid^
RUFIN their Porter grown, love's God their guide
When strait, as Burden to that former Song,
Sad Voice amazed them both, conceived a throng
Of bitter Sighs, and sobs, complainings, WOE
(As the froward Morn were proudly brooding too
Her Viperous mischiefs) seemed as the Heart 'twould break,
Death thus forestalled, contemned; that manner wreak
Vengeance on Fate. Which strange tune, perfect mourning
Drawn near, they Woman's Gar^ discry'd; and turning
Her head about, who should (alas) this be
But poor ARDINA, the Nurse, unhappy she!
Who, having reached that Vestall mansion, late
Over Night, with strange events obliged to wait
On her beloved Lady there: anon
Informed by all, that she was wandered, gone
For Thracias Kingdom, none knew where (though most
She feared (indeed) through desperate Sorrow lost)
Lost in her own Mind, Way to boot, through passion,
Sh' had roam'd it thus all night in doleful fashion.
Who clearly viewed, FLOSTELLA, stolen behind,
Cried (grasping) Take thy Mistress; when the ore-kind
Transported Wretch was near unto Ioy-swoon,
How hugged, how kissed her! wept! nor could be soon
Convinced (intr^th) but 'twas her Ladies Ghost:
Though when informed, as Spouse by her ingrost
That fine, complete, young Lord (to boot) O (...),
Had not the Lady timely'st kissed it in,
Her Soul had doubtless leapt forth, took Vagary
As had her body late. Thus, mean breasts carry
Sound truest Hearts oft-times; till now, restored
Full to her self, tongue breath did jointly accord
To speak their weighty News, though late at strife'.
COMMANDRA, great ARPLASTUS proudest Wife,
Having for all that wanton season past
Held true to him (if Whorish Loves, unchaste
Worth noblest Style of truth) scarce added now
Nine full months more, when sacred Marriage-vow
More strongly obliged her to it, begins to rave
Through ^ordid new Lusts; which (although she gave
Slight Honors check sometimes) within few days
Burst forth most furious Flame, whose wanton blaze
Sought but convenience: good Choice in loving,
As had ARPLASTUS done before, approving.
Thus, rarely'st Innocence, once being stained,
Found purged and washed white; Virtue lost, regained.
Besides, this Blew the hot wanton Forge, a Son
(To towring'st honors, fortunes the heir alone)
Most greedy of; and doubting much her Lord,
Since no Sign, Blossom yet (the unchaste Accord
Those former six years too) she will change condition,
Diet, try more: so serve both Lust, Ambition.
The Object, Person proved gentile and fine,
CYPRIAN by birth; not Natures mean Design
For face and limb, spruce-modell'd, handsome Piece
(Her Graces Usher, lo) conjoined to this
Prime voice, rare Musick's art: whom her close Favor,
Amorous enough before, had now taught braver
Bold Feats, exploits; since Looks can paint desires
(Each Touch grown kind and Mystic) blaze heart-fir^^.
Thus, now some fortnight past, ARPLASTUS rod
To far-fam'd Hunting match, 'twas spacious Wood
Ten miles from home; where meant some following nights
To rest with bord'ring friend, 'mid sport-delights.
But so it chanced, that busy Morn, a Fray
(Sport's rougher Wrong-side often) at bleeding bay
Set the Hunting-masters, men themselves turned Cu^s;
Some bauling Dog or Mistress the angry stirs
Ingendring first; from words they grew to wounds:
Smart Siding, parties followed, till their Hounds
At length most Moral seemed; 'twas turned to Chase
Or fray of silvan Bores: which bloody place,
Foul Clashings wisely ARPLASTUS left, withdrew.
And being informed, his Friend was wandered too
Far off, with his total train (the intruding Plague,
Death, his Joynt-tenants left) as Witch or Hag
Had crossed with ill luck, back he gallopt home,
Vexed, heated; Noon much over-past being come,
Wife forth, he walked directly (softly'st pacing)
Toward that coolest Grot, SOL's beams out-facing:
Where with his own Key that outward Door oth' ground
Unlocked first, to the Summer House chief bound.
Drawn near, some gentler Sattins russle scared
(Such, Wind, Leaves whispring noise) joined Him; oreheard
These, twice, thrice over; when Darting strait his eye
Through the empty Lockhole there (Soul-blasted nigh,
Turned wondering Statue) strange Lust-antick racked
That way his Heart: COMANDRA in the very Act
With her own formal Cringer, Conge-man,
'Twixt whom Himself seemed merely butchered, Slain:
His first Lusts wages, this. When grown all fired
(Sudden thoughts too, through her damned art expired
Sweet'st, best ORANTHES Life) the baudy Door
His own Key opened strait; then, griping the Whoor,
Keen Dagger coupled closely with her Heart,
Till hugged her Soul from thence; cool, new Love-dart:
The Man escaping: Thus has righteous Heaven
Paid poor ORANTHES Ghost, at one made even
Sad, double Scoar. This dismal dalliance ended,
He storm-like hurried back, ere long attended
To's Chamber, Bed, where violent Fever burned;
Through rage and the former heat; his Body turned
All Furnace, torrid-zoan: the incensed Blood
Sulphurous boiling Streams, whilst Guts they showed
Rolls of match, fired: Thus, the Oil consumed, exhausted
(Juice, Spirits gone) Life's Lamp soon lauguish'd, wasted.
What time, ARDINA, bed confined too
Through sickness (nor great have) deferred to show
Her dearest Lady ought (whom promise tied
Never to take Vestall Vow, till specified,
First known to her) now were the whole F^^^rals over:
Though this for Cordial joined, ARPLASTUS wore
Good Father's parting heart; and, dying Kind
(His lands turned over in trust) did strongly'st bind
Her Uncle ANSELVIN, late from Sea^ returned
(Though long believed for dead, deplored, mourned)
To give up all upon his Daughters claim,
Which Nobly'st offered, ere ARDINA came.
Such was the Event; the sweet'st FLOSTELLA hear^
Her Fathers death with sobrest filial Tears,
Kind Fun'rall-show'r; most melting, most soft-hearted:
Till all must comfort her, Alleged, sh' had smarted
Much through his Fondness; reading wisely thence
Rare, signal Act of divine Providence.
And now that Prince of day had (powerful) raised
The World from nights dark Chaos, Mountains blazed
And Woods, with golden Brows, fine golden Tresses
( Tranc'd Earth awaked, when Men made their egresses
For work, for pastimes) whilst those Winged Quires
Ch^nted their Morn-devotions to SOL's fires:
How seemed to pride himself in Beamings round,
Whilst viewed his Half-words Lordship, globy ground.
Here strait RUFIN roused himself for TREGOR,
Mile off, to hire speedy Coach from thence, for more
Conveyance, health; their feeble Lady tired;
Whose Body, Mind to boot (though so admired,
Angellick-pure) ore-powr'd, now drooping showed
Too much sad Fraylty (alas) of Flesh and blood.
When empty Coach, four horses, whirled apace
Close by them for TREGOR (which very place
All aimed at) to fetch some Gallants thence;
Him strait they Fee'd, more quick convenience.
Arriving there, the Lady safe was shrouded
In close Out-cottage strait (so's lost, ore-clouded
Bright Ci^thia often; so skulk'd in earthen Cell
Gems lodge: so couched (lastly) in the simpler Shell
Does the orient Pearl appear) though spruce and neat:
When choycest Cordials sought with busy sweat,
Procured by skilled RUFIN (life-ayds, supports)
Thence to Recruit in Natures weakened Forts
Their dear spent Spirits* the Air that morning-hour
Quickened by art, through Influentiall power
Of certain strow'd Herbs, Plants, whilst sweetly rise
(Fuming towered Heaven in kind of Sacrifice)
Rich Od'ro^^ clouds, to cheer, refresh her Brain:
Last, drowsy Juice received by Sleep does reign
Over her in^eebled World; the offensive Light,
Noise banished round* all is turned to Scean of night:
The God of slumbers (Amorous grown) embracing
Her lulled Se^ce, twenty-hours; disquiets chasing.
Thus, that next Morn, fresh* travayl-proof she Wakes
Seldom Heaven moanful^ Virtue long forsakes.
Though know, that day before (as meet) RUFIN
Transferred unto her Uncle their design
By nimble Post, that they would visit him
This second Night, least else surprised seem
(ANSELVIN whom by Name we styled of late)
When, going back, he chanced congratulate
Old Merchant-friend of his; possessed by whom
Four curious TYRIAN Robet (that were become
His late Sea-prize) for Male and Female those,
From thence for PERSIAN Prince and Princess chose:
Though Two most richly gorgeous found, esteemed
(Whereof anon) Two, rich, but slighter-trim'd:
Choice Garb, much in the ARCADIAN Court allowed.
That slightest Manly Robe, which seemed less proud,
Was purple Sattain Suit, loose-formed Coat;
Long-button'd both with silver Flowr's, fine-wrought:
But here is Aurora-sattin, shone, the adorning
Bright Silver trayls, for Lace. These second morning
Were fully viewed, and bought by the noble Payr;
How primely fit! the Occasion too so rare.
Since public Objects growing now, more eyed
Gazed at, for Sun-like rank, estate beside.
Those meaner-trim'd, much Nobler then their own,
Fresh too, for Travayl-garb were then put on.
The Host well discharged; with whom that Hundred pound
Oth' Thieves was left; proclaimed which if found
None the Owner, 'twas decreed for the hungry Poor.
Thus All, well-coach'd to the wish, by early hour
Set prancing forth, the Morn whilst smiling showed;
Seemed glad FLOSTELLA thus was come abroad
(Proud to Usher her) which being withdrawn, ore-past;
Bright PH^^BUS driving now his Steeds, with have,
Down the Azur'd western road, with Charret blazing
(As though kind Harbinger) their light wheels grazing
Those pleasant flowery Plains; ere-long (beguiled
Through over-hast) they passed small Forest, wild,
Unused track: yet onwards still they strayed,
All Is Chanting, ^erdant, sweet: When they are dismayed
Soft Groanings, cries (scarce heard) like some tormented,
Strokes louder much: when further lo's presented,
Through smaller Glade, this horrid Sight to view
(Nor blazed much Danger in it) 'twas only Crew
Of five or six Hags, muffled, all surrounding
Naked Man bound; with Whipcord-scourges wounding
Or Burchen Rods. Both hands were closely knit
To Tree's strong upper Branch, whilst shackled feet
Fast tied to the stumps below; thus, all exposed
The whole Body stood, full dismal Mark; though closed
His glove-stop'd mouth, thence stifling louder Mo^n.
Drawn near, his Body gored with blood, like one
Entire sore seemed to view; or as, the Skin
New Shifted, fley'd, 't had for some Shambles been:
Most hideous Lump, grown doubly Naked* yet still
Those Bayted round his flesh like anvill, steel
(The unmatched Hell-beadles) as they would conjure out
His vagrant Soul: often crying thus the whole Rout;
Dog, Villain, we are Furies come to plague
Thy vile flesh. Busied thus, one pursie Hag
Spying RUFIN, All turned to wondering gaze;
He seemed half-charmed too, joy'd heaven 'twas
To the tortured Wretch this smaller truce, whose Groan,
Look double pity craved. When, asked anon
The cause of all; ^Twas he (those Hags reply)
Had done those cruel Thefts, those Raepes hard by
(Purse-^eech, Flesh-devill) Providence thus bound him;
And they were Furies sent from Fate, to wound him.
RUFIN star'd more; POLINDOR with FLOSTEL
(Hood down) approached them, May Game, masque of Hell
The whole Sight appeared: Til now, his freer tongue
Released, No Thief (he loud exclaimed) they wrong;
'Twas he was robbed bound. When the whole Antic fry
With strange Signs rounded them, more mutteringly
Disclosed the Riddle strait, why all was done:
That STORGUIS 'twas, that vile BRUNDESCARS Son;
ASTORIN's downfall (whom by face RUFIN
Well knew) who, proving the Fathers Heir in sin,
Worse Villain, had blood-suck'd (as 'twere by power
Most of their Husbands chief estates, that hour
Laid Gasping; ravished too three of their Daughters
(This had he likewise heard) those Virgin-slaughters
Added to the first: as then kept one his Whore:
Thus, Neighing on, till tempted yet one more
To her Fames death; close Pander-letters woo,
That she would meet that Noon in the Cave below,
Where should find Golden showers. This, wisely scanned,
The Maid to the Mother showed, whose cunning hand
Wrote back from her, she would wait on him, if so
He Would come by stealth: when strait the whole injured row,
Those wives and Mothers met; their Husbands lay
Lodged in that Cave, disguised, like men of Prey
(Forged plot) where seized, then left him naked and bound:
Those gone, these (Muffled, Armed) did thus surround
Like Stygian Furies, sent to fall upon him*
So, wrought in part their grieved heart Vengean^e on him,
Nor knew he whence the Wrong: those men conceived
Mere Robbers, Thieves; while the Hags souls Guilt believed
Plain Furies come from Hell. The whole Justice showed;
Whose treacherous Father ended too in blood.
This said, whilst they the Arch, punished Rogue unbind,
Those Hags were vanished all, and gone like Wind.
STORGUIS they left at next Wood-bordring Cell,
Though scarce could lie nor sit (intruth) to steal
Short Napping-fit; POLINDOR well from hence
Lesson'd by the way, against Rapine, Violence.
Thus, prancing forwards, All betimes (ere night)
Approached that second Eden of delight,
FLOSTELLAS stately'st Home; where round the place
Bowers, Meadows, Groves, as with new Summers face
(Fresh-drest, as 'twere, through new rare influences)
Welcome their Mistress seemed: from Leavy fences
Birds chant their praise in Hymenean song,
Each Bush turned jolly qui^e; whilst Flowery thro^g
Low-bended as 'twere, Cursey-homage showing
(Gale-mov'd) their Pasture-way with perfumes strowing;
Skies smiling round; West, Morn-like blushing, fair,
Bride-cheek'd, as strove FLOSTELLAS self to Payr;
Whence Sun did seem to Dart in amorous Blaze
VVelcome, goodnight to both: Thus, on they pass.
When, near her Mansion, forth the adjoining Thick
Small Rustic troop appeared, clothed, furnished like
Harvests sons Daughters; sprucely'st trimmed to the Ey^^;
Men Sickles bore, tossed, flourished sprightfully,
Whilst Women Rakes; their gallant Hat^ of straw,
Joined Flowery brooch to each: All decked they saw
With wreathed Wheat-girdles round. But know the Twai^^
Which led both Sex, as eithers Sovereign
(Fine, jolly payr) were these; the God of Wine,
BACCHUS, whose curled head, swollen wast intwine
Grapes Gem-like clusters; in whose hand there showed
Glass-bottle of Grapes pure and sprightly Blood.
His mate cor^s Goddess, CERES, quaintly'st crowned
With Gold-e^r'd sprigs; like Circl^ did surround
Her wast too, Basket sh' had, adorned enriched
With Fruits gay wealth: Both these (by turns) beseech'd
The Lady taste this from their fuller store,
In country-rhimes; small Earnest 'twas of more;
What Corn and Wine to both should yearly abound,
Fruits of the blisfull Womb, as well as ground.
Which Gift most kindly took, with Richest smile,
That sweet'st of Women (back repaid the while)
From her Town-tenants, who conjoined had made
This rude Masque: Dance for sooth (for cloze) they had
Till whispered by RUFIN, their dance was yet
Less suited to her Mind, that merry Fit
Was laid aside: Now the open Gates they view.
Where noble ANSELVIN, with some Remnant-few
Her Fathers good old Servants, ranged stands;
Who, doubly joy'd (indeed) those slavish Bands
Of vile COMANDRA shattered broke, beside,
Sweet'st face of their Young Lady (long lost) eyed;
All burst forth into sober, downright Crying:
Loud'st Welcome, that, words empty air out-vying.
Lighted, ANSELVIN closely strait intwin'd
His lovely'st Neice, as Steward all resigned;
Whereof (her Eye first sweetly'st cast to Heaven;
Then, Gratefull'st pearly Tear as offering given)
With kindest Lip-heart-welcome, frankly she
POLI^DOR Master makes; as Noblest he
Had crowned her his hearts Mistress, long before:
Thus, proved All her own still, never more.
See what Heavens can produce, how blisfull Morrow
Pregnant with Joys, as fable Night with sorrow!
We shall not (Reader) here that Evenings talk,
Actions recount, each pleasant Garden-walk,
How viewed by both; those stately'sts Founts and Mases;
There the Lady showed, COMANDRAS first kind Blaz^^,
Toyings burst forth; her Young ORDELLAN there
Courted with Masks both gazing eye and ear:
There pointed she to the Bower, where first Love-potion:
Held forth to her, that Candy'd amorous motion
There had she traced often with Folded arms,
Fixed eyes on Earth and Heaven, those cunning Charms
Of hers, those spleenfull Spights (at length) to oppose;
How Sighed, mused, wept! There, for conclusion, show^
That doubly amorous and fatal Grot
(Fatal to the Whoor) nor lastly was forgot
That dancing Antic stage, the adjoining Grove;
Often whilst POLINDOR did with the arms of Love
Intwine his Spouse, how breathing forth Soul even
In Joys to her, and thankful Praise to heaven!
Next morn, this Epithalm (next the Ayery quire)
Saluted both, well sung to the Roman Lyre;
Spark of ANSELVIN's love, poetic fire.
SONG.
1.
Choice Planet-pair, by Heavens designed
(Th^se old surpassing)
For Conjunction, live combined
(Through whose embracing
Worth survives,
Perfection lives)
Star-race on us bestowing;
Whilst to skies amazement gives,
Each SOL or VENUS showing.
Mix rays, Eye-beams join in looks,
As Hearts in kisses,
Nights joys; True love-co^pling sucks
Forth Souls in blisses:
Bath thy flames
Young Sun, she shames
THETIS, Loves dearer Ocean;
Thou't rise more glorious, all Joy claims
Her Touch, Ice then takes motion
3.
Flesh and blood's AMBROSIA the have,
Earth's Dainty, treasure;
Fathom well thou may her wast,
But nere thy Pleasure;
Framed she is
For Ecstasies,
Unions highest sweet; excelling:
Love's Indies, World, dear'st All Is in this,
Man's longings paralelling.
Give her thy All again;
Coin Beauties, Virtues, till your Ten
Twenty-fold selves deck the Orb terre^e.
Mean while ORTHERIS (buried man to all
These weighty great things) Pensive treads the Vale,
Through former harsher Stars, those late unkind;
Though chiefly tossed within his various mind
This late strange Dream, or mystic Vision.
He seemed couched upon some Rock, alone
(While's wandering Sheep beneath) whose crest or'e-peering
Vast' troubled Sea; Winds loudly chased, Waves rearing
To fight against the skies; Skies stormed again
With Cataracts; 'midst which tumulteous Scean;
Foul discord, fairest Vessel seemed tossed,
Bandy'd to Ruin quite, where sunk and lost
The Lord POLIND. When Sea more swelling high
Conceived in his own Breast, the heart wracking nigh
All turned, oth' sudden, dainty'st calm and whist
Like lulled Babes, smooth as cheeks of Virgins kis't
Soft Gale^ the wrincled Main: delicious season!
When floating Temple, lo (thing strange to reason)
Came toward him upon the Sun-guilt Wave;
Whose Tarras'd open front Masque-prospect gave
Of Gods and Goddesses, there stately enthroned:
At whose feet (though) choice Favorites there owned,
Young Man and Maid appeared, resplendent shining,
Close-arm'd, with Nuptial wreaths and robes combining,
Shaped like POLINDOR just FLOLTELLA fair.
Foremost rod Nymphs on Dolphin-backs, which bare
Flow'r-baskets others sweetly'st Harp'd, as though
Stilled thence the Ayrs broils, and charmed mad Depths below
To Sleep, with their Marine harmonious Noyses
Till reaching now the Rock, all mounted, Voices
Harps joined; those foremost Nymphs still strowing round
Rose, Violets, till turned to VENUS ground;
Love's Bridal Shore. These handmayds followed soon
That beam-encompass'd Cluster (each as Sun
Roused from the Flood) with godlike, ayery paces:
Drawn near, APOLLO first advanced, forth traces,
POLINDOR in his hand, whom gently does
Present to the Duke ORTHERIS, speaking thus.
Here Retired Lord, take thy brave
Gem-son from the watery Grave;
Born in HYMEN'S Temple to thee,
With such favors Gods do woo thee:
Take him too as dropped from Sky,
Through whom, nere thy Fame shall dye.
Then stepped forth PALLAS with the unequalled Nay^
Who seemed divinely Blazing too, and said,
Thy Pearl-daughter from the Tomb
Take again, as from Deaths Womb;
Changed though Name and Face, thou have
Daughter still, more lovely graced;
Choycest blessing Heaven could give,
In whom KALASP, DORISBE live.
Then HYMEN marriage-god, and stately'st she
Births Goddess, JUNO, marched forth solemnly;
Joined both their Hands, whose words did thus agree:
None these Hands Hearts dare to sever;
Grow your Joys unnumber'd, ever.
This said, All vanished round, though leaving there
That young joined Couple (favor still) howere:
When strait ORTHERIS sleeps Bands wildly broke
(Or were it some Trance) through wonder, joy awoke*
Here, riding post, RUFIN the strange Event
Broke wisely to him; though, by joint Consent,
Masquing that dangerous Nuns plot, design;
As though meet Fear did all that while confine
To some dark place, the closely espoused Payr:
ORTHERIS when, as born a new the rare
POLINDOR, lent from Death to life, rejoices;
Approved besides his Noblest best of Choyces:
Her Father too, whilst both were Young, designed
His Brother-travayler, both nearly twined
In strictest foreign League; often Friendship proving
Endeared more through dangers, stronger-loving:
Yea, whilst an Infant was, had kissed beside,
Often Dandled in his arms the lovely Bride.
Nor heightened least that rarest Trance, or Dream,
Wherein the Immortal troop of Gods did stream
Full showers of blessings on him; told RUFIN,
Thus, threatening Visit (^o) though fondly seen
The ill-look'd World once again, till viewed his fair
Revived DORISBE in her (much brighter Star)
Quick winged Post was strait dispatched, to tell
What time precise: which noblest Promise well
The Duke performed, sixth day for the Journey choosing;
Arrived; whose presence Joy through all diffusing.
Next day was kept their solemn Bridal Feast,
Huge, pompous-garnish'd; many a Lordly guest,
Knight, Lady there, whose gallant joined port
Shone with the Luster of some Princes Court:
All things most gorgeous left, for houshold-state,
To the ready hand, by proved COMANDRA late.
Forth came the Bridesgroom and the lovely'st Bride,
Clayming all eyes, all hearts to boot; discry'd
The most Accomplished most transcendent Payr
Throughout the World; great Heavens wisdom, care
Adored, in so well Forming, Matching them:
Each of their Sex conceived the amazing Gem:
Whilst Wept some kinder Hearts withal, to view
That sweetest wonder; Prayed for blessings too.
His Suit and Coat (long that, large-shap'd to the eye)
Skies colored Satin proved, rich glorious Die:
Skirt, sides, and sleeves to the Coat, broad-border'd round
With dainty'st Fruits appeared; choice Silk for ground,
Whose heights bright Silver, beamy Gold, to express
That Glistring Orchard of the HESPERIDES;
Or the artfull Needles Summer-portraiture:
Prime mystic work (by TYRIAN Youths) and pure.
There shone the impurpled Grape, Pomegranate, Cherry,
Peach, Orange, Pear; with Plum, small Coran-berry:
Though just on the back, rich blazing Sun did seem
To gild those Fruits, through smilings ripened them.
Its Breast long-button'd down (for fashion, mould)
With stretch'd-out Faulkons seemed, of Silk and Gold,
Beaks purest Silver, which thrust forth to Bill.
The whole Suit with smaller trayls adorned, like skill
Much richness showed; whose Buttons Pearls did wear.
His Satin Buskins lastly, o're-flown as 'twere
With silver-streamed ^ounts, most sweetly shined:
Two lowest Elements the whole work designed:
Became that Person in compleatest sort;
Though Blazed their truest Phoebus, he that wor't.
Hers, fair green Satin Robe; the lowest part
Or Skirts whereof, most richly decked by Art
With stately'st, lo^ty trayls of growing Flowers;
Silk, Silver, heightning Gold; thin pearly Showers
Weeping on them from scattered Clouds above,
Like Mays distilling Gems: There seemed to rove
The loyt'ring Fly, that stout laborious Be;
How truely'st sucked! whilst higher men might see
Small winged Birds, choice ayery generation.
Those Flowers beneath seemed part oth' first Creation,
So primely fair; where the glistring Lilly, Rose,
Gillyflow'r, Tulip joined, did seem disclose
More Sun-born beauties far, more Radiant cheeks
Then painted Garden beds (there sweetly pecks
Small Paun^ey too) All which might Fragrant from
That influentiall bodies Touch become,
Like Natures brood: 'twas needless Springtide draught;
By curious TYRIAN Virgins only wrought;
Whose Goddess CHLORIS crowned might seem FLOSTEL.
Her Sleeves did through Carnation Die excel;
With gorgeous silver Ca^lwork covered over,
As though Lights glistring Orbs* they (twin-like) bore:
While the purest Neck, with D^mons flaming higher,
Limbed forth that unknown Element of Fire.
Lastly, Azure silken Vest, skarf-form'd to the eye
(Worn so) Star-pouder'd like Heavens Canopie,
Boasted their Needles spark'ling Firmament:
Those Flow's Earths under-glory might present:
Which Mantles shoulder decked resplendent Moon,
Though she chief Cinthia shined, which had it on:
For (Reader) know what Garb soever was worn,
FLOSTELLA still did Braveness-self adorn.
That tedious Noon-kept Triumph of the Taste,
Their Dinner ore (most full, gaudy'st repast
Would tire out Natures eating force, undo
Strong'st appetite, cloy wanton fancy too)
Rare Musick-strains, with Voyce-quires, banquetings;
All strait for the ample Park prepared, took wings
For Hunting-sport: the Lord POLINDOR where,
FLOSTELLAS self, with other Ladies there
Brave mounted rod; most gallant view on Land.
His Horse was white, by skillful Nature stained
With blushing Spots; so glossie, shone, so clear,
That skinned in Satin all (when stroaked, near
Like-silken) appeared; whose moving Nostrills, Eyes
Bred ardent Flames, for shape all Rarities.
Trod the Air so mounting, proud, as if some One
O^h' Suns winged Coursers were; disposed for none
But the Star bright milky Road: or (lastly) as knew
His own and Riders matchless Beauty too
(Both so excel^ing) whom the brave POLIND
Best managed, Ruled, as (skillful) backed the Wind:
Horse, Man, (indeed) so jointly motion'd showing,
They proved as 'twere one Piece, together growing.
Here Is, lovely'st Dappl'd-gray, prime thing, for Beast
All Delicacy seemed (whom often pressed
That proud COMANDRA) his wavy Mane, unbound,
Like Nymphs loosed Morning-tresses, kissed the ground,
How glass-bright fair, choice, beauteous-limb'd, as it
For Rose-bed only; silken Couch were fit!
Light-motion'd too, for the heel, but showing more
Fine awful Reverence, as conscious bore
Some sacred Goddess; least its dainty'st Load
The hard Earth should chance to Offend, how nicely'st trod,
With Seagreen Velvet-saddle was he decked,
Wrought over with Silver Waves, by art bespeck'd
Like foaming Froath, where glistring Dolphins shone,
Rich-skal'd as 'twere; both Dolphins, Waves thereon
Moving, just as the wanton Palfr^y mov'^.
Her Stirrup, Bit, Guilt silver both approved.
Next these, Sky colored Velvet Charret (late
COMANDRAS glory, pride) Imbroider'd that
To the height, Purl fringed, Six milk-white Horse attended
Stag being run down, and those last Fun'rals ended
With shrillest Horns, the arch Hunts-man's tunefull P^al
Rocks, Woods conjoined in mournful Ecchos still;
Repast of various Chreams (that evening-hour
By Masque like Silvans brought) long covered Bow^^
Replenished, mixed with Fruits and choycest Wines:
Whilst from those lofty Tops more ayre-confines
(Skulk'd amongst the boughs) clear Cornets music sound.
Rare sportive Strains for the ear; hills, woods rebound.
Then pranced both with Duke ORTHERIS home
In The Chariot, store oth' train Night-guests become.
Their much too formal Supper being past,
Nights Curtains spread, and all Spectators placed
For artfull Banquet of the ear and eye,
Set, Court-like Masque began; prime rarity;
ANSELVIN's work; whose view through torches beams
More heightened seemed, with Ladies sparkling gems.
MASQUE.
Large Curtain drawn, these Sceans their art did boast:
First, Wilderness, which shaken seemed and t^st
Through stormy Hail; Banks, Rocks were hoary'd over
(Tru'st Clime of horror found) Hobgoblings store
Whence boystrous Antique danced; thereby expressed
Wild Furies, troublers of the World: nor ceast,
Till e^ter'd those, Winds, flashy Lightning, Thunder.
That next did Calmest Prospect prove (to wonder)
Two lovely'st Mounts, where verdant Laurels grew,
Bays, proud victorious Palms; most beauteous View
Of Honors Temple garnishing to the One,
Whilst on that other Virtues sweetly shone;
Part-shaded both: betwixt those Mounts discry'd
Smooth, slumbring Sea, Two Ships at anchor ride:
'Bout whom, the whole Watery Surface glister seeming
(With Rocks) through TITAN's Golden Blaze, rich beaming
Priest (lastly) from those Temples came, which bare
This short Embassage to our Bridal Payr.
That Six young Knights from powerful THRACIAN State,
Sent to present the Lord POLINDOR late
That Crown, as due from's royal Ancesters
(Driven from thence by Fate of bloody Wars)
Six Ladies too, from fruitful CIPRUS Land
Employed, with Crown at fair FLOSTELS command
(Whose Right it was, PERSANDRAS Heir disclosed)
Their Barks through envious Furies, Storms opposed,
Bright Honor, Virtues Temple yet (at last)
Both Meeting gained; toyls, dangers overpast:
Where wondering found that All were Agents sent
To one Joined Princely Pair (most strange event
As happy) now turned Fellow Servants proved:
Which Nuptials being heard, transported, moved
Through the fair example, those in Love united;
Espousing too: would shortly Attend; Recited.
When from those loftly'st Temples heavenly Quire
Of Priests appeared, Rose-crown'd; to the sweetest Lyr^
Sung forth choice Epithalm, as one full Blessing
On this grand Bridal, Those to boot expressing.
The Song was thus.
1.
Storms and Furies vanished prove,
Heaven has those to Hell confounded;
Lo, sweet'st-smiling Calm for Love,
All Is with Gales of Joy surrounded:
Chirpers sing,
Lovers, Flowers make double Spring,
2.
One transcendent Sun-like Pair
Has produced six Pair of Lovers;
Honor, virtues Buds they are,
Each those Great ones Stamp di^covers:
Thus, Divine
Influentia^l Pair does shine.
All Delights
Crown your Days, your dearest Nights,
B^essing sprung from Marryage-rites.
Here, Water-nymphs-(Founts from that Sea expressing)
With wavy-stained Robes, purl'd Tinsell-dressing
Danced stream-like forth; besprinkled round the Room
With choice Sweet-waters, Fragrant thence become.
Third Scean and last Springs beauteous face assumed,
Banks dressed with lovely'st Flowers, with Trees beplum'd;
Bright Founts like Ropes of Pearl, those banks ore-straying,
Or Crystal Chains, Gems; danced (as 'twere) a Maying:
Whilst chirping Birds, with various-tuned Noats,
Heard, Chant it from those Wilder Champaign Grots.
In The furthest end Delicious Arbor showing,
God HYMEN's Bower, still Ro^ie-fresh, new blowing:
From whence their Masquers came, Six comely Payr;
Carnation Satin Robes, with Wreaths most fair
(Flow'r-deck'd) like Lovers; Rich, bespangled trimming;
Danced graceful up, their foremost Couple seeming
The whole World for gallant Personage to excel,
Bate only Two, POLINDOR and FLOSTEL:
The Duke ORTHERIS Face whilst changing often
Looks, color both; most various-passion'd Draught.
Their Dance performed, All Faces turned to the side,
Where seated shone the Bridgroom and the Bride,
Low-bowing all; when st^ait their middle-payr
March slowly forth, and with Obaisance fair,
Presented, ranged their Crown at eithers feet,
So back returning to their place: That sweet
Harmonious Quire (meanwhile) of Priestly fashion,
Joined, warbled round their Twofold Coronation.
The Song was thus.
1.
Great and sovereign Pair for beauty,
Virtue, as for Princely Birth,
TO whom of duty
Stoops all Excellence on earth;
See what Fates reserve in store
For you More.
2.
These bright Crowns, joint homage showing
From Two faithful Lands, embrace;
Presents owing
Your High worths as Royal race:
With their Persons, each imparts
Rule over the Hearts.
Thus be twined
Scepters like your Selves, combined;
Nor be You, those Crowns, outshined.
'Twas rare, their Senses seemed to intrance;
Song being cloz'd, All roused for second Dance:
Where choice Sounds took their ear, there active ey^
Choice Motion, Beauty, choycest Bravery.
Dance likewise done, That Foremost Couple strait
Advanced to the upper end, where fitly'st ^ate
The Duke ORTHERE; Knee^'d, crying, Our Lord and Father
When, Startled he, ore-whelm'd confounded rather
(Breath failed) cries, Who art thou come with that Name*
And shape both, thus to torture me? I am,
My Lord (said she) your Daughter^ Hah? my Daughter?
(Said he again) such once I had; When caught her
By the lovely'st trembling Hand (more grasping) near,
Least cheated with some Shade: Your Daughter (here
Said she) DORISBE. Vanished Ghosts walk then
(Said he) dead Corpse she proved, when but Fifteen;
Buried. Supposed dead, my Lord, interred
(Said she again) but Heavens -- What was it I heard
(Said she) supposed dead? Am I awake?
No doubt, my Lord, (said she) O do not take
(Said he) the Advantage of that comely'st Face,
Voice, gentle Girl, to swell my Griefs (alas)
Make me more Wretch'd. When, weeping (^o) soon after,
Smiles mixed, Heaven knows (said she) I am your Daughter
Which truth affirmed POLINDOR, standing by.
When snatching her in's grasping arms, more nigh
To the panting heart, joined kisses; The art (said he)
My Girl, my loved DORISBE; very she;
The art she indeed. When the Lady kneeling new,
And this my Spouse, my Lord (said she, to view
Showing THERSAMES) for which, though virtuous Prize,
I beg your pardon. The have it Daughter, rise
(Said he) the Man seems worthy'st of esteem:
Mean while, Spectators did transformed seem.
When traversed slowly up from Door oth' room
A Lady, thinly'st Vayl'd, to proper whom
Fine, gallant Pers'nage; Habit plain and neat;
Best-carryag'd too; who drawing near the seat,
Clasping ORTHERIS round, in have, cried out,
My dearest Lord! when now, past jealous doubt
'Twas all but Dream, turned staring; W^o art thou
(Said he again) come to torment me now?
Voyc'd, shaped thus? I am (replied she)
Your Spouse and Wife. My wife? transformed he
Replied in have, all wonder) she again,
Your Wife KALASPE. How those Fates mock men
To death (said he, strait gazing through her Hood)
Hah? somewhat here disturbs my frantic blood
(Went on) afflicts me; sure it is general Night
Of Doom, dead waken round: Dear, dearest Spright,
She was long since by the Rock torn, battered, slain;
I saw her mournful Ghost. Sore bruised, taken
For dead, my Lord, (said she) but Heavens supplied --
Go, the art her lovelyer Ghost. (he sudden cried)
And this, Ghosts Field, that gloomy ELYSIUM:
All Is dead. No shade, my Lord (said she) become
(Wept, throwing off her Vayl) Disown your poor
Though true KALASPE, thus? strange broding hour
Of Miracles! said he (soul-rapt, love-flaming)
Caught, grasped her, kisses her; then strait exclaiming;
Nay now thou art she indeed, my best KALASPE!
That Dying Hour's at hand (behold) last Gasp,
And Heavens ordain through monstrous favor, I
Must burst to Death in Joyful Ecstasy:
Gods, aid my Reason, least your Kindest load
Ore-whelm, confound this frailer Flesh and blood.
Here Mother, Daughter strait, most fondly flew
Unto each others Breast, as raised anew
From the lowly Tomb; since deemed each other Dead;
Such postures, looks, that grand Joy might be se'd
Half-tac'd like Sorrow; tears, smiles, Med-ley-kind:
The Heart so ore-fraught, ore-powr'd. Much joy'd Polind
Then bowing came, and then the All-sweet Flostel
Embraced her, Mother owned (whose Face to excel
Yet seemed; choice lovely'st wonder, were it not by
That young unequalled Pair) their general Eye
Acting the Silent rest, full Passion flows
In sobrest Weeping round, for pause and cloze.
Whilst some Spectators thought their former show
No Masque, but Dream or Vision, ending so.
The ore-rapt ORTHERIS, here, could scarce believe
He Waked yet, till both their Story give;
What wondrous ways obtained this Mystic Blessing;
Those briefly'st each (then growing late) expressing:
Though in DORISBES story were concealed
Some cautious truths, Truth though, what e're revealed:
Whose fuller Map we shall hold forth to view;
Though Both of them wrapped up most briefly too.
First for KALASPES short, though various Fate,
Who was thrown down that dismal Rock, through hate
Of vile LURGANOR (as long since was told)
By Huntesmen scared, when (lo) that uncontrol'd,
Highest Providence so checked the threatening stroke
That, leavy Branch, grown forth 'bout 'midst oth' Rock,
Embraced her dainty'st Limbs; did gently so
Dandle them down to the sprouting Branch, below,
Which kindly'st Kissed them too: Though cruel Crag
Oth' Rock, receiving next, might ^adly brag
Of purest Blood; which rudely'st armed did throw'er.
For second heavy'st Greeting, down much lower
To the Champaign-ground: where Lump of senceless Clay
(Though fair to boot) Blood-purpled, bruised she lay.
Chief Lord oth' Hunting Train (as hap'ly chanced)
Came strait-waies Riding by, with Pity glanced
On the mournful Object; Pers'nage there espied
Pure-form'd, rich-jewel'd, gorgeous-cloath'd (beside)
Which spoke her Noblest ranked; nor fully yet
Dispairing Life, conveyed that Corpse so sweet
By gentlest Litter to his worthy Friend's
(Some half-mile off) whom for important ends
Late visited, his honou^'d nightly ^uest.
And, being known Himself most learned Breast,
Choyce-skil'd as well as noble (through the All wise
Conjoined, All-pow'rfull Surgeon of the Skies)
Caused Motion in short time, and next (ere long)
Roused partly Sense; yea, faint Life-spirits sprung,
Small vigor in some few propitio^s days:
Though still so low, weak voyc'd, weak-brain'd (alas)
She could not least make known her self; nor came
Least Noise so far enquiry of such a Dame.
When, being summoned Home through weighty Affairs;
Mind sadly loath to leave her there to Stars
Most doubtful, since Iunes warmer air could brook
(As then) short way, soft Litters Couch, he took
Her Person along with him, whose Roof could boast
The worlds prime rarest Surgeon (whence ingrost
His Skill) though crazy grown, too old to ride:
Had bound himself by sudden Vow, beside,
Never to pass beyond that watery Bay
(Seas branch some three miles broad) which, being theirway
They smoothly crossed: now never to embrace the Shore:
When Pirates seized their Bark; to melt, implore
Fond vain attempt those Cut^throats of the Flood,
Brothers of winds and waves, more friendly good
From swimming found the strangely enfranchised Lord:
When, going chiefly to cast overboard
KALASPE as Corpse, faint burdenous Bulk; espying
(Rich Sunshine Iewell-box on the Table lying
(Grand Fees for cure) their Master tendrer-hearted,
First spared her Life, then skilfull'st hand imparted
(Prime Surgeon) toward her Health; with thoughts (in fine)
That she might prove his handsome Concubine.
Thus, all of them soon reached the TYRIAN shore
(Full-sayl'd) Full-booty'd too) strait turning over
Their several Prisoners, sold for Slaves about
Like Market-beasts (indeed) unhappy rout!
KALASPE though was nicely'st kept at Home
(Choice- Pearl) till healthfull'st, lovely'st grown; overcome
Through whose sweet-pleading Tears (at length, as favor)
To th'TYRIAN Queen, rewarded though, he gave her;
Who loved much Graecians, beauty much extolled,
Ere long as Chief' among all her Train inrol'd.
Thus lived she Favored there, most loved, admired
For four years space; though Pensive, sad; o're-tir'd
(Indeed) through eager, Courtly Suitors still:
ORTHERIS though concluded Dead (worst ill!)
Seen foully Mangled, Falling, Prostrate lie:
Till Merchant-friend of hers, from ARCADY
(Who chanced to spy her out) at Court arriving
Informed her that ORTHERIS still was living;
Live-bury'd though through Grief; DORISBE turned
Long since a Ghost, whom she most truly mourned.
Thus, longing now for the worthy'st Husband, Home
(Whose Lady-queen, Deaths Bond-mayd then become,
Fully freed her) that Merchant shipped her hither;
Last, to SARMARA brought (near hand) where either
Wearied Reposed, till, noys'd PO^INDOR'S Feast,
Thus stole she up, unknown intruding Guest.
As for that vile' LURGANOR, with his beloved
Damned rout, by Sea fit sops for Whales they proved.
Next, fair DORISBES wondrous Fortune view;
Whose Mother being surprised by the rambling Crew
(As hard) her Father too most sad-confin'd
To's pleasant Lodge; gored both in body, mind;
She strait to the Countess, her great-Lady Aunt
(Chief Town, SARMARA) came; might justly vaunt
Then 'bout Fifteen ripe Beauty most excelling;
Most sweet: sweet'st Nature also paralelling.
Her Aunt and she (month after) on sollemn day
Gracing JOVE'S Temple both, as then, to pay
Public devotions there; her Gallant Spouse
Most brave THERSAMES saw her, humbly bows
TO Imperial Love: that JOVE-spous'd Deity
She seemed alone, great'st JUNO from on high
Come down, to whom all Hearts due sacrifice.
Whom viewed with what most dear regards! discries
What speaking Flames (as 'twere) of honor, love,
Soul-pantings there! since Souls do clearly move
In The eyes bright splendid Orbs, and the under-cheek:
Looks sued vowed; Looks Burned thence, as quick
Froze too, when the Blood retired from face to the Heart,
Which Wooing gestures, being on her part
Fully observed, whilst Gazed the rest (his prime
Accomplished Form, rich courtly Garb) betime
Were answered back by the Lady thus, so rare,
Fine, modest Sweetness shone, that thence Despair
Might well seem checked; though checked Presumption (too;
The hallowed Rites done, THERSAMES needs must (view
His radiant M^rning-star to the very Set;
Traced her to the door, some cautious distance yet;
Where seeming Blind, as then he had lost Daylight,
Soul both with her, there sallied forth in fight
Spruce, middle-ag'd Physick-doctor, named FORENZ:
Old Friend of his, first by his Grandsires means
Brought up from Clouts, maintained of Alms; preferred
By's Father too, to whom long since appeared
Owing for's Life; choice Doctor thought, esteemed
By the Countess aunt, whose constant Lodger seemed:
Her Girl his Patient then, Darling beloved.
Whom marching fitly'st by, as prompted, moved
By powerful Fato, THERSAMES gladly embraced
(The whole thing by the Lady spied by chance, who cast
Glance from above) strait drew him roundly on
To by-nook, cloistered Place; where both alone,
Inquired of him who that Young Lady was.
FORENZ informed him strait, in the second place
Who^h' Guardian-aunt. THERSAMES strongly prayed,
That, privilege through his procurement, aid,
Entering, he might salute that Sovereign part
Of Natures wonder, breathing forth his heart
By the Tongue, as Blaz'a it lately by his Eyes.
FORENZ, grown pensive, sad, wished him be wise;
New-minds him of her great'st illustrious Birth,
Huge, dazeling Fortunes too; her Aunt the whole earth
Not matched for towring'st mind, almost, beside
Known loftly'st Aims for her: Informed, what Tide
O^ Big-rank'd Suitors there, though mentioned one
Grand, mighty Lord, most urged by the Aunt alone
(Whom yet conceived she loathed) for damping cloze,
How strictly austere her Aunt; Mayds, Daughters, those
Sti^l Scout-like following her: no way did seem
TO obtain the Prize, but by strange Stratagem.
THERSAMES when replied; O, dearest Friend
Support me, or I sink ingulph'd; but lend
Your (...) aid; in Losing her
I Am wholly Lost, Whose Reason, Life (dear Sir)
Bound up in her become: O make me able
To grasp, Enjoy, or know I Am miserable.
The Doctor startled, knowing well his high
Obliging, double Scoar, strong friendly Tie
Connex'd to boot; Entreats him pause that Even,
Self-conquest practice, try; by the hour of Seven
Next Morn (howere) he would wait on him again.
Home goes FORENZ with shrewdly puzzled brain,
Sadly task'd thoughts, should this Love-fit endure,
By what safe Means both sturdy Work and Cure
TO effect at once, prime Cordial since fruition:
First groundwork though in this Abstruse condition,
The Ladies conquest seemed, her Love ^' ore-come;
Fair hopes whereof, that choycest Natures Bloom,
Her sweetest Goodness: next, most gallant Shape,
Of young THERSAME, Court-garb (whilst seemed as Rape
To loath that rude-form'd Lords, embrace) severe,
Strict, sowrest Aunt: Her friendly'st aspect there
Regard toward him, whose Patient, when arrived
There first, became; Sick-grown through un-repriev'd
Dear Mothers loss, weak' Father's body, mind:
Though, won her Love, dark cloudy'st Maze behind:
Since guarded so, to the secret Closset even,
Least (Praying) thence should flutter up to Heaven,
D^ndl'd twixt some enamored Angel's arms;
How to convey her thence, no Magic, charms.
Sore mused he that visits debt next Morn
Discharged, performed, he finds in Bed forlorn,
Perplexed THERSAMES; Stormy-soul'd; his Blood
Turned feverish, strange, dolefull'st Lovers mood:
Crying, O FORENZ, support; redeem me from
Loves earthly Hell, this burning friezing Doom.
When, grasping him in's arms, through-pierc'd FORENZ
Cried; cheer up boldly, worthy'st Youth, from hence
^ind me the Oar'd Slave to serve thy Loving passion;
Though sunk my Life in the boisterous Navigation:
^id rise, and rouse withal his Amorous brains,
Write unto her in the most endearing Strains
(...), Love; that Temples place express
^here viewed her first, what Bodies clothes, Souls dress
(Kind Gestures looks) he wore, displayed as then:
Three hours consumed, he would call on him again.
THERSAMES penned his worthy'st Thoughts, as writ
In ardent Flames for Ink, highest Passion, Wit;
So purely harmonious Sounds, so Musical
Love-stile (indeed) 'twould Savage-brest inthrall:
How limbed his Passions forth, her heavenly Beauty!
The Heart sent enclosed as Sacrifice of duty.
FORENZ, returning back, joined underneath
Much also, shown his Friend; as powerful Wreath
To crown belief: Wherein his Pen conjured
Her strongest Faith to all he wrote; Assured
First of's gentilest Birth (though highly'st raised
Their Ancestors) his Ports, good Nature blazed
(Known to him from the Womb) his Full and free
Estate to boot, discovered punctually:
Love last confirmed, whose Agonies discry'd;
Breathing through Hope, else sure the Youth had dy`d;
Gods the awful Witness then Invoak'd to all,
Whose Powers he feared, adored. But least befall
Nice doubts oth' Party ought, he Begged thus far,
That she would next Morn, in person grace Be-star
Some Window; Ten conceived most vacant Hour;
When, in such former Clothes, that gallant Flower
Of Youth should pass by, fixed Hand oth' breast.
Whom if she would with Favor crown, make Blessed
By secret Flight, as both should safely Ordain;
Then begged, beseech'd, next Morn to that again
('Bout Ten) placed near her sickly'st Consius Bed,
Walls darker side (as used) he entered,
She Would stroke (for sign) with gentlest Hand her eye;
Then thrust in the Bosom strait; drawing more nigh,
Take lower under's Cloak (by nimble slight)
Small Glass from's wary reach'd-out Hand, but light;
Cased round with Paper all, which strait convay
T'her faithfull'st Cabinet from the eyes of D^y.
Though sadly'st su'd, if Doomed beyond repeal
This worthy'st Youth for Death, she would these conceal.
FORENZ, love-furnish'd thus, about eleven
Entered his Patients room, where bounteous Heaven
Had set DORISBE, being newly'st come
(As Kindly used) walls darker side; on whom
Most wistly Glancing, whilst she sweetly Blushed
(Prepared for some Design) he softlier pushed
Into her gentle hand (quick'st under-slight)
That Paper which the Lady took: from sight
Wrapped up, as though fore-warned oth' Amorous plot:
T'her Closets councel-board, ere long, she got
(Mayd-following) and, closed her Door, began
With new-blown Roses there (alas, too plain)
To read her Lines; when shortly Milky'st white
Seemed to overflow those beds of Roses quite,
Sweet'st-pale. She read (choice scroul with love Begem'd,
Word-pearls) the eyes Gilding it, how often! though streamed
No doubt at all, who the Lovesick Person was,
Yet, mildly'st ere Tens hour, the Windows glass
She pleased to Adorn; through which, being Chrystalline,
Full-view'd, did like to the fair AURORA shine
Through the eastern Casements; standing reading there,
Near large broke Pane (which seemed Compliance bear)
Maid working by. The approved THERSAMES came;
Most Sun-like pers'nage, clothed all in Flame,
Gold, beauty, love; his Goddess soon espies,
Whom (undiscerned) adored, with fixed eyes
On her, then Heaven; his Hand across the breast:
So, passing slowly on, such looks at least,
Mild Sweetness from those Window- clouds, distilling,
As blazed her forth no Tigre brood, nor killing.
Sight being past, much more this second day
The sweet DORISBE Mused, does sober weigh
All things; besides that soul offensive Lord,
Tart, strictest Aunt, her Servant seemed stored
For Birth, estate to boot t'her humble Mind;
His parts and goodness glistring much, though shined
His lovely'st Person with Planetick blaze.
To her own Fancies wish; unmatched: the Face
Body (indeed Compound Enamouring.
His Love last heightened all, whose noblest Spring
Sublime and High, since begged her Self alone.
These weighed, she Sighed; when, wondering at that one,
Sighed three times over: perceived too plainly there
That she was growing now Unself'd (as 'twere)
Non-hearted, thrall'd; given up unto Another;
Which strange surmounting Fits, whilst strove to smoth^
Saucy'^t increased; more Mused, the more she Loved:
The own Heart (alas) since kind Revoltress proved,
For absent, poor THERSAMES strongly pleading,
Thus, sick through Fancy* qualms, this new Love breeding
She yielded her self up, for governed by
Great Love, well-known FORENZ, and Destiny.
Next prosperous Morn, at the hour and place requird,
She gave to joy'd FORENZ (as wished, desired)
Those dear sweet Signs; drawing near, with gentlest H^^^
Received that mentioned Glass; which, closely gained,
Conceald some while, to the Closset lightly trip'd
(Maid following) spring-lock'd her door, unstrip'd
That precious Glass; found Paper- cased over;
Wherein FORENZ did strongly'st thus implore.
As first, that she would trust more boldly, Su'd,
Heaven and his faithful Care, resolve, conclude
For secret Flight; sought stolen embrace alone;
Which should such Wondrous easy Ways be done,
Sure, safe (as he would next Morn by lines discover,
Given near her Cousins Bed, Plot strangely above'er)
The Whole World should nere pursue, their Joys debar:
THERSAMES goodly'st Seat, Estate as far
(Resides) removed, as reached the ARCADIAN Bound.
Meanwhile, beseech'd her drink that most renownd
Choice Cordial sent, the Worlds only Sovereign;
'Twould mint new Spirits, steel both Heart and Brain
For the crowned Exploit at hand (some's meaner Power
Sh'had tried, approved) but begged to observe her Hour:
Eight next Morn, by her Watch, the attendant Maid
Sent down for Drink, then step to the Closet (prayed)
Close by her, toss it off: the empty Glass
Thrown forth at Window, strait amonst the grass
(Wild Plot beneath) whereby confirmed, lo,
That she had drunk't, he would watchful Seize it so
(Least spied, that Glass bred thoughts of some combining)
So strait to the naked Bed her self resigning:
'Twould sudden short refreshing Slumber breed:
Though begged, conjured, as loved their Lives (indeed)
Those Papers both should over night be burned;
Their Plot thence being Entombed, to cinders turned.
'Twas thus far Managed well, faint hope to invight;
Next, young THERSAMES Heart he cheered (as right)
Him Cordialliz'd; who seemed to endure
Strange bandyes betwixt Heaven and Hell; procure
Two large false Beards enjoined him anon,
Till's utmost Lovers Task be shortly known.
Next following Morn by eight, the rarely sweet
DORISBE (every point performed as meet)
Maid being sent down for Drink, and th'hidden Gloves,
Carous'd her Potion off; then nimbly moves
To the Bed again; where, warmly couched, ere long
Cold frozen Vapors seemed at once to throng
Her sadly ore-clouded Brain, benumbed, congealed:
Limbs stretched, Sense stifled, gone whilst clozing sealed
Black, dismal Night those Jewels of her eyes;
Some softer groans; O death (no more) she cries:
Stiff, pale, like Death's more pure-complexion'd Queen:
Dire Cordial; dolefull'st Slumber ere was seen.
The Maid returning now, less quick of foot,
With sudden start, and loud outcries to boot,
Called up her Countess-Aunt; the Doctor then
(Sweet'st, lovely'st Corpse beheld, choice Picture, Scean
Of humane fraylty) when the damped FORENZ
Grown pensive, sad, startling (the Head turned thence,
Breast struck withal) cried, Fearfull'st Symtomes showed
'Twas that new killing Pestilence, which trod
With sudden Death; advised her Aunt (howere)
She should till ten at Night lie couched there,
Shrouded alone, which would Resolve how strong
That Band of Death; though then affirmed 'twere Wrong
To the Living, not to Coffin her, Inter:
Because that inward Venom, lodged in her,
Would Fume-like breath forth by that hour, exhale:
Which the Aunt approved, scarce seen to melt, bewail
(Stout, frosty-temper'd breast) though worthy'st Neice
Might claim all Tears, the whole Fun'rall-tide of Greece.
And thus, ere long, the sweetly delicate
(Though corpse) DORISBE shrouded was, Death's ma^e;
Whose Shrouding-cloath beneath her Chin did pass
(Such the use) broad Bongrace only over her Face
Shelving, as slept: her Head most Nightly dressed.
When one oth' Shrouders (Laundress, greedy beast)
Rich Di'mon-rings upon her fingers spying,
Which through much Care (alas) ore-night (less eying)
Sh' had kept on, vowed those costly Gems to obtain:
Though Custom made such dangerous seizure, gain
Foul Crime, called robbing the Dead: what ever G^m
( Death sudden chanced) being still interred with them,
If worn upon their naked Corpse: so swaies
Fancy in Customs often, more fondly strayes.
FORENZ; the measure having well espied
For the Coffin, charged THERSAMES strait provide
The (...); fair-clasp'd, part filled next with Mold
(Nor urging reason why) his Watch when told
That Midnights hour of twelve, transformed disguised
With His stranger Beard and Cloak, some meaner-priz'd
The other Beard worn by him) from's pleasant Place,
That lonely Garden-cabin, wary trace
(Fine, wall-joyn'd Summer-room) since having Door
To the open Feilds, which large-spread Fields before
The Countess Gardens Postern fitly'st lay;
Wood-cops adjoynd: thither be sure convay
That Coffin, there^ concealed, close-sculking lie
Till whistles Sign performed; then, loaded hye
To the Garden* door (worst past) where he would attend him:
That sovereign Night his longed-for Joys should send him:
Ten being come at night, full fourteen hours,
No sign appeared in the Corpse of living Powers:
The Lady therefore Coffined then in have
Slight Fun'rall-form, though dismal Torches cast
Sad, mournful flames, some Weeping Household eyes
(Since was conceived prime Bud of Rarities,
Beloved, admired by all) such running State,
Was done to the arched Vault conveyed strait
(In Shades) most near their Gardens postern-dore:
Where by her Uncle's slumbring Corpse (no more)
Lodged in those doleful Chambers of the Dead.
Ere one oth' Clock somewhile (O Night of dread!
Marked dismal hour!) that Whoorish Jade, fore* named,
(Laundress in the house) whose heart long since inflamed
Those Di'mon-rings, left in her Ruffian-wooer
By thievish stealth, through the Gardens Postern-door
(Trick plotted so from Noon) for load-conveighing
Fair Coffin stuffed with earth (as charged obeying
His Wenches rules) well-clasp'd, DORISBES size:
Whom boldly led short closest way to the Prize:
Entered that shaded Vault, where, leaving's own,
DORISBES precious Coffin (thoroughly known)
Hoys'd up in's arms, jog'd roundly forth at Door
(Soft-lock'd again) which crafty'st further bore
From the common Path (that Cops too near, displeasing)
To poor, old, broken Cot: where shoulders easing
Doubly Rich load, indeed) with his Tools began
To break, unclasp; resolved those Rings to gain,
Or crop their Fingers if they sullen stuck.
Her Corpse ordained then, for the neighboring Brook
(Dainty'st Fish-food) though Molten Crystal Tomb,
Still Weeping over her bones, 'twould thus become.
That Wench but newly gone, through Shades about*
Cautious FORENZ, whose Chamber like some Scout
Opened to the Garden, blessed, propitious chance
(Thinking indeed h' had weighed each Circumstance)
Stole with his dark Lanthorn down (though walking mu^^d
Often late) to the Postern-door, where found as used
That Is ready Key, left chiefly for his ease;
That might by the early Dawn (if so did please).
Go forth, return, 'bout Life and Deaths Affairs.
Door being open, he whistled strait, then stares
Upon that neighboring Cops with forged Beard;
When forth the roused THERZAMES strait appeared
With His Coffin all disguised, and forward paced
To the Garden-door; from whence most softly traced
Behind his leading Chief (FORENZ as trod
Some dismal Maze of death) to the sad Abo^e
Oth' dead, the Vault; strait gazing wildly round,
Where sweet'st, beloved DORISBE might be found:
Ghost nigh become. So, nimbly, down with that
(Low cried FORENZ) and help to take up strait
Your Mistress; pointing forth to the Coffin then:
Ay-me! forlorn! (the poor THERSAMES when)
And have I found at length dead Mistress? cries.
No, no (said the other) whilst she lives; be wise;
Quick, take her up. Ah sweetest, dearest Soul
( Said he) my jealous Boading Heart! Control
Those fonder thoughts (the stout FORENZ replied)
Away with her. Thus, hoys'd by eithers side
Their new false Coffin's born (the Garden-door
Soft closed, locked) their Cloaks thrown spreading over
(Strange Fat^s abuse!) till, entered now the Feilds,
Path's justly feared; more comfort straying yields,
Wheeling about; THERRAMES mournful Heart
Panting Death's solemn March, their Fun'rall-part
Bore sighing Lungs: till passing jointly by
(Unwares) the old broken Shepherds Cot, most nigh;
The arch-guilty Rogue, strait going to Divorce
(Just then) those precious Fingers (dismal curse!)
From the dainty'st hand, since could not from those Rings;
These judged Pursuer-like; forth madly flings
With horror, Prize and Body left behind:
Part-view'd through the open Wall, as glimring shind:
So that FORENZ with his Lanthorn glanced in*
Where true DORISBE (^o, sad Corpse) was seen.
Good heaven's (cried out FORENZ) we are mocked, abused;
Here lies DORISBE. Fates and death! (Soul-bruis'd
THERSAMES cried) alas! and is this she?
Dear, truest Corpse now, butchered, slain! said he;
Grasped, kissed her. No, no she breaths, she lives
(Said next FORENZ, though strangely Amazed, misgives
Whilst the honest Heart) it is only deeper Trance
I cast her in; be cheered: with eagrest glance
Scouting the whole body round, though then espied
Nor wound, nor seeming bruise: at last descried
Those Rings; skin rippl'd 'bout them, broke: Behold
Grieved Youth (said he) those tempting Gems and Gold
That caused this grand Delusion; quick, convay
Her body hence: whilst he; Dear, dearest clay,
I shall not long survive thy Sweetness ( cried)
Nor mine own Joy. Sh' has not least Bruise (replied
FORENZ) no more; that sovereign Potion often
I Have used; quick, bear her hence. Thus closing soft
Her Coffins top, more air (though nimbly then
Their own stuffed Coffin broke, through ready mean
Oth' fled Roagues borrowed tools, least being found
Caused jealous Wonder; pouring the Earth on ground
Planks took along) with quick though wary'st paces
Toward that Garden-cabin either traces.
Being safe Arrived, their dainty'st Corpse anew
Was in the warm Bed interred: Ah dismal view!
Deaths perfect draught! The poor THERSAMES cried;
Still mourning, weeping over. With faith confide
In Heaven and Art (said rarely'st skilled FORENZ)
She s^eeps alone; by Three, thy greedy Sense
Please with DORISBE and all her charming Graces.
O Heavens (said he again) what Rack surpasses
My torturing fears? so long? that needs not neither
(Replied FORENZ) this cold Frost, cloudy weather,
Deaths fog, my Art much sooner can dispell;
So, clear the all-fair, all-lovely Clime. From Hell
O then redeem poor me (THERSAMES cried)
As her from rapefull Death; whose Darling, pride
Long since become: scarce, scarcely he will let her go.
Here powerfull'st Unguents, cordialls strait did show
The admired FORENZ; how bathed her Temples, Breast!
Rubbed, chafed, her then: Nor loyt'ring proved the least
THERSAMES, laboring for second Life
(Stolen mournful Kisses often) 'twas eager strife
Which should exceed: Till now, some half an hour
Thus spent, dissolved; their Seat each living Power
(Awaked) resumed; she moving, warm became;
Both Cheeks and Lips thin-blossom'd over: All Flame
THERSAMES when, she lives, she lives (he cried)
She moves; all Beauty, Virtue else had died
With my Heart also: grasped her, Kisses then
Snatching such ravenous-wise (true Lovers Scean)
As though would that Life's sweet'st Advantage take
(Dear, dearest Flash) least soon the Corpse forsake:
Or, feared her Modesty, would thus improve
That living Dream for's hunger-starved Love:
Kisses (indeed) whose kindest Larum more
Might waken at that sweetest Rubie-dore.
When, gently'st rouzing now, fresh, gallant Spring
Flowr'd on her Cheeks and Lips, forth seemed to bring
Entombed lost Ravishments; Those radiant Eyes,
Life's Daybreak, as the worlds, their Crystal Skies
Shone forth unclos'd. O Heavens (then said she)
Where am I? in what World? Madam, you be
In the old one; sa^e, secure: FORENZ replied.
Are you not Ghosts then? shadows? strait she cried.
No Ghosts but men; soon answered they: Indeed
(Said she again) that ghostly Vale, if Freed,
I traversed passed but now; what you, FORENZ?
Pray, where is THERSAMES? Rapt, transported whence
Since seemed that pure Angellick Tongue to sound
His Name in favor forth, that instant crowned
Lord of the whole World) Dear Madam, here he cried)
Kneeling withal submisfull by your side
For Pardon, if his Love have least offended.
Alas! said she (therewith the eyes gently bended,
Choice blush) I thought not you had been so near
Rise Sir, you have it: which spoke translated here
To heaven, those snowy Hands she kissed, then leaped
TO her sweetest Lips. Sure I have soundly slept
(Said she) to night. Full fourteen hours; replied
FORENZ. Strange! wondrous! hark, my Aunt (she cried)
My Maid comes (gazing) Heavens bless me (then)
How strange my Chamber's altered! Smiling when
The ore-joy'd FORENZ; Madam, y're now in the Arm^s
And Bed of young THERSAMES, powerful Charms
Against Bugbear-spies; remote: Is It possible?
Said she again. Most certain truth, to the full:
Answered FORENZ. Sweet Madam, let not that
Displease you (joined low-bowing THERSA^ES strait)
Loves over-sawcy Crime. It does not, Sir
(Said she) but yet the Manner how does stir
My Souls amazement. Madam, you were drowned
In deepest Trance, by the potion (said profound
FORENZ) thought Dead; next, by elev'n at night
Coffined, in the Vault interred; ere morning Light
Stolen thence by us, false Coffin left in the room:
Though after told her out the whole story's sum.
Bless me (said she) and was I Voted, thought
Dead corpse (nigh fainting) Coffined too? in the Vault
Doleful interred? My life's dear Life you were
THERSAMES said. Dead, or alive, whatere
Methought (said she) those Feilds, that gloomy Wood
I traced, where wandered thinnest Ghosts; 'twas good
You Vayl'd your dismal Project so from the eye,
Scarce had I ventured on it. Nor truly ^ad I,
Best Lady, least informed (THERSAMES se'd)
Exposed you thus; though through Dispairing dead.
Come simple Punees (cried the unmatched FORENZ)
Y' are both in Natures Schools; by powerful means
Of this Device, you now may follow Home
This brave Youth to his country, travail, roam
(If please) the whole World, since marshalled amongst the Dead,
My Self too safe, secure, unquestioned.
When sweetly'st she, with blushing smile displayed
Down-glance, The Gods indeed have Both convay'd
Strangely'st together thus (the All-powerfull, Wise)
What ever else their joined Divinities
Have fixed, Ordain^d? It Is in your sovereign Power
Dear gentlest Madam (cried THERSAME) this hour
Next Voice of Heaven, to cloze up all for me
In blessedness. When, sweetly'st breathing she
Again, Since Heavens and You have managed it
Thus far (stupendous Work ineed) thought fit,
I yield, resign^me. Crowned, exalted when,
Dear Madam, please but to confirm it then
( Said he) to the Touch, with sweetest sealing Kiss:
Whose favor deigned, he reaped that single Bliss
Full ten times over. When, richly'st blushing she,
You cannot blame (I hope) my Modesty.
Mean while (went on) Your selves since forced to these
Strange naked Pastures. On our humble Knees
Best Madam (cried THERSAMES) we should rather
Implore your pardon for it. As Beard-grown Father
To both (said then FORENZ) Come, come despis^
Such squ^amish Toys, poor simple Niceties
'Twixt Love-conjoyned breasts; whom for a space
I now must leave intwin'd: sore words: Alas!
And will you leave me thus then? (strait replied
DORISBE drooping, sad. L^, there is (he cried)
Your worthy'st Guardian, one that dares no wrong,
Will pri^e your Person; Fame (believe't) among
Things sacred: trust that noblest Character
I wrote of him. When strait-petition'd her
THERSAMES too, for gracious Confidence
For why, that Night (howere) ^ain would FORENZ
Be thought within; Key left in the postern found;
From whence to's Chamber close and shaded ground:
Should early too, next morn, some physical
Receipts to the young sick Cousin give withal.
By Seav'n he would not fayl to attend her there,
When they would provide for needful'st things to wear:
Priest last should be procured, for joining fit.
Mean while with what Delights, how various sweet
Kisses discourse, the enamored Youthful Pair
Melted those Sugared hours! things new and rare,
Dainties as yet to both! much more Sublimed
Through past fears, tortures, j^alousies (though prim'd
Love-sweets become, when with both Arms and Lip^
The Heart moves, kind sympathising temper keeps,
United Souls when seem't embrace and kiss)
All modest, chaste: Nights gentle shades their bliss
First (conscious) shrouding; then, the fainter Dawn
Peeped glimmering Witness through, till Charret-drawn
Forth rod the golden Day; through sundry choice
Of Seasons variating more their Joys:
Whilst hugged THERSAMES thus (transported, 'prov'd)
Some Angel in death-smock; or Buriall-shroud:
Strange, mistick-fine possession of her there
Given in's own Bed, from courteous Fate as 'twere.
His Man (besides) in the Country then to view
Some nearest Friends; thus, naught oth' Coffin knew.
By sev'n returned FORENZ, when 'twas agreed,
THERSAMES (since less known) should bring with speed
Some Silk-Gowns ready made, for the present use;
With Linen; all things needful else, and Spruce:
Which task how gladly embraced! in no long time
Brought Choice of all: one fit-siz'd Gown, the prime
DORISBE chose; unseen, though viewed them there
In The Bedchamber, nor would FORENZ appear.
Thus, being Bride-like dressed, ere long their hands
Priest-closely linked in Hymenean Bands;
The Lady veyl'd; THERSAMES with FORENZ
Disguised in those false Beards: less danger thence.
Next blisfull Night was paid in the Garden-bow'r
Wedding-joyes total Sum, loves Golden* shower:
Dear, sweet'st DORISBE now (contemning harms)
New-tranc'd and buried in her Lovers arms.
Those Coffins blazed themselves with Fun'rall ^fire.
Short time she stayed in Town for clothes, attire;
Till, furnished like THERSAMES Wife, FORENZ
Saw them SARMARA leave; new-coach'd from thence:
Though breathed both sides in Tears their last Farewell.
Thus did this Lady honored, happy dwell
Far off, remote (most plenteous too) till dead
Her Countess-Aunt, SARMARA visited
Neer-hand: was to her Brother late unclouded;
Made known; though from ORTHERIS fitly shrouded.
Though Both did thus their Story raise, advance
For best to the view; That, through Lethargick Trance
(Thought that new Pestilence) with have interred,
That Villain stole her thence, most likely (as heard)
Employed to obtain those Gems; till, passing by
THERSAMES, nimbly'st fled: Who painfully
(Judging her Noblest-rank'd, perhaps not dead
But Tranc'd, signs found) conveyed her to his Bed;
Ere long through's care Restored: whose earnest Love,
Known general worth, did Marriage-motives prove;
For Life too (strongest Scoar) most dearly engaged:
Though known, her Father thence might turn enraged.
This ended, from the side spruce comely Pair
Marched slowly forth, whose Hands conjoined are;
Most cheerfull-ey'd, fresh-cheek'd to boot; so fine
Their Habit, Garb, some Bridal thence did shine;
FORENZ, ARDIAN these indeed (Beloved
Nurse to FLOSTEL) whom, Widow then, approved
Still handsome youthful Piece; Neat-fashion'd, bred
Moneyed, rich-farm'd for life (near gains Wellhead
SARMARA Town) the Doctor stoutly wooed;
Soon won, ore-came: though secret Wedding showed;
For which Offense FLOSTELLAS pardon there
Both humbly asked: who (sparkling Smiles however)
Wished them chief Marriage-joy; 'twas sport become,
New Masque of jolly mirth, to all the Room.
The ore-joy'd THERSAMES and DORISBE though
Most gladly embraced him, to whom speaking low,
Thus said FORENZ; I hope you passed by
My Potions part, in the late strange History,
As 'twas resolved, agre'd: They told him, Yes;
'Twas wisely done: thus ended all in bliss,
Short running Banquet though, for sweeter cloze;
When all withdrew, sought Natures calm repose:
Though second Wedding-night that proved as 'twere
(Loves joys revived) to the late forlorn ORTHERE.
(Thus (Reader) from these Towry heights we view
Spread Cottage-plains, with Pastoral troops, anew;
Those two gentile-born Nymphs, DULCENZA fair
MARPESA, in chief; to whom (kind noblest care)
POLINDOR wrote apart, with his own hand:
In which did (first) Confess the obliging Band,
His great Engagement for their Virgin-loves;
In the second place with Pen conjuring moves
Their joined Beliefs, that he naught disesteem'd
Their Persons, Parts, or Birth; since worthy'st deemed:
But rather proved (as then) less freely Inclined
To settled Marriage, of untuned mind
To the rustic Plains, besides some secret Fate
Ordained him for FLOZTELS espoused mate:
Although he should their precious memories
Still strongly Love, their persons chastely prize
Next to his own Wife; rest to the clozing end
(If proved) their Real, true, commanded Friend.
These Lines instil'd to eithers Maiden breast
Some Balmy comfort (sorest wound, unrest
(Indeed) where true Love seems disdained and scorned)
Though both of them with Showers of Pearl adorned
Their blubbered Lines; as if from thence should Grow
Those precious, dear Love-fruits, which late did flow
Dropped from his gentle Pen, as Relics kept;
Began both now with melting hearts to accept
Their constant Servants, who had pined for them;
Brave Youths, gentilest-born, each deemed as Gem;
(MENANDER, whom, SIRENUS we did call)
Fair-fortun'd like their Mistresses withal:
Though both the Women's portions doubled by
ORTHERIS were, through friendly'st courtesy
(Those sums left free to their own power, disposing)
Such ardent Fires these gallant Youths disclosing;
More love not bare those Nymphs to the Lord POLIND.
Two several Wedding days they chose, designed;
Each celebrating thus that others Feast,
Kind Partners in it; both happy Wives and blessed.
All which, their Parents too, as first they were
(Most part) Ioynt-sufferers with Duke ORTHERE;
Sharing with him that peacefull'st pastoral Life;
So when, recovered thus his dearest Wife,
Scean changed for Home; They also, still his train
Kind Shadows as it were, took leaves oth' Plain
Four years consumed (as if in honor trod
His Steps) returned to their gentile Abode.
And now FLOSTELLAS House was freed from guests,
Wedding-coyl, business over; those Masquings, Feasts,
Gay costly triumphs; Progress time become:
The ore-joy'd ORTHERIS now his ancient Home,
With His dear New-liv'd KALASPE, longed to view
(Since growing Friends, part-reconcil'd anew
To the gentler-visag'd World) that stately Seat,
Where next to his own King (indeed) most great,
Powerful, transcendent lived, for fourteen year
(Though proved the Court his constant glistring Spear)
'Twas Place, for all respects, magnificent,
Prince-like esteemed (the House, Gardens, Large extent
Of Lordship, Park adjoined) became his might;
First, greatest Peer, next, greatest Favorite.
Thither the Duke, with all that Courtly train
Joyful arrived; where viewed over again
Like pompous Scean, with like triumphant Feast,
For sweet DORISBES Nuptial sake expressed.
His own Feast too, more providentiall fashion,
Happened just then; whose gladsome Celebration
With yearly Zeal was still performed, and now
Wore sumptuous Plenties on its smiling brow:
Sack flowing there, rich Fount his Conduits womb,
Whence Streamed forth the old FALERN Grate, become.
Before, and since those Storms disastrous blew,
The world more constant Couple never new;
Though Pattern equaliz'd it was, to the full,
By both those younger Payrs; love-miracle.
Huge mounting Portion then to's Son, the brave
THERSAMES, with beloved DORISBE he gave*
Though present fair Estate, to boot, with one
Prime gallant House, the Lo^d POLINDOR's grown.
Just when POLINDOR's Feast, gave up Life-breath
That wild young King, mere surffetted to death:
Whose humerous Folly sensual Lu^t the Realm
Five years (alas) did sadly'st Cloud, ore-whelm.
When Is Uncle seized the Crown to the Duke ORTHER^
Kind Friend, as was his Royal brother, ere;
Confirming strait to him his Ancient power,
Who humbly Waved all that very hour;
Grown since withdrawn, retired (howere, for place
First-rank'd ARCADIAN Peer, as for wealths blaze,
Honored, beloved to boot) Self-conquering Mind
More strange, POLINDOR though great heights declined:
Convinced by's Father's change of late, how bowing
Those lofty Spires; FLOSTELLAS self allowing:
Yet was made Duke in her dead Fathers room,
ARPLAST; THERSAMES too new Lord become;
Whose own Inheritance, conjoined to that
Grand portion given, made up good Lords Estate.
And now at length, the lovely'st Bride was wooed
TO her Husbands new brave Mansion, thither rod;
Harmonious-joyning guests with whom did go
The whole Troop; no Churls FORENZ, ARDINA too
(Though the Parents left behind) whose pompous Gat^
Now drawing near, POLINDOR (as did wait
To quit kind former Scoars) with sobrest Kiss
Her Mistress made of all, entitled his.
'Twas needful time House-warmings there began,
Whose goodly'st-modell'd Structure the art of Man*
Prospective seat the skill of Nature vaunted;
Fine Gardens, joining Park, Groves rarely planted:
'Twixt these their Mansion-bow'rs divided were
Those twofold various Seasons of the Year.
POLINDOR Ruled without; hearts sovereign Queen
So wished, desired; whilst Mistress she is within
He Would have it so: and Mistress without door
In what might rai^e, advance, her Pleasure more:
So, crossing least her self, she crossed him.
Thus, both their powerful little World did seem
To share, as those grand Heaven-luminaries
Rule night and day; two still but one Soul marries:
Both, like to Twins (as 'twere) incorporated,
Going one way, whatever loved or hated:
So like proved their Affections, Echo, Shades
TO one seemed to the other still; one Pulse they had.
As when some Musick-string you sounding touch,
Another, Eight to that, will tremble much
Through rare, kind, Sympathizing force; even so
Their Turtle-brests like secret pantings show:
One stock of joy and grief, as of estate,
Served both; to ones ^ye seemed Glass oth' others fate.
And if least differing Mind, those thoughts were either
Veyl'd, gently hid; or Wisdom, Love together
Soon struck conjoyning Cloze: as, when trench made,
One wandering Stream does speedily invade
Another channel-road; till mingled, Lost:
Thus, seemed their strife but Dandling ball at most.
So good, Both, so discreet (intruth) appearing,
That, who e're Yields, small danger of much Erring.
Scarce parted they, and parted then no longer,
Then serious Buisness, sports, made Passion stronger;
Raised, quickened Appetite; through daintier Kisses
Endearing ^ove-delights sometimes, love-blisses.
'Midst all their store as choycest Crown and Gem
Viewing each other st^ll, whereby did seem
(Whilst Moon-like moving in their several Sphere)
As each the others PHoeBUS, dear Sun were;
From whence its borrowed light and comfort darted;
In whose arms Circle showed all joys imparted:
Where sweetli'st snatched from their own Selves surpised
To pleasing Ecstasies, imparadiz'd*
Lo, Virtue, Love, which blazoned worthy'st be
Star-coat of arms; Skie-mounted heraldry.
For close of all; fair Monumentall Shrine
Over that Dust of noblest ASTORIN
POLINDOR thankful raised; Inscribed above
These words; Devote to true unhappy Love.
His dainty'st bowry Green, and blisfull Cave
To's good old Host, oth' Town TREGOR, he gave.
His Fathers Grange on him conferred, to those
His neighboring Swains was left, at full dispose;
Who yearly Feasted there, sung forth to Fame
Renowned POLINDOR and FLOSTELLAS Name.
Finis Historiae de POLINDOR and FLOSTELLA.
POEMS.
THE AUTHORS First DREAM of FLOSTELLA, Seen in a Winters Morning, as he rode on
Hunting.
WEnt I this Morn, in cruel sport,
To fright the poor Hare from her Fort?
Up-rouze her from the solemn Cell
With horrors of a Fun'^all-knell?
Did Tyrant-I seek others Prize?
My self now made the Sacrifice?
Fates, you are equal, and thou Love;
Like mercy I (just Talio) prove
As meant to others; Torture, Pain;
Dire Scourge! it is my reward again.
'Twas She my Huntre^s was, by the way,
That ayr'd her so, like Princess May;
Such sweets and beauties scattring round,
Dull Winter seemed turned jolly, Crowned
With Rose-buds, fragrant breathed. What Rays
Then struck our eyes! what wonders blaze,
Sweet'st Lightnings! O, what Charms divine!
The ore-coming Glory did define
Some Angel- Form; if Earthly race,
Then Woman, lovely'st woman, 'twas;
Or rare I know not what: she is All
We Men admire, perfection call.
Her Looks shot daylight, Beame-supplyes,
While the sun (cloud muffled scout) close lies;
Ashamed on's gaudier blasing so,
Those Copper-rayes to hers in show:
Perhaps, some Love-dart feared, least he
By the jealous Morn forsaken be;
Or, indeed struck, with amorous head
Iog'd on, and so went sick to Bed:
The world not needing beg the old Sun,
Since from her eyes fl^m'd Two for one,
No Crystal frost work de^k'd the ground
T'intice her foot, whose Beamings round
That Morn dispersed, perhaps ore-aw'd
The glazed Earth, Congelations thawd.
Her pace Court-measure, gratefull'st showd;
Whilst through her Breath, the Air, spicy, good,
Purged wholesome seemed: as Gobli^s light,
Fogs shun her Purity, take flight.
Ten thousand Cupids came along,
Playing in her eyes, her cheeks, or hung
Oth' Breast, Lips, Hayr; encamped appear,
In Bright and loveli'st Musters, there,
As with their quiver'd Host would pierce
All Hearts, and conquer the Universe:
A moving world of wonder showing;
Heaven of flesh all Joys bestowing.
It Was fairely-sweetly-cruell (...),
That chased and seized my liberty;
That let whole Mint of lightnings fly,
Heap of Grenades from her Eye,
Dart-magazine, that shot through mine;
I saw their flaming points to shine
All the way they came, when, through the Eye,
The heart bled in kindest sympathy:
I hoped, feared, mused (Non-self'd, confess)
Strange Seeing Road! what wonders press
Through the eyes glazed Organs, Souls possess!
On FLOSTELLAS Close Nun-like Retirement.
WHy seems (Sun clothed Flostel) so long
Deferd our Break of day, till stung
With Greenland curse? O Why (Mole fashion)
Pore we on Clods, this dull Creation,
Our glory hid? with whom's inshrin'd
Those longed for blisses of Mankind.
Is It for our sins, that righteous Heaven
Has us this Plague amongst others Given,
This Judgment sent (alas) that we
Must lose thy Presence, and want Thee?
Or did we too profanely slight
That blessing, meanly rate thy Sight
Enjoyed? when thou (more justly-nice)
By Want do please to inhance thy Price:
An angry Absence must alone
Make thee more reverenc't, and more known.
Or last, was it Charity divine,
Did through our frailties guilt confine
Thee to thy Cells, devouter floar,
TO obtain our pardon? O, restore
That Face back, fair Example, thus,
We shall grow good, less criminous.
Rare Beautyes were not made at all
For cloistring, and live-buriall,
Though Bats, Owls be; those glorious Seven,
The unwasted Lamps of Earth and Heaven
(Sky-brooches) lo, they were not thrust
To Corners, lodged in Rubbish, dust,
But shine to the World, and traverse by
Spears blazing Pageants: whilst hid lie
(Earth chested) Gold, Gems where is their glory?
Sight's all; that magnifies thy story.
Some times it is wholesome, purest Maid,
To air thee through the field and shade;
When from some Hill faire-map'd does lie
Small Europe, traveled by thine Eye;
And the amazed People gazing round,
As though another Morn were found.
For as through sight thou Physick'st us,
And our dross-spirits refinest thus
To subtle Fire; this Earth Air grown,
Pure Quintessentiall, whilst (anon)
Our Bloods dance revels in each vein;
So thou do Physic thy Self again.
Mayes sovereign, delicious air,
'Twill make that Cheek more snowy-fayr
(If possible) those Breasts of spyce,
Thus fan'd, more, Beds of Paradise:
It Will make that Angell-shape to strike
Our eyes with motion Angell-like
Quick, sprightly; improve that daintiest frame
So lively, as if all Soul became;
Then show thee often, dear Cordial; thus
Thou physick'st both thy self and us.
FLOSTELLAS Nunlike Coyness
FLostella fairest, why so coy,
So dainty nice? when but to enjoy
One favor such a task does prove,
Herculean Labor: tell me Love;
What though that daintier hand touch mine
(Of Spotless Alablaster-shine)
Would 't show less fair and sulli'd be?
Or lose the Fashion, if by me
But kindly pressed? though never I
That sacred white do come so nigh,
But with washed hands; nor touch their Down,
But reverentiall fear does crown
My Devout Palm your Glove all day
May freelyer touch, your S^isers may,
Silk, needle, lawn, nay, meaner thread;
Then is my Hand more vile indeed
Then these? or say, you purify
Those things by Touch, like Chimistry
May these coorse hands sublime, refine.
Or say, those daintier Lips touch mine,
Are they impoverish't in their store?
Or wast their Delicates the more
By often giving? (since they are
A lasting sweetness) or, less fair,
Ought lose their color Ruby excelling?
The more they are kissed, more red and swelling.
The wanton Air with hovering play
May touch them and the tawny Ray
Of Ph^bus, Toys, which often please;
Then are my Lips more base then these?
The Fly may buzzing kiss, and touch
(Unbalm'd) those Cherries; mine is but such
Las! can you chide and frown, when I
(Nigh starved) do beg the Charity,
The Alms of one kiss? it was never yet
Held sin for Starvelings to crave meat;
That Is free; would you not Life bestow,
Where you your self never the Poor^^ grow?
Nay, Sweetest, were 't love-relish'd, this,
You would seem Richer by a kiss;
Love's First-course, Second Mintage it is.
The Author's second Dream of FLOSTELLAS Morning-Walk.
It Was Fresh-che^k'd May, with all her pride
And Progress-bravery beautified:
Her musk, perfumes, and Gems of price,
To take that sex, more dainty, nice:
When the Ch^os-world (late sullen) now
Turned laughing all, stamped on whose brow
Fine new Creation: when froz'd Men
(Not snailes alone) seemed Live again.
Forth went the Nimphe, whose eyes fair ray
Had January turned to May,
And spruc't the poor-clad earth howere
With flowers, though Flora banished were:
Forth trip'd Fostel whilst I alone
Engrossed that blessing, the honor wonn
To attend, her Walks chief Favorite;
Sole Guardian to my souls delight:
Called by her as if Heaven had called
To Joys, wherein blessed Saints instal'd
(Who would not glory?) Champi^n thence
To weak, yet purest Innocence.
For well FLOSTELLA knew that I
Would not hurt, but protecting dye;
And (though Temptations all, her shape)
Would punish, not commit a Rape.
Thus, though no morning star am borne,
Yet was I usher to the Morn;
Did, next, her Sun-companion show,
Whose hand enriched mine with its snow^
Naught envying now Great Turk, Mogor,
T^rtarian Chin^'s Bug^eare, or
Black Southern Prince; thus s^epter'd, I
Durst boast a fairer Monarchy.
Each Object, as we trac't below,
With rival-courtship seemed to woo
My Heavenly Fair; and bred in me
A kind of sportive Jealousy:
Birds chant love songs, Gales whispered soft
Kind tales, stole kisses; whilst (me thought)
Herbs, Flowers hung their lovesick heads
Or bowed with reverence from their beds,
Hills animated seemed, rejoice,
And (wanton) Echoed back her Voice:
O pregnant Soul! say, what does prove
So all-breeding as that womb of Love?
Here, whilst I sacrificed such Vows,
Sighs Incense as Love's zeal allows
Her hand, Breast, the Alters made to ^l.' ear
Thus breathed Flost^l, O, breathed sounds were
Seraphick Music! (words? be gone
That poor Term) Thus she seemed to own
Hold Fondling, don't expose abroad
Such sweetness to the Airs common Road;
Be wise; the Harmonious touch oth' Spears
Not Music is for Vulgar ears:
Repeat the Blisses to thine own;
Tell Venus, or Loves self alone:
And feed you lickerish ears (revived
Your dear Joys) Fancy makes new lived;
Whilst Cupid scores up all, each word,
The Hour, Minute, in's chaste Loves Record.
FLOSTELLAS Lute.
SIght, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling all be gone,
And leave with me the officious Ea^e alone;
Go Slumber, or the unheeded loytrers play,
Whilst thou attend (Souls Favorite) this way:
Bless, bless thy self and me, till seem translated
To new divine Joys, by that Hand Created.
List, list with reverence; devoutly O
Harken; the Orbs Minstrelsyes ^ham'd here below^
Whilst gives Flostel Life to her senceless L^te,
And warbling language to what late was mute.
Hark, what delicious strains and Heavenly rare
Do as 'twere sweeten, and enrich the Air!
Phebean Harps Great Master finds his skill
Scornd by the Olimpicks, and neglected still
When thou once play'st; all listening unto thee;
T'whom meaner hands like winds rude blustrings be
Or the note of bu^ling Brooks: All Music is
Untuned harsh Discord, and but noise to This.
Away all dumpish cares, all puling sorrow
(You Cloud-drove) fly my world, pack til the morrow;
Let me forget I Am Earth, or burdend am
With dross of flesh, but the Elementall flame
Seem ra^ifi'd, turned Spirits (Air does show
Poor, languid) dance my Blood, your veins overflow
In glad Tides; whilst those highest Soul faculties
Frame all a Masque: that Lute Soule-revels please.
O, th^r's a sweetly, sweetly-solemn strain
Has laid all in a slumbring Trance again,
And charmed all to amazement; view but round,
How strange a Metamorphosis there is found:
Men stand by the walls, and furnish out the room
Like Arras-pictures, or as to some Tomb
Belonged for Monuments; whilst only flies
A glimps of Life or Twilight from their Eyes,
All Is turned a Sepulch^e, so whist and dead
A silence raigns: the sweet Death welcomed.
O, let me thus expire and (...) It away
To dissolution, Nature that Deot pay
Of Vapour-breath, that else some boiling Fever,
Stone, Poison, sturdy Gout, or Stab might sever:
Sweet killing Flostel, thus the Soul to stray
To Heaven, 'twere to have Heaven by the way:
Such death were but to live; the Gaspes to this,
Ore-ravishing Delights, too powerful bliss.
And then I dye a Martyr by the Hand,
Though not in wrath; But (spite of countermand)
As fleeting Souls last Farewell, I must kiss
That beauteous hand first: Fool! all is spoyld by this.
FLOSTELLAS Hand and Glove.
FAir FLOSTEL, my ambitious Muse,
Through its aspiring zeal wu'd choose
Rather to chant thy Hand then Glove,
Court that Diviner form, my Love;
TO whom Snow, with the Alablaster mine,
Great style of whiteness do resign:
Where azure streams in purling measure
Make Cupids Isles, and place of pleasure:
But this eclipses vails their light,
And pleads commission for it; worse spite.
Whilst, cased up, beauteous those appear
Like sacred Twin-like Relics there,
Worth ^bove all Romes; like cloistered Nu^s,
Or silver, Orbe-involved Moons.
Nor naked to each unworthy eye,
Or the Sun's bolder kisses lie
(Sight fit'st for Kings) but then divest,
Break forth like Morns, their dusky East,
When Silk and Gold ask touch more fine;
Some Needle-miracle, design.
Where shown to the eye small new Creation;
Birds, Beasts so near inanimation,
So true, that Natures self does start;
Half mothering that mere Child of Art:
Mocked by this Landscape, nigh mistakes
For her own work the Hills, Plants, and Lakes.
Sweet'st Recluse-payr! you meanly choice
Beauties triumph it now, rejoice;
Let coor^er Hands now boldly show.
And seek to enamour with worse Snow.
Your Gloves kind pardon, if I seem
Transported here with what is their Gem,
Chief Riches, Glory; wherefore spite
Should not ore-long debar my Sight:
Since I love These too, even in this
Fine, pritty'st winning Beauty is;
Both as it self, and as it is Thine:
So dainty-shap'd, Symmetrick fine,
Pure-white withal, that it might stand
A rude-drawn Picture to that Hand:
From whence (methinks) breath highest sweets,
Whose sublimation Juno fits.
This Pattern seems for best of Gloves
(As that for Hands) like Queen of Love's,
O Cupid, would ordain, that I,
Under that form might hug so nigh
That loved Hand (stupendous feat!)
But ah, I fear my Youthful Heat,
Sighs, soft-breath'd whispers, joyful Dance
Oth' Panting-heart, then colder Trance
With servent ravenous Kisses, soon
Would blab the Cozenage; all undone;
When I Am cashiered eternally:
Whereas, that Favourit-Glove laid by,
Recloathes that Beauty; exalted is
To it is late Paradisian Bl^ss.
The Authors third Dream of FLOSTELLAS Evening Walk, and Voice.
FLOSTEL and I (O, fondly'st-kind,
Indulgent Stars! thus still you bind)
Flostel and I in Evening fair
Stole ^orth to taste the Garden-ayr;
That sweet'st and mildest Age of Day,
When Sun does sprinkle kinder ray;
Nor breeds our headache, whilst Goodnight
Sends from far West with drowsy light:
That and the Morn, those pauses sweet
'Tween the Aguish fits of Cold and Heat.
Those harmless Gales were only straying,
Which dance the leaves with nieer playing,
Nor whisper, whilst, with kind of bliss,
May's Flowery beauteous Strangers kiss
In sign of welcome: dandling often
Flostellas Curles, when used (me thought)
Reverence too, least, through their sin,
One curle disturbed or spoild had been:
The Airs Concave stil^'d to quiet rest,
Like Flostels gentle Mayden-brest.
Who, masked and veiled (that else had soon
Turned the Evening into glorious Noon)
Traversed a gloomy Thick, designed
For Love maze, Labourinth, where inshrin'd
The Worlds Beauty appeard. It Was ambush plot
T'ore-heare the Nightingales small throat,
High, strong'st to boot (That, praised to be
The Shades prime Songster, harmony)
With rest oth' Noise, who all begun,
As if to the then departing Sun
Would chirp some merry shril Goodnight,
And so long Sing as he gave Light.
Which heard (prime mirthfull jollity)
By both, with pleased Ear, drawn nigh:
Flostel puts into the warbling Quire;
Fair Goddess lo, which seemd to inspire
Those little creatures with their skill;
Chanting her praise in A^thems still.
The ruder place seemed (Chaos-wise)
Turned to some new dressed Paradise,
Earth-Heaven, so well that Face and Tongue
Might to sweet Cherubins belong.
Gods (rapt with joy oth' recreation)
TO affairs divine held strait Vacation,
Breaking Heavens Parliament asunder,
To see, to hear this Mortal Wonder
(The Air traced in measures) while cros-arm'd
Some fate, enamourd showing, Love-charm'd:
Consulting all her soon Translation
From this base Earth to the starry station,
As their Quire's Mistress; female powers
Whilst praised, or envied from their Towers:
Wood-satyres skipping wildly round;
This masque at least my fancy found.
Lo the All of Rapture, sweets how high!
Best Joys the ears capacity
Could reach to, only those above,
The dear Soul melting Sounds of Love.
Her Lute was rare, though dead the sound;
This Living, therefore rather crowned:
That, was but hollow Timbers noise,
This, sweet, warm, lovely Woman's voice:
Religion swayed, else I had nigh
Been guilty of Voice-idolatry.
FLOSTELLA and the Nightingale.
RAre, charming Voice! but (O) how rare,
Breathed by that she so only fair!
Whose Face and bodi's beauties be
Composed with so rare Symmetry
( Heavens choice D^sig^e) so sweetly accorded,
One heavenly consort all afforded;
And were the Harmony oth' eye;
Seemed Natures silent Melody:
N'ere man so doubly blessed; the Eye, Ear!
Record it Love, 'twas only here.
Each trembling Noate, those Coralls wrought
(When born) seemed swadled, wrapped methought,
And (as soon dying) Embal^'d within
So sweet Breath, as perfumed 't had been;
Came flying in a precious Air
Of Odours, 'bove Arabian far:
The same sweet Noats (you would have deemed)
The several souls of Music seemed.
O, had I caught and kept alive
Those precious sounds (beyond Reptive)
Those Spirits of sweetness as they flew!
So to have had constant Music, True
FLOSTELLAS Self by me in those:
Her Breath, preserved and relick'd close,
Had served for sovereign protection
Against poisonous Plagues and all infection.
If that famed Harp, could Rivers cause
To stand at wanton Gaze, and pause;
Beasts, stubborn Rocks, and burly Trees,
Made dance in Antique Revels these;
Her Voice must greater Magic prove,
And make them court her, fall in Love.
Whilst breathed Flostel and closed her song
Behold, most pretty wonder sprung;
The ambitious Nightingale replied,
Through pertest emulations pride
(Chief Chorister in the feathered Count
To the royal Eagle famed) in sport
Would sing her part, and nimbly runs
Her fine-poys'd, quaint divisions:
Now Flostel, then the Nightingale,
Now she, then she, which should prevail.
The Chirper's fallen to earnest now,
No more must Jesting strains allow;
'Twas sober Duel, no idle play,
Sharp Breast contention for the Day:
Till the ore-strain'd Bird presumed still higher,
As life 'twould forfeit thus, Expire.
Which pirtying, I was fain to entreat,
Her softer Heart would make retreat;
And end that dangerous strife so nigh,
By yiedling a false Victory:
This Quarrel must not ruin prove
Of such a voice, to the Spring and Grove:
Her Mercy rather should reprive
(Double honor's Trophie) keep alive.
When, loath to stifle yet my blisses,
I silenced those sweet Lips with ^isses;
Though but the Ears ^yery Joys transferred
To the solid Touch; so, saved the Bird.
CRESSAS Funeral, the Love of DIFLORIS.
IS any Pastors Ear so deaf to ^ame,
That has not heard of fairest CRESSAS name?
So used to bleatings, whom that Funerall-knell,
Which Groaned this Nymph to earth; did hearts congeal^
Has not arrived to? happy sure's that He
In this, since knows not the common Misery;
Distressed Argadias loss, with whom does share
Nature, Grand Mourner; her Beloved fair
Cloistered in dust, nor (without company)
Died she alone, for Hundreds! seemed to dye
In sorrow with her; The Suns self was gone
Fast from her Funerals, and Night came on
To bring her Sables. O what new-rays'd Train,
Of Goblins struck my sight! which roved the Plain
With such dire ceremony, rufull guise,
As each did his own Funeral solemnize:
Lo, Deaths March' ^was. First went young Swains by pairs
(Each crowned with mournful Cipress) Usherers
To the solemn Hearse; those Four next to it (that led)
Bare Shields, were pictured, on dark Cole-black Bed
Most pale-check'd Virgin lay, prepared as 'twere
For Bridalls, and which beauteous did appear
Even in Death, by Deaths black arms embraced:
And over, in white Characters, was placed,
This, this my Lover, t^is my Bridal: So
All passed along: But following the Hearse did go
A single Swain; how dismal looked, ^low-pac't^
Tr^'st Bulk of wretchedness, o'r whose face cast
A mere Life-da^p; seemed Ghost, to the Corpse before:
Sighs bestorm'd about him, whilst be drenched their (...)
His Torrent-eyes; and thus, would needs excel,
Surpass in grief. About his Ha (mixed well)
Forsaken Willow, Cipresse wreathed; above,
This written, Deaths my Rival. Next did move
The Virgin-train in white, which Cens^rs bear;
Dark veiled like Doom^-day Planets: Torch-light there
Forced frightfull Noon. And thus they softly trace
(Dire measure! how unwilling) to the sad place,
Where they must leave their slumbring Nymph behind,
TO enrich the covetous Earth; which (half struck blind)
Their Youth beheld: never spoke Sorrow more
Then now in silence: different Passion store;
Here Sighs, there Tears, pale Looks there, yet all one
Consor^ in Grief; This general alone;
All looked their utmost, till now lost the sight,
With whom their Eyes seemed as 'twere buried quite;
And (blind to upper things) in Earth beneath
Are following her, as though in spite of Death
Would still Enjoy: with many a pitying muse,
The hard ground's ore-churlish mold should so abuse
That daintiest Body, which though once more nice)
Las, now complained not; but Death-tranced lies,
What Maiden Adi^us, what Tears! Swains kissed the Place;
All saying, Richer Gem'd Earth never was.
SONG. Scornfulness.
Know, thou fair Tyrant ere't belong
Down will fall
Thy grand Scepter, Crown and all,
Beauti^'s imperial Fort, so strong;
When those Sunny Eyes, but late
Lamps of day^ to Dawnings turn,
Dim twylights, twinkling Tapers fate;
And Glowworms seem more clearly burn.
Those Spring-like Cheeks and Lip^, admired
(Scean changed often)
Autumn's, ^oul December's draught;
Thy gay-form'd Pageantry expired:
When, Thou living walking Tomb
To thine own Beauties shall appear,
And here thine Epi^a^h, like doom,
Breathed in three words [She wa^ however.]
Then shall those former Slaves of thine
Kings become,
Which wore out Clothes and Brains (in sum)
To court thy peevish Mood's design;
Thy S^rapadoes felt, were laid
Panting at thy scornful feet,
Expecting Dooms; one Smile displayed
Their Light of life, refreshing sweet.
One Kiss oth' Hand or breast at least,
Life's food showed,
One calm Word life-^ound bestowed;
Begged these, poor Amorists, unblest!
Then, though churlish Thou did scorn,
They shall (nobler) pity thee;
Or long before, perhaps (Freeborn)
Turn wise, renounce Love's slavery.
Court now their dainty'st Freedoms, ease,
Looking on
Thy mocked Beams undazl'd grown,
Charm-proof, be it Frowns or smiling dress;
Queen of some fair World (as 'twere)
Leaving thee no Subjects to it,
When thou will wish the had practiced there
Less Scorn, known more Love-sweets to boot.
The Goodmorrow.
Fairest, fair Goodmorrow from
Thy Servant Voice and Lute present;
Lo, Day's glorious Prince (Brides-groom
To the More) is up, for progress bent;
Bounteous, gracious in his Rays,
The Worlds bright influentiall Show'^,
Though I stand Frozen here this hour,
Till thou (my sweetest Sun) do Blaze.
Plumed Songsters chant to the ears,
Earth and Heaven smiles combine;
Pleased whole Natures Cheek appears,
OF do not Thou unpleasing Shine:
Lovers (often) their bad days
Prove, and good; last night my Sun
Did set in lowering Clouds, Night done,
O let her Rise more gently, Blaze.
May those Dewy slumbers, steep't
Her fair Eyes sunk down to the Heart
Have softened that, what time she slept;
The like might Pillow's Down impart,
Mollisie both Head and Brain:
Break ^orth sweetly'st, O my Sun,
Thy Casements glassie East, nor shun
This Morning-sacrifice, as vain.
Or if Couched still my Fair,
Might this Lute, Voice lull thee yet
Gentler, breed Morn slumbers rare;
So, keep till Noon thy Blazing fit;
When ^or Light* warmth I Have designed
Short visit, O look Beamy, clear,
That I may Vaunt m^ dearest Dear
W^k'd Gentle, though she slept unkind.
Lovers mixed Weather.
WHence is it that Lovers prize
The Object more, that full enjoying,
Doubtings when through Rubs arise,
Or discreet Reserv'dness, Coying?
Seldom when her Smiles do glance,
Sparkle, or kind words Intrance;
Sweet-meat kisses
Lock'd-up Dainties held, rare Blisses?
So when solemn Clouds be over,
Sweeter Sunshine, lovelyer grows;
Or, when sickly fits, the more
Valued Health; what Joys bestows!
Worldly troubles cares if cease,
How Is Endeared our calm-like Ease!
Heightnings carry
All things from their Bad Contrary.
But that Coyness, if exceeds
Civil bounds, Affronts discover
(Churlish, froward grown) but breeds
Qualms in the Generous minded Lover;
Through the embitter'd Sauce worse far
The After-favours relished are:
She Is less prized
When enjoyed, who once, despised.
Too much suffering, Love's Wounds
Leaves Ill-skinned over, confounds.
The Springtime.
BEhold those crystal Founts
Which P^rl and wander over the Plain;
How branching, plumed those lofty Mounts,
Plush- Banks bedrest with Flow'^s again:
The whole World's revived;
Earth decked in Ma^quing robes, bright Heavens surrond
Cleer-check'd, sweet'st-breathing Gales abound,
Whilst Mortals grow new-liv'd.
Chief Empress of the Spring,
Come forth with all thy Beamy power,
Thine Hand maid since does smi^ing bring,
Let not the lovely'st Mistress Lower;
Least damping thence
The whole worlds fair Spring-tyde, with my faithful
Drooping thy Frown to both imparts,
Through strangest Influence.
Come Sweetest, let us trace
To yonder Bower, prospective Hill,
Where the Springs Musitia^s, more to grace,
(...) shall with their Carolls fill:
There Is VENUS Fount,
Melting its streams forth from those Rocks above;
All, Lectures of Joy, Beauty, Love
shall now to thee Recount.
The Face and Glass.
Sweet, let me hold
Thy Glass as Hand-mayd, uncontrolled,
And show thee more then the whole World can present,
That is thy Fellow; yet (alas)
Not such, since it is but shadowed Face,
Thine true, substantial Natures ornament:
Sweet'st Coynage though, portray'd beside
In my Hearts Tablet does reside.
More Guiltless (know)
And bold, I can this duty show,
Since rest confirmed that Sight, not makes thee Proud,
Although chief Cause of pride there be,
Transporting thoughts Self ecstasy,
Since viewed such Sparkling wonders through that Cloud;
In which So^^'s beauteous worth I do
Vaunt, glory, that is Unequalled too
Not least proud Thought
In Looks appears, no Action's wrought
But what might show Neglect or Pleasedness;
As if thou (sober) all did see,
Thanked thy Creator thence, so free:
That Brig^t-che^k'd, frozen Lake (used but for dress)
Thou look not in with Doting vein,
As Glass'd in crystal streams the Swain.
Dear, still permit,
Since have my serious Ends in it;
Hoping, that while thou view'st those charming Eyes*
Thou will my Love-intranced Sense
Pardon and Pit^y both, from thence:
And though my Wages paid, since Beauti^'s Skies
Thus long Behold, and gently this,
Grant to my (...) T^uch one Kiss:
That I may know the art substance, tell
Love's God, how far (Sight, Touching, Smell)
Thou do that beauteous shade excel.
Presence.
Now shines on me my sweetest Sun,
As yet my Springtime is not done,
And I boast that I am living;
Whilst my Soul and Senses dance,
Or else prove some blessed Trance
Through those Joys from thee Reviving;
Now I view
The All of Beauty, touch it too:
Those Hands and Breast: all sweetness hear
That Tongue, Voice, musical to the Ear:
O yet more (to the Joys abounding)
Let me Time's advantage take,
Reap some Kisses for Love's sake;
Whilst those Eyes prove deeply Wounding,
Let impart
Lips their sugared Balm to the Heart.
My starved Desire those Fruits afford
Though want Love's sovereign Food and hoord
Nay (my Dear) such shortened Bl^sses?
Think not One my Life preserves,
Or, that More oth' sweet Conserves
Ought could make me slight thy Kisses,
Who do swear
Each begets new Longings there.
Thus high-grac't,
I Have no fickle Lovers Taste,
Nor can those Lips or cloy, or waste.
Absence.
Sweetest know did not control
Cruell'st Fate, my steps, this ^our,
Thus to leave I had no power,
Parting as from mine own Soul
Cloud thine Eye seems over-vayling,
As grown sad, did Pity me,
Which Looks grandest honor be,
Hearts-support; since smiles prevayling
(Else I vow
Dear) would scarce Delight me now.
Yet that Cloud o're-heavy, sad
Wish I should not, least thy trouble
Mine but Aggravating double;
Leave me to my Nightly shade
(Far worse Curse thy want producing)
And with pleasing Glimmers dress
Those Looks, though not smilingnesse;
Love less sorrow thence infusing:
Though indeed
Saddest looks there Pleasure breed.
Ghost from thee this Body goes
Vowing to my Heart's esteemed
(Thoughts of her so Precious deemed)
Night these E^es shall never cloze,
Nor Day their (...)-curtains ^ever,
But thy dearest Image shall
Sleep with me, and Wake withal;
As my Guardian^angell ever:
Whatere's Rare
Shall to the Thought present my Fair.
Thus I Part,
Till thy (...) Presence dart
(...)
Beauty.
How gallant'st Beauty to the ^ight,
Of Wonders mystic rare Compound!
Framed for Amazement, as delight,
Heavens sweetest Map, Prospective found!
And the earthly Globe's Epitome being crowned:
The whole Worlds contraction!
Though rarer far this Excellence,
Life sparkling thence,
All heightened still through Looks, Words, graceful Action.
What lovely'st Radiance in the Eye,
Souls splendid Orb! what Visions there
Of Beauties, Virtues, speakingly
Both shine and move! what Springs ^ppear
In dainty'st Checks* delicious Beds (as ^twere)
Of Heav'n-^orn Flowers!
Heaven planted Fruits, both Pearls and Gem
Lips boast in them;
Prime-model^'d sweets; great LOVE'S Imperial Bowe^s
Alas that should prove this Quintescense
Of Worth, like meanest Creatures, frail*
Such vaunts the Rose her self to sense,
(Proud, fragrant Garden-Queen) though pale
Drooping ere long, turned Coars our eyes bewail:
So I Have observed
That choyce-stain'd Tulip, Gillystow'^
Fresh-cheek'd this hour;
Fruits lovely, sweet, ere long grown old, Death-starved.
All things are Changing, fading here,
Minds, Bodies prove their sinking Fate,
Like those young Seasons of the Year;
That Beauties withered, gone, which lat^
Florish'd adored, Slaves waiting on her State;
Now pitty'd, scorned:
Bright Virtue, Wisdom though should lend
Luster to the end,
Changed Cheeks though those, like Sunshine-beams adorned
SONG. A French Villanell Englished. Il ya dans ce Village, etc.
1.
IN this Village lives I^shri^ed
The fair Saint my thoughts adore:
Paris, 'midst her Beauteous store,
Shows me naught so Fair, refined:
Ah, ah, how sweet it is,
Were to Dye for thee my Bliss!
2.
All times shall I serve, admire
Her law-giving Lips and Eyes;
More then King my self I prize
In this new-rays'd Love-desire:
Ah, ah, how sweet it is,
Were to Dye for thee my Bliss!
3.
Truth it is, so dearly seizing
Proves her Beauties charming grace,
Less my Liberty I praise
Then this Servitude so pleasing:
Ah, ah, how sweet it is,
Were to Dye for thee, my Bliss!
4.
I not know the artfull Passion
Other flattering Lovers vent;
But for all deep Complement,
Make my Fair this protestation;
Ah, ah, sweet it is
Were to Dye, for thee my Bliss.
EPITAPH On a young Lady.
HEre Chastity it self does lie,
And Beauties self; whom never eye
Nor tongue could tempt as yet to love;
Till Death his violent dar^ did prove,
And (powerful'st) won unto his Bed,
Though she was even then Ravished.
SONG. Hero and Leander: Fra^'d after that of Dido was a Carthage Queen, etc.
1.
HERO Alas unhappy Maid,
That ere Loves winged Boy
So treacherously thy Heart betrayed,
To Love, but scarce enjoy:
Cursed be the Hand, the cruel Bow,
Which did wound thy poor Heart so;
Accursed the ravenous Wave,
That raging, bent so murdrously,
Forced thy sweet-fac'd Boy to dye,
And needs would be his Grave.
2.
HERO, Long with wishing eyes
Awayts her Curled Love,
And from her Tower entreats the sk^^
And waters gentle prove:
Many a Vow she numbered over
(If would wast him safe to Shore)
To Gods of Seas and Wind;
For why, she fears too rough the stream
For her poor Delight to swim,
And least should prove Unkind
3.
HERO, Sees with smoothest Brow
The well pleased Waters (...),
Those Winds are hushed, and Heavens fair show,
The rather to Beguile:
When strait the Nymph from far discries
(Nimble are poor Lovers eyes)
LEANDER Waves embrace;
And leaving shore, with cast-up eye
If thence his Goddess might ^spy,
To glide the Streams apace.
4.
HERO, Looks with gladdest thought,
And Ravished hasts to shore;
When strait the sturdy Waves high-wronght,
And Bellowing Winds do roar:
When she the storm increasing new,
With Tears and Sighs which from her blew,
Does see her Lover fail;
And, the only Bark, his Body show
(Shipwrack'd) beaten to and fro,
No struglings might avail.
5.
HERO, Grieves, and by and by
LEANDER before her Eyes,
With stretcht-out Arm and many a Cry
On HERO, sinks and Dies:
Who takes no time now to Complain,
Calls and cries since all but vain,
She sees no cause to live;
And so the unpittying Wave bestrides,
Which soon her dainty'st Body hides,
And Both one Tomb does give*
Englished out of Montemayor in Spanish. On LEANDER Leandro Amoroso Fuego
ardia, etc.
LEander, burning in an Amorous fire,
Stole down to the Liquid murmuring shore, attended
With one Love-thought alone, his dear Desire;
Through whose Bold force no danger apprehended:
Which flaming Light through streams when darted was,
God Neptune angry roused, with Waves to quench it;
God Cupid too might better ceased that Blaze,
'Tween HERO'S wisht-for Arms have sought to Drench (...)
The Morns ^air Light to the Voyage, urged, as 'twere;
Night gently rose, with friendly'st shades surrounding;
More kind then either Love, or Fortune were:
O wretched Lovers fates, belief confounding!
That Love and Fortune both, in one combined,
Such dismal Death in the end for him Designed.
Another Englished out of Montemayor, in Spanish: On a coy Mistress. Los Oios
no peccaron en Miraros, etc.
MIne Eyes in Looking (Sweetest) does not sin,
If but pretend to view, and to Admire you;
Should my Soul Merit plead, aspire to win,
Wished not worse Ev^ll, then still to Want, desire you:
Nere speaks my Tongue to you, be it silent, dumb,
If word, with thought to move you, forth it warble:
My Tears, if plot to soften overcome,
You punish may, hardening your Breast as Marble:
But do not snatch from me your dearest Sight,
For though it cause (in the End) my secret anguish,
Sad Life I Will spend in viewing you, earths Light;
Since no Life else, for none I feel, or languish:
My Soul, if lives without you's Dead, or dying;
Hope of its Torment still best Cure applying*
Happiness.
THere is a precious thing whom we all bless
As Gem of Heaven, entitled Happiness;
For which the pined World plods and sweats, approves
From Towers to Thatch, from Silks to Leather Loves;
The general thirst and hunger only this,
To frail Humanity prime Minion it is:
But most, how blindly hurry to the wrong School
TO instruct them in it! their Tutor is most Fool.
Reason disclaimed, Sense, Fancy proves their Guide;
Thus those deluded Pilgrims travel wide,
But never enjoy, becoming still worse strayes,
In that their Magick-strow'd, unlucky Maze.
He, Honou^s Blazes, Popular breath's air
Hunts after; wanton Venus Breasts (made bare)
The Other admires, how Courts; with stallion-heat
Neighing after the flesh: That, studies how to Eat,
Carouse to pleasure, Lauds his various mess;
Whose Hell-deep Gorge, tooth's nicety to please,
That Elementall storehouse wants food;
The whole Globes a thin starved market: there is his Good.
The fourth hugs his Mint^, gay metal does adore:
The fifth Horses, Hounds (keen sports-man) loves, plays over
His life just like a Game; whilst Lazyer He
Sits yauning, looks about, an Idlesby.
All these Graspe ayery Blisses, bitter sweets;
Tarant'la-stung, but dye 'midst laughing fits;
Since only Virtue (Heavens choice Offspring known,
Frail Earths best seasonning sweet, life's life alone)
This Souls Elix^r, tenfold Indies wears,
And on her Votaries as Gift confers:
In Her stored All. Sublimed this Virtue grows
Through Learning, arts; What Is well, that former shows,
And yields both Comfort, Peace of a Good Action;
The nobler souls prime glory, and satisfaction:
The other gives Knowledge, unlocks to thine eye
Nature with each her richest Mystery
Infuse but Third to these, the Moderate mind
(Though shadow-like with virtue 't seems combined)
Who seeks but what is Enough, and there behold
That Happy man, great Lord oth' Western Gold
(If He Will but think so) Prince of this vast Round,
This Medley of Sea and Land, by himself Crowned.
Nor can his starvling-Fortunes miserable
Make him or wretch'd, if to subsist but able,
TO uphold a Being, and worst Poverty
May Natures low Ambition satisfy.
Thus he enjoyes himself still, is the same,
Though's Changling Fortun's turned; nor finds a shame
In being Poor, or's heard to rayl upon
His Stars for their extortion; stands alone,
Like unmoved Rock, the battering Wind and Wave,
Mocking their choleric Frensies; bids 'em rave.
Sucks as sweet pleasing Air, talks, eats, and sleeps
As hearty as ever, whilst his Curtain keeps
Forth Care with Day: Good Bedfellow, as kind,
Soft, Down-support, does still his Pillow find.
And as friends flinch away, but laughs to see
The odd humor of the Age, how Poverty
Is left alone, save of her own lean Crew;
The Worlds grown Coy, known Face, strangers show
And look on him A-squint, whilst cheerful he
Finds from within the sweetest Company;
Can hug himself: That base Tribe pitying still,
And if his burlyer fortunes claim the style
Of Plump Prosperity, if now he shows
Somebody in the World, how kindly flows
The late ebbing Rout, what Hails and Visits then!
Both make him Mirth, he is now beloved again.
Englished out of Petrark, in Italian. On his first view of LAVRA. Era'l
giorno, ch' al Sol si scoloraro, etc.
THere was a Day when the Sun's beams grew pale
Through reverence of you, Lights chief Disposer,
When those fair Eyes (dear Mistress) ah too ^rail
Ungaurded bound my Soul, no band the incloser:
Time served not then for Breach repairs, or Fence
Against CUPIDS storm, yet felt I sore suspicion,
Strong fears (though loves disease more vulgar) whence
Chief spru^g my bleeding woes, this thrall'd condition;
Love, treacherous love, found me disarmed there,
When through mine Eyes to the Heart free road extending
(Eyes, now the Sluice to tears, sad Foords as 'twere)
Though little with Loves honor, glory ending;
Struck Naked me with Dart, whilst not Alone,
To Coy well-armed you his Bow was shown.
Another Englished out of Petrarch in Italian: On LAVRA veyl'd. Lassare il Velo
Oper Sole, O per Ombra, etc.
THat you leave off your Veyl, by Sun of shade
(Mist^ess) I have not seen, nor can discover;
As though you thought my Grand desire allayed
That way, which throngs my Heart, become all Lo^er;
Since secret thoughts, there harbored, lurking, do
Stifle me still through Want, breed more Desiring:
I Have seen choice Goodness to adorn that Brow,
But since that Love disclosed my inward ^^ring,
Those Sunshine-curls with Cloud^ be-veyled over;
Your splendid amorous Look, o'recast, obscured?
Thus, snatched from me what most I prize, Adore,
If governed by that Veyl, worst plagues endured;
Which, friezing me to Death, be'^ heat or cold,
Your fair Eyes sweetest Light does darken, infold.
The doubting Lover.
THrough doubt, desire, he friezes, burns
(Quotidian Ague) both Zoanes turns,
Torrid, frozen: Lauds his Saint, adores;
Hugs his late slavery, yet deplores:
Thanks, blames his Stars, as kind, unkind*
Can talk to himself, and wandering Wind;
Fool it with the Echo, pleased with Trees
Lone Rocks and Cells Societies:
Kisses his Chain, loved poisoned Dart;
Hopes, fears: a poor Convulsion'd Heart!
Man of all ^eathers; lowrs this hour,
Next smiles; it is Sunshine, Hony-shower.
How Is her words poys'd! her each glance, look
How Anatomized! Star-gaze, his Bock:
He Nods, Sighs, Breaths, by Rule; so sore,
Love's Good-behaviour, binds all over.
Idols his Creed; his Trade inrol'd
Underground delving* though seeks Gold.
In brief some Heaven's, more Hells do seize him.
Naught but to enjoy or dye, can ease him.
The Despairing Lover.
HOw like's that wretch't, unhappy Lover,
Whose Travels naught but scorns discover,
To the chased Deer; their Dwellings are
Like-rac'd, and sadly alike they fare.
As Wilderness his Fancy shows
About him, which wild thoughts compose.
Those Dogs that hunt him, lean Despair,
Grief, Sorrow; fierce the whole Kennell are:
Killingly ^leet, well-nos'd for scent,
Too True, too Bloody-diligent:
Whose mouths spit Ven^me, from whose eyes
Quick Balls of raging wildfire flies.
Those dismal Horns that storm about
His ears, and ring his Funeral out,
Those last disdainful breathed Cheeks, came
From his o're-coy, Heartbreaking Dame;
Made terribler, far far more shrill
Through Fancy's doubling Echo still.
The frightfull Hunter's glance, called View
(Whilst through the Road or Lawn pursue)
Seems the often imagined Vision, form,
Or's Doom-fac'd Mistress; that she-storme.
That Shaft sheathed in his side* Desire,
Worst-pointed with a flame of fire;
Which drinks Life-^pirits, feeds upon
Blood, yea, fries the marrow through the bone,
Full-blown with sighs, and sobbings often:
Imbost with rage, and heat of thought*
Thus, when the ore-hounded wretch his Race
Has run, and so long held the Chase
As faintest gasping hopes supply
With fleeting breath; when 'midst the Cry,
No Comforts cooler stream relieving,
For Soil; nor Reasons Bay help giving:
With Stag-like tears he falling dies,
Scorns Triumph, and Love's Sacrifice.
Englished out of Montemayor, in Spanish. On a Pastoral Lover. Estava Lusitano
rep^stando.
YOung Lus^tan sat grazing (Solemn turned)
His Snow white Flock, through Verdant Plain dispersing;
Green Sheep-h^ok, Scepter-like, the own hand adorned,
He viewed the ground, with his own sad Thoughts conversing:
And raising the Eyes sometimes, forth Breathed this.
If prov'st so sovereign (my Disease) excelling,
Who says, that, ^osing me not saving is?
Knows he not that in Pain there 's Pleasure dwelling?
Since for my Care no salve of comfort sought?
She need not to regard thee: O Vanda^essa
Those Ignoran^s mistake my Mystic lot;
For, since received thy Looks divine Impressa,
I count it Grief not to be grieved, or wounded:
My Malady's my Medcine thus compounded.
The Offering.
Sweet'st Saint,
Accept my Vows, which Incence like (...)
And sum before thee in sol^mn Sacrifice;
My flaming Heart my chaste Desires allow,
^T^ose Morning-offer'd Sighs, and Evening too;
Receive their ^inder B^eath, whereof each one
Seems to put up short begging Orison
Or Love-suit to thee: Pity the complain^
Each whispers in thine Ear. And least I fain^
In my Devotio^s, please but other-whil^,
To Answer with the sparkle of a Smile
That I Am accepted; but if frowns you bring
Alas my Heart's turned mee^ dead Offering.
Fain would I please my Saint, O gently bow
TO entrust my Ignorance, and teach me how:
Crown me thus far, thy Favorite (...),
And I Will disclaim all other Saints, but Thee.
The Complaint.
WHy was I Born,
Or not born Blind?
Though thence the sco^^;
Of whole mankind,
Their Pity, or Wonder;
That ^o I Would Woman's shape nere known;
Or seeing, had I mist but one,
But Thine alone;
We only kept ^sunder.
O then kind Heavens you had (...)
A Soul of Anguish,
Tha^'s now conde^n'd to sad un-rest,
And endlessly must languish:
Yet check my Heart, no more
These Plaints; give over:
Since thou had rather dye through her rejection
Then not have seen so rare Perfection
Mutual Love, Conjugall.
MOst true that Love, sweet sweetest those
Enjoyments where there Liking is
(Whence Value of each other grows)
For the Person, Parts, Conditions, these;
To that is measure
Seems reduced the Fancies pleasure;
Va^ue coining all that hour,
Though something wrought by Nature's pow'^.
Mird where not enforced by friends,
Nor strained through ^ondness, greedy Mood
To Honor, Wealth, such Worldly ends
(Although ^it Competence be good,
S^rves to season
M^rri^ge, life, on grounds of reason)
K^sses else bad food become,
Faint qualmish Sweets that Wedlock-sum*
Love away, but wasting time
Those Acts appear, with sigh for (...);
At least when (...)' N^vel^y, joy's prime
Of Wealth is over, when cloying grows;
Poor sauce ^oording
To the B^d^ choice delights affording,
(...) sense (...) please,
By the Fa^^y that seems chec^'d, with ease.
So to the hungry loathsome prove
Meats often, where crossed their Fancy, mind:
Strange Damping too, where either's Love
Contemned (...) first in ruder kind,
O^ce Disdained;
Tai^t it leaves, though the P^ize obtained:
This sel^ lov^ to all (...),
That (...) would have their Lov^s abused.
(...)
Besides the offensive scorn, it leaves
Of colder Love stamped Jealousy;
Whereas each nobler Spirit conceives
Joys lost, if come not kindly free:
Tenfold deeming
Those Sweets too, inhanc'd esteeming,
Whilst but thinks Another's Pleased,
Loved, choycest Minions flames appeased
Pure sweets alone
Where no such Love-affrontings known;
Though Civil, modest coyness shown.
Constancy.
AFter liking of each other,
Needful Constancy does prove
To the harmonious Marriage- Love,
That no Fog those Joys might smoother;
Such strong settled Temper, Mind
(Linked discretion) as the enjoying
Damps no^ Love through fuller Cloying;
Nor Worl^'s businesses combind,
Houshold-cares,
Which breed often distemper, Iars.
Some from thence dull Melancholies
Raise, become untuned often;
Or, through worldly Pleasures caught,
Vain Moods rambling sensual Follies:
Whilst his constant fixed Soul
Can both worldly Business, Pleasure
Manage rule, in sober measure,
Not like the Air or Waters ^oul;
But unmoved
Like the Earths Center, Rocks approved.
Thus, less tossed his Brain, confounded
Through those Objects manifold,
Counting Her chief wr^^th of Gold;
L^ve's preserved, still deeply grounded:
And if envious Sickness, Time
Change her Cheeks, for former Beauty
Fancies, loves (kind Husband's duty)
Sweets enjoyed once, in the Prime:
Holds his R^ad
Planet-like, for ever trod.
Authoris Sententia, eadem and Salomonis;
Vanitas vanitatum, Vanitas vanitatum, Omnia vanitas.
FINIS.
Page 21. line 23. r. They Would, p. 22. l. 28. blindly, r. wildly. p. 25. l. 33.
r. he would pacify, p. 29. l. 20. r. He must nor, p. 43. l. 6. Blowed, r. sunk, p.
105. l. 5. r. Hear^'^, p. 135. l. 34. r. brooding.


