FAITHS VICTORY over NATVRE: OR, The unparalled president of an unnaturally
Religious Father.

Delivered in a SERMON Preached at the Funerals of the hopeful young Gentleman
Master John Rushout: Son and Heir to Master JOHN RUSHOUT Merchant and Citizen
of LONDON.

By NATHANAEL HARDY Master of Arts, and Preacher to the Parish of DIONIS
Back-Church.

Was not Abraham our Father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his
son upon the Altar.

See thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made
perfect,

JAM. 2.21, 22. Transgreditur fides rationis fidem, humanae naturae usum,
experientiae terminos, Bern.

Verus obediens mandatum non procrastinat, sed statim parat aures auditui,
linguam voci, pedes itineri, manus operi; and se totum intus colligit ut
mandatum peragat imperantis. Idem.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Webb, and William Grantham, at the Greyhound in
Paul's Churchyard, 1648.

To my Right Worthy FRIEND, Mr. JOHN RVSHOVT Of LONDON Merchant, and Inhabitant
in the Parish of Dionis Back-Church, the blessings of the throne and footstool.
Honored SIR,
IT was a sorrowful loss occasioned the delivery of this Sermon in your
ears, and the seasonable comfort you then found, caused those desires which
(being to me commands) occasion the presenting of it to your eyes.

The trial wherewith God has been pleased to exercise you, cannot but be
grievous, yet a patient sufferance and sanctified use will make it precious: no
better means of support under, and benefit by this trial then faith, which is
both a powerful Antidote against the cross, and a skillful Alchymist to
extract spiritual advantage out of temporal losses.

It is true you have lost a hopeful son, but faith will eye God, as a wise and
gracious Father. Charity comforts you in the hope that he has gained, the
enjoyment of glory by his dissolution: Faith will instruct you in the Christian
art, how to gain increase of grace by this affliction. It is the justice of God
that he never punishes without a cause, it is his mercy that he orders all
to a good end, let repentance find out and bewail sin deserving, and faith will
apprehend the benefit intended.

Oh divine grace of faith, many daughters have done worthily, but thou
surmountest them all; thou regulatest our actions, and moderatest our passions,
thou teach us how to enjoy, and supplyest us in what we want; by thee we
find the sweetness of a God in the creature comforts we have, and the
sweetness of those comforts we lose in a God.

And now worthy Sir, what bitter counsel could I prescribe you then this of
Faith? what fuller example of faiths energie could I set before you then that
of Abraham, who by faith gave up that Isaac to God, whom God had conferred on
him in love. The picture of this believing Patriark, offering up his obedient
Isaac, you have delineated in the following Sermon.

Let Abraham's steps be your walk, and his bosom shall be your rest; imitate
him as a son in the grace of Faith, and you shall be an heir together with him
in the grace of life, whech is the prayer of him who is

Your devoted servant in all Christian and Ministerial offices, NATH. HARDY.

Errata.
Page 4. line 23 devoute, the former l 28. for people r. people p. 6. l. 5.1.
se transfer, p. 13. in marg pone Chrysostom. p. 14. in marg. pone Chrysostom.

Imprimatur, Ja. Cranford.

On the death of Master John Rushout, eldest Son of Master John Rushout, of
London Merchant.
WHo slew all these? was Nimshi's sonne's demand,
When Is will was done by false Samaria's hand,
When heads were heapt, and Nobles (by the rude)
Were made the many-headed multitude:
When slain Youth, and Beauty were heaped on high,
Virtue and Strength pil'd with Nobility.
Who slew all these? each tear now seems to say,
The mourner drops by this sad heap of clay.
Nor do they soloecise, for in Rushout's son
There Is a heaped funeral, though he be but one.
Logic is out, it is praecepts err in this,
He is but one, and yet a number is.
Arithmetic mistakes in him, for we
If not divide, yet one may multiply.
Virtue and Beauty, Strength and Youth are here
Heaped up and pil'd together: on this Biere
A sum of Graces are, He Is a Total than,
Not one of these, but might complete a man.
The tears that from his Fathers eyes do run,
Fall for but one Son, and yet not for One.
When he laments his Beauty so soon gone,
Does he not Weep for his Dead Absalom?
He mourns and praises his obedient Will
It Is for his Isaac sure those tears distill.
When he recounts the Wisdom of his Son,
And Sighs, sighs he not for his Solomon?
When how religious! and a tear let fall,
Then sure he weeps at Joseph's funeral.
Absolon, Isaac, Joseph, Solomon,
Are all deceased in this his only JOHN.
Who slew all these then? not the barbarous hand,
Of foreign stranger, nor the dire command
Of the Theeve's Captain, where the riddle's this,
Out laws obey, and rape obedience is.
No death abroad, strange air his breath supplies,
He travels and lives, but returns and dies.
Thus have we seen the Pearl or Diamond stone
(Brought to the cooler, from the hotter Zone)
Escape the threats of the Rocks, and the Oceans foam,
And yet in the Harbor have been lost at home:
Having past the Pirates, and the watery way,
Made, or the Customers, or the Thames his prey.
Is this the welcome thy returned Natives have
O England? entertainment in a grave?
When to thy longed for Soil thy Sons return,
Can find no lodging for them, but their Urn^?
When from strange Climates to their own they come
Has't no home for them, but their longest Home?
Fame calls thee Eden, if thou a Garden be,
It Is such as Joseph's, the Sepulchre's in thee.
The terme's too good; since on thine none thou prey*
We Will change thy name, thou art Acel^^^a.
Since now thy Bowels are with Funerals full,
You Are or a field of blood, or place of Scull.
Death dwells within thee, makes his Mansion here,
Has taken a Lease (we dread) for many years.
A Lease not made by Law, but War; yet good,
'Cause sealed with Swords and written in our blood.
Thus cruel art thou, and like to be, yet He
Has cause to thank thee for thy cruelty.
In thee he died, but to thy Sins and fears,
Thy Crown's of Cypress, he a Laurel wear.
He rests in Peace secured from thy harms,
Hears glad Hallelujah's, but thou Alarms.
The Grave and Heaven's his Arc, whilst that the flood
Sweeps thee away, he floats above thy Blood.
The Grave and Heaven's his House, where he hid ly,
And the destroying- Angel pass him by.
Death leads to Life. He died young, yet shall be,
A Youth as long-lived as Aeternitie.
J. THOMPSON.

FAITHS VICTORY over NATVRE: OR, The unparalled president of an unnaturally
Religious Father.
HEBR. 11.17. By Faith ABRAHAM when he was tried, offered up ISAAC.


THis Chapter after a brief yet full description, presents us with a large and
singular commendation of the grace of faith, the excellency of this virtue is
demonstrated by the efficacy; that in its powerful effects we may behold its
Divine nature. Peruse the Chapter, and you shall find her honored as the
mother of many graces, the spring of choice duties; yea, the worker of strange
Miracles. The truth of all which our Apostle illustrates by various examples,
since though positive doctrines declare what faith can do, yet plain examples
show what faith has done: amongst many others we have the president of
Abraham, chief of the Patriarks, and father of the saithfull set before us: if
you cast your eyes upon the 8 verse, you shall there find an eminent instance
of his faith, When he was called to go out into a place which he should after
receive for inheritance, obeying, and he went out not knowing whither he went;
no easy matter, doubtless, for a man to part with his friends and live among
strangers, to let go his present possessions for uncertain enjoyments, and
become a voluntary exile from his own Country; sense derides it, reason
contemns it, but faith obeys it: nor does his faith stay here, behold in the
Text a harder task imposed upon, and performed by him; that was to leave his
Country, this was to lose his Isaac: that was to sojourn in a strange Land,
this to commit a strange act: that to forsake his fathers house, this to forgo
his sons life: in that he sailed against the wind, in this against the wind
and tide: but the strength of faith carried him through, enabling him to leave
his country when called; and to offer his Isaac when tried.

By faith Abraham, etc. In the words we have these three observables; 1 A
singular fact performed by Abraham, He offered up Isaac. 2 A special occasion
moving him to it, when he was tried. 3 A powerful cause enabling, and that was
his Faith.


Or if you please to take the words in their natural order, observe, 1 An act
of Gods wisdom, to wit, the trial of Abraham. 2 An act of Abraham's obedience
in offering up Isaac. 3 The principle inclining him to perform his obedience,
in reference to divine trial, and that was his Faith.


Once more we have here considerable, 1 The state and condition to which
Abraham was exposed, to wit, of temptation, When he was tried. 2 His suitable
behavior under that condition, in obedience to that trial, he offered up
Isaac. 3 The true ground of that obedient behavior, to wit, his faith.
According to each of these there are three assertions our Apostle lays down in
the words.


That Abraham was tried, that being tried he offered up Isaac, that it was by
faith he offered him up: and of these in order.

1 The state of temptation, to which Abraham was exposed when he was tried, St.
Austine speaking of the life of man tells us, Tota vita humana tentatio est,
every man's life but much more the Saints is a continued trial, no day passes
over his head without some clouds, and whiles he is in the sea of this world
waves continually dash upon him, but yet there are some days in the Calendar
of his life which deserve, Nigro carbone notari; to be marked with a black
coal as more cloudy then others there are some storms wherein the waves rage
more vehemently, some times in which the Saint is exposed to strange and strong
trials; and of such a one our Apostle here speaks, When he was tried.

Quest. 1.
But by whom is it that Abraham was tried?

Answ.
The Hebrews have a tradition that the Devil appeared to him in an angelical
form, and by many arguments diswaded him from sacrificing his son, as being an
unnatural and impious act, contrary to the law of God and nature; nor is it
improbable, that then the Devil was very busy with Abraham by temptation to
withdraw him from obedience to Gods command, though the conceit of his visible
appearing to him is altogether uncertain; but this trial whereof my text
speaks, is doubtless to be referred unto God himself: for so we find it
plainly mentioned in the history, God tempted Abraham: Genes. 22.1. nor do
Moses and Saint James herein contradict each other, when the one says, Aliter
Deus tentat, aliter diabolus, diabolus tent^t ut subruat, Deus tentat ut
coron^t. Ambros.
God tempted Abraham, and the other Chap. 1.13. God tempts no man, but rather
we must distinguish of a double tentation, the one probationis, the other
seductionis, the one merely of trial for our good, the other of enticement for
our hurt; this latter cannot agree to the pure and holy God, but is the Devils
work, who goes about seeking to ensnare and devour the former: as it stains
not Gods purity, so it suits well with his wisdom, which often times puts him
upon making experiments of his servants, as here he did of Abraham.

But for what end, may some say, does God tempt and try his peoole? Quest. 2.


Answ.
I answer, for this double end.

1 Partly to disclose their corruptions, and discover those sins which were
lurking in the heart: It is a common saying, Magistratus judicas virum, many
men that were good while confined to privacie, have proved licentious, when
advanced to Magistracy; it is as true of trials, wherein often times, there is an
eruption of of that corruption which one would not have imagined had lodged in
their breasts, for this end God proved Hezekiah, that the pride of his heart
might appear, 2 Chronicles. 32.3^. Deuteronomy. 8.2.
and the Israelites to humble them under the sense of those corruptions which
trials manifested to be in them. But,

2 Chiefly the end of trial is a discovery of our graces, both their truth,
and strength, their quality and measure. Trials show what is the depth of our
confidence, the breadth of our patience, the height of our love, and the length
of our perseverance, observe but this trial of Abraham, and you shall find
what a many graces here was tried and discovered: namely,

His faith, whether he would depend upon Gods, Promise above, against reason.

His obedience, whether he would yield to Gods command against nature.

His love, whether his affection was more enlarged toward his son or his God.

Finally, his fear, whether he did reverentially acknowledge and stand in awe
of Divine Sovereingty the truth is, Apparet virtus arguiturque malis: stars
shine bright in the darkest nights, graces are manifest in the sharpest trial;
and for this end that our graces may appear, we are tried, and they are
exercised.

But what need is there that God should for these ends try his servants? Quest.
3. Answ.
Does he not understand there thoughts long before, are not both there sins and
graces open in his fight; it is a strange expression which God uses concerning
himself in this trial of Abraham, Now I know that thou fear God. Genesis
22.12.


What did he not know before who is Omniscient? yes, doubtless, but we must
remember, it is usual with God, Quod homini competit in iis tansferri, to
apply that to himself which belongs to men, (...). Chrysostom.
and to speak of himself after the manner of men; but the truth is Gods end
of trial is not that he might know but that we and others may know the graces
of God that are in us: trials are often times publishers of concealed virtues,
neither the patience of Job, wisdom of Solomon, or the faith of Abraham, would
have been so famous had it not been for trials.

Quest. 4.
But how and by what means does God try his servants?

Answ.
Divines answer two ways, factis, verbis; by deeds and words: by deeds, when
either he substracts his grace from us, leaving us to our selves; as he did
Hezekiah, To try all that was in his heart, or else when he brings us into
straits, and lays upon us afflictions, so he was forty years in leading of the
children of Israel through the wilderness, to prove them, sometimes by words
and commands, which he enjoins us, such was that command which Christ gave to
the young man in the Gospel, To sell all he had; and this which he gave to
Abraham, Luke 18.22. Genesis 22.2.
take thy son, and offer him for a burnt offering; and if you please to take a
serious view of this command, you shall find it was a sore trial, and that
there was a strange probation in this Divine precept: for consider,

1 Whom does the command concern? not a servant, or a friend, or an allye, but
a son; and him not an adopted, but a natural son: not of many but an only son
by Sarah, one that was the son of his love, of his hope, yea, of his old age; a
child of promise, of prayers; nay, tears.

2 What it is that is required? is it to send him a far off into some strange
Country? is it to part with him and not see his face for some years? is it to
have him taken away by death, through some visitation of Gods hand? all of
these would have been sad trials: nay, but it is to lay violent hands upon him
and cut him off by an untimely slaughter: but whose hands must they be, may his
servants carry him away to some remote place out of his sight and there kill
him, or is it only to stand by* look on and suffer him to be slain; no, he
himself must 'offer him up: Abraham must not only have his eyes on, but his
hands in this bloody act, he must not only be a spectator of, but an actor in
this doleful Tragedy: the tender father must imbrue his hands in the blood of
his innocent child. God had tried Abraham before many ways, calling him to
go out of his Country, suffering that contention between him and Lot, in the
battle he had with the five Kings, in the circumcising of his household, in the
casting out of Ishmael, but all short of this, in sacrificing of his Isaac,
which Abraham here was put upon, and our Apostle means in these words, When he
was tried. To apply this.

Let the Saints of God learn continually to expect and prepare for trials, Use
1.
let no son of Abraham hope to escape temptation, when he sees the bosom in
which he desires to rest, assaulted with difficulties, nor must we only stand
in fear of diabolical suggestions, but in expectance of divine temptation; the
truth is, trials are both necessary and precious, needful and useful: Saint
Peter joins both together, Ye are in heaviness, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7.
if need be, and the trial of your faith being being much more precious then
that of gold: the shakeing of the trees by the wind, the casting of gold into
the fire, is not more useful for the se^ling of the one, and purifying of the
other, than trials are for Gods servants: Nor must we only expect single but
successive trials, like Jobs Messengers, one upon the neck of the other: When
one woe is past look for another to come, and that many times on a sudden, in
matters we are least aware of: nor let us only prepare for many, but great and
sore trials, such as will not only rend our garments but break our hearts,
trials in our nearest friends, dearest comforts, the delight of our eyes, joy
of our hearts, and breath of our nostrils, such were Jobs, in his cattle, the
support of his estate, his children, the fruit of his loins; nay, in the wife
of his bosom, and the smiting of his own body: such was Abraham's in the Text,
in his near and dear Isaac.

2 Since we must be tried, look we to the soundness of our graces that they be
such as will abide trial: paint will melt at the heat, while the natural
complexion remains: dross will consume in the fire while the gold grows
purer: bad stuff will shrink in the wetting, whilst that which is good retains
its measure: finally, the house that is built upon the sand falls down at the
blowing of the wind, while that which is built upon the rock remains: Seeming
grace vanishes in the times of tribulation, only true grace retains its
luster, continues firm, nay, grows purer in fiery trials. And since we must
expect strong trials, look we to the strength of our graces, If thou saint in
the day of adversity, thy strength is small, says Solomon, Prove. 24.10.
adversity though it be a hard tyrant, yet it is a right Judge speaking truly
what our graces are: Gr^^*
Nemo vires suas in pace cognoscit, no, one knows his strength in peace, a
sharp battle calls for courage in the soldier, hard weather makes the weak
body shrink, every cock-boat can swim in the river, its the lusty ship must
sail in the Ocean; we meet with strong trials, we must labor for strong
graces ever remembreing this for our comfort, that Divine wisdom and goodness
will proportion the trial to our strength: a skillful Physician in potions
considers the strength of his patient, a wise Scholmaster in his lessons
observes the ability of his Scholar, and our gracious God in his trials
remembers what we are and will lay no heavier burden on our shoulders then we
are able to bear: that of the Apostle is in this sense truly applicable; he
has both milk for babes, and meat for strong men; and if he impose so great a
trial as the slaying of a son it shall be upon an Abraham that is strong in
faith, vigorous in grace, and knows how to obey so severe a command which
leads me to the.

2 General Abraham's obedient behavior under his trial, He offered up Isaac;
God puts him upon it, and he sets about it, and having received an injunction,
puts it in execution: He offers up Isaac.

But here some, perhaps, may tax our Apostle as a false relater of the story,
since indeed Isaac was not offered up, but a Ram, the answer is easy.

1 He offered, that is, Offerre coepit; Fieri dicitur quod tentatur fieri. Rib.
he began to offer him, he had taken his journey, clave the wood, and was come
to the mount; being there, he had built an altar, laid the wood in order on
that altar, bound and laid his son on that wood, stretched forth his hand, took
the knife to slay his son; the knife was even at his throat, and nothing
wanting but the last blow to have done execution; and so on Abraham's part there
was no deficiency in fulfilling this probatory command of God.

2 He offered, that is, Voluntate jugulavit; he offered him in his intention
and readiness of will, Hier.
Immolatio Isaac, Calv.
ab animi affectu censetur, his sacrificing of Isaac is reckoned not from the
action but his affection, and

3 He offered him, that is, interpretative obtulit; in regard of Gods account
and esteem: that which was but begun by Abraham is consummated in Gods sight,
and his readiness to sacrifice is interpreted as an actual performance of it,
thus Pareus upon the text Obtulit ille holocaustum, Pareus.
non facto quidem, sed prompta voluntate and obedientiae quam Deus acceptavit,
and Scriptura celebrat pro facto. Abraham's willingness to offer his son is
accepted with God, and is recorded in Scripture as if it had been really done:
excellently Saint Chrysostom to this purpose, so far (says he) as concerned
the fathers will, he had already imbrued his hands in his sons blood, and
therefore that Father brings in God commending his ready performance of what he
had enjoined, Chrysostom.
(...), Thou did not spare him at my command, I have spared him for thy
obedience,

Obser.
To sum up this, it lets us see the gracious goodness of God, who is pleased
to accept the will for the deed, and accounts what we would do as if we had
done it; when we perform any duty, it is not quid facis, but quo animo, what we
do, but with what mind we do it; and as the action is never accepted without
the affoction, so sometimes the affection is regarded without the action: true
it is, where God affords ability, and gives opportunity, he expects the
expression of our will by the execution of the act, but if either be denied (as
here God sent his Angel to stay Abraham's hand, and many times he is pleased to
withhold enablements to good duties) then he mercifully accepts our intention
and endeavor; in this sense a poor man may be more charitable then the rich,
according to that of our Savior concerning the widow; Mark 1^ 43.
Verily this poor widow has cast in more then all they that have cast into the
treasury: more for the manner, though less for the matter, not so much, yet
with more cheerfulnes, and so it was more in Gods estimation. In this regard a
man that dies in his bed, may yet be a Martyr in divine account, not opere,
but voluntate; real suffering but propense willingness to lay down his life if
God had called him to it: finally, by this means it is, we fulfill that command
of our Savior, in taking up the cross daily, that is, Luke ^.21. Stella.
semper animum habere paratum, being in a daily readiness to bear whatsoever
cross it shall seem good to Divine wisdom to inflict upon us.

It is that which may yield abundant comfort to weak Saints, and tender
consciences, Use.
who are often times sadly perplexed at the non performance of those duties, the
omission whereof is caused, not through want of will but power, surely what the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 8.^^.
in the point of charity, is true in regard of all other services. If there be
first a^ willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, not
according to that a man has not. I would not have profane careless sinners
encourage themselves from this comfortable Doctrine, who pretend to good
desires, whilst they improve not the opportunity and ability God puts into their
hands of doing good, and which is worse, please themselves in the vain excuse
of their good meanings, whilst they impenitently go on in evil ways; such
lasie desires will be no sufficient plea at Gods bar, and they will find that
usual maxim true, too late, Hell is full of good wishes, Heaven of good
works. But as for weak Christians, who do what they can, and would do what
they cannot, let them take comfort in this meditation, that the syncerity of
their intention shall be regarded, and rewarded by God. It was the complaint of
holy Paul, concerning himself, Matthew. 7.8, 9.
When I would do good evil is present with me, so that the good I would do I
do not, and the evil I would not do, that I do: and surely if he, well may
we have cause of taking up the same complaint, but though we complain, yet let
us not despair: it is observable what a candid interpretation our Savior makes
of his Disciples sleep in the midst of his agony, excusing it as a fault
arising only from the weakness of their flesh, Matthew. 26.41.
not defect of their will; the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak,
and it is his gracious promise not to quench the smoking flax, Matthew. 12.20.
nor break the bruised reed: know then, oh thou dejected soul; though thou
can offer nothing to God but a Turtle, that is, gemitus a sound of sorrow
that thou can do no better, or a pair of Pigeons that is well wishing, a
desire to do good, God will accept and account of thy will as the work; it was
so with Abraham, whose real intention of offering was esteemed and is
registered as an actual execution He offered up Isaac, to let this go.

That which is principally observable in these words, is the nature and
strength of Abraham's obedience, God imposes a strange command upon him, he
denies not, delays not his obedience, he does not consult with flesh and
blood, harkens not to natural affection, acquaints not the wife of his bosom
with his intention, but obsequiously follows divine injunction, he well knew,
that though he were Isaacs father, yet he was Gods servant, and though his love
as a father would have diverted him from the slaughter, yet his duty as a
servant engaged him to the sacrifice of his son: his son was dear to him, but
his God was dearer; affection was strong in him, but grace was stronger; (...):
he casts away all natural, and embraces divine love; he trampleth upon
fatherly bowels, and resists not his Fathers call. Thus he became obedient,
though against his will, yet with his will, in the sacrifice of his Son, one will
sacrificed another, his spiritual will to serve his God, overcame his natural
will to save his child: and so he set upon this unnatural work of offering
up Isaac.

One would have thought that in so near a trial, so harsh a command Abraham
through frailty might have replied against God with murmuring, as those
Israelites did upon a less occasion when they wanted food, Would God we had
dyed in the Wilderness, Exodus 16.3. flesh and blood would have broken out into
these or the like expressions. What, Lord? did thou mock me with thy gift,
that so soon thou take him away, nay command me to throw him away, would
thou never had bestowed a son upon me, (...).
rather then so suddenly to snatch him from me? why did thou make me a
father, if now I must become a murderer of my child? far better I had been
childlesse, then now to make my self so. But far be such thoughts from
Abraham, who had learned this sacred lesson, not to murmur but to obey, had it
been any but an Abraham, he would doubtless have returned an excuse and said
(to use Naamans words) In this the Lord pardon his servant, any thing but my
Isaac, thou shall command, him I cannot, know not how to part with, however it
might seem no more then just for Abrahom in this case to expostulate with God
in these or the like words. Does the God of mercy delight in cruelty, and
piety it self command murder? will justice require the slaughter of an
innocent, and can thou in equity desire the blood of the guiltless? or if
thou will needs have an humane sacrifice, is none but Isaac fit for thine
Altar, and must none offer him but Abraham? Shall these hands destroy the fruit
of my loins? must I that was the instrument of his life, become the means of
his death* Can not I be faithful unto thee, unless I be unnatural to my
child? Why did I so long wayt for him? Why did thou at last bestow him, if I
must now part with him? How shall I look Sarah in the fa^e when I have slain
her son? How will the Heathens censure this holy cruelty, and say, there goes
the man who cut the throat of his own child? But Abraham's obedience had taught
him better, not to dispute but (...) me thinks, I hear him answering Gods
command in these o^ the like submissive terms: Blessed Lord, do thou call
for my Isaac, thou shall have him; what though he be precious in my eyes yet
thou art more: true, he is my son, but thou art my God, to me it will prove a
bitter loss, I, but to thee it will become a sweet sacrifice; what though my
wife may blame me, yet thou command me? better she call me a bloody
husband, then thou an undutifull servant? What though the world accuse me of
cruelty, yet thou requirest it as a duty? better I be in their eyes an
unnatural father, then in thine an ungracious son: were he ten thousand
Isaacs, I dare not, I will not spare him, but am ready, though against my own,
to do thy will o God. But here a farther doubt may be moved, how Abraham,
though he would, could offer Isaac: Abraham was old and feeble, Isaac young and
lusty, though one had a command of offering, yet the other none of suffering,
and the law of nature would teach Isaac to endeavor the preservation of his
life, though a father came to take it from him. To this Divines answer, that
Isaac being religiously educated, and no doubt, by his father, sufficiently
informed of Gods will in this particular, submitted himself to be offered up.
Suitable to this purpose is that of Saint Chrysostom, (...) Isaac gave himself
to his Father, as freely as Abraham gave him to God: Whom should I first
admire, to whom shall I give the greatest honor, the tender father that
offered his son: or the obedient son submitting to his father, even to the
death: thus there was the same mind, the like affection both in Abraham and
Isaac; so that the courage of the Father seemed to be transplanted into the
son, and the innocence of the son; not wanting unto the father: that
golden-mouthed Orator illustrated this, whilst he fitly brings in Abraham,
thus be-speaking his son; Suffer me, o my son, suffer me to perform the command
of my God, that God that made thee, calls for thee; he that gave thee, seeks
thee: he that created thee, desires thou should be sacrificed to him; thou will be a sacrifice, so much the more acceptable: by how much the more
willingly thou entertainest the glorious benefits of death: and then Isaac
sweetly complying with his fathers desire. My father, perform what thou art
commanded, do the office thou art enjoined, I resist not, refuse not: what
thou will I will, what thou desire, I submit to, and with the same readiness
I embrace death, as I know thou do by Gods command inflict it. See here a
rare pattern of obedience to parents in Isaac, who suffered Abraham, to God in
Abraham, who offered up Isaac. This latter is especially presented in the Text,
and ought principally to be imitated by us, and though we cannot attain, yet
let us aspire to that height of obedience which Abraham practiced: indeed,
herein is the trial of our submission, when in things contrary to our nature,
contradictory to our desires, cross to our reason, we can obey God; it is the
aggravation of disobedience in easy precepts to rebel, it is the commendation
of obedience in difficult commands to submit, to obey God in what suites with
our temper is not praise worthy, but then to yield when nature and reason
oppose is most laudable. Indeed, hic labor, hoc opus; to strive against the
stream, row against the tide; go against the hair, act against the dictates of
our own natural and carnal affections is the difficulty: and withal the
excellency of obedience.

To close up this in a threefold special application:

1 Though God call not upon us to offer up our sons, yet he requires us to
offer up our sins, there is none of us but in this sense has an Isaac, a
dilectum delictum, some darling lust, bosom corruption, which he expects we
should part with at his call; but alas how far short are we of this Patriark?
he offered up a dutiful Isaac, we will not sacrifice a rebellious lust; he at
a single command went about the work, we neglect after many precepts, often
entreaties and frequent threatenings; he rose early in the morning to slay his
son, we make it our evening sacrifice, and scarce think of mortifying our
lusts, till death is ready to kill us; finally, he would have sacrificed his
son, in whom all Nations were to be blessed, we will not slay our sins which
otherwise will make us for ever cursed; but o sinner, how long will thou hug
that in thy bosom which is Gods hate and will be thy ruin, think thou hear
a voice from heaven once more be-speak thee as God did Abraham, Take now thine
Isaac whom thou love, thy sin wherein thou delightest, and offer it up to me
for Sacrifice: or as Christ did the Jews: as for my enemies (thy lusts) which
would not that I should reign over them, Ge^. 22 ^*
bring them hither and slay them before me. O then delay not, consult not,
neglect not, but while it is called to day, bind thy corruptions on the Altar
of the Law, take the knife of Gods Word in thy hand, and cut the throat of thy
sins, that they may become a sweet smelling Sacrifice in Gods nostrils, and
thou an amiable Priest in his eyes.

2 Though God do not call us as he did Abraham, to offer up our children, yet
he sometimes requires us to neglect both children and parents, and all natural
relations for his sake, and surely in such a case, Pietas est impium esse pro
Domino, it is piety toward God, to be unnatural to our friends, Hier.
our blessed Savior has told us, He that loves father or mother more then
me, is not worthy of me, and he that loves son or daughter more then me, is
not worthy of me, Mat. 10.37. Another Evangelist uses a more harsh expression,
He that comes to me and hates not all these: Luke 14.22.
strange that love it self should require hatred, but yet just, not in an
absolute but comparative sense, we must not love father or mother more then
him, yea, when their desires come in competition with his will, we must hate
them for him, we must say as Levi, nescio vos, I know you not, or with Christ
to his mother, quid mihi tecum? woman, what have I to do with thee? trampling
under foot all natural relations, which would hinder us from obedience to
divine injunctions. It was a pious (though erroneous) spirit that lodged in the
breast of Sir Thomas Moor, once Lord Chancellor of this Kingdom, who regarded
not the prayers, nay tears, of his dearest wife, when she persuaded him with
the forfeiture of his conscience to endeavor the restoration of his liberty,
let us follow his pattern, that no respect either to wives or children may
withdraw us from the performance of our duties to God.

3 Finally, though God do not call us to offer up our children, yet many times
he calls to us to part with them; though not to sacrifice them with our own
hands, yet to resign them up to his dispose; oh let us learn by Abraham's
example, cheerfully to give up our dearest comforts to that God who has given
them unto us, he was willing to an obtulit, so far obedient as himself to
offer his son, shall not we be content with an abstulit, that God should take
away wife or children, or any enjoyment from us,: good old Eli, when acquainted
by Samuel with Gods severe intentions against himself, his sons, his family,
sits down quietly and says submissively, Dominus est, It is the Lord, 1 Samuel
3.^^.
let him do what it seems good in his sight. Holy Job, when informed by
several messengers of the loss of his Oxen by the Sabeans, of his Camels by
the Caldeans, of his Sheep and servants by a fire from God, nay of his sons and
daughters by a wind from the wilderness, worshipped, saying, Dominus dedit,
The Lord gives, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.
Job 1.21.
Oh let us write after these copies, and what we daily pray for, cheerfully,
submit unto, that the will of the Lord may be done, let all parents say, to use
the Prophets words, though in another case, Behold, I and the children whom
thou, o Lord, have given me, are at thy dispose, do with me and mine as it
pleases thee, And that we may attein this gracious frame of spirit, let us
take notice of, and strive after that grace of faith wherein Abraham excelled,
and by which he was enabled to so difficult a work: which leads me to the

3 General, namely, the true ground of Abraham's obedient behavior in those
words by faith, indeed nothing but faith could enable him to quit himself in
so great a trial. I deny not but even Heathens have sacrificed themselves and
their children unto death, but upon what grounds? for the most part affection
of vain glory, at the best, but love of their Country, was that which bereaved
them of their lives, Abraham's offering up his Isaac was upon another ground, in
a religious observance of divine precept, to which nothing but faith could
enable: the truth is, if we rightly weigh this act of Abraham, we shall find
there was great need of faith to unlock the difficulties, silence the
reasonings, and answer the doubts which could not but arise in his spirit.

There was a double objection which this Patriark might make against offering
up his son, to both which only faith could give an answer.

The one in reference to the command which God gave.

The other in respect of the promise which God made.

1 Besides the Law of nature God has given an express command, Thou shall not
kill, and well might Abraham argue, if I must not kill any man, much less my
son, surely God is either contrary to himself, or else this bloody precept
came not from him, but is a mere delusion of the Devil; but here faith steps
in, unfolds the riddle, assures Abraham it was no other then God who had given
this in charge, that he is an absolute illimited commander, and therefore might
enjoin what he pleased, that he is sovereigne Lord of his own Law, and
therefore may dispense with it when he will, thus silencing this objection by
faith he offers up Isaac, and it is a rule we are to take notice of, that where
Gods commands seem or do really clash one against another, the lesser must
give way to the greater, and ordinary to extraordinary precepts, the ten
Comandements are the general rule of our life, yet if a special intervene as
here did to Abraham, faith gives that the pre-eminence.

(...), Chrysostom.
2 Another objection might well arise from Gods promise God has assured Abraham
of an innumerable seed, as the stars of heaven, and the sands on the seashore,
all these to come out of Isaacs loins, and yet God commands that Isaac should
be slain. Might not Abraham well have reasoned thus. What, Lord, are thy
decrees changable, or thy promise failable? how can these two stand together,
Isaac shall be a father of many nations, and yet he must dye by his fathers
hands? what fruit is to be expected from a dry root, or what hopes can there be
in a dead Isaac? the truth is to sense and reason, there is a manifest
contrariety between his precept and his promise, neither of these eyes can see
how God should fulfill what he had promised if Abraham performed what he
required, but faith has a piercing sight, so, she steps in, untyes the knot,
and thus bespeaks Abraham: Fear not Abraham to sacrifice thy son, he that
commands thee to kill him, wants not power to quicken him; the same hand which
raised him from the dead womb of Sarah, can revive him from the ashes of a
sacrifice, thou gottest thy Isaac by believing, thou shall not lose him by
obeying. Now faith has got the day, obtained the victory. What cruelty does in
others, that faith did in Abraham, makes him not to be moved at the
strangeness of the fact, God knew he had to do with an Abraham, and therefore
puts upon him such a command; Abraham knew he had to do with a God, and
therefore believes what he commands is good: and what he promises is
infallible. Thus being careless of the means, not doubting of the end, he sets
upon the work, and by faith offers up Isaac.

Briefly, faith wrought in Abraham a double effect which inclined him to offer
up Isaac.

The one a dependence on Gods power.

The other submissive to Gods will.

The one confidence on Gods truth in promising.

The others reverence of Gods Majesty in commanding.

In regard of the promise it assured him God was able to raise up Isaac from
the dead, as it is Verse 19th, that notwithstanding all seeming contrarieties,
and though he saw no way of accomplishment, divine power could act above,
against means, and so he believes above and beyond hope.

In reference to his command, it persuades him this was Gods will to which he
must subscribe, that the Almighty was his sovereigne Lord to dispose of him and
his how he pleased, and therefore ought to be obeyed.

Thus being confident of Gods ability and fidelity in making good his word,
being resolved to exalt Gods will above his own, he readily performs his
duty, and by faith when he was tried, offered up Isaac.

To shut it up in a brief application, learn we all to prize the worth, and
endeavor for the growth of this grace of faith, we know not what trials God
may call us, but, alas* how shall we bear them if not supported by faith, its
faith is the only weapon to resist Satan's temptations, and the best staff to
hold us up under divine trials: this grace of faith, as it is of singular
worth, so of universal use, in prosperity it teaches us how to use comforts,
in adversity; how to want them; without this; we can neither do what is
enjoined, nor bear what is inflicted: oh then let our care be with all our
gettings to get faith, and not only to get but strengthen faith, since its
strong faith gives us strong support in strong trials; and in particular, that
we may with Abraham, in some sense offer up our Isaac, resign our children,
yea all earthly comforts with cheerfulness, when he tryes us in them, and
calls for them from us, let us pray with the Apostles, Lord, increase our
faith, true it is, a natural man when he sees there is no possibility of
enjoyment, may be contented to want, just like a man who in apparent danger of
the ship, with a nilling willingness and mixed consent casts his goods into the
Sea; but its only the believing Saint who makes a free and full resignation of
himself, and comforts into Gods hand. There is a fourfold enablement which
faith contributes to this difficult duty of offering up our Isaac, parting with
our dearest comforts when God calls.

1 It acknowledges Gods Sovereignty over all, and teaches the soul to say, my
state, my friends, my children, my self are not my own but Gods, who may do
with his own what he will.

2 It confesses the inconstancy of all worldy enjoyments, and lets us see upon
what uncertain terms we hold creature comforts, being only tenants at the will
of the Lord, of whatsoever we possess: thus it learns those that buy to be as
that possessed not, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30
to rejoice as those rejoiced not; and those that have wives and children, as
though they had none, continually expecting to be bereaved of them.

3 It assures us of great good by obedientiall submission, and that there is no
loss in giving up all to God, its good for me to enjoy this comfort, says
sense, its better to part with it, says faith, since there is no better way to
retein a comfort then in a faithful carelessness to surrender it up to God,
witness Abraham in the text, he offers and God spares his Isaac.

4 It convinces us of Gods All-sufficiencie, presents him to the soul as an
universal good, finding all losses to be made up in him alone: what sweetness
can be sucked out of any or all the creatures below, that, and more does faith
find in the God above, as once Briseis said to Achilles.

Tu Dominus, tu vir, tu mihi frater eris. Thou art Lord, brother, husband,
children, all to me. Thus will faith draw strength from God to support us
under, and carry us through the saddest trials. That therefore we may answer
when God calls, obey when he commands, resign when he requires, and be found
blameless in the day of trial: let our care be in all exigencies to quicken
faith, so shall we walk in the steps of faithful Abraham now, and after the
cheerful endurance of trials for a time, we shall rest in the bosom of
Abraham for ever, finding that gracious promise fully verified, Blessed is the
man that endures temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive the crown
of life, James 1.12.
which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

To end all, with one word of advice to you the father of this son, whom God
has pleased in mercy (I hope) to take away; I may truly affirm, God has
bereaved you of your Isaac, one who had learnt with Isaac obedience to you, no
small virtue in children, especially when grown up in years, (since it too
often falls out that they come no sooner to know themselves, but they forget
their parents) one in whom you had much comfort, on whom you had placed
singular affection, of whom you and all that knew him, had great hopes; his
natural endowments, ingenuous education, skill in variety of Languages; modest
and civil behavior, promising in future time abundant fruit: but this tree
God has cut down betimes, and in charity (we may hope) transplanted to his
own paradise, but, doubtless, it is no small loss to the Garden of your
Family, and cannot but be a sore trial of your patience, that therefore you
may be comforted, look on Abraham, and let his practice be the matter of your
imitation your trial, in a double respect falls short of his, his was an only
son; you have one yet surviving: he was to be executioner of his own son, but
it is divine providence which by a sad accident hastened your sons death; since
then your loss is less then his: let your submission be equal with his, and
if you cannot keep even pace with him, yet be sure to follow him in those steps
of faith and obedience, which he took, remember your son is not amissus but
praemissus, lost but sent before you whether one day you and we all must
follow: in the mean time, think that God says to you, as Elkana said to
Hannah, why weepest thou, 1 Samuel 1.^.
and why is thy heart grieved, am not I better to thee then ten sons? o then
let grace overruled nature, faith suppress passion: and though you cannot but
show your self a tender father toward him, yet still behave your self as a son
of Abraham, who by faith when he was tried, offered up Isaac.

FINIS.

