THE HIERARCHY EXALTED AND Its Enemies Humbled. A SERMON Preached on the first
Sunday in Advent, being the 2d. day of December. 1660.

AFTER The Consecration of the Right Reverend Fathers in God, JOHN Lord Bishop
of Durham. WILLIAM Lord Bishop of St. David's. BENJAMIN Lord Bishop of
Peterborough. HUGH Lord Bishop of Landaff. RICHARD Lord Bishop of Carlisle.
BRIAN Lord Bishop of Chester, and JOHN Lord Bishop of Exceter.


In the Abbey Church of St. Peter's Westminster.

By Nathanael Hardy D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Dean of
Rochester, and Rector of St. Dionys. Back Church London.

LONDON, Printed by Abraham Miller for Joseph Cranford, at the Castle and Lion
in St Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

Imprimatur.

M. Franck Reverendo in Christo Patri Gilberto Episcopo Land. a Sacris
Domesticis.
Martij 14. 1660.
TO THE READER.
WHen that bright Sun (of glorious memory) having been for many years clouded
by an unnatural War, did at last through an unparalleld Treason set in our
Horizon, it was a red and bloody Evening.

After that Evening, followed a black and dismal night, where in the ravening
Wolves and beasts of prey domineered, worrying the estates and lives of those
who were loyal and Orthodox.

That night has by Gods just indignation against us, been measured to us, not
by hours but years, and stretched out to a long continuance.

About the Beginning of the Twelfth year of that Night, a morning Star
appeared, and that not from the East, but North, To whom it was the unanimous
cry of all Countries, Phosphore read diem. that he would be an happy
instrument (under God) to turn our night into day.

Through the tender mercy of our God, and his prudent conduct, our desire was
fulfilled. Not the same Sun indeed ( he shines in the Heaven of the blessed)
but another (He who of right ought to succeed him) arose as it were from the
Sea, gilding our desolate Land, with his radiant Beams. His amiable light has
ever since increased, and He is now near the Meridian of his Coronation; Where
being in the Zenith, may he (like Joshuahs Sun,) stand still, and that not for
a few hours, but many, many years, to the amazement of the eyes of Rebels, and
refreshment of the hearts of all Loyal Subjects.

By the benign aspect and influence of this Sun, it is, that the firmament of
our Church is now again bespangled with Stars, and those fixed in their various
Orbs. After the joyful appearing of those Two Stars of the first and second
magnitude, We have beheld three several Constellations, of six, and seven,
and four Stars; of whom I may justly say in these words of our Savior,
concerning John Baptist. They are burning and shining Lights, and I pray God,
both we and our posterity may have continual cause of rejoicing in the
splendour of such Eminent Lights.

As for this ensuing Discourse, it was only a broken Echo to that voice whith
distinctly and learnedly asserted Episcopal Authority, from that Power Saint
Paul gave to Titus, Titus 1. 5.
when he left him in Crete. It was designed for no other end, but to be a
Congratulatory Appendix to the Solemn Consecration of those seven Bishops:
and as it was Preached upon short warning, so it had never been exposed to
public view; but that it was required by them, and particularly by my Lord
Bishop of Durham, whose Judgment I had great reason to prefer before my own;
Nor can I but account it an high honor to be in any kind owned by him, who
has so resolutely owned this Church of England, both at home and abroad,
asserting her Doctrine against the Papists, and discipline against the
Schismatics.

The multiplicity of other urgent affairs, has for a time retarded my
performance of the command I received from, and promise I made to that Reverend
Prelate, for which I humbly beg his Lordships pardon: and now having made these
weak labors public, I entreat thy candid censure of them, together with thy
earnest Prayer for me, who am

Thine in our common Savior, Nath. Hardy.

THE Hierarchy Exalted.
Revel. Chap. 3. Verse 9. Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan
(which say they are Jews and are not but do lie) behold I will make them to
come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.
THese words are part of an Epistle to the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia.
It has been controverted whether by the Angel in the Inscription of these
several Epistles, be meant one Bishop, or many Presbyters. But if a multitude
had been intended, the Plural number might as easily have been used, as the
Singular. I deny not, but many things written in these Epistles, concerned not
only the Bishops, but the inferior Clergy, yea and the Laily; and therefore in
one place we read, I say to you and the rest in Thyatira; Rev. 2. 24.
but this hinders not that what was designed for the benefit of the whole
Church, might be directed to him, who was chief in place and office. Ambros. in
Apoc.
Sure I am St. Ambrose expounds the several Angels to be Rectores Ecclesiarum,
the particular Governors of those Churches. And St. Austins gloss is Angelo,
i. e. Episcopo illic constituto, to the Angel that is there placed. Yea
Irenaeus and Eusebius, with other Ecclesiastical Writers of good note, have
given us the names of some of the persons who were at that time Bishops of
those Churches; and therefore I shall not doubt to affirm, that as the rest, so
this Epistle was sent from Jesus Christ the chief Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls, to the Bishop of the Church of Philadelphia.

If you please to take a particular view of this Epistle, you shall find the
greatest part of it to be consolatory, as being most suitable to the condition
both of the Angel and the Church. In the foregoing Verse Christ tells the
Bishop, Verse. 8.
Behold I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it; by which I
conceive is meant that opportunity and liberty which was given him of
exercising his Episcopal function. And whereas there were two sorts or
Adversaries with which the primitive Bishops and Christians were molested, to
wit Jews and Pagans, our blessed Lord comforts this Angel against the fear of
both, Verse. 10.
letting him know in the next Verse, that he should be kept from the
persecution of the Pagans; and here in this Verse, that he would remove the
opposition of the Jews, Behold I will make them which are of the Synagogue of
Satan, etc.

In which words are two several parts observable;

A sharp and severe censure of the Angels enemies, Them which are of the
Synagogue of Satan, who say they are Jews, but are not, and do lie.

A sweet and gracious promise to the Angel himself, Behold I will make, behold
I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have
loved thee.

Begin we with the first of these, Genesis 1.
wherein are two particulars considerable.

The false opinion which these persons had of themselves, They say they are
Jews and are not.

The true judgment of Christ concerning them, that they were liars, and of the
Synagogue of Satan.

The false opinion these persons had of themselves was, Partic. 1.
that whereas they were not, they said they were Jews. Our late learned
Annotatour conceives the them here spoken of, to be Gnostics, who said they
were Jews by their compliance with them, in observing their Jewish rites, and
persecuting the orthodox Christians.

The generality of Interpreters understands the them to be such as were of
the Nation and people of the Jews; but then the difficulty will be in what
sense our Savior denies them to be Jews, and charge them for saying they
were so. To which the Answer is fitly returned, by distinguishing between a Jew
according to the flesh, and according to the spirit. Romans 2. 28, 29.
He is not a Jew says St. Paul, which is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart. In this notion he that is not
a Jew, may truly say he is a Jew, and he that says he is a Jew, may be truly
said to be none. They which are of the faith of Abraham (says the Apostle) are
Gal. 3. 7.
the children of Abraham, though not descended from his loins; and if you were
the children of Abraham, Ioh. 8. 37.
you would do the works of Abraham, says Christ to those who were of his
lineage. In vain therefore did these in the Text say, (and saying boast) that
they were Jews, whenas they were so unlike to their godly progenitors. That
Christ whom their Fathers expected, they rejected; and whereas the end of Moses
his rites was to lead them to, these set up Moses in opposition against Christ.

It will yet further serve to clear the meaning of these words, if we interpret
Jews Metonymically, pro unico Dei populo, for Gods only people; so indeed the
Jews were before the coming of Christ, to whom says St. Paul pertained the
adoption, and the glory, and the Rom 9. 4.
Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
promises; and such did these Jews glory themselves still to be, but in truth
they were not; yea they were so far from being his only people, that they were
not his people at all; Loammi were become Ammi, and Ammi Loammi; the Gentiles
who were not, become his people by the reception, and the Jews who were of old,
now were not his people, through their rejection of Christ.

That which I shall here take notice of in brief, is one special character of
an hypocrite, namely to say, he is that he is not. The Greek word for hypocrite
is used concerning a Stage Player, who in acting puts on the person of another;
and it is his fit Emblem, as being one, who cares not to appear as he is, nay
appears what he is not. Singuli caetus haereticorum suam esse Catholicam
Ecclesiam putant, was Lact antius Lactant.
his observation in his time. And to the same purpose St. Austin, Omnes
haeretici se Catholicos dicivolunt. Aug.
And it is still verfied, Heretics would be accounted by others, and esteem
themselves to be Catholics, and their Conventicles to be the true, nay only
Churches of Christ. Believe not fair shows and specious pretenses; all is not
gold that glistereth; many faces seem beautiful, which are but painted. You
read in the ninth Verse of the former Chapter Rev. 2. 9.
of Pseudo-Apostoli, those who say they are Apostles but are not; and here of
Pseudo-Iudaei, those who say they are Jews, but are not, whom therefore our
blessed Lord brands with these two black characters;

They are of the Synagogue of Satan, and do lie, Partic. 2.
which is the next particular; Christ's true judgment and censure concerning
them.

1. The first brand which Christ sets upon these persons is, that they were of
the Synagogue of Satan; and what here he says of them, is no more than what he
said to them, when he tells them to their faces, Ioh 8. 44.
You are of your Father the Devil. Indeed when you consider who they were,
namely a people whom God had separated from all the Nations of the earth to be
his, it cannot but seem strange that they should deserve such a mark as this:
yet thus it was, and too often is; the faithful City proves an harlot; Bethel
becomes Bethaven; the Temple is made a den of thieves; and Gods Church is
turned into a Chapel for the Devil. How far may both persons and Churches
degenerate both in doctrine and manners? They who were Orthodox, haereticall;
Apostolical, apostaticall; and Divine, diabolical?

Nor was this charge how severe soever it may seem, unjust or untrue, if you
consider their inveterate malice against the Preachers, and professors of
Christian Religion. The name Satan here used, is derived from a Verb that
signifies to hate; nor is any thing more diabolical then hatred. He is called
in this Book the accuser of the Brethren; and wll might these Jews be styled
his Synagogue, of whom we read in the Acts, Rev. 12. 10.
that they were hateful accusers, and violent opposers of the Apostles and
Disciples of Christ.

2. The second mark of infamy upon them is that they were liars. Nor is this
less true then the former, since to affirm what we know to be false, or deny
what we know to be true, is to lie; and these in the Text affirm themselves to
be, what indeed they were not, and either they did, or might have known it
themselves. Liars they were, and that of the worst sort; pernicious liars,
boasting themselves to be what they were not, that thereby they might withdraw
others from embracing Christianity, to the ruin of their precious souls. This
is not unsitly annexed as a justification of the former; for since as our
Savior tells us in the forementioned Scripture, Ioh. 8.
the Devil is a liar, and the Father of it, all liars are justly charged to be
the Synagogue of Satan.

And now to close up this first part of the Text; though the blessed Jesus
delights in the still voice; yet see what sharp language he uses toward these
enemies of his Church. In the like manner he dealt Mat. 7. 15. 12. 34.
with the Scribes and Pharisees, whom he calls ravening Wolves, and a generation
of Vipers, hereby setting a pattern to all his Ministers, when they meet with
obstinate sinners, gross hypocrites, and malicious adversaries, to rebuke them
sharply. It is a known Proverb, Malo nodo* malus cuneus; not the axe but the
wedge must be used in knotty pieces of wood. Plutarch observes of Physicians
(...), Plut. Mor.
they use strong potions in violent diseases. God bids the Prophet cry aloud
and not spare, to wit his vehement increpations. Provided our reproofs arise
not from anger, but zeal; ill will Isa. 57. 1.
to men's persons, but hatred of their sins, we cannot be too severe. Nor need
we fear that such a spirit is incongruous to the Evangelicall dispensation,
whenas we find not only John the Baptist, Peter, Paul, John, the Apostles, but
even Christ himself as elsewhere, so here declaiming against these persons with
so much acrimony, Them that are of the Synagogue of Satan, which say they are
Jews but are not, and do lie.

From the bitter censure of the enemies, pass we Genesis 2.
on to the sweet promise made to the Angel, as it is expatiated in the greatest
part of the Verse, Behold I will make, etc.

A promise of very great importance, and well worthy our most serious
attention, as being ushered in with an Ecce, Behold; and that not only
mentioned, but ingeminated, of which what the peculiar Emphasis is, will best
be reserved to the close of my discourse.

Though the word Make be twice repeated in our English Translation; yet in the
Greek the words are different Verbs, whereof the one is in the present tense,
and may be rendered I do give, and the other in the future, and is fitly rendered
I will make.

The former of these words is sometimes used for as much as to give leaves or
permission, (...) is translated in the Acts, Thou will not suffer thine holy
one to see corruption. And when it is said of the Beast in Act. 12. 35.
the Revelation, that it was given to him to make war Rev. 13. 7.
with the Lamb, it means God permitted him. In this notion some conceive the
word may be here taken, I give leave to thy enemies to molest and persecute
thee. Whatever wicked men act against the Church and her Angels, as it is by
Satanicall instigation, so not without Divine ordination. The Devil himself
could not vex Job without leave from God; much less can his instruments. If
Jacob be given for Isa. 42. 24.
a spoil, and Israel to the robbers, it is the Lord who does it. Thou could
have no power (said Christ to Pilate) except it were given thee from above. And
Io^. 19. 11.
the people of Israel who gathered together against thy holy Child Jesus, did
what soever Gods hand and counsel determined before to be done. With this
meditation David quieted himself, when Shimei railed upon him, The Lord has
bid him. And this I doubt Acts 4. 27, 28.
not has been the consolation of Gods suffering servants among us; and
especially the Angels of 2 Samuel 16. 10.
our Churches, that in all the persecutions which have befallen them, there was
Gods hand permitting and appointing, or rather appointing to permit it.

Though this be an useful truth, yet I rather adhere to the generality of
Interpeters, who refer both the Verbes to that which follows, of worshipping
at this Angels feet. But then the Question is, what this means, since it may
very well admit of a double notion, to wit, in reference to a forced or a
voluntary subjection? In the former sense the Text is so a promise to the
Angel, that it is a threat against his enemies; in the latter it is a promise
to both, intending the conversion of the enemies, as well as the exaltation of
the Angel.

When the Spirit of God would set forth the complete Victory of Christ over his
enemies, he makes Interp. 1.
use of the similitude of a footstool, The Lord said Psalm 110. 1.
unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy
footstool. In like manner, by this phrase of worshipping at the Angels feet,
may very fitly be understood that conquest he should have over those his
adversaries, so that though against their wills they should submit unto him; it
being usual with Conquerours to make their captives lie down at their feet.

The Church and her Angels are never so low, but the divine power can raise
them up, nor are their enemies at any time so high, but that the same power can
cast them down. Wicked men's presumptuous hopes, commonly end in despairing
fears; they who insolently commanded, are ofttimes made shamefully to
supplicate; and though for a time, they are Tyrants riding on the heads, yet in
the end they become slaves sprawling at the feet of Gods servants.

But the most received exposition of these words is Interp. 2.
of a milder notion, and understands a voluntary subjection in the same
sense, which that promise to the Church is understood, where it is said, The
sons of Isaiah 60. 14.
them that afflicted thee shall come bending to thee, (to wit, of their own
accord) and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down (not be bowed
down) at the soles of thy feet.

According to this construction of the words, that which is here assured is the
happy conversion of these adversaries, wherein more plainly observe.

The Efficacious Agent, I will make.

The notorious Subjects, Them that are of the Synagogue of Satan.

The Evident sign, To come and worship at thy feet; And

The singular effect of this conversion, and shall know that I have loved thee.

1. The efficacious Agent, is expressed and inculcated Partic. 1.
in these words, I will make, I will make.

1. I, who, he that is described in the beginning of this Epistle to be holy
and true, and to have the keys of David, who is no other than the eternal
Son of God. The same I, who did at first make the beasts and fouls to come
unto Adam in acknowledgment of his dominion over them, made these brutish
enemies of the Angel, to come and worship at his feet. The same I, who shall at
the last day make all knees in Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth to bow at
his name, made them to submit to this Angel, and bow at his feet. Indeed these
acts of coming and worshipping were done by them, but it was Christ who
inclined their wills to these acts. Appositely to this purpose St Augustine, Aug.
Certum est nos velle, cum velimus, sed ille facit, ut velimus; certum est nos
facere, cum facimus, sed ille facit ut facimus, it is we that will and do, but
it is he makes us, or according to St Paul's language, Phil. 2. 13.
Works in us to will and to do what is good.

2. I give, so the first Verb is most properly rendered, and notes the
freeness of Christ's grace in the work of Conversion, without any desert of
ours. Indeed Quibus datur, ex gratuita gratia datur, quibus denegatur justo
negatur judicio; to whom it is denied, it is denied justly, and to whom it is
given, it is given freely; none but Christ could effect this work, and he
works it says St Paul, of his good pleasure; St James, Phil. 2. 13.
of his own good will, James 1. 18.
Saint Peter, according to his abundant mercy, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
and here his own language is, I give.

3. I will make, so the latter Verb is rightly translated, and as the former
notes the gratuity, so this the efficacy of the grace of Christ. When a sinner
is converted, the promise is made good, I will take away the stony heart, and
when the actual stubbornness and resistance of the will is taken away, no
wonder if Ezekiel. 11. 19.
conversion be effectually wrought.

Indeed this efficacy is such as does not infringe the natural liberty of the
will, by putting any force or violence upon it; and therefore it is said, I
will make them to come, and elsewhere, Draw me and we will Cant. 1. 4.
run after thee; he so makes us, as that we come, draws us as that we run of
our own accord. I know I am here fallen upon a knotty Controversy, but I
profess my self to be one of them, who earnestly desire, that all those
disputes (having caused so great animosities both in the Reformed, and Romish
Church) might be buried in silence, and in particular this. Why should we so
notly contend de modo, about the manner how Christ makes us to come, whilst we
all agree de re about the thing it self, that it is he that does make us, and
that all the glory of our conversion belongs to his grace?

4. Once more, I will make, but by what means? it is not expressed, yet may be
supplied from those words, I have set before thee an open door, which Verse 8.
are partly understood of the freedom which this Angel now had to Preach the
Gospel, by which his enemies were wrought upon so as to come and worship at
his feet. That fiction of taming wild beasts by the Music of Orpheus his
Harp, was in some sort verified of the Ministry of this Angel; by which these
Jews of fierce became gentle. True, this happy alteration was principally
wrought by the internal operation of Christ's Spirit, but instrumentally by
this Angels Preaching; and as the natural heat of the body, though in it self
but a quality, yet being the souls instrument, so concocts and digests our
meat, that it turns into our substance: So the Ministry of the Gospel,
though dispensed by a frail man, being actuated by the holy Spirit, becomes
the Power of God, to the conversion of the most obstinate: which leads me to
the consideration of the

Notorious Subjects, Them, such as were maliciously Partic. 2.
and devilishly wicked. Grievous sinners may become gracious Penitents, and
proud opposers, humble Suppliants. God wants not mercy to pardon the greatest
sins, nor grace to reclaim the greatest sinners; as the Blood of Christ is
omnisufficient to wash away the fowlest spots, so his Spirit is omniefficient
to knock off the strongest fetters of sin. We are apt to say of the
conversion of obstinate transgressors, what that Nobleman said in another case,
If God should make windows in Heaven, might this 2 Kings 7. 19.
thing be? not considering that divine grace can break the stony heart, and
bend the stiff knee. It is foretold by the Prophet Isaiah in one place, That
the Isaiah 11. 6.
Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid,
and the Calf and the young Lion and the fatling together, and a little child
shall lead them: those who are ravenous like Wolves, petulant like Calves, and
fierce like Lions, are made gentle by grace. To this purpose is tha other
prophecy of bringing the mountains low, making the crooked straight, and rough
places plain, which Isaiah 40. 3.
is made good when the proud and presumptuous are subdued to the obedience of
the Gospel, and this is that which these converts did testify by

That evident sign of coming and worshipping at the Parti^. 3.
Angels feet; which is the third particular, and comes now to be discussed,
and that according to a double interpretation.

1. Shall come and worship (me) before thy feet, so some expound these words,
inserting the pronoun it; so the worship here intended is sacred and religious,
of the same nature with that which is mentioned by Saint Paul, where he says
of the unbeliever, that coming into the Christian Assemblies, and falling down
on his face, he will worship God, and report that 1 Cor. 14. 25.
God is in them of a truth; and then the meaning of the words is, that these
Jews, who had looked upon Christ as an impostor and seducer, and used him as a
notorious Malefactor, should come to the Congregations of Christians, and join
with them in worshipping that Jesus whom they had crucified.

More particularly, here are two properties of that worship which these
converts should perform unto Christ, insinuated in the two Verbs, come and
worship, namely, alacrity in the one, and humility in the other.

1. They shall come and worship, not be forced or driven, but come of their own
accord, voluntarily resigning up themselves to Christ. It is prophesied
concerning the Gentiles by the Psalmist, that they Psalm 110. 3.
should be a willing people, and by the Prephet Isaiah, Isaiah 55. 6.
that they should not only come, but run unto Christ. We must not take up
Christ's yoke as the Cyrenian did his Cross, unwillingly but cheerfully
undertake his service. Upon which account, though our worship be a due debt, it
is called a gift, give unto the Lord, glory and strength, give unto the Lord
Psalm. 29. 1, 2.
the glory due unto his name.

2. They shall worship, to wit, with a lowly reverence, for so much the Greek
word imports, and the nature of the thing requires; and therefore the Psalmist
in one place fitly joyneth worshipping and Psalm 29. 1, 2.
falling down together, and in another, expounds worshipping by bowing down.
Those Seraphins which stood before the Throne of God are said to cover their
faces and fete with wings, to wit, in reverence of the divine Majesty: In like
manner do true converts abase themselves before Christ in their approaches to
him. Psalm 95. 8. 22. 29.
I deny not but there may be, I fear too often is prostration Isaiah 6. 2.
of body, where there is no consternation of mind; but certainly whosoever
worships Christ with his soul, will express (so far as may be) his inward
subjection by outward incurvation.

2. But I see no reason why we may not refer this worship to the Angel of the
Church, since though religious adoration is peculiar to God, and so belonging
to Christ as God; yet there is a reverential submission due to his Ministers.
And this was the evidence which those Jews should give of their conversion,
that the Bishop of this Church who had been abhorred by them as a Devil, should
be reverenced as an Angel, and their haughty spirit so far humbled as that they
should worship at his very feet. This is that which we find to be the temper of
other converts in holy Writ. The Shunamite fell at the feet of the Prophet
Elisha, and so did Cornelius at the feet of the Apostle Peter. How beautiful
are the 2 Kings 4. 37.
feet of them that Preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good
things? says the Apostle from Acts 10. 25.
the Prophet, to which question this Text returns Romans 10. 15.
an answer, how beautiful? so beautiful in the eyes Isaiah 52. 7.
of all true Christians, that they worship at their feet.

More particularly, there are three things which this phrase of worshipping at
the Angels feet may intimate.

1. A reverentiall esteem of his person, The feet are the lowest part of the
body, and such a respect have these converts unto the Angel, that they fell
down as low as his lowest part: and no wonder, since they looked upon him as a
Spiritual Father (for so have Bishops been ever accounted) and what more
reasonable, than that the child should reverence the Father? it is Gods own
Argument, If I be a Father, where is my honor? nay and his Precept, Mal. 1. 4.
Honor thy Father, which extends to civil and ecclesiastical, Exodus 20. 12.
as well as the natural Father.

2. An obedientiall submission to his Doctrine. Mary sat at the feet of Jesus
to hear his Word. Paul Luke 10. 40.
was brought up at the feet of Gamaliell as being taught by him, and thus these
converts lay at the Angels feet to receive his instructions. True penitents
account the Ministers of the Gospel as Ambassadors, for, and from Christ, and
therefore with all humility entertain their message.

3. A paenitential acknowledgment of their own unworthiness, by reason of their
former contempt; They were so sensible of the injuries and affronts they had
offered to this Angel, that they now think they cannot abase themselves enough;
and therefore worship at his feet. As Peter in the sense of his own
unworthiness Luke 5. 8.
fell down at Jesus his knees. So these Converts in the sense of their
vileness, worship at the Angels feet, to intimate, that they deserved to be
trampled upon as the mire in the street. It is the disposition of every true
penitent to think basely of himself and highly of Christ's Ministers, to Judge
them worthy of double Honor, and himself unworthy of any respect. An instance
of the one is holy Job, who says, I repent and abhor my self in dust and
ashes, Job 42. 5.
of the other, The Jailer who came in trembling and fell down before Paul and
Sylas; of both in these penitents, Acts 16. 29.
who considering how ill they had deserved of the Angel, and how well the
Angel had deserved of them, Come and worship at his feet.

I end this part of my Text with this short Observation, true conversion is
always attended with a manifest alteration. The penitent is not what he was,
nay, he is contrary to what he was; no wonder, if repentance be called by St.
Paul a Metamorphosis, Be ye transformed by the renewing of the mind. There is
not Romans 12. 2.
a greater change made in the air from darkness to light, when the Sun
arises, than there is in the sinner from sin to grace, when Christ that Sun
of righteousness shines upon him. The Wolf does not only dwell with, but is
turned into a Lamb, the heart of stone is changed into an heart of flesh, the
converted sinner, of proud becomes humble; of rebellious, obedient of
covetuous, charitable; of cruel, merciful; what; before he hated, now he
loves, whom before he despised, now he honors; so did these Converts,
Worship at the feet of that Angel, who had been contemptible in their eyes.

The last considerable in the Text, is the effect of Partic. 4.
their conversion, expressed in these words, and shall know that I have loved
thee.

It is a clause that looks two ways, to the Angel, and tells him that he is
Christ's favorite; to his enemies, and foretells that they should know it.

1. Christ's love to the Angel, will the better appear by this following
Gradation.

1. Great is that love which Christ has to the whole race of mankind, whom he
came to seek and to save: Titus 3. 5.
in respect of which St Paul says, The kindness and love of God our Savior
toward man appeared.

2. Greater is that love which Christ bears to his Church, whom he culleth
out of, and therefore has a dearer affection to, than the rest of mankind.
Hence those affectionate appellations, My sister, my love, my Cant. 5. 2.
dove, my undesiled one.

3. Greatest is that love, which Christ has to the Angels of his Church, the
vigilant Pastors and Governors thereof. It is said of him, in the beginning of
the former Chapter, That he holds the seven Rev. 2. 1.
Stars in his right hand, and walks in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks; where by the Candlesticks are meant by the Churches, and by the
Stars the Bishops of those Churches. He walks indeed among the Candlesticks
by his special presence of grace and mercy, but the Stars are in his right
hand, as vouchsafing a more special affection to, and protection over them:
his hand in which he holds his Ministers, is nearer his heart than his feet,
by which he walks among his people, and accordingly it is an higher measure
of love, which he bears to the one than the other.

Will you see yet more particularly how he loves the Angels of his Church? He
so loves them, as that Psalm. 115. 14, 15.
he reproves even Kings for their sakes, saying, Do my Prophets no harm; He so
loves them, that he accounts what is done to them, as done to himself: for so
he tells his Disciples, He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises
you, despises me. He so Luke 10. 16.
loves them, that he will recompense the meanest courtesy which is vouchsafed
to them, though it be but a cup of cold water which is given to a Prophet in
Matthew. 10. 42.
the name of a Prophet, it shall not be unrewarded. Finally, He so loves them,
that though in this world he sends them forth as sheep among Wolves, yet he
will not suffer the Wolves to worry them; and though for a time they may be
persecuted, yet they shall at length be delivered, and when their course on
earth is finished, whereas others are only stones, he Rev. 3. 12.
will make them pillars in his celestial Temple.

2. The love of Christ to this Angel, is that which his enemies should at
length know, that is, (according to the usual notion of the Word, so as to
acknowledge and own him. Being converted to Christianity, they were brought to
know Christ as their only Lord and Savior, and knowing him, they acknowledge
the Angel as sent from, and beloved of him; and (which is the latitude of this
word knowing, as elsewhere, so here) that so as to love and honor him with
their souls, which as it is the effect of their conversion; so it was the cause
of their prostration and worshipping at his feet. Thus was the Proverb of
Solomon verified, When a man's ways please the Lord, he will make his Prove. 16.
7.
enemies at peace with him, yea of enemies to become friends. And oh that all
the enemies of the Church and her Angels, would in time be brought to this
acknowledgment. It is that, which against their wills, they shall do at the
last day, when they shall behold those who were so vilified by them, magnified
by Christ, and be ashamed of their envy and malignity against them. Oh how much
better will it be for them to do that now freely, which they shall do then
forcedly; and repenting of their former rage and bitterness, after the pattern
of these Converts, to know and embrace the Angels of the Church, as the friends
and favorites of Christ?

By this time you see the extent and meaning of this promise, and in that, what
great reason there was for a Behold, yea a double Behold to be prefixed, since
it is such a promise, as calls for both admiration and exultation.

1. Here is a Behold of wonder, it being a thing deservedly to be admired, that
there should be such a change wrought in the enemies of this Angel. When God
sent Ananias to find out Saul of Tarsus, he adds, Act. 9. 6.
For behold he prays; and well is Behold prefixed, since it was no less then
a wonder to find him penitently praying, whom he had known cruelly persecuting.
The like is the Emphasis of this Behold in the Text, it being almost incredible
and therefore admirable, that such proud enemies should come and worship at the
Angels feet. Indeed the Behold serves at once both to strengthen the Angels
faith, and enlarge his wonder. It was not so strange as true, and therefore
behold and believe; though true, yet it was very strange, and therefore behold
and admire.

2. Here is a Behold of joy as well as wonder, since this happy change was that
which could not but glad the Angels heart. The righteous shall rejoice when he
Psalm. 58. 12.
sees the vengeance; but much rather when he sees repentance. There is joy in
heaven over one sinner Luke 15. 6.
that repents, says our Savior. Indeed there is joy both in heaven and
earth; in heaven by the Angels those heavenly Ministers; and in earth by the
Ministers those earthly Angels. And so much the more ought they to rejoice,
because they are the instruments by whom this work is wrought. The reclaiming
of these obstinate adversaries was that which this Angel desired in his
prayers, endeavored by his preaching, and therefore could not but be
exceedingly rejoiced at, when it was accomplished.

And thus I have given you an account of the whole, and every part of this
Text: nothing now remains, but to bring it home by a particular application
to the present occasion.

Some Interpreters have conceived these seven Churches of Asia, as typical of
the Christian Churches, which should succeed in several parts of the world.
One of our late Writers, out of his bitter zeal against this Church of England,
charging her with lukewarmness in Religion, (because she is unwilling to recede
from the Romish, but in what she recedeth from the Catholic Church) makes
Laodicea to be her type. But when I behold the brotherly love which is begun,
and I both pray and hope will every day more and more increase among us, I may
upon far better ground look upon it as typified by this Church of Philadelphia.
And what in this Verse was written to the Angel of the Church, seems at this
day to be spoken by our blessed Lord, to the several Angels of our Church.

There has been a generation of men among us, whom (without breach of charity)
I may justly charge to be of the Synagogue of Satan. Indeed they say they are
the godly Party, and their Conventicles the purest Churches; but they are not,
and do lie. Yea their pride and arrogance; blood and cruelty; malice and
oppression; treason and rebellion, proclaim to all the world that they are not
Bees but Wasps; Lambs but Wolves; Doves but Hawks; the best of Saints, but the
worst of sinners; and give their verbal profession the real lie.

By these men the Church of England has been for many years sorely persecuted;
her Lands and revenues sacrilegiously alienated; her Liturgy and worship
causlesly extirpated; and her Angels not only of the lower but higher order
contemptuously abused.

But whilst men have hated, I may truly say Christ has loved them, and after
their grievous afflictions, testified his singular affection toward them. He
has so loved them, as to preserve well nigh a third part of our worthy
Prelates alive, like so many sheep or Shepherds rather in the midst of Wolves;
so that they have all attained an old, and some a very old age, and live to see
the Church in an hopeful way of restoration. And as he has preserved some,
so he has raised up others of choice abilities and integrity, to fill up the
vacant Seas. What he says to this Angel in the former Verse, he says to ours
at this day, Behold I have set before thee an open door, for the consecration
of Archbishops and Bishops; and by them, for the Apostolical ordination of
Priests and Deacons; and lo on this very day a number of Angels, equal to
that of those Bishops over the Asian Churches, set in the Heaven of our Church.

What was here promised to the Angel of this Church, is through Gods mercy
vouchsafed to our Angels. Some of those who despised and derided, do cordially
honor them, and humbly worship at their feet, as being ashamed of, and grieved
for those former contumelies, which they have cast upon them. And even those
who continue obstinate, are in some measure subdued, and will I trust (if they
can by no fair means be inclined) be by just rigor enforced to submit to their
government and discipline.

And whatsoever others do, yet we I hope will learn our duty, in yielding all
due obedience, as next under God, to our dread Sovereign, the Father of our
Country; so next under him, to the most Reverend and right Reverend Fathers of
our Church.

I end all with that excellent Exhortation of Ignatius, Ignat. Ep. 4. ad Philip.
(...). Let our people submit to the Priests and Deacons; the Deacons to the
Priests; Priests to the Bishop; I add, the Bishops to the King; and the King
(yea all) to God; so shall this distracted Church and Kingdom be happily
re-established, to the envy of her enemies, and joy of her friends, who will
not cease to say Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

